CHAPTER XVIII

On Looking at a Picture

    Hived in our bosoms like the bag o’ the bee,
    Think’st thou the honey with those objects grew?
                                            _Don Juan_.


The diagram and account given of the processes which make up
the reading of a poem may be easily modified to represent what
happens when we look at a picture, a statue or building, or listen
to a piece of music. The necessary changes are fairly obvious,
and it will only be necessary here to indicate them briefly.
Needless to say the importance to the whole response of different
kinds of elements varies enormously from art to art; so much
so as to explain without difficulty the opinion so often held
by persons interested primarily in one of the arts—that the others
(or some of them) are entirely different in nature. Thus painters
often aver that poetry is so different, so indirect, so second-hand
in the way in which it produces its results, as hardly to deserve
the name of an art at all. But, as we shall see, the differences
between separate arts are sometimes no greater than differences
to be found in each of them; and close analogies can be discovered
by careful analysis between all of them. These analogies indeed
are among the most interesting features which such scrutiny as
we are here attempting can make clear. For an understanding of
the problems of one art is often of great service in avoiding
misconceptions in another. The place of representation in painting,
for example, is greatly elucidated by a sound comprehension of
the place of reference or thought in poetry, just as a crude
view on this latter point is likely to involve unfortunate mistakes
upon the first. Similarly a too narrow view of music which would
limit it to an affair merely of the appreciation of the pitch
and time relations of notes may be corrected most easily by a
comparison with the phenomena of colour in the plastic arts.
Comparison of the arts is, in fact, far the best means by which
an understanding of the methods and resources of any one of them
can be attained. We must be careful of course not to compare
the wrong features of two arts and not to find merely fanciful
or insecurely grounded analogies. The dangers both of too close
assimilation and too wide separation of the structures of different
arts are well illustrated in criticism, both before and since
the days of Lessing. Only a thorough psychological analysis will
allow them to be avoided, and those whose experience leads them
to doubt whether analogies are of service, may be asked whether
their objection is not directed merely to attempts to compare
different arts without a sufficient analysis. With such an analysis,
comparison and the elaboration of analogies involve no attempt
to make one art legislate for another, no attempt to blur their
differences or to destroy their autonomy.

In analysing the experiences of the visual arts the first essential
is to avoid the word ‘see’, a term which is treacherous in its
ambiguity. If we say that we see a picture we may mean either
that we see the pigment-covered surface, or that we see the image
on the retina cast by this surface, or that we see certain planes
or volumes in what is called the ‘picture-space’. These senses
are completely distinct. In the first case we are speaking of
the source of the stimulus, in the second of the immediate effect
of the stimulus on the retina, in the third we are referring
to a complex response made up of perceivings and imaginings due
to the intervention of mental structures left behind by past
experience, and excited by the stimulus. The first case we may
leave out of account as a matter of purely technical interest.
The degree of similarity holding between the second and third,
between the first effect of the stimulus and the whole visual
response, will of course vary greatly in different cases. A perfectly
flat, meticulously detailed depiction of conventionally conceived
objects, such as is so often praised in the Academy for its ‘finish’,
may be very nearly the same from its first impression on the
retina to the last effort which vision can make upon it. At the
other extreme a Cézanne, for example, which to the eye of a person
quite unfamiliar with such a manner of painting may at first
seem only a field or area of varied light, may, as the response
develops, through repeated glances, become first an assemblage
of blots and patches of colour, and then, as these recede and
advance, tilt and spread relatively to one another and become
articulated, a system of volumes. Finally, as the distances and
stresses of their volumes become more definitely imagined, it
becomes an organisation of the entire ‘picture-space’ into a
three-dimensional whole with the characters of the solid masses
which appear in it, their weights, textures, tensions and what
not, very definitely, as it seems, given. With familiarity the
response is of course shortened. Its final visual stage is reached
much sooner, and the stages outlined above become, through this
telescoping, too fleeting to be noticed. None the less the great
difference between the first retinal impression and the complete
_visual_ response remains. The retinal impression, the sign,
that is, for the response, contains actually but a small part
of the whole final product, an all-important part it is true,
the seed in fact from which the whole response grows.

The additions made in the course of the response are of several
kinds. They may, perhaps, for our present purposes be spoken
of without misunderstanding as images, or image-substitutes (see
Chapter XVI). The eye, as is well known, is peculiar among our
sense organs in that the receptor, the retina, is a part of the
brain, instead of being a separate thing connected with the brain
more or less remotely by a peripheral nerve. Moreover there are
certain connections leading from other parts of the brain outwards
to the retina as well as connections leading inwards. Thus there
is some ground for supposing that through these outgoing connections
actual retinal effects may accompany some visual images, which
would thereby become much more like actual sensations than is
the case with the other senses. However this may be, the process
whereby an impression which, if interpreted in one way (e.g.
by a person measuring the pigmented areas of a canvas), is correctly
counted as a sign of a flat coloured surface, becomes, when differently
interpreted, an intricately divided three-dimensional space—this
process is one of the intervention of images of several kinds.

The order of these interventions probably varies from case to
case. Perhaps the most important of the images which come in
to give depth, volume, solidity to the partly imagined and partly
perceived ‘picture-space’ are those which are relicts of eye
movements, kinæsthetic images of the convergence of the eyes
and accommodation of the lenses according to the distance of
the object contemplated. When, as it seems, we look past an object
in a picture to some more distant object, seeming in so doing
to change the focus of our eyes, we do not as a rule actually
make any change. But certainly we feel as though we were focussing
differently and as though the convergence were different. This
felt difference which mainly gives the sense of greater distance
is due to kinæsthetic imagery. Correspondingly the parts of the
‘picture-space’ upon which we seem to be focussing, upon which
we _are_ imaginally focussing, become definite and distinct,
and parts much nearer or much more distant become to some extent
blurred and diffused. This effect is probably due to visual images,
simulating the sensations which would normally ensue were we
actually making a change of focus. The degree to which these
last effects occur appears to differ very greatly from one person
to another. Insufficient attention to the great variation in
the means by which these images are involved by the painting
is responsible for much bad criticism. Thus artists can commonly
be found who are quite unable, when looking at paintings: in
which the means employed are unlike their own, to apprehend forms
over which less specialised persons find no difficulty. In general
most visitors to Galleries pay too little attention to the fact
that few pictures can be instantaneously apprehended, that even
ten minutes’ study is quite inadequate in the case of unfamiliar
kinds of work, and that the capacity for ‘seeing’ pictures (in
sense three), an indispensable but merely an initial step to
appreciating them, is something which has to be acquired. It
is naturally of great assistance if many works by the same painter
or of the same School can be seen together, for then the essential
methods employed become clearer. In a general collection it is
difficult not to look at too great a variety of pictures, and
a confusion results, perhaps unnoticed, which is a serious obstacle
to the coherent building up of any one picture. The fashion in
which most Old Masters are hidden away under grime and glass
and the efforts which are necessary in order to reconstruct them
are additional obstacles. The neglect of these obvious facts
is the chief explanation of the low level of appreciation and
criticism from which the art of painting at present suffers.

Following upon the visual images are a swarm of others varying
from picture to picture: tactile images giving the appearance
of texture to surfaces, muscular images giving hardness, stiffness,
softness, flexibility and so on to the volumes imagined—the lightness
and insubstantiality of muslin, the solidity and fixity of rock
being matters of the intervention of images due originally to
the sensations we have received in the past from these materials.
This muscular imagery is of course called up in differing ways
in different cases. Primarily it is due to the imitation by the
artist of subtleties in the light given off by the materials,
or characteristic peculiarities in their form, but there are,
as we shall see, more indirect but also less stable, less reliable
and less efficacious ways by which they may be evoked. The same
applies to the other images, thermal, olfactory, auditory and
the rest, which may be involved in particular cases. There is
a direct and an indirect way in which they can be evoked. They
may spring up at the visual appeal or they may only respond at
a later stage as a result of roundabout trains of thinking. Thus
a silk scarf may _look_ soft and light; or we may imagine
it as light, it _looking_ all the while iron-hard and heavy,
because we know that it is a scarf and that scarves are soft
and light. The two methods are very different. The second is
a reversal of the natural order of perception and for this reason
the condemnation so often heard from painters, of the literary
or ‘detective’ approach to pictures, of which this would be a
representative specimen, is well merited. We must, however, distinguish
cases in which there is this reversal from those in which it
does not occur, those namely in which by a process of inference
we arrive at conclusions about the represented objects which
could not possibly be directly given. But this question may be
deferred until we come to discuss representation.

Hitherto in considering the growth of the three-dimensional imagined
picture-space we have not explicitly mentioned the part played
by colour nor the equally important effect of this growth in
modifying the original colours of the first retinal impression.
But not only may colour be the chief factor determining form,
i.e. the three-dimensional organisation of space, but it is itself
most vitally modified by form.

Colours as signs, that is to say even at the most optical and
least elaborated stage, have certain very marked spatial characters
of their own. Red, for example, seems to advance towards the
eye and to swell out of its boundaries, while blue seems to retreat
and to withdraw into itself[51]. Degree of saturation may also
give recession in obvious and in more recondite ways. Pure colours
in the foreground and greyed colours in the background are a
simple example. Similarly opposition of colours is one of the
main means by which the stresses and strains of volumes may be
suggested.

These characters of colours, especially when they reinforce and
co-operate with one another, may be made to play a very important
part in determining the way in which the picture-space is constructed
when we look at a picture.

Equally important are the less direct effects upon our picture-space
imagining of the emotional or organic responses which we make
to different colours. Individuals vary greatly in the extent
to which they notice and can reflectively distinguish these responses,
and probably also in the degree to which they actually make different
responses. To persons sensitive in this respect, the colours
excite each a distinct, well-marked emotion (and attitude) capable
of being clearly differentiated from others. The sad poverty
and vagueness of the colour vocabulary, however, misleads many
people with regard to these. Each of the ‘puces’, ‘mauves’, ‘magentas’
etc. has to cover numbers of distinguishable colours, often with
strikingly different effects upon us. Thus people who are content
to say that pink is their favourite colour, or that green always
suits them, are either quite undiscriminating in their attitude
towards colour or little attentive to the actual effects produced
upon them. A similar obtuseness or insincerity is evidenced when
it is maintained, as is often done, that pink and green do not
go together. Some pinks and some greens do not, but some do,
and the test of a colourist is just his ability to feel which
are which. Few if any, in fact, of the colour relations with
which the painter is concerned can be stated with the aid of
such general terms—‘red’, ‘brown’, ‘yellow’, ‘grey’, ‘primrose’,
etc.—as are at present available. Each of these stands for a
number of different colours whose relations to a given colour
will commonly be different.

Taking ‘colour’ in this sense to stand for specific colours,
not for classes or ranges of varying hues, sets of colours, where
in certain spatial proportions and in certain relations of saturation,
brightness and luminosity relatively to one another, excite responses
of emotion and attitude with marked individual characteristics.
Colours, in fact, have harmonic relations, although the physical
laws governing these relations are at present unknown, and the
relations themselves only imperfectly ascertained. For every
colour another can be found such that the combined response to
the two will be of a recognisable kind, whose peculiarities are
due probably to the compatibility with one another of the impulses
set up by each. This compatibility varies in a number of ways.
The result is that for every colour a set of other colours is
discoverable such that the response to each of them is compatible
with the response to the tonic colour in a definite way.[52] A
sensitive colourist feels these compatibilities as giving to
these combinations of colours a definite character, which no
other combinations possess. Similarly relations of incompatibility
between colours can also be felt such that their combination
yields no ordered response but merely a clash and confusion of
responses. Colours which just fail to be complementary are a
typical example. Similarly the primary colours in combination
are offensive; should this precise kind of offensiveness be part
of the artist’s purpose, he will, of course, make use of them.

The fact that roses, sunsets, and so forth are so often found
to present harmonious combinations of colour may appear a little
puzzling by this account. But the vast range of close gradations,
which a rose petal, for example, presents, supplies the explanation.
Out of all these the eye picks that gradation which best accords
with the other colours chosen. There is usually some set of colours
in some harmonious relation to one another to be selected out
of the multitudinous gradations which natural objects in most
lightings present; and there are evident reasons why the eye
of a sensitive person should, when it can, pick out those gradations
which best accord. The great range of different possible selections
is, however, of importance. It explains the fact that we see
such different colours for instance when gloomy and when gay,
and thus how the actual selection made by an artist may reveal
the kind and direction of the impulses which are active in him
at the moment of selection.

Needless to say in the absence of a clear nomenclature and standardisation
of colours the task of describing and recording colour relations
is of great difficulty, but the unanimity of competent, that
is, sensitive persons as to which colours are related in specific
ways to which, is too great to be disregarded. It is as great
as the unanimity among musicians as to the harmonic relations
of notes to one another. The great differences between the two
cases are not likely to be overlooked. The presence of physical
laws in many cases connecting notes harmonically related and
the absence of similar known physical laws connecting colours
is a glaring difference. But it should not be forgotten that
these physical laws are, as it were, an extra-musical piece of
knowledge. What matters to the musician is not the physical connections
between notes but the compatibilities and incompatibilities in
the responses of emotion and attitude which they excite. The
musical relations between the notes would be the same even though
the physical relations between the stimuli which arouse them
were quite different.

Naturally enough the analogy with the harmonic relations of music
has been the chief guide to those who have systematically investigated
colour relations. Whatever may be the precise limits to which
it may profitably be carried, for anyone who wishes to form a
general conception of the emotional effects of colours in combination
it is of very great value.

Colour is of course primarily the cause and controlling factor
of emotional response to painting, but, as we have said, it may,
and commonly does, help to determine form. Parts of a picture
which are through their colour out of all emotional connection
with the rest of the picture, tend, other things being equal,
to fall out of the picture altogether, appearing as patches accidentally
adhering to the surface or as gaps through which something else
irrelevant is seen. This is the extreme instance, but the influence
of colour upon form through the emotional relations of colours
to one another is all-pervading Sometimes colour strengthens
and solidifies the structure, sometimes it fights against it,
sometimes it turns into a commentary, as it were, the colour
response modifying the form response and _vice versa_. The
great complexity of the colour and form interactions needs no
insistence. They are so various that no rule can possibly be
laid down as to a _right_ relation for all cases. All depends
upon what the whole response which the painter is seeking to
record may be. As with attempts to define a universal proper
relation of rhythm to thought in poetry (e.g. the assertion that
rhythm should echo or correspond to thought, etc.), so with general
remarks as to how form and colour should be related. All depends
upon the purpose, the total response to which both form and colour
are merely means. Mistakes between means and ends, glorifying
particular techniques into inexplicable virtues are at least
as common in the criticism of painting as with any other of the
arts.

One other aspect of the picture-space needs consideration. It
is not necessarily a fixed and static construction, but may in
several ways contain elements of movement. Some of these may
be eye movements, or kinæsthetic images of eye movements. As
the eye wanders imaginally from point to point the relations
between the parts of the picture-space change; thus an effect
of movement is induced. Equally important are the fusions of
successive visual images which may be suggested by drawing. As
we watch, for example, an arm being flexed, the eye receives
a series of successive and changing retinal impressions. Certain
combinations of these, which represent not the position and form
of the arm at any instant, but a compromise or fusion of different
positions and forms, have an easily explicable capacity to represent
the whole series, and thus to represent movement. The use of
such fused images in drawing may easily be mistaken for distortion,
but when properly interpreted it may yield normal forms in movement.
Many other means by which movement is given in Painting might
be mentioned. One means by which colour, may suggest it, for
example, is well indicated in the following description by Signac
of _Muley-abd-er Rahman entouré de sa garde_: “la tumulte
est traduit par l’accord presque dissonant du grand parasol vert
sur le bleu du ciel, surexcité déjà par l’orangé des murailles[53]”.
It need hardly be pointed out that the response made to the picture-space
varies enormously according to whether the forms in it are seen
as in rest or in movement.



So far we have merely discussed what may be described as the
sensory elements in the picture, and the responses in emotion
and attitude due to these elements. But in most painting there
are further elements essentially involved. It has been asserted
that all further elements are irrelevant, at least to appreciation;
and as a reaction to common views that seem to overlook the sensory
elements altogether the doctrine is comprehensible and perhaps
not without value. For too many people do look at pictures primarily
with intent to discover what they are ‘of’, what they represent,
without allowing the most important thing in the picture, its
sensory stimulation through colour and form, to take effect.
But the reaction goes too far when it denies the relevance of
the representative elements in all cases. It may be freely granted
that there are great pictures in which nothing is represented,
and great pictures in which what is represented is trivial and
may be disregarded. It is equally certain that there are great
pictures in which the contribution to the whole response made
through representation is not less than that made more directly
through form and colour. To those who can accept the general
psychological standpoint already outlined, or indeed any modern
account of the working of the mind, the assertion that there
is no reason why representative and formal factors in an experience
should conflict, but much reason why they should co-operate,
will need no discussion. The psychology of ‘unique æsthetic emotions’
and ‘pure art values’ upon which the contrary view relies is
merely a caprice of the fancy.

The place of representation in the work o different masters varies
enormously and it is not true that the value of their works varies
correspondingly. From Raphael and Picasso at one extreme to Rembrandt,
Goya and Hogarth at the other, Rubens, Delacroix and Giotto occupying
an intermediate position, all degrees of participation between
non-representative form and represented subject in the building
up of the whole response can be found. We may perhaps hazard,
for reasons indicated already, as a principle admitting of exception,
that what can be done by sensory means should not be done indirectly
through representation. But to say more than this is to give
yet another instance of the commonest of critical mistakes: the
exaltation of a method into an end.

Representation in painting corresponds to thought in poetry.
The same battles over the Intellect-Emotion _imbroglio_
rage in both fields. The views recently so fashionable that representation
has no place in art and that treatment not subject is what matters
in poetry spring ultimately from the same mistakes as to the
relation of thinking to feeling, from an inadequate psychology
which would set up one as inimical to the other. Reinforced as
they are by the illusion, supported by language, that Beauty
is a quality of things, not a character of our response to them,
and thus that all beautiful things as sharing this Beauty must
be alike, the confusion which such views promote is a main cause
of the difficulty which is felt so widely in appreciating both
the arts and poetry. They give an air of an esoteric mystery
to what is, if it can be done at all, the simplest and most natural
of proceedings.

The fundamental features of the experiences of reading poetry
and of appreciating pictures, the features upon which their value
depends, are alike. The means by which they are brought about
are unlike, but closely analogous critical and technical problems
arise, as we have seen, for each. The misapprehensions to which
thought is liable recur in all the fields in which it is exercised,
and the fact that it is sometimes more easy to detect a mistake
in one field than in another is a strong argument for comparing
such closely allied subjects.


[51] This character of blue is the basis of the doctrine of Reynolds,
that blue is unsuitable in foregrounds, which led Gainsborough,
according to the well-known story, to paint The Blue Boy.

[52] This account of harmony also applies to music. Few modern
authorities are content to regard harmony as an affair merely
of the physical relationships of notes.

[53] _D’Eugène Delacroix au Néo-Impressionisme_, p. 39.




