CHAPTER XIII

Emotion and the Cœnesthesia

    They are the silent griefs that cut the heart-strings.
                                            _The Broken Heart_.


In alluding to the cœnesthesia we came very near to giving an
account of emotion as an ingredient of consciousness. Stimulating
situations give rise to widespread ordered repercussions throughout
the body, felt as clearly marked colourings of consciousness.
These patterns in organic response are fear, grief, joy, anger
and the other emotional states. They arise for the most part
when permanent or periodical tendencies of the individual are
suddenly either facilitated or frustrated. Thus they depend far
less upon the nature of the external stimulus than upon the general
internal circumstances of the individual’s life at the time the
stimulus occurs. These emotional states, with pleasure and unpleasure,
are customarily distinguished under the head of feeling[45] from
sensations, which are, as we have seen, very closely dependent
for their character upon their stimulus. Thus sensations are
ranked together as cognitive elements, concerned, that is, with
our knowledge of things rather than with our attitude or behaviour
towards them, or our emotion about them. Pleasure, however, and
emotion have, on our view, also a cognitive aspect. They give
us knowledge; in the case of pleasure, of how our activities
are going on, successfully or otherwise; in the case of emotion,
knowledge primarily of our attitudes. But emotion may give us
further knowledge. It is a remarkable fact that persons with
exceptional colour sense apparently judge most accurately whether
two colours are the same, for example, or whether they have or
have not some definite harmonic relation to one another, not
by attentive optical comparison or examination, but by the general
emotional or organic reaction which the colours evoke when simply
glanced at. This is an indirect way of becoming aware of the
specific nature of the external world, but none the less a very
valuable way. A similar method is probably involved in those
apparently immediate judgments of the moral character of persons
met with for the first time which many people make so readily
and successfully. They may be quite unable to mention any definite
feature of the person upon which their judgment could be based.
It is none the less often extraordinarily just and discriminating.
The remarkable sensitiveness to its mother’s expression which
the infant shows is a striking example. The part played by this
kind of judgment in all æsthetic appreciation need not be insisted
upon. It is notable that artists are often pre-eminently adepts
at such judgments. The topic is usually discussed under the wide
and vague heading of intuition; a rubric which completely obscures
and befogs the issues.

For such judgments are not a simpler and more direct way of taking
cognisance of things, but a more indirect and more complex way.
It is not thereby shown to be a less primitive process. On the
contrary, simplified ways of thinking are commonly advanced products.
The ‘intuitive’ person uses his cœnesthesia as a chemist uses
his reagents or a physiologist his galvanometer. As far as the
sensations which the colour stimuli excite can be optically discriminated,
no difference is perceptible. But an actual yet sensorily imperceptible
difference becomes apparent through the difference in organic
reaction. The process is merely one of adding further and more
delicate signs to the situation, it is analogous to attaching
a recording lever to a barograph.

The differences between sensitive or ‘intuitive’ and more ‘rational’
and obtuse individuals may be of two kinds. It may be that the
sensitive person’s organic response is more delicate. This is
a difficult matter to decide. It is certain, however, that the
chief difference (a derivative difference very likely) lies in
the fact that the obtuse person has not learned to _interpret_
the changes in his general bodily consciousness in any systematic
fashion. The changes may occur and occur systematically, but
they mean nothing definite to him.

This kind of intervention of organic sensation in perception
plays a part in all the arts. Much neglected, it is probably
of very great importance. What here needs to be noticed is that
it is not a mode of gaining knowledge which differs in any essential
way from other modes. No unique and peculiar relation of ‘feeling’
towards things needs to be introduced to explain it, any more
than a unique and peculiar mode of ‘cognitively apprehending’
them needs to be introduced to explain ordinary knowing. In both
instances their causes, which have to be assumed in any case,
will suffice. When we sense something our sensation is caused
by what we sense. When we refer to something absent, a present
sensation similar to sensations which in the past have been coincident
with it, is thereby a sign for it, and so on, through more and
more intricate mnemic sign-situations. Here a present colour
sensation gives rise to an organic response which has in the
past accompanied a definite colour; the response becomes then
a sign of that colour which the sensitive and discriminating
person trusts, although he is optically unable to make sure whether
that colour is present or merely one very like it. Other cases
differ from this in complexity but not in principle. If it is
objected that this account of referring or thinking in terms
of causes gives us at best but a very indirect way of knowing,
the reply is that the prevalence of error is itself a strong
argument against a too direct theory of knowledge.

In popular parlance the term ‘emotion’ stands for those happenings
in minds which accompany such exhibitions of unusual excitement
as weeping, shouting, blushing, trembling, and so on. But in
the usage of most critics it has taken an extended sense, thereby
suffering quite needlessly in its usefulness. For them it stands
for any noteworthy ‘goings on’ in the mind almost regardless
of their nature. The true and profound emotions, as spoken of
by critics, are often lacking in all the characteristics which
govern the more refined linguistic usage of common people, and,
as it happens, of psychologists also, for what may perhaps be
regarded now as the standard usage in psychology, sets out from
the very same bodily changes accompanying experience as were
noted above.

Two main features characterise every emotional experience. One
of these is a diffused reaction in the organs of the body brought
about through the sympathetic systems. The other is a tendency
to action of some definite kind or group of kinds. These extensive
changes in the visceral and vascular systems, characteristically
in respiration and in glandular secretion, commonly take place
in response to situations which call some instinctive tendency
into play. As a result of all these changes a tide of sensations
of internal bodily origin comes into consciousness. It is generally
agreed that these sensations make up at least the main part of
the peculiar consciousness of an emotion. Whether they are necessary
to it or not is disputed. It may perhaps be suggested that insufficient
attention has been paid in the theory of emotion to images of
such sensations. The fact that fear, for example, may be felt
in the absence of any detectable bodily changes of the kind described
(a disputed fact) may be explained by supposing images of these
sensations to be taking their place.

These sensations, or images of them, are then a main ingredient
of an emotional experience and account for its peculiar ‘colour’
or tone, for the voluminousness and massiveness as well as for
the extreme acuteness of emotions. But of equal or greater importance
are the changes in consciousness due to reactions in the nervous
systems which control movement, governing muscular response to
the stimulating situation. These range, in the case of fear,
from the awakening of a simple tendency, an impulse to run away
or hide under the table, to such elaborate readjustments as we
make when we prepare to counter a threat against some favourite
opinion. As a rule a process of extraordinary complexity takes
place between perceiving the situation and finding a mode of
meeting it. This complicated process contributes the rest of
its peculiar flavour to an emotional experience.



A more detailed discussion from the same angle of the points
raised in this and the surrounding chapters will be found in
_The Meaning of Psychology_ (1926) by C. K. Ogden, where
the author’s view of mental activity is elaborated.

[45] The fashion in which the term ‘feeling’ shifts about in psychology
is notorious as a source of confusion. It would be convenient
if it could be kept for pleasure-unpleasure, and used no longer
as a synonym for ‘emotion’, since emotions can much more easily
be regarded as built up from organic sensations.




