Chapter X, especially the final paragraph. If a belief in Retributive
Justice, for example, is fatal to _Prometheus Unbound_,
so in another way is the belief that the Millennium is at hand.
To steer an unperplexed path between these opposite dangers is
extremely difficult. The distinctions required are perhaps better
left to the reader’s reflection than laboured further in the
faulty terminology which alone at present is available.

[102] Cf. Gurney, _The Power of Sound_, p. 126. “A splendid melodic
phrase seems continually not like an object of sense, but like an
affirmation; not so much prompting admiring ejaculation as compelling
passionate assent.” His explanation, through association with speech,
seems to me inadequate. He adds that the use of terms such as
“_expressiveness_ and _significance_, as opposed to meaninglessness and
triviality, may be allowed, without the implication of any reference to
transcendental views which one may fail to understand, or theories of
interpretation which one may entirely repudiate.”

[103] Percy Dearmer, _The Necessity of Art_, p. 180.

[104] A.W. Pollard, _ibidem_, p. 135.




APPENDIX A. On Value


A friendly reviewer, Mr. Conrad Aiken, complains that my theory
of value is not sufficiently relativistic, that it inevitably
involves the surreptitious re-entrance of the ‘absolute’ value
which we had been at such pains to exclude. Except for the word
‘surreptitious’ and the suggestion that the ‘absolute’ value
we arrive at is the same thing as the ultimate idea discussed
in Chapter VI., I agree to this. The purpose of the theory is
just to enable us to compare different experiences in respect
of their value; and their value, I suggest, is a quantitative
matter. To put it briefly the best life is that in which as much
as possible of our possible personality is engaged. And of two
personalities that one is the better in which there is more which
can be engaged without confusion. We all know people of unusually
wide and varied possibilities who pay for their width in disorder,
and we know others who pay for their order by narrowness. What
the theory attempts to provide is a system of measurement by
which we can compare not only different experiences belonging
to the same personality but different personalities. We do not
yet know how to make the measurements required. We have to use
the roughest kinds of estimates and very indirect indications.
But to know at least what would have to be measured if we were
to reach precision and how to make the comparison is a step towards
the goal. The parallel, though I am not fond of it, between the
new absolutism which Relativity has reached and this quantitative
way of comparing the experiences and preferences of individuals
may perhaps be helpful. But whereas the physicist has measurements
to work from, the psychologist as yet has none. And further,
it is likely that modes of mental organisation which are at present
impossible or dangerously unstable may become possible and even
easy in the future with changes in social structure and material
conditions. This last consideration might give any critic a nightmare.
Nothing less than our whole sense of man’s history and destiny
is involved in our final decision as to value.




APPENDIX B.

THE POETRY OF T. S. ELIOT


We too readily forget that, unless something is very wrong with
our civilisation, we should be producing three equal poets at
least for every poet of high rank in our great-great-grandfathers’
day. Something must indeed be wrong; and since Mr. Eliot is one
of the very few poets that current conditions have not overcome,
the difficulties which he has faced, and the cognate difficulties
which his readers encounter, repay study.

Mr. Eliot’s poetry has occasioned an unusual amount of irritated
or enthusiastic bewilderment. The bewilderment has several sources.
The most formidable is the unobtrusiveness, in some cases the
absence, of any coherent intellectual thread upon which the items
of the poem are strung. A reader of ‘Gerontion,’ of ‘Preludes,’
or of ‘The Waste Land,’ may, if he will, after repeated readings,
introduce such a thread. Another reader after much effort may
fail to contrive one. But in either case energy will have been
misapplied. For the items are united by the accord, contrast,
and interaction of their emotional effects, not by an intellectual
scheme that analysis must work out. The value lies in the unified
response which this interaction creates in the right reader.
The only intellectual activity required takes place in the realisation
of the separate items. We can, of course, make a ‘rationalisation’
of the whole experience, as we can of any experience. If we do,
we are adding something which does not belong to the poem. Such
a logical scheme is, at best, a scaffolding that vanishes when
the poem is constructed. But we have so built into our nervous
systems a demand for intellectual coherence, even in poetry,
that we find a difficulty in doing without it.

This point may be misunderstood, for the charge most usually
brought against Mr. Eliot’s poetry is that it is overintellectualised.
One reason for this is his use of allusion. A reader who in one
short poem picks up allusions to _The Aspern Papers_, _Othello_,
‘A Toccata of Galuppi’s,’ Marston, _The Phœnix and the Turtle_,
_Antony and Cleopatra_ (twice), ‘The Extasie,’ _Macbeth_,
_The Merchant of Venice_, and Ruskin, feels that his wits
are being unusually well exercised. He may easily leap to the
conclusion that the basis of the poem is in wit also. But this
would be a mistake. These things come in, not that the reader
may be ingenious or admire the writer’s erudition (this last
accusation has tempted several critics to disgrace themselves),
but for the sake of the emotional aura which they bring and the
attitudes they incite. Allusion in Mr. Eliot’s hands is a technical
device for compression. ‘The Waste Land’ is the equivalent in
content to an epic. Without this device twelve books would have
been needed. But these allusions and the notes in which some
of them are elucidated have made many a petulant reader turn
down his thumb at once. Such a reader has not begun to understand
what it is all about.

This objection is connected with another, that of obscurity.
To quote a recent pronouncement upon ‘The Waste Land’ from Mr.
Middleton Murry: ‘The reader is compelled, in the mere effort
to understand, to adopt an attitude of intellectual suspicion,
which makes impossible the communication of feeling. The work
offends against the most elementary canon of good writing: that
the immediate effect should be unambiguous.’ Consider first this
canon. What would happen, if we pressed it, to Shakespeare’s
greatest sonnets or to _Hamlet_? The truth is that very
much of the best poetry is necessarily ambiguous in its immediate
effect. Even the most careful and responsive reader must reread
and do hard work before the poem forms itself clearly and unambiguously
in his mind. An original poem, as much as a new branch of mathematics,
compels the mind which receives it to grow, and this takes time.
Anyone who upon reflection asserts the contrary for his own case
must be either a demigod or dishonest; probably Mr. Murray was
in haste. His remarks show that he has failed in his attempt
to read the poem, and they reveal, in part, the reason for his
failure—namely, his own overintellectual approach. To read it
successfully he would have to discontinue his present self-mystifications.

The critical question in all cases is whether the poem is worth
the trouble it entails. For ‘The Waste Land’ this is considerable.
There is Miss Weston’s _From Ritual to Romance_ to read,
and its ‘astral’ trimmings to be discarded—they have nothing
to do with Mr. Eliot’s poem. There is Canto xxvi of the _Purgatorio_
to be studied—the relevance of the close of that canto to the
whole of Mr. Eliot’s work must be insisted upon. It illuminates
his persistent concern with sex, the problem of our generation,
as religion was the problem of the last. There is the central
position of Tiresias in the poem to be puzzled out—the cryptic
form of the note which Mr. Eliot writes on this point is just
a little tiresome. It is a way of underlining the fact that the
poem is concerned with many aspects of the one fact of sex, a
hint that is perhaps neither indispensable nor entirely successful.

When all this has been done by the reader, when the materials
with which the words are to clothe themselves have been collected,
the poem still remains to be read. And it is easy to fail in
this undertaking. An ‘attitude of intellectual suspicion’ must
certainly be abandoned. But this is not difficult to those who
still know how to give their feelings precedence to their thoughts,
who can accept and unify an experience without trying to catch
it in an intellectual net or to squeeze out a doctrine. One form
of this attempt must be mentioned. Some, misled no doubt by its
origin in a Mystery, have endeavoured to give the poem a symbolical
reading. But its symbols are not mystical, but emotional. They
stand, that is, not for ineffable objects, but for normal human
experience. The poem, in fact, is radically naturalistic; only
its compression makes it appear otherwise. And in this it probably
comes nearer to the original Mystery which it perpetuates than
transcendentalism does.

If it were desired to label in three words the most characteristic
feature of Mr. Eliot’s technique, this might be done by calling
his poetry a music of ideas. The ideas are of all kinds, abstract
and concrete, general and particular, and, like the musician’s
phrases, they are arranged, not that they may tell us something,
but that their effects in us may combine into a coherent whole
of feeling and attitude and produce a peculiar liberation of
the will. They are there to be responded to, not to be pondered
or worked out. This is, of course, a method used intermittently
in very much poetry, and only an accentuation and isolation of
one of its normal resources. The peculiarity of Mr. Eliot’s later,
more puzzling, work is his deliberate and almost exclusive employment
of it. In the earlier poems this logical freedom appears only
occasionally. In ‘The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock,’ for example,
there is a patch at the beginning and another at the end, but
the rest of the poem is quite straightforward. In ‘Gerontion,’
the first long poem in this manner, the air of monologue, of
a stream of associations, is a kind of disguise, and the last
two lines,

            Tenants of the house,
    Thoughts of a dry brain in a dry season,

are almost an excuse. The close of ‘A Cooking Egg’ is perhaps
the passage in which the technique shows itself most clearly.
The reader who appreciates the emotional relevance of the title
has the key to the later poems in his hand. I take Pipit to be
the retired nurse of the hero of the poem, and _Views of the
Oxford Colleges_ to be the, still treasured, present which
he sent her when he went up to the University. The middle section
of the poem I read as a specimen of the rather withered pleasantry
in which contemporary culture has culminated and beyond which
it finds much difficulty in passing. The final section gives
the contrast which is pressed home by the title. Even the most
mature egg was new laid once. The only other title of equal significance
that I can recall is Mrs. Wharton’s _The Age of Innocence_,
which might well be studied in this connection. ‘The Waste Land’
and ‘The Hollow Men’ (the most beautiful of Mr. Eliot’s poems,
and in the last section a new development) are purely a ‘music
of ideas,’ and the pretence of a continuous thread of associations
is dropped.

How this technique lends itself to misunderstandings we have
seen. But many readers who have failed in the end to escape bewilderment
have begun by finding on almost every line that Mr. Eliot has
written—if we except certain youthful poems on American topics—that
personal stamp which is the hardest thing for the craftsman to
imitate and perhaps the most certain sign that the experience,
good or bad, rendered in the poem is authentic. Only those unfortunate
persons who are incapable of reading poetry can resist Mr. Eliot’s
rhythms. The poem as a whole may elude us while every fragment,
as a fragment, comes victoriously home. It is difficult to believe
that this is Mr. Eliot’s fault rather than his reader’s, because
a parallel case of a poet who so constantly achieves the hardest
part of his task and yet fails in the easier is not to be found.
It is much more likely that we have been trying to put the fragments
together on a wrong principle.

Another doubt has been expressed. Mr. Eliot repeats himself in
two ways. The nightingale, Cleopatra’s barge, the rats, and the
smoky candle-end, recur and recur. Is this a sign of a poverty
of inspiration? A more plausible explanation is that this repetition
is in part a consequence of the technique above described, and
in part something which many writers who are not accused of poverty
also show. Shelley, with his rivers, towers, and stars, Conrad,
Hardy, Walt Whitman, and Dostoevski spring to mind. When a writer
has found a theme or image which fixes a point of relative stability
in the drift of experience, it is not to be expected that he
will avoid it. Such themes are a means of orientation. And it
is quite true that the central process in all Mr. Eliot’s best
poems is the same; the conjunction of feelings which, though
superficially opposed,—as squalor, for example, is opposed to
grandeur,—yet tend as they develop to change places and even
to unite. If they do not develop far enough the intention of
the poet is missed. Mr. Eliot is neither sighing after vanished
glories nor holding contemporary experience up to scorn.

Both bitterness and desolation are superficial aspects of his
poetry. There are those who think that he merely takes his readers
into the Waste Land and leaves them there, that in his last poem
he confesses his impotence to release the healing waters. The
reply is that some readers find in his poetry not only a clearer,
fuller realisation of their plight, the plight of a whole generation,
than they find elsewhere, but also through the very energies
set free in that realisation a return of the saving passion.



