CHAPTER VIII

Art and Morals

            Com, no more,
    This is meer moral babble, and direct
    Against the canon laws of our foundation.—_Comus_.


From this excursus let us return to our proper task, the attempt
to outline a morality which will change its values as circumstances
alter, a morality free from occultism, absolutes and arbitrariness,
a morality which will explain, as no morality has yet explained,
the place and value of the arts in human affairs. What is good
or valuable, we have said, is the exercise of impulses and the
satisfaction of their appetencies. When we say that anything
is good we mean that it satisfies, and by a good experience we
mean one in which the impulses which make it are fulfilled and
successful, adding as the necessary qualification that their
exercise and satisfaction shall not interfere in any way with
more important impulses. Importance we have seen to be a complicated
matter, and which impulses are by an extensive inquiry into what
actually happens. The problem of morality then, the problem of
how we are to obtain the greatest possible value from life, becomes
a problem of organisation, both in the individual life and in
the adjustment of individual lives to one another, and is delivered
from all non-psychological ideas, from absolute goods and immediate
convictions, which incidentally help greatly to give unnecessary
stiffness and fixity to obsolescent codes. Without system, needless
to say, value vanishes, since in a state of chaos important and
trivial impulses alike are frustrated.

A minor problem may occur here to the reader. It concerns the
choice between a ‘crowded hour’ and an age without a name, and
the place of the time factor in valuation. There are many very
valuable states which cannot last very long in the nature of
the case, and some of these seem to have disabling consequences.
But, to take merely the most interesting instance, if we knew
more about the nervous constitution of genius we might discover
that the instability from which so many people suffer who are
at times best able to actualise the possibilities of life is
merely a consequence of their plasticity; not in the least a
price which they pay for such ‘high moments,’ but rather a result
in systems of great delicacy of wear and tear at lower levels
of adjustment. It is generally those who have the least refined
views of value who most readily believe that highly valuable
hours must be paid for afterwards. Their conception of a ‘hectic
time’ as the summit of human possibilities explains the opinion.
For those who find that the most valuable experiences are those
which are also most fruitful of further valuable experiences
no problem arises. To the query whether they prefer a long life
to a joyous one, they will reply that they find very satisfactory
a life which is both.

The most valuable states of mind then are those which involve
the widest and most comprehensive co-ordination of activities
and the least curtailment, conflict, starvation and restriction.
States of mind in general are valuable in the degree in which
they tend to reduce waste and frustration. We must be careful
in considering this formulation to remember how varied human
activities are and avoid, for example, undue admiration for practical
efficient persons whose emotional life is suppressed. But, thanks
to the psycho-analysts, we are hardly likely at the moment to
overlook the consequences of suppressions.

It is plain that no one systematisation can claim a supreme position.
Men are naturally different and in any society specialisation
is inevitable. There are evidently a great number of good systematisations
and what is good for one person will not be good for another.
A sailor, a doctor, a mathematician and a poet can hardly have
the same organisation throughout. With different conditions different
values necessarily arise. Doubtless conditions may be, and too
often are, such that no life of high value is possible. With
a naturalistic morality the reasons for altering them and the
way to do so both become clearer. But even with our present resources
and command over nature, it is universally agreed that intelligence
and goodwill could contrive that no man should be so situated
as to be deprived of all the generally accessible values. The
clearing away from moral questions of all ethical lumber and
superstitious interpolations is a step long overdue in this undertaking.
But until it has been carried further, so it is often thought,
to be busied with such apparently ‘unpractical’ activities as
art or criticism is to behave too much like a passenger on a
short-handed ship. This is true enough doubtless of some who
so busy themselves. But it is not true that criticism is a luxury
trade. The rear-guard of society cannot be extricated until the
vanguard has gone further. Goodwill and intelligence are still
too little available. The critic, we have said, is as much concerned
with the health of the mind as any doctor with the health of
the body. To set up as a critic is to set up as a judge of values.
What are the other qualifications required we shall see later.
For the arts are inevitably and quite apart from any intentions
of the artist an appraisal of existence. Matthew Arnold when
he said that poetry is a criticism of life was saying something
so obvious that it is constantly overlooked. The artist is concerned
with the record and perpetuation of the experiences which seem
to him most worth having. For reasons which we shall consider
in Chapter XXII, he is also the man who is most likely to have
experiences of value to record. He is the point at which the
growth of the mind shows itself. His experiences those at least
which give value to his work, represent conciliations of impulses
which in most minds are still confused, intertrammelled and conflicting.
His work is the ordering of what in most minds is disordered.
That his _failures_ to bring order out of chaos are often
more conspicuous than those of other men is due in part at least
to his greater audacity; it is a penalty of ambition and a consequence
of his greater plasticity. But when he succeeds, the value of
what he has accomplished is found always in a more perfect organisation
which makes more of the possibilities of response and activity
available.

What value is and which experiences are most valuable will never
be understood so long as we think in terms of those large abstractions,
the virtues and the vices. “You do invert the covenants of her
trust,” said Comus, that disreputable advocate of Utilitarianism,
to the Lady, that enemy of Nature. Instead of recognising that
value lies in the ‘minute particulars’ of response and attitude,
we have tried to find it in conformity to abstract prescriptions
and general rules of conduct. The artist is an expert in the
‘minute particulars’ and _qua_ artist pays little or no
attention to generalisations which he finds in actual: practice
are too crude to discriminate between what is valuable and the
reverse. For this reason the moralist has always tended to distrust
or to ignore him. Yet since the fine conduct of life springs
only from fine ordering of responses far too subtle to be touched
by any general ethical maxims, this neglect of art by the moralist
has been tantamount to a disqualification. The basis of morality,
as Shelley insisted, is laid not by preachers but by poets. Bad
taste and crude responses are not mere flaws in an otherwise
admirable person. They are actually a root evil from which other
defects follow. No life can be excellent in which the elementary
responses are disorganised and confused.




