CHAPTER II

The Phantom Æsthetic State

  None of his follies will he repent, none will he wish to repeat; no
    happier lot can be assigned to man.—_Wilhelm Mester_.


A more serious defect in æsthetics is the avoidance of considerations
as to value. It is true that an ill-judged introduction of value
considerations usually leads to disaster, as in Tolstoy’s case.
But the fact that some of the experiences to which the arts give
rise are valuable and take the form they do because of their
value is not irrelevant. Whether this fact is of service in analysis
will naturally depend upon the theory of value adopted. But to
leave it out of account altogether is to run the risk of missing
the clue to the whole matter. And the clue has in fact been missed.

All modern æsthetics rests upon an assumption which has been
strangely little discussed, the assumption that there is a distinct
_kind_ of mental activity present in what are called æsthetic
experiences. Ever since “the first rational word concerning beauty”[1]
was spoken by Kant, the attempt to define the ‘judgment of taste’
as concerning pleasure which is disinterested, universal, unintellectual,
and not to be confused with the pleasures of sense or of ordinary
emotions, in short to make it a thing _sui generis_, has
continued. Thus arises the phantom problem of the æsthetic mode
or æsthetic state, a legacy from the days of abstract investigation
into the Good, the Beautiful and the True.

The temptation to align this tripartite division with a similar
division into Will, Feeling and Thought was irresistible. “All
the faculties of the Soul, or capacities, are reducible to three,
which do not admit of any further derivation from a common ground:
the _faculty of knowledge_, the _feeling of pleasure or
displeasure_, and the _faculty of desire_”[2] said Kant.
Legislative for each of these faculties stood Understanding,
Judgment and Reason respectively. “Between the faculties of knowledge
and desire stands the feeling of pleasure, just as judgment is
intermediate between understanding and reason.” And he went on
to discuss æsthetics as appertaining to the province of judgment,
the middle one of these three, the first and last having already
occupied him in his two other Critiques of Pure and Practical
Reason respectively. The effect was virtually to annex æsthetics
to Idealism, in which fabric it has ever since continued to serve
important purposes.

This accident of formal correspondence has had an influence upon
speculation which would be ridiculous if it had not been so disastrous.
It is difficult even now to get out of ruts which have been seen
to lead nowhere. With the identification of the provinces of
Truth and Thought no quarrel arises, and the Will and the Good
are, as we shall see, intimately connected, but the attempts
to fit Beauty into a neat pigeon-hole with Feeling have led to
calamitous distortions. It is now generally abandoned,[3] although
echoes of it can be heard everywhere in critical writings. The
peculiar use of ‘emotion’ by reviewers, and the prevalence of
the phrase ‘æsthetic emotion’ is one of them. In view, then,
of the objections to Feeling, something else, some special mode
of mental activity, had to be found, to which Beauty could belong.
Hence arose the æsthetic mode. Truth was the object of the inquiring
activity, of the Intellectual or Theoretical part of the mind,
and the Good that of the willing, desiring, practical part; what
part could be found for the Beautiful? Some activity that was
neither inquisitive nor practical, that did not question and
did not seek to use. The result was the æsthetic, the contemplative,
activity which is still defined, in most treatments[4], by these
negative conditions alone, as that mode of commerce with things
which is neither intellectual inquiry into their nature, nor
an attempt to make them satisfy our desire. The experiences which
arise in contemplating objects of art were then discovered to
be describable in some such terms, and system secured a temporary
triumph.

It is true that many of these experiences do present peculiarities,
both in the intellectual interest which is present and in the
way in which the development of desires within them takes place,
and these peculiarities—detachment, impersonality, serenity and
so forth—are of great interest. They will have to be carefully
examined in the sequel.

We shall find that two entirely different sets of characters
are involved. They arise from quite different causes but are
hard to distinguish introspectively. Taken as marking off a special
province for inquiry they are most unsatisfactory. They would
yield for our purposes, even if they were not so ambiguous, a
diagonal or slant classification. Some of the experiences which
most require to be considered would be left out and many which
are without importance brought in. To choose the Æsthetic State
as the starting-point for an inquiry into the values of the arts
is in fact somewhat like choosing ‘rectangular, and red in parts’
as a definition of a picture. We should find ourselves ultimately
discussing a different collection of things from those we intended
to discuss.

But the problem remains—Is there any such thing as the æsthetic
state, or any æsthetic character of experiences which is _sui
generis_? Not many explicit arguments have ever been given
for one. Vernon Lee, it is true, in _Beauty and Ugliness_,
p. 10, argues that “a relation entirely _sui generis_ between
visible and audible forms and ourselves” can be deduced from
the fact “that given proportions, shapes, patterns, compositions
have a tendency to recur in art.” How this can be done it is
hard to divine. Arsenic tends to recur in murder cases, and tennis
in the summer, but no characters or relations _sui generis_
anywhere are thereby proved. Obviously you can only tell whether
anything is like or unlike other things by examining it and them,
and to notice that one case of it is like another case of it,
is not helpful. It may be suspected that where the argument is
so confused, the original question was not very clear.

The question is whether a certain kind of experience is or is
not _like_ other kinds of experience. Plainly it is a question
as to degree of likeness. Be it granted at once, to clear the
air, that there are all sorts of experiences involved in the
values of the arts, and that attributions of Beauty spring from
all sorts of causes. Is there among these one kind of experience
as different from experiences which don’t so occur as, say envy
is from remembering, or as mathematical calculation is from eating
cherries? And what degree of difference would make it specific?
Put this way it is plainly not an easy question to answer. These
differences, none of them measurable, are of varying degree,
and all are hard to estimate. Yet the vast majority of post-Kantian
writers, and many before him, have unhesitatingly replied, “Yes!
the æsthetic experience is peculiar and specific.” And their
grounds, when not merely verbal, have usually been those of direct
inspection.

It requires some audacity to run counter to such a tradition,
and I do not do so without reflection. Yet, after all, the matter
is one of classification, and when so many other divisions in
psychology are being questioned and re-organised, this also may
be re-examined.

The case for a distinct æsthetic species of experience can take
two forms. It may be held that there is some unique kind of mental
element which enters into æsthetic experiences and into no others.
Thus Mr Clive Bell used to maintain the existence of an unique
emotion ‘æsthetic emotion’ as the _differentia_. But psychology
has no place for such an entity. What other will be suggested?
Empathy, for example, as Vernon Lee herself insists, enters into
innumerable other experiences as well as into æsthetic experiences.
I do not think any will be proposed.

Alternatively, the æsthetic experience may contain no unique
constituent, and be of the usual stuff but with a special form.
This is what it is commonly supposed to be. Now the special form
as it is usually described—in terms of disinterestedness, detachment,
distance, impersonality, subjective universality, and so forth—this
form, I shall try to show later, is sometimes no more than a
consequence of the incidence of the experience, a condition or
an effect of communication. But sometimes a structure which can
be described in the same terms is an essential feature of the
experience, the feature in fact upon which its value depends.
In other words, at least two different sets of characters, due
to different causes, are, in current usage, ambiguously covered
by the term ‘æsthetic.’ It is very necessary to distinguish the
sense in which merely putting something in a frame or writing
it in verse gives it an ‘æsthetic character,’ from a sense in
which value is implied. This confusion, together with other confusions,[5]
has made the term nearly useless.

The æsthetic mode is generally supposed to be a peculiar way
of regarding things which can be exercised, whether the resulting
experiences are valuable, disvaluable or indifferent. It is intended
to cover the experience of ugliness as well as that of beauty,
and also intermediate experiences. What I wish to maintain is
that there is no such mode, that the experience of ugliness has
nothing in common with that of beauty, which both do not share
with innumerable other experiences no one (except Croce; but
this qualification is often required) would dream of calling
æsthetic. But a narrower sense of æsthetic is also found in which
it _is_ confined to experiences of beauty and does imply
value. And with regard to this, while admitting that such experiences
can be distinguished, I shall be at pains to show that they are
closely similar to many other experiences, that they differ chiefly
in the connections between their constituents, and that they
are only a further development, a finer organisation of ordinary
experiences, and not in the least a new and different kind of
thing. When we look at a picture, or read a poem, or listen to
music, we are not doing something quite unlike what we were doing
on our way to the Gallery or when we dressed in the morning.
The fashion in which the experience is caused in us is different,
and as a rule the experience is more complex and, if we are successful,
more unified. But our activity is not of a fundamentally different
kind. To assume that it is, puts difficulties in the way of describing
and explaining it, which are unnecessary and which no one has
yet succeeded in overcoming.

The point here raised, and particularly the distinction between
the two quite different sets of characters, on the ground of
which an experience may be described as æsthetic or impersonal
and disinterested, will become clearer at a later stage.[6]



A further objection to the assumption of a peculiar æsthetic
attitude is that it makes smooth the way for the idea of a peculiar
æsthetic value, a pure art value. Postulate a peculiar kind:
of experience, æsthetic experience, and it is an easy step to
the postulation of a peculiar unique value, different in kind
and cut off from the other values of ordinary experiences. “To
appreciate a work of art we need bring with us nothing from life,
no knowledge of its ideas and affairs, no familiarity with its
emotions.”[7] So runs a recent extreme statement of the Æsthetic
Hypothesis, which has had much success. To quote another example
less drastic but also carrying with it the implication that æsthetic
experiences are _sui generis_, and their value not of the
same kind as other values. “Its nature is to be not a part, nor
yet a copy, of the real world (as we commonly understand that
phrase), but a world in itself independent, complete, autonomous.”[8]

This view of the arts as providing a private heaven for æsthetes
is, as will appear later, a great impediment to the investigation
of their value. The effects upon the general attitudes of those
who accept it uncritically are also often regrettable; while
the effects upon literature and the arts have been noticeable,
in a narrowing and restriction of the interests active, in preciousness,
artificiality and spurious aloofness. ~Art~ envisaged as a mystic,
ineffable virtue is a close relative of the ‘æsthetic mood’,
and may easily be pernicious in its effects, through the habits
of mind which, as an idea, it fosters, and to which, as a mystery,
it appeals.


[1] Hegel’s _dictum, History of Philosophy_, iii, 543.

[2] _Critique of Judgment_, transl. by Meredith, p. 15.

[3] Dr Bosanquet was one of the last adherents. See his _Three
Lectures on Æsthetics_.

[4] E.g. Vernon Lee, _The Beautiful_.

[5] E.g. Any choice for which the chooser cannot give his reasons
tends in the laboratory to be called an ‘æsthetic choice.’

[6] Cf. Chapters X and XXXII, and Impersonality, _Index_.

[7] Clive Bell, _Art_, p. 25.

[8] A.C. Bradley, _Oxford Lectures on Poetry_, p. 5.




