CHAPTER VII

A Psychological Theory of Value

    Hands that can grasp, eyes
    that can dilate, hair that can rise
        if it must, these things are important not because a
  high-sounding interpretation can be put upon them, but because they are
    useful.—_Marianne Moore_.


The method then by which any attempt to analyse ‘good’ has been
condemned is itself objectionable, and yields no sound reason
why a purely psychological account of the differences between
good, bad, and indifferent experiences should not be given. The
data for the inquiry are in part supplied by anthropology. It
has become clear that the disparity among the states of mind
recognised as good by persons of different races, habits and
civilisations is overwhelming. Any observant child, it is true,
might discover in the home circle how widely people disagree,
but the effect of education is to suppress these scientific efforts.
It has needed the vast accumulations of anthropological evidence
now available to establish the fact that as the organisation
of life and affairs alters very different experiences are perceived
to be good or bad, are favoured or condemned. The Bakairi of
Central Brazil and the Tahitians, among others, are reported,
for example, to look upon eating with the same feelings which
we reserve for quite different physiological performances, and
to regard the public consumption of food as a grave breach of
decency. In many parts of the world feelings of forgiveness towards
enemies, for example, are looked upon as low and ignoble. The
experiences which one person values are thought vicious by another.
We must allow, it is true, for widespread confusion between intrinsic
and instrumental values, and for the difficulty of identifying
experiences. Many states of mind in other people which we judge
to be bad or indifferent are no doubt unlike what we imagine
them to be, or contain elements which we overlook, so that with
fuller knowledge we might discover them to be good. In this manner
it may be possible to reduce the reported disparity of value
intuitions, but few people acquainted with the varying moral
judgments of mankind will doubt that circumstances and necessities,
present and past, explain our approval and disapproval. We start,
then, with a hearty scepticism of all immediate intuitions, and
inquire how it is that individuals in different conditions, and
at different stages of their development, esteem things so differently.

With the exception of some parents and nursemaids we have lately
all been aghast at revelations of the value judgments of infants.
Their impulses, their desires, their preferences, the things
which they esteem, as displayed by the psycho-analysts, strike
even those whose attitude towards humanity is not idealistic
with some dismay. Even when the stories are duly discounted,
enough which is verifiable remains for _infans polypervers_
to present a truly impressive figure dominating all future psychological
inquiry into value.

There is no need here to examine in detail how these early impulses
are diverted and disguised by social pressures. The rough outlines
are familiar of the ways in which by growth, by the appearance
of fresh instinctive tendencies, by increase of knowledge and
of command over the world, under the control of custom, magical
beliefs, public opinion, inculcation and example, the primitive
new-born animal may be gradually transformed into a bishop. At
every stage in the astonishing metamorphosis, the impulses, desires,
and propensities of the individual take on a new form, or, it
may be, a further degree of systematisation. This systematisation
is never complete. Always some impulse, or set of impulses, can
be found which in one way or another interferes, or conflicts,
with others. It may do so in two ways, directly or indirectly.
Some impulses are in themselves psychologically incompatible,
some are incompatible only indirectly, through producing contrary
effects in the world outside. The difficulty some people have
in smoking and writing at the same time is a typical instance
of the first kind of incompatibility; the two activities get
in each other’s way by a psychological accident as it were. Interference
of this kind can be overcome by practice to an unexpected degree,
as the feats of jugglers show; some, however, are insurmountable;
and these incompatibilities are often, as we shall see, of supreme
consequence in moral development. Indirect incompatibilities
arising through the consequences of our acts are more easy to
find. Our whole existence is one long study of them, from the
infant’s first choice whether he shall use his mouth for screaming
or for sucking, to the last codicil to his Will.

These are simple instances, but the conduct of life is throughout
an attempt to organise impulses so that success is obtained for
the greater number or mass of them, for the most important and
the weightiest set. And here we come face to face again with
the problem of value. How shall we decide which among these are
more important than: others, and how shall we distinguish different
organisations as yielding more or less value one than another?
At this point we need to be on our guard not to smuggle in any
peculiar ethical, non-psychological, idea under some disguise,
under ‘important’ or ‘fundamental’, for example.

Among those who reject any metaphysical view of value it has
become usual to define value as capacity for satisfying feeling
and desire in various intricate ways.[19] For the purpose of tracing
in detail the very subtle and varied modes in which people actually
value things, a highly intricate treatment is indispensable,
but here a simpler definition will suffice.

We may start from the fact that impulses may be divided into
appetencies and aversions, and begin by saying that anything
is valuable which satisfies an appetency or ‘seeking after.’
The term ‘desire’ would do as well if we could avoid the implication
of accompanying conscious beliefs as to what is sought and a
further restriction to felt and recognised longings. The term
‘want’ used so much by economists has the same disadvantages.
Appetencies may be, and for the most part are, unconscious, and
to leave out those which we cannot discover by introspection
would involve extensive errors. For the same reason it is wiser
not to start from feeling. Appetencies then, rather than felt
appetencies or desires, shall be our starting-point.

The next step is to agree that apart from consequences anyone
_will actually prefer_ to satisfy a greater number of equal
appetencies rather than a less. Observation of people’s behaviour,
including our own, is probably sufficient to establish this agreement.
If now we look to see what consequences can intervene to upset
this simple principle, we shall find that only interferences,
immediate or remote, direct: or indirect, with other appetencies,
need to be considered. The only _psychological_ restraints
upon appetencies are other appetencies.[20]

We can now extend our definition. Anything is valuable which
will satisfy an appetency without involving the frustration of
some equal or _more important_ appetency; in other words,
the only reason which can be given for not satisfying a desire
is that more important desires will thereby be thwarted. Thus
morals become purely prudential, and ethical codes merely the
expression of the mast general scheme of expediency[21] to which
an individual or a race has attained. But we have still to say
what ‘important’ stands for in this formulation. (Cf. p. 51).

There are certain evident priorities among impulses, some of
which have been studied in various ways by economists under the
headings of primary wants and secondary wants. Some needs or
impulses must be satisfied in order that others may be possible.
We must eat, drink, sleep, breathe, protect ourselves and carry
on an immense physiological business as a condition for any further
activities. Some of these impulses, breathing, for example, can
be satisfied directly, but most of them involve us in complicated
cycles of instrumental labour. Man for the most part must exert
himself half his life to satisfy even the primitive needs, and
these activities, failing other means of reaching the same ends,
share their priority. In their turn they involve as conditions
a group of impulses, whose satisfaction becomes only second in
importance to physiological necessities, those, namely, upon
which communication and the ability to co-operate depend. But
these, since man is a social creature, also become more directly
necessary to his well-being.

The very impulses which enable him to co-operate in gaining his
dinner would themselves, if not satisfied, wreck by their mere
frustration all his activities. This happens all through the
hierarchy. Impulses, whose exercise may have been originally
only important as means, and which might once have been replaced
by quite different sets, become in time necessary conditions
for innumerable quite different performances. Objects, again,
originally valued because they satisfy one need, are found later
to be also capable of satisfying others. Dress, for example,
appears to have originated in magical, ‘life-giving,’ ornaments[22],
but so many other interests derive satisfaction from it that
controversy can still arise as to its primitive uses.

The instances of priorities given must only be taken as examples.
It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that for a civilised
man, activities originally valuable as means only, often become
so important through their connections with the rest of his activities,
that life without them is regarded as intolerable. Thus acts
which will debar him from his normal relations with his fellows
are often avoided, even at the cost of death. Total cessation
of all activities is preferred to the dreadful thwarting and
privation which would ensue. The case of the soldier, or of the
conscientious objector, is thus no exception to the principle.
Life deprived of all but the barest physiological necessities,
for example, prison life, is for many people worse than non-existence.
Those who even so incur it in defence of some ‘moral ideal’ do
so because they are so organised, either permanently or temporarily,
that only in this way can their dominant impulses secure satisfaction.
The self-regarding impulses form only a part of the total activities
of social man, and the impulse of the martyr to bear witness
at any cost to what he regards as truth, is only one extreme
instance of the degree to which other impulses often assume supremacy.

For another reason any priorities mentioned must be taken only
as illustrations. We do not know enough yet about the precedences,
the hierarchies, the modes of systematisation, actual and possible,
in that unimaginable organisation, the mind, to say what order
in any case actually exists, or between what the order holds.
We only know that a growing order is the principle of the mind,
that its function is to co-ordinate, and we can detect that in
some of its forms the precedence is different from that in others.
This we could do by observation, by comparing the drunken man
with the sober, but from our own experience of our own activity
we can go much further. We can feel differences between clear
coherent thinking and confusion or stupidity, between free, controlled
emotional response and dull or clogged impassivity, between moments
when we do with our bodies more delicate and dexterous things
than seem possible, and moments of clumsiness, when we are ‘all
thumbs’, have no ‘balance’ or ‘timing’, and nothing ‘comes off’.
These differences are differences in momentary organisation,
differences in precedence between rival possible systematisations.
The more permanent and more specifically ‘moral’ differences
between individuals grow out of differences such as these and
correspond to similar precedences between larger systems.

The complications possible in the systematisation of impulses
might be illustrated indefinitely. The plasticity of special
appetencies and activities varies enormously. Some impulses can
be diverted more easily than others. Sex has a wider range of
satisfactions than hunger, for example; some are weaker than
others; some (not the same necessarily) can be suppressed in
the long run with less difficulty. Some can be modified; some
obey the ‘all or none’ rule—they must either be satisfied specifically
or completely inhibited—well-established habits may have this
peculiarity. In judging the importance of any impulse all these
considerations must be taken into account. The affiliations of
impulses, at present often inexplicable, need especially to be
considered. Within the whole partially systematised organisation,
numerous sub-systems can be found, and what would be expected
to be quite trivial impulses are often discovered to be important,
because they belong to powerful groups. Thus there are reasonable
persons who, without a high polish on their shoes, are almost
incapacitated.

The importance of an impulse, it will be seen, can be defined
for our purposes as _the extent of the disturbance of other
impulses in the individual’s activities which the thwarting of
the impulse involves_. A vague definition, it is true, but
therefore suitable to our at present incomplete and hazy knowledge
of how impulses are related. It will be observed that no special
ethical idea is introduced. We can now take our next step forward
and inquire into the relative merits of different systematisations.

No individual can live one minute without a very intricate and,
so far as it goes, very perfect co-ordination of impulses. It
is only when we pass from the activities which from second to
second maintain life to those which from hour to hour determine
what kind of life it shall be, that we find wide differences.
Fortunately for psychology we can each find wide enough differences
in ourselves from hour to hour. Most people in the same day are
Bonaparte and Oblomov by turns. Before breakfast Diogenes, after
dinner Petronius or Bishop Usher. But throughout these mutations
certain dispositions usually remain much the same, those which
govern public behaviour in a limited number of affairs varying
very greatly from one society or civilisation to another. Every
systematisation in the degree to which it is stable involves
a degree of sacrifice, but for some the price to be paid in opportunities
foregone is greater than for others. By the extent of the loss,
the range of impulses thwarted or starved, and their degree of
importance, the merit of a systematisation is judged. That organisation
which is least wasteful of human possibilities is, in short,
the best. Some individuals, hag-ridden by their vices, or their
virtues, to a point at which the law of diminishing returns has
deprived even these of their appropriate satisfactions, are still
unable to reorganise; they go through life incapacitated for
most of its possible enjoyments.[23] Others, paralysed with their
conflicts, are unable to do anything freely; whatever they attempt
some implicated but baffled impulse is still fitfully and fretfully
stirring. The debauchee and the victim of conscience alike have
achieved organisations whose price in sacrifice is excessive.
Both their individual satisfactions, and those for which they
are dependent upon sympathetic relations with their fellows,
an almost equal group, are unduly restricted. Upon grounds of
prudence alone they have been injudicious, and they may be condemned
without any appeal to peculiarly ‘ethical’ standards. The muddle
in which they are forced to live is itself sufficient ground
for reprobation.

At the other extreme are those fortunate people who have achieved
an ordered life, whose systems have developed clearing-houses
by which the varying claims of different impulses are adjusted.
Their free, untrammelled activity gains for them a maximum of
varied satisfactions and involves a minimum of suppression and
sacrifice. Particularly is this so with regard to those satisfactions
which require humane, sympathetic, and friendly relations between
individuals. The charge of egoism, or selfishness, can be brought
against a naturalistic or utilitarian morality such as this only
by overlooking the importance of these satisfactions in any well-balanced
life. Unfair or aggressive behaviour, and preoccupation with
self-regarding interests to the exclusion of due sensitiveness
to the reciprocal claims of human intercourse, lead to a form
of organisation which deprives the person so organised of whole
ranges of important values. No mere loss of social pleasures
is in question, but a twist or restriction of impulses, whose
normal satisfaction is involved in almost all the greatest goods
of life. The two senses in which a man may ‘take advantage’ of
his fellows can be observed in practice to conflict. Swindling
and bullying, whether in business matters or in personal relations,
have their cost; which the best judges agree to be excessive.
And the greater part of the cost lies of in the consequences
of being found out, in the loss of social esteem and so forth,
but in actual systematic disability to attain important values.

Although the person who habitually disregards the claims of his
fellows to fair treatment and sympathetic understanding may be
condemned, in most cases, upon the ground of his own actual loss
of values in such behaviour, this of course is not the reason
for the steps which may have to be taken against him. It may
very well be the case that a person’s own interests are such
that, _if he understood them_, were well organised in other
words, he would be a useful and charming member of his community;
but, so long as people are about who are not well organised,
communities must protect themselves. They can defend their action
on the ground that the general loss of value which would follow
if they did not protect themselves far outweighs such losses
as are incurred by the people whom they suppress or deport.

To extend this individual morality to communal affairs is not
difficult. Probably the best brief statement upon the point is
the following note by Bentham, if we interpret ‘happiness’ in
his formula not as pleasure but as the satisfaction of impulses.

                                    _June_ 29, 1827.

1. Constantly actual end of action on the part of every individual
at the moment of action, his greatest happiness, according to
his view of it at that moment.

2. Constantly proper end of action on the part of every individual
at the moment of action, his real greatest happiness from that
moment to the end of life.

3. Constantly proper end of action on the part of every individual
considered as trustee for the community, of which he is considered
as a member, the greatest happiness of that same community, in
so far as it depends upon the interest which forms the bond of
union between its members.[24]

But communities, as is well known, tend to behave in the same
way to people who are better organised as well as to people who
are worse organised than the standard of the group. They deal
with Socrates or Bruno as severely as with Turpin or Bottomley.
Thus mere interference with ordinary activities is not by itself
a sufficient justification for excluding from the group people
who are different and therefore nuisances. The precise nature
of the difference must be considered, and whether and to what
degree it is the group, not the exceptional member, which ought
to be condemned. The extent to which alteration is practicable
is also relevant, and the problem in particular cases becomes
very intricate.

But the final court of appeal concerns itself in such cases with
questions, not of the wishes of majorities, but of the actual
range and degree of satisfaction which different possible systematisations
of impulse yield. Resentment at interference and gratitude for
support and assistance are to be distinguished from disapproval
and approval. The esteem and respect accorded to persons with
the social[25] virtues well developed is only in a small degree
due to the use which we find we can make of them. It is much
more a sense that their lives are rich and full.

When any desire is denied for the sake of another, the approved
and accepted activity takes on additional value; it is coveted
and pursued all the more for what it has cost. Thus the spectacle
of other people enjoying both activities without difficulty,
thanks to some not very obvious adjustment, is peculiarly distressing,
and such people are usually regarded as especially depraved.
In different circumstances this view may or may not be justified.
The element of sacrifice exacted by any stable system explains
to a large extent the tenacity with which custom is clung to,
the intolerance directed sea innovations, the fanaticism of converts,
the hypocrisy of teachers, and many other lamentable phenomena
of the moral attitudes. However much an individual may privately
find his personality varying from hour to hour, he is compelled
to join in maintaining a public facade of some rigidity and buttressed
with every contrivance which can be invented. The Wills of Gods,
the Conscience, the Catechism, Taboos, Immediate Intuitions,
Penal Laws, Public Opinion, Good Form, are all more or less ingenious
and efficient devices with the same aim—to secure the uniformity
which social life requires. By their means and by Custom, Convention,
and Superstition, the underlying basis of morality, the effort
to attain maximum satisfaction through coherent systematisation,
is a veiled and disguised to an extraordinary degree. Whence
arise great difficulties and many disasters. It is so necessary
and so difficult to secure a stable and general system of public
behaviour that any means whatever are justifiable, failing the
discovery of better. All societies hitherto achieved, however,
involve waste and misery of appalling extent.

Any public code of behaviour must, it is generally agreed, represent
a cruder and more costly systematisation than those attained
to by many of the individuals who live under the code, a point
obviously to be remembered in connection with censorship problems.
Customs change more slowly than conditions, and every change
in conditions brings with it new possibilities of systematisation.
None of the afflictions of humanity are worse than its obsolete
moral principles. Consider the effects of the obsolete virtues
of nationalism under modern conditions, or the absurdity of the
religious attitude to birth control. The present lack of plasticity
in such things involves a growing danger. Human conditions and
possibilities have altered more in a hundred years than they
had in the previous ten thousand, and the next fifty may overwhelm
us, unless we can devise a more adaptable morality. The view
that what we need in this tempestuous turmoil of change is a
Rock to shelter under or to cling to, pane than an efficient
aeroplane in which to ride it, is comprehensible but mistaken.

To guard against a possible misunderstanding it may be added
that the organisation and systematisation of which I have been
speaking in this chapter are not primarily an affair of conscious
planning or arrangement, as this is understood, for example,
by a great business house or by a railway. (Cf. p. 202.) We pass
as a rule from a chaotic to a better organised state by ways
which we know nothing about. Typically through the influence
of other minds. Literature and the arts are the chief means by
which these influences are diffused. It should be unnecessary
to insist upon the degree to which high civilisation, in other
words, free, varied and unwasteful life, depends upon them in
a numerous society.


[19] E.g., “The value of the object is its capacity of becoming
the object of feeling and desire through actualisation of dispositional
tendencies by acts of presumption, judgment, and assumption.”
Urban, _Valuation_, p. 53.

[20] Or, of course, aversions. In what follows we shall take no
further note of aversions. To do so would introduce inessential
complications. The omission in no way affects the argument, since
for our present purposes they may be counted in with appetencies.

[21] This view plainly has close connections with Utilitarianism.
In fact if Bentham’s editor is to be trusted in his interpretation
of his master’s doctrine, it would be what Bentham intended to
teach. “The term nearest to being synonymous with pleasure is
_volition_: what it pleases a man to do is simply what he
wills to do. . . . What a man wills to do, or what he pleases
to do, may be far from giving him enjoyment; yet shall we say
that in doing it, he is not following his own pleasure? .. .
A native of Japan, when he is offended, stabs himself to prove
the intensity of his feelings. It is difficult to prove enjoyment
in this case: yet the man obeyed his impulses.” John Hill Burton,
_Jeremy Bentham’s Works_, vol. 1, p. 22.

[22] Cf. W. J. Perry, _The Origin of Magic and Religion_,
p. 15.

[23] Both ‘enjoyment’ and ‘satisfaction’ are unsuitable terms
in this connection. An unfortunate linguistic gap must be recognised.
The full exercise of an activity is commonly its own ‘satisfaction’,
and, as we shall see later, what pleasure may accompany it is
derivative and incidental.

“Beatitudo non est virtutis premium, sed ipsa virtus.”

[24] _Works_, Vol. X, p. 560.

[25] Not necessarily ‘social workers.’ Only personal communication
can show who have the virtues here referred to.




