Chapter XXXII, p. 249.)

The result of the co-ordination of a great number of impulses
of different kinds is very often that no _overt_ action
takes place. There is a danger here of supposing that no action
whatever results or that there is something incomplete or imperfect
about such a state of affairs. But imaginal action and incipient
action which does not go so far as actual muscular movement are
more important than Overt action in the well-developed human
being. Indeed the difference between the intelligent or refined,
and the stupid or crass person is a difference in the extent
to which overt action can be replaced by incipient and imaginal
action. An intelligent man can ‘see how a thing works’ when a
less intelligent man has to ‘find out by trying’. Similarly with
such responses as are aroused by a work of art. The difference
between ‘understanding’ it and failing to do so is, in most cases,
a difference between being able to make the required responses
in an imaginal or incipient degree, adjusting them to one another
at that stage, and being unable to produce them or adjust them
except overtly and at their fullest development. Though the kinds
of activity involved are different, the analogy with the case
of the mathematician is not misleading. The fact that he will
not make half so many marks on paper as a schoolboy does not
show that he is any less active. His activity takes place at
an earlier stage in which his responses are merely incipient
or imaginal. In a similar manner the absence of any overt movements
or external signs of emotion in an experienced reader of poetry,
or concert-goer, compared to the evident disturbances which are
sometimes to be seen in the novice, is no indication of any lack
of internal activity. The response required in many cases by
works of art is of a kind which can only be obtained in an incipient
or imaginal stage. Practical considerations often prevent their
being worked out in overt form, and this is, as a rule, not in
the least to be regretted. For these responses are commonly of
the nature of solutions to problems, not of intellectual research,
but of emotional accommodation and adjustment, and can usually
be best achieved while the different impulses which have to be
reconciled are still in an incipient or imaginal stage, and before
the matter has become further complicated by the irrelevant accidents
which attend overt responses.

These imaginal and incipient activities or tendencies to action,
I shall call attitudes. When we realise how many and how different
may be the tendencies awakened by a situation, and what scope
there is for conflict, suppression and interplay—all contributing
something to our experience—it will not appear surprising that
the classification and analysis of attitudes is not yet far advanced.
A thousand tendencies to actions, which do not overtly take place,
may well occur in complicated adjustments. For these what evidence
there is must be indirect. In fact, the only attitudes which
are capable of clear and explicit analysis are those in which
some simple mode of observable behaviour gives the clue to what
has been taking place, and even here only a part of the reaction
is open to this kind of examination.

Among the experiences which are by the nature of the case hidden
from observation are found almost all those with which criticism
is concerned. The outward aspect and behaviour of a man reading
_The Prioresses’ Tale_ and _The Miller’s Tale_ may well be
indistinguishable. But this should not lead us to overlook how
great a part in the whole experience is taken by attitudes. Many
experiences which, if examined by introspection for their actual
content of sensation and imagery, differ very little, are totally
diverse in the kind and degree of implicit activity present. This
aspect of experiences as filled with incipient promptings, lightly
stimulated tendencies to acts of one kind or another, faint preliminary
preparations for doing this or that, has been constantly overlooked
in criticism. Yet it is in terms of attitudes, the resolution,
inter-inanimation, and balancing of impulses—Aristotle’s definition of
Tragedy[46] is an instance—that all the most valuable effects of poetry
must be described.


[46] “Tragedy is an imitation of an action... effecting through
Pity and Terror the correction and refinement (_κάθαρςις_)
of such passions.” _Poetics_, VI. Cf. p. 247, _infra_.




CHAPTER XVI

The Analysis of a Poem

    Toutes choses sont dites déjà, mais comme personne n’écoute
            il faut toujours recommencer.—André Gide.


The qualifications of a good critic are three. He must be an
adept at experiencing, without eccentricities, the state of mind
relevant to the work of art he is judging. Secondly, he must
be able to distinguish experiences from one another as regards
their less superficial features. Thirdly, he must be a sound
judge of values.

Upon all these matters psychology, even in its present conjectural
state, has a direct bearing. The critic is, throughout, judging
of experiences, of states of mind; but too often he is needlessly
ignorant of the general psychological form of the experiences
with which he is concerned. He has no clear ideas as to the elements
present or as to their relative importance. Thus, an outline
or schema of the mental events which make up the experience of
‘looking at’ a picture or ‘reading’ a poem, can be of great assistance.
At the very least an understanding of the probable structures
of these experiences can remove certain misconceptions which
tend to make the opinions of individuals of less service to other
individuals than need be.

Two instances will show this. There are certain broad features
in which all agree a poem of Swinburne is unlike a poem of Hardy.
The use of words by the two poets is different. Their methods
are dissimilar, and the proper approach for a reader differs
correspondingly. An attempt to read them in the same way is unfair
to one of the poets, or to both, and leads inevitably to defects
in criticism which a little reflection would remove. It is absurd
to read Pope as though he were Shelley, but the essential differences
cannot be clearly marked out unless such an outline of the general
form of a poetic experience, as is here attempted, has been provided.
The psychological means employed by these poets are demonstrably
different. Whether the effects are also dissimilar is a further
question for which the same kind of analysis is equally required.

This separation inside the poetic experience of certain parts
which are means from certain other parts which are the ends upon
which the poetic value of the experience depends, leads up to
our other instance. It is unquestionable that the actual experiences,
which even good critics undergo when reading, as we say, _the
same poem_, differ very widely. In spite of certain conventions,
which endeavour to conceal these inevitable discrepancies for
social purposes, there can be no doubt that the experiences of
readers in connection with particular poems are rarely similar.
This is unavoidable. Some differences are, however, much more
important than others. Provided the ends, in which the value
of the poem lies, are attained, differences in the means need
not prevent critics from agreement or from mutual service. Those
discrepancies alone are fatal which affect the fundamental features
of experiences, the features upon which their _value_ depends.
But enough is now known of the ways in which minds work for superficial
and fundamental parts of experiences to be distinguished. One
of the greatest living critics praises the line:

    The fringed curtain of thine eyes advance,

for the ‘ravishing beauty’ of the visual images excited. This
common mistake of exaggerating personal accidents in the means
by which a poem attains its end into the chief value of the poem
is due to excessive trust in the commonplaces[47] of psychology.

[Illustration: Arcadia, Night, a Cloud, Pan, and the Moon]

In the analysis of the experience of reading a poem, a diagram,
or hieroglyph, is convenient, provided that its limitations are
clearly recognised. The spatial relations of the parts of the
diagram, for instance, are not intended to stand for spatial
relations between parts of what is represented; it is not a picture
of the nervous system. Nor are temporal relations intended. Spatial
metaphors, whether drawn as diagrams or merely imagined, are
dangers only to the unwary. The essential service which pictures
can give in abstract matters, namely, the simultaneous and compact
representation of states of affairs which otherwise tend to remain
indistinct and confused, is worth the slight risk of misunderstanding
which they entail.

We may begin then with a diagrammatic representation of the events
which take place when we read a poem. Other literary experiences
will only differ from this in their greater simplicity.

The eye is depicted as reading a succession of printed words.
As a result there follows a stream of reaction in which six distinct
kinds of events may be distinguished.

     I The visual sensations of the printed words.
    II Images very closely associated with these sensations.
   III Images relatively free.
    IV References to, or ‘thinkings of,’ various things.
     V Emotions.
    VI Affective-volitional attitudes.

Each of these kinds of occurrences requires some brief description
and explanation.

Upon the visual sensations of the printed words all the rest
depends (in the case of a reader not previously acquainted with
the poem); but with most readers they have in themselves no great
importance. The individual shapes of the letters, their size
and spacing, have only a minor effect upon the whole reaction.
No doubt readers differ greatly in this respect; with some, familiarity
plays a great part. They find it unpleasant and disturbing to
read a poem in any but the edition in which they first became
acquainted with it. But the majority of readers are less exigent.
Provided that the print is clear and legible, and allows the
habitual eye-movements of reading to be easily performed, the
full response arises equally well from widely differing sensations.
Those for whom this is true have, in the present state of economic
organisation, a decided advantage over the more fastidious. This
does not show that good printing is a negligible consideration;
and the primary place of calligraphy in the Chinese arts is an
indication to the contrary. It shows merely that printing belongs
to another branch of the arts. In the poetic experience words
take effect through their associated images, and through what
we are, as a rule, content to call their meaning. What meaning
is and how it enters into the experience we shall consider.

_Tied Images_.—Visual sensations of words do not commonly
occur by themselves. They have certain regular companions so
closely tied to them as to be only with difficulty disconnected.
The chief of these are the auditory image—the sound of the words
in the mind’s ear—and the image of articulation—the feel in the
lips, mouth, and throat, of what the words would be like to speak.

Auditory images of words are among the most obvious of mental
happenings. Any line of verse or prose slowly read, will, for
most people, sound mutely in the imagination somewhat as it would
if read aloud. But the degree of correspondence between the image-sounds,
and the actual sounds that the reader would produce, varies enormously.
Many people are able to imagine word-sounds with greater delicacy
and discrimination than they can utter them. But the reverse
case is also found. What importance then is to be attached to
clear, rich and delicate sound imagery in silent reading? How
far must people who differ in their capacity to produce such
images differ in their total reactions to poems? And what are
the advantages of reading aloud? Here we reach one of the practical
problems of criticism for which this analysis is required. A
discussion is best postponed until the whole analysis has been
given. The principal confusion which prevents a clear understanding
of the point at issue does, however, concern images and may be
dealt with here. It is of great importance in connection with
the topic of the following section.

The sensory qualities of images, their vivacity, clearness, fullness
of detail and so on, do not bear any constant relation to their
effects. Images differing in these respects may have closely
similar consequences. Too much importance has always been attached
to the sensory qualities of images. What gives an image efficacy
is less its vividness as an image than its character as a mental
event peculiarly connected with sensation. Lissette way which
no one yet knows how to explain, a relict of sensation and our
intellectual and emotional response to it depends far more upon
its being, through this fact, a representative of a sensation,
than upon its sensory resemblance to one. An image may lose almost
all its sensory nature to the point of becoming scarcely an image
at all, a mere skeleton, and yet represent a sensation quite
as adequately as if it were flaring with hallucinatory vividity.
In other words, what matters is not the sensory _resemblance_
of an image to the sensation which is its prototype, but some
other relation, at present hidden from us in the jungles of neurology.
(Cf. Chapter XIV.)

Care then should be taken to avoid the natural tendency to suppose
that the more clear and vivid an image the greater will be its
efficacy. There are trustworthy people who, according to their
accounts, never experience any imagery at all. If certain views
commonly expressed about the arts are true, by which vivid imagery
is an all-important part of the experience, then these people
are incapable of art experiences, a conclusion which is contrary
to the facts. The views in question are overlooking the fact
that _something_ takes the place of vivid images in these
people, and that, provided the image-substitute is efficacious,
their lack of mimetic imagery is of no consequence. The efficacy
required must, of course, include control over emotional as well
as intellectual reactions. Needless perhaps to add that with
persons of the image-producing types an increase in delicacy
and vivacity in their imagery will probably be accompanied by
increased subtlety in effects. Thus it is not surprising that
certain great poets and critics have been remarkable for the
vigour of their imagery, and dependent upon it. No one would
deny the usefulness of imagery to some people; the mistake is
to suppose that it is indispensable to all.

Articulatory imagery is less noticeable; yet the quality of silent
speech is perhaps even more dependent upon these images than
upon sound-images. Collocations of syllables which are awkward
or unpleasant to utter are rarely delightful to the ear. As a
rule the two sets of images are so intimately connected that
it is difficult to decide which is the offender. In ‘Heaven,
which man’s generation draws,’ the sound doubtless is as harsh
as the movements required are cramping to the lips.

The extent to which interference with one set of images will
change the other may be well seen by a simple experiment. Most
people, if they attempt a silent recitation while opening the
mouth to its fullest stretch or holding the tongue firmly between
the teeth, will notice curious transformations in the auditory
images. How the experiment should be interpreted is uncertain,
but it is of use in making the presence of both kinds of verbal
imagery evident to those who may have overlooked them hitherto.
Images of articulation should not, however, be confused with
those minimal actual movements which for some people (for all,
as behaviourists maintain) accompany the silent rehearsing of
words.

These two forms of tied imagery might also be called verbal images,
and supply the elements of what is called the ‘formal structure’
of poetry. They differ from those to which we now proceed in
being images of words, not of things words stand for, and in
their very close connection with the visual sensations of printed
words.

_Free Imagery_.—Free images, or rather one form of these,
visual images, pictures in the mind’s eye, occupy a prominent
place in the literature of criticism, to the neglect somewhat
of other forms of imagery, since, as was remarked in a preceding
chapter, for every possible kind of sensation there is a corresponding
possible image.

The assumption, natural before investigation, that all attentive
and sensitive readers will experience the same images, vitiates
most of the historical discussions from that of Longinus to that
of Lessing. Even in the present day, when there is no excuse
for such ignorance, the mistake still thrives, and an altogether
too crude, too hasty, and too superficial form of criticism is
allowed to pass unchallenged. It cannot be too clearly recognised
that individuals differ not only in the type of imagery which
they employ, but still more in the particular images which they
produce. In their whole reactions to a poem, or to a single line
of it, their free images are the point at which two readings
are most likely to differ, and the fact that they differ may
very well be quite immaterial. Fifty different readers will experience
not one common picture but fifty different pictures. If the value
of the poem derived from the value _qua_ picture of the
visual image excited then criticism might well despair. Those
who would stress this part of the poetic reaction can have but
crude views on pictures.

But if the value of the visual image in the experience is not
pictorial, if the image is not to be judged as a picture, how
is it to be judged? It is improbable that the many critics, some
of them peculiarly well qualified in the visual arts, who have
insisted upon the importance of imagery, have been entirely wasting
their time. It ought to be possible to give an account of the
place of free imagery in the whole poetic experience which will
explain this insistence. What is required will be found if we
turn our attention from the sensory qualities of the imagery
to the more fundamental qualities upon which its efficacy in
modifying the rest of the experience depends. It has been urged
above that images which are different in their sensory qualities
may have the same effects. If this were not the case the absence
of glaring differences between people of different image-types
would be astonishing. But since images may represent sensations
without resembling them, and represent them in the sense of replacing
them, as far as effects in directing thought and arousing emotion
go, differences in their mimetic capacity become of minor importance.
As we have seen, it is natural for those whose imagery is vivid,
to suppose that vivacity and clearness go together with power
over thought and feeling. It is the power of an image over these
that is as a rule being praised when an intelligent and sensitive
critic appears merely to be praising the picture floating before
his mind’s eye. To judge the image as a picture is judged, would,
as we have seen, be absurd; and what is sought in poetry by those
painters and others whose interest in the world is primarily
visual is not pictures but records of observation, or stimuli
of emotion.

Thus, provided the images (or image-substitutes for the imageless)
have the due effects, deficiencies in their sensory aspect do
not matter. But the proviso is important. In all forms of imagery
sensory deficiencies are for many people signs and accompaniments
of defective efficacy, and the habit of reading so as to allow
the fullest development to imagery in its sensory aspect is likely
to encourage the full development of this more essential feature,
its efficacy, if the freaks and accidents of the sensory side
are not taken too seriously.

Some exceptions to this general recommendation will occur to
the reader. Instances in plenty may be found in which a full
development of the sensory aspect of images is damaging to their
effects. Meredith is a master of this peculiar kind of imagery:—

    Thus piteously Love closed what he begat
    The union of this ever diverse pair!
    These two were rapid falcons in a snare,
    Condemned to do the flitting of the bat.

The emotional as well as the intellectual effects of the various
images here suggested are much impaired if we produce them vividly
and distinctly.

_Impulses, and References_.—We have now to consider those
more fundamental effects upon which stress has been laid above
as the true places of the values of the experience. It will be
well at this point to reconsult the diagram. The vertical lines
which run capriciously downwards from the visual sensations of
the words, through their tied imagery and onward to the bottom
of the diagram, are intended to represent, schematically, streams
of impulses flowing through in the mind.

They start in the visual sensations, but the depiction of the
tied imagery is intended to show how much of their further course
is due to it. The placing of the free imagery in the third division
is intended to suggest that while some free images may arise
from visual words alone, they take their character in a large
part as a consequence of the tied imagery. Thus the great importance
of the tied imagery, of the formal elements, is emphasised in
the diagram.

These impulses are the weft of the experience, the warp being
the pre-existing systematic structure of the mind, that organised
system of possible impulses. The metaphor is of course inexact,
since weft and warp here are not independent. Where these impulses
run, and how they develop, depends entirely upon the condition
of the mind, and this depends upon the impulses which have previously
been active in it. It will be seen then that impulses—their
direction, their strength, how they modify one another—are the
essential and fundamental things in any experience. All else,
whether intellectual or emotional, arises as a consequence of
their activity. The thin trickle of stimulation which comes in
through the eye finds an immense hierarchy of systems of tendencies
poised in the most delicate stability. It is strong enough and
rightly enough directed to disturb some of these without assistance.
The literal sense of a word can be grasped on the prompting of
the mere sight of it, without hearing it or mentally pronouncing
it. But the effects of this stimulation are immensely increased
and widened when it is reinforced by fresh stimulation from tied
images, and it is through these that most of the emotional effects
are produced. As the agitation proceeds new reinforcement comes
with every fresh system which is excited. Thus, the paradoxical
fact that so trifling an irritation as the sight of marks on
paper is able to arouse the whole energies of the mind becomes
explicable.

To turn now to references, the only mental happenings which are
as closely connected with visual words as their tied images are
those mysterious events which are usually called thoughts. Thus
the arrow symbol in the hieroglyph should perhaps properly be
placed near the visual impression of the word. The mere sight
of any familiar word is normally followed by a thought of whatever
the word may stand for. This thought is sometimes said to be
the ‘meaning’, the literal or prose ‘meaning’ of the word. It
is wise, however, to avoid the use of ‘meaning’ as a symbol altogether.
The terms ‘thought’ and ‘idea’ are less subtle in their ambiguities,
and when defined may perhaps be used without confusion.

What is essential in thought is its direction or reference to things.
What is this direction or reference? How does a thought come to be ‘of’
one thing rather than another? What is the link between a thought and
what it is ‘of’? The outline of one answer to these questions has been
suggested in Chapter XI. A further account must here be attempted.
Without a fairly clear, although, of course, incomplete view, it is
impossible to avoid confusion and obscurity in discussing such topics
as truth in art, the intellect-_versus_-emotion _imbroglio_, the scope
of science, the nature of religion and many others with which criticism
must deal.

The facts upon which speculations as to the relations between
thoughts and the things which they are ‘of’ have been based,
have as a rule been taken from introspection. But the facts which
introspection yields are notoriously uncertain, and the special
position of the observer may well preclude success. Introspection
is competent, in some cases, to discover the relations between
events which take place within the mind, but cannot by itself
give information as to the relations of these events with the
external world, and it is precisely this which we are inquiring
into when we ask, What connection is there between a thought
and that which it is a thought of? For an answer to this question
we must look further.

There is no doubt that causal relations hold between events in
the mind and events outside it. Sometimes these relations are
fairly simple. The striking of a clock is the cause of our thinking
of its striking. In such a case the external thing is linked
with the thought ‘of’ it in a fairly direct fashion, and the
view here taken is that to be a thought ‘of’ the striking is
to be merely a thought caused in this fashion by the striking.
A thought of the striking is nothing else and nothing more than
a thought caused by it.

But most thoughts are ‘of’ things which are not present and not
producing direct effects in the mind. This is so when we read.
What is directly affecting the mind is words on paper, but the
thoughts aroused are not thoughts ‘of’ the words, but of other
things which the words _stand for_. How, then, can a causal
theory of thinking explain the relation between these remote
things and the thoughts which are ‘of’ them? To answer this we
must look at the way in which we learn what words stand for.
Without a process of learning we should only think of the words.

The process of learning to use words is not difficult to analyse.
On a number of occasions the word is heard in connection with
objects of a certain kind. Later the word is heard in the absence
of any such object. In accordance with one of the few fundamental
laws known about mental process, something then happens in the
mind which is like what would happen if such an object were actually
present and engaging the attention. The word has become a _sign_
of an object of that kind. The word which formerly was a part
of the cause of a certain effect in the mind is now followed
by a similar effect in the absence of the rest of the previous
cause, namely, an object of the kind in question. This kind of
causation appears to be peculiar to living tissue. The relation
now between the thought and what it is ‘of’ is more indirect,
the thought is ‘of’ something which formerly was part cause,
together with the sign, of similar thoughts. It is ‘of’ the missing
part of the sign, or more strictly ‘of’ anything which would
complete the sign as a cause.

Thoughts by this account are general, they are of anything _like_
such and such things, except when the object thought of and the
thought are connected by direct causal relations, as, for instance,
when we think of a word we are hearing. Only when these direct
relations hold can we succeed in thinking simply of ‘That’. We
have to think instead of ‘something of a kind’. By various means,
however, we can contrive that there shall only be one thing of
the kind, and so the need for particularity in our thoughts is
satisfied. The commonest way in which we do this is by thoughts
which make the kind spatial and temporal. A thought of ‘mosquito’
becomes a thought of ‘mosquito there now’ by combining a thought
of ‘thing of mosquito kind’ with a thought of ‘thing of there
kind’ and a thought of ‘thing of now kind’. The awkwardness of
these phrases, it may be mentioned, is irrelevant. Combined thoughts
of this sort, we may notice, are capable of truth and falsity,
whereas a simple thought—of ‘whatever is now’ for instance—can
only be true. Whether a thought is true or false depends simply
upon whether there is anything of the kind referred to, and there
must be something now. It is by no means certain that there must
be anything there always. And most probably no mosquito is where
we thought it was then.

The natural generality and vagueness of all reference which is
not made specific by the aid of space and time is of great importance
for the understanding of the senses in which poetry may be said
to be true. (Cf. Chapter XXXV.)

In the reading of poetry the thought due simply to the words,
their _sense_ it may be called, comes first; but other thoughts
are not of less importance. These may be due to the auditory
verbal imagery, and we have onomatopœia,[48] but this is rarely
independent of the sense. More important are the further thoughts
caused by the sense, the network of interpretation and conjecture
which arises therefrom, with its opportunities for aberrations
and misunderstanding. Poems, however, differ fundamentally in
the extent to which such further interpretation is necessary.
The mere sense without any further reflection is very often sufficient
thought, in Swinburne, for instance, for the full response—

    There glowing ghosts of flowers
    Draw down, draw nigh;
    And wings of swift spent hours
        Take flight and fly;
    She sees by formless gleams
    She hears across cold streams
        Dead mouths of many dreams that sing and sigh.

Little beyond vague thoughts of the things the words stand for
is here required. They do not have to be brought into intelligible
connection with one another. On the other hand, Hardy would rarely
reach his full effect through sound and sense alone—

    ‘Who’s in the next room?—who?
        I seemed to see
    Somebody in the dawning passing through
        Unknown to me.’
    ‘Nay: you saw nought. He passed invisibly’.

Between these and even more extreme cases, every degree of variation
in the relative importance of sound, sense, and further interpretation,
between form and content in short, can be found. A temptation
to which few do not succumb is to suppose that there is some
‘proper relation’ for these different parts of the experience,
so that a poem whose parts are in this relation must thereby
be a greater or better poem than another whose parts are differently
disposed. This is another instance of the commonest of critical
mistakes, the confusion of means with ends, of technique with
value. There is no more a ‘proper place’ for sound or for sense
in poetry than there is one and only one ‘proper shape’ for an
animal. A dog is not a defective kind of cat, nor is Swinburne
a defective kind of Hardy. But this sort of criticism is extraordinarily
prevalent. The objection to Swinburne on the ground of a lack
of thought is a popular specimen.



Within certain types, needless to say, some structures are more
likely to be successful than others. Given some definite kind
of effect as the goal, or some definite structure already being
used, a good deal can of course be said as to the most probable
means, or as to what may or may not be added. Lyric cannot dispense
with tied imagery, it is clear, nor can we neglect the character
of this imagery in reading it. A prose composition has to be
longer than a lyric to produce an equal definiteness of developed
effect. Poems in which there is much turmoil of emotion are likely
to be strongly rhythmical and to be in metre, as we shall see
when we come to discuss rhythm and metre. Drama can hardly dispense
with a great deal of conjecture and further interpretation which
in most forms of the novel is replaced by analysis and explanation,
and in narrative poetry is commonly omitted altogether; and so
on.

But no general prescription that in great poetry there _must_
always be this or that,—deep thought, superb sound or vivid imagery—is
more than a piece of ignorant dogmatism. Poetry may be almost
devoid even of mere sense, let alone thought, or _almost_
without sensory (or formal) structure, and yet reach the point
than which no poem goes further. The second case, however, is
very rare. Almost always, what seems structureless proves to
have still a loose and tenuous (it may be an intermittent) structure.
But we can for example shift the words about very often in Walt
Whitman without loss, even when he is almost at his best.

It is difficult to represent diagrammatically what takes place
in thought in any satisfactory fashion. The impulse coming in
from the visual stimulus of the printed word must be imagined
as reaching some system in the brain in which effects take place
not due merely to this present stimulus, but also to past occasions
on which it has been combined with other stimulations. These
effects are thoughts; and they in their groupings act as signs
for yet other thoughts. The little arrows are intended to symbolise
these references to things outside the mind.

_Emotions, and Attitudes._

Feeling or emotion is not, we have insisted above, another and
a rival mode of apprehending nature. So far as a feeling or an
emotion does refer to anything, it refers in the way described,
through its origin. Feelings, in fact, are commonly signs, and
the differences between those who ‘see’ things by intuition,
or ‘feel’ them, and those who reason them out, is commonly only
a difference between users of signs and users of symbols. Both
signs and symbols are means by which our past experience assists
our present responses. The advantages of symbols, due to the
ease with which they are controlled and communicated, their public
nature, as it were, are obvious. Their disadvantages as compared
with such relatively private signs as emotions or organic sensations
are perhaps less evident. Words, when used symbolically or scientifically,
not figuratively and emotively, are only capable of directing
thought to a comparatively few features of the more common situations.
But feeling is sometimes a more subtle way of referring, more
dangerous also, because more difficult to corroborate and to
control, and more liable to confusion. There is no inherent superiority,
however, in feeling as opposed to thought, there is merely a
difference in applicability; nor is there any opposition or clash
between them except for those who are mistaken either in their
thinking or in their feeling, or in both. How such mistakes arise
will be discussed in Chapter XXXIV.

As regards emotions and attitudes little need be added to what has
already been said. Emotions are primarily signs of attitudes and owe
their great prominence in the theory of art to this. For it is the
attitudes evoked which are the all-important part of any experience.
Upon the texture and form of the attitudes involved its value depends.
It is not the intensity of the conscious experience, its thrill, its
pleasure or its poignancy which gives it value, but the organisation
of its impulses for freedom and fullness of life. There are plenty of
ecstatic instants which are valueless; the character of consciousness
at any moment is no certain sign of the excellence of the impulses from
which it arises. It is the most convenient sign that is available,
but it is very ambiguous and may be very misleading. A more reliable
but less accessible set of signs can be found in the readiness for
this or that kind of behaviour in which we find ourselves after the
experience. Too great insistence upon the quality of the momentary
_consciousness_ which the arts occasion has in recent times been a
prevalent critical blunder. The Epilogue to Pater’s _Renaissance_ is
the _locus classicus_. The after-effects, the permanent modifications
in the structure of the mind, which works of art can produce, have been
overlooked. No one is ever quite the same again after any experience,
his possibilities have altered in some degree. And among all the agents
by which “the widening of the sphere of human sensibility” may be
brought about, the arts are the most powerful, since it is through them
that men may most co-operate and in these experiences that the mind
most easily and with least interference organises itself.


[47] The description of images belongs to the first steps in psychology,
and it is often possible to judge the rank and standing of a
psychologist by the degree of importance which he attaches to
their peculiarities. On theoretical grounds it seems probable
that they are luxury products (cf. _The Meaning of Meaning_,
pp. 148-151) peculiarly connected with the reproduction of emotion.
For a discussion of some experimental investigations into their
utility, Spearman, _The Nature of Intelligence_, Ch. XII,
may be consulted.

[48] Two kinds of onomatopœia should be distinguished. In one
the sound of the words (actual or imaginal) is like some natural
sound (the buzzing of bees, galloping horses, and so forth).
In the other it is not like any such sound but such as merely
to call up free auditory images of the sounds in question. The
second case is by far the more common.




