CHAPTER XIV

Memory

    Within the surface of Time’s fleeting river
      Its wrinkled image lies, as then it lay
    Immovably unquiet, and for ever
      It trembles, but it cannot pass away!
                                Shelley, _Ode to Liberty_.


So far we have alluded only casually to memory, to that apparent
revival of past experience to which the richness and complexity
of experience is due. Every stimulus which is ever received leaves
behind it, so it is said, an imprint, a trace capable of being
revived later and of contributing its quota to consciousness
and to behaviour. To these effects of past experience the systematic,
the organised character of our behaviour is due; the fact that
they intervene is the explanation of our ability to learn by
experience. It is a way peculiar to living tissue by which the
past influences our present behaviour across, as it might appear,
a gulf of time.

How we should conceive this influence is perhaps the most puzzling
point in psychology. The old theory of a kind of Somerset House
of past impressions has given place to an account in terms of
facilitations of neural paths, lowered resistances in synapses,
and so forth. It was natural that as the broad outlines of neural
activity came to be known, psychologists should attempt to make
use of them. But on close examination it is clear that their
interpretations were far too crude. Fixed ‘paths’, one for every
item of experience which has ever taken place, and others for
every kind of connection into which the items come, however multitudinous
we make them, no longer explain what can be observed in behaviour
and experience. As Von Kries and, more recently, Koffka have
insisted, the fact, for example, that we _recognise_ things
in cases where it is certain that quite different paths must
be involved, is fatal to the scheme. And mere multiplication
of the entities invoked leads to no solution. Semon even goes
so far as to say that when we listen to a song for the hundredth
time we hear not only the singer but a chorus of nine and ninety
mnemic voices. This corollary by itself is almost a refutation
of his theory.

We have to escape from the crude assumption that the only way
in which what is past can be repeated is by records being kept.
The old associationists supposed the records to be writ small
inside separate cells. The more modern view was that they were
scored large through a deepening of the channels of conduction.
Neither view is adequate.

Imagine an energy system of prodigious complexity and extreme
delicacy of organisation which has an indefinitely large number
of stable poises. Imagine it thrown from one poise to another
with great facility, each poise being the resultant of all the
energies of the system. Suppose now that the _partial_ return
of a situation which has formerly caused it to assume a stable
poise, throws it into an unstable condition, from which it most
easily returns to equilibrium by reassuming the former poise.
Such a system would exhibit the phenomena of memory; but it would
keep no records though appearing to do so. The appearance would
be due merely to the extreme accuracy and sensitiveness of the
system and the delicacy of its balances. Its state on the later
occasion would appear to be a _revival_ of its state on
the former, but this would not be the case any more than a cumulus
cloud this evening is a revival of those which decorated the
heavens last year.

This imaginary construction can be made more concrete by imagining
a solid with a large number of facets upon any one of which it
can rest. If we try to balance it upon one of its coigns or ridges
it settles down upon the nearest facet. In the case of the neural
system we are trying to suggest each stable poise has been determined
by a definite set, or better, context of conditions. Membership
of this context is what corresponds to nearness to a facet. The
partial return of the context causes the system to behave as
though conditions were present which are not, and this is what
is essential in memory.

That this suggestion in the form here presented is unsatisfactory
and incomplete is evident. It is wildly conjectural no doubt,
but so are the Archival and Pathway Theories. Yet it does avoid
the chief deficiencies of those theories, it does suggest why
only some conjunctions of experiences become ‘associated’, those
namely which yield a stable poise. And it suggests why a thing
should be recognised as the same though appearing in countless
different aspects; every time it appears different conditions
occur which, none the less, lead to one and the same stable poise,
as the polyhedron we imagined may settle down on one and the
same facet from all the surrounding ridges.

One of the collateral advantages of such a view is that it removes
some of the temptations to revert to animism from which psychologists,
and especially literary psychologists, suffer. Dissatisfaction
with current hypotheses as to the mechanism of reflex arcs is
a main cause for the scientifically desperate belief in the soul.
And apart from this, the special emotive factors which disturb
judgment on this point are less obtrusive when this account is
substituted for the usual story of the conditioned reflex, that
sacrilegious contrivance of the mechanists.

There is no kind of mental activity in which memory does not
intervene. We are most familiar with it in the case of images,
those fugitive elusive copies of sensations with which psychology
has been hitherto so much, perhaps too much, concerned. Visual
images are the best known of them, but it is important to recognise
that every kind of sensation may have its corresponding image.
Visceral, kinæsthetic, thermal images can with a little practice
be produced, even by people who have never noticed their occurrence.
But individual differences as regards imagery are enormous, more
in the degree to which images become conscious, however, than
in their actual presence or absence on the needful occasion.
Those people who, by their own report, are devoid of images,
none the less behave in a way which makes it certain that the
same processes are at work in them as in producers of the most
flamboyant images.




