Chapter XIII we saw an analogous situation arising in the case
of the discrimination of colours. The obvious comparison with
the difference between what even musical notation can record
in music and the player’s interpretation can usefully be made
here.

A more serious omission is the neglect by the majority of metrists
of the pitch relations of syllables. The reading of poetry is
of course not a monotonous and subdued form of singing. There
is no question of definite pitches at which the syllables must
be taken, nor perhaps of definite harmonic relations between
different sounds. But that a rise and fall of pitch is involved
in metre and is as much part of the poet’s technique as any other
feature of verse, as much under his control also, is indisputable.
Anyone who is not clear upon this point may compare as a striking
instance Milton’s _Hymn on the Morning of Christ’s Nativity_
with Collins’ _Ode to Simplicity_ and both with the second
Chorus of _Hellas_ discussed in Chapter XXVIII. Due allowances
made for the natural peculiarities of different readers, the
scheme of pitch relations, in their contexts, of

    That on the bitter cross
    Must redeem our loss;

and of

    But com’st a decent maid,
    In Attic robe array’ɖ,

are clearly different. There is nothing arbitrary or out of the
poet’s control in this, as there is nothing arbitrary or out
of his control in the way in which an adequate reader will stress
particular syllables. He brings both about by the same means,
the modification of the reader’s impulses by what has gone before.
It is true that some words resist emphasis far more than perhaps
any resist change of pitch, yet this difference is merely one
of degree. It is as natural to lower the pitch in reading the
word ‘loss’ as it is to emphasise it as compared with ‘our’ in
the same context.

Here again we see how impossible it is to consider rhythm or
metre as though it were purely an affair of the sensory aspect
of syllables and could be dissociated from their sense and from
the emotional effects which come about through their sense. One
principle may, however, be hazarded. As in the case of painting
the more direct means are preferable to the less direct (see
Chapter XVIII), so in poetry. What can be done by sound should
not be done otherwise or in violation of the natural effects
of sound. Violations of the natural emphases and tones of speech
brought about for the sake of the further effects due to thought
and feeling are perilous, though, on occasion, they may be valuable
devices. The use of italics in _Cain_ to straighten out
the blank verse is as glaring an instance as any. But more liberties
are justified in dramatic writing than elsewhere, and poetry
is full of exceptions to such principles.[50] We must not forget
that Milton did not disdain to use special spelling, ‘mee’, for
example, in place of ‘me’, in order to suggest additional emphasis
when he feared that the reader might be careless.

So far we have been concerned with metre only as a specialised
form of rhythm, giving an increased interconnection between words
through an increased control of anticipation. But it has other,
in some cases even more important powers. Its use as an hypnotic
agent is probably very ancient. Coleridge once again drops his
incidental remark, just beside yet extremely close to the point.
“It tends to increase the vivacity and susceptibility both of
the general feelings and of the attention. This effect it produces
by the continued excitement of surprise, and by the quick reciprocations
of curiosity still gratified and still re-excited, which are
too slight indeed to be at any moment objects of distinct consciousness,
yet become considerable in their aggregate influence. As a medicated
atmosphere, or as wine during animated conversation, they act
powerfully, though themselves unnoticed.” (_Biographia Literaria_,
Chap. XVIII.) Mr Yeats, when he speaks of the function of metre
being to “lull the mind into a waking trance” is describing the
same effect, however strange his conception of this trance may
be.

That certain metres, or rather that a certain handling of metre
should produce in a slight degree a hypnoidal state is not surprising.
But it does so not as Coleridge suggests, through the surprise
element in metrical effects, but through the absence of surprise,
through the lulling effects more than through the awakening.
Many of the most characteristic symptoms of incipient hypnosis
are present in a slight degree. Among these susceptibility and
vivacity of emotion, suggestibility, limitations of the field
of attention, marked differences in the incidence of belief-feelings
closely analogous to those which alcohol and nitrous oxide can
induce, and some degree of hyperæsthesia (increased power of
discriminating sensations) may be noted. We need not boggle at
the word ‘hypnosis’. It is sufficient to say, borrowing a phrase
from M. Jules Romains, that there is a change in the regime of
consciousness, which is directly due to the metre, and that to
this regime the above-mentioned characteristics attach. As regards
the hyperæsthesia, there may be several ways of interpreting
what can be observed. All that matters here is that syllables,
which in prose or in _vers libres_ sound thin, tinny and
flat, often gain an astonishing sonority and fullness even in
verse which seems to possess no very subtle metrical structure.

Metre has another mode of action not hitherto mentioned. There
can be little doubt that historically it has been closely associated
with dancing, and that the connections of the two still hold.
This is true at least of some ‘measures’. Either motor images,
images of the sensations of dancing, or, more probably, imaginal
and incipient movements follow the syllables and make up their
‘movement’. A place for these accompaniments should be found
in the diagram in Chapter XVI. Once the metre has begun to ‘catch
on’ they are almost as closely bound up with the sequence of
the words as the tied ‘verbal’ images themselves.

The extension of this ‘movement’ of the verse from dance forms
to more general movements is natural and inevitable. That there
is a very close connection between the sense and the metrical
movement of

    And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly
    Along a huge cloud’s ridge; and now with sprightly
    Wheel downward come they into fresher skies,

cannot be doubted whatever we may think of the rime.

It is not less clear in

    Where beyond the extreme sea wall, and between the
                            remote sea gates,
    Waste water washes, and tall ships founder, and deep
                            death waits,

or in

    Ran on embattell’d Armies clad in Iron,

than it is in

    We sweetly curtsied each to each
    And deftly danced a saraband.

Nor is it always the case that the movement takes its cue from
the sense. It is often a commentary on the sense and sometimes
may qualify it, as when the resistless strength of Coriolanus
in battle is given an appearance of dreadful ease by the leisureliness
of the description,

    Death, that dark spirit, in’s nervy arm doth lie
    Which being advanc’d declines, and then men die.

Movement in poetry deserves at least as much study as onomatopœia.

This account, of course, by no means covers all the ways by which
metre takes effect in poetry. The fact that we appropriately
use such words as ‘lulling’, ‘stirring’, ‘solemn’, ‘pensive’,
‘gay’ in describing metres is an indication of their power more
directly to control emotion. But the more general effects are
more important. Through its very appearance of artificiality
metre produces in the highest degree the ‘frame’ effect, isolating
the poetic experience from the accidents and irrelevancies of
everyday existence. We have seen in Chapter X how necessary this
isolation is and how easily it may be mistaken for a difference
in kind. Much which in prose would be too personal or too insistent,
which might awaken irrelevant conjectures or might ‘overstep
itself’ is managed without disaster in verse. There are, it is
true, equivalent resources in prose—irony, for example, very
frequently has this effect—but their scope is far more limited.
Metre for the most difficult and most delicate utterances is
the all but inevitable means.


[49] _Works_, II, 171.

[50] It is worth remarking that any application of critical principles
must be indirect. They are not any the less useful because this
is so. Misunderstanding on this point has often led artists to
accuse critics of wishing to make art a matter of rules, and
their objection to any such attempt is entirely justified.




