CHAPTER III

The Language of Criticism

                . . . . I too have seen
    My vision of the rainbow Aureoled face
    Of her whom men name Beauty: proud, austere:
    Divinely fugitive, that haunts the world. . . .
                                _The Dominion of Dreams_.


Whatever the disadvantages of modern æsthetics as a basis for
a theory of Criticism, the great advance made upon prescientific
speculation into the nature of Beauty must also be recognised.
That paralysing apparition Beauty, the ineffable, ultimate, unanalysable,
simple Idea, has at least been dismissed and with her have departed
or will soon depart a flock of equally bogus entities. Poetry
and inspiration together, it is true, still dignify respectable
quarters with their presence.

“Poetry, like life, is one thing. . . . Essentially a continuous
substance or energy, poetry is historically a connected movement,
a series of successive integrated manifestations. Each poet,
from Homer or the predecessors of Homer to our own day, has been,
to some degree and at some point, the voice of the movement and
energy of poetry; in him, poetry has for the moment become visible,
audible, incarnate; and his extant poems are the record left
of that partial and transitory incarnation. . . . The progress
of poetry, with its vast power and exalted function, is immortal.”[9]

A diligent search will still find many other Mystic Beings, for
the most part of a less august nature, sheltering in verbal thickets.
Construction, Design, Form, Rhythm, Expression . . . are more
often than not mere _vacua_ in discourse, for which a theory
of criticism should provide explainable substitutes.

While current attitudes to language persist, this difficulty
of the linguistic phantom must still continue. It has to be recognised
that all our natural turns of speech are misleading, especially
those we use in discussing works of art. We become so accustomed
to them that even when we are aware that they are ellipses, it
is easy to forget the fact. And it has been extremely difficult
in many cases to discover that any ellipsis is present. We are
accustomed to say that a picture is beautiful, instead of saying
that it causes an experience in us which is valuable in certain
ways.[10] The discovery that the remark, “This is beautiful”,
must be turned round and expanded in this way before it is anything
but a mere noise signalling the fact that we approve of the picture,
was a great and difficult achievement. Even to-day, such is the
insidious power of grammatical forms, the belief that there is
such a quality or attribute, namely Beauty, which attaches to
the things which we rightly call beautiful, is probably inevitable
for all reflective persons at a certain stage of their mental
development.

Even among those who have escaped from this delusion and are
well aware that we continually talk as though things possess
qualities, when what we ought to say is that they cause effects
in us of one kind or another, the fallacy of ‘projecting’ the
effect and making it a quality of its cause tends to recur. When
it does so it gives a peculiar obliquity to thought and although
few competent persons are nowadays so deluded as actually to
hold the mystical view that there is a quality Beauty which inheres
or attaches to external objects, yet throughout all the discussion
of works of art the drag exercised by language towards this view
can be felt. It perceptibly increases the difficulty of innumerable
problems and we shall have constantly to allow for it. Such terms
as ‘construction’, ‘form’, ‘balance’, ‘composition’, ‘design’,
‘unity’, ‘expression’, for all the arts; as ‘depth’, ‘movement’,
‘texture’, ‘solidity’, in the criticism of painting; as ‘rhythm’,
‘stress’, ‘plot’, ‘character’, in literary criticism; as ‘harmony’,
‘atmosphere’, ‘development’, in music, are instances. All these
terms are currently used as though they stood for qualities inherent
in things outside the mind, as a painting, in the sense of an
assemblage of pigments, is undoubtedly outside the mind. Even
the difficulty of discovering, in the case of poetry, what thing
other than print and paper is there for these alleged qualities
to belong to, has not checked the tendency.

But indeed language has succeeded until recently in hiding from
us almost all the things we talk about. Whether we are discussing
music, poetry, painting, sculpture or architecture, we are forced
to speak as though certain physical objects—vibrations of strings
and of columns of air, marks printed on paper, canvasses and
pigments, masses of marble, fabrics of freestone, are what we
are talking about. And yet the remarks we make as critics do
not apply to such objects but to states of mind, to experiences.

A certain strangeness about this view is often felt but diminishes
with reflection. If anyone says that ‘The May Queen’ is sentimental,
it is not difficult to agree that he is referring to a state
of mind. But if he declares that the masses in a Giotto exactly
balance one another, this is less apparent, and, if he goes on
to discuss time in music, form in visual art, plot in drama,
the fact that he is all the while talking about mental happenings
becomes concealed. The verbal apparatus comes between us and
the things with which we are really dealing. Words which are
useful, indeed invaluable, as handy stop-gaps and makeshifts
in conversation, but which need elaborate expansions before they
can be used with precision, are treated as simply as people’s
proper names. So it becomes natural to seek for the things these
words appear to stand for, and thus arise innumerable subtle
investigations, doomed _ab initio_ as regards their main
intent to failure.



We must be prepared then to translate, into phrases pedantic
and uncouth, all the too simple utterances which the conversational
decencies exact. We shall find later, in their peculiar emotive
power the main reason why, in spite of all manner of confusions
and inconveniences, these current ways of speaking are retained.
For emotive purposes they are indispensable, but for clarity,
for the examination of what is actually happening, translations
are equally a necessity.

Most critical remarks state in an abbreviated form that an object
causes certain experiences, and as a rule the form of the statement
is such as to suggest that the object has been said to possess
certain qualities. But often the critic goes further and affirms
that the effect in his mind is due to special particular features
of the object. In this case he is pointing out something about
the object in addition to its effect upon him, and this fuller
kind of criticism is what we desire. Before his insight can greatly
benefit, however, a very clear demarcation between the object,
with its features, and his experience, which is the effect of
contemplating it, is necessary. The bulk of critical literature
is unfortunately made up of examples of their confusion.

It will be convenient at this point to introduce two definitions.
In a full critical statement which states not only that an experience
is valuable in certain ways, but also that it is caused by certain
features in a contemplated object, the part which describes the
value of the experience we shall call the _critical_ part.
That which describes the object we shall call the _technical_
part. Thus to say that we feel differently towards wooden crosses
and stone crosses is a technical remark. And to say that metre
is more suited to the tender passion than is prose would be,
as it stands, a technical remark, but here it is evident that
a critical part might easily be also present. All remarks as
to the ways and means by which experiences arise or are brought
about are technical, but critical remarks are about the values
of experiences and the reasons for regarding them as valuable,
or not valuable. We shall endeavor in what follows to show that
critical remarks are merely a branch of psychological remarks,
and that no special ethical or metaphysical ideas need be introduced
to explain value.

The distinction between technical and critical remarks is of
real importance. Confusion here is responsible for some most
curious passages in the histories of the arts. A certain technique
in certain cases produces admirable results; the obvious features
of this technique come to be regarded at first as sure signs
of excellence, and later as the excellence itself. For a while
nothing, however admirable, which does not show these superficial
marks, gets fair consideration. Thomas Rymer’s denigration of
Shakespeare, Dr Johnson’s view of Milton’s pauses, the aftermath
of the triumph of Pope, archaistic sculpture, the Greek poses
in the compositions of David, the imitations of Cézanne, are
famous instances; they could be multiplied indefinitely. The
converse case is equally common. An obvious technical blemish
in a special case is recognised. It may be too many S’s in a
particular line, or the irregularity and rimelessness of a ‘Pindaric’
Ode; henceforth any line superficially similar,

    The lustre of the long convolvulusses,

any unrhymed lyric, is regarded as defective. This trick of judging
the whole by the detail, instead of the other way about, of mistaking
the means for the end, the technique for the value, is in fact
much the most successful of the snares which waylay the critic.
Only the teacher knows (and sometimes he is guilty himself) how
great is the number of readers who think, for example, that a
defective rime—bough’s house, bush thrush, blood good—is sufficient
ground for condemning a poem in the neglect of all other considerations.
Such sticklers, like those with a scansion obsession (due as
a rule to Exercises in Latin Verse), have little understanding
of poetry. We pay attention to externals when we do not know
what else to do with a poem.

[9] G. W. Mackail, _Lectures on Poetry_. Introduction.

[10] We can diagrammatically represent the delusion as follows.
What actually occurs is that A, a work of art, causes E an effect
_in us_, which has the character b; A _causes_ E[b]. We _speak_
as though we perceived that A has the quality B (Beauty); we are
perceiving A[B]; and if we are not careful we think so too. No one
of our recent revolutions in thought is more important than this
progressive rediscovery of what we are talking about. It is being
inevitably followed by wide changes in our attitudes to the world and
to fellow-creatures. One current in this change is towards tolerance,
another towards scepticism, a third towards far more secure founding
of our motives of action. The startling philosophical changes in the
general outlook sometimes’ predicted for Relativity (or for popular
ideas about it when once they become widespread) appear likely, if
they occur at all, to be engulfed by these more unobtrusive but more
domestic changes.




