CHAPTER X

Poetry for Poetry’s Sake

    On passe plus facilement d’un extrême à un autre
        que d’une nuance à une autre nuance.
                                    _Attirance de la Mort_.


Another possible misapprehension which cannot be left unmentioned
arises in connection with the doctrine ‘Art for Art’s sake’,
a doctrine definitely and detrimentally dated; it concerns the
place of what are called ulterior effects in the valuing of a
work of art. It has been very fashionable to turn up the nose
at any attempt to apply, as it is said, ‘external canons’ to
art. But it may be recalled that of all the great critical doctrines,
the ‘moral’, theory of art (it would be better to call it the
‘Ordinary values’ theory) has the most great minds behind it.
Until Whistler came to start the critical movements of the last
half-century, few poets, artists or critics had ever doubted
that the value of art experiences was to be judged as other values
are. Plato, Aristotle, Horace, Dante, Spenser, Milton, the Eighteenth
Century, Coleridge, Shelley, Matthew Arnold and Pater, to name
only the most prominent, all with varying degrees of refinement,
held the same view.[29] The last is a somewhat unexpected adherent.

“Given the conditions I have tried to explain as constituting
good art, then if it be devoted further to the increase of men’s
happiness, to the redemption of the oppressed, or to the enlargement
of our sympathies with each other, or to such presentment of
new and old truth about ourselves and our relation to the world
as may fortify us in our sojourn here . . . it will also be great
art; if, over and above those qualities which I have summed up
. . . it has something of the soul of humanity in it, and finds
its logical, its architectural place, in the great structure
of human life.”[30] No better brief emotive account of the conditions
under which an experience has value could be desired.

Against all these weighty opinions, the view—supported largely
by a distinction between Form and Content, Subject and Handling,
which will be examined elsewhere,[31] and relying upon the doctrine
of intrinsic, supersensible, ultimate Goods discussed above—that
the values of art are unique, or capable of being considered
in isolation from all others, has held sway for some thirty years
in many most reputable quarters. The reasons for this attempted
severance have already been touched upon; they are of all sorts.
Partly it may be due to the influence of Whistler and Pater,
and of those still more influential disciples who spread their
doctrines. Partly it may be due to a massed reaction against
Ruskin. Partly again we may suspect the influence, rather suddenly
encountered, of Continental and German æsthetics upon the English
mind. Almost from the beginning of scientific æsthetics, the
insistence on the æsthetic experience as an experience, peculiar,
complete, and capable of being studied in isolation, has received
prominence. Often it is no more than an extension into this considering,
whenever possible, one thing at a time. When critics in England,
not very long ago, heard that there was something connected with
art and poetry—namely, the æsthetic experience—which could be
considered and examined in isolation by the methods of introspection,
they not unnaturally leapt to the conclusion that its value also
could be isolated and described without reference to other things.
In some hands the further conclusions drawn were too queer to
outlive their hour of fashion. They amounted often to the postulation
of a ‘specific thrill’ yielded by works of art and nothing else,
unlike and unconnected with all other experiences. “No queerer,”
it was said, “than anything else in this incredibly queer universe.”[32]
But the queerness of the universe is of a different and a more
interesting sort. It may be a curiosity shop but it nowhere seems
to be a chaos.

For our present purposes we need only consider the view as it
is put forward by its ablest exponent, a critic who by his own
explanations of this formula goes very far towards meeting the
objection we urge.

“What then does the formula ‘Poetry for Poetry’s sake’ tell us
about this experience? It says, as I understand it, these things.
First, this experience is an end in itself, is worth having on
ifs own account, has an intrinsic value. Next, its _poetic_
value is this intrinsic worth alone. Poetry may have also have
an ulterior value as a means to culture or religion; because
it conveys instruction or softens the passions, or furthers a
good cause; because it brings the poet fame, or money, or a quiet
conscience. So much the better: let it be valued for these reasons
too. But its ulterior worth neither is nor can directly determine
its poetic worth as a satisfying imaginative experience; and
this is to be judged entirely from within. . . . The consideration
of ulterior ends whether by the poet in the act of composing
or by the reader in the act of experiencing, tends to lower poetic
value. It does so because it tends to change the nature of poetry
by taking it out of its own atmosphere. For its nature is to
be not a part, nor yet a copy of the real world (as we commonly
understand that phrase) but to be a world by itself, independent,
complete, autonomous[33].”

There seem four points well worth close consideration here. The
first is that the things mentioned as possible ulterior values
in Dr Bradley’s list—culture, religion, instruction, softening
of the passions, furtherance of good causes, the poet’s fame,
or money, or quiet conscience—these things are plainly upon quite
different levels. He says of all of them that they cannot possibly
determine the poetic worth of an æsthetic experience; that whether
or no any poetic experience is poetically valuable cannot depend
upon any of these ulterior values. But it is certain that some
of these stand in a quite different relation to the poetic experience
than do others. Culture, religion, instruction in some special
senses, softening of the passions, and the furtherance of good
causes may be directly concerned in our judgments of the _poetic_
values of experiences. Otherwise, as we shall see, the word ‘poetic’
becomes a useless sound. On the other hand, the poet’s fame,
his reward, or his conscience, seem plainly to be irrelevant.
That is the first point.

The second point is that what Dr Bradley says as to the imaginative
experience—that it is to be judged entirely from within—is misleading.
In most cases we do not judge it from within. Our judgment as
to its value is no part of it. In rare instances such a judgment
may be part of it, but this is exceptional. As a rule we have
to come out of it in order to judge it, and we judge it by memory
or by other residual effects which we learn to be good indices
to its value. If by judging it in the experience we mean merely
while these residual effects are fresh, we may agree. In so judging
it, however, it’s “place in the great structure of human life”
cannot possibly be ignored. The value which it has is dependent
upon this, and we cannot judge that value without taking this
place, and with it innumerable ulterior worths, into account.
It is not that we shall evaluate it wrongly if we neglect them,
but that evaluation is just this taking account of everything,
and of the way things hang together.

The third point arises with regard to Dr Bradley’s third position,
that the consideration of ulterior ends, whether by the poet
in the act of composing, or by the reader in the act of experiencing,
tends to lower poetic value. Here all depends upon _which are
the ulterior ends in question_, and what the kind of poetry.
It will not be denied that for some kinds of poetry the _intrusion_
of certain ulterior ends may, and often does, lower their value;
but there seem plainly to be other kinds of poetry in which its
value as poetry definitely and directly depends upon the ulterior
ends involved. Consider the Psalms, Isaiah, the New Testament,
Dante, the _Pilgrim’s Progress_, Rabelais, any really universal
satire, Swift, Voltaire, Byron.

In all these cases the consideration of ulterior ends has been
certainly essential to the act of composing. That needs no arguing;
but, equally, this consideration of the ulterior ends involved
is inevitable to the reader.

Dr Bradley puts this third position forward in a tentative form;
he says that the ulterior _tends_ to lower poetic value,
an important reservation, but it would be better to distinguish
two kinds of poetry, one to which his doctrine applies and one
to which it does not. As illustrations of the cases in which
his doctrine does apply, _The Ancient Mariner_ and _Hartleap
Well_ may be mentioned. Here in both cases the experiences
are of a kind into which no ulterior ends enter in any important
degree. Thus when Coleridge and Wordsworth introduce moral considerations,
the effect is undeniably one of intrusion. As Mrs Meynell comically
remarks, “_The Ancient Mariner_ offends upon a deliberate
plan. It denies the natural function of observation when it invents
sanctions for the protection of a wild bird’s life, and for the
punishment of its slaughter. Coleridge intends to enforce a lesson
by telling us that 200 mariners died of thirst because they had—with
the superstition pardonable in their state of education—supposed
an albatross to be the bringer of foggy weather, and had approved
its slaughter, as almost all men implicitly approve the daily
slaughter of innocent beast and bird.” But this charge against
Coleridge is only reasonable if we make of this ulterior end,
this ‘lesson’ against cruelty to animals, a vital part of the
poem. Mrs Meynell, we may think, takes Coleridge’s moral too
seriously. It may be this possibility which Coleridge had in
mind when he said, long afterwards, that _The Ancient Mariner_
did not contain enough of the moral. As the poem stands, it is
of a kind into which ulterior ends do not enter. If we are to
take this alien element, this lesson, into account in our judgment,
we shall have deliberately to misread the poem, with Mrs Meynell.
The same considerations apply to _Hartleap Well_; and so
far as Dr Bradley is merely enforcing this point, we may agree;
but he fails to notice—it is only fair to say that few critics
seem ever to notice it—that poetry is of more than one kind,
and that the different kinds are to be judged by different principles.
There is a kind of poetry into the judgment of which ulterior
ends directly and essentially enter; a kind part of whose value
is directly derivable from the value of the ends with which it
is associated. There are other kinds, into which ulterior ends
do not enter in any degree, and there are yet other kinds whose
value may be lowered by the intrusion of ends relatively trivial
in value. Dr Bradley is misled by the usual delusion that there
is in this respect only one kind of poetry, into saying far more
than the facts of poetic experience will justify.

The fourth point is of more general importance perhaps than these
three. It is in fact the real point of disagreement between the
view we are upholding and the doctrine which Dr Bradley, together
with the vast majority of modern critics, wishes to maintain.
It is stated in the concluding sentence of the paragraph which
I have quoted. He says of poetry that “its nature is to be, not
a part nor yet a copy of the real world, as we commonly understand
that phrase, but to be a world by itself, independent, complete,
autonomous. To possess it fully, you must enter that world, conform
to its laws, and ignore, for the time being, the beliefs, aims,
and particular conditions which belong to you in the other world
of reality.” This doctrine insists: upon a severance between
poetry and what, in opposition, may be called life; a complete
severance, allowing however, as Dr Bradley goes on to insist—an
‘underground’ connection. But this ‘underground’ connection is
all-important. Whatever there is in the poetic experience has
come through it. The world of poetry has in no sense any different
reality from the rest of the world and it has no special laws
and no other-worldly peculiarities. It is made up of experiences
of exactly the same kinds as those that come to us in other ways.
Every poem however is a strictly limited piece of experience,
a piece which breaks up more or less easily if alien elements
intrude. It is more highly and more delicately organised than
ordinary experiences of the street or of the hillside; it is
fragile. Further it is communicable. It may be experienced by
many different minds with only slight variations. That this should
be possible is one of the conditions of its organisation. It
differs from many other experiences, whose value is very similar,
in this very communicability. For these reasons when we experience
it, or attempt to, we must preserve it from contamination, from
the irruptions of personal particularities. We must keep the
poem undisturbed by these or we fail to read it and have some
other experience instead. For these reasons we establish a severance,
we draw a boundary between the poem and what is not the poem
in our experience. But this is no severance between unlike things
but between different systems of the same activities. The gulf
between them is no greater than that between the impulses which
direct the pen and those which conduct the pipe of a man who
is smoking and writing at once, and the ‘disassociation’ or severance
of the poetic experience is merely a freeing of it from extraneous
ingredients and influences. The myth of a ‘transmutation’ or
‘poetisation’ of experience and that other myth of the ‘contemplative’
or ‘æsthetic’ attitude, are in part due to talking about Poetry
and the ‘poetic’ instead of thinking about the concrete experiences
which are poems.

The separation of poetic experience from its place in life and
its ulterior worths, involves a definite lop-sidedness, narrowness,
and incompleteness in those who preach it sincerely. No one,
of course, would bring such charges against the author of _Shakespearean
Tragedy_; his is that welcome and not unfamiliar case of the
critic whose practice is a refutation of his principles. When
genuinely held the view leads to an attempted splitting up of
the experiencing reader into a number of distinct faculties or
departments which have no real existence. It is impossible to
divide a reader into so many men—an æsthetic man, a moral man,
a practical man, a political man, an intellectual man, and so
on. It cannot be done. In any genuine experience all these elements
inevitably enter. But if it could be done, as many critics pretend,
the result would be fatal to the wholeness and sanction of the
critical judgment. We cannot e.g. read Shelley adequately while
believing that all his views are moonshine—read _Prometheus
Unbound_ while holding that ‘the perfectibility of man is
an undesirable ideal’ and that ‘hangmen are excellent things.’
To say that there is a purely æsthetic or poetic approach to,
let us say, the _Sermon on the Mount_, by which no consideration
of the intention or ulterior end of the poem enters, would appear
to be merely mental timidity, the shrinking remark of a person
who finds essential literature too much for him. Into an adequate
reading of the greater kinds of poetry everything not private
and peculiar to the individual reader must come in. The reader
must be required to wear no blinkers, to overlook nothing which
is relevant, to shut off no part of himself from participation.
If he attempts to assume the peculiar attitude of disregarding
all but some hypothetically-named æsthetic elements, he joins
Henry James’ Osmond in his tower, he joins Blake’s Kings and
Priests in their High Castles and Spires.


[29] It is true that in mechanics one might draw up a formidable
list of names and say “Opposed to all these appeared a certain
Einstein”, but the cases are not parallel. A scientific advance
is different from a change of fashion, and no new facts nor any
new hypothesis—no Michelson-Morley experiment, nor any widened
purview—led up to the separate value theory of art. Although
historians of æsthetics are sometimes pleased to present their
facts as though they represented a progress from cruder to more
refined opinion, from ignorance to wisdom, there is no sound
basis for the procedure. Aristotle was at least as clearly and
fully aware of the relevant facts and as adequate in his explanations
as any later inquirers. Æsthetics in fact has hardly yet reached
the scientific stage, in which succeeding investigators can start
where their predecessors left off.

[30] _An Essay on Style_. The final paragraph.

[31] See Chapters XVI, XVIII and XXXI.

[32] Clive Bell, _Art_, p. 49.

[33] A. C. Bradley, _Oxford Lectures on Poetry_, p. 5.




