

“Extraordinarily interesting. . . . He is erudite and he is intelligent;
he makes the courageous attempt to be at the same time scientific
and psychological; and he has the great advantage of having at
his disposal a knowledge of semantics. His terms are clear, useful,
and conveniently few.”—_The Nation_.

“What he has done is to make thinking about art clearer, and
about life, too. This is precisely the merit of Richards’ remarkable
volume.”—_Christian Science Monitor_.

“The book is compact with stimulating criticism of the great
critics of the ages, and with numberless original suggestions
on all phases of the creation and appreciation of art.”—_Springfield
Republican_.

“An important contribution to the rehabilitation of English
criticism—perhaps, because of its sustained scientific nature, the
most important yet made. . . . The principles enunciated are pursued
in more particular aspects of literary criticism, always with a clear
rest and consequent elucidation. Parallel applications to the arts of
painting, sculpture, and music form the subjects of three chapters.
Another important chapter deals with the availability of the poet’s
experience.”—_The Criterion, London_.

“Mr. Richards is an entertaining writer, whose work avoids easily
the tedium of a technical treatise.”—_The British Journal of
Psychology_.




Transcriber’s Note:

This eBook was created from a 1928 edition, scans of which are
available from the Internet Archive. Tildes (~) indicate words
that were set in Fraktur script in the original text.

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to
the public domain.




  International Library of Psychology
  Philosophy and Scientific Method



  PRINCIPLES OF
  LITERARY
  CRITICISM

  BY
  I. A. RICHARDS
  FELLOW OF
  MAGDALENE COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

  NEW YORK
  HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY
  LONDON: KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO. LTD.

  PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
  LUND HUMPHRIES
  LONDON · BRADFORD




CONTENTS

       I. THE CHAOS OF CRITICAL THEORIES

      II. THE PHANTOM ÆSTHETIC STATE

     III. THE LANGUAGE OF CRITICISM

      IV. COMMUNICATION AND THE ARTIST

       V. THE CRITICS’ CONCERN WITH VALUE

      VI. VALUE AS AN ULTIMATE IDEA

     VII. A PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF VALUE

    VIII. ART AND MORALS

      IX. ACTUAL AND POSSIBLE MISAPPREHENSIONS

       X. POETRY FOR POETRY’S SAKE

      XI. A SKETCH FOR A PSYCHOLOGY

     XII. PLEASURE

    XIII. EMOTION AND THE CŒNESTHESIA

     XIV. MEMORY

      XV. ATTITUDES

     XVI. THE ANALYSIS OF A POEM

    XVII. RHYTHM AND METRE

   XVIII. ON LOOKING AT A PICTURE

     XIX. SCULPTURE AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF FORM

      XX. THE _IMPASSE_ OF MUSICAL THEORY

     XXI. A THEORY OF COMMUNICATION

    XXII. THE AVAILABILITY OF THE POET’S EXPERIENCE

   XXIII. TOLSTOY’S INFECTION THEORY

    XXIV. THE NORMALITY OF THE ARTIST

     XXV. BADNESS IN POETRY

    XXVI. JUDGMENT AND DIVERGENT READINGS

   XXVII. LEVELS OF RESPONSE AND THE WIDTH OF APPEAL

  XXVIII. THE ALLUSIVENESS OF MODERN POETRY

    XXIX. PERMANENCE AS A CRITERION

     XXX. THE DEFINITION OF A POEM

    XXXI. ART, PLAY, AND CIVILISATION

   XXXII. THE IMAGINATION

  XXXIII. TRUTH AND REVELATION THEORIES

   XXXIV. THE TWO USES OF LANGUAGE

    XXXV. POETRY AND BELIEFS

          APPENDIX A ON VALUE

          APPENDIX B ON MR. ELIOT’S POETRY




PREFACE


A book is a machine to think with, but it need not, therefore,
usurp the functions either of the bellows or the locomotive.
This book might better be compared to a loom on which it is proposed
to re-weave some ravelled parts of our civilisation. What is
most important about it, the interconnection of its several points
of view, might have been exhibited, though not with equal clarity,
in a pamphlet or in a two-volume work. Few of the separate items
are original. One does not expect novel cards when playing so
traditional a game; it is the hand which matters. I have chosen
to present it here on the smallest scale which would allow me
to fit together the various positions adopted into a whole of
some firmness. The elaborations and expansions which suggest
themselves have been constantly cut short at the point at which
I thought that the reader would be able to see for himself how
they would continue. The danger of this procedure, which otherwise
has great advantages both for him and for me, is that the different
parts of a connected account such as this mutually illumine one
another. The writer, who has, or should have, the whole position
in his mind throughout, may overlook sources of obscurity for
the reader, due to the serial form of the exposition. This I
have endeavoured to prevent by means of numerous cross-references,
forwards and backwards.

But some further explanation of the structure of the book is
due to the reader. At sundry points—notably in Chapters VI,
VII, and XI-XV—its progress appears to be interrupted by lengthy
excursions into theory of value, or into general psychology.
These I would have omitted if it had seemed in any way possible
to develop the argument of the rest strongly and clearly in their
absence. Criticism, as I understand it, is the endeavour to discriminate
between experiences and to evaluate them. We cannot do this without
some understanding of the nature of experience, or without theories
of valuation and communication. Such principles as apply in criticism
must be taken from these more fundamental studies. All other
critical principles are arbitrary, and the history of the subject
is a record of their obstructive influence. The view of value
implied throughout is one which must be held in some form by
very many persons. Yet I have been unable to discover anywhere
any statement of it to which I might satisfactorily refer the
reader. I had to make a fairly full statement with applications
and illustrations myself. And I had to put in the forefront of
the book where, to the more exclusively literary reader, it will
appear a dry and uninviting tract to be crossed for problematical
advantages. The same remarks apply to the second theoretical
expansion, the psychological chapters; they are to the value
chapters, I fear, as a Sahara to a Gobi. No other choice seemed
open if I did not wish my later, critical, sections to be misunderstood,
than to include as a preliminary what amounts to a concise treatise
on psychology. For nearly all the topics of psychology are raised
at one point or another by criticism, but raised from an angle
which ordinary text-books do not contemplate. These two deserts
passed, the rest of the book accords, I believe, much more closely
with what may be expected of an essay in criticism, although
the language in which some of the more obvious remarks are couched
may seem unnecessarily repellant. The explanation of much of
the turgid uncouthness of its terminology is the desire to link
even the commonplaces of criticism to a systematic exposition
of psychology. The reader who appreciates the advantages so gained
will be forgiving.

I have carefully remembered throughout that I am not writing
for specialists alone. The omissions, particularly as to qualifications
and reservations, which this fact entails, should in fairness
to myself be mentioned.

My book, I fear, will seem to many sadly lacking in the condiments
which have come to be expected in writings upon literature. Critics
and even theorists in criticism currently assume that their first
duty is to be moving, to excite in the mind emotions appropriate
to their august subject-matter. This endeavour I have declined.
I have used, I believe, few words which I could not define in
the actual use which I have made of them, and necessarily such
words have little or no emotive power. I have comforted myself
with the reflection that there is perhaps something debilitated
about a taste for speculation which requires a flavouring of
the eternal and the ultimate or even of the literary spices,
mystery and profundity. Mixed modes of writing which enlist the
reader’s feeling as well as his thinking are becoming dangerous
to the modern consciousness with its increasing awareness of
the distinction. Thought and feeling are able to mislead one
another at present in ways which were hardly possible six centuries
ago. We need a spell of purer science and purer poetry before
the two can again be mixed, if indeed this will ever become once
more desirable. In the Second Edition I added a note on Mr. Eliot’s
poetry which will elucidate what I mean here by purity, and some
supplementary remarks upon Value; in the Third, a few minor improvements
have been made.

It should be borne in mind that the knowledge which the men of
A.D. 3000 will possess, if all goes well, may make all our æsthetics,
all our psychology, all our modern theory of value, look pitiful.
Poor indeed would be the prospect if this were not so. The thought,
“What shall we do with the powers, which we are so rapidly developing,
and what will happen to us if we cannot learn to guide them in
time?” already marks for many people the chief interest of existence.
The controversies which the world has known in the past are as
nothing to those which are ahead. I would wish this book to be
regarded as a contribution towards these choices of the future.

Between the possession of ideas and their application there is
a gulf. Every teacher winces when he remembers this. As an attempt
to attack this difficulty, I am preparing a companion volume,
_Practical Criticism_. Extremely good and extremely bad
poems were put _unsigned_ before a large and able audience.
The comments they wrote at leisure give, as it were, a stereoscopic
view of the poem and of possible opinion on it. This material
when systematically analysed, provides, not only an interesting
commentary upon the state of contemporary culture, but a new
and powerful educational instrument.

                                                    I. A. R.

_Cambridge, May_, 1928.




CHAPTER I

The Chaos of Critical Theories

  O monstrous! but one half-pennyworth of bread to this intolerable
    deal of sack!—_The First Part of King Henry the Fourth._


The literature of Criticism is not small or negligible, and its
chief figures, from Aristotle onwards, have often been among
the first intellects of their age. Yet the modern student, surveying
the field and noting the simplicity of the task attempted and
the fragments of work achieved, may reasonably wonder what has
been and is amiss. For the experiences with which criticism is
concerned are exceptionally accessible, we have only to open
the book, stand before the picture, have the music played, spread
out the rug, pour out the wine, and the material upon which the
critic works is presently before us. Even too abundantly, in
too great fullness perhaps: “More warmth than Adam needs” the
critic may complain, echoing Milton’s complaint against the climate
of the Garden of Eden; but he is fortunate not to be starved
of matter like the investigator of psychoplasm. And the questions
which the critic seeks to answer, intricate though they are,
do not seem to be extraordinarily difficult. What gives the experience
of reading a certain poem its value? How is this experience better
than another? Why prefer this picture to that? In which ways
should we listen to music so as to receive the most valuable
moments? Why is one opinion about works of art not as good as
another? These are the fundamental questions which criticism
is required to answer, together with such preliminary questions—What
_is_ a picture, a poem, a piece of music? How can experiences
be compared? What is value?—as may be required in order to approach
these questions.

But if we now turn to consider what are the results yielded by
the best minds pondering these questions in the light of the
eminently accessible experiences provided by the Arts, we discover
an almost empty garner. A few conjectures, a supply of admonitions,
many acute isolated observations, some brilliant guesses, much
oratory and applied poetry, inexhaustible confusion, a sufficiency
of dogma, no small stock of prejudices, whimsies and crotchets,
a profusion of mysticism, a little genuine speculation, sundry
stray inspirations, pregnant hints and random _aperçus_;
of such as these, it may be said without exaggeration, is extant
critical theory composed.

A few specimens of the most famous utterances of Aristotle, Longinus,
Horace, Boileau, Dryden, Addison, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Carlyle,
Matthew Arnold, and some more modern authors, will justify this
assertion. “All men naturally receive pleasure from imitation.”
“Poetry is chiefly conversant about general truth.” “It demands
an enthusiasm allied to madness; transported out of ourselves
we become what we imagine.” “Beautiful words are the very and
peculiar light of the mind.” “Let the work be what you like,
provided it has simplicity and unity.” “De Gustibus. . .” “Of
writing well right thinking is the beginning and the fount.”
“We must never separate ourselves from Nature.” “Delight is the
chief, if not the only end; instruction can be admitted but in
the second place.” “The pleasures of Fancy are more conducive
to health than those of the understanding.” “The spontaneous
overflow of powerful feeling.” “The best words in the best order.”
“The whole soul of man in activity.” “Unity in variety.” “The
synthetic and magical power of the imagination.” “The eye on
the object.” “The disimprisonment of the soul of fact.” “The
identification of content and form.” “A criticism of Life.” “Empathy
favourable to our existence.” “Significant form.” “The expression
of impressions,” etc. etc.

Such are the pinnacles, the _apices_ of critical theory,
the heights gained in the past by the best thinkers in their
attempt to reach explanations of the value of the arts. Some
of them, many of them indeed, are profitable starting-points
for reflection, but neither together, nor singly, nor in any
combination do they give what is required. Above them and below
them, around and about them can be found other things of value,
of service for the appreciation of particular poems and works
of art; comment, elucidation, appraisal, much that is fit occupation
for the contemplative mind. But apart from hints such as have
been cited, no explanations. The central question, What is the
value of the arts, why are they worth the devotion of the keenest
hours of the best minds, and what is their place in the system
of human endeavours? is left almost untouched, although without
some clear view it would seem that even the most judicious critic
must often lose his sense of position.



But perhaps the literature of Criticism is the wrong place in
which to expect such an inquiry. Philosophers, Moralists and
Æstheticians are perhaps the competent authorities? There is
certainly no lack of treatises upon the Good and the Beautiful,
upon Value and upon the Æsthetic State, and the treasures of
earnest endeavour lavished upon these topics have not been in
vain. Those investigators who have relied upon Reason, upon the
Select Intuition and the Ineluctable Argument, who have sat down
without the necessary facts to think the matter out, have at
least thoroughly discredited a method which apart from their
labours would hardly have been suspected of the barrenness it
has shown. And those who, following Fechner, have turned instead
to the collection and analysis of concrete, particular facts
and to empirical research into æsthetics have supplied a host
of details to psychology. In recent years especially, much useful
information upon the processes which make up the appreciation
of works of art has been skilfully elicited. But it is showing
no ingratitude to these investigators if we point out certain
defects of almost all experimental work on æsthetics, which make
their results at best of only indirect service to our wider problems.

The most obvious of these concerns their inevitable choice of
experiments. Only the simplest human activities are at present
amenable to laboratory methods. Æstheticians have therefore been
compelled to begin with as simple forms of ‘æsthetic choice’
as can be devised. In practice, line-lengths and elementary forms,
single notes and phrases, single colours and simple collocations,
nonsense syllables, metronomic beats, skeleton rhythms and metres
and similar simplifications have alone been open to investigation.
Such more complex objects as have been examined have yielded
very uncertain results, for reasons which anyone who has ever
_both_ looked at a picture or read a poem _and_ been inside a
psychological laboratory or conversed with a representative
psychologist will understand.

The generalisations to be drawn from these simple experiments
are, if we do not expect too much, encouraging. Some light upon
obscure processes, such as empathy, and upon the intervention
of muscular imagery and tendencies to action into the apprehension
of shapes and of sequences of sounds which had been supposed
to be apprehended by visual or auditory apparatus alone, some
interesting facts about the plasticity of rhythm, some approach
towards a classification of the different ways in which colours
may be regarded, increased recognition of the complexity of even
the simplest activities, these and similar results have been
well worth the trouble expended. But more important has been
the revelation of the great variety in the responses which even
the simplest stimuli elicit. Even so unambiguous an object as
a plain colour, it has been found, can arouse in different persons
and in the same person at different times extremely different
states of mind. From this result it may seem no illegitimate
step to conclude that highly complex objects, such as pictures,
will arouse a still greater variety of responses, a conclusion
very awkward for any theory of criticism, since it would appear
to decide adversely the preliminary question: “How may experiences
be compared?” which any such theory must settle if the more fundamental
questions of value are to be satisfactorily approached.

But just here a crucial point arises. There seems to be good
reason to suppose that the more simple the object contemplated
the more varied the responses will be which can be expected from
it. For it is difficult, perhaps impossible, to contemplate a
comparatively simple object by itself. Inevitably it is taken
by the contemplator into some context, and made part of some
larger whole, and under such experimental conditions as have
yet been devised it seems not possible to guarantee the kind
of context into which it is taken. A comparison with the case
of words is instructive. A single word by itself, let us say
‘night,’ will raise almost as many different thoughts and feelings
as there are persons who hear it. The range of variety with a
single word is very little restricted. But put it into a sentence
and the variation is narrowed; put it into the context of a whole
passage, and it is still further fixed; and let it occur in such
an intricate whole as a poem and the responses of competent readers
may have a similarity which only its occurrence in such a whole
can secure. The point will arise for discussion when the problem
of corroboration for critical judgments is dealt with later (cf.
pp. 166, 178, 192). It had to be mentioned here in order to explain
why the theory of criticism shows no great dependence upon experimental
æsthetics, useful in many respects as these investigations are.




