CHAPTER IV

Communication and the Artist

  Poetry is the record of the best and happiest moments of the happiest
        and best minds.—_The Defence of Poetry_.


The two pillars upon which a theory of criticism must rest are
an account of value and an account of communication. We do not
sufficiently realise how great a part of our experience takes
the form it does, because we are social beings and accustomed
to communication from infancy. That we acquire many of our ways
of thinking and feeling from parents and others is, of course,
a commonplace.

But the effects of communication go much deeper than this. The
very structure of our minds largely determined by the fact that
man has been engaged in communicating for so many hundreds of
thousands of years, throughout the course of his human development
and beyond even that. A large part of the distinctive features
of the mind are due to its being an instrument for communication.
An experience has to be formed, no doubt, before it is communicated,
but it takes the form it does largely because it may have to
be communicated. The emphasis which natural selection has put
upon communicative ability is overwhelming.

There are very many problems of psychology, from those with which
some of the exponents of _Gestalt theorie_ are grappling to those by
which psycho-analysts are bewildered, for which this neglected, this
almost overlooked aspect of the mind may provide a key, but it is
pre-eminently in regard to the arts that it is of service. For the
arts are the supreme form of the communicative activity. As we shall
see, most of the difficult and obscure points about the structures of
the arts, for example the priority of formal elements to content,[11]
or the impersonality and detachment so much stressed by æstheticians,
become easily intelligible as soon as we consider them from this angle.
But a possible misunderstanding must be guarded against. Although it is
as a communicator that it is most profitable to consider the artist,
it is by no means true that he commonly looks upon himself in this
light. In the course of his work he is not as a rule deliberately and
consciously engaged in a communicative endeavour. When asked, he is
more likely than not to reply that communication is an irrelevant or
at best a minor issue, and that what he is making is something which
is beautiful in itself, or satisfying to him personally, or something
expressive, in a more or less vague sense, of his emotions, or of
himself, something personal and individual. That other people are
going to study it, and to receive experiences from it may seem to him
a merely accidental, inessential circumstance. More modestly still, he
may say that when he works he is merely amusing himself.

That the artist is not as a mule consciously concerned with communication,
but with getting the work, the poem or play or statue or painting
or whatever it is, ‘right’, apparently regardless of its communicative
efficacy, is easily explained. To make the work ‘embody’, accord
with, and represent the precise experience upon which its value
depends is his major preoccupation, in difficult cases an overmastering
preoccupation, and the dissipation of attention which would be
involved if he considered the communicative side as a separate
issue would be fatal in most serious work. He cannot stop to
consider how the public or even how especially well qualified
sections of the public may like it or respond to it. He is wise,
therefore, to keep all such considerations out of mind altogether.
Those artists and poets who can be suspected of close separate
attention to the communicative aspect tend (there are exceptions
to this, of which Shakespeare might be one) to fall into a subordinate
rank.

But this conscious neglect of communication does not in the least
diminish the importance of the communicative aspect. It would
only do so if we were prepared to admit that only our conscious
activities matter. The very process of getting the work ‘right’
has itself, so far as the artist is normal,[12] immense communicative
consequences. Apart from certain special cases, to be discussed
later, it will, when ‘right’, have much greater communicative
power than it would have had if ‘wrong’. The degree to which
it accords with the relevant experience of the artist is a measure
of the degree to which it will arouse similar experiences in
others.

But more narrowly the reluctance of the artist to consider communication
as one of his main aims, and his denial that he is at all influenced
in his’ work by a desire to affect other people, is no evidence
that communication is not actually his principal object. On a
simple view of psychology, which overlooked unconscious motives,
it would be, but not on any view of human behaviour which is
in the least adequate. When we find the artist constantly struggling
towards impersonality, towards a structure for his work which
excludes his private, eccentric, momentary idiosyncrasies, and
using always as its basis those elements which are most uniform
in their effects upon impulses; when we find private works of
art, works which satisfy the artist,[13] but are incomprehensible
to everybody else, so rare, and the publicity of the work so
constantly and so intimately bound up with its appeal to the
artist himself, it is difficult to believe that efficacy for
communication is not a main part of the ‘rightness’[14] which
the artist may suppose to be something quite different.

How far desire actually to communicate, as distinguished from
desire to produce something with communicative efficacy (however
disguised), is an ‘unconscious motive’ in the artist is a question
to which we need not hazard an answer. Doubtless individual artists
vary enormously. To some the lure of ‘immortality’ of enduring
fame, of a permanent place in the influences which govern the
human mind, appears to be very strong. To others it is often
negligible. The degree to which such notions are avowed certainly
varies with current social and intellectual fashions. At present
the appeal to posterity, the ‘nurslings of immortality’ attitude
to works of art appears to be much out of favour. “How do we
know what posterity will be like? They may be awful people!”
a contemporary is likely to remark, thus confusing the issue.
For the appeal is not to posterity merely as living at a certain
date, but as especially qualified to judge, a qualification most
posterities have lacked.

What concerns criticism is not the avowed or unavowed motives
of the artist, however interesting these may be to psychology,
but the fact that his procedure does, in the majority of instances,
make the communicative efficacy of his work correspond with his
own satisfaction and sense of its rightness. This may be due
merely to his normality, or it may be due to unavowed motives.
The first suggestion is the more plausible. In any case it is
certain that no mere careful study of communicative possibilities,
together with any desire to communicate, however intense, is
ever sufficient without close natural correspondence between
the poet’s impulses and possible impulses in his reader. All
supremely successful communication involves this correspondence,
and no planning can take its place. Nor is the deliberate conscious
attempt directed to communication so successful as the unconscious
indirect method.

Thus the artist is entirely justified in his apparent neglect
of the main purpose of his work. And when in what follows he
is alluded to without qualification as being primarily concerned
with communication, the reservations here made should be recalled.



Since the poet’s unconscious motives have been alluded to, it
may be well at this point to make a few additional remarks. Whatever
psycho-analysts may aver, the mental processes of the poet are
not a very profitable field for investigation. They offer far
too happy a hunting-ground for uncontrollable conjecture. Much
that goes to produce a poem is, of course, unconscious. Very
likely the unconscious processes are more important than the
conscious, but even if we knew far more than we do about how
the mind works, the attempt to display the inner working of the
artist’s mind by the evidence of his work alone must be subject
to the gravest dangers. And to judge by the published work of
Freud upon Leonardo da Vinci or of Jung upon Goethe (e.g. _The
Psychology of the Unconscious_, p. 305), psycho-analysts tend
to be peculiarly inept as critics.

The difficulty is that nearly all speculations as to what went
on in the artist’s mind are unverifiable, even more unverifiable
than the similar speculations as to the dreamer’s mind. The most
plausible explanations are apt to depend upon features whose
actual causation is otherwise. I do not know whether anyone but
Mr Graves has attempted to analyse _Kubla Khan_, a poem
which by its mode of composition and by its subject suggests
itself as well fitted for analysis. The reader acquainted with
current methods of analysis can imagine the results of a thoroughgoing
Freudian onslaught.

If he will then open _Paradise Lost_, Book IV at line 223,
and read onwards: for sixty lines, he will encounter the actual
sources of not a few of the images and phrases of the poem. In
spite of—

    Southward through _Eden_ went a River large,
    Nor changed his course, but through the shaggie hill
    Pass’d underneath ingulft . . .

in spite of—

    Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill
    Waterd the Garden; thence united fell
    Down the steep glade, and met the neather Flood . . .

in spite of—

    Rowling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold
    With mazie error under pendant shades
    Ran Nectar . . .

in spite of—

    Meanwhile murmuring waters fall
    Down the slope hills, disperst . . .

his doubts may still linger until he reaches

    Nor where _Abassin_ Kings thir issue Guard,
    Mount Amara.

and one of the most cryptic points in Coleridge’s poem, the Abyssinian
maid, singing of Mount Abora, finds its simple explanation. The
closing line of the poem perhaps hardly needs this kind of derivation.

From one source or another almost all the matter of _Kubla
Khan_ came to Coleridge in a similar fashion. I do not know
whether this particular indebtedness has been remarked before,
but _Purchas his Pilgrimage_, Bartram’s _Travels in North
and South Carolina_, and Maurice’s _History of Hindostan_
are well-known sources, some of them indicated by Coleridge himself.

This very representative instance of the unconscious working
of a poet’s mind may serve as a not inapposite warning against
one kind at least of possible applications of psychology in criticism.



The extent to which the arts and their place in the whole scheme
of human affairs have been misunderstood, by Critics, Moralists,
Educators, Æstheticians . . . is somewhat difficult to explain.
Often those who most misunderstood have been perfect in their
taste and ability to respond, Ruskin for example. Those who both
knew what to do with a work of art and also understood what they
were doing, have been for the most part artists and little inclined
for, or capable of, the rather special task of explaining. It
may have seemed to them too obvious to need explanation. Those
who have tried have as a rule been foiled by language. For the
difficulty which has always prevented the arts from being explained
as well as ‘enjoyed’ (to use an inadequate word in default of
an adequate) is language.

    “Happy who can
    Appease this virtuous enemy of man!”

It was perhaps never so necessary as now that we should know
why the arts are important and avoid inadequate answers. It will
probably become increasingly more important in the future. Remarks
such as these, it is true, are often uttered by enthusiastic
persons, and are apt to be greeted with the same smile as the
assertion that the future of England is bound up with Hunting.
Yet their full substantiation will be found to involve issues
which are nowhere lightly regarded.

The arts are our storehouse of recorded values. They spring from
and perpetuate hours in the lives of exceptional people, when
their control and command of experience is at its highest, hours
when the varying possibilities of existence are most clearly
seen and the different activities which may arise are most exquisitely
reconciled, hours when habitual narrowness of interests or confused
bewilderment are replaced by an intricately wrought composure.
Both in the genesis of a work of art, in the creative moment,
and in its aspect as a vehicle of communication, reasons can
be found for giving to the arts a very important place in the
theory of Value. They record the most important judgments we
possess as to the values of experience. They form a body of
evidence which, for lack of a serviceable psychology by which
to interpret it, and through the desiccating influence of abstract
Ethics, has been left almost untouched by professed students
of value. An odd omission, for without the assistance of the
arts we could compare very few of our experiences, and without
such comparison we could hardly hope to agree as to which are
to be preferred. Very simple experiences—a cold bath in an enamelled
tin, or running for a train—may to some extent be compared without
elaborate vehicles; and friends exceptionally well acquainted
with one another may manage some rough comparisons in ordinary
conversation. But subtle or recondite experiences are for most
men incommunicable and indescribable, though social conventions
or terror of the loneliness of the human situation may make us
pretend the contrary. In the arts we find the record in the only
form in which these things can be recorded of the experiences
which have seemed worth having to the most sensitive and discriminating
persons. Through the obscure perception of this fact the poet
has been regarded as a seer and the artist as a priest, suffering
from usurpations. The arts, if rightly approached, supply the
best data available for deciding what experiences are more valuable
than others. The qualifying clause is all-important however.
Happily there is no lack of glaring examples to remind us of
the difficulty of approaching them rightly.

[11] See Chapter XXIV.

[12] This point will be discussed in Chapter XXIV.

[13] Again the normality of the artist has to be considered.

[14] As will be seen, I am not going to identify ‘beauty’ with
‘communicative efficacy’. This is a trap which it is easy to
fall into. A number of the exoteric followers of Croce may be
found in it, though not Croce himself.




