CHAPTER VI

Value as an Ultimate Idea

    Some lovely glorious nothing I did see.—_Aire and Angels_.


It has always been found far more easy to divide experiences[15]
into good and bad, valuable and the reverse, than to discover
what we are doing when we make the division. The history of opinions
as to what constitutes value, as to why and when anything is
rightly called good, shows a bewildering variety. But in modern
times the controversy narrows itself down to two questions. The
first of these is whether the difference between experiences
which are valuable and those which are not can be fully described
in psychological terms; whether some additional distinctive ‘ethical’
or ‘moral’ idea of a non-psychological nature is or is not required.
The second question concerns the exact psychological analysis
needed in order to explain value if no further ‘ethical’ idea
is shown to be necessary.

The first question will not detain us long. It has been ably
maintained[16] and widely accepted that when we say that an experience
is good we are simply saying that it is endowed with a certain
ethical property or attribute not to be reduced to any psychological
properties or attributes such as being desired or approved, and
that no further elucidation of this special ethical property
by way of analysis is possible. ‘Good’ on this view is in no
way a shorthand term for some more explicit account. The things
which are good, it is held, are just good, possess a property
which can be recognised by immediate intuition, and here, since
good is unanalysable, the matter must rest. All that the study
of value can do is to point out the things which possess this
property, classify them, and remove certain confusions between
ends which are good in themselves and means which are only called
good, because they are instrumental in the attainment of intrinsically
good ends. Usually those who maintain this view also hold that
the only things which are good for their own sakes and not merely
as a means are certain conscious experiences, for example, knowledge,
admiring contemplation of beauty, and feelings of affection and
veneration under some circumstances. Other things, such as mountains,
books, railways, courageous actions, are good instrumentally
because, and in so far as, they cause or make possible states
of mind which are valuable intrinsically. Thus the occurrence
of states of mind which are recognised as good is regarded as
an isolated fact of experience, not capable of being accounted
for, or linked up with the rest of human peculiarities as a product
of development in the way made familiar by the biological sciences.

The plausibility of this view derives principally from the metaphysical
assumption that there are properties, in the sense of subsistent
entities, which attach to existent particulars, but which might
without absurdity be supposed to attach to nothing.

These metaphysical entities, variously named Ideas, Notions,
Concepts or Universals, may be divided into two kinds, sensuous
and supersensuous.[17] The sensuous are those which may be apprehended
by the senses, such as ‘red’, ‘cold’, ‘round’, ‘swift’, ‘painful’,
and the supersensuous, those apprehended not in sensuous perception
but otherwise. Logical relations, ‘necessity’ or ‘impossibility,’
and such ideas as ‘willing’, ‘end’, ‘cause’, and ‘being three
in number’, have in this way been supposed to be directly apprehensible
by the mind. Amongst these supersensuous Ideas good is to be
found.

Nothing could be simpler than such a view, and to many people
the subsistence of such a property of goodness appears not surprising.
But to others the suggestion seems merely a curious survival
of abstractionism, if such a term may be defended by its close
parallel with obstructionism. A blind man in a dark room chasing
a black cat which is not there would seem to them well employed
in comparison with a philosopher apprehending such ‘Concepts’.
While ready for convenience of discourse to talk and even to
think as though Concepts and Particulars were separable and distinct
kinds of entities, they refuse to believe that the structure
of the world actually contains such a cleavage. The point is
perhaps undiscussable, and is probably unimportant, except in
so far as the habit of regarding the world as actually so cloven
is a fruitful source of bogus entities, usually hypostatised
words. The temptation to introduce premature ultimates—Beauty
in Æsthetics, the Mind and its faculties in psychology, Life
in physiology, are representative examples—is especially great
for believers in Abstract Entities. The objection to such Ultimates
is that they bring an investigation to a dead end too suddenly.
An ultimate Good is, in this instance, just such an arbitrary
full stop.

It will be agreed that a less cryptic account of good, if one
can be given, which is in accordance with verifiable facts, would
be preferable, even though no means were available for refuting
the simpler theory. Upholders of this theory, however, have produced
certain arguments to show that no other view of good is possible,
and these must first be briefly examined. They provide, in addition,
an excellent example of the misuse of psychological assumptions
in research, for although a psychological approach is often of
the utmost service, it can also be a source of obscurantism and
over-confidence. The arguments against any naturalistic account
depend upon the alleged results of directly inspecting what is
before our minds when we judge that anything is good. If we substitute,
it is maintained, any account of good whatever for ‘good’ in
the assertion, ‘This is good’—for example, ‘This is desired’
or ‘This is approved’—we can detect that what is substituted
is different from ‘good’, and that we are not then making the
same judgment. This result, it is claimed, is confirmed by the
fact that we can always ask, “Is what is desired, or what is
approved, good?” however we may elaborate the account provided,
and that this is always a genuine question which would be impossible
were the substituted account actually the analysis of good.

The persuasiveness of this refutation is found to vary enormously
from individual to individual, for the results of the experiments
upon which it relies differ. Those who have accustomed themselves to
the belief that good is a supersensuous simple Idea readily discover
the fraudulent character of any offered substitute, while those who
hold some psychological theory of value, with equal ease identify
their account with ‘good’. The further question, “When and under what
conditions can judgments be distinguished?” arises, a question so
difficult to answer that any argument becomes suspect which depends
upon assuming that they can be infallibly recognised as different. If
for any reason we wish to distinguish two judgments, we can persuade
ourselves, in any case in which they are differently formulated, that
they are different. Thus it has been thought that ‘_a_ exceeds _b_’ and
‘_a_ is greater than _b_’ are distinguishable, the first being supposed
to state simply that _a_ has the relation ‘exceeds’ to _b_, while the
second is supposed to state that _a_ has the relation ‘is’ to _greater_
which again has the relation ‘than’ to _b_.[18] The conclusion to
be drawn from the application of such methods to the problem of the
meaning of Good would seem to be that they are not competent to decide
anything about it—by no means a valueless result.

Since nothing can be concluded from a comparison of ‘This is
good’ with, let us say, ‘This is sought by an impulse belonging
to a dominant group’, let us see whether light can be gained
by considering analogous instances in which special distinct
ideas have for a time been thought indispensable only to yield
later to analysis and substitution. The case of Beauty is perhaps
too closely related to that of Good for our purpose. Those who
can persuade themselves that Good is an unique irreducible entity
might believe the same of Beauty. An episode in the theory of
the tides is more instructive. It was once thought that the moon
must have a peculiar Affinity with water: When the moon is full
the tides are higher. Clearly the seas swell in sympathy with
the increase of the moon. The history of science is full of mysterious
unique entities which have gradually evaporated as explanation
advanced.

The struggles of economists with ‘utility’, of mathematical philosophers
with ‘points’ and ‘instants’, of biologists with ‘entelechies’,
and the adventures of psycho-analysts with ‘the libido’ and ‘the
collective unconscious’ are instances in point. At present theoretical
psychology in particular is largely made up of the manipulation
of similar suspects. The Act of Judgment, the relation of Presentation,
Immediate Awareness, Direct Inspection, the Will, Feeling, Assumption,
Acceptance, are only a few of the provisional ultimates introduced
for convenience of discussion. Some of them may in the end prove
to be indispensable, but meanwhile they are not, to prudent people,
more than symbolic conveniences; theories dependent upon them
must not be allowed to shut off from investigation fields which
may be fruitful.

[15] Throughout this discussion ‘experience’ will be used in a
wide sense to stand for any occurrence in the mind. It is equivalent
to ‘mental state, or process.’ The term has often unfortunate
suggestions of passiveness and of consciousness, but many of
the ‘experiences’ here referred to would ordinarily be called
‘actions’ and have parts which are not conscious and not accessible
to introspection as important as those which are.

[16] A chief advocate of this view is Dr G. E. Moore, whose _Principia
Ethica_ and _Ethics_ contain brilliant statements of the position.

[17] Cf. F. Brentano, _The Origin of the Knowledge of Right and Wrong_,
pp. 12, 46.

[18] Cf. Russell, _The Principles of Mathematics_, p. 100. “On this
principle, from which I can see no escape, that every genuine word
must have some meaning, the _is_ and _than_ must form part of ‘_a_
is greater than _b_’, which thus contains more than two terms and
a relation. The _is_ seems to state that _a_ has to _greater_ the
relation of referent, while the _than_ states similarly that _b_ has to
_greater_ the relation of relatum. But ‘_a_ exceeds _b_’ may be held to
express solely the relation of _a_ to _b_, without including any of the
implications of further relations.” On the introspective comparison of
judgments _The Meaning of Meaning_, by C. K. Ogden and the writer, may
be consulted.




