CHAPTER XII

Pleasure

  The poor benefit of a bewitching minute.—_The Revenger’s Tragedy_.


Sensation, imagery, feeling, emotion, together with pleasure,
unpleasure and pain are names for the conscious characteristics
of impulses: How they may best be sorted out is a problem whose
difficulty is much aggravated by the shortcomings of language
at this point. We speak, for instance, of pleasures and pains
in the same fashion, as though they were of the same order, but,
strictly, although pains as single self-sufficing modifications
of consciousness are easily enough obtainable, pleasures by themselves
do not seem to occur. Pleasure seems to be a way in which something
happens, rather than an independent happening which can occur
by itself in a mind. We have, not pleasures, but experiences
of one kind or another, visual, auditory, organic, motor, and
so forth, which are pleasant. Similarly we have experiences which
are unpleasant. If, however, we call them painful we give rise
to an ambiguity. We may be saying that they are unpleasant or
we may be saying that they are accompanied by pains, which is
a different matter. The use of the term pleasure, as though like
pain it was itself a complete experience, instead of being something
which attaches to or follows along with or after other experiences,
has led to a number of confusions; especially in those critical
theses, to which objection has already been taken in Chapter
IX, which identify value with pleasure.

The twenty or more distinct kinds of sensations, into which modern
psychology has elaborated the old five senses, can be observed
to differ very widely in the degree to which they are susceptible
of and accompanied by pleasantness and unpleasantness. The higher
senses, sight and hearing, in most persons seem to yield sensations
which vary much less from neutrality or indifference than the
others. We must be careful to understand this difference correctly
however. An arrangement of colours and shapes, a sequence of
notes or a musical phrase may, of course, in suitable people,
be as intensely toned, pleasantly or unpleasantly, as any organic
or taste sensations, for example. But even this is not usual.
The right experiment is to compare a single colour, say, or a
single note, with such a sensation as a uniform touch or temperature
gives rise to, a bath for example, or with a simple uniform taste
or smell, or with hunger, or nausea. Fair comparison is difficult,
equivalent levels of simplicity and uniformity being impossible
to discover, but few will doubt that the degree of pleasure-unpleasure
aroused by tastes, for example, far exceeds that which auditory
or visual sensations excite by themselves. We must of course
be careful here to avoid confusing the intrinsic pleasure-unpleasure
of the sensations with that which arises through memory, through
the effects of other sensations, pleasant or unpleasant, which
may have accompanied them in the past, and through expectations
agreeable or disagreeable.

To speak of the intrinsic pleasure-unpleasure of a sensation
is perhaps misleading. The pleasantness of a sensation as we
know is a highly variable thing. It may alter completely while
the strictly sensory characteristics of the sensation remain
as before. The difference in the same smell of liquor, before
and after an alcoholic excess is a striking example. A sound
which is pleasant for a while may become very unpleasant if it
continues and does not lapse from consciousness. And yet indisputably
it may remain _qua_ sensation the same. A sound-sensation
may remain unchanged in tone, volume and intensity yet vary widely
in pleasure-unpleasure. This difference is important. It is one
of the chief reasons which have caused feeling (pleasure-unpleasure)
to be distinguished from sensation as altogether of a different
nature. Tone, volume and intensity are features in the sound
closely dependent upon the stimulus, pleasantness is dependent
not on external stimulus but upon factors, very obscure at present,
in us. All here is conjecture. The close connection of stimulus
with sensation we know because it happens to be comparatively
accessible to experiment. And introspection of sensations of
external origin is for that reason much more easy than introspection
of most visceral or organic sensations. We can practise it freely
and repeat it and so control our results. To a lesser extent
those sensations of internal origin which we can in part consciously
control, those due to voluntary movements, share this double
accessibility. But all the rest of the multifarious conscious
goings on in the nervous system remain obscure. One broad fact,
however, is important. The effects in the body of almost all
stimuli of whatever nature are extraordinarily numerous and varied.
“You cannot show the observer a wall-paper pattern without by
that very fact disturbing his respiration and circulation.”[41]
And no man knows what other disturbances do not join in. The
whole body resounds in what would seem to be a fairly systematic
way. Whether the outpouring of this tide of disturbance makes
up a part of, gives a tone to consciousness, or whether only
the incoming reports of the results can be conscious is a question
upon which no conclusive evidence would seem to be yet available.
The incoming reports of some at least of these disturbances certainly
can become conscious. A lump in the throat, a yearning of the
bowels, horripilation, breathlessness, these are their coarser
and more obvious forms. Usually, they are less salient and fuse
with the whole mass of internal sensations to form the _cœnesthesia_,
the whole bodily consciousness, tinging it, altering its general
character in some one of perhaps a thousand different ways.

It has been much disputed whether pleasure-unpleasure is a quality
of general bodily or organic consciousness, of some part of it
perhaps, or whether it is something quite different from any
quality of any sensation or set of sensations. As we have seen,
it is not a quality of an auditory sensation in the sense in
which its loudness, for instance, is a quality. There seem to
be similar objections to making it a quality of any sensation
of any kind. A sensation is what an impulse at a certain stage
in its development feels like, and its sensory qualities are
characters[42] of the impulse at that stage. The pleasure-unpleasure
attaching to the impulse may be no character of the impulse itself,
but of its fate, its success or failure in restoring equilibrium
to the system to which it belongs.

This is perhaps as good a guess at what pleasure and unpleasure
are as can yet be made, pleasure being successful activity of
some kind, not necessarily of a biologically useful kind, and
unpleasure being frustrated, chaotic, mal-successful activity.
We shall consider this theory again at a later stage (cf. Chapter
XXIV). The point to be made here is that pleasure and unpleasure
are complicated matters arising in the course of activities which
are directed to other ends. The old controversies as to whether
pleasure is the goal of all striving or whether avoidance of
unpleasure the starting-point, are thus escaped. As Ribot pointed
out[43] the exclusive quest of pleasure for itself, _plaisir-passion_,
is a morbid form of activity and self-destructive. Pleasure on
this view is originally an _effect_ signifying that certain
positive or negative tendencies have instinctively attained their
aim and are satisfied. Later through experience it becomes a
cause. Instructed by experience man and animal alike place themselves
in circumstances which will arouse desire and so through satisfaction
lead to pleasure. The gourmet, the libertine, the æsthete, the
mystic do so alike. But when the pleasure which is the result
of satisfying the tendency becomes the end pursued rather than
the satisfying of the tendency itself, then an ‘_inversion_
of the psychological mechanism’ comes about. In the one case
the activity is propagated from below upwards, in the other from
above downwards, from the brain to the organic functions. The
result is often an exhaustion of the tendency, ‘disillusionment’
and the _blasé_, world-wearied attitude.

The evil results, as Ribot remarks, are largely confined to those
individuals in whom the quest for pleasure has the force of an
obsession. But on the view of pleasure which we have indicated
above, it is clear that all those doctrines, very common in critical
literature, which set up pleasure as the goal of activity, are
mistaken. Every activity has its own specific goal. Pleasure very
probably ensues in most cases when this goal is reached, but that
is a different matter. To read a poem for the sake of the pleasure
which will ensue if it is successfully read is to approach it in an
inadequate attitude. Obviously it is the poem in which we should be
interested, not in a by-product of having managed successfully to read
it. The orientation of attention is wrong if we put the pleasure in
the forefront. Such a mistake is perhaps not common among instructed
persons, but to judge by many remarks which appear in reviews and
dramatic notices the percentage of instructed persons among reviewers
and theatre-goers does not seem high. This error, a legacy in part
from the criticism of an age which had a still poorer psychological
vocabulary[44] than Our own, is one reason why Tragedy, for example,
is so often misapproached. It is no less absurd to suppose that a
competent reader sits down to read for the sake of pleasure, than to
suppose that a mathematician sets out to solve an equation with a view
to the pleasure its solution will afford him. The pleasure in both
cases may, of course, be very great. But the pleasure, however great
it may be, is no more the aim of the activity in the course of which
it arises, than, for example, the noise made by a motor-cycle—useful
though it is as an indication of the way the machine is running—is the
reason in the normal case for its having been started.

This very common mistake noted, the significance of pleasure
and unpleasure may be insisted upon without misgiving. They are
our most delicate signs of how our activities are thriving. But
since even the most intense delight may indicate only a local
success and the activity be generally detrimental, they are signs
which need a very wary interpretation.


[41] Titchener, _Text-book of Psychology_, p. 248.

[42] Into conjectures as to what these are, it seems as yet not
profitable to enter.

[43] _Problèmes de Psychologie affective_, pp. 141-144.

[44] It is probable that Wordsworth and certain that Coleridge
if writing to-day would use quite other terms in place of pleasure
for describing poetic values.




