CHAPTER XV

Attitudes

    My Sences want their outward motion
            Which now within
            Reason doth win,
    Redoubled by her secret notion.—John Hoskins.


The interventions of memory are not confined to sensation and
emotion. They are of equal importance in our active behaviour.
The acquisition of any muscular accomplishment, dancing or billiards,
for example, shows this clearly. What we have already done in
the past controls what we shall do in the future. If the perception
of an object and the recognition that it is a tree, for example,
involve a poise in the sensory system concerned, a certain completeness
or ‘closure,’ to use the term employed by Kohler, so an act,
as opposed to a random movement, involves a similar poise in
a motor system. But sensory and motor systems are not independent;
they work together; every perception probably includes a response
in the form of incipient action. We constantly overlook the extent
to which all the while we are making preliminary adjustments,
getting ready to act in one way or another. Reading Captain Slocum’s
account of the centipede which bit him on the head when alone
in the middle of the Atlantic, the writer has been caused to
leap right out of his chair by a leaf which fell upon his face
from a tree. Only occasionally does some such accident show how
extensive are the motor adjustments made in what appear to be
the most unmuscular occupations.

This incipient activity stands to overt action much as an image
stands to a sensation. But such ‘imaginal’ activity is, by its
very nature, extraordinarily hard to detect or to experiment
upon. Psychology has only dealt with fringes of the mind hitherto
and the most accessible fringe is on the side of sensation. We
have therefore to build up our conjectures as to the rest of
mental happenings by analogy with the perhaps not entirely representative
specimens which sensation supplies. This limitation has led the
majority of psychologists to see in imaginal movement no more
than images of the _sensations_ from muscle, joint, and
tendon, which would arise if the movement were actually made.

It is certain that before any action takes place a preliminary
organisation must occur which ensures that the parts do not get
in one another’s way. It appears to the writer that these preliminaries
in his case make up part of consciousness, but there is a heavy
weight of authority against him. The point is no doubt exceptionally
hard to determine.

In any case, whether the consciousness of activity is due to
sensations and images of movements alone, or whether the outgoing
part of the impulse and its preparatory organisation help to
make up consciousness, there is no doubt about the importance
of incipient and imaginal movement in experience. The work done
by Lipps, Groos and others on _einfühlung_, or empathy,
however we may prefer to restate their results, shows that when
we perceive spatial or musical form we commonly accompany our
perception with closely connected motor activity. We cannot leave
this activity out of our account of what happens in the experiences
of the arts, although we may think that those who have built
upon this fact what they have put forward as a complete æsthetic—Vernon
Lee, for example—have been far from clear as to what questions
they were answering.

The extent to which any activity is conscious seems to depend
very largely upon how complex and how novel it is. The primitive
and in a sense natural outcome of stimulus is action; the more
simple the situation with which the mind is engaged, the closer
is the connection between the stimulus and some overt response
in action, and in general the less rich and full is the consciousness
attendant. A man walking over uneven ground, for example, makes
without reflection or emotion a continuous adjustment of his
steps to his footing; but let the ground become precipitous and,
unless he is used to such places, both reflection and emotion
will appear. The increased complexity of the situation and the
greater delicacy and appropriateness of the movements required
for convenience and safety, call forth far more complicated goings
on in the mind. Besides his perception of the nature of the ground,
the thought may occur that a false move would be perilous and
difficult to retrieve. This, when accompanied by emotion, is
called a ‘realisation’ of his situation. The adjustment to one
another of varied impulses—to go forward carefully, to lie down
and grasp something with the hands, to go back, and so forth—and
their co-ordination into useful behaviour alters the whole character
of his experience.

Most behaviour is a reconciliation between the various acts which
would satisfy the different impulses which combine to produce
it; and the richness and interest of the feel of it in consciousness
depends upon the variety of the impulses engaged. Any familiar
activity, when set in different conditions so that the impulses
which make it up have to adjust themselves to fresh streams of
impulses due to the new conditions, is likely to take on increased
richness and fullness in consciousness.

This general fact is of great importance for the arts, particularly
for poetry, painting and sculpture, the representative or mimetic
arts. For in these a totally new setting for what may be familiar
elements is essentially involved. Instead of seeing a tree we
see something in a picture which may have similar effects upon
us but is _not_ a tree. The tree impulses which are aroused
have to adjust themselves to their new setting of other impulses
due to our awareness that it is a _picture_ which we are
looking at. Thus an opportunity arises for those impulses to
define themselves in a way in which they ordinarily do not.

This, of course, is only the most obvious and simple instance
of the way in which, thanks to the unusual circumstances in which
things depicted, or in literature described, come before us,
the experiences that result are modified. To take another obvious
example, the description or the theatrical presentation of a
murder has a different effect upon us from that which would be
produced by most actual murders if they took place before us.
These considerations, of vast importance in the discussion of
artistic form, will occupy us later (pp. 145, 237). Here it is
sufficient to point out that these differences between ordinary
experiences and those due to works of art are only special cases
of the general difference between experiences made up of a less
and of a greater number of impulses which have to be brought
into co-ordination with one another. The bearing of this point
upon the problem of the æsthetic mode with its detachment, impersonality,
etc., discussed in the second chapter, will be apparent. (Compare
