The Project Gutenberg eBook of An Introduction to Philosophy
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: An Introduction to Philosophy

Author: George Stuart Fullerton


        
Release date: August 1, 2005 [eBook #16406]
                Most recently updated: December 12, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/16406

Credits: E-text prepared by Al Haines




E-text prepared by Al Haines



AN INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY

by

GEORGE STUART FULLERTON

Professor of Philosophy in Columbia University
New York

New York
The MacMillan Company
London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd.

1915

Norwood Press
J. S. Cushing Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.







PREFACE

As there cannot be said to be a beaten path in philosophy, and as
"Introductions" to the subject differ widely from one another, it is
proper that I should give an indication of the scope of the present
volume.

It undertakes:--

1.  To point out what the word "philosophy" is made to cover in our
universities and colleges at the present day, and to show why it is
given this meaning.

2.  To explain the nature of reflective or philosophical thinking, and
to show how it differs from common thought and from science.

3.  To give a general view of the main problems with which philosophers
have felt called upon to deal.

4.  To give an account of some of the more important types of
philosophical doctrine which have arisen out of the consideration of
such problems.

5.  To indicate the relation of philosophy to the so-called
philosophical sciences, and to the other sciences.

6.  To show, finally, that the study of philosophy is of value to us
all, and to give some practical admonitions on spirit and method.  Had
these admonitions been impressed upon me at a time when I was in
especial need of guidance, I feel that they would have spared me no
little anxiety and confusion of mind.  For this reason, I recommend
them to the attention of the reader.

Such is the scope of my book.  It aims to tell what philosophy is.  It
is not its chief object to advocate a particular type of doctrine.  At
the same time, as it is impossible to treat of the problems of
philosophy except from some point of view, it will be found that, in
Chapters III to XI, a doctrine is presented.  It is the same as that
presented much more in detail, and with a greater wealth of reference,
in my "System of Metaphysics," which was published a short time ago.
In the Notes in the back of this volume, the reader will find
references to those parts of the larger work which treat of the
subjects more briefly discussed here.  It will be helpful to the
teacher to keep the larger work on hand, and to use more or less of the
material there presented as his undergraduate classes discuss the
chapters of this one.  Other references are also given in the Notes,
and it may be profitable to direct the attention of students to them.

The present book has been made as clear and simple as possible, that no
unnecessary difficulties may be placed in the path of those who enter
upon the thorny road of philosophical reflection.  The subjects treated
are deep enough to demand the serious attention of any one; and they
are subjects of fascinating interest.  That they are treated simply and
clearly does not mean that they are treated superficially.  Indeed,
when a doctrine is presented in outline and in a brief and simple
statement, its meaning may be more readily apparent than when it is
treated more exhaustively.  For this reason, I especially recommend,
even to those who are well acquainted with philosophy, the account of
the external world contained in Chapter IV.

For the doctrine I advocate I am inclined to ask especial consideration
on the ground that it is, on the whole, a justification of the attitude
taken by the plain man toward the world in which he finds himself.  The
experience of the race is not a thing that we may treat lightly.

Thus, it is maintained that there is a real external world presented in
our experience--not a world which we have a right to regard as the
sensations or ideas of any mind.  It is maintained that we have
evidence that there are minds in certain relations to that world, and
that we can, within certain limits, determine these relations.  It is
pointed out that the plain man's belief in the activity of his mind and
his notion of the significance of purposes and ends are not without
justification.  It is indicated that theism is a reasonable doctrine,
and it is held that the human will is free in the only proper sense of
the word "freedom."  Throughout it is taken for granted that the
philosopher has no private system of weights and measures, but must
reason as other men reason, and must prove his conclusions in the same
sober way.

I have written in hopes that the book may be of use to undergraduate
students.  They are often repelled by philosophy, and I cannot but
think that this is in part due to the dry and abstract form in which
philosophers have too often seen fit to express their thoughts.  The
same thoughts can be set forth in plain language, and their
significance illustrated by a constant reference to experiences which
we all have--experiences which must serve as the foundation to every
theory of the mind and the world worthy of serious consideration.

But there are many persons who cannot attend formal courses of
instruction, and who, nevertheless, are interested in philosophy.
These, also, I have had in mind; and I have tried to be so clear that
they could read the work with profit in the absence of a teacher.

Lastly, I invite the more learned, if they have found my "System of
Metaphysics" difficult to understand in any part, to follow the simple
statement contained in the chapters above alluded to, and then to
return, if they will, to the more bulky volume.


GEORGE STUART FULLERTON.

New York, 1906.




CONTENTS


PART I

INTRODUCTORY


CHAPTER I

THE MEANING OF THE WORD "PHILOSOPHY" IN THE PAST AND IN THE PRESENT

   1.  The Beginnings of Philosophy.
   2.  The Greek Philosophy at its Height.
   3.  Philosophy as a Guide to Life.
   4.  Philosophy in the Middle Ages.
   5.  The Modern Philosophy.
   6.  What Philosophy means in our Time.

