CHAPTER XIV, section 55.  See "System of Metaphysics," Chapter XVI,
"The Insufficiency of Materialism."

Section 56.  Professor Strong's volume, "Why the Mind has a Body"
(N.Y., 1903), advocates a panpsychism much like that of Clifford.  It
is very clearly written, and with Clifford's essay on "The Nature of
Things-in-themselves," ought to give one a good idea of the
considerations that impel some able men to become panpsychists.

Section 57.  The pantheistic monism of Spinoza is of such importance
historically that it is desirable to obtain a clear notion of its
meaning.  I have discussed this at length in two earlier works: "The
Philosophy of Spinoza" (N.Y., 1894) and "On Spinozistic Immortality."
The student is referred to the account of Spinoza's "God or Substance"
contained in these.  See, especially, the "Introductory Note" in the
back of the first-mentioned volume.

Professor Royce is a good illustration of the idealistic monist; see
the volume referred to in the note above (section 53).  His "Absolute,"
or God, is conceived to be an all-inclusive mind of which our finite
minds are parts.

Section 58.  Sir William Hamilton's dualism is developed in his
"Lectures on Metaphysics," VIII.  He writes: "Mind and matter, as known
or knowable, are only two different series of phenomena or qualities;
as unknown and unknowable, they are the two substances in which these
two different series of phenomena or qualities are supposed to inhere.
The existence of an unknown substance is only an inference we are
compelled to make, from the existence of known phenomena; and the
distinction of two substances is only inferred from the seeming
incompatibility of the two series of phenomena to coinhere in one."


CHAPTER XV, section 60.  The reader will find Descartes's path traced
in the "Meditations."  In I, we have his sweeping doubt; in II, his
doctrine as to the mind; in III, the existence of God is established;
in VI, he gets around to the existence of the external world.  We find
a good deal of the "natural light" in the first part of his "Principles
of Philosophy."

Section 61.  We have an excellent illustration of Locke's inconsistency
in violating his own principles and going beyond experience, in his
treatment of "Substance."  Read, in his "Essay," Book I, Chapter IV,
section 18, and Book II, Chapter XXIII, section 4.  These sections are
not long, and might well be read and analyzed in class.

Section 62.  See the note to section 51.

Section 64.  I write this note (in 1908) to give the reader some idea
of later developments of the doctrine called pragmatism.  There has
been a vast amount printed upon the subject in the last two or three
years, but I am not able to say even yet that we have to do with "a
clear-cut doctrine, the limits and consequences of which have been
worked out in detail."  Hence, I prefer to leave section 64 as I first
wrote it, merely supplementing it here.

We may fairly consider the three leaders of the pragmatic movement to
be Professor William James, Dr. F. C. S. Schiller, and Professor John
Dewey.  The first has developed his doctrine at length in his volume
entitled "Pragmatism" (London, 1907); the second, who calls his
doctrine "Humanism," but declares himself a pragmatist, and in
essential agreement with Professor James, has published two volumes of
philosophical essays entitled "Humanism" (London, 1903) and "Studies in
Humanism" (London, 1907); the third has developed his position in the
first four chapters of the "Studies in Logical Theory" (Chicago, 1903).

Professor James, in his "Pragmatism" (Lecture II), says that
pragmatism, at the outset, at least, stands for no particular results.
It has no dogmas, and no doctrines save its method.  This method means:

"The attitude of looking away from first things, principles,
'categories,' supposed necessities; and of looking towards last things,
fruits, consequences, facts."  He remarks further, however, that
pragmatism has come to be used also in a wider sense, as signifying a
certain theory of truth (pp. 54-55).  This theory is brought forward in
Lecture VI.

The theory maintains that: "True ideas are those that we can
assimilate, validate, corroborate, and verify.  False ideas are those
that we can not" (p. 201).  This sounds as though Professor James
abandoned his doctrine touching the Turk and the Christian mentioned in
section 64.

But what do the words "verification" and "validation" pragmatically
mean?  We are told that they signify certain practical consequences of
the verified and validated idea.  Our ideas may be said to "agree" with
reality when they lead us, through acts and other ideas which they
instigate, up to or towards other parts of experience with which we
feel that the original ideas remain in agreement.  "The connections and
transitions come to us from point to point as being progressive,
harmonious, satisfactory.  This function of agreeable leading is what
we mean by an idea's verification" (p. 202).

Thus, we do not seem to be concerned with verification in the sense in
which the word has usually been employed heretofore.  The tendency to
take as true what is useful or serviceable has not been abandoned.
That Professor James does not really leave his Turk in the lurch
becomes clear to any one who will read his book attentively and note
his reasons for taking the various pragmatic attitudes which he does
take.  See, for example, his pragmatic argument for "free-will."  The
doctrine is simply assumed as a doctrine of "relief" (pp. 110-121).

Briefly stated, Dr. Schiller's doctrine is that truths are man-made,
and that it is right for man to consult his desires in making them.  It
is in substantial harmony with the pragmatism of Professor James, and I
shall not dwell upon it.  Dr. Schiller's essays are very entertainingly
written.

Professor Dewey's pragmatism seems to me sufficiently different from
the above to merit another title.  In the "Journal of Philosophy,
Psychology, and Scientific Methods," Volume IV, No. 4, Professor Dewey
brings out the distinction between his own position and that of
Professor James.

To the periodical literature on pragmatism I cannot refer in detail.
Professor James defends his position against misconceptions in the
"Philosophical Review," Volume XVII, No. 1.  See, on the other side,
Professor Perry, in the "Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and
Scientific Methods," Volume IV, pp. 365 and 421; Professor Hibben,
"Philosophical Review," XVII, 4; and Dr. Carus, "The Monist," July,
1908.


