CHAPTER XVI, sections 65-68.  To see how the logicians have regarded
their science and its relation to philosophy, see; Keynes's "Formal
Logic" (London, 1894), Introduction; Hobhouse's "Theory of Knowledge"
(London, 1896), Introduction; Aikins's "The Principles of Logic" (N.Y.,
1902), Introduction; and Creighton's "Introductory Logic" (N.Y., 1898),
Preface.

Professor Aikins writes: "Thus, in so far as logic tries to make us
reason correctly by giving us correct conceptions of things and the way
in which their relations involve each other, it is a kind of simple
metaphysics studied for a practical end."

Professor Creighton says, "Although in treating the syllogistic logic I
have followed to a large extent the ordinary mode of presentation, I
have both here, and when dealing with the inductive methods, endeavored
to interpret the traditional doctrines in a philosophical way, and to
prepare for the theoretical discussions of the third part of the book."

John Stuart Mill tried not to be metaphysical; but let the reader
examine, say, his third chapter, "Of the Things denoted by Names," or
look over Book VI, in his "System of Logic."

Professor Sigwart's great work, "Logik" (Freiburg, 2d edition, Volume
I, 1889, Volume II, 1893), may almost be called a philosophy of logic.


CHAPTER XVII, section 69.  Compare with Professor James's account of
the scope of psychology the following from Professor Baldwin: "The
question of the relation of psychology to metaphysics, over which a
fierce warfare has been waged in recent years, is now fairly settled by
the adjustment of mutual claims. . . .  The terms of the adjustment of
which I speak are briefly these: on the one hand, empirical
investigation must precede rational interpretation, and this empirical
investigation must be absolutely unhampered by fetters of dogmatism and
preconception; on the other hand, rational interpretation must be
equally free in its own province, since progress from the individual to
the general, from the detached fact to its universal meaning, can be
secured only by the judicious use of hypotheses, both metaphysical and
speculative.  Starting from the empirical we run out at every step into
the metempirical."  "Handbook of Psychology," Preface, pp. iii and iv.


CHAPTER XVIII, section 71.  The teacher might very profitably take
extracts from the two chapters of Whewell's "Elements of Morality"
referred to in the text, and read them with the class.  It is
significant of the weakness of Whewell's position that he can give us
advice as long as we do not need it, but, when we come to the
cross-roads, he is compelled to leave the matter to the individual
conscience, and gives us no hint of a general principle that may guide
us.

Section 72.  Wundt, in his volume "The Facts of the Moral Life" (N.Y.,
1897), tries to develop an empirical science of ethics independent of
metaphysics; see the Preface.

Compare with this: Martineau's "Types of Ethical Theory" (London,
1885), Preface; T. H. Green's "Prolegomena to Ethics," Introduction;
Muirhead's "The Elements of Ethics" (N.Y., 1892); Mackenzie's "A Manual
of Ethics" (London, 1893); Jodl's "Gesduchte der Ethik" (Stuttgart,
1882), Preface.  I give but a few references, but they will serve to
illustrate how close, in the opinion of ethical writers, is the
relation between ethics and philosophy.


CHAPTER XIX, section 74.  The student who turns over the pages of
several works on metaphysics may be misled by a certain superficial
similarity that is apt to obtain among them.  One sees the field mapped
out into Ontology (the science of Being or Reality), Rational
Cosmology, and Rational Psychology.  These titles are mediaeval
landmarks which have been left standing.  I may as well warn the reader
that two men who discourse of Ontology may not be talking about the
same thing at all.  Bear in mind what was said in section 57 of the
different ways of conceiving the "One Substance"; and bear in mind also
what was said in Chapter V of the proper meaning of the word "reality."

I have discarded the above titles in my "System of Metaphysics,"
because I think it is better and less misleading to use plain and
unambiguous language.

Section 75.  See the note to Chapter XVI.


CHAPTER XX, sections 76-77.  One can get an idea of the problems with
which the philosophy of religion has to deal by turning to my "System
of Metaphysics" and reading the two chapters entitled "Of God," at the
close of the book.  It would be interesting to read and criticise in
class some of the theistic arguments that philosophers have brought
forward.  Quotations and references are given in Chapter XXXIV.


CHAPTER XXI, sections 78-79.  What is said of the science of logic, in
Chapter XVI, has, of course, a bearing upon these sections.  I suggest
that the student examine a few chapters of "The Grammar of Science";
the book is very readable.


CHAPTER XXII, sections 80-82.  The reader will find in lectures I and
II in Sir William Hamilton's "Lectures on Metaphysics" a discussion of
the utility of philosophy.  It has a pleasant, old-fashioned flavor,
and contains some good thoughts.  What is said in Chapters XVI-XXI of
the present volume has a good deal of bearing upon the subject.  See
especially what is said in the chapters on logic, ethics, and the
philosophy of religion.


