CHAPTER V, sections 10-21.  See Chapters VIII and IX, "System of
Metaphysics," "The Distinction between Appearance and Reality" and "The
Significance of the Distinction."

Section 22.  See Chapter XXVI, "The World as Unperceived, and the
'Unknowable,'" where Spencer's doctrine is examined at length, and
references are given.  I think it is very important that the student
should realize that the "Unknowable" is a perfectly useless assumption
in philosophy, and can serve no purpose whatever.


CHAPTER VI, sections 23-25.  See Chapters X and XI, "System of
Metaphysics," "The Kantian Doctrine of Space" and "Difficulties
connected with the Kantian Doctrine of Space."

It would be an excellent thing for the student, after he has read the
above chapters, to take up Kant's "Critique of Pure Reason," and read
and analyze the argument of Antinomies I and II, with the Observations
appended.  One can understand these arguments without being familiar
with the "Critique" as a whole; at any rate, the account of Kant's
philosophy contained in section 51 of this book will serve to explain
his use of certain terms, such as "the laws of our sensibility."

Kant's reasonings are very curious and interesting in this part of his
book.  It seems to be proved that the world must be endless in space
and without a beginning or end in time, and just as plausibly proved
that it cannot be either.  It seems to be proved that finite spaces and
times are infinitely divisible, and at the same time that they cannot
be infinitely divisible.  The situation is an amusing one, and rendered
not the less amusing by the seriousness with which the mutually
destructive arguments are taken.

When the student meets such a tangle in the writings of any
philosopher, I ask him to believe that it is not the human reason that
is at fault--at least, let him not assume that it is.  The fault
probably lies with a human reason.

Section 26.  See Chapter XII, "The Berkeleian Doctrine of Space," in my
"System of Metaphysics."  The argument ought not to be difficult to one
who has mastered Chapter V of this volume.


CHAPTER VII, sections 27-29.  Compare Chapter XIII, "System of
Metaphysics," "Of Time."

With the chapters on Space and Time it would be well for the student to
read Chapter XIV, "The Real World in Space and Time," where it is made
clear why we have no hesitation in declaring space and time to be
infinite, although we recognize that it seems to be an assumption of
knowledge to declare the material world infinite.


CHAPTER VIII, sections 30-32.  Read, in the "System of Metaphysics,"
Chapters V and XVII, "The Self or Knower" and "The Atomic Self."

Section 33.  The suggestions, touching the attitude of the psychologist
toward the mind, contained in the preface to Professor William James's
"Psychology" are very interesting and instructive.


CHAPTER IX, sections 35-36.  For a strong argument in favor of
interactionism see James's "Psychology," Chapter V.  I wish the student
would, in reading it, bear in mind what is said in my chapter on "The
Atomic Self," above referred to.  The subject should be approached with
an open mind, and one should suspend judgment until both sides have
been heard from.

Section 37.  Descartes held that the lower animals are automata and
that their actions are not indicative of consciousness; he regarded
their bodies as machines lacking the soul in the "little pineal gland."
Professor Huxley revived the doctrine of animal automatism and extended
it so as to include man.  He regarded consciousness as a "collateral
product" of the working of the body, related to it somewhat as is the
steam-whistle of a locomotive engine to the working of the machine.  He
made it an effect, but not a cause, of motions.  See "System of
Metaphysics," Chapter XVIII, "The Automaton Theory: its Genesis."

We owe the doctrine of parallelism, in its original form, to Spinoza.
It was elaborated by W. K. Clifford, and to him the modern interest in
the subject is largely due.  The whole subject is discussed at length
in my "System of Metaphysics," Chapters XIX-XXI.  The titles are: "The
Automaton Theory: Parallelism," "What is Parallelism?" and "The Man and
the Candlestick."  Clifford's doctrine is presented in a new form in
Professor Strong's recent brilliant work, "Why the Mind has a Body"
N.Y., 1903.

Section 38.  See "System of Metaphysics," Chapter XXIV, "The Time and
Place of Sensations and Ideas."


CHAPTER X, sections 40-42.  See "System of Metaphysics," Chapters XXVII
and XXVIII, "The Existence of Other Minds," and "The Distribution of
Minds."

Writers seem to be divided into three camps on this question of other
minds.

(1) I have treated our knowledge of other minds as due to an inference.
This is the position usually taken.

(2) We have seen that Huxley and Clifford cast doubts upon the validity
of the inference, but, nevertheless, made it.  Professor Strong, in the
work mentioned in the notes to the previous chapter, maintains that it
is not an inference, and that we do not directly perceive other minds,
but that we are assured of their existence just the same.  He makes our
knowledge an "intuition" in the old-fashioned sense of the word, a
something to be accepted but not to be accounted for.

(3) Writers who have been influenced more or less by the Neo-Kantian or
Neo-Hegelian doctrine are apt to speak as though we had the same direct
evidence of the existence of other minds that we have of the existence
of our own.  I have never seen a systematic and detailed exposition of
this doctrine.  It appears rather in the form of hints dropped in
passing.  A number of such are to be found in Taylor's "Elements of
Metaphysics."

Section 43. The "Mind-stuff" doctrine is examined at length and its
origin discussed in Chapter XXXI of the "System of Metaphysics,"
"Mental Phenomena and the Causal Nexus."  It is well worth while for
the student to read the whole of Clifford's essay "On the Nature of
Things-in-themselves," even if he is pressed for time.


