CHAPTER XI, section 44.  See "System of Metaphysics," Chapter XV, "The
World as Mechanism."

Section 45.  See Chapter XXXI, "The Place of Mind in Nature."

Section 46.  For a definition of Fatalism, and a description of its
difference from the scientific doctrine of Determinism, see Chapter
XXXIII, "Fatalism, 'Freewill' and Determinism."  For a vigorous defense
of "Freewill" (which is not, in my opinion, free will at all, in the
common acceptation of the word) see Professor James's Essay on "The
Dilemma of the Determinist," in his volume, "The Will to Believe."

Fatalism and Determinism are constantly confused, and much of the
opposition to Determinism is attributable to this confusion.

Section 47.  See Chapter XXXII, "Mechanism and Teleology."


CHAPTER XII, section 48.  The notes to Chapter III (see above) are in
point here.  It is well worth the student's while to read the whole of
Chapter XI, Book IV, of Locke's "Essay."  It is entitled "Of our
Knowledge of the Existence of Other Things."  Notice the headings of
some of his sections:--

Section 1.  "It is to be had only by sensation."

Section 2.  "Instance whiteness of this paper."

Section 3.  "This, though not so certain as demonstration, yet may be
called 'Knowledge,' and proves the existence of things without us."

Locke's argument proceeds, as we have seen, on the assumption that we
perceive external things directly,--an assumption into which he slips
unawares,--and yet he cannot allow that we really do perceive directly
what is external.  This makes him uncomfortably conscious that he has
not absolute proof, after all.  The section that closes the discussion
is entitled: "Folly to expect demonstration in everything."

Section 49.  I wish that I could believe that every one of my readers
would sometime give himself the pleasure of reading through Berkeley's
"Principles of Human Knowledge" and his "Three Dialogues between Hylas
and Philonous."  Clearness of thought, beauty of style, and elevation
of sentiment characterize them throughout.

The "Principles" is a systematic treatise.  If one has not time to read
it all, one can get a good idea of the doctrine by running through the
first forty-one sections.  For brief readings in class, to illustrate
Berkeley's reasoning, one may take sections 1-3, 14, 18-20, and 38.

The "Dialogues" is a more popular work.  As the etymology of the names
in the title suggests, we have in it a dispute between a man who pins
his faith to matter and an idealist.  The aim of the book is to confute
skeptics and atheists from the standpoint of idealism.

For Hume's treatment of the external world, see his "Treatise of Human
Nature," Part IV, section 2.  For his treatment of the mind, see Part
IV, section 6.

Section 50.  Reid repeats himself a great deal, for he gives us
asseveration rather than proof.  One can get the gist of his argument
by reading carefully a few of his sections.  It would be a good
exercise to read in class, if time permitted, the two sections of his
"Inquiry" entitled "Of Extension" (Chapter V, section 5), and "Of
Perception in General" (Chapter VI, section 20).

Section 51.  For an account of the critical Philosophy, see
Falckenberg's "History of Modern Philosophy" (English translation,
N.Y., 1893).  Compare with this the accounts in the histories of
philosophy by Ueberweg and Hoeffding (English translation of the latter,
London, 1900).  Full bibliographies are to be found especially in
Ueberweg.

It is well to look at the philosophy of Kant through more than one pair
of eyes.  Thus, if one reads Morris's "Kant's Critique of Pure Reason"
(Chicago, 1882), one should read also Sidgwick's "Lectures on the
Philosophy of Kant" (N.Y., 1905).


CHAPTER XIII, section 52.  It is difficult to see how Hamilton could
regard himself as a "natural" realist (the word is employed by him).
See his "Lectures on Metaphysics," VIII, where he develops his
doctrine.  He seems to teach, in spite of himself, that we can know
directly only the impressions that things make on us, and must infer
all else: "Our whole knowledge of mind and matter is, thus, only
relative; of existence, absolutely and in itself, we know nothing."

Whom may we regard as representing the three kinds of "hypothetical
realism" described in the text?  Perhaps we may put the plain man, who
has not begun to reflect, in the first class.  John Locke is a good
representative of the second; see the "Essay concerning Human
Understanding," Book II, Chapter VIII.  Herbert Spencer belonged to the
third while he wrote Chapter V of his "First Principles of Philosophy."

Section 53.  I have said enough of the Berkeleian idealism in the notes
on Chapter XII.  As a good illustration of objective idealism in one of
its forms I may take the doctrine of Professor Royce; see his address,
"The Conception of God" (N.Y., 1902).

Mr. Bradley's doctrine is criticised in Chapter XXXIV (entitled "Of
God"), "System of Metaphysics."


