V.

But if Aristotle had not his master’s enthusiasm for practical reforms,
nor his master’s command of all the forces by which humanity is raised
to a higher life, he had, more even than his master, the Greek passion
for knowledge as such, apart from its utilitarian applications, and
embracing in its vast orb the lowliest things with the loftiest, the
most fragmentary glimpses and the largest revelations of truth. He
demanded nothing but the materials for generalisation, and there was
nothing from which he could not generalise. There was a place for
everything within the limits of his world-wide system. Never in any
human soul did the theorising passion burn with so clear and bright
and pure a flame. Under its inspiration his style more than once breaks
into a strain of sublime, though simple and rugged eloquence. Speaking
of that eternal thought which, according to him, constitutes the divine
essence, he exclaims:

 On this principle the heavens and Nature hang. This is that best
 life which we possess during a brief period only, for there it is
 so always, which with us is impossible. And its activity is pure
 pleasure; wherefore waking, feeling, and thinking, are the most
 pleasurable states, on account of which hope and memory exist.... And
 of all activities theorising is the most delightful and the best,
 so that if God always has such happiness as we have in our highest
 moments, it is wonderful, and still more wonderful if he has more.[191]

Again, he tells us that—

 If happiness consists in the appropriate exercise of our vital
 functions, then the highest happiness must result from the highest
 activity, whether we choose to call that reason or anything else which
 is the ruling and guiding principle within us, and through which
 we form our conceptions of what is noble and divine; and whether
 this be intrinsically divine, or only the divinest thing in us, its
 appropriate activity must be perfect happiness. Now this, which we
 call the theoretic activity, must be the mightiest; for reason is
 supreme in our souls and supreme over the objects which it cognises;
 and it is also the most continuous, for of all activities theorising
 is that which can be most uninterruptedly carried on. Again, we think
 that some pleasure ought to be mingled with happiness; if so, of all
 our proper activities philosophy is confessedly the most pleasurable,
 the enjoyments afforded by it being wonderfully pure and steady;
 for the existence of those who are in possession of knowledge is
 naturally more delightful than the existence of those who merely
 seek it. Of all virtues this is the most self-sufficing; for while
 in common with every other virtue it presupposes the indispensable
 conditions of life, wisdom does not, like justice and temperance and
 courage, need human objects for its exercise; theorising may go on in
 perfect solitude; for the co-operation of other men, though helpful,
 is not absolutely necessary to its activity. All other pursuits are
 exercised for some end lying outside themselves; war entirely for
 the sake of peace, and statesmanship in great part for the sake of
 honour and power; but theorising yields no extraneous profit great or
 small, and is loved for itself alone. If, then, the energising of pure
 reason rises above such noble careers as war and statesmanship by its
 independence, by its inherent delightfulness, and, so far as human
 frailty will permit, by its untiring vigour, this must constitute
 perfect human happiness; or rather such a life is more than human,
 and man can only partake of it through the divine principle within
 him; wherefore let us not listen to those who tell us that we should
 have no interests except what are human and mortal like ourselves;
 but so far as may be put on immortality, and bend all our efforts
 towards living up to that element of our nature which, though small in
 compass, is in power and preciousness supreme.[192]

Let us now see how he carries this passionate enthusiasm for knowledge
into the humblest researches of zoology:—

 Among natural objects, some exist unchanged through all eternity,
 while others are generated and decay. The former are divinely
 glorious, but being comparatively inaccessible to our means of
 observation, far less is known of them than we could wish; while
 perishable plants and animals offer abundant opportunities of study to
 us who live under the same conditions with them. Each science has a
 charm of its own. For knowledge of the heavenly bodies is so sublime
 a thing that even a little of it is more delightful than all earthly
 science put together; just as the smallest glimpse of a beloved
 beauty is more delightful than the fullest and nearest revelation of
 ordinary objects; while, on the other hand, where there are greater
 facilities for observation, science can be carried much further; and
 our closer kinship with the creatures of earth is some compensation
 for the interest felt in that philosophy which deals with the divine.
 Wherefore, in our discussions on living beings we shall, so far as
 possible, pass over nothing, whether it rank high or low in the scale
 of estimation. For even such of them as displease the senses, when
 viewed with the eye of reason as wonderful works of Nature afford an
 inexpressible pleasure to those who can enter philosophically into
 the causes of things. For, surely, it would be absurd and irrational
 to look with delight at the images of such objects on account of our
 interest in the pictorial or plastic skill which they exhibit, and
 not to take still greater pleasure in a scientific explanation of
 the realities themselves. We ought not then to shrink with childish
 disgust from an examination of the lower animals, for there is
 something wonderful in all the works of Nature; and we may repeat
 what Heracleitus is reported to have said to certain strangers who
 had come to visit him, but hung back at the door when they saw him
 warming himself before a fire, bidding them come in boldly, for
 that there also there were gods; not allowing ourselves to call any
 creature common or unclean, because there is a kind of natural beauty
 about them all. For, if anywhere, there is a pervading purpose in the
 works of Nature, and the realisation of this purpose is the beauty of
 the thing. But if anyone should look with contempt on the scientific
 examination of the lower animals, he must have the same opinion about
 himself; for the greatest repugnance is felt in looking at the parts
 of which the human body is composed, such as blood, muscles, bones,
 veins, and the like.[193] Similarly, in discussing any part or organ
 we should consider that it is not for the matter of which it consists
 that we care, but for the whole form; just as in talking about a house
 it is not bricks and mortar and wood that we mean; and so the theory
 of Nature deals with the essential structure of objects, not with the
 elements which, apart from that structure, would have no existence at
 all.[194]

It is well for the reputation of Aristotle that he could apply himself
with such devotion to the arduous and, in his time, inglorious
researches of natural history and comparative anatomy, since it was
only in those departments that he made any real contributions to
physical science. In the studies which were to him the noblest and most
entrancing of any, his speculations are one long record of wearisome,
hopeless, unqualified delusion. If, in the philosophy of practice and
the philosophy of art, he afforded no real guidance at all, in the
philosophy of Nature his guidance has always led men fatally astray.
So far as his means of observation extended, there was nothing that
he did not attempt to explain, and in every single instance he was
wrong. He has written about the general laws of matter and motion,
astronomy, chemistry, meteorology, and physiology, with the result
that he has probably made more blunders on those subjects than any
human being ever made before or after him. And, if there is one thing
more astounding than his unbroken infelicity of speculation, it is
the imperturbable self-confidence with which he puts forward his
fallacies as demonstrated scientific certainties. Had he been right,
it was no ‘slight or partial glimpses of the beloved’ that would have
been vouchsafed him, but the ‘fullest and nearest revelation’ of her
beauties. But the more he looked the less he saw. Instead of drawing
aside he only thickened and darkened the veils of sense which obscured
her, by mistaking them for the glorious forms that lay concealed
beneath.

Modern admirers of Aristotle labour to prove that his errors were
inevitable, and belonged more to his age than to himself; that without
the mechanical appliances of modern times science could not be
cultivated with any hope of success. But what are we to say when we
find that on one point after another the true explanation had already
been surmised by Aristotle’s predecessors or contemporaries, only to be
scornfully rejected by Aristotle himself? Their hypotheses may often
have been very imperfect, and supported by insufficient evidence; but
it must have been something more than chance which always led him wrong
when they were so often right. To begin with, the infinity of space is
not even now, nor will it ever be, established by improved instruments
of observation and measurement; it is deduced by a very simple
process of reasoning, of which Democritus and others were capable,
while Aristotle apparently was not. He rejects the idea because it is
inconsistent with certain very arbitrary assumptions and definitions
of his own, whereas he should have rejected them because they were
inconsistent with it. He further rejects the idea of a vacuum, and with
it the atomic theory, entirely on _à priori_ grounds, although, even
in the then existing state of knowledge, atomism explained various
phenomena in a perfectly rational manner which he could only explain by
unmeaning or nonsensical phrases.[195] It had been already maintained,
in his time, that the apparent movements of the heavenly bodies were
due to the rotation of the earth on its own axis.[196] Had Aristotle
accepted this theory one can imagine how highly his sagacity would have
been extolled. We may, therefore, fairly take his rejection of it as
a proof of blind adherence to old-fashioned opinions. When he argues
that none of the heavenly bodies rotate, because we can see that the
moon does not, as is evident from her always turning the same side to
us,[197] nothing is needed but the simplest mathematics to demonstrate
the fallacy of his reasoning. Others had surmised that the Milky Way
was a collection of stars, and that comets were bodies of the same
nature as planets. Aristotle is satisfied that both are appearances
like meteors, and the aurora borealis—caused by the friction of our
atmosphere against the solid aether above it. A similar origin is
ascribed to the heat and light derived from the sun and stars; for it
would be derogatory to the dignity of those luminaries to suppose,
with Anaxagoras, that they are formed of anything so familiar and
perishable as fire. On the contrary, they consist of pure aether like
the spheres on which they are fixed as protuberances; though how
such an arrangement can co-exist with absolute contact between each
sphere and that next below it, or how the effects of friction could
be transmitted through such enormous thicknesses of solid crystal, is
left unexplained.[198] By a happy anticipation of Roemer, Empedocles
conjectured that the transmission of light occupied a certain time:
Aristotle declares it to be instantaneous.[199]

On passing to terrestrial physics, we find that Aristotle is, as usual,
the dupe of superficial appearances, against which other thinkers were
on their guard. Seeing that fire always moved up, he assumed that it
did so by virtue of a natural tendency towards the circumference of the
universe, as opposed to earth, which always moved towards the centre.
The atomists erroneously held that all matter gravitated downwards
through infinite space, but correctly explained the ascent of heated
particles by the pressure of surrounding matter, in accordance, most
probably, with the analogy of floating bodies.[200] Chemistry as a
science is, of course, an entirely modern creation, but the first
approach to it was made by Democritus, while no ancient philosopher
stood farther from its essential principles than Aristotle. He analyses
bodies, not into their material elements, but into the sensuous
qualities, hot and cold, wet and dry, between which he supposes the
underlying substance to be perpetually oscillating; a theory which, if
it were true, would make any fixed laws of nature impossible.

It might have been expected that, on reaching physiology, the Stagirite
would stand on firmer ground than any of his contemporaries. Such,
however, is not the case. As already observed, his achievements belong
entirely to the dominion of anatomy and descriptive zoology. The whole
internal economy of the animal body is, according to him, designed
for the purpose of creating and moderating the vital heat; and in
apportioning their functions to the different organs he is entirely
dominated by this fundamental error. It was a common notion among the
Greeks, suggested by sufficiently obvious considerations, that the
brain is the seat of the psychic activities. These, however, Aristotle
transports to the heart, which, in his system, not only propels the
blood through the body, but is also the source of heat, the common
centre where the different special sensations meet to be compared,
and the organ of imagination and of passion. The sole function of
the brain is to cool down the blood—a purpose which the lungs also
subserve. Some persons believe that air is a kind of food, and is
inhaled in order to feed the internal fire; but their theory would
involve the absurd consequence that all animals breathe, for all have
some heat. Anaxagoras and Diogenes did, indeed, make that assertion,
and the latter even went so far as to say that fish breathe with
their gills, absorbing the air held in solution by the water passed
through them—a misapprehension, says Aristotle, which arose from not
having studied the final cause of respiration.[201] His physiological
theory of generation is equally unfortunate. In accordance with his
metaphysical system, hereafter to be explained, he distinguishes two
elements in the reproductive process, of which one, that contributed by
the male, is exclusively formative; and the other, that contributed by
the female, exclusively material. The prevalent opinion was evidently,
what we know now to be true, that each parent has both a formative and
a material share in the composition of the embryo. Again, Aristotle,
strangely enough, regards the generative element in both sexes as
an unappropriated portion of the animal’s nutriment, the last and
most refined product of digestion, and therefore not a portion of
the parental system at all; while other biologists, anticipating Mr.
Darwin’s theory of pangenesis in a very wonderful manner, taught that
the semen is a conflux of molecules derived from every part of the
body, and thus strove to account for the hereditary transmission of
individual peculiarities to offspring.[202]

All these, however, are mere questions of detail. It is on a subject of
the profoundest philosophical importance that Aristotle differs most
consciously, most radically, and most fatally from his predecessors.
They were evolutionists, and he was a stationarist. They were
mechanicists, and he was a teleologist. They were uniformitarians, and
he was a dualist. It is true that, as we mentioned at the beginning of
this chapter, Mr. Edwin Wallace makes him ‘recognise the genesis of
things by evolution and development,’ but the meaning of this phrase
requires to be cleared up. In one sense it is, of course, almost an
identical proposition. The genesis of things must be by genesis of some
kind or other. The great question is, what things have been evolved,
and how have they been evolved? Modern science tells us, that not
only have all particular aggregates of matter and motion now existing
come into being within a finite period of time, but also that the
specific types under which we arrange those aggregates have equally
been generated; and that their characteristics, whether structural
or functional, can only be understood by tracing out their origin
and history. And it further teaches us that the properties of every
aggregate result from the properties of its ultimate elements, which,
within the limits of our experience, remain absolutely unchanged. Now,
Aristotle taught very nearly the contrary of all this. He believed
that the cosmos, as we now know it, had existed, and would continue
to exist, unchanged through all eternity. The sun, moon, planets,
and stars, together with the orbs containing them, are composed of
an absolutely ungenerable, incorruptible substance. The earth, a
cold, heavy, solid sphere, though liable to superficial changes, has
always occupied its present position in the centre of the universe.
The specific forms of animal life—except a few which are produced
spontaneously—have, in like manner, been preserved unaltered through
an infinite series of generations. Man shares the common lot. There is
no continuous progress of civilisation. Every invention and discovery
has been made and lost an infinite number of times. Our philosopher
could not, of course, deny that individual living things come into
existence and gradually grow to maturity; but he insists that their
formation is teleologically determined by the parental type which they
are striving to realise. He asks whether we should study a thing by
examining how it grows, or by examining its completed form: and Mr.
Wallace quotes the question without quoting the answer.[203] Aristotle
tells us that the genetic method was followed by his predecessors, but
that the other method is his. And he goes on to censure Empedocles for
saying that many things in the animal body are due simply to mechanical
causation; for example, the segmented structure of the backbone, which
that philosopher attributes to continued doubling and twisting—the
very same explanation, we believe, that would be given of it by a
modern evolutionist.[204] Finally, Aristotle assumes the only sort of
transformation which we deny, and which Democritus equally denied—that
is to say, the transformation of the ultimate elements into one
another by the oscillation of an indeterminate matter between opposite
qualities.


