CHAPTER XIV

THE GROWTH OF MEDIAEVAL EMOTION

     I. THE PATRISTIC CHART OF PASSION.

    II. EMOTIONALIZING OF LATIN CHRISTIANITY.


The characteristic passions of a period represent the emotionalized
thoughts of multitudes of men and women. Mediaeval emotional development
followed prevailing ideas, opinions, convictions, especially those of
mediaeval Christianity. Its most impressive phases conformed to the tenets
of the system which the Middle Ages had received from the Church Fathers,
and represented the complement of passion arising from the long acceptance
of the same. One may observe, first, the process of exclusion, inclusion,
and enhancement, through which the Fathers formed a certain synthesis of
emotion from the matter of their faith and the circumstances of their
environment; and, secondly, the further growth of emotion in the Middle
Ages.


I

In the centuries immediately preceding and following the Christian era
there took place a remarkable growth of the pathetic or emotional element
in Greek and Roman literature. Yet during the same period Stoicism, the
most respected system of philosophy, kept its face as stone, and would not
recognize the ethical value of emotion in human life.[410] But the
emotional elements of paganism, which were stretching out their hands like
the shades by Acheron, were not to be restrained by philosophic
admonition, or Virgilian _Desine fata deum flecti sperare precando_. And
though the Stoic could not consent to Juvenal’s avowal that the sense of
tears is the best part of us, Neo-Platonism soon was to uphold the
sublimated emotion of a vision transcending reason as the highest good for
man. Rational self-control was disintegrating in the Neo-Platonic
dialectic which pointed beyond reason to ecstasy. That ecstasy, however,
was to be super-sensual, and indeed came only to those who had long
suppressed all cravings of the flesh. This ascetic emotionalism of the
Neo-Platonic _summum bonum_ was strikingly analogous to the ideal of
Christian living pressing to domination in the patristic period.

No need to say that the Gospel of Jesus was addressed to the heart as well
as to the mind; and for times to come the Saviour on the Cross and at its
foot the weeping Mother were to rouse floods of tears over human sin,
which caused the divine sacrifice. The words _Jesus wept_ heralded a new
dispensation under which the heart should quicken and the mind should
guide through reaches of humanity unknown to paganism. This Christian
expansion of the spirit did not, however, address itself to human
relationships, but uplifted itself to God, its upward impulse spurning
mortal loves. In its mortal bearings the Christian spirit was more ascetic
than Neo-Platonism, and its _élan_ of emotion might have been as
sublimated in quality as the Neo-Platonic, but for the greater reality of
love and terror in the God toward whom it yearned with tears of
contrition, love, and fear.

Another strain very different from Neo-Platonism contributed to the sum of
Christian emotion. This was Judaism, which recently had shown the fury of
its energy in defence of Jerusalem against the legions of Titus.
Christians imbibed its force of feeling from the books of the Old
Testament. The passion of those writings was not as the humanly directed
passions of the Greeks. Israel’s desire and aversion, her scorn and
hatred, her devotion and her love, hung on Jehovah. “Do I not hate them, O
Jehovah, that hate thee?” This cry of the Psalmist is echoed in Elijah’s
“Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape.” Jewish wrath was
a righteous intolerance, which would neither endure idolatrous Gentiles
nor suffer idolaters in Israel. Moses is enraged by the sight of the
people dancing before the golden calf; and Isaiah’s scorn hisses over
those daughters of Israel who have turned from Jehovah’s ways of decorum:
“Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
necks, and wanton eyes, mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with
their feet; therefore Jehovah will smite with a scab the crown of the head
of the daughters of Zion, and Jehovah will lay bare their secret parts.”

Did a like scorn and anger find harbourage in Him who likened the
Pharisees to whitened sepulchres, and with a scourge of small cords drove
the money-changers from His Father’s house? At all events a kindred hate
found an enduring home in the religion of Tertullian and Athanasius, and
in the great Church that persecuted the Montanists at Augustine’s
entreaty, and thereafter poured its fury upon Jew and Saracen and heretic
for a thousand years.

Jehovah was also a great heart of love, loving His people along the ways
of every sweet relationship understood by man. “When Israel was a child,
then I loved him, and out of Egypt called my son hither.” “Can a woman
forget her sucking child, so as not to yearn upon the son of her womb?
Yea, these may forget, yet will I not forget thee.” Again, Jehovah is the
husband, and Israel the sinning wife whom He will not put away.[411]
Israel’s responding love answers: “My soul waits on God--My heart and
flesh cry aloud to the living God--Like as the hart panteth for the
water-brooks”! Such passages throb obedience to Deuteronomy’s great
command, which Jesus said was the sum of the Law and the Prophets. No need
to say that the Christian’s love of God had its emotional antecedent in
Psalmist and Prophet. Jehovah’s purifying wrath of love also passed over
to the Christian words, “As many as I love, I reprove and chasten.” And
“the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom,” found its climax
in the Christian terror of the Judgment Day.

The Old Testament has its instances of human love: Isaac and Rebekah,
Jacob and Rachel. There is Jacob’s love of Joseph and Benjamin, and
Joseph’s love, which yearned upon his brethren who had sold him to the
Egyptians. The most loving man of all is David, with his love of Jonathan,
“wonderful and passing the love of women,” unforgotten in the king’s old
age, when he asks, “Is there yet any living of the house of Saul, that I
may show him kindness for Jonathan’s sake?” To a later time belongs the
Song of Songs. Beautiful, orientally sensuous, too glowing perhaps for
western taste, is this utterance of unchecked passion. And its fortune has
been the most wonderful that ever fell to a love poem. It became the
epithalamion of the Christian soul married to Christ, an epithalamion
which was to be enlarged with passionate thought by doctor, monk, and
saint, through the Christian centuries. The first to construe it as the
bridal of the Soul was one who, by an act more irrevocable than a monastic
vow, put from him mortal bridals--Origen, the greatest thinker of the
Eastern Church. Thus the passion of the Hebrew woman for the lover that
was to her as a bundle of myrrh lying between her breasts, was lifted,
still full of desire, to the love of the God-man, by those of sterile
flesh and fruitful souls.

Christianity was not eclecticism, which, for lack of principles of its
own, borrows whatever may seem good. But it made a synthetic adoption of
what could be included under the dominance of its own motives, that is,
could be made to accord with its criterion of Salvation. What sort of
synthesis could it make of the passions and emotions of the
Graeco-Roman-Oriental-Jewish world? That which was achieved by the close
of the patristic period, and was to be passionately approved by the Middle
Ages, proceeded partly in the way of exclusion, and partly by adding a
quality of boundlessness to the emotional elements admitted.

With the first conversions to the new religion, arose the problem: What
human feelings, what loves and interests of this world, shall the believer
recognize as according with his faith, and as offering no obstacle to the
love of God and the attainment of eternal life? A practical answer was
given by the growth of an indeterminate asceticism within the Christian
communities, which in the fourth century went forth with power, and
peopled the desert with anchorites and monks.

Ascetic suggestions came from many sources to the early Christians.
Stoicism was ascetic in tendency; Neo-Platonism ascetic in principle,
holding that the soul should be purged from contamination with things of
sense. Throughout Egypt asceticism was rife in circles interested in the
conflict of Set and his evil host with Horus seeking vengeance for Osiris
slain; and we know that some of the earliest Christian hermits had been
recluses devoted to the cult of Serapis. In Syria dwelt communities of
Jewish Essenes, living continently like monks. Nevertheless, whatever may
have been the effects of such examples, monasticism developed from within
Christianity, and was not the fruit of influences from without.

The Lord had said, “My kingdom is not of this world”; and soon enough
there came antagonism between the early Churches and the Roman Empire. The
Church was in a state of conflict. It behoved the Christian to keep his
loins girded: why should he hamper himself with ephemeral domestic ties,
when the coming of the Lord was at hand? Moreover, the Christian warfare
to the death was not merely with political tyranny, but against fleshly
lusts. Such convictions, in men and women desirous of purifying the soul
from the cravings of sense, might bring the thought that even lawful
marriage was not as holy as the virgin state. The Christian’s ascetic
abnegation had as a further motive the love of Christ and the desire to
help on His kingdom and attain to it, the motive of sacrifice for the sake
of the Kingdom of Heaven; for which one man must be burned, another must
give up his goods, and a third renounce his heart’s love. Ascetic acts are
also a natural accompaniment of penitence: the sinner, with fear of hell
before him, seeks to undergo temporal in order to avoid eternal pain; or,
better, stung by love of the Crucified, his heart cries for flagellation.
When St. Martin came to die he would lie only upon ashes: “I have sinned
if I leave you a different example.”[412] A similar strain of religious
conviction is rendered in Jerome’s “You are too pleasure-loving, brother,
if you wish to rejoice in this world and hereafter to reign with
Christ.”[413]

So currents of ascetic living early began in Christian circles; and before
long the difficulty of leading lives of self-mortification within the
community was manifest. It was easier to withdraw: ascetics must become
anchorites, “they who have withdrawn.” Here was reason why the movement
should betake itself to the desert. But the solitary life is so difficult,
that association for mutual aid will soon ensue; and then regulations will
be needed for these newly-formed ascetic groups. So anchorites tended to
become coenobites; monasticism has begun.

In both its hermit and coenobitic phases, monasticism began in the East,
in Syria and the Thebaid. It was accepted by the Latin West, and there
became impressed with Roman qualities of order, regularity, and obedience.
The precepts of the eastern monks were collected and arranged by Cassian,
a native of Gaul, in his _Institutes_ and _Conlocations_ between the years
419 and 428. And about a century afterwards, western monasticism received
its typeform in the _Regula_ of St. Benedict of Nursia (d. 543), which was
approved by the authority of Gregory the Great (d. 604).[414]

By the close of the patristic period, monasticism had become the most
highly applauded practical interpretation of Christianity. Its precepts
represented the requirements of the Christian criterion of Salvation
applied to earthly life. Like all great systems which have widely
prevailed and long endured, it was not negation, but substitution. If it
condemned usual modes of pleasure, this was because of their
incompatibility with the life it inculcated. The _Regula_ of Benedict set
forth a manner of life replete with positive demands. Its purpose was to
prescribe for those who had taken monastic vows that way of living, that
daily round of occupation, that constant mode of thought and temper, which
should make a perfected Christian, that is, a perfect monk. And so broad
and spiritually interwoven were its precepts that one of them could hardly
be obeyed without fulfilling all. Read, for example, the beautiful seventh
chapter upon the twelve grades of humility, and it will become evident
that whoever achieves this virtue will gain all the rest: he will always
have the fear of God before his eyes, the terror of hell and the hope of
heaven; he will cut off the desires of the flesh; he will do, not his own
will, but the Lord’s; since Christ obeyed His Father unto death, he will
render absolute obedience to his superior, obeying readily and cheerfully
even when unjustly blamed; in confession he will conceal no evil thought;
he will deem himself vilest of all, and will do nothing save what the
_regula_ of the monastery or the example of the elders prescribes; he will
keep from laughter and from speech, except when questioned, and then he
will speak gently and humbly, and with gravity, in few words; he will
stand and walk with inclined head and looks bent on the ground, feeling
himself unworthy to lift up his eyes to heaven: through these stairs of
humility he will reach that perfect love of God which banishes fear, and
will no longer need the fear of hell, as he will do right from habit and
through the love of Christ.

Having thus pointed out the way of righteousness, Benedict’s _regula_
gives minute precepts for the monk’s conduct and occupation through each
hour of the day and night. No time, no circumstance shall be left
unguarded, or unoccupied with those acts which lead to God. Wise was this
great prototypal _regula_ in that its abundance of positive precepts kept
the monk busy with righteousness, so that he might have no leisure for
sin. Its prohibitions are comparatively unemphatic, and the monk is guided
along the paths of righteousness rather than forbidden to go astray.

Thus monk and nun were consecrated to a calling which should contain their
whole desire, as it certainly demanded their whole strength. Was the monk
a celibate because carnal marriage was denied him? Rather he was wedded to
Christ. If this is allegory, it is also close to literal truth. “Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind.” Is not love the better part of marriage? And how if
the Lord thy God has been a gracious loving figure here on earth, who
loved thee humanly as well as divinely, and died for thee at last? Will
not the complete love required by the commandment become very ardent, very
heart-filling? Shalt thou not always yearn to see Him, fall at His feet,
confess thy unworthiness, and touch His garment? Is there any end to the
compass of thy loving Him, and musing upon Him, and dwelling in His
presence? Dost thou not live with Him in a closer communion than the
sunderances of mortality permit among men, or between men and women? And
if it be thou art a nun, art thou not as close to Him in tears and washing
of those blessed feet, as ever was that other woman, who had been a
sinner? Thou shalt keep thy virginity for Him as for a bridegroom.[415]

But the great commandment to love the Lord thy God has an adjunct--“and
thy neighbour as thyself.” _As thyself_--how does the monk love himself?
why, unto Christ and his own salvation. He does not love his sinful
pleasures, nor those matters of earth which might not be sins, had he not
realized how they conflicted with his scheme of life. His love for a
fellow could not recognize those pleasures which he himself had cast
away. He must love his fellow, like himself, unto the saving, not the
undoing, of him--be his true lover, not his enemy. This vital principle of
Christian love had to recast pagan passion and direct the affections to an
immortal goal. Under it these reached a new absoluteness. The Christian
lover should always be ready to give his life for his friend’s salvation,
as for his own. So love’s offices gained enlargement and an infinity of
new relationship, because directed toward eternal life.[416]

Unquestionably in the monk’s eyes passionate love between the sexes was
mainly lust. Within the bonds of marriage it was not mortal sin; but the
virgin state was the best. Here, as we shall see, life was to claim its
own and free its currents. Monasticism did not stop the human race, or
keep men from loving women. Such love would assert itself; and ardent
natures who felt its power were to find in themselves a love and passion
somewhat novel, somewhat raised, somewhat enlarged. In the end the love
between man and woman drew new inspiration and energy from the enhancement
of all the rest of love, which came with Christianity.

Evidently the great office of Christian love in a heathen period was to
convert idolaters to the Faith. So it had been from the days of Paul.
Rapidly Christianity spread through all parts of the Roman Empire. Then
the Faith pressed beyond those crumbling boundaries into the barbarian
world. Hereupon, with Gregory the Great and his successors, it became
clear that the great pope is always a missionary pope, sending out such
Christian embassies as Gregory sent to the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms.

If conversion was a chief office of Christian love, the great object of
Christian wrath was unbelief. That existed within and without Christendom:
within in forms of heresy, without in the practices of heathenism.
Christian wrath was moved by whatever opposed the true faith. The
Christian should discriminate: hate the sin, and love the sinner unto his
betterment. But it was so easy, so human, from hating the sin to hate the
obdurate sinner who could not be saved and could but harm the Church. One
need not recount how the disputes of the Athanasian time regarding the
nature of Christ came to express themselves in curses; nor how the
Christian sword began its slaughter of heretic and heathen. Persecution
seemed justified in reason; it was very logical; broad reasons of
Christian statecraft seemed to make for it; and often a righteous zeal
wielded the weapon. It had moreover its apparent sanction in Jehovah’s
destroying wrath against idolaters within and without the tribes of
Israel.

So the two opposites of love and wrath laid aside somewhat of grossness,
and gained new height and compass in the Christian soul. A like change
came over other emotions. As life lifted itself to further heights of
holiness, and hitherto unseen depths of evil yawned, there came a new
power of pity and novel revulsions of aversion. The pagan pity for life’s
mortality, which filled Virgil’s heart, could not but take on change.
There was no more mortality, but eternal joy and pain. Souls which had so
unavailingly stretched forth their hands to fate, had now been given wings
of faith. Yet death gained blacker terror from the Christian Hell, the
newly-assured alternative of the Christian Heaven. The great Christian
pity did not touch the mortal ebbing of the breath; that should be a
triumphant birth. But an enormous and terror-stricken pity was evoked by
sin, and the thought of the immortal soul hanging over an eternal hell.
And since all human actions were connected with the man’s eternal lot,
they became invested with a new import. So the Christian’s compassion
would deepen, his sympathy become more intense, although no longer stirred
by everything that had moved his pagan self. With him fear was raised to a
new intensity by other terrors than had driven the blood from pagan
cheeks. His sense of joy was deepened also; for a joy hitherto unrealized
came from his new love of God and the God-man, from the assurance of his
salvation, and the thought of loved human relationships never to end. So
Christian joy might have an absoluteness which it never had under the
pause-giving mortal limitations of paganism.

Within the compass of pagan joyfulness there had been no deeper passion
than the love of beauty. That had its sensuous phases, and its far blue
heights, where Plato saw the beauty of order, justice, and proportion. For
the Christian, the beauty of the flesh became a veil through which he
looked for the beauty of the soul. If a face testified to the beauty of
holiness within, it was fair. Better the pale, drawn visages of monk and
nun than the red lip too quickly smiling. Feeling as well as thought
should be adjusted to these sentiments. Yet Plato’s realization of
intellectual beauty found home within the Christian thoughts of God and
holiness, indeed helped to construct them. This is clear with the Fathers.
In the East, Gregory of Nyssa’s passion for divine beauty was Platonism
set in Christian phrase; in the West, Augustine reached his thoughts of
beauty through considerations which came to him from Greek
philosophy.[417] “Love is of the beautiful,” said Plato; “Do we love ought
else?” says Augustine. Both men shape their thoughts of beauty after their
best ideals of perfection. Augustine’s burn upward to the beauty of a God
as loving as He is omnipotent; Plato’s had been more abstract. Augustine’s
Platonism shows the highest Greek thoughts of beauty and goodness changed
into attributes of a personal God, who could be loved because He was
loving.

In these ways the loftier Christian souls suppressed, or transformed and
greatened, the emotions of their natures. It was thus with those possessed
of a faith that brought the whole of life within its dominance. There were
many such. Yet the multitude of Christians ranged downward from such great
obsession, through all stages of human half-heartedness and frailty, to
the state of those whose Christianity was but a name, or but a magic rite.
Always preponderant in numbers, and often in influence and power, these
nominal and fetichistic Christians would keep alive the loves and hates,
the interests and tastes, the approvals and disapprovals, of paganism or
barbaric heathenism, as the case might be.


II

The patristic synthesis of emotion passed on entire and authoritative to
the Middle Ages. It exercised enormous influence (usually in the way of
compulsion, but sometimes in the way of repulsion) upon emotional
phenomena both of a religious and a secular nature. Yet it was merely the
foundation, or the first stage, of mediaeval emotional development. The
subsequent stages were dependent on the conditions under which mediaeval
attitudes of mind arose, very dependent upon the maturing and blending of
the native traits of inchoate mediaeval peoples and upon their
appropriation of Latin Christianity and the antique education.

The northern races had been introduced to a novel religion and to modes of
thought considerably above them. Their old conceptions were discredited,
their feelings somewhat distraught. Emotionally as well as intellectually
they were confused. Turbid feelings, arising from ideas not fully
mastered, had to clarify and adjust themselves. From the sixth to the
eleventh century the crude mediaeval stocks, tangled but not blended,
strange to the religion and culture which held their destinies, were not
possessed of clear and dominant emotions that could create their own forms
of expression. They could not think and feel as they would when their new
acquirements had mellowed into faculty and temperament, and unities of
character had once more emerged.

Christianity and Latin culture were operative everywhere, and everywhere
tended to produce a uniform development. Yet the peoples affected by these
common influences were kept unlike each other through varieties of
environment and a diversity of racial traits which still showed clearly as
the centuries passed. In consequence, the emotional development of these
different peoples remained marked by racial characteristics, while also
becoming mediaeval under the action of common influences. It proceeded in
two parallel and partially mingling streams: the one of the religious
life, the other of earth’s desires. They may be observed in turn.

Augustine represents the sum of doctrine and emotion contained in the
Latin Christianity of the fifth century. However imperfectly others might
comprehend his thought or feel the power of his grandly reasoned love of
God, he established this love for time to come as the centre and the bound
of Christian righteousness: “Virtus non est nisi diligere quod diligendum
est.”[418] He drew within this principle the array of dogma and precept
constituting Latin Christianity. On the other hand, the practical
embodiment of the patristic synthesis of human interests and emotions was
monasticism, with its lines set by the Rule of Benedict.

Pope Gregory the Great[419] refashioned Augustine’s teachings, and placed
the seal of his approval upon Benedictine monasticism as the perfect way
of Christian living. His mind was darkened with the new ignorance and
intellectual debasement which had come in the century and a half
separating him from Augustine; and his soul was filled with the fantastic
terrors which were to constitute so large a part of the religion of the
Middle Ages. Devil lore, relic worship, miracles, permeate his
consciousness of life. The soul’s ceaseless business is so to keep itself
that it may at last escape the sentence of the awful Judge. Love and
terror struggle fearfully in Gregory. Christ’s death had shown God’s love;
and yet the Dies Irae impends. No delict is wiped out without penitence
and punishment, in this life or afterwards--let it be in Purgatory and not
in Hell!

The centuries following Gregory’s death rearranged the contents of Latin
Christianity, including Gregory’s teachings, to suit their own
intellectual capacities. This (Carolingian) period of rearrangement and
painful learning, as it was unoriginative intellectually, was likewise
unproductive of Christian emotion. Occasionally from far-off converts,
who are not troubled overmuch with learning, come utterances of simple
feeling for the Faith (one thinks of Bede’s story of Cædmon); and the
Teuton spirit, warlike as well as intimate and sentimental, enters the
vernacular interpretation of Christianity.[420] The Christian message
could not be understood at all without a stirring of the convert’s nature;
some quickening of emotion would ensue. This did not imply a development
of emotion corresponding to the credences of Latin Christianity, to which
so many people had been newly introduced. That system had to be more
vitally appropriated before it could arouse the emotional counterpart of
its tenets, and run its course in modes of mediaeval religious passion.

Accordingly one will look in vain among the Carolingian scholars for that
torrential feeling which becomes articulate in the eleventh century. They
were excerpting and rearranging patristic Christianity to suit their own
capacities. They could not use it as a basis for further thinking; nor, on
the other hand, had it become for them the ground of religious feeling.
Undoubtedly, Alcuin and Rabanus Maurus and Walafrid Strabo were pious
Christians, taking their Faith devoutly. But such religious emotion as was
theirs, was reflected rather than spontaneous. Alcuin, as well as Gregory
the Great, realizes the opposition between heaven and the _vana
delectibilia_[421] of this world. But Alcuin’s words have lost the
horror-stricken quality of Gregory; neither do they carry the floods of
tears which like thoughts bring to Peter Damiani in the eleventh century.
Odo, Abbot of Cluny in the middle of the tenth century, has something of
Gregory’s heavy horror; but even in him the gift of tears is not yet
loosed.[422]

From the eleventh century onward, the gathering religious feeling pours
itself out in passionate utterances; and in this new emotionalizing of
Latin Christianity lay the chief religious office of the Middle Ages,
wherein they went far beyond the patristic authors of their faith. The
Fathers of the Latin Church from Tertullian to Gregory the Great had been
occupied with doctrine and ecclesiastical organization. This dual
achievement was the work of the constructive mind of the Latin West,
following, of course, what had been accomplished by the Greek Fathers. It
stood forth mainly as the creation of those human faculties which are
grouped under the name of intellect. Patristic Latin Christianity hardly
presents itself as the product of the whole man. Its principles were not
as yet fully humanized, made matter of the heart, and imbued with love and
fear and pity: this creature of the intellect had yet to receive a soul.

It is true that Augustine had an enormous love of God. It was fervently
felt; it was powerfully reasoned; it impassioned his thought. Yet it did
not contain that tender love of the divinely human Christ which trembles
in the words of Bernard and makes the life of Francis a lyric poem. St.
Jerome also had even an hysterically emotional nature; Tertullian at the
beginning of the patristic period was no placid soul, nor Gregory the
Great at its close. But it does not follow that Latin Christianity was as
yet emotionalized, or that it had become a matter of the heart because it
was accepted by the mind. Its dogmas and constructive principles were
still too new; the energies of men had been spent in devising and
establishing them. Not yet had they been pondered over for generation
after generation, and hallowed through time; they had not yet become part
of human life, cherished in men’s hopes, fondled in their affections,
frozen in their fears, trembled before and loved.

What was absent from the formation of Latin Christianity constituted the
conditions of its gradual appropriation by the Middle Ages. It had come to
them from a greater past, sanctioned by the saints who now reigned above.
Through the centuries, men had come to understand it, and had made it
their own with power. Through generations its commands and promises, its
threats and rewards, had been feared and loved. Its persons, symbols, and
sacraments had become animate with human quality and were endeared with
intimate incident and association. Every one had been born to it, had been
suckled upon it, had adored it in childhood, youth, and age: it filled all
life; with hope or menace it overhung the closing hour.

The Middle Ages have been given credit for dry theologies and sublimated
metaphysics. Less frequently have they been credited with their great
achievement, the imbuing of patristic Christianity with the human elements
of love and fear and pity. Yet their religious phenomena display this
emotionalizing of transmitted theological elements. Chapters which are to
follow will illustrate it from the lives of many saints of different
temperaments. As wide apart as life will be the phases of its
manifestations. The tears of Peter Damiani are not like the love of the
God-man in St. Bernard; St. Francis’s love of Christ and love of man is
again different and new; and the mystic thought-shot visions of a
Hildegard of Bingen are as blue to crimson when compared with the
sense-passion for the Bridegroom of a Mechthild of Magdeburg. Even as
illustrated in these so different natures, it will still appear that the
emotional humanizing of Latin Christianity in the Middle Ages shaped
itself to the tenets of the system formulated by the Church Fathers. It
was an emotionalizing of that system, quite as much as a direct
appropriation of the Gospel-heart of Christ. Christ and the heart of
Christ were with the mediaeval saints; and yet the emotions as well as
thoughts through which they turned to Him received their form from
patristic Christianity.

Religious art plainly tells the story. Let one call to mind the character
of its achievements in the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries. That was
the period following the recognition of Christianity as the religion of
the Roman Empire. Everywhere basilicas arose.[423] Some of them may be
seen in Rome, in Ravenna, in Constantinople. They still contain many of
the mural mosaics which were their glory. Numberless artists laboured in
the composition of those stately church decorations. There was a need,
unprecedented and never afterwards paralleled, of creative composition.
Spacious surfaces were to be covered with prefigurative scenes from the
Old Testament, with scenes from the life of Christ on earth, and
representations of His apocalyptic triumph in the Resurrection. They had
all to be composed without aid from previous designs, for there were none.
The artists had need to be as constructive as the Church Fathers, who
through the same period were perfecting the formulation of the Faith. They
succeeded grandly, setting forth the subjects they were told to execute,
in noble, balanced, and decorative compositions, which presented the facts
and tenets of the Faith strikingly and correctly. Stylistically, these
great church mosaics belonged to antique art. What did they lack? Merely
the human, veritably tragic, qualities of love and fear and pity, which
had not yet come. Like the dogmatic system, this mosaic presentation was
too recently composed. Its subjects were not yet humanized through
centuries of contemplation, reverence, and love.[424]

Many of the early compositions, repeated from century to century, in time
were humanized and transformed with feeling. But this was not in the
seventh, eighth, and ninth centuries, when art was but a decadent and
barbarized survival of the antique Christian manner, nor in the tenth and
eleventh. One may note also that the mediaeval expression of Christian
emotion was beginning in religious literature. This came with fulness in
the twelfth century, and along with it the emotionalizing, the veritable
humanizing, of religious art began. Yet the artists of western Europe
still lacked the skill requisite for delicate execution. A marked advance
came in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. That was the great period
of Gothic architecture; and in the sculpture on the French cathedrals,
stone seems to live and feel. The prophetic figures from the Old
Testament, the scenes of man’s redemption and final judgment, are
humanized with love and terror. Moreover, the sculptor surrounds them with
the myriad subsidiary detail of mortal life and changing beauty, showing
how closely they are knit to every human love and interest.

In Italy a like story is told in a different manner. There is sculpture,
but there also is mosaic, and above all there is and will be fresco.
Before the end of the thirteenth century, Giotto was busy with his new
dramatic art; no need to tell what power of human feeling filled the
works of that chief of painters and his school. The hard materials of the
mosaicist were also made to render emotion. If one will note the mosaics
along the nave in Santa Maria Maggiore, belonging to the fifth century,
and then turn to the mosaics of the Coronation of the Virgin in the apse,
or cross the Tiber and look at those in the lower zone of the apse of
Santa Maria in Trastevere, which tell the Virgin’s story, he will see the
change which was bringing love and sweetness into the stiff mosaic medium.
Torriti executed the former in 1295; and the latter with their gentler
feeling were made by Giotto’s pupil, Cavallini, in 1351. The art is still
as correct and true and orthodox as in the fifth century. It conforms to
Latin Christianity in the choice of topics and the manner of presenting
them, and drapes its human emotions around conceptions which the patristic
period formed and delivered to the Middle Ages. Thus, in full measure, it
has taken to itself the emotional qualities of the mediaeval
transformation of Latin Christianity, and is filled with a love and tears
and pity, which were not in the old Christian mosaics.

Quite analogous to the emotionalizing of Christian art is the example
afforded by the evolution of the Latin hymn. The earliest extant Latin
hymns are those of St. Ambrose, written in iambic dimeters. Antique in
phrase as in metre, they are also trenchantly correct in doctrine, as
behoved the compositions of the great Archbishop of Milan who commanded
the forces of orthodoxy in the Arian conflict. They were sung in anxious
seasons. Yet these dignified and noble hymns are no emotional outpour
either of anxiety or adoration. Such feeling as they carry lies in their
strength of trust in God and in the power of conviction of their stately
orthodoxy.

Between the death of Ambrose and the tenth century, Latin hymns gradually
substituted accent in the place of metrical quantity, as the dominant
principle of their rhythm. With this partial change there seems to come
increase of feeling. The

  “Jesu nostra redemptio,
   Amor et desiderium.”

of the seventh century is different from the

  “Te diligat castus amor,
   Te mens adoret sobria”

of Ambrose.[425] And the famous pilgrim chant of the tenth century, “O
Roma nobilis, orbis et domina,” has the strength of long-deepening
emotion.[426]

These hymns have but dropped the constraint of metre. Religious passion
had not yet proved its creative power, and the new verse-forms with their
mighty rhyme, fit to voice the accumulated emotions of the Liturgy, were
not in existence. The eleventh and twelfth centuries witnessed the
strophic evolution of the Latin hymn, in which feeling, joined with art,
at last perfected line and stanza and the passionate phrases filling
them.[427] Yet nothing could be more orthodox than the Latin hymn
throughout its course of development. Its function was liturgical. It was
correct in doctrinal expressions, and followed in every way the
authoritative teachings of the Church; its symbolism was derived from the
works of learned doctors; and its feeling took form from the tenets of
Latin Christianity. The _Dies Irae_ and the _Stabat Mater_ yield evidence
of this.[428]

From the religious phases of mediaeval emotion, one may pass to modes of
feeling which were secular and human. The antecedents were again the
racial traits of the peoples who were to become mediaeval; the formative
influences still are Christianity and the profane antique culture. The
racial traits show clearest in vernacular compositions, some of which may
carry fervent feeling, such as enkindles the Crusader’s song of _Hartmann
von Aue_:

  “Min froüde wart nie sorgelos
       Unz an die tage
   Daz ich mir Kristes bluomen kos
       Die ich hie trage.
   Die kundent eine sumerzìt,
       Die alsô gar
   In suezer augenweide lit;
       Got helfe uns dar.

  “Mich hât diu werlt also gewent (gewöhnt),
       Daz mir der muot
   Sich z’einer mâze nâch ir sent:
       Dêst mir nu guot.
   Got hat vil wol ze mir getân,
       Als ez nu stât,
   Daz ich der sorgen bin erlân
       Diu manegen hât
   Gebunden an den fuoz,
       Daz er belîben muoz
   Swenn’ ich in Kristes schar
       Mit fröuden wünneclichen var.”[429]

The secular emotional development was connected with the religious. It was
stimulated by the deepening of emotional capacity caused by Christianity,
and was not unrelated to the Christian love of God, the place of which was
taken, in secular mediaeval passion, by an idealizing, but carnal, love of
woman; and instead of the terror-stricken piety which accompanied the
Christian’s love for his Maker and his Judge, the heart was glad and the
temper open to every joy, while also subject to the fears and hates which
spring up among men of mortal passions.

In the romantic and utter abandonment required of its votaries, this
earthly love may well have drawn suggestion from that boundless love of
God which had superseded the Greek precept of “nothing in excess,”
teaching instead that no limit should be set on what was absolutely good.
The principle of love unrestrained was thus inaugurated, and did not
always turn to God. Ardent natures who felt love’s power, might hold it as
the supreme arbiter and law of life, and the giver of strength and virtue.
These thoughts will shape the tale of Lancelot and myriad poems besides.
They also may be found incarnate in the living instance: the heart of
Heloïse held a passion for her human master which she recognized as her
highest law. It was such a passion as she would hardly have conceived but
for the existence of like categories of devotion to the Christian God. Not
in her nature alone, but through many Christian generations whereof she
was the fruit, there had gone on a continual enhancement of capacities of
feeling, for which she was a greater woman when she grew to womanhood and
felt its passion. Through such heightening of her powers of loving, and
through the suggestiveness of the Christian love of God, she could
conceive and feel a like absolute devotion to a man.[430]

There were, moreover, partially humanized stages in which the love of God
was affiliated with loves of mortal hue. Many a mediaeval woman felt a
passionate love for the spiritual Bridegroom. Its expression, its
suggestions, its training, might transmit power and passion to the love of
very mortal men: while from the worship of the Blessed Virgin expressions
of passionate devotion might pass over into poems telling man’s love of
woman. And what reaches of passion might not the Song of Songs suggest,
although that imagined bridal of the Soul was never deemed a song of human
love?[431]




