CHAPTER IX

THE BRINGING OF CHRISTIANITY AND ANTIQUE KNOWLEDGE TO THE NORTHERN PEOPLES

      I. IRISH ACTIVITIES; COLUMBANUS OF LUXEUIL.

     II. CONVERSION OF THE ENGLISH; THE LEARNING OF BEDE AND ALFRED.

    III. GAUL AND GERMANY; FROM CLOVIS TO ST. WINIFRIED-BONIFACE.


The northern peoples, Celts and Teutons for the most part as they are
called, came into contact with Roman civilization as the great Republic
brought Gaul and Britain under its rule. Since Rome was still pagan when
these lands were made provinces, an unchristianized Latinity was grafted
upon their predominantly Celtic populations. The second stage, as it were,
of this contact between Rome and the north, is represented by that influx
of barbarians, mostly Teutonic, which, in both senses of the word,
_quickened_ the disruption of the Empire in the fourth and following
centuries. The religion called after the name of Christ had then been
accepted; and invading Goths, Franks, Burgundians, Lombards, and the rest,
were introduced to a somewhat Christianized Latindom. Indeed, in the
Latin-Christian combination, the latter was becoming dominant, and was
soon to be the active influence in extending even the antique culture. For
Christianity, with Latinity in its train, was to project itself outward to
subjugate heathen Anglo-Saxons in England, Frisians in the Low Countries,
and the unkempt Teutondom which roved east of the Rhine, and was ever
pressing southward over the boundaries of former provinces, now reverting
to unrest. In past times the assimilating energy of Roman civilization had
united western Europe in a common social order. Henceforth Christianity
was to be the prime amalgamator, while the survivals of Roman
institutions and the remnants of antique culture were to assist in
secondary rôles. With Charles Martell, with Pippin, and with Charlemagne,
Latin Christianity is the symbol of civilized order, while heathendom and
savagery are identical.


I

The conversion of the northern peoples, and their incidental introduction
to profane knowledge, wrought upon them deeply; while their own qualities
and the conditions of their lives affected their understanding of what
they received and their attitude toward the new religion. Obviously the
dissemination of Christianity among rude peoples would be unlike that
first spreading of the Gospel through the Empire, in the course of which
it had been transformed to Greek and Latin Christianity. Italy, Spain, and
Gaul made the western region of this primary diffusion of the Faith. Of a
distinctly missionary character were the further labours which resulted in
the conversion of the fresh masses of Teutons who were breaking into the
Roman pale, or were still moving restlessly beyond it. Moreover, between
the time of the first diffusion of Christianity within the Empire and that
of its missionary extension beyond those now decayed and fallen
boundaries, it had been formulated dogmatically, and given ecclesiastical
embodiment in a Catholic church into which had passed the conquering and
organizing genius of Rome. This finished system was presented to simple
peoples, sanctioned by the authority and dowered with the surviving
culture of the civilized world. It offered them mightier supernatural aid,
nobler knowledge, and a better ordering of life than they had known. The
manner and authority of its presentation hastened its acceptance, and also
determined the attitude toward it of the new converts and their children
for generations. Theirs was to be the attitude of ignorance before
recognized wisdom, and that of a docility which revered the manner and
form as well as the substance of its lesson. The development of mediaeval
Europe was affected by the mode and circumstances of this secondary
propagation of Christianity. For centuries the northern peoples were to
be held in tutelage to the form and constitution of that which they had
received: they continued to revere the patristic sources of Christian
doctrines, and to look with awe upon the profane culture accompanying
them.

Thus, as under authority, Christianity came to the Teutonic peoples, even
to those who, like the Goths, were converted to the Arian creed. Likewise
the orthodox belief was brought to the Celtic Britons and Irish as a
superior religion associated with superior culture. But the qualities or
circumstances of these western Celts reacted more freely upon their form
of faith, because Ireland and Britain were the fringe of the world, and
Christianity was hardly fixed in dogma and ritual when the conversion at
least of Britain began.

Certain phrases of Tertullian indicate that Christianity had made some
progress among the Britons by the beginning of the third century. For the
next hundred years nothing is known of the British Church, save that it
did not suffer from the persecution under Diocletian in 304, and ten years
afterwards was represented by three bishops at the Council of Arles. It
was orthodox, accepting the creed of Nicaea (A.D. 325) and the date of
Easter there fixed. The fourth century seems to have been the period of
its prosperity. It was affiliated with the Church of Gaul; nor did these
relations cease at once when the Roman legions were withdrawn from Britain
in 410. But not many decades later the Saxon invasion began to cut off
Britain from the Christian world. After a while certain divergences appear
in rite and custom, though not in doctrine. They seem not to have been
serious when Gildas wrote in 550. Yet when Augustine came, fifty years
later, the Britons celebrated Easter at a different date from that
observed by the Roman Catholic Church; for they followed the old
computation which Rome had used before adopting the better method of
Alexandria. Also the mode of baptism and the tonsure differed from the
Roman.

At the close of the sixth century the British Church existed chiefly in
Wales, whither the Britons had retreated before the Saxons. Formerly there
had been no unwillingness to follow the Church of Rome. But now a long
period had elapsed, during which Britain had been left to its misfortunes.
The Britons had been raided and harassed; their country invaded; and at
last they had been driven from the greater portion of their land. How they
hated those Saxon conquerors! And forsooth a Roman mission appears to
convert those damned and hateful heathen, and a somewhat haughty summons
issues to the expelled or downtrodden people to abandon their own
Christian usages for those of the Roman communion, and then join this
Roman mission in its saving work among those Saxons whom the Britons had
met only at the spear’s point. Love of ancient and familiar customs soured
to obstinacy in the face of such demands; a sweeping rejection was
returned. Yet to conform to Roman usages and join with Augustine in his
mission to the Saxons, was the only way in which the dwindling British
Church could link itself to the Christian world, and save its people from
exterminating wars. By refusing, it committed suicide.

A refusal to conform, although no refusal to undertake missions to the
Saxons, came from the Irish-Scottish Church. As Ireland had never been
drawn within the Roman world, its conversion was later than that of
Britain. Yet there would seem to have been Christians in Ireland before
431; for in that year, according to an older record quoted by Bede,
Palladius, the first bishop (_primus episcopus_), was sent by Celestine
the Roman pontiff “ad Scottos in Christum credentes.”[201] The mission of
Palladius does not appear to have been acceptable to the Irish. Some
accounts have confused his story with that of Patrick, the “Apostle of
Ireland,” whose apostolic glory has not been overthrown by criticism. The
more authentic accounts, and above all his own _Confession_, go far to
explain Patrick’s success. His early manhood, passed as a slave in Antrim,
gave him understanding of the Irish; and doubtless his was a great
missionary capacity and zeal. The natural approach to such a people was
through their tribal kings, and Patrick appears to have made his prime
onslaught upon Druidical heathendom at Tara, the abode of the high king of
Ireland. The earliest accounts do not refer to any authority from Rome.
Patrick seems to have acted from spontaneous inspiration; and a like
independence characterizes the monastic Christianity which sprang up in
Ireland and overleapt the water to Iona, to Christianize Scotland as well
as northern Anglo-Saxon heathendom.

Irish monasticism was an ascetically ordered continuance of Irish society.
If, like other early western monasticism, it derived suggestions from
Syria or Egypt, it was far more the product of Irish temperament, customs,
and conditions. One may also find a potent source in the monastic
communities alleged to have existed in Ireland in the days of the Druids.
Doubtless many members of that caste became Christian monks.

The noblest passion of Irish monastic Christianity was to _peregrinare_
for the sake of Christ, and spread the Faith among the heathen; the most
interesting episodes of its history are the wanderings and missionary
labours and foundations of its leaders. The careers of Columba and
Columbanus afford grandiose examples. Something has been said of the
former. The monastery which he founded on the Island of Iona was the
Faith’s fountainhead for Scotland and the Saxon north of England in the
sixth and seventh centuries. About the time of Columba’s birth, men from
Dalriada on the north coast of Ireland crossed the water to found another
Dalriada in the present Argyleshire, and transfer the name of Scotia
(Ireland) to Scotland. When Columba landed at Iona, these settlers were
hard pressed by the heathen Picts under King Brude or Bridius. Accompanied
by two Pictish Christians, he penetrated to Brude’s dwelling, near the
modern Inverness, converted that monarch in 565, and averted the overthrow
of Dalriada. For the next thirty years Columba and his monks did not cease
from their labours; numbers of monasteries were founded, daughters of
Iona; and great parts of Scotland became Christian at least in name. The
supreme authority was the Abbot of Iona with his council of monks;
“bishops” performed their functions under him. Early in the seventh
century, St. Aidan was ordained bishop in Iona and sent to convert the
Anglo-Saxons of Northumberland. The story of the Irish Church in the north
is one of effective mission work, but unsuccessful organization, wherein
it was inferior to the Roman Church. Its representatives suffered defeat
at the Synod of Whitby in 664. Fifty years afterward Iona gave up its
separate usages and accepted the Roman Easter.[202]

The missionary labours of the Irish were not confined to Great Britain,
but extended far and wide through the west of Europe. In the sixth and
seventh centuries, Irish monasteries were founded in Austrasia and
Burgundy, Italy, Switzerland, Bavaria; they were established among
Frisians, Saxons, Alemanni. And as centres of Latin education as well as
Christianity, the names of Bobbio and St. Gall will occur to every one. Of
these, the first directly and the second through a disciple were due to
Columbanus. With him we enter the larger avenues of Irish missions to the
heathen, the semi-heathen, and the lax, and upon the question of their
efficacy in the preservation of Latin education throughout the rent and
driven fragments of the western Roman Empire. The story of Columban’s life
is illuminating and amusing.[203]

He was born in Leinster. While yet a boy he felt the conflict between
fleshly lusts and that counter-ascetic passion which throughout the
Christian world was drawing thousands into monasteries. Asceticism, with
desire for knowledge, won the victory, and the youth entered the monastery
of Bangor, in the extreme north-east of Ireland. There he passed years of
labour, study, and self-mortification. At length the pilgrim
mission-passion came upon him (_coepit peregrinationem desiderare_) and
his importunity overcame the abbot’s reluctance to let him depart. Twelve
disciples are said to have followed him across the water to the shores of
Britain. There they hesitated in anxious doubt, till it was decided to
cross to Gaul.

This was about the year 590. Columban’s austere and commanding form, his
fearlessness, his quick and fiery tongue, impressed the people among whom
he came. Reports of his holiness spread; multitudes sought his blessing.
He traversed the country, preaching and setting his own stern example,
until he reached the land of the Burgundians, where Gontran, a grandson of
Clovis, reigned. Well received by this ruler, Columban established himself
in an old castle. His disciples grew in numbers, and after a while Gontran
granted him an extensive Roman structure called Luxovium (Luxeuil)
situated at the confines of the Burgundian and Austrasian kingdoms.
Columban converted this into a monastery, and it soon included many noble
Franks and Burgundians among its monks. For them he composed a monastic
_regula_, stern and cruel in its penalties of many stripes imposed for
trivial faults. “Whoever may wish to know his strenuousness
(_strenuitatem_) will find it in his precepts,” writes the monk Jonas, who
had lived under him.

The strenuousness of this masterful and overbearing man was displayed in
his controversy with the Gallican clergy, upon whom he tried to impose the
Easter day observed by the Celtic Church in the British Isles. In his
letter to the Gallican synod, he points out their errors, and lectures
them on their Christian duties, asking pardon at the end for his loquacity
and presumption. Years afterwards, entering upon another controversy, he
wrote an extraordinary letter to Pope Boniface IV. The superscription is
Hibernian: “To the most beautiful head of all the churches of entire
Europe, the most sweet pope, the most high president, the most reverent
investigator: O marvellous! mirum dictu! nova res! rara avis!--that the
lowest to the loftiest, the clown to the polite, the stammerer to the
prince of eloquence, the stranger to the son of the house, the last to the
first, that the Wood-pigeon (Palumbus) should dare to write to Father
Boniface!” Whereupon this Wood-pigeon writes a long letter in which
belligerent expostulation alternates with self-debasement. He dubs himself
“garrulus, presumptuosus, homunculus vilissimae qualitatis,” who caps his
impudence by writing unrequested. He implores pardon for his harsh and too
biting speech, while he deplores--to him who sat thereon--the _infamia_ of
Peter’s Seat, and shrills to the Pope to watch: “Vigila itaque, quaeso,
papa, vigila; et iterum dico: vigila”; and he marvels at the Pope’s lethal
sleep.

One who thus berated pope and clergy might be censorious of princes.
Gontran died. After various dynastic troubles, the Burgundian land came
under the rule nominally of young Theuderic, but actually of his imperious
grandmother, the famous Brunhilde. In order that no queen-wife’s power
should supplant her own, she encouraged her grandson to content himself
with mistresses. The youth stood in awe of the stern old figure ruling at
Luxeuil, who more than once reproved him for not wedding a lawful queen.
It happened one day when Columban was at Brunhilde’s residence that she
brought out Theuderic’s various sons for him to bless. “Never shall
sceptre be held by this brothel-brood,” said he.

Henceforth it was war between these two: Theuderic was the pivot of the
storm; the one worked upon his fears, the other played upon his lusts.
Brunhilde prevailed. She incited the king to insist that Luxeuil be made
open to all, and with his retinue to push his way into the monastery. The
saint withstood him fiercely, and prophesied his ruin. The king drew back;
the saint followed, heaping reproaches on him, till the young king said
with some self-restraint: “You hope to win the crown of martyrdom through
me. But I am not a lunatic, to commit such a crime. I have a better plan:
since you won’t fall in with the ways of men of the world, you shall go
back by the road you came.”

So the king sent his retainers to seize the stubborn saint. They took him
as a prisoner to Besançon. He escaped, and hurried back to Luxeuil. Again
the king sent, this time a count with soldiers, to drive him from the
land. They feared the sacrilege of laying hands on the old man. In the
church, surrounded by his monks praying and singing psalms, he awaited
them. “O man of God,” cried the count, “we beseech thee to obey the royal
command, and take thy way to the place from which thou earnest.” “Nay, I
will rather please my Creator, by abiding here,” returned the saint. The
count retired, leaving a few rough soldiers to carry out the king’s will.
These, still fearing to use violence, begged the saint to take pity on
them, unjustly burdened with this evil task--to disobey their orders meant
their death. The saint reiterates his determination to abide, till they
fall on their knees, cling to his robe, and with groans implore his pardon
for the crime they must execute.

From pity the saint yields at last, and a company of the king’s men make
ready and escort him from the kingdom westward toward Brittany. Many
miracles mark the journey. They reach the Loire, and embark on it.
Proceeding down the river they come to Tours, where the saint asks to be
allowed to land and worship at St. Martin’s shrine. The leader bids the
rowers keep the middle of the stream and row on. But the boat resistlessly
made its way to the landing-place. Columban passed the night at the
shrine, and the next day was hospitably entertained by the bishop, who
inquired why he was returning to his native land. “The dog Theuderic has
driven me from my brethren,” answered the saint. At last Nantes was
reached near the mouth of the Loire, where the vessel was waiting to carry
the exile back to Ireland. Columban wrote a letter to his monks, in which
he poured forth his love to them with much advice as to their future
conduct. The letter is filled with grief--suppressed lest it unman his
beloved children. “While I write, the messenger comes to say that the ship
is ready to bear me, unwilling, to my country. But there is no guard to
prevent my escape, and these people even seem to wish it.”

The letter ends, but not the story. Columban did not sail for Ireland.
Jonas says that the vessel was miraculously impeded, and that then
Columban was permitted to go whither he would. So the dauntless old man
travelled back from the sea, and went to the Neustrian Court, the people
along the way bringing him their children to bless. He did not rest in
Neustria, for the desire was upon him to preach to the heathen. Making his
way to the Rhine, he embarked near Mainz, ascended the river, and at last
established himself, with his disciples, upon the lake of Constance. There
they preached to the heathen, and threw their idols into the lake. He had
the thought to preach to the Wends, but this was not to be.

The time soon came when all Austrasia fell into the hands of Brunhilde and
Theuderic, and Columbanus decided to cross over into northern Italy,
breaking out in anger at his disciple Gall, who was too sick to go with
him. With other disciples he made the arduous journey, and reached the
land of the Lombards. King Agilulf made him a gift of Bobbio, lying in a
gorge of the Apennines near Genoa, and there he founded the monastery
which long was to be a stronghold of letters. For himself, his career was
well-nigh run; he retired to a solitary spot on the banks of the river
Trebbia, where he passed away, being, apparently, some seventy years of
age.

It may seem surprising that this strenuous ascetic should occasionally
have occupied a leisure hour writing Latin poems in imitation of the
antique. There still exists such an effusion to a friend:

  “Accipe, quaeso,
   Nunc bipedali
   Condita versu
   Carminulorum
   Munera parva.”

The verses consist mainly of classic allusions and advice of an antique
rather than a Christian flavour: the wise will cease to add coin to coin,
and will despise wealth, but not the pastime of such verse as the

  “Inclyta Vates
   Nomine Sappho”

was wont to make. “Now, dear Fedolius, quit learned numbers and accept our
squibs--_frivola nostra_. I have dictated them oppressed with pain and old
age: ‘Vive, vale, laetus, tristisque memento senectae.’” The last is a
pagan reminiscence, which the saint’s Christian soul may not have deeply
felt. But the poem shows the saint’s classic training, which probably was
exceptional. For there is no evidence of like knowledge in any Irishman
before him; and after his time, in the seventh century, or the eighth,
Latin education in Ireland was confined to a few monastic centres. A small
minority studied the profanities, sometimes because they liked them, but
oftener as the means of proficiency in sacred learning.

The Irish had cleverness, facility, ardour, and energy. They did much for
the dissemination of Christianity and letters. Their deficiency was lack
of organization; and they had but little capacity for ordered discipline
humbly and obediently accepted from others. Consequently, when the period
of evangelization was past in western Europe, and organization was needed,
with united and persistent effort for order, the Irish ceased to lead or
even to keep pace with those to whom once they had brought the Gospel. In
Anglo-Saxon England and on the Carolingian continent they became strains
of influence handed on. This was the fortune which overtook them as
illuminators of manuscripts and preservers of knowledge. Their emotional
traits, moreover, entered the larger currents of mediaeval feeling and
imagination. Strains of the Irish, or of a kindred Celtic temperament
passed on into such “Breton” matters as the Tristan story, wherein love is
passion unrestrained, and is more distinctly out of relationship with
ethical considerations than, for example, the equally adulterous tale of
Lancelot and Guinevere.[204]


II

The Saxon invasions of the fifth and sixth centuries drove Christianity
and letters from the land where the semi-Romanized Britons and their
church had flourished. To reconvert and instruct anew a relapsed heathen
country was the task which Gregory the Great laid on the willing
Augustine. The story of that famous mission (A.D. 597) need not be
told;[205] but we may note the manner of the presentation of Christianity
to the heathen Saxons, and the temper of its reception. Most impressive
was this bringing of the Faith. Augustine and his band of monks came as a
stately embassy from Rome, the traditionary centre of imperial and
spiritual power. Their coming was a solemn call to the English to
associate themselves with all that was most august and authoritative in
heaven and earth. According to Bede, Augustine sent a messenger to
Ethelbert, the Kentish king, to announce that he had come from Rome
bearing the best of messages, and would assure to such as hearkened,
eternal joys in heaven and dominion without end with the living and true
God. To Ethelbert, whose kingdom lay at the edge of the great world, the
message came from this world’s sovereign pontiff, who in some awful way
represented its almighty God, and had authority to admit to His kingdom.
He was not ignorant of what lay within the hand of Rome to give. His wife
was a Catholic Christian, daughter of a Frankish king, and had her own
ministering bishop. Doubtless the queen had spoken with her lord. Still
Ethelbert feared the spell-craft of this awe-inspiring embassy, and would
meet Augustine only under the open sky. Augustine came to the meeting, a
silver cross borne before him as a banner, and the pictured image of
Christ, his monks singing litanies and loudly supplicating their Lord for
the king’s and their own salvation. Knowledge, authority, supernatural
power, were represented here. And how could the king fail to be struck by
the nobility of Augustine’s Gospel message, by its clear assurance, its
love and terror,[206] so overwhelming and convincing, so far outsoaring
Ethelbert’s heathen religion? To be sure, in Christian love and
forgiveness lay some reversal of Saxon morality, for instance of the duty
of revenge. But this was not prominent in the Christianity of the day; and
experience was to show that only in isolated instances did this teaching
impede the acceptance of the Gospel.[207]

Ethelbert spoke these missionaries fair; accorded them a habitation in
Canterbury with the privilege of celebrating their Christian rites and
preaching to his people. There they abode, zealous in vigils and fastings,
and preaching the word of life. Certain heathen men were converted, then
the king, and then his folk in multitudes--the usual way. Under the
direction of Gregory, Augustine proceeded with that combination of
insistence, dignity, and tolerance, so well understood in the Roman
Church. There was insistence upon the main doctrines and requirements of
the Faith--upon the Roman Easter day and baptism, as against the practices
of the British Church. Tolerance was shown respecting heathen fanes and
sacrificial feastings; the fanes should be reconsecrated as Christian
churches; the feasts should be continued in honour of the true God.[208]

Besides zeal and knowledge and authority, miracles advanced Augustine’s
enterprise. To eliminate by any sweeping negation the miraculous element
from the causes of success of such a mission is to close the eyes to the
situation. All men expected miracles; Gregory who sent Augustine was
infatuated with them. Augustine performed them, or believed he did, and
others believed it too. Throughout these centuries, and indeed late into
the mediaeval period, the power and habit of working miracles constituted
sainthood in the hermit or the monk, thereby singled out as the special
instrument of God’s will or the Virgin’s kindness. Of course miracles were
ascribed to the great missionary apostles like Augustine or Boniface; and
this conviction brought many conversions.

Among the heathen English about to be converted, there was diversity of
view and mood as to the Faith. They stood in awe of these newcomers from
Rome, fearing their spell-craft. From their old religion they had sought
earthly victory and prosperity; and some had found it of uncertain aid.
“See, king, how this matter stands,” says Coifi, at the Northumbrian
Witenagemot held by Edwin to decide as to the new religion: “I have
learned of a certainty that there is no virtue or utility whatever in that
religion which we have been following. None of your thanes has slaved in
the worship of our gods more zealously than I. Yet many have had greater
rewards and dignities from you, and in every way have prospered more. Were
the gods worth anything, they would wish rather to aid me, who have been
so zealous in serving them. So if these new teachings are better and
stronger, let us accept them at once.”[209] Coifi expressed the common
motives of converts of all nations from the time of Constantine. No better
thought of Christian expediency had inspired Gregory of Tours’s story of
Clovis’s career; and Bede in no way condemns Coifi’s _verba prudentiae_,
as he terms them. Naturally in times of adversity such converts were quick
to abandon their new religion, proved ineffectual.[210]

Among these Angles of Northumberland, however, finer souls were looking
for light and certitude. Such a one was that thane who followed Coifi with
the wonderful illustration of man’s mortal need of enlightenment, the
thane for whom life was as the swallow flying through the warmed and
lighted hall, from the dark cold into the dark cold: “So this life of men
comes into sight for a little; we are ignorant of what shall follow or
what may have preceded. If this new doctrine offers anything more certain,
I think we should follow it.” The heathen poetry had given varied voice to
this contemplative melancholy so wont to dwell on life’s untoward changes;
and there was ghostly evidence of the other world before the coming of the
Roman monks. Now, as those monks came with authority from the traditionary
home of ghostly lore, why question their knowledge of the life beyond the
grave? Many Anglo-Saxons were prepared to fix their gaze upon a life to
come and to let their fancies fill with visions of the great last
severance unto heaven and hell. When once impressed by the monastic
Christianity[211] of the Roman, or the Irish, mission, they were quick to
throw themselves into the ascetic life which most surely opened heaven’s
doors. So many a noble thane became an anchorite or a monk, many a noble
dame became a nun; and Saxon kings forsook their kingdoms for the
cloister: “Cenred, who for some time had reigned most nobly in Mercia,
still more nobly abandoned his sceptre. For he came to Rome, and there was
tonsured and made a monk at the church of the Apostles, and continued in
prayers and fastings and almsgiving until his last day.”[212]

As might be expected, the re-expression of Christianity in Anglo-Saxon
writings was martial and emotional. A martial tone pervades the epic
paraphrases of Scripture, the Anglo-Saxon _Genesis_ for example. On the
other hand, adaptations of devotional Latin compositions[213] evince a
realization of Christian feeling and prevalent ascetic sentiments. The
“elegiac” Anglo-Saxon feeling seems to reach its height in a more original
composition, the _Christ_ of Cynewulf, while the emotional fervour coming
with Christianity is disclosed in Bede’s account of the inspiration which
fell upon the cowherd Cædmon, in St. Hilda’s monastery of Whitby, to sing
the story of creation.[214] A pervasive monastic atmosphere also surrounds
the visions of hell and purgatory, which were to continue so typically
characteristic of monastic Christianity.[215]

What knowledge, sacred and profane, came to the Anglo-Saxons with
Christianity? Quite properly learned were Augustine and the other
organizers of the English Church. Two generations after him, the Greek
monk Theodore was sent by the Pope to become Archbishop of Canterbury,
complete Augustine’s work, and instruct the English monks and clergy.
Theodore was accompanied by his friend Hadrian, as learned as himself.
Their labours finally established Roman Christianity in England. The two
drew about them a band of students, and formed at Canterbury a school of
sacred learning, where liberal studies were conducted by these foreigners
with a knowledge and intelligence novel in Great Britain. In the north,
Benedict Biscop, a Northumbrian, promoted the ends of Roman Catholicism
and learning by establishing the monasteries of Wearmouth and Jarrow under
the monastic _regula_ of St. Benedict of Nursia, as modified by the
practices of continental monasteries in the seventh century. He had been
in Italy, and brought thence many books. It was among these books that
Bede grew up at Jarrow.

Thus strong currents of Roman ecclesiasticism and liberal knowledge
reached England. On the other hand, Irish monastic Christianity had
already made its entry in the south-western part of Great Britain, and
with greater strength established itself in the north, converting
multitudes to the Faith and instructing such as would learn. The Irish
teaching had been eagerly received by those groups of Anglo-Saxons who
henceforth were to prosecute their studies with the aid of the further
knowledge and discipline brought from the Continent by Theodore. Some of
them had even journeyed to Ireland to study.

From this dual source was drawn the education of Aldhelm. He was born in
Wessex about the year 650, and was nephew of the powerful King Ini. He
became abbot of Malmesbury in 675. An Irish monk was his first teacher;
his second, the learned Hadrian. From the two he received a broader
education than any Anglo-Saxon had possessed before him. Always holding in
view the perfecting of his sacred knowledge, he studied grammar and
kindred topics, produced treatises himself, and as a Catholic student and
teacher was a true forerunner of the greatest scholar among his younger
contemporaries, Bede.[216]

Bede the Venerable, and we may add the still beloved, was Aldhelm’s junior
by some twenty-five years. He was born in 673 and died in 735. He passed
his whole life reading, teaching, and writing in the Cloister of Jarrow
near where he was born, and not far from where, beneath the “Galilee” of
Durham Cathedral, his bones have long reposed. Back of him was the double
tradition of learning, the Irish and the Graeco-Roman. Through a long life
of pious study, Bede drew into his mind, and incorporated in his writings,
practically the total sum of knowledge then accessible in western Europe.
He stands between the great Latin transmitters (Boëthius, Cassiodorus,
Gregory and Isidore) and the epoch known as the Carolingian. He was
himself a transmitter of knowledge to that later time. If in spirit, race,
epoch and circumstances, Aldhelm was Bede’s direct forerunner, Bede had
also a notable predecessor in Isidore. The writings of the Spanish bishop
contributed substance and suggestions of plan and method to the
Anglo-Saxon monk, whose works embrace practically the same series of
topics as Isidore’s, whose intellectual interests also, and attitude
toward the Church Fathers, appear the same. But Bede was the more genial
personality, and could not help imbuing his compositions with something
from his own temperament. Even in his Commentaries upon the books of
Scripture, which were made up principally of borrowed allegorical
interpretations, there is common sense and some endeavour to present the
actual meaning and situation.[217] But he disclaimed originality, as he
says in the preface to his Commentary on the Hexaemeron, addressed to
Bishop Acca of Hexham:

    “Concerning the beginning of Genesis where the creation of the world
    is described, many have said much, and have left to posterity
    monuments of their talents. Among these, as far as our feebleness can
    learn, we may distinguish Basil of Caesarea (whom Eustathius
    translated from Greek to Latin), Ambrose of Milan, and Augustine,
    Bishop of Hippo. Of whom the first-named in nine books, the second
    following his footprints in six books, the third in twelve books and
    also in two others directed against the Manichaeans, shed floods of
    salutary doctrine for their readers; and in them the promise of the
    Truth was fulfilled: ‘Whoso believeth in me, as the Scripture saith,
    out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water....’ But since
    these works are so great that only the rich may own them, and so
    profound that they may be fathomed only by the learned, your holiness
    has seen fit to lay on us the task of plucking from them all, as from
    the sweetest wide-flowering fields of paradise, what might seem to
    meet the needs of weaklings.”[218]

Bede was also a lovely story-teller. His literary charm and power appear
in his Life of St. Cuthbert, and still more in his ever-famous
_Ecclesiastical History of the English People_, so warm with love of
mankind, and presenting so wonderful a series of dramatic stories animate
with vital motive and the colour of incident and circumstance. Midway
between the spontaneous genius of this work and the copied Scripture
Commentary, stand Bede’s grammatical, metrical, and scientific
compositions, compiled with studious zeal. They evince a broad interest in
scholarship and in nature. Still, neither material nor method was
original. For instance, his _De rerum natura_ took its plan and much of
its substance from Isidore’s work of the same name. Bede has, however, put
in further matter and made his work less of a mere shell of words than
Isidore’s. For he is interested in connecting natural occurrences with
their causes, stating, for example, that the tides depend on the
moon.[219] In this work as in his other _opera didascalica_, like the _De
temporum ratione_ and his learned _De arte metrica_,[220] he shows himself
a more intelligent student than his Spanish predecessor. Yet he drew
everything from some written source.

One need not wonder at the voluminousness of Bede’s literary
productions.[221] Many of the writings emanating from monasteries are
transcriptions rather than compositions. The circumstance that books,
_i.e._ manuscripts, were rare and costly was an impelling motive. Isidore
and Bede made systematic compilations for general use. They and their
congeners would also make extracts from manuscripts, of which they might
have but the loan, or from unique codices in order to preserve the
contents. Such notes or excerpts might have the value of a treatise, and
might be preserved and in turn transcribed as a distinct work. Yet whether
made by a Bede or by a lesser man, they represent mainly the labour of a
copyist.

Bede’s writings were all in Latin, and were intended for the instruction
of monks. They played a most important rôle in the transmission of
learning, sacred and profane, in Latin form. For its still more popular
diffusion, translations into the vernacular might be demanded. Such at all
events were made of Scripture; and perhaps a century and a half after
Bede’s death, the translation of edifying Latin books was undertaken by
the best of Saxon kings. King Alfred was born in 849 and closed his eyes
in 901. In the midst of other royal labours he set himself the task of
placing before his people, or at least his clergy, Anglo-Saxon versions of
some of the then most highly regarded volumes of instruction. The wise
_Pastoral Care_ of Gregory the Great; his _Dialogues_, less wise according
to our views; the _Histories_ of Orosius[222] and Bede; and that
philosophic vade-mecum of the Middle Ages, the _De consolatione
philosophiae_ of Boëthius. Of these, Alfred translated the _Pastoral Care_
and the _De consolatione_, also Orosius; the other works appear to have
been translated at his direction.[223] Alfred’s translations contain his
own reflections and other matter not in the originals. In rendering
Orosius, he rewrote the geographical introduction, inserted a description
of Germany and accounts of northern Europe given by two of his Norse
liegemen, Ohthere and Wulfstan. The alertness of his mind is shown by this
insertion of the latest geographical knowledge. Other and more personal
passages will disclose his purpose, and illustrate the manner in which his
Christianized intelligence worked upon trains of thought suggested perhaps
by the Latin writing before him.

Alfred’s often-quoted preface to Gregory’s _Pastoral Care_ tells his
reasons for undertaking its translation, and sets forth the condition of
England. He speaks of the “wise men there formerly were throughout
England, both of sacred and secular orders,” and of their zeal in learning
and teaching and serving God; and how foreigners came to the land in
search of wisdom and instruction. But “when I came to the throne,” so
general was the decay of learning in England “that there were very few on
this side of the Humber who could understand their rituals in English, or
translate a letter from Latin into English; and I believe there were not
many beyond the Humber.... Thanks be to God Almighty that we have any
teachers among us now.” Alfred therefore commands the bishop, to whom he
is now sending the copy, to disengage himself as often as possible from
worldly matters, and apply the Christian wisdom God has given him. “I
remembered also how I saw, before it had been all ravaged and burnt, how
the churches throughout the whole of England stood filled with treasures
and books, and there was also a great multitude of God’s servants, but
they had very little knowledge of books, for they could not understand
anything of them because they were not written in their own language.” It
therefore seemed wise to me “to translate some books which are most
needful for all men to know, into the language which we can all
understand, and ... that all the youth now in England of free men, who are
rich enough to be able to devote themselves to it, be set to learn so long
as they are not fit for any other occupation, until that they are well
able to read English writing: and let those be afterwards taught more in
the Latin language who are to continue learning and be promoted to a
higher rank.”

In the _De consolatione_ of Boëthius, the antique pagan thought, softened
with human sympathy, and in need of such comfort and assurance as was
offered by the Faith, is found occupied with questions (like that of
free-will) prominent in Christianity. The book presented meditations which
were so consonant with Christian views that its Christian readers from
Alfred to Dante mistook them for Christian sentiments, and added further
meanings naturally occurring to the Christian soul. Alfred’s reflections
in his version of the _De consolatione_ are very personal to Saxon Alfred
and show how he took his life and kingly office:

    “O Philosophy, thou knowest that I never greatly delighted in
    covetousness and the possession of earthly power, nor longed for this
    authority”--so far Boëthius,[224] and now Alfred himself: “but I
    desired instruments and materials to carry out the work I was set to
    do, which was that I should virtuously and fittingly administer the
    authority committed unto me. Now no man, as thou knowest, can get full
    play for his natural gifts, nor conduct and administer government,
    unless he hath fit tools, and the raw material to work upon. By
    material I mean that which is necessary to the exercise of natural
    powers; thus a king’s raw material and instruments of rule are a
    well-peopled land, and he must have men of prayer, men of war, and men
    of work. As thou knowest, without these tools no king may display his
    special talent. Further, for his materials he must have means of
    support for the three classes above spoken of, which are his
    instruments; and these means are land to dwell in, gifts, weapons,
    meat, ale, clothing, and what else soever the three classes need.
    Without these means he cannot keep his tools in order, and without
    these tools he cannot perform any of the tasks entrusted to him. [I
    have desired material for the exercise of government that my talents
    and my power might not be forgotten and hidden away[225]] for every
    good gift and every power soon groweth old and is no more heard of, if
    Wisdom be not in them. Without Wisdom no faculty can be fully brought
    out, for whatsoever is done unwisely can never be accounted as skill.
    To be brief, I may say that it has ever been my desire to live
    honourably while I was alive, and after my death to leave to them that
    should come after me my memory in good works.”

The last sentence needs no comment. But those preceding it will be
illuminated by another passage inserted by Alfred:

    “Therefore it is that a man never by his authority attains to virtue
    and excellence, but by reason of his virtue and excellence he attains
    to authority and power. No man is better for his power, but for his
    skill he is good, if he is good, and for his skill he is worthy of
    power, if he is worthy of it. Study Wisdom then, and, when ye have
    learned it, contemn it not, for I tell you that by its means ye may
    without fail attain to power, yea, even though not desiring it.”

Perhaps from the teaching of his own life Alfred knew, as well as
Boëthius, the toil and sadness of power: “Though their false hope and
imagination lead fools to believe that power and wealth are the highest
good, yet it is quite otherwise.” And again, speaking of friendship, he
says that Nature unites friends in love, “but by means of these worldly
goods and the wealth of this life we oftener make foes than friends,”
which doubtless Alfred had discovered, as well as Marcus Aurelius. Perhaps
the Saxon king knew wherein lay peace, as he makes Wisdom say: “When I
rise aloft with these my servants, we look down upon the storms of this
world, even as the eagle does when he soars in stormy weather above the
clouds, where no storm can harm him.” The king was thinking of man’s peace
with God.[226]


III

Christianity came to the cities of Provincia and the chief Roman colonies
of Gaul (Lyons, Trèves, Cologne) in the course of the original
dissemination of the Faith. There were Roman, Greek, or Syrian Christians
in these towns before the end of the second century. Early Gallic
Christianity spoke Greek and Latin, and its rather slow advance was due
partly to the tenacity of Celtic speech even in the cities; while outside
of them heathen speech and practices were scarcely touched. Through Gaul
and along the Rhine, the country in the main continued heathen in religion
and Celtic or Germanic in speech during the fifth century.[227] The
complete Latinizing of Gaul and the conversion of its rural population
proceeded from the urban churches, and from the labours and miracles of
anchorites and monks. In contrast with the decay of the municipal
governments, the urban churches continued living institutions. Their
bishops usually were men of energy. The episcopal office was elective, yet
likely to remain in the same influential family, and the bishop, the
leading man in the town, might be its virtual ruler. He represented
Christianity and Latin culture, and when Roman officials yielded to
Teutonic conquerors, the bishop was left as the spokesman of the
Gallo-Roman population. Thus the Gallic churches, far from succumbing
before the barbarian invasions, rescued and appropriated the derelict
functions of government, and emerged aggrandized from the political and
racial revolution. In the year 400 the city of Trèves was Latin in speech
and Roman in government; in the year 500 the Roman government had been
overthrown, and a German-speaking population predominated in what was left
of the city, but the church went on unchanged in constitution and in
language.

There was constant intercourse between Teutons and Romans along the
northern boundaries of the Empire. In the Danube regions many of the
former were converted. The Goths, through the labours of Ulfilas and
others in the fourth century, became Arian Christians; their conversion
was of moment to themselves and others, but destiny severed the continuity
of its import for history. In the provinces of Rhaetia, Vindelicia, and
Noricum there were Christians, some of them Teutons, as early as the time
of Constantine. For the next century, when disruption of the Empire was in
full progress, the Life of St. Severinus by Eugippius, his disciple, gives
the picture.[228] Bits and fragments of Roman government endured; letters
were not quite quenched; but Alemanni and Rugii moved as they would,
marauding, besieging, and destroying. Everywhere there was uncertainty and
confusion, and yet civilized Roman provincials still clung to a driven
life. Through this mountain land, the monk Severinus went here and there,
barefoot even in ice and snow, austere, commanding. He encouraged the
townspeople to maintain decency and courage; he turned the barbarians from
ruthlessness. Clear-seeing, capable, his energies shielded the land. He
was an ascetic who took nothing for himself, and won men to the Faith by
this guarantee of disinterestedness. So he shepherded his harrowed flocks,
and more than once averted their destruction. But his arm was too feeble;
after his death even his cell was plundered, while the confusion swept on.

Such were fifth-century conditions on the northern boundary of what had
been the Empire, conditions amid which the culture and doctrine germane to
Christianity went down, although the Faith still glimmered here and there.
Farther to the west, the Burgundians had gained a domicile in a land
sparsely tenanted by Roman and Catholic provincials. Here on the left bank
of the Rhine, in the neighbourhood of Worms, this people accepted the
Christianity which they found. Afterwards, in the year 430, their heathen
kin on the right bank were baptized as a people; for they hoped, through
aid from fellow-Christians, to ward off the destruction threatening from
the Huns. Yet five years later they were overthrown by those savage
riders--an overthrow out of which was to rise the _Nibelungenlied_. The
Burgundian remnants found a new home by the Rhone.

The Christianity of Burgundians and Goths was subject to the vicissitudes
of their fortunes. The permanent conversion to Catholicism of the great
masses of the Germans commenced somewhat later, when the turmoil of
fifth-century migration was settling into contests for homes destined to
prove more lasting. Its beginning may be dated from the baptism of Clovis
as a Catholic on Christmas Day in the year 496. His retainers followed him
into the consecrated water. By reason of the king’s genius for war and
politics, this event was the beginning of the final triumph of
Catholicism.[229]

The baptism of Clovis and his followers was typical of early Teutonic
conversions. King and tribal following acted as a unit. Christ gave
victory; He was the mightier God: such was the crude form of the motive.
Its larger scope was grasped by the far-seeing king. Believing in
supernatural aid, he desired it from the mightiest source, which, he was
persuaded, was the Christian God. It was to be obtained by such homage to
Christ as heretofore the king had paid to Wuotan. Any doubt as to the
sincerity of his belief presupposes a point of view impossible for a
fifth-century barbarian. But to this sincere expectation of Christ’s aid,
to be gained through baptism, Clovis joined careful consideration of the
political situation. Catholic Christianity was the religion of the
Gallo-Roman population forming the greater part of the Frankish king’s
subjects. He knew of Arian peoples; probably attempts had been made to
draw him to their side. They constituted the great Teutonic powers at the
time; for Theodoric was the monarch of Italy, and Arian Teutons ruled in
southern France, in Spain, and Africa. Nevertheless, it was of paramount
importance for the establishment of his kingdom that there should be no
schism between the Franks and the Gallo-Roman people who exceeded them in
number and in wealth and culture. Catholic influences surrounded Clovis;
Catholic interests represented the wealth and prosperity of his dominions,
and when he decided to be baptized he did not waver between the Catholic
and the Arian belief. Thus the king attached to himself the civilized
population of his realm. A common Catholic faith quickly obliterated
racial antagonism within its boundaries and gained him the support of
Catholic church and people in the kingdoms of his Arian rivals.

So under Clovis and his successors the Gallic Church became the Frankish
Church, and flourished exceedingly. Tithes were paid it, and gifts were
made by princes and nobles. Its lands increased, carrying their dependent
population, until the Church became the largest landholder in the
Merovingian realm. It was governed by Roman law, but the clergy were
subject to the penal jurisdiction of the king.[230] It was he that
summoned councils, although he did not vote, and left ecclesiastical
matters to the bishops, who were his liegemen and appointees.[231] They
recognized the king’s virtually unlimited authority, which they patterned
on the absolute power of the Roman Emperors and the prerogatives of David
and Solomon. In fine, the Merovingian Church was a national church,
subject to the king. Until the seventh century it was quite independent of
the Bishop of Rome.[232]

It is common knowledge--especially vivid with readers of the famous
_Historia Francorum_ of Gregory of Tours--that ethically viewed, the
conduct of the Merovingian house was cruel, treacherous, and abominable;
and likewise the conduct of their vassals. Frankish kings and nobles
appear as men no longer bound by the ethics of the heathenism which they
had foresworn, and as yet untouched by the moral precepts of the Christian
code. Not Christianity, however, but contact with decadent civilization,
and rapid increase of power and wealth, had loosened their heathen
standards. Merovingian history leaves a unique impression of a line of
rulers and dependents among whom mercy and truth and chastity were
unknown. The elements of sixth-century Christianity which the Franks made
their own were its rites, its magic, and its miracles, and its expectation
of the aid of a God and His saints duly solicited. Here the customs of
heathenism were a preparation, or themselves passed into Frankish
Christianity. Nevertheless, the general character of Christian
observances--baptism, the mass, prayer, the sign of the cross, the rites
at marriage, sickness, and death--could not fail to impress a certain tone
and demeanour upon the people, and impart some sense of human sinfulness.
The general conviction that patent and outrageous crime would bring divine
vengeance gained point and power from the terrific doctrine of the Day of
Wrath, and the system of penances imposed by the clergy proved an
excellent discipline with these rough Christians. Many bishops and priests
were little better than the nobles, yet the Church preserved Christian
belief and did something to improve morality. Everywhere the monk was the
most striking object-lesson, with his austerities, his terror-stricken
sense of sinfulness, and conviction of the peril of the world. No martial,
grasping bishop, no dissolute and treacherous priest denied that the
monk’s was the ideal Christian life; and the laity stood in awe, or
expectation, of the wonder-working power of his asceticism. Indeed
monasticism was becoming popular, and the Merovingian period witnessed the
foundation of numberless cloisters.

In the fifth and through part of the sixth century the Gallic monastery of
Lerins, on an island in the Mediterranean, near Fréjus, was a chief source
of ascetic and Christian influence for Gaul. Its monks took their
precepts from Syria and Egypt, and some of the zeal of St. Martin of Tours
had fallen on their shoulders. As the energy of this community declined,
Columban’s monastery at Luxeuil succeeded to the work. The example of
Columbanus, his precepts and severe monastic discipline, proved a source
of ascetic and missionary zeal. With him or following in his steps came
other Irishmen; and heathen German lands soon looked upon the walls of
many an Irish monastery. But Columbanus failed, and all the Irish failed,
in obedience, order, and effective organization. His own monastic
_regula_, with all its rigour, contained no provisions for the government
of the monasteries. Without due ordering, bands of monks dwelling in
heathen communities would waver in their practices and even show a lack of
doctrinal stability. Sooner or later they were certain to become confused
in habit and contaminated with the manners of the surrounding people.
These Irish monasteries omitted to educate a native priesthood to
perpetuate their Christian teaching. The best of them, St. Gall (founded
by Columbanus’s disciple Gallus), might be a citadel of culture, and
convert the people about it, through the talents and character of its
founder and his successors. But other monasteries, farther to the east,
were tainted with heathen practices. In fine, it was not for the Irish to
convert the great heathen German land, or effect a lasting reform of
existing churches there or in Gaul.

The labours of Anglo-Saxons were fraught with more enduring results.
Through their abilities and zeal, their faculty of organization and
capacity of submitting to authority, through their consequent harmony with
Rome and the support given them by the Frankish monarchy, these
Anglo-Saxons converted many German tribes, established permanent churches
among them, reorganized the heterogeneous Christianity which they found in
certain German lands, and were a moving factor in the reform of the
Frankish Church. The most striking features of their work on the Continent
were diocesan organization, the training of a native clergy, the
establishment of monasteries under the Benedictine constitution, union
with Rome, obedience to her commands, strenuous conformity to her law, and
insistence on like conformity in others. Their presentation of
Christianity was orthodox, regular, and authoritative.

Some of these features appear in the work of the Saxon Willibrord among
the Frisians, but are more largely illustrated in the career of St.
Boniface-Winfried. Willibrord moved under the authority of Rome; the
varying fortunes of his labours were connected with the enterprises of
Pippin of Heristal, the father of Charles Martel. They advanced with the
power of that Frankish potentate. But after his death, during the strife
between Neustria and Austrasia, the heathen Frisian king Radbod drove back
Christianity as he enlarged his dominion at the expense of the divided
Franks. Later, Charles Martel conquered him, and the Frankish power
reached (718) to the Zuyder Zee. Under its protection Willibrord at last
founded the bishopric of Utrecht (734). He succeeded in educating a native
clergy; and his labours had lasting result among the Frisians who were
subject to the Franks, but not among the free Frisians and the Danes.

Evidently there was no sharp geographical boundary between Christianity
and heathendom. Throughout broad territories, Christian and heathen
practices mingled. This was true of the Frisian land. It was true in
greater range and complexity of the still wider fields of Boniface’s
career. This able man surrendered his high station in his native Wessex in
order to serve Christ more perfectly as a missionary monk among the
heathen. He went first to Frisia and worked with Willibrord, yet refused
to be his bishop-coadjutor and successor, because planning to carry
Christianity into Germany.

Strikingly his life exemplifies Anglo-Saxon faculties working under the
directing power of Rome among heathen and partly Christian peoples. On his
first visit to Rome he became imbued with the principles, and learned the
ritual, of the Roman Church. He returned to enter into relations with
Charles Martell, and to labour in Hesse and Thuringia, and again with
Willibrord in Frisia. Not long afterwards, at his own solicitation,
Gregory II. called him back to Rome (722), where he fed his passion for
punctilious conformity by binding himself formally to obey the Pope,
follow the practices of the Roman Church, and have no fellowship with
bishops whose ways conflicted with them. Gregory made him bishop over
Thuringia and Hesse, and sent him back there to reform Christian and
heathen communities. Thus Gregory created a bishop within the bounds of
the Frankish kingdom--an unprecedented act. Nevertheless, Charles, to whom
Boniface came with a letter from Gregory, received him favourably and
furnished him with a safe conduct, only exacting a recognition of his own
authority.

Boniface set forth upon his mission. In Hesse he cut down the ancient
heathen oak, and made a chapel of its timber; he preached and he
organized--the land was not altogether heathen. Then he proceeded to
Thuringia. That also was a partly Christian land; many Irish-Scottish
preachers were labouring or dwelling there. Boniface set his face against
their irregularities as firmly as against heathenism. Again he dominated
and reorganized, yet continued unfailing in energetic preaching to the
heathen. Gregory watched closely and zealously co-operated.

On the death of the second Gregory in 731, the third Gregory succeeded to
the papacy and continued his predecessor’s support of the Anglo-Saxon
apostle, making him archbishop with authority to ordain bishops. Many
Anglo-Saxons, both men and holy women, came to aid their countryman, and
brought their education and their nobler views of life to form centres of
Christian culture in the German lands. Cloisters for nuns, cloisters for
monks were founded. The year 744 witnessed the foundation of Fulda by
Sturm under the direction of Boniface, and destined to be the very apple
of his eye and the monastic model for Germany. It was placed under the
authority of Rome, with the consent of Pippin, who then ruled. The
reorganization rather than the conversion of Bavaria was Boniface’s next
achievement. The land long before had been partially Romanized, and now
was nominally Christian. Here again Boniface acted as representative of
the Pope, and not of Charles, although Bavaria was part of the Frankish
empire.

The year 738 brought Boniface to Rome for the third time. He was now
yearning to leave the fields already tilled, and go as missionary to the
heathen Saxons. But Gregory sent him back to complete the reorganization
of the Bavarian Church, and to this large field of action he added also
Alemannia with its diocesan centre at Speyer. Here he came in conflict
with Frankish bishops, firm in their secular irregularities. Yet again he
prevailed, reorganized the churches, and placed them under the authority
of Rome. Evidently the two Gregories had in large measure turned the
energies of Boniface from the mission-field to the labours of reform.

On the death of Charles in 741 (and in the same year died Gregory, to be
succeeded by the lukewarm Zacharias) his sons Carloman and Pippin
succeeded to his power. The following year Carloman in German-speaking
Austrasia called a council of his church (_Concilium Germanicum primum_)
under the primacy of Boniface. Its decrees confirmed the reforms for which
the latter had struggled:

    “We Carloman, Duke and Prince of the Franks, in the year 742 of the
    Incarnation, on the 21st of April, upon the advice of the servants of
    God, the bishops and priests of our realm, have assembled them to take
    counsel how God’s law and the Church’s discipline (fallen to ruin
    under former princes) may be restored, and the Christian folk led to
    salvation, instead of perishing deceived by false priests. We have set
    up bishops in the cities, and have set over them as archbishop
    Bonifatius, the legate of St. Peter.”

The council decreed that yearly synods should be held, that the
possessions taken from the Church should be restored, and the false
priests deprived of their emoluments and forced to do penance. The clergy
were forbidden to bear arms, go to war, or hunt. Every priest should give
yearly account of his stewardship to his bishop. Bishops, supported by the
count in the diocese, should suppress heathen practices. Punishments were
set for the fleshly sins of monks and nuns and clergy, and for the
priestly offences of wearing secular garb or harbouring women. The
Benedictine rule was appointed for monasteries. It was easier to make
these decrees than carry them out against the opposition of such martial
bishops as those of Mainz and Trèves, whose support was necessary to
Carloman’s government; and military conditions rendered the restoration of
Church lands impracticable. Yet the word was spoken, and something was
done.

The next year in Neustria Pippin instituted like reforms. He was aided by
Boniface, although the latter held no ecclesiastical office there. In 747
Carloman abdicated and retired to a monastery;[233] and Pippin became sole
ruler, and at last formally king, anointed by Boniface under the direction
of the Pope in 752. After this, Boniface, withdrawing from the direction
of the Church, turned once more to satisfy his heart’s desire by going on
a mission among the heathen Frisians, where he crowned a great life with a
martyr’s death.

Thus authoritatively, supported by Rome and the Frankish monarchy,
Christianity was presented to the Germans. It carried suggestions of a
better order and some knowledge of Latin letters. The extension of Roman
Catholic Christianity was the aim of Boniface first and last and always.
But a Latin education was needed by the clergy to enable them to
understand and set forth this some-what elaborated and learned scheme of
salvation. Boniface and his coadjutors had no aversion to the literary
means by which a serviceable Latin knowledge was to be obtained, and
their missionary and reorganizing labours necessarily worked some
diffusion of Latinity.

The Frankish secular power which had supported Boniface, advanced to
violent action when Charlemagne’s sword bloodily constrained the Saxons to
accept his rule and Christianity, the two inseverable objects which he
tirelessly pursued. Nor could this ruler stay his mighty hand from the
government of the Church within his realm. With his power to appoint
bishops, he might, if he chose, control its councils. But apparently he
chose to rule the Church directly; and his, and his predecessors’ and
successors’ Capitularies (rather than Conciliar decrees) contain the chief
ecclesiastical legislation for the Frankish realm.

In its temporalities and secular action the Church was the greatest and
richest of all subjects; it possessed the rights of lay vassals and was
affected with like duties.[234] But in ritual, doctrine, language and
affiliation, the Frankish Church made part of the Roman Catholic Church.
It used the Roman liturgy and the Latin tongue. The ordering of the clergy
was Roman, and the regulation of the monasteries was Romanized by the
adoption of the Benedictine _regula_. Within the Church Rome had
triumphed. Prelates were vassals of the king who had now become Emperor;
and the great corporate Church was subject to him. Nevertheless, this
great corporate institution was Roman rather than Gallic or Frankish or
German. It was Teuton only in those elements which represented
ecclesiastical abuses, for example, the remaining irregularities of
various kinds, the lay and martial habits of prelates, and even their
appointment by the monarch. These were the elements which the Church in
its logical Roman evolution was to eliminate. Charlemagne himself, as well
as his lesser successors, strove just as zealously to bring the people
into obedience to the Church as into obedience to the lay rulers. While
the Carolingian rule was strong, its power was exerted on behalf of
ecclesiastical authority and discipline; and when the royal administration
weakened after Charlemagne’s death, the Church was not slow to revolt
against its temporal subjection to the royal power.

But the Church, in spite of Latin and Roman affinities, strove also to
come near the German peoples and speak to them in their own tongues. This
is borne witness to by the many translations from Latin into Frankish,
Saxon, or Alemannish dialects, made by the clergy. Christianity deeply
affected the German language. Many of its words received German form, and
the new thoughts forced old terms to take on novel and more spiritual
meanings. To be sure these German dialects were there before Christianity
came, and the capacities of the Germans acquired in heathen times are
attested by the sufficiency of their language to express Christian
thought. Likewise the German character was there, and proved its range and
quality by the very transformation of which it showed itself capable under
Christianity. And just as Christianity was given expression in the German
language, which retained many of its former qualities, so many fundamental
traits of German character remained in the converted people. Yet so
earnestly did the Germans turn to Christianity, and such draughts of its
spirit did they draw into their nature, that the early Germanic
re-expression of it is sincere, heartfelt, and moving, and illumined with
understanding of the Faith.

These qualities may be observed in the series of Christian documents in
the German tongues commencing in the first years of Charlemagne’s reign.
They consist of baptismal confessions of belief, the first of which (cir.
769) was composed for heathen Saxons just converted by the sword, and of
catechisms presenting the elements of Christian precept and dogma. The
earliest of the latter (cir. 789), coming from the monastery at
Weissenburg in Alsace, contains the Lord’s Prayer, with explanations, an
enumeration of the deadly sins according to the fifth chapter of the
Epistle to the Galatians, the Apostles’ Creed and the Athanasian. Further,
one finds among these documents a translation of the _De fide Catholica_
of Isidore of Seville, and of the Benedictine _regula_; also
Charlemagne’s _Exhortatio ad plebem Christianam_, which was an admonition
to the people to learn the Creed and the Lord’s Prayer. There are likewise
general confessions of sins. Less dependent on a Latin original is the
so-called _Muspilli_, a spirited description in alliterative verse of the
last times and the Day of Judgment.

German qualities, however, express themselves more fully in two Gospel
versions, the first the famous Saxon _Heliand_ (cir. 835), (which follows
Tatian’s “Harmony”); the second the somewhat later _Evangelienbuch_ of
Otfrid the Frank. They were both composed in alliterative verse, though
Otfrid also made use of rhyme.[235] The martial, Teutonic ring of the
former is well known. Christ is the king, the disciples are His thanes
whose duty is to stand by their lord to the death; He rewards them with
the promised riches of heaven, excelling the earthly goods bestowed by
other kings. In the “betrayal” they close around their Lord, saying: “Were
it thy will, mighty Lord of ours, that we should set upon them with the
spear, gladly would we strike and die for our Lord.” Out broke the wrath
of the “ready swordsman” (_snel suerdthegan_)[236] Simon Peter; he could
not speak for anguish to think that his lord should be bound. Angrily
strode the bold knight before his lord, drew his weapon, the sword by his
side, and smote the nearest foe with might of hands. Before his fury and
the spurting blood the people fled fearing the sword’s bite.

The _Heliand_ has also gentler qualities, as when it calls the infant
Christ the _fridubarn_ (peace-child), and pictures Mary watching over her
“little man.” But German love of wife and child and home speak more
clearly in Otfrid’s book. Although a learned monk, his pride of Frankish
race rings in his oft-quoted reasons for writing _theotisce_, _i.e._ in
German: Why shall not the Franks sing God’s praise in Frankish tongue?
Forcible and logical it is, although not bound by grammar’s rules. Yes,
why should the Franks be incapable? they are brave as Romans or Greeks;
they are as good in field and wood; wide power is theirs, and ready are
they with the sword. They are rich, and possess a good land, with honour.
They can guard their own; what people is their equal in battle? Diligent
are they also in the Word of God. Otfrid is quite moving in his
sympathetic sense of the sorrow of the Last Judgment, when the mother from
child shall be parted, the father from son, the lord from his faithful
thane, friend from friend--all human kind. Deep is the mystic love and
yearning with which he realizes Heaven as one’s own land: there is life
without death, light without darkness, the angels and eternal bliss. We
have left it--that must we bewail always, banished to a strange land, poor
misled orphans. The antithesis between the _fremidemo lant_ (_fremdes
land_) of earth, and the _heimat_, the _eigan lant_ of Heaven, which is
home, real home, is the keynote strongly felt and movingly expressed.




