CHAPTER XIII

MENTAL ASPECTS OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY: GERMANY; ENGLAND; CONCLUSION

      I. German Appropriation of Christianity and Antique Culture.

     II. Othloh’s Spiritual Conflict.

    III. England; Closing Comparisons.


I

In the Germans of the eleventh century one notes a strong sense of German
selfhood, supplemented by a consciousness that Latin culture is a foreign
matter, introduced as a thing of great value which it were exceeding well
for them to make their own. They are even conscious of having been
converted to Latin Christianity, which on their part they are imbuing with
German thoughts and feeling. They are not Romance people; they have never
spoken Latin; it has never been and will never be their speech. They will
master what they can of the antique education which has been brought to
them. But even as it was no part of their forefathers’ lives, so it will
never penetrate their own personalities, so as to make them the spiritual
descendants of any antique Latin or Latinized people. They have never been
and never will be Latinized; but will remain forever Germans.

Consequently the appropriation of the Latin culture in Germany is a labour
of translation: first a palpable labour of translation from the Latin
language into the German tongue, and secondly, and for always, a more
subtle kind of translation of the antique influence into a German
understanding of the same, and gradually into informing principles made
use of by a strong and advancing racial genius. The German genius will be
enlarged and developed through these foreign elements, but it will never
cease to use the Latin culture as a means of informing and developing
itself.

No need to say that these strong statements apply to the Germans in their
home north of the Alps and east of the Rhine; not to those who left the
Fatherland, and in the course of generations became Italians, for example.
Moreover, general phrases must always be taken subject to qualification
and rounding of the corners. No people can absorb a foreign influence
without in some degree being made over into the likeness of what they are
receiving, and to that extent ceasing to be their unmitigated selves. In
general, however, while Latin Christianity and the antique culture both
were brought to Germany from abroad, the Germans were converted or
transformed only by the former, and merely took and used the latter--a
true statement this, so far as one may separate these two great mingled
factors of mediaeval progress.

Evidently those Germans of the opening mediaeval centuries who did most to
advance the civilization of their people were essentially introducers of
foreign culture. This was manifestly true of the missionaries (chief among
whom was the Anglo-Saxon Boniface) who brought Christianity to Germany. It
was true both as to the Christian and the secular learning of Rabanus
Maurus, who was born at Mainz, a very German.[386] With all his Latin
learning he kept his interest in his mother tongue, and always realized
that his people spoke German and not Latin. He encouraged preaching in
German; and with the aid of his favourite pupil, Walafrid, he prepared
German glosses and Latin-German glossaries for Scripture.

Before Rabanus’s death popular translations of the Gospels had appeared,
imbued with the Germanic spirit. The _Heliand_ and Otfrid’s
_Evangelienbuch_ are the best known of these.[387] Then, extending through
the last part of the tenth and the first part of the eleventh century we
note the labours of that most diligent of translators, Notker the German,
a monk of St. Gall, and member of the Ekkehart family, which gave so many
excellent abbots to that cloister. He died in 1022. Like Bede, Rabanus,
and many other Teutonic scholars, he was an encyclopaedia of the knowledge
afforded by his time. He was the head of a school of German translators.
His own translations covered part of Boëthius’s _De consolatione_,
Virgil’s _Bucolics_, Terence’s _Andria_, Martianus Capella’s _De nuptiis_,
Aristotle’s _Categories_ and _De interpretatione_, an arithmetic, a
rhetoric, Job, and the Psalms. He was a teacher all his life, and a German
always, loving his mother tongue, and occupying himself with its grammar
and word forms. His method of translation was to give the Latin sentence,
with a close German rendering, accompanied by an occasional explanation of
the matter, also in German.[388] All the while, this foreign learning was
being mastered gallantly in the leading cloisters, Fulda, St. Gall,
Reichenau, Hersfeld, and others. Within their walls this Latin culture was
studied and mastered, as one with resolve and perseverance masters that to
which he is not born.

Besides those who laboured as translators, other earnest fosterers of
learning in Germany appear as introducers of the same. Bruno, youngest
brother of Otto I., is distinguished in this rôle. He promoted letters in
his archiepiscopal diocese of Cologne. From many lands learned men came to
him, Liutprand and Ratherius among others. Otto himself loved learning,
and drew foreign scholars to his Court, one of whom was that conceited
Gunzo, already spoken of.[389] Schools moved with the emperor (_scholae
translatitiae_) also with Bruno, who though archbishop, duke, and burdened
with affairs, took the time to teach. A passage in his Life by Ruotger
shows the education and accomplishments of this most worthy prince of the
Church and land:

    “Then as soon as he learned the first rudiments of the grammatic art,
    as we have heard from himself, often pondering upon this in the glory
    of the omnipotent God, he began to read the poet Prudentius, at the
    instance of his master. This one, as he is catholic in faith and
    argument, eminent for eloquence and truth, and most elegant in the
    variety of his works and metres, with so great sweetness quickly
    pleased the palate of his heart, that at once, with greater avidity
    than can be expressed, he drank up not only the knowledge of the
    foreign words, but even the marrow of the innermost meaning and most
    liquid nectar, if I may so say. Afterwards there was almost no branch
    of liberal study in all Greek or Latin eloquence, that escaped the
    quickness of his genius. Nor indeed, as often happens, did the
    multitude of riches, or the insistency of clamouring crowds, nor any
    disgust otherwise coming over him, ever turn his mind from this noble
    employment of leisure.... Often he seated himself as a learned arbiter
    in the midst of the most learned Greek and Latin doctors, when they
    argued on the sublimity of philosophy or upon some subtility of her
    glistening discipline, and gave satisfaction to the disputants, amid
    universal plaudits, than which he cared for nothing less.”[390]

One may read between these awkward lines that all this learning was
something to which Bruno had been introduced at school. Another short
passage shows how new and strange this Latin culture seemed, and how he
approached it with a timorous seriousness natural to one who did not well
understand what it all meant:

    “The buffoonery and mimic talk in comedies and tragedies, which cause
    such laughter when recited by a number of people, he would always read
    seriously; he took small count of the matter, but chiefly of
    authority, in literary compositions.”[391]

Such an attitude would have been impossible for an Italian cradled amid
Latin or quasi-Latin speech and reminiscence.

The most curious if not original literary phenomenon of the time of Bruno
and his great brother was the nun Hrotsvitha, of Gandersheim, a Saxon
cloister supported by the royal Saxon house. A niece of Otto’s was the
Abbess, and she it was who introduced Hrotsvitha to the Latin Classics,
after the completion of her elementary studies under another _magistra_,
likewise an inmate of the convent. The account bears witness to the taste
for Latin reading among this group of noble Saxon dames. Hrotsvitha soon
surpassed the rest, at least in productivity, and became a prolific
authoress. She composed a number of sacred _legendae_, in leonine or
rhymed hexameters.[392] One of them gave the legend of the Virgin, as
drawn from the Apocryphal Gospel of Matthew. She also wrote several
_Passiones_ or accounts of the martyrdoms of saints, and the story of the
Fall and Repentance of Theophilus, the oldest poetic version of a compact
with the devil. Quite different in topic was the Deeds of Otto I. (_De
gestis Oddonis I. imperatoris_) written between 962 and 967, likewise in
leonine hexameters. It told the fortunes of the Saxon house as well as the
career of its greatest member.

Possibly more interesting were six moral dramas written in formal
imitation of the _Comedies_ of Terence. As an antidote to the poison of
the latter, they were to celebrate the virtue of holy virgins in this same
kind of composition which had flaunted the adulteries of lascivious
women--so the preface explains. Again, Hrotsvitha’s sources were
_legenda_, in which Christian chastity, martyred though it be, triumphs
with no uncertain note of victory.[393] These pious imitations of the
impious Terence do not appear to have been imitated by other mediaeval
writers: they exerted no influence upon the later development of the
Mystery Play. They remain as evidence of the writer’s courage, and of the
studies of certain denizens of the cloister at Gandersheim.

Besides this convent for high-born women, and such monasteries as Fulda
and St. Gall, an interesting centre of introduced learning was Hildesheim,
fortunate in its bishops, who made it an oasis of culture in the north.
Otwin, bishop in 954, supplied its school with books from Italy. Some
years after him came that great hearty man, Bernward, of princely birth,
who began his clerical career at an early age, and was made bishop in 992.
For thirty years he ruled his see with admirable piety, energy, and
judgment; qualities which he likewise showed in affairs of State. He was a
diligent student of Latin letters, one “who conned not only the books in
the monastery, but others in divers places, from which he formed a goodly
library of codices of the divines and also the philosophers.”[394] His was
a master’s faculty and a master-hand, itself skilfully fashioning; for not
only did he build the beautiful cloister church of St. Michael at
Hildesheim, and cause it to be sumptuously adorned, but he himself carved
and painted, and set gems. Some of the excellent works of his hand remain
to-day. His biographer tells of that munificence and untiring zeal which
rendered Hildesheim beautiful, as one still may see. Yet, throughout,
Bernward appears as consciously studying and gathering and bringing to his
beloved church an art from afar and a learning which was not of his own
people. The bronze work on the Bernward column in Hildesheim is thought to
suggest an influence of Trajan’s column, while the doors of Bernward’s
church unquestionably follow those of St. Sabina on the Aventine. This
shows how Bernward noticed and learned and copied during his stay at Rome
in the year 1001, when Otto III. was imperator and Gerbert was pope.

Bernward’s successor, Godehard, continued the good work. One of his
letters closes with a quick appeal for books: “Mittite nobis librum
Horatii et epistolas Tullii.”[395] Belonging to the same generation was
Froumundus (fl. cir. 1040), a monk of Tegernsee, where Godehard had been
abbot before becoming bishop of Hildesheim. He was a sturdy German lover
of the classics--very German. At one time he writes for a copy of Horace,
apparently to complete his own, and at another for a copy of Statius;
other letters refer to Juvenal and Persius.[396] His ardour for study is
as apparent as the fact that he is learning a literature to which he was
not born. His turgid hexameters sweat with effort to master the foreign
language and metre. People would have made a priest of him; not he:

  “Cogere me certant, fatear, quod sim sapiens vir,”

and a good grin seems to escape him:

    “Discere decrevi libros, aliosque docere:

    from such work no difficulty shall repel me; be it my reward to be
    co-operator (_synergus_) with what almighty God grants to flourish in
    this time of Christ, or in the time of yore.”[397]

The spirit is grand, the literary result awful. With diligence, the
studious _élite_ of Germany applied themselves to Latin letters. And in
the course of time tremendous scholars were to rise among them. But the
Latin culture remained a thing of study; its foreign tongue was never as
their own; and in the eleventh century, at least, they used it with a
painful effort that is apparent in their writings and the Germanisms
abounding in them. There may come one like Lambert of Hersfeld, the famous
annalist of the Hildebrandine epoch, who with exceptional gifts gains a
good mastery of Latin, and writes with a conscious approach to
quasi-classical correctness. The place of his birth and the sources of his
education are unknown. He was thirty years old, and doubtless had obtained
his excellent training in Latin, when he took the cowl in the cloister of
Hersfeld in 1058. But the next year he made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and
afterwards other journeys. He wrote his _Annals_[398] in his later years,
laying down his pen in 1077, when he had brought the Emperor to Canossa.
His was a practised hand, and his style the evident result of much study
of the classics. His work remains the best piece of Latin from an
eleventh-century German.

Among German scholars of the period, one can find no more charming
creature than Hermann Contractus, the lame or paralytic. His father, a
Suabian count, brought the little cripple to the convent of Reichenau. It
was in the year 1020. Hermann was seven years old. There he studied and
taught, and loved his fellows, till his death thirty-four years later. His
mind was as strong as his body was weak. He could not rise from the
movable seat on which his attendant placed him, and could scarcely sit up.
He enunciated with difficulty; his words were scarcely intelligible. But
his learning was encyclopaedic, his sympathies were broad: “Homo revera
sine querela nihil humani a se alienum putavit,” says a loving pupil who
sketched his life. Evil was foreign to his nature. Affectionate, cheerful,
happy, his sweet and engaging personality drew all men’s love, while his
learning attracted pupils from afar.

    “At length, after he had been labouring for ten days in a grievous
    pleurisy, God’s mercy saw fit to free his holy soul from prison. I who
    was his familiar above the rest,” says the biographer, “came to his
    couch at dawn of day, and asked him whether he was not feeling a
    little better. ‘Do not ask me,’ he replied, ‘but rather listen to what
    I have to tell you. I shall die very soon and shall not recover: so to
    thee and all my friends I commend my sinful soul. This whole night I
    have been rapt in ecstasy. With such complete memory as we have for
    the Lord’s Prayer, I seemed to be reading over and over Cicero’s
    _Hortensius_, and likewise to be scanning the substance and very
    written pages of what I intended to write Concerning the Vices--just
    as if I had it already written. I am so stirred and lifted by this
    reading, that the earth and all pertaining to it and this mortal life
    are despicable and tedious; while the future everlasting world and the
    eternal life have become such an unspeakable desire and joy, that all
    these transitory circumstances are inane--nothing at all. It wearies
    me to live.’”[399]

Was not this a scholar’s vision? The German dwarf reads and cares for the
_Hortensius_ even as Augustine, from whose _Confessions_ doubtless came
the recommendation of this classic. The barbarous Latin of the _Vita_ is
so uncouth and unformed as to convey no certain grammatical meaning. One
can only sense it. The biographer cannot write Latin correctly, nor write
it glibly and ungrammatically, like a man born to a Latinesque speech.
Hermann’s own Latin is but little better. It approaches neither fluency
nor style. But the scholar ardour was his, and his works remain--a long
chronicle, a treatise on the Astrolabe, and one on Music; also, perhaps, a
poem in leonine elegiacs, “The Dispute of the Sheep and the Flax,” which
goes on for several hundred lines till one comes to a welcome _caetera
desunt_.[400]

Thus, with a heavy-footed Teutonic diligence, the Germans studied the
Trivium and Quadrivium. They sweated at Latin grammar, reading also the
literature or the stock passages. Their ignorance of natural science was
no denser than that of peoples west of the Rhine or south of the Alps.
Many of them went to learn at Chartres or Paris. Within the mapped-out
scheme of knowledge, there was too much for them to master to admit of
their devising new provinces of study. They could not but continue for
many decades translators of the foreign matter into their German tongue or
German selves. In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries they will be
translators of the French and Provençal literatures.

Even before the eleventh century Germans were at work at Logic--one
recalls Gerbert’s opponent Otric;[401] and some of them were engaged with
dialectic and philosophy. William, Abbot of Hirschau, crudely anticipated
Anselm in attempting a syllogistic proof of God’s existence.[402] He died
in 1091, and once had been a monk in the convent of St. Emmeram at
Ratisbon in Bavaria, where he may have known a certain monk named Othloh,
who has left a unique disclosure of himself. One is sufficiently informed
as to what the Germans and other people studied in the eleventh century;
but this man has revealed the spiritual conflict out of which he hardly
brought his soul’s peace.


II

Nothing is so fascinating in the life of a holy man as the struggle and
crisis through which his convictions are established and his peace
attained. How diverse has been this strife--with Buddha, with Augustine,
with Luther, or Ignatius Loyola. Its heroes fall into two companies: in
one of them the man attains through his own thought and resolution; in the
other he casts himself on God, and it may be that devils and angels carry
on the fight, of which his soul is the battle-ground and prize.
Nevertheless, the man himself holds the scales of victory; the choice is
his, and it is he who at last goes over to the devil or accepts the grace
of God. This conflict, in which God is felt to aid, is still for men; only
its forms and setting change. Therefore the struggle and the tears,
through which souls have won their wisdom and their peace, never cease to
move us. Othloh, like many another mediaeval scholar, was disturbed over
the sinful pleasure derived from Tully and Virgil, Maro and Lucan. But his
soul’s chief turmoil came from the doubts that sprang from his human
sympathies and from moral grounds--can the Bible be true and God
omnipotent when sin and misery abound? The struggle through which he
became assured was the supreme experience of his life: it fixed his
thoughts; his writings were its fruit; they reflect the struggle and the
struggler, and present a psychological tableau of a mediaeval German soul.

He was born in the bishopric of Freising in Bavaria not long after the
year 1000, and spent his youth in the monastic schools of Tegernsee and
Hersfeld. His scholarship was made evident to men about him through his
skill in copying texts in a beautiful script, ornamented with
illuminations. In the year 1032 he took the monk’s vows in the monastery
of St. Emmeram at Ratisbon, which had been founded long before in honour
of this sainted Frankish missionary bishop, who had met a martyr’s death
in Bavaria in the late Merovingian period. The annals of the monastery are
extant. When the Ottos were emperors, grammatical and theological studies
flourished there, especially under a certain capable Wolfgang, who died
as Bishop of Ratisbon in 994, and whose life Othloh wrote. The latter, on
becoming a monk, received charge of the monastery school, which he
continued to direct for thirty years.[403] Then he left, because some of
the young monks had turned the Abbot against him; but after some years
spent mainly at the monastery of Fulda, he returned to St Emmeram’s in
1063, where he died an old man ten or fifteen years later. From his youth
he had been subject to illness, even to fits of swooning, and, writing in
the evening of his days, he speaks of his many bodily infirmities.

As Othloh looked back over his life, his soul’s crisis seemed to have been
reached soon after he was made a monk. The wisdom brought through it came
as the answer to those questionings which made up the diabolic side of
that great experience. Othloh describes it in his _Book concerning the
Temptations of a certain Monk_.

    “There was a sinful clerk, who, having often been corrected by the
    Lord, at length turned to monastic life. In the monastery where he was
    made a monk he found many sorts of men, some of whom were given over
    to the reading of secular works, while some read Holy Scripture. He
    resolved to imitate the latter. The more earnest he was in this, the
    more was he molested by temptations of the devil; but committing
    himself to the grace of God, he persevered; and when, after a long
    while, he was delivered, and thought over what he had suffered, it
    seemed that others might be edified by his temptations, as well as by
    the passages of Holy Scripture which had come to him through divine
    inspiration. So he began to write as follows: I wish to tell the
    delusions of Satan which I endured sleeping and waking. His deceits
    first confounded me with doubt as to whether I was not rash in taking
    the vow perilous of the monastic life, without consulting parents or
    friends, when Scripture bids us ‘do all things with counsel.’ Diabolic
    illusion, as if sympathizing and counselling with me, brought these
    and like thoughts. When, the grace of God resisting him, the Tempter
    failed to have his way with me here, he tried to make me despair
    because of my many sins. ‘Do you think,’ said he, ‘that such a wretch
    can expect mercy from God the Judge, when it is written, Scarcely
    shall a righteous man be saved?’ So he overwhelmed me, till I could do
    nothing but weep, and tears were my bread day and night. I protest,
    from my innermost heart, that save through the grace of God alone, no
    one can overcome such delusions.

    “When the Weaver of wiles failed to cause me utterly to despair, he
    tried with other arguments of guile to lead me to blaspheme the divine
    justice, suggesting thoughts, as if condoling with my misery: ‘O most
    unhappy youth, whose grief no man deigns to consider--but men are not
    to blame, for they do not know your trouble. God alone knows, and
    since He can do all things, why does He not aid you in tribulation,
    when for love of Him you have surrendered the world and now endure
    this agony? Have done with impossible prayers and foolish grief. The
    injustice of that Potentate will not permit all to perish.’ These
    delusions were connected with what I now wish to mention: Often I was
    awakened by some imaginary signal, and would hasten to the oratory
    before the time of morning prayer; also, and for a number of years,
    though I slept at night as a man sound in body, when the hour came to
    rise, my limbs were numb, and only with uncertain trembling step could
    I reach the Church.

    “One delusion and temptation must be spoken of, which I hardly know
    how to describe, as I never read or heard of anything like it. By the
    stress of my many temptations I was driven--though by God’s grace I
    was never utterly torn from faith and hope of heavenly aid--to doubt
    as to Holy Scripture and the essence of God himself. In the struggle
    with the other temptations there was some respite, and a refuge of
    hope remained. In this I knew no alleviation, and when formerly I had
    been strengthened by the sacred book and had fought against the darts
    of death with the arms of faith and hope, now, shut round with doubt
    and mental blindness, I doubted whether there was truth in Holy
    Scripture and whether God was omnipotent. This broke over me with such
    violence as to leave me neither strength of body nor strength of mind,
    and I could not see or hear. Then sometimes it was as if a voice was
    whispering close to my ear: ‘Why such vain labourings? Can you not,
    most foolish of mortals, prove by your own experience that the
    testimony of Scripture is without sense or reason? Do you not see that
    what the divine book says is the reverse of what the lives and habits
    of mankind approve? Those many thousands who neither know nor care to
    know its doctrine, do you think they err?’ Troubled, I would urge, as
    if against some one questioning and objecting: ‘How then is there such
    agreement among all the divinely inspired writings when they speak of
    God the Founder and of obedience to His commands?’ Then words of this
    kind would be suggested in reply: ‘Fool, the Scriptures on which you
    rely for knowledge of God and religion speak double words; for the men
    who wrote them lived as men live now. You know how all men speak well
    and piously, and act otherwise, as advantage or frailty prompts. From
    which you may learn how the authors of the ancient writings wrote good
    and religious sayings, and did not live accordingly. Understand then,
    that all the books of the divine law were so written that they have an
    outer surface of piety and virtue, but quite another inner meaning.
    All of which is proved by Paul’s saying, The letter killeth; the
    spirit, that is the meaning, maketh to live. So you see how perilous
    it is to follow the precepts of these books. Likewise should one think
    concerning the essence of God. And besides, if there existed any
    person or power of an omnipotent God there would not be this apparent
    confusion in everything,--nor would you yourself have had all these
    doubts which trouble you.’”

The last diabolically insidious suggestion was just the one to bring
despair to the unaided reason seeking faith. Othloh’s soul was passing
through the depths; but the path now ascends, and rapidly:

    “I was assaulted with an incredible number of these delusions, and so
    strange and unheard of were they that I feared to speak of them to any
    of the brothers. At last I threw myself upon the ground groaning in
    bitterness, and, collecting the forces of my mind, I cried with my
    lips and from my heart: ‘O if thou art some one, Almighty, and if thou
    art everywhere, as I have read so often in so many books, now, I pray,
    show me whom thou art and what thou canst do, delivering me quickly
    from these perils; I can bear this strife no more.’ I did not have to
    wait; the grace of God scattered the whole cloud of doubt, and such a
    light of knowledge poured into my heart that I have never since had to
    endure the darkness of deadly doubt. I began to understand what I had
    scarcely perceived before. Then the grace of knowledge was so
    increased that I could no longer hide it. I was urged by ineffable
    impulse to undertake some work of gratitude for the glory of God, and
    it seemed that this new ardour should be devoted to composition. So I
    wrote what I have written concerning those diabolic delusions which
    sprang from my sins, and then it seemed reasonable to tell of the
    divine inspiration by which my mind was enabled to repel them; so that
    he who reads these delusions may at the same time know the workings of
    the divine aid, and not ascribe to me a victory which was never mine,
    or, thinking that aid was lacking in my temptation, fear lest it fail
    in his. I remember how often, especially on rising in the mornings, it
    was as if there was some one rising with me and walking with me, who
    mutely warned, or gently persuaded me to amend faults which it may be
    only the day before I was ignorantly committing and deeming of no
    consequence.

    “When surrounded by such inspirations I would enter the Church and bow
    down in prayer--God knows that I do not lie--it seemed as if some one
    besought me with like earnestness of prayer, saying: ‘As that has been
    granted which you asked of me, it will be precious to me if you will
    obey my entreaties. Do you not continue in those vices which I have
    often begged you to abandon? are you not proud and carnal, neglectful
    of God’s service, hating whom you should not hate, although the
    Scripture says, Every one who hates his brother is a murderer? Where
    now is the patience and constancy and that perfection which you
    promised God, if He would deliver you from perils and make you a monk?
    God has done as you asked, why do you delay to pay your vow? You have
    asked Him to set you in a place where you would have a store of books.
    Lo, you have been heard; you have books--from which you may learn of
    life eternal. Why do you dissipate your mind in vanities and do not
    hasten to take the desired gift? You have also asked to be tried, and
    tried you have been in temptation, and delivered. Yet you are still a
    man unfit for peace or war, since when the battle is far off you are
    ready for it, and when it approaches you flee. Which of the holy
    fathers that you have read of in the Old or New Testament was so dear
    to me that I did not seek to try him in the furnace of tribulation?
    Blessed are those who suffer persecution for righteousness’ sake.
    Steep and narrow is the way; no one is crowned who has not striven
    lawfully. When you have read these, and many more passages of
    Scripture, why if you desire a crown of life eternal, do you wish to
    suffer no tribulation for your sins?’”

Then the Spirit of God, with many admonishings, shows Othloh how easy had
been his lot and how needful to him were his temptations, even the very
carnal temptations of the flesh, which Othloh suffered in common with all
monks. And he is bid to consider their reason and order:

    “First you were tried with lighter trials, that gradually you might
    gain strength for the weightier; as you progressed you ascribed to
    your own strength what was wrought by my grace. Wherefore I subjected
    you to the final temptation, from which you will emerge the more
    certain of my grace the less you trust in your merits.”

The “warring opposites” of Othloh’s spiritual struggle were, on the one
side, evil thoughts and delusions from the devil, and, on the other, the
strength and enlightenment imparted by the grace of God. The nearer the
crisis comes, the clearer are the devil’s whisperings and the warnings of
the instructing voice. Othloh’s part in it was his choice and acceptance
of the divine counsellor. This conflict never faded from his mind. He has
much to say of the visions[404] in which parts of his enlightenment had
come. Once reading Lucan in the monastery, he swooned, and in his swoon
was beaten with many stripes by a man of terrible and threatening
countenance. By this he was led to abandon profane reading and other
worldly vanities. These visionary floggings left him feeble and ill in
body. They were the approaches to his great spiritual conflict. His
“fourth vision” is in and of the crisis. This monk, immersed in spiritual
struggles, had also his opinions regarding the government of the
monastery, and for a time refused obedience to the abbot’s irregular
rulings, and spoke harshly of him:

    “For this I did penance before the abbot but not before God, against
    whom I had greatly sinned; and after a few days I fell sick. This
    sickness was from God, since I have always begged of His mercy, that
    for any sin committed I might suffer sickness or tribulation, and so
    it has come to me. On this occasion, when weakness had for some days
    kept me in the infirmary, one evening as it was growing dark I thought
    I should feel better if I rose and sat by my cot. Immediately the
    house appeared to be filled with flame and smoke. Horror-stricken, my
    wonted trust in God all scattered, I started, tottering, towards the
    cot of the lay brother in charge, but, ashamed, I turned back and went
    to the cot of a brother who was sick; he was asleep. Then I sank
    exhausted on my cot, thinking how to escape the horror of that vision
    of smoke. I had no doubt that the smoke was the work of evil spirits,
    who, from its midst, would try to torment me. As I gradually saw that
    it was not physical, but of the spirit, and that there was no one to
    help me, as all were asleep, I began to sing certain psalms, and,
    singing, went out and entered the nearest church, of St. Gallus, and
    fell down before the altar. At once, for my sins, strength of mind and
    body left me, and I perceived that my lips were held together by evil
    spirits, so that I could not move them, to sing a psalm. I tried till
    I was weary to open them with my hands.

    “Leaving that church, crawling rather than walking I gained the great
    church of St. Emmeram, where I hoped for some alleviation of my agony.
    But it was as before; I could barely utter a few words of prayer. So I
    painfully made my way back to my bed, hoping, from sheer weariness, to
    get some sleep. But none came, and, turn as I would, still I saw the
    vision of smoke. Suddenly--was I asleep or awake?--I seemed to be in a
    field well known to me, surrounded by a crowd of demons mocking me
    with shrieks of laughter. The louder they laughed, the sadder I was,
    seeing them gathered to destroy me. When they saw that I would not
    laugh, they became enraged, crying, ‘So! you won’t laugh and be merry
    with us! Since you choose melancholy you shall have enough.’ Then
    flying about me, with blows from all sides, they whirled me round and
    round with them over vast spaces of earth, till I thought to die.
    Suffering unspeakably, I was at length set down on the top of a peak
    which scarcely held me; no eye could fathom its abyss. Vainly I looked
    for a descent, and the demons kept flying about me, saying: ‘Where now
    is your hope in God! And where is that God of yours! Don’t you know
    that neither God is, as men say, nor is there any power in Him which
    can prevail against us? One proof of this is that you have no help,
    and there is no one who can deliver you from our hands. Choose now;
    for unless you join with us you shall be cast into the abyss.’ In this
    strait, scarcely consenting or resisting, I faintly remembered that I
    had once believed and read that God was everywhere, and so I looked
    around to see whether He would not send some aid. Now when the demons
    kept insisting that I should choose, and when I was well-nigh put to
    it to promise what they wished, a man suddenly appeared, and, standing
    by me, said: ‘Do not do it; all that these cheats say is false. Abide
    firm in that faith which you had in God. He knows all that you suffer,
    and permits it for your good.’ Then he vanished, and the demons
    returned, flying about me, and saying: ‘Miserable man, would you trust
    one who came to deceive you? Why, he dared not wait till we came! Come
    now, yield yourself to our power.’

    “Uttering these words with fury, they snatched me up, and whirled me,
    sorely beaten, across plains and deserts, over heights and precipices,
    and set me on a yet more dreadful peak, hurling at me abuse and
    threats, to make me do their will. And, as before, I was near
    succumbing, and was looking around for some aid from God, when that
    same man again stood near, and heartened me. ‘Do not yield; let your
    heart be comforted against its besiegers.’ And I replied: ‘Lord, I can
    no longer bear these perils. Stay with me, and aid, lest when you go
    away they torment me still more grievously.’ To which he said: ‘Their
    threats cannot prevail so long as you persevere in faith and hope in
    the Lord. Be comforted; the sharper the strife, the quicker will it
    end. If with constancy you wage the Lord’s battles, you shall have
    eternal rewards in the future, and in this world you shall be famous.’

    “Then he vanished the second time, and the demons, who dared do
    nothing in his presence, raged and mocked more savagely, and kept me
    in anguish, until, the divine grace effecting it, the convent bell
    rang for early prayer. I heard it as I lay in bed, and gradually
    gaining my senses, I was conscious that I was living, and I no longer
    saw the vision of smoke. With gratitude I remembered what the man in
    my vision told me that my trial would soon be over. After this, though
    for many days I lay sick in body and soul, my spiritual temptations
    began to lessen; and I have learned that without the Grace of God I
    am, and always shall be, a thing of naught.”

The struggle through which faith and peace came to Othloh became the
fountain-head of his wisdom; it fixed the point of view from which he
judged life, and set the categories in which he ordered his knowledge; it
directed his thoughts and imparted purpose and unity to his writings. His
gratitude to God incited him to write in order that others might share in
the light and wisdom which God’s grace had granted him; and his writings
chiefly enlarge upon those questions which the victory in his spiritual
conflict had solved. I will refrain from drawing further from them,
although they seem to me the most interesting works of a pious and
doctrinal nature emanating from any German of this still crude and
inchoate intellectual period.[405]


III

From the point of view of the development of mediaeval intellectual
interests in the eleventh century, England has little that is distinctive
to offer. The firm rule of Canute (1016-1035) brought some reinstatement
of order, after the times of struggle between Dane and Saxon. But his son,
Hardicanute, was a savage. The reign of Edward the Confessor (1042-1066)
followed. It wears a halo because it was the end of the old order, which
henceforth was to be a memory. Then came the revolution of the Norman
Conquest. Letters did not thrive amid these storms. At the beginning of
the period, Dunstan is the sole name of note, as one who fostered letters
in the monasteries where his energies were bringing discipline. English
piety and learning looked then, as it had looked before and was for
centuries to look, to the Continent. And Dunstan promoted letters by
calling to his assistance Abbo of St. Fleury, of whom something has been
said.[406]

In Dunstan’s time Saxon men were still translating Scripture into their
tongue--paraphrasing it rather, with a change of spirit. Such translations
were needed in Anglo-Saxon England, as in Germany. But after the Conquest
the introduction of Norman-French tended to lessen at least the
consciousness of such a need. That language, as compared with Anglo-Saxon,
came so much nearer to Latin as to reduce the chasm between the learned
tongue and the vernacular. The Normans had (at least in speech) been
Gallicized, and yet had kept many Norse traits. England likewise took on a
Gallic veneering as Norman-French became the language of the Court and the
new nobility. But the people continued to speak English. The degree of
foreign influence upon their thought and manners may be gauged by the
proportion of foreign idiom penetrating the English language; and the fact
that English remained essentially and structurally English proves the same
for England racially. In spite of the introduction of foreign elements,
people and language endured and became more and more progressively
English.

In the island before the Conquest, the round of studies had been the same
as on the Continent; and that event brought no change. The studies might
improve, but would have no novel source to draw upon. And in this period
of racial turmoil and revolution, it was unlikely that the Anglo-Saxon
temperament would present itself as clearly as aforetime in the Saxon poem
of _Beowulf_ or the personality of the Saxon Alfred, or in the Saxon
_Genesis_ and the writings of Cynewulf.[407] In a word, the eleventh
century in England was specifically the period when the old traits were
becoming obscure, and no distinct modifications had been evolved in
correspondence with the new conditions. Consequently, for presentations of
the intellectual genius of the English people, one has to wait until the
next century, the time of John of Salisbury and other English minds. Even
such will be found receiving their training and their knowledge in France
and Italy. England was still intellectually as well as politically under
foreign domination.

       *       *       *       *       *

In every way it has been borne in upon us how radically the conditions and
faculties of men differed in England, Germany, France, and Italy in the
eleventh century. Very different were their intellectual qualities, and
different also was the measure of their attainment to a palpable mediaeval
character, which in Italy was not that of the ancient Latins, in France
was not that of the Gallic provincials, and in England and Germany was not
altogether that of the original Celtic and Teutonic stocks. Neither in the
eleventh century nor afterwards was there an obliteration of race traits;
yet the mediaeval modification tended constantly to evoke a general
uniformity of intellectual interest and accepted view.

There exists a certain ancient _Chronicon Venetum_ written by a Venetian
diplomat and man of affairs called John the Deacon, who died apparently
soon after 1008.[408] He was the chaplain of the Doge, Peter Urseolus, and
the doge’s ambassador to the emperors Otto III. and Henry II. The earlier
parts of his _Chronicon_ were taken from Paulus Diaconus and others; the
later are his own, and form a facile narrative, which makes no pretence to
philosophic insight and has nothing to say either of miracles or God’s
Christian providence. Its interests are quite secular. John writes his
Latin, glib, clear, and unclassical, just as he might talk his Venetian
speech, his _vulgaris eloquentia_. There is no effort, no struggle with
the medium of expression, but a pervasive quality of familiarity with his
story and with the language he tells it in. These characteristics, it is
safe to say, are not to be found, to a like degree, in the work of any
contemporary writer north of the Alps.

The man and his story, in fine, however mediocre they may be, have
arrived: they are not struggling or apparently tending anywhither. The
writing suggests no capacity in the writer as yet unreached, nor any
imperfect blending of disparate elements in his education. One should not
generalize too broadly from the qualities exemplified in this work; yet
they indicate that the people to which the writer belonged were possessed
of a certain entirety of development, in which the component elements of
culture and antecedent human growth and decadence were blended in accord.
This old _Chronicon_ affords an illustration of the fact that the
transition and early mediaeval centuries had brought nothing to Italy that
was new or foreign, nothing that was not in the blood, nothing to deeply
disturb the continuity of Italian culture and character which moved along
without break, whether in ascending or descending curves.

Yet evidently the eleventh-century Italian is no longer a Latin of the
Empire. For one thing, he is more individualistic. Formerly the prodigious
power of Roman government united citizens and subject peoples, and
impressed a human uniformity upon them. The surplus energies of the Latin
race were then absorbed in the functions of the _Respublica_, or were at
least directed along common channels. That great unification had long been
broken; and the smaller units had reasserted themselves--the civic units
of town or district, and the individual units of human beings upon whom no
longer pressed the conforming influence of one great government.

In imperial times cities formed the subordinate units of the _Respublica_;
the Roman, like the Greek civilization, was essentially urban. This
condition remained. The civilization of Italy in the eleventh century was
still urban, but was now more distinctly the civilization of small closely
compacted bodies, which were no longer united. For the most part, the
life, the thought, of Italy was in the towns; it remained predominantly
humanistic, taken up with men and their mortal affairs, their joys and
hates, and all that is developed by much daily intercourse with fellows.
Thus the intellect of Italy continued secular, interesting itself in
mortal life, and not so much occupied with theology and the life beyond
the grave. This is as true of the intellectual energies of the Roman
papacy as it is of the mental activities of the towns which served or
opposed it, according to their politics.

On the other hand, the intense emotional nature of the Italians was apt to
be religious, and given to despair and tears and ecstasy; its love welled
up and flung itself around its object, without the mediating offices of
reason. If reflection came, it was love’s ardent musing, rather than
religious ratiocination. One does not forget that the Italians who became
scholastic theologians or philosophers left Italy, and subjected
themselves to northern spiritual influences at Paris or elsewhere. Their
greatest were Anselm, Peter Lombard, Bonaventura, Thomas Aquinas. None of
these remained through life altogether Italian.

Thus, with Italians, religion meant either the papal government and the
daily conventions of observance and minor mental habits, all very secular;
or it meant that which was a thing of ecstasy and not of
thought--generally speaking, of course. The mediaeval Italian (in the
eleventh century only to a slightly less degree than in the twelfth or
thirteenth) is, typically speaking, a man of urban human interests and
affairs, a politician, a trader, a doctor, a man of law or letters, an
artist, or a poet. If really religious, his religion is an emotion, and is
not occupied with dogma, nor interested in doctrinal correctness or
reform. Such a religious character may, according to individual temper,
result in a Romuald[409] or a Peter Damiani; its perfected ideal is
Francis of Assisi.

Things were already different in the country now called France. No need to
repeat what has been said as to the lesser strength and somewhat broken
continuity of the antique there, as compared with Italy. Yet there was a
sufficient power of antique influence and descent to keep the language
Romanesque, and the forms of its literature partly set by antique
tradition. But the spirit was not Latin. Perhaps it had but seemed such
with the Gallic provincials. At all events, the incoming Franks and other
Germans brought a Teutonic infusion and reinspiration that forever kept
France from being or becoming a northern Italy.

Neither was the spirit urban. To be sure, much of the energy of French
thought awoke and did its work in towns; and Paris was to become the
intellectual centre. But the stress of French life was not so surely in
the towns, nor men’s minds so characteristically urban as in Italy, and by
no means so predominantly humanistic. Even in the eleventh century the
lofty range of French thought, of French intellectual interests, is
apparent; for it embraces the problems of philosophy and theology, and
does not find its boundary and limit in phenomenal or mortal life. Gerbert
is almost too universal an intellect to offer as a fair example. Yet all
that he cared for is more than represented by other men taken together;
for Gerbert did not fully represent the interests of religious thought in
France. His was the humanism and the thirst for all the round of knowledge
included in the Seven Arts. But he scarcely reached out beyond logic to
philosophy; and theology seems not to have troubled him. Both philosophy
and theology, however, made part of the intellectual interests of France;
for there was Berengar and Roscellinus, Gaunilo and St. Anselm, and the
wrangling of many disputatious, although overwhelmingly orthodox, councils
of French Churchmen. Paris also, with its great schools of theology and
philosophy, looms on the horizon. The intellectual matter is but inchoate,
yet universally germinating, in the eleventh century.

Thus intellectual qualities of mediaeval France appear inceptively. The
French mediaeval temperament needs perhaps another century for its clear
development. Both as to temperament and intellectual interests, a line
will have to be drawn between the south and north; between the land of the
_langue d’oc_, the Roman law, the troubadour, and the easy, irreligious,
gay society which jumped the life to come; and the land of the various old
French dialects (among which that of the Isle de France will win to
dominance), the land of philosophy and theology, the land of Gothic
architecture and religion, the hearth of the crusades against the Saracen
or the Albigensian heretic; the land of the most distinctive mediaeval
thought and strongest intellectual development.

In the Germany and the England of the eleventh century there is less of
interest from this point of view. England had scarcely become her
mediaeval self; the time was one of desperate struggle, or, at most, of
tumultuous settling down and shaking together. As for Germany, it was
surely German then, and not a medley of Saxon, Dane, and Norman-French.
The people were talking in their German tongues. German song and German
epos were already heard in forms which were not to be cast aside, but
retained and developed; of course the influence of the French poetry was
not yet. The Germans were still living their own sturdy and half-barbarous
life. Those who loved knowledge had turned with earnest purpose to the
Latin culture; they were studying Latin and logic, and, as we have said,
translating it into their German tongue or temperament. But the lessons
were not fully mastered--not yet transformed into German mediaeval
intellectual capacity. And in this respect, at least, the German will
become more entirely his Germanic mediaeval self in another century, when
he has more faculty of using the store of foreign knowledge in combination
with his strongly felt and honestly considered Christianity.




