BOOK IV

THE IDEAL AND THE ACTUAL: SOCIETY




CHAPTER XXII

FEUDALISM AND KNIGHTHOOD

    FEUDAL AND CHRISTIAN ORIGIN OF KNIGHTLY VIRTUE; THE ORDER OF THE
    TEMPLE; GODFREY OF BOUILLON; ST. LOUIS; FROISSART’S _CHRONICLES_


The world is evil! the clergy corrupt, the laity depraved! none denounces
them! Awake! arise! be mindful! Such ceaseless cry rises more shrilly in
times of reform and progress. It was the cry of the preacher in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, when preaching was reviving with the
general advance of life.[651]

Satire and pious invective struck at all classes: kings, counts and
knights, merchants, tradesmen, artisans, even villain-serfs, came under
its lash.[652] And properly, since every class is touched with universal
human vices, besides those which are more peculiar to its special way of
life. All men fall below the standards of the time; and each class fails
with respect to its own ideals. The special shortcomings are most apparent
with those classes whose ideals are most definitely formulated.

Among the laity the gap between the ideal and the actual may best be
observed in the warrior class whose ideals accorded with the feudal
situation and tended to express themselves in chivalry. Not that knights
and ladies were better or worse than other mediaeval men and women. But
literature contains clearer statements of their ideals. The knightly
virtues range before us as distinctly as the monastic; and harsh is the
contrast between the character they outline and the feudal actuality of
cruelty and greed and lust. Feudalism itself presents everywhere a state
of contrast between its principles of mutual fidelity and protection, and
its actuality of oppression, revolt, and private war.

The feudal system was a sprawling conglomerate fact. The actual usages of
chivalry (the term is loose and must be allowed gradually to define
itself) were one expression of it, and varied with the period and country.
But chivalry had its home also in the imagination, and its most
interesting media are legend and romantic fiction. Still, much that was
romantic in it sprang from the aggregate of law, custom, and sentiment,
which held feudal society together. Chivalry was the fine flower of honour
growing from this soil, embosomed in an abundant leafage of imagination.

The feudal system was founded on relations and sentiments arising from a
state of turbulence where every man needed the protection of a lord: it
could not fail to foster sentiments of fealty. The fief itself, the feudal
unit of land held on condition of homage and service, symbolized the
principle of mutual troth between lord and vassal. The land was part of
mother earth; the troth, the elemental personal tie, existed from of yore.
In this instance it came from the German forests. But the feudal system of
land tenure also stretched its roots back into the rural institutions of
the disintegrating Roman Empire. In the fifth century, for example, when
what was left of the imperial rule could no longer enforce order, and
provincial governments were decaying with the decay of the central power
from which they drew their life, men had to look about them for
protection. It became customary for men to hand over land and liberty to
some near lord, and enter into a relationship akin to serfage in return
for protection. Thus the Gallo-Roman population were becoming accustomed
to personal dependence even while the Merovingians were establishing their
kingdom.

On their side the Franks and other Teutons had inherited the institution
of the _comitatus_, which bound the young warrior to his chief. They were
familiar with exacting modes of personal retainership, which merged the
follower’s freedom in his lord’s will. If during the reigns of Pepin and
his prodigious son the development of local dominion and dependence was
held in some abeyance, on the death of Charlemagne it would proceed apace.
All the factors which tend to make institutions out of abuses and the
infractions of earlier custom, sprang at once into activity in the renewed
confusion. Everything served to increase the lesser man’s need of defence,
weld his dependence on his lord, and augment the latter’s power. Moreover,
long before Charlemagne’s time, not only for protection in this life, but
for the sake of their souls, men had been granting their lands to
monasteries and receiving back the use thereof--such usufruct being known
as a _beneficium_. This custom lent the force of its example and manifest
utility to the relations between lay lords and tenants. And finally one
notes the frequent grant to monasteries and individuals of immunity from
governmental visitation, a grant preventing the king’s officers from
entering lands in order to exercise the king’s justice, or exact fines and
requisitions.[653]

From out of such conditions the feudal system gradually took form. Its
central feature was the tenure of a fief by a vassal from his lord on
condition of rendering faithful military and other not ignoble service. As
the tenth century passed, fiefs tended to become hereditary. So long as
the vassal fulfilled his duty to his lord, the rights of the lord over the
land were nominal; more substantial was the mutual obligation--on the part
of the lord to protect his vassal against the violence of others, and on
the vassal’s part to make good the homage pledged by him when he knelt and
placed his hands within his lord’s hands and vowed himself his lord’s man
for the fief he held. His duty was to aid his lord against enemies, yield
him counsel and assistance in the judgment of causes, and pay money to
ransom him from captivity, knight his eldest son, or portion his daughter.
The ramifications of these feudal tenures and obligations extended, with
all manner of complications, from king and duke down to such as held the
meagre fief that barely kept man and war-horse from degrading labour. All
these made up the feudal class whose members might expect to become
knights on reaching manhood.

Neither this system of land tenure, nor the sentiments and relations
sustaining it, drew their origin from Christianity. But the Church was
mighty in its influence over the secular relationships of those who came
under its spiritual guidance. Feudal troth was to become Christianized.
The old regard for war-chief and war-comrade was to be broadened through
the Faith’s solicitude for all believers; then it was raised above the
human sphere to fealty toward God and His Church; and thereupon it was
gentled through Christian meekness and mercy.

This Christianized spirit of fealty, broadening to courtesy and pity, was
to take visible form in a universal Order into which members of the feudal
class were admitted when their valour had been proved, and into which
brave deeds might bring even a low-born man. Gradually, as the Order’s
_regula_, a code of knighthood’s honour was developed, valid in its
fundamentals throughout western Christendom; but varying details and
changing fancies from time to time intruded, just as subsequent phases of
monastic development were grafted on the common Benedictine rule.

Investing a young warrior with the arms of manhood has always in fighting
communities been the normal ceremony of the youth’s coming of age and his
recognition as a member of the clan. The binding on of the young Teuton’s
sword in the assembly of his people was an historical antecedent of the
making of a knight. In all the lands of western Europe--France, Germany,
Anglo-Saxon England, Lombard Italy, and Visigothic Spain--this ceremony
appears to have remained a simple one through the ninth and tenth
centuries. As for the eleventh, one may note the following passages:
William of Malmesbury (d. 1142 cir.) speaks of William of Normandy
receiving the insignia of knighthood (_militiae insignia_) from the King
of France as soon as his years permitted.[654] Henry of Huntington (d.
1155) says that this same William the Conqueror, in the nineteenth year of
his reign, invested his younger son Henry with the arms of manhood
(_virilibus induit armis_); while another chronicler says that Prince
Henry: “sumpsit arma in Pentecostem”--a festival at which it was customary
to make knights. And again, Ordericus Vitalis says of the armour-bearer of
Duke William that after five years’ service he was by that same duke
regularly invested with his arms and made a knight (_decenter est armis
adornatus et miles effectus_).

These short references[655] do not indicate the nature of the ceremony.
But one notes the use of the Latin words _miles_ and _militia_ as meaning
knight and knighthood. Like so many other classical words, _miles_ took
various meanings in the Middle Ages. But it came commonly to signify
knight, chevalier, or ritter.[656] And whatever other meanings _militia_
and _militare_ retained or acquired, they signified knighthood and the
performance of its duties. Frequently they suggested the relationship of
vassal to a lord: and in this sense _miles_ meant one who held a fief
under the obligation to do knightly service in return.

But how did this word _miles_ (which in classical Latin meant a soldier
and sometimes specifically a foot-soldier as contrasted with an _eques_)
come to mean a knight? It was first applied to the warriors of the various
Teutonic peoples, who for the most part fought on foot. But the wars with
the Saracens in the eighth century appear to have made clear the need of a
large and efficient corps of horse. From the time of Charles Martel the
warrior class began to fight regularly on horseback;[657] and thus,
apparently, the term _miles_ began to signify primarily one of these tried
and well-armed riders.[658] Such were the very ones who would regularly be
invested with their arms on reaching manhood. Many of them had inherited
the sentiments of fealty to a chief, and probably were vassals of some
lord from whom they had received lands to be held on military tenure. They
were not all noble (an utterly loose term with reference to these early
confused centuries) nor were they necessarily free (another inappropriate
term with respect to these incipiently mediaeval social conditions).[659]
But their mainly military duties would naturally develop into a retainer’s
relationship of fealty.

The ninth century passes into the tenth, the tenth into the eleventh, the
eleventh into the twelfth. Classes and orders of society become more
distinct. The old warrior groups have become lords and vassals, and
compose the feudal class whose members upon maturity are formally girt
with the arms of manhood, and thereupon become knights. The ceremony of
their investiture has been gradually made more impressive; it has also
been imbued with religious sentiment and elaborated with religious rite.
It now constitutes the initiation to a universally recognized fighting
Order which has its knightly code of honour, if not its knightly duties.
In a word, along with the clearer determination of its membership, and the
elaboration of the ceremonies of entry or “adoubement,” knighthood has
become a distinct conception and has attained existence as an Order. And
an Order it remains, into which one is admitted, but into which no one is
born, though he be hereditary king or duke or count. Moreover, although
the candidates normally would be of the feudal class, the Order is not
closed against knightly merit in whomsoever found.[660] Of course there
was no written _regula_ or charter, except of certain special Orders. Yet
there was no uncertainty as to who was or was not a knight.

A knight could be “made” or “dubbed” at any time, for example, on the
field of battle or before the fight. But certain festivals of the Church,
Christmas, Easter, and Pentecost, came to be regarded as peculiarly
appropriate for the ceremony. Any knight, but no unknighted person however
high his rank, could “dub” another knight.[661] This appears to have been
the universal rule, and yet it suffered infringements. For example, at a
late period a king might claim the right to _confirm_ the bestowal of
knighthood, which in fact commonly was bestowed by a great lord or
sovereign prince. On its negative side, the general rule may be said to
have been infringed when Church dignitaries, no longer content with
blessing the arms of the young warrior, usurped the secular privilege of
investing him with them and dubbing him a knight.[662]

The ceremony itself probably originated in the girding on of the sword. As
these warriors in time changed to mounted riders with elaborate arms and
armour, it became more of an affair to invest them fully with their
equipment. There would be the putting on of helm and coat of mail, and
there would be the binding on of spurs; and at some time it became
customary for the youth to prepare himself by a bath. But girding on the
sword was still the important point, although perhaps the somewhat
enigmatical blow, given by him who conferred the dignity, and not to be
returned (_non repercutiendus_), became the finish to the ceremony. That
blow existed (we find it in the _Chansons de geste_) in the twelfth
century as a thwack with the fist on the young man’s bare neck; then in
course of years it refined itself into a gentle sword-tap on the mailed
shoulder.[663]

At an early period the Church sought to sanctify the ceremony through
religious rites; for it could not remain unconcerned with the consecration
of the warriors of Christendom, whose services were needed and whose souls
were to be saved. What time so apt for inculcating obedience and other
Christian virtues as this solemn hour when the young warrior’s nature was
stirred with the pride and hopes of knighthood? And the young knight
needed the Church’s blessing. Heathen peoples sought in every enterprise
the protection of their gods, usually obtained through priestly magic. And
when converted to the faith of Christ, should they not call on Him who was
mightier than Odin? Should not His power be invoked to shield the
Christian knight? Will not the sword which the priest has blessed and has
laid upon Christ’s miracle-working altar, more surely guard the wearer’s
life? Better still if there be blessed relics in its hilt. The dying
Roland speaks to his great sword:

  “O Durendel cum ies bele et seintisme!”

“O Durendel how art thou fair and holy! In thy hilt what store of relics:
tooth of St. Peter, blood of St. Basil, hairs of my lord St. Denis, cloth
worn by the Holy Mary.”[664] These relics made the “holiness” of that
sword, not in the way of sentiment, but through their magic power. And we
shall not be thinking in mediaeval categories if we lose sight of the
magic-religious effect of the priest’s blessing on the novice’s sword: it
is a protection for the future knight.

Doubtless the religious features of the “adoubement” revert to various
epochs. The ancient watch-nights preceding Easter and Pentecost, followed
at daybreak by the baptism of white-robed catechumens, may have been the
original of the novice’s night vigil over his arms laid by the altar. His
bath had become a symbol of purification from sin. He heard Mass in the
early morning, and then came the blessing of the sword, the _benedictio
ensis_, of which the oldest extant formula is found in a Roman manuscript
of the early eleventh century: “Exaudi, quaeso, Domine, preces nostras, et
hunc ensem quo hic famulus N. se circumcingi desiderat, majestatis tuae
dextera benedicere dignare.”[665]

Through the Middle Ages the fashions of feudalism did not remain
unchanged; likewise its quintessential spirit, chivalry, was modified, and
one may say, between the ninth and the fourteenth centuries, passed from
barbarism to preciosity. Nevertheless the main ideals of chivalry endured,
springing as they did from the fundamental and but slowly-changing
conditions of feudal society. Since that society was constantly at
war,[666] the first virtue of the knight was valour. Next, since life and
property hung on mutual aid and troth, and a larger safety was ensured if
one lord could rely upon his neighbour’s word, the virtues of
truth-speaking and troth-keeping took their places in the chivalric ideal.
Another useful quality, and means of winning men, was generosity
(_largesse_). When coin is scarce, and stipulations for fixed pay unusual,
he who serves looks for liberality, which, in accordance with feudal
conditions, made the third of the chief knightly virtues.

Valour, troth, largesse, had no necessary connection with Christianity.
It was otherwise with certain of the remaining qualities of a knight.
According to Christian teaching, pride was the deadliest of sins. So
haughtiness, boasting, and vain-glory were to be held vices by the
Christian knight. He should show a humble demeanour, save toward the
mortal enemies of God; and far from boasting, he should rather depreciate
himself and his exploits, though never lowering the standard of his
purpose to achieve. Humility entered knighthood’s ideal from Christianity;
and so perhaps did courtesy, its kin, a virtue which was not among the
earliest to enter knighthood’s ideal, and yet reached universal
recognition.

Christianity also meant active charity, beneficence, and love of
neighbour. These are virtues hard to import into a state of war. Fighting
means harm-doing to an enemy; and only indirectly makes for some one’s
good. Let there be some vindication of good in the fighting of a Christian
knight: he shall be quick to right the wrong, succour distress, and
quickest to bear help where no reward can come. Since knighthood’s ideals
took form in crusading times, the slaughter of the Paynim became the
supreme act of knightly warfare.

If such elements of the knightly ideal were of Christian origin, others
still were even more closely part of mediaeval Christianity. First of
these was faith, orthodox faith, heresy-uprooting, infidel-destroying,
_fides_ in the full Church sense. Without faith’s sacramental
credentials--baptism, participation in the mass--no one could be a knight:
and heresy degrades the recreant even before the scullion’s cleaver hacks
off his spurs.

From faith knighthood advances to obedience to the Church, a vow expressly
made by every knight on taking the Cross, and also incorporated in the
Constitutions of the crusading Orders of Templars and Hospitallers. But
does the knight pass on from obedience to chastity? This virtue might or
might not enter knighthood’s ideal. It scarcely could exist with courtly
or chivalric love;[667] and, in fact, knights commonly were either lovers
or married men--or both. Yet even in the Arthurian literature there is the
monkish Galahad, and many a sinful knight becomes a hermit in the end; and
among real and living knights, the Templars and Hospitallers were vowed to
celibacy. In these crusading orders the orbits of knighthood and
monasticism cross; and it will not be altogether a digression to review
the foundation and constitution of one of them.

The Order of the Temple was founded in the year 1118 by Hugh of Payns
(Champagne) and other French knights; who placed their hands within those
of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and vowed to devote themselves to the
protection of pilgrims in the Holy Land. Probably they also bestowed their
lands for the support of the nascent Order. Ten years afterwards Hugh
passed through France and England, winning new recruits and appearing at
the Council of Troyes. With the authority of that Council and of Pope
Honorius II. the _Regula pauperum commilitonum Christi Templique
Salomonici_ was promulgated. St. Bernard, to whom it is ascribed, was in
large part its inspiration and its author. It still exists in some
seventy-two chapters; but one cannot distinguish between those belonging
to the original document of 1128 and those added somewhat later.[668]

This _regula_ with its amendments and additions was translated from Latin
into Old French (_par excellence_ the tongue of the Crusades), and became
apparently the earliest form of the _Regle dou Temple_, upon which was
grafted a mass of ordinances (_retrais et establissemens_). Apparently the
whole of the extant Latin regula was prior to everything contained in the
French _regle_; and accordingly we shall simply regard the Latin as
containing the earliest regulations of the Temple, and the French as
exhibiting the modifications of tone and interest which came in the course
of years.

The hand of St. Bernard ensured the dominance of the monastic temper in
the original _regula_; and Hugo, the first Master of the Temple, could
not have been the Saint’s close friend without sharing his enthusiasms. So
the prologue opens with a true monastic note:

    “Our word is directed primarily to all who despise their own wills,
    and with purity of mind desire to serve under the supreme and
    veritable King; and with minds intent choose the noble warfare of
    obedience, and persevere therein. We therefore exhort you who until
    now have embraced secular knighthood (_miliciam secularem_) where
    Christ was not the cause, and whom God in His mercy has chosen out of
    the mass of perdition for the defence of the holy Church, to hasten to
    associate yourselves perpetually.”

This phraseology would suit the constitution of a sheer monastic order.
And the first chapter exhorts these _venerabiles fratres_ who renounce
their own wills and serve the King (Christ) with horses and arms,
zealously to observe all the religious services regularly prescribed for
monks. The _regula_ contains the usual monastic commands. For example,
obedience to the Master of the Order is enjoined _sine mora_ as if God
were commanding, which recalls the language of St. Benedict.[669] Clothes
are regulated, and diet; habitual silence is recommended; the brethren are
not to go alone, nor at their own will, but as directed by the Master, so
as to imitate Him who said, I came not to do mine own will, but His who
sent me.[670] Again, chests with locks are forbidden the brothers, except
under special permission; nor may any brother, without like permission,
receive letters from parents or friends; and then they should be read in
the Master’s presence.[671] Let the brethren shun idle speech, and above
all let no brother talk with another of military exploits, “follies
rather,” achieved by him while “in the world,” or of his doings with
miserable women.[672] Let no brother hunt with hawks; such mundane
delectations do not befit the religious, who should be rather hearing
God’s precepts, and at prayer, or confessing their sins with tears. Yet
the lion may always be hunted; for he goes seeking whom he may
devour.[673]

The _religio_ professed by the Templars is called, in the Latin rule,
_religio militaris_, which the French translates “religion de
chevalerie,” not incorrectly, but with somewhat different flavour.[674]

    “This new _genus religionis_, as we believe, by divine providence
    began with you in the Holy Land, a _religio_ in which you mingle
    chivalry (_milicia_). Thus this armed religion may advance through
    chivalry, and smite the enemy without incurring sin. Rightfully then
    we decree that you shall be called knights of the Temple (_milites
    Templi_) and may hold houses, lands and men, and possess serfs and
    justly rule them.”[675]

The pomp of the last sentence seems to remove from the tone of the earlier
chapters, and suggests a later date. Another, possibly late, chapter (66)
permits the knights to receive tithes, since they have abandoned their
riches for _spontaneae paupertati_. Still another accords to married men a
qualified admission to the brotherhood, but they may not wear the white
robe and mantle (55). The next forbids the admission of _sorores_; and the
last chapter of all (72) warns against the sight of women, and forbids the
brethren to kiss one, be she widow, virgin, mother, sister or friend.

Thus the Latin _regula_ formulates an order of monasticism with only the
modifications imperatively demanded by the exigencies of holy warfare. The
French _regle_ elaborates the military organization and enhances the
chivalric element. This begins to appear in the portions which are a
translation (usually quite close) of the Latin rule. But even that
translation makes changes, for example, omitting the period of probation
required in the Latin text, before admitting a brother to the Order.[676]
A striking change was made by the later French ordinances in the
interrogations and proceedings for admission. The Latin formula begins in
Cistercian phrase:

    “Vis abrenunciare seculo?

    “Volo.

    “Vis profiteri obedientiam secundum canonicam institutionem et
    secundum preceptum domini papae?

    “Volo.

    “Vis assumere tibi conversationem (the monastic mode and change of
    life) fratrum nostrorum?

    “Volo.”[677]

And so forth.

The substance of these and other questions was retained in the far longer
French formula, which exacted specific promises of compliance with all the
Order’s ordinances. But far removed from the original are such questions
as the following: “Biau dous amis” (the ordinary phrase of the chivalric
romance) have you, or has any one for you, made any promise to any one in
return for his aid in procuring your admission, which would be simony?
“Estes vos chevalier et fis de chevalier?”

Is the candidate a knight, and son of knight and lady, and are his “peres
... de lignage de chevaliers”? This means chivalry and gentle blood; and
if the candidate answers in the negative, he cannot be admitted as a
knight of the Temple, although he may be as “sergent,” or in some other
character. Most noble and courtly is the phrasing of these statutes. Their
frequent “Beaus seignors freres” is the address proper for knights rather
than monks.[678]

Usually wherever the translation of the Latin _regula_ ends, the _Regle
dou Temple_ passes on to provisions meeting the requirements of a
military, rather than a monastic order. We enter upon such in the chapters
governing the powers and privileges of the (Grand) Master, of the
Seneschal, of the Marshal, of the “Comandeor de la terre de Jerusalem.”
Many sections have to do with military discipline, with the ordering of
the knights and their followers on the march and in the battle; they
forbid the knights to joust or leave the squadron without orders.[679]
Horses, armour, and accoutrements are regulated, and, in short, full
provision is made for everything conducing to make the army efficient in
war. There is also a long list of faults and crimes for which a knight may
be disciplined or expelled; the latter shall be his punishment if he flee
before the Saracens and forsake his standard in battle.[680]

The history of the Templars, significantly epitomized in the amendments to
their _regula_, shows the necessary as well as inevitable secularization
of a military monastic order; an order which for the purposes of this
chapter may be placed among the chief historical examples of chivalry. For
in this chapter we are not straying through the pleasant mazes of romantic
literature, but are keeping close to history, with the intention of
drawing from it illustrations of chivalry’s ideals. We shall not, however,
enter further upon the story of the Order of the Temple, with its valorous
and rapacious achievements and most tragic end; but will rather look to
the careers of historic individuals for the illumination of our theme.

Reaching form and consciousness in the eleventh and twelfth centuries,
chivalry became part of the crusading ardour of those times. All true
knights were or might be Crusaders; and of a truth there was no purer
incarnation of the crusading spirit than Godfrey of Bouillon, that figure
of veritable if somewhat slender historicity, upon whom in time chronicler
and trouvère alike were to fasten as the true hero of the enterprise that
won Jerusalem. And so he was. Not that Godfrey was commander of the host.
He was not even its most energetic or most capable leader. Boemund of
Tarentum and Raymond of Toulouse were his superiors in power and military
energy. But neither Boemund, nor Tancred, nor Raymond, nor any other of
those princes of Christendom, was what Godfrey appears to us, the type and
symbol of the perfect, single-hearted, crusading knight, fighting solely
for the Faith, with Christian devotion and humility, and, like them all,
with more than Christian wrath. The First Crusade (1096-1099) was stamped
with hatred and slaughter: on the dreadful march, at the more dreadful
siege and final sack of Antioch, and finally when the holy sepulchre’s
defilement was washed out in Saracen blood. And there was no slaughterer
more eager than Godfrey.

The cruelty and religious fervour of the Crusade are rendered in the
words of Raymond of Agiles, one of the clergy in the train of Count
Raymond of Toulouse, and an eye-witness of the capture of Jerusalem. After
days of despairing struggle to effect a breach, success came as by the
mercy of God:

    “Among the first to enter was Tancred and the Duke of Lothringia
    (Godfrey), who on that day shed quantities of blood almost beyond
    belief. After them, the host mounted the walls, and now the Saracens
    suffered. Yet although the city was all but in the hands of the
    Franks, the Saracens resisted the party of Count Raymond as if they
    were never going to be taken. But when our men had mastered the walls
    of the city and the towers, then wonderful things were to be seen.
    Numbers of the Saracens were beheaded--which was the easiest for them;
    others were shot with arrows, or forced to jump from the towers;
    others were slowly tortured and were burned in flames. In the streets
    and open places of the town were seen piles of heads and hands and
    feet. One rode about everywhere amid the corpses of men and horses.
    But these were small matters! Let us go to Solomon’s temple, where
    they were wont to chant their rites and solemnities. What had been
    done there? If we speak the truth we exceed belief: let this suffice.
    In the temple and porch of Solomon one rode in blood up to the knees
    and even to the horses’ bridles by the just and marvellous Judgment of
    God, in order that the same place which so long had endured their
    blasphemies against Him should receive their blood.”

So the Crusaders wrought; and what joy did they feel! Raymond continues:

    “When the city was taken it was worth the whole long labour to witness
    the devotion of the pilgrims to the sepulchre of the Lord, how they
    clapped their hands, exulted, and sang a new song unto the Lord. For
    their hearts presented to God, victor and triumphant, vows of praise
    which they were unable to explain. A new day, new joy and exultation,
    new and perpetual gladness, the consummation of toil and devotion drew
    forth from all new words, new songs. This day, I say, glorious in
    every age to come, turned all our griefs and toils into joy and
    exultation.”[681]

So new songs of gladness burst from the hearts of the soldiers of the
Cross. In a few days the princes made an election, and offered the kingdom
to Count Raymond: he declined. Then Godfrey was made king; though he
would not be crowned, nor would he ever wear a crown where his Lord had
worn a crown of thorns. As a servant of Christ and of His Church he fought
and ruled some short months till his death. His fame has grown because his
heart was pure, and because, among the knights, he represented most
perfectly the religious impulse of this crusade which fought its way
through blood, until it poured out its new song of joy over the
blood-drenched city. He errs who thinks to find the source and power of
the First Crusade elsewhere than in the flaming zeal of feudal
Christianity. There was doubtless much divergence of motive, secular and
religious; but over-mastering and unifying all was the passion to wrest
the sepulchre of Christ from paynim defilement, and thus win salvation for
the Crusader. Greed went with the host, but it did not inspire the
enterprise.

Doubtless the stories of returning knights awakened a spirit of romantic
adventure, which stirred in later crusading generations. It was not so in
the eleventh century when the First Crusade was gathering. The romantic
imagination was then scarcely quickened; adventure was still inarticulate,
and the literature of adventure for the venture’s sake was yet to be
created. So the First Crusade, with its motive of religious zeal, is in
some degree distinguishable from those which followed when knighthood was
in different flower. If not the Crusades themselves, at least the
_Chansons_ of the trouvères who sang of them, follow a change
corresponding with the changing taste of chivalry: they begin with serious
matters, and are occupied with the great enterprise; then they become
adventurous in theme, romantic, till at last even romantic love is
infelicitously grafted upon the religious rage that won Jerusalem.

This process of change may be traced in the growth of the legends of the
First Crusade and Godfrey of Bouillon. Something was added to his career
even by the Latin Chronicles of fifty years later. But his most
venturesome development is to be found in those French _Chansons de geste_
which have been made into the “Cycle” of the First Crusade. Two of these,
the _Chansons_ of _Antioche_ and _Jerusalem_, were originally composed by
a contemporary, if not a participant in the expedition. They were
refashioned perhaps seventy-five or a hundred years later, in the reign of
Philip Augustus, by another trouvère, who still kept their old tone and
substance. They remained poetic narratives of the holy war. In them the
knights are fierce and bloody, cruel and sometimes greedy; but their whole
emprise makes onward to the end in view, the winning of the holy city.
These poems are epic and not romantic: they may even be called historical.
The character of Godfrey is developed with legendary or epic propriety,
through a heightening of his historic qualities. He equals or excels the
other barons in fierce valour, and yet a touch of courtesy tempers his
wrath. In Christian meekness and in modesty he surpasses all, and he
refuses the throne of Jerusalem until he has been commanded from on high.
At that he accepts the kingdom as a sacred charge in defence of which he
is to die.

It is otherwise with a number of other _chansons_ composed in the latter
part of the twelfth and through the thirteenth century. Some of them (the
_Chanson des chétifs_, for example) had probably to do with the First
Crusade. Others, like the various poems which tell of the Chevalier au
Cygne, were inaptly forced into connection with the family of Godfrey.
They have become adventurous, and are studded with irrelevant marvels,
rather than assisted to their denouements by serious supernatural
intervention. Monsters appear, and incongruous romantic episodes;
Godfrey’s ancestor has become the Swan-knight, and he himself duplicates
the exploits previously ascribed to that half-fairy person. Knightly
manners, from brutal have become courteous. Women throng these poems, and
the romantic love of women enters, although not in the finished guise in
which it plays so dominant a role in the Arthurian Cycle. Such themes,
unknown to the earlier crusading _chansons_, would have fitted ill with a
martial theme driving on through war and carnage (not through
“adventures”) to the holy end in view.[682]

The Crusades open with the form of Godfrey of Bouillon. A century and a
half elapses and they deaden to a close beneath the futile radiance of a
saintlike and perfect knightly personality. St. Louis of France is as
clear a figure as any in the Middle Ages. From all sides his life is
known. We see him as a painstaking sovereign meting out even justice, and
maintaining his royal rights against feudal turbulence and also against
ecclesiastical encroachment. During his reign the monarchy of France
continues to advance in power and repute. And yet there was no jot of
worldly wisdom, and scant consideration of a realm sorely needing its
ruler, in the Quixotic religious devotion which drew him twice across the
sea on crusades unparalleled in their foolishness. For the world was
growing wiser politically; and what was glorious feudal enthusiasm in the
year 1099, was deliberate disregard of experience in the years 1248 and
1270.

Yet who would have had St. Louis wiser in his generation? The loss to
France was mankind’s gain, from the example of saintly king and perfect
knight, kept bright in the narratives of men equal to the task. Louis was
happy in his biographers. Two among them knew him intimately and in ways
affording special opportunities to observe the sides of his character
congenial to their respective tempers. One was his confessor for twenty
years, the Dominican Geoffrey of Beaulieu; the other was the Sire de
Joinville. Geoffrey’s _Vita_ records Louis’ devotions; Joinville’s
_Histoire_ notes the king’s piety; but the qualities which it illuminates
are those of a French gentleman and knight and grand seigneur, like
Joinville himself.

The book of the Dominican[683] is not picturesque. It opens with an
edifying comparison between King Josiah and King Louis. Then it praises
the king’s mother, Queen Blanche of pious memory. As for Louis, the
confessor has been unable to discover that he ever committed a mortal sin:
he sought faithful and wise counsellors; he was careful and gracious in
speech, never using an oath or any scurrilous expression. In earlier
years, when under the necessity of taking oath, he would say, “In nomine
mei”; but afterwards, hearing that some religious man had objected to
this, he restricted his asseverations to the “est, est” and “non, non” of
the Gospel.

From the time he first crossed the sea, he wore no scarlet raiment, but
clothed himself in sober garments. And as such were of less value to give
to the poor than those which he had formerly worn, he added sixty pounds a
year to his almsgiving; for he did not wish the poor to suffer because of
his humble dress. Geoffrey gives the long tale of his charities to the
poor and to the mendicant Orders. On the Sabbaths it was the king’s secret
custom to wash the feet of three beggars, dry them, and kiss them humbly.
He commanded in his will that no stately monument should be erected over
his grave. He treated his confessors with great respect, and, while
confessing, if perchance a window was to be closed or opened, he quickly
rose and shut or opened it, and would not hear of his confessor doing it.
In Advent season and Lent he abstained from marital intercourse. Some
years before his death, if he had had his will, he would have resigned his
kingdom to his son, and entered the Order of the Franciscans or
Dominicans. He brought up his children most religiously, and wished some
of them to take the vows.[684]

He confessed every Friday and also between times, if something occurred to
him; and if he thought of anything in the night, he would send for his
confessor and confess before matins.[685] After confession he always took
his discipline from his confessor, whom he furnished with a scourge of
five little braided iron chains, attached to an ivory handle. This he
would afterwards put back into a little case, which he carried hanging to
his belt, but out of sight. Such little cases he sometimes presented to
his children or friends in secret, that they might have a convenient
instrument of discipline. He wore haircloth next his flesh in the holy
seasons, a habit distressing to his tender skin, until his confessor
persuaded him to abandon this form of penance as ill comporting with his
station. He replaced it by increasing his charities. His fasts were
regular and frequent, till he lessened them upon prudent advice; for he
was not strong. He would have liked to hear all the canonical hours
chanted; and twice a day he heard Mass, and daily the Office for the Dead.
Sometimes, soon after midnight, he would rise to hear matins, and then
would take a quiet time for prayer by his bed. Likewise he loved to hear
sermons. On returning over the sea, when the ships suffered a long delay,
he had preaching three times a week, with the sermon specially adapted to
the sailors, a class of men who rarely hear the Word of God. He prevailed
on many of them to confess, and declared himself ready at any time to put
his hand to a rope, if necessary, so that a sailor while confessing might
not be called away by any exigency of the sea.

While beyond the sea, this good king, hearing that a Saracen Sultan had
collected the books of their philosophy at his own expense for his
subjects’ use, determined not to be outdone whenever he should return to
Paris, a purpose which he amply carried out, diligently and generously
supplying money for copying and renewing the writings of the Doctors. At
enormous expense he obtained the Saviour’s crown of thorns and a good part
of the true cross, from the emperor at Constantinople, with many other
precious relics; all of which the king barefooted helped to carry in holy
procession when they were received by the clergy of Paris.

The king was very careful in the distribution of ecclesiastical patronage,
always seeing to it that the candidate was not already enjoying another
benefice. His heart exulted when it came to him to bestow a benefice upon
some especially holy man. He was most zealous in the suppression of
swearing and blasphemy, and with the advice of the papal legate then in
France issued an edict, providing that the lips of those guilty of this
sin should be seared with hot irons; and when certain ones murmured, he
declared that he would willingly suffer his own lips to be branded if that
would purge his realm of this vice.

Such were the acts and qualities of Louis which impressed his Dominican
confessor. They were the qualities of a saint, and would have brought
their possessor to a monastery, had not his royal station held him in the
world. The Dominican could not know the knightly nature of his royal
penitent, and still less reflect it in his Latin of the confessional. For
this there was needed the pen of a great gentleman, whose nature enabled
him to picture his lord in a book of such high breeding that it were hard
to find its fellow. This book is stately with the Sire de Joinville’s
consciousness of his position and blood, and stately through the respect
he bore his lord--a book with which no one would take a liberty. Yet it is
simple in thought and phrase, as written by one who lived through what he
tells, and closely knew and dearly loved the king. From it one learns that
he who was a saint in his confessor’s eyes was also a monarch from his
soul out to his royal manners and occasional royal insistence upon acts
which others thought unwise. We also learn to know him as a knightly,
hapless soldier of the Cross, who would not waver from his word plighted
even to an infidel.

That St. Louis was a veritable knight is the first thing one learns from
Joinville. The first part of my book, says that gentleman, tells how the
king conducted his life after the way of God and the Church, and to the
profit of his realm; the second tells of his “granz chevaleries et de ses
granz faiz d’armes.” “The first deed (_faiz_) whereby ‘il mist son cors en
avanture de mort’ was at our arrival before Damietta, where his council
was of the opinion, as I have understood, that he ought to remain in his
ship until he saw what his knights (_sa chevalerie_) should do, who made a
landing. The reason why they so counselled him was that if he disembarked,
and his people should be killed and he with them, the whole affair was
lost; while if he remained in his ship he could in his own person renew
the attempt to conquer Egypt. And he would credit no one, but leaped into
the sea, all armed, his shield hanging from his neck, his lance in hand,
and was one of the first upon the beach.”

This is from Joinville’s Introduction. He recommences formally:

    “In the name of God the all powerful, I, John, Sire of Joinville,
    Seneschal of Champagne, cause to be written the life of our sainted
    king Louis, as I saw and heard of it for the space of six years while
    I was in his company on the pilgrimage beyond the sea, and since we
    returned. And before I tell you his great deeds and prowess
    (_chevalerie_), I will recount what I saw and heard of his holy words
    and good precepts, so that they may be found one after the other for
    the improvement of those who hear.

    “This holy man loved God with all his heart, and imitated His works:
    which was evident in this, that as God died for the love which He bore
    His people, so he (Louis) put his body in peril several times for the
    love which he bore his people. The great love which he had for his
    people appeared in what he said to his eldest son, Louis, when very
    sick at Fontainebleau: ‘Fair son,’ said he, ‘I beg thee to make
    thyself loved by the people of thy kingdom; for indeed I should prefer
    that a Scot from Scotland came and ruled the people of the kingdom
    well and faithfully, rather than that thou shouldst rule them ill in
    the sight of all.’”

Joinville continues relating the virtues of the king, and recording his
conversations with himself:

    “He called me once and said, ‘Seneschal, what is God?’ And I said to
    him, ‘Sire, it is a being so good that there can be no better.’

    “‘Now I ask you,’ said he, ‘which would you choose, to be a leper, or
    to have committed a mortal sin?’ And I who never lied to him replied
    that I had rather have committed thirty than be a leper. Afterwards he
    called me apart and made me sit at his feet and said: ‘Why did you say
    that to me yesterday?’ And I told him that I would say it again. And
    he: ‘You speak like a thoughtless trifler; for you should know there
    is no leprosy so ugly as to be in mortal sin, because the soul in
    mortal sin is like the devil. This is why there can be no leprosy so
    ugly. And then, of a truth, when a man dies, he is cured of the
    leprosy of the body; but when the man who has committed a mortal sin
    dies, he does not know, nor is it certain, that he has so repented
    while living, that God has pardoned him; this is why he should have
    great fear that this leprosy will last as long as God shall be in
    paradise. So I pray you earnestly that you will train your heart, for
    the love of God and of me, to wish rather for leprosy or any other
    bodily evil, rather than that mortal sin should come into your soul.’
    He asked me whether I washed the feet of the poor on Holy Tuesday.
    ‘Sire,’ said I, ‘_quel malheur_! I will not wash those villains’
    feet.’ ‘Truly that was ill said,’ said he; ‘for you should not hold
    in contempt what God did for our instruction. So I pray you, for the
    love of God first, and for the love of me, to accustom yourself to
    wash them.’”

Joinville was some years younger than his king, who loved him well and
wished to help him. The king also esteemed Master Robert de Sorbon[686]
for the high respect as a _preudom_ in which he was held, and had him eat
at his table. One day Master Robert was seated next to Joinville.

    “‘Seneschal,’ said the king, smiling, ‘tell me the reasons why a man
    of wisdom and valour (_preudom_, _prud’homme_) is accounted better
    than a fool.’ Then began the argument between me and Master Robert;
    and when we had disputed for a time, the king rendered his decision,
    saying: ‘Master Robert, I should like to have the name of _preudom_,
    so be it that I was one, and all the rest I would leave to you; for
    _preudom_ is such a grand and good thing that it fills the mouth just
    to pronounce it.’”

Master Robert plays a not altogether happy part in another scene,
varicoloured and delightful:

    “The holy king was at Corbeil one Pentecost, and twenty-four knights
    with him. The king went down after dinner into the courtyard back of
    the chapel, and was talking at the entrance with the Count of
    Brittany, the father of the present duke, whom God preserve. Master
    Robert de Sorbon came to seek me there, and took me by the cloak, and
    led me to the king, and all the other gentlemen came after us. Then I
    asked Master Robert: ‘Master Robert, what would you?’ And he said to
    me: ‘If the king should sit down here, and you should seat yourself
    above him, I ask you whether you would not be to blame?’ And I said,
    Yes.

    “And he said to me: ‘Yet you lay yourself open to blame, since you are
    more nobly clad than the king: for you wear squirrel’s fur and cloth
    of green, which the king does not.’

    “And I said to him: ‘Master Robert, saving your grace, I do nothing
    worthy of blame when I wear squirrel’s fur and cloth of green; for it
    is the clothing which my father and mother left me. But you do what is
    to blame; for you are the son of a _vilain_ and _vilaine_, and have
    abandoned the clothes of your father and your mother, and are clad in
    richer cloth than the king.’ And then I took the lappet of his surcoat
    and that of the king’s, and said to him: ‘See whether I do not speak
    truly.’ And the king set himself to defend Master Robert with all his
    might.”

    “Afterwards Messire the king called to him Monseigneur Philippe his
    son, the father of the present king, and the king Thibaut (of
    Navarre), and laid his hand on the earth and said: ‘Sit close to me,
    so that they may not hear.’

    “‘Ah Sire,’ say they, ‘we dare not sit so close to you.’

    “And he said to me, ‘Seneschal, sit down here.’ And so I did, so close
    that our clothes touched. And he made them sit down by me, and said to
    them: ‘You have done ill, you who are my sons, who have not obeyed at
    once all that I bade you: and see to it that this does not happen with
    you again.’ And they promised. And then he said to me, that he had
    called us in order to confess to me that he was in the wrong in
    defending Master Robert against me. ‘But,’ said he, ‘I saw him so
    dumbfounded that there was good need I should defend him. And do none
    of you attach any importance to all I said defending Master Robert;
    for, as the seneschal said to him, you ought to dress well and
    becomingly, so that your wives may love you better, and your people
    hold you in higher esteem. For the sage says that one should appear in
    such clothes and arms that the wise of this world may not say you have
    done too much, nor the young people say you have done too little.’”

The hopelessly worthy _parvenu_ was quite outside this charmed circle of
blood and manners.

Another story of Joinville opens our eyes to Louis’ views on Jews and
infidels. The king was telling him of a grand argument between Jews and
Christian clergy which was to have been held at Cluny. And a certain
poverty-stricken knight was there, who obtained leave to speak the first
word; and he asked the head Jew whether he believed that Mary was the
mother of God and still a virgin. And the Jew answered that he did not
believe it at all. The knight replied that in that case the Jew had acted
like a fool to enter her monastery, and should pay for it; and with that
he knocked him down with his staff, and all the other Jews ran off. When
the abbot reproached him for his folly, he replied that the abbot’s folly
was greater in having the argument at all. “So I tell you,” said the king
on finishing his story, “that only a skilled clerk should dispute with
misbelievers; but a layman, when he hears any one speak ill of the
Christian law, should defend that law with nothing but his sword, which he
should plunge into the defamer’s belly, to the hilt if possible.”

Well known is the hapless outcome of St. Louis’ Crusades: the first one
leading to defeat and captivity in Egypt, the second ending in the king’s
death by disease at Tunis. Yet in what he sought to do in his Lord’s
cause, St. Louis was a true knight and soldier of the Cross. The spirit
was willing; but the flesh accomplished little. Let us take from
Joinville’s story of that first crusade a wonderfully illustrative
chapter, giving the confused scenes occurring after the capture of
Damietta, when the French king and his feudal host had advanced southerly
through the Delta, along the eastern branch of the Nile. Joinville was
making a reconnaissance with his own knights, when they came suddenly upon
a large body of Saracens. The Christians were hard pressed; here and there
a knight falls in the melée, among them

    “Monseigneur Hugues de Trichatel, the lord of Conflans, who carried my
    banner. I and my knights spurred to deliver Monseigneur Raoul de
    Wanou, who was thrown to the ground. As I was making my way back, the
    Turks struck at me with their lances; my horse fell on his knees under
    the blows, and I went over his head. I recovered myself as I might,
    shield on neck and sword in hand; and Monseigneur Erard de Siverey
    (whom God absolve!), who was of my people, came to my aid, and said
    that we had better retreat to a ruined house, and there wait for the
    king who was approaching.”

One notes the high-born courtesy with which the Sire de Joinville speaks
of the gentlemen who had the honour of serving him. The fight goes on.

    “Monseigneur Erard de Siverey was struck by a sword-blow in his face,
    so that his nose hung down over his lips. And then I was minded of
    Monseigneur Saint Jacques, whom I thus invoked: ‘Beau Sire Saint
    Jacques help and succour me in this need.’

    “When I had made my prayer, Monseigneur Erard de Siverey said to me:
    ‘Sire, if you think that neither I nor my heirs would suffer reproof,
    I would go for aid to the Count of Anjou, whom I see over there in the
    fields.’ And I said to him: ‘Messire Erard, I think you would do
    yourself great honour, if you now went for aid to save our lives; for
    your own is in jeopardy.’ And indeed I spoke truly, for he died of
    that wound. He asked the advice of all our knights who were there, and
    all approved as I had approved. And when he heard that, he requested
    me to let him have his horse, which I was holding by the bridle with
    the rest. And so I did.”

The knightliness of this scene is perfect, with its liege fealty and its
carefulness as to the point of honour, its carefulness also that the
vassal knight shall fail in no duty to his lord whereby the descent of his
fief may be jeopardized. Monseigneur Erard (whom God absolve, we say with
Joinville!) is very careful to have his lord’s assent and the approval of
his fellows, before he will leave his lord in peril, and undergo still
greater risk to bring him succour.

Well, the Count of Anjou brought such aid as created a diversion, and the
Saracens turned to the new foe. But now the king arrives on the scene:

    “There where I was on foot with my knights, wounded as already said,
    comes the king with his whole array, and a great sound of trumpets and
    drums. And he halted on the road on the dyke. Never saw I one so
    bravely armed: for he showed above all his people from his shoulders
    up, a gilded casque upon his head and a German sword in his hand.”

Then the king’s good knights charge into the battle, and fine feats of
arms are done. The fighting is fierce and general. At length the king is
counselled to bear back along the river, keeping close to it on his right
hand, so as to reunite with the Duke of Burgundy who had been left to
guard the camp. The knights are recalled from the melée, and with a great
noise of trumpets and drums, and Saracen horns, the army is set in motion.

    “And now up comes the constable, Messire Imbert de Beaujeu, and tells
    the king that the Count of Artois, his brother, was defending himself
    in a house in Mansourah, and needed aid. And the king said to him:
    ‘Constable go before and I will follow you.’ And I said to the
    constable that I would be his knight, at which he thanked me greatly.”

Again one feels the feudal chivalry. Now the affair becomes rather
distraught. They set out to succour the Count of Artois, but are checked,
and it is rumoured that the king is taken; and in fact six Saracens had
rushed upon him and seized his horse by the bridle; but he had freed
himself with such great strokes that all his people took courage. Yet the
host is driven back upon the river, and is in desperate straits. Joinville
and his knights defend a bridge over a tributary, which helps to check the
Saracen advance, and affords an uncertain means of safety to the French.
But there is no cessation of the Saracen attack with bows and spears. The
knights seemed full of arrows. Joinville saved his life with an
arrow-proof Saracen vest, “so that I was wounded by their arrows only in
five places”! One of Joinville’s own stout burgesses, bearing his lord’s
banner on a lance, helped in the charges upon the enemy. In the melée up
speaks the good Count of Soissons, whose cousin Joinville had married. “He
joked with me and said: ‘Seneschal, let us whoop after this canaille; for
by God’s coif (his favourite oath) we shall be talking, you and I, about
this day in the chambers of the ladies.’”

At last, the arbalests were brought out from the camp, and the Saracens
drew off--fled, says the Sire de Joinville. And the king was there, and

    “I took off his casque, and gave him my iron cap, so that he might get
    some air. And then comes brother Henry de Ronnay, Prevost of the
    Hospital, to the king when he had passed the river, and kisses his
    mailed hand. And the king asked him whether he had news of the Count
    of Artois, his brother; and he said that he had indeed news of him,
    for he was sure that his brother the Count of Artois was in Paradise.
    ‘Ha! sire,’ said the Prevost, ‘be of good cheer; for no such honour
    ever came to a king of France as is come to you. For to fight your
    enemies you have crossed a river by swimming, have discomfited your
    enemies and driven them from the field, and taken their engines and
    tents, where you will sleep this night.’ And the king replied that God
    be adored for all that He gave; and then the great tears fell from his
    eyes.”

One need not follow on to the ill ending of the campaign, when king and
knights all had to yield themselves prisoners, in most uncertain
captivity. The Saracen Emirs conspired and slew their Sultan; the
prisoners’ lives hung on a thread; and when the terms were arranging for
the delivery and ransom of the king, his own scruples nearly proved fatal.
For the Emirs, after they had made their oath, wished the king to swear,
and put his seal to a parchment,

    “that if he the king did not hold to his agreements, might he be as
    shamed as the Christian who denied God and His Mother, and was cut off
    from the company of the twelve Companions (apostles) and of all the
    saints, male and female. To this the king consented. The last point of
    the oath was this: That if the king did not keep his agreements, might
    he be as shamed as the Christian who denied God and His law, and in
    contempt of God spat on the Cross and trod on it. When the king heard
    that, he said, please God, he would not make that oath.”

Then the trouble began, and the Emirs tortured the venerable patriarch of
Jerusalem till he besought the king to swear. How the oath was arranged I
do not know, says Joinville, but finally the Emirs professed themselves
satisfied. And after that, when the ransom was paid, the Saracens by a
mistake accepted a sum ten thousand livres short, and Louis, in spite of
the protest of his counsellors, refused to permit advantage to be taken
and insisted on full payment.

Many years afterwards, when Louis was dead and canonized, a dream came to
his faithful Joinville who was then an old man.

    “It seemed to me in my dream that I saw the king in front of my chapel
    at Joinville; and he was, so he seemed to me, wonderfully happy and
    glad at heart; and I also was glad at heart, because I saw him in my
    chateau. And I said to him: ‘Sire, when you go hence, I will prepare
    lodging for you at my house in my village of Chevillon.’ And he
    replied, smiling, and said to me: ‘Sire de Joinville, by the troth I
    owe you, I do not wish so soon to go from here.’ When I awoke I
    bethought me; and it seemed to me that it would please God and the
    king that I should provide a lodging for him in my chapel. So I have
    placed an altar in honour of God and of him there, where there shall
    be always chanting in his honour. And I have established a fund in
    perpetuity to do this.”

Godfrey of Bouillon and St. Louis of France show knighthood as inspired by
serious and religious motives. We pass on a hundred years after St. Louis,
to a famous Chronicle concerning men whose knightly lives exhibit no such
religious, and possibly no such serious, purpose, so far at least as they
are set forth by this delightful chronicler. His name of course is Sir
John Froissart, and his chief work goes under the name of _The Chronicles
of England, France, Spain, and the adjoining Countries_. It covers the
period from the reign of Edward II. to the coronation of Henry IV. of
England. Have we not all known his book as one to delight youth and age?

Let us, however, open it seriously, and first of all notice the Preface,
with its initial sentence giving the note of the entire work: “That the
_grans merveilles_ and the _biau fait d’armes_ achieved in the great wars
between England and France, and the neighbouring realms may be worthily
recorded, and known in the present and in the time to come, I purpose to
order and put the same in prose, according to the true information which I
have obtained from valiant knights, squires, and marshals at arms, who are
and rightly should be the investigators and reporters of such
matters.”[687]

“Marvels” and “deeds of arms”--soon he will use the equivalent phrase
_belles aventures_. With delicious garrulity, but never wavering from his
point of view, the good Sir John repeats and enlarges as he enters on his
work in which “to encourage all valorous hearts, and to show them
honourable examples” he proposes to “point out and speak of each adventure
from the nativity of the noble King Edward (III.) of England, who so
potently reigned, and who was engaged in so many battles and perilous
adventures and other feats of arms and great prowess, from the year of
grace 1326, when he was crowned in England.”

Of course Froissart says that the occasion of these wars was King Edward’s
enterprise to recover his inheritance of France, which the twelve peers
and barons of that realm had awarded to Lord Philip of Valois, from whom
it had passed on to his son, King Charles. This enterprise was the woof
whereon should hang an hundred years of knightly and romantic feats of
arms, which incidentally wrought desolation to the fair realm of France.
Yet the full opening of these matters was not yet; and Froissart begins
with the story of the troubles brought on Queen Isabella and the nobles
of England through the overbearing insolence of Sir Hugh Spencer, the
favourite of her husband Edward II.

The Queen left England secretly, to seek aid at Paris from her brother
King Charles, that she might regain her rights against the upstart and her
own weak estranged husband. King Charles received her graciously, as a
great lord should receive a great dame; and richly provided for her and
her young son Edward. Then he took counsel of the “great lords and barons
of his kingdom”; and their advice was that he should permit her to enlist
assistance in his realm, and yet himself appear ignorant of the matter. Of
this, Sir Hugh hears, and his gold is busy with these counsellors; so that
the Court becomes a cold place for the self-exiled queen. On she fares in
her distress, and, as advised, seeks the aid of the great Earl of
Hainault, then at Valenciennes. But before the queen can reach that city,
the earl’s young brother, Sir John, Lord of Beaumont, rides to meet her,
ardent to succour a great lady in distress, “being at that time very
young, and panting for glory like a knight-errant.” In the evening he
reached the house of Sir Eustace d’Ambreticourt, where the queen was
lodged. She made her lamentable complaint, at which Sir John was affected
even to tears, and said, “Lady, see here your knight, who will not fail to
die for you, though every one else should desert you; therefore will I do
everything in my power to conduct you and your son, and to restore you to
your rank in England, by the grace of God, and the assistance of your
friends in those parts; and I, and all those whom I can influence, will
risk our lives on the adventure for your sake.”

Is not this a chivalric beginning? And so the Chronicle goes on. King
Edward III. is crowned, marries the Lady Philippa, daughter of the Earl of
Hainault, and afterwards sends his defiance to Philip, King of France, for
not yielding up to him his rightful inheritance, and this after the same
King Edward had, as Duke of Aquitaine, done homage to King Philip for that
great duchy.

So the challenge of King Edward, and of sundry other lords, was delivered
to the King of France; and thereupon the first bold raid is made by the
knightliest figure of the first generation of the war, Sir Walter Manny,
a young Hainaulter who had remained in the train of Queen Philippa. The
war is carried on by incursions and deeds of derring-do, the larger armies
of the kings of England and France circumspectly refraining from battle,
which might have checked the martial jollity of the affair. It is all
beautifully pointless and adventurous, and carried out in the spirit of a
knighthood that loves fighting and seeks honour and adventure, while
steadying itself with a hope of plunder and reward. There are likewise
ladies to be succoured and defended.

One of these was the lion-hearted Countess of Montfort, who with her
husband had become possessed of the disputed dukedom of Brittany. The Earl
of Montfort did homage to the King of England; the rival claimant, Charles
of Blois, sought the aid of France. He came with an army, and Montfort was
taken and died in prison; the duchess was left to carry on the war. She
was at last shut up and besieged in Hennebon on the coast; the burghers
were falling away, the knights discouraged; emissaries from Lord Charles
were working among them. His ally, Lord Lewis of Spain, and Sir Hervé de
Leon were the leaders of the besiegers. Sir Hervé had an uncle, a bishop,
Sir Guy de Leon, who was on the side of the Countess of Montfort. The
nephew won the uncle over in a conference without the walls; and the
latter assumed the task of persuading the Lords of Brittany who were with
the countess to abandon the apparently hopeless struggle. Re-entering the
town, the bishop was eloquent against the countess’s cause, and promised
free pardon to the lords if they would give up the town. Now listen to
Froissart, how he tells the story:

    “The countess had strong suspicions of what was going forward, and
    begged of the lords of Brittany, for the love of God, that they would
    not doubt but she should receive succours before three days were over.
    But the bishop spoke so eloquently, and made use of such good
    arguments, that these lords were in much suspense all that night. On
    the morrow he continued the subject, and succeeded so far as to gain
    them over, or very nearly so, to his opinion; insomuch that Sir Hervé
    de Leon had advanced close to the town to take possession of it, with
    their free consent, when the countess looking out from a window of the
    castle toward the sea, cried out most joyfully, ‘I see the succours I
    have so long expected and wished for coming.’ She repeated this twice;
    and the town’s people ran to the ramparts and to the windows of the
    castle, and saw a numerous fleet of great and small vessels, well
    trimmed, making all the sail they could toward Hennebon. They rightly
    imagined it must be the fleet from England, so long detained at sea by
    tempests and contrary winds.

    “When the governor of Guingamp, Sir Yves de Tresiquidi, Sir Galeran de
    Landreman, and the other knights, perceived this succour coming to
    them, they told the bishop that he might break up his conference, for
    they were not now inclined to follow his advice. The bishop, Sir Guy
    de Leon, replied, ‘My lords, then our company shall separate; for I
    will go to him who seems to me to have the clearest right.’ Upon which
    he sent his defiance to the lady, and to all her party, and left the
    town to inform Sir Hervé de Leon how matters stood. Sir Hervé was much
    vexed at it, and immediately ordered the largest machine that was with
    the army to be placed as near the castle as possible, strictly
    commanding that it should never cease working day nor night. He then
    presented his uncle to the Lord Lewis of Spain, and to the Lord
    Charles of Blois, who both received him most courteously. The
    countess, in the meantime, prepared and hung with tapestry halls and
    chambers to lodge handsomely the lords and barons of England, whom she
    saw coming, and sent out a noble company to meet them. When they were
    landed, she went herself to give them welcome, respectfully thanking
    each knight and squire, and led them into the town and castle that
    they might have convenient lodging: on the morrow, she gave them a
    magnificent entertainment. All that night, and the following day, the
    large machine never ceased from casting stones into the town.

    “After the entertainment, Sir Walter Manny, who was captain of the
    English, inquired of the countess the state of the town and the
    enemy’s army. Upon looking out of the window, he said, he had a great
    inclination to destroy that large machine which was placed so near,
    and much annoyed them, if any would help him. Sir Yves de Tresiquidi
    replied, that he would not fail him in this his first expedition; as
    did also the lord of Landreman. They went to arm themselves, and then
    sallied quietly out of one of the gates, taking with them three
    hundred archers, who shot so well, that those who guarded the machine
    fled, and the men at arms, who followed the archers, falling upon
    them, slew the greater part, and broke down and cut in pieces this
    large machine. They then dashed in among the tents and huts, set fire
    to them, and killed and wounded many of their enemies before the army
    was in motion. After this they made a handsome retreat. When the enemy
    were mounted and armed they galloped after them like madmen.

    “Sir Walter Manny, seeing this, exclaimed, ‘May I never be embraced by
    my mistress and dear friend, if I enter castle or fortress before I
    have unhorsed one of these gallopers.’ He then turned round, and
    pointed his spear toward the enemy, as did the two brothers of
    Lande-Halle, le Haze de Brabant, Sir Yves de Tresiquidi, Sir Galeran
    de Landreman, and many others, and spitted the first coursers. Many
    legs were made to kick the air. Some of their own party were also
    unhorsed. The conflict became very serious, for reinforcements were
    perpetually coming from the camp; and the English were obliged to
    retreat towards the castle, which they did in good order until they
    came to the castle ditch; there the knights made a stand, until all
    their men were safely returned. Many brilliant actions, captures, and
    rescues might have been seen. Those of the town who had not been of
    the party to destroy the large machine now issued forth, and, ranging
    themselves upon the banks of the ditch, made such good use of their
    bows, that they forced the enemy to withdraw, killing many men and
    horses. The chiefs of the army, perceiving they had the worst of it,
    and that they were losing men to no purpose, sounded a retreat, and
    made their men retire to the camp. As soon as they were gone, the
    townsmen re-entered, and went each to his quarters. The Countess of
    Montfort came down from the castle to meet them, and with a most
    cheerful countenance, kissed Sir Walter Manny, and all his companions,
    one after the other like a noble and valiant dame.”

In this manner the genial chronicler goes on through his long delightful
ramble. After a while the chief combatants close. Cressy is fought and
Poictiers. The Black Prince, that extremest bit of knightly royalty, fills
the page. The place of Sir Walter Manny is taken by the larger figure of
Sir John Chandos, and, on the other side, the usually unfortunate but
unconquerable Bertrand du Guesclin. Froissart is at his best when he tells
of the great expedition of the Black Prince to restore the cruel Don Pedro
of Castille to the throne from which he had been expelled by that
picturesque bastard brother Henry, who had a poorer title but a better
right, by virtue of being fit to rule.

This whole expedition was--as we see it in Froissart--neither politics nor
war, but chivalry. What interest had England, or Edward III., or the
Prince of Wales in Don Pedro? None. He was a cruel tyrant, rightfully
expelled. The Prince of Wales would set him back upon his throne in the
interest of royal legitimacy, and because there offered a brilliant
opportunity for fame and plunder: the Black Prince thought less of the
latter than the Free Companies enlisted under his banner, and less than
his own rapacious knights.

So in three divisions, headed by the most famous knights and in a way
generalled by Sir John Chandos, the host passes through the kingdom of
Navarre, and crosses the Pyrenees. Then begin a series of exploits. Sir
Thomas Felton and a company set out just to dare and beard the Castillian
army, and after entrancing feats of knight-errantry, are all captured or
slain. Much is the prince annoyed at this; but bears on, gladdened with
the thought, often expressed, that the bastard Henry is a bold and hardy
knight, and is advancing to give battle.

And true it was. One of Henry’s counsellors explains to him how easy it is
to hem in the Black Prince in the defiles, and starve him into a
disastrous retreat. Perish the thought! “By the soul of my father,”
answers King Henry, “I have such a desire to see this prince, and to try
my strength with him, that we will never part without a battle.”

So the unnecessary and resultless battle of Navaretta took place. Don
Pedro, the cruel rightful king, was knighted, with others, by the Prince
of Wales before the fight. The tried unflinching chivalry of England and
Aquitaine conquered, although one division of King Henry’s host had du
Guesclin at its head. That knight was captured; somehow his star had a way
of sinking before the steadier fortune of Sir John Chandos, who was here
du Guesclin’s captor for a second time. King Henry, after valiant
fighting, escaped. Don Pedro was re-set upon his throne; and played false
with the Black Prince and his army, in the matter of pay. The whole
expedition turned back across the Pyrenees. And not so long after, Henry
bestirred himself, and the tardily freed du Guesclin hurried again to aid
him. This time there was no Black Prince and Sir John Chandos; and Don
Pedro was conquered and slain, and Henry was at last firm upon his throne.

Could anything have been more chivalric, more objectless, and more
absolutely lacking in result? It is a beautiful story; every one should
refresh his childhood’s memory of it by reading Froissart’s delightful
pages. And then let him also read at least the subsequent story of the
death of Sir John Chandos in a knightly brush at arms; he, the really wise
and great leader, perishes through his personal rash knighthood! It is a
fine tale of the ending of an old and mighty knight, the very flower of
chivalry, as he was called.

So matters fare on through these Chronicles. All is charming and
interesting and picturesque; charming also for the knights: great fame is
won and fat ransoms paid to recoup knightly fortunes. Now and then--all
too frequently, alas! and the only pity of it all!--some brave knight has
the mishap to lose his life! That is to say, the only pity of it from the
point of view of good Sir John. But we can see further horrors in this
picture of chivalry’s actualities: we see King Edward pillage, devastate,
destroy France;[688] we see the awful outcome of the general ruin in the
rising of the vile, unhappy peasants, the Jacquerie; then in the
indiscriminate slaughter and pillaging by the Free Companies, no longer
well employed by royalties; and then we see the cruel treachery of many an
incident wrought out by such a flower of chivalry even as du
Guesclin.[689] Indeed all the horrors of ceaseless interminable war are
everywhere, and no more dreadful horror through the whole story than the
bloody sack of Limoges commanded by that perfect knight, the Black Prince,
himself stricken with disease, and carried in a litter through the breach
of the walls into the town, and there reposing, assuaging his cruel soul,
while his men run hither and thither “slaying men, women and children
according to their orders.”[690]

But when King Edward was old, and the Prince of Wales dying with disease,
the French and their partisans gathered heart, and pressed back the
English party with successful captures and reprisals. Du Guesclin was made
Constable of France; and there remained no English leader who was his
match. From this second period onwards, the wars and slaughters and
pillagings become more embittered, more horrid and less relieved. The tone
of everything is brutalized, and the good chronicler himself frequently
animadverts on the wanton destruction wrought, and the frightful ruin.
All is not as in the opening of the story, which was so fascinating, so
knightly and almost as purely adventurous as the Arthurian romances--only
that there was less love of ladies and a disturbing dearth of forests
perilous, and enchanted castles. It was then that the reader had ever and
anon to remind himself that Froissart is not romance or legend, but a
contemporary chronicle; and that in spite of heightened colours and
expanded (if not invented) dialogues, his narrative does not belong to the
imaginative or fictitious side of chivalry, but to its actualities.[691]

Froissart’s pictures of the depravity and devastation caused by the wars
of England and France, disclose the unhappy actuality in which chivalry
might move and have its being. And the knights were part of the cruelty,
treachery, and lust. One may remark besides in Froissart a certain
shallowness, a certain emptying, of the spirit of chivalry. One phase of
this lay in the expansion of form and ceremony, while life was
departing;--as, for example, in the hypertrophe of heraldry, and in the
pageantry of the later tournaments, where such care was taken to prevent
injury to the combatants. A subtler phase of chivalry’s emptying lay in
its preciosity and in the excessive growth of fantasy and utter
romance--of which enough will be said in the next chapter.




