CHAPTER XXIII

ROMANTIC CHIVALRY AND COURTLY LOVE

    FROM ROLAND TO TRISTAN AND LANCELOT


The instance of Godfrey of Bouillon showed how easy was the passage from
knighthood in history to knighthood in legend and romance: legend
springing from fact, out of which it makes a story framed in a picture of
the time; romance unhistorical in origin, borrowing, devising, imagining
according to the taste of an audience and the faculty of the trouvère. A
boundless mediaeval literature of poetic legend and romantic fiction sets
forth the ways of chivalry. Our attention may be confined to the Old
French, the source from which German, English, and Italian literatures
never ceased to draw. Three branches may be selected: the _chansons de
geste_; the _romans d’aventure_; and the Arthurian romances. The subjects
of the three are distinct, and likewise the tone and manner of treatment.
Yet they were not unaffected by each other; for instance, the hard feudal
spirit of the _chansons de geste_ became touched with the tastes which
moulded the two other groups, and there was even a borrowing of topic.
This was natural, as the periods of their composition over-lapped, and
doubtless their audiences were in part the same.

The _chansons de geste_ (_gesta_ == deeds) were epic narratives with
historical facts for subjects, and commonly were composed in ten-syllable
assonanced or (later) rhyming couplets, _laisses_ so called, the same
final assonance or rhyme extending through a dozen or so lines. They told
the deeds of Charlemagne and his barons, or the feuds of the barons among
themselves, especially those of the time following the emperor’s death. So
the subject might be national, for instance the war against the Saracens
in Spain; or it might be more provincially feudal in every sense of the
latter word.[692] It is not to our purpose to discuss how these poems grew
through successive generations, nor how much of Teutonic spirit they put
in Romance forms of verse. They were composed by trouvères or _jongleurs_.
The _Roland_ is the earliest of them, and in its extant form belongs to
the last part of the eleventh century. One or two others are nearly as
early; but the vast majority, as we have them, are the creations, or
rather the _remaniements_, of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.

These _chansons_ present the feudal system in epic action. They blazon
forth its virtues and its horrors. The heroes are called barons (_ber_)
and also chevaliers;[693] _vassalage_ and prowess (_proecce_) are closely
joined; the _Roland_ speaks of the _vassalage_ of Charles _le ber_
(Charlemagne). The usages of chivalry are found:[694] a baron begins as
_enfant_, and does his youthful feats (_enfances_); then he is girt with
manhood’s sword and given the thwack which dubs him _chevalier_.
Naturally, the chivalry of the _chansons_ is feudal rather than romantic.
It is chivalry, sometimes crusading against “felun paien,” sometimes
making war against emperors or rivals; always truculent, yet fighting for
an object and not for pure adventure’s sake or the love of ladies. The
motives of action are quite tangible, and the tales reflect actual
situations and conditions. They tell what knights (the chevaliers and
barons) really did, though, of course, the particular incidents related
may not be historical. Naturally they speak from the time of their
composition. The _Roland_, for example, throbs with the crusading wrath
of the eleventh century--a new fervour, and no passionate memory of the
old obscure disaster of Roncesvalles. It does not speak from the time of
the great emperor. For when Charlemagne lived there was neither a “dulce
France” nor the sentiment which enshrined it; nor was there a sharply
deliminated feudal Christianity set over against a world of “felun
paien”--those false paynim, who should be trusted by no Christian baron.
The whole poem revolves around a treason plotted by a renegade among vile
infidels.

In this rude poem which carries the noblest spirit of the _chansons de
geste_, the soul of feudal chivalry climbs to its height of loyal
expiation for overweening bravery. The battle-note is given in Roland’s
words, as Oliver descries the masses of paynim closing in around that
valiant rear-guard.

Said Oliver: “Sir comrade, I think we shall have battle with these
Saracens.”

Replied Roland: “God grant it! Here must we hold for our king. A man
should suffer for his lord, endure heat and cold, though he lose hair and
hide. Let each one strike his best, that no evil song be sung of us. The
paynim are in the wrong, Christians in the right!”[695]

Then follows Oliver’s prudent solicitation, and Roland’s fatal refusal to
sound his horn and recall Charles and his host: “Please God and His holy
angels, France shall not be so shamed through me; better death than such
dishonour. The harder we strike the more the emperor will love us.” Oliver
can be stubborn too; for when the fight is close to its fell end, he
swears that Roland shall never wed his sister Aude, if, beaten, he sound
that horn.[696]

The paynim host is shattered and riven; but nearly all the Franks have
fallen. Roland looks upon the mountains and the plain. Of those of France
he sees so many lying dead, and he laments them like a high-born knight
(_chevaliers gentilz_). “_Seigneurs barons_, may God have pity on you and
grant Paradise to your souls, and give them to repose on holy flowers!
Better vassals shall I never see; long are the years that you have served
me, and conquered wide countries for Charles--the emperor has nurtured you
for an ill end! Land of France, sweet land, to-day bereft of barons of
high prize! Barons of France! for me I see you dying. I cannot save or
defend you! God be your aid, who never lies! Oliver, brother, you I must
not fail. I shall die of grief, if no one slay me! Sir comrade, let us
strike again.”[697]

Roland and Oliver are almost alone, and Oliver receives a death-stroke.
With his last strength he slays his slayer, shouts his defiance, and calls
Roland to his aid. He strikes on blindly as Roland comes and looks into
his face;--and then might you have seen Roland swoon on his horse, and
Oliver wounded to death. “He had bled so much, that his eyes were
troubled, and he could not see to recognize any mortal man. As he met his
comrade, he struck him on his helmet a blow that cut it shear in twain,
though the sword did not touch the head. At this Roland looked at him, and
asked him soft and low: ‘Sir comrade, did you mean that? It is Roland, who
loves you well. You have not defied me.’

“Says Oliver, ‘Now I hear you speak; I did not see you; may the Lord God
see you! I have struck you; for which pardon me.’”

Roland replied: “I was not hurt. I pardon you here and before God.”

“At this word they bent over each other, and in such love they parted.”
Oliver feels his death-anguish at hand; sight and hearing fail him: he
sinks from his horse and lies on the earth; he confesses his sins, with
his two hands joined toward heaven. He prays God to grant him Paradise,
and blesses Charles and sweet France, and his comrade Roland above all
men. Stretched on the ground the count lies dead.[698]

A little after, when Roland and Turpin the stout archbishop have made
their last charge, and the paynim have withdrawn, and the archbishop too
lies on the ground, just breathing; then it is that Roland gathers the
bodies of the peers and carries them one by one to lay them before the
archbishop for his absolution. He finds Oliver’s body, and tightly
straining it to his heart, lays it with the rest before the archbishop,
whose dying breath is blessing and absolving his companions. And with
tears Roland’s voice breaks “Sweet comrade, Oliver, son of the good count
Renier, who held the March of Geneva; to break spear and pierce shield,
and counsel loyally the good, and discomfit and vanquish villains, in no
land was there better knight.”[699] Knowing his own death near, Roland
tries to shatter his great sword, and then lies down upon it with his face
toward Spain; he holds up his glove toward God in token of fealty; Gabriel
accepts his glove and the angels receive his soul.

This was the best of knighthood in the best of the _chansons_: and we see
how close it was to what was best in life. As the fight moves on to
Oliver’s blow and Roland’s pardon, to Roland’s last deeds of Christian
comradeship, and to his death, the eyes are critical indeed that do not
swell with tears. The heroic pathos of this rough poem is great because
the qualities which perished at Roncesvalles were so noble and so
knightly.

The poem passes on to the vengeance taken by the emperor upon the
Saracens, then to his return to Aix, and the short great scene between him
and Aude, Roland’s betrothed:

“Where is Roland, the chief, who vowed to take me for his wife?”

Charles weeps, and tears his white beard as he answers: “Sister, dear
friend, you are asking about a dead man. But I will make it good to
thee--there is Louis my son, who holds the Marches....”

Aude replies: “Strange words! God forbid, and His saints and angels, that
I should live after Roland.” And she falls dead at the emperor’s feet.

As was fitting, the poem closes with the trial of the traitor Ganelon, by
combat. His defence is feudal: he had defied Roland and all his
companions; his treachery was proper vengeance and not treason. But his
champion is defeated, and Ganelon himself is torn in pieces by horses,
while his relatives, pledged as hostages, are hanged. All of which is
feudalism, and can be matched for savagery in many a scene from the
Arthurian romances of chivalry--not always reproduced in modern versions.

So the _chansons de geste_ are a mirror of the ways and customs of feudal
society in the twelfth century. The feudal virtues are there, troth to
one’s liege, orthodox crusading ardour, limitless valour, truth-speaking.
There is also enormous brutality; and the recognized feudal vices,
cruelty, impiousness, and treason. In the _Raoul de Cambrai_, for example,
the nominal hero is a paroxysm of ferocity and impiety. All crimes rejoice
him as he rages along his ruthless way to establish his seignorial rights
over a fief unjustly awarded him by Louis, the weak son of Charlemagne.
His foil is Bernier, the natural son of one of the rightful heirs against
whom Raoul carries on raging feudal war. But Bernier is also Raoul’s
squire and vassal, who had received knighthood from him, and so is bound
to the monster by the strongest feudal tie. He is a pattern of knighthood
and of every feudal virtue. On the day of his knighting he implored his
lord not to enter on that fell war against his (Bernier’s) family. In
vain. The war is begun with fire and sword. Bernier must support his lord;
says he: “Raoul, my lord, is worse (_plu fel_) than Judas; he is my lord;
he has given me horse and clothes, my arms and cloth of gold. I would not
fail him for the riches of Damascus”: and all cried, “Bernier, thou art
right.”[700]

But there is a limit. Raoul is ferociously wasting the land, and
committing every impiety. He would desecrate the abbey of Origni, and set
his tent in the middle of the church, stabling his horse in its porch and
making his bed before the altar. Bernier’s mother is there as a nun; Raoul
pauses at her entreaties and those of his uncle. Then his rage breaks out
afresh at the death of two of his men; he burns the town and abbey, and
Bernier’s mother perishes with the other nuns in the flames.

Now the monster is feasting on the scene of desolation--and it is Lent
besides! After dining, he plays chess: enter Bernier. Raoul asks for wine.
Bernier takes the cup and, kneeling, hands it to him. Raoul is surprised
to see him, but at once renews his oath to disinherit all of Bernier’s
family--his father and uncles. Bernier speaks and reproaches Raoul with
his mother’s death: “I cannot bring her back to life, but I can aid my
father whom you unjustly follow up with war. I am your man no longer. Your
cruelty has released me from my duties; and you will find me on the side
of my father and uncles when you attack them.” For reply, Raoul breaks his
head open with the butt of his spear; but then at once asks pardon and
humiliates himself strangely. Bernier answers that there shall be no peace
between them till the blood which flowed from his head returns back whence
it came. Yet in the final battle he still seeks to turn Raoul back before
attacking him who had been his liege lord. Again in vain; and Raoul falls
beneath Bernier’s sword. Here are the two sides of the picture, the
monster of a lord, the vassal vainly seeking to be true: a situation
utterly tragic from the standpoint of feudal chivalry.

It is not to be supposed that a huge body of poetic narrative could remain
utterly truculent. Other motives had to enter;--the love of women, of
which the _Roland_ has its one great flash. The ladies of the _chansons_
are not coy, and often make the first advances. Such natural lusty love is
not romantic; it is not _l’amour courtois_; and marriage is its obvious
end. The _chansons_ also tend to become adventurous and to fill with
romantic episode. An interesting example of this is the _Renaud de
Montaubon_ where Renaud and his three brothers are aided by the enchanter,
Maugis, against the pursuing hate of Charlemagne and where the marvellous
horse, Bayard, is a fascinating personality. This diversified and romantic
tale long held its own in many tongues. In the somewhat later _Huon de
Bordeaux_ we are at last in fairyland--verily at the Court of Oberon--his
first known entry into literature.[701] Thus the _chansons_ tend toward
the tone and temper of the _romans d’aventure_.

The latter have the courtly love and the purely adventurous motives of the
Arthurian romances, with which the men who fashioned them probably were
acquainted, as were the _jongleurs_ who recast certain of the _chansons de
geste_ to suit a more courtly taste. Of the _romans d’aventure_,
so-called, the _Blancandrin_ or the _Amadas_ or the _Flamenca_ may be
taken as the type; or, if one will, _Flore et Blanchefleur_ and _Aucassin
et Nicolette_, those two enduring lovers’ tales.[702] Courtly love and
knightly ventures are the themes of these _romans_ so illustrative of
noble French society in the thirteenth century. They differ from the
Arthurian romances in having other than a Breton origin; and their heroes
and heroines are sometimes of more easily imagined historicity than the
knights and ladies of the Round Table. But they never approached the
universal vogue of the Arthurian Cycle.

It goes without saying that tastes in reading (or rather listening)
diverged in the twelfth century, just as in the twentieth. One cannot read
the old _chansons de geste_ in which fighting, and not love, is the
absorbing topic, without feeling that the audience before whom they were
chanted was predominantly male. One cannot but feel the contrary to have
been the fact with the romances in verse and prose which constitute that
immense mass of literature vaguely termed Arthurian. These two huge
groups, the _chansons de geste_ and the Arthurian romances, overlap
chronologically and geographically. Although the development of the
_chansons_ was somewhat earlier, the Arthurian stories were flourishing
before the _chansons_ were past their prime; and both were in vogue
through central and northern France. But the Arthurian stories won
adoptive homes in England, Germany, Italy, and elsewhere. Indeed their
earlier stages scarcely seem attached to real localities: nor were their
manners and interests rooted in the special traditions of any definite
place.

The tone and topics of these romances suggest an audience chiefly of
women, and possibly feminine authorship. Doubtless, with a few exceptions,
men composed and recited them. But the male authors were influenced by the
taste, the favour and patronage, and the sympathetic suggestive interest
of the ladies. Prominent among the first known composers of these
“Breton” lays was a woman, Marie de France as she is called, who lived in
England in the reign of Henry II. (1154-1189). Her younger contemporary
was the facile trouvère Chrétien de Troies, of whose life little is
actually known. But we know that the subject of his famous Lancelot
romance, called the _Conte de la charrette_, was suggested to him (about
1170) by the Countess Marie de Champagne, daughter of Louis VII. Surely
then he wrote to please the taste of that royal dame, whose queenly
mother, Eleanor of Aquitaine, was also a patroness of this courtly poetry.

These are instances proving the feminine influence upon the composition of
these romances. And the growth of this great Arthurian Cycle represents,
_par excellence_, the entry of womanhood into the literature of chivalry.
Men love, as well as women; but the topic engrosses them less, and they
talk less about it. Likewise men appreciate courtesy; but in fact it is
woman’s influence that softens manners. And while the masculine fancy may
be drawn by what is fanciful and romantic, women abandon themselves to its
charm.

Of course the origin or _provenance_ of these romances was different from
that of the _chansons de geste_. It was Breton--it was Welsh, it was
_walhisch_ (the Old-German word for the same) which means that it was
_foreign_. In fact, the beginnings of these stories floated beautifully in
from a _weiss-nicht-wo_ which in the twelfth century was already hidden in
the clouds. When the names of known localities are mentioned, they have
misty import. Arthurian geography is more elusive than Homeric.

In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries these stories took form in the
verse and prose compositions in which they still exist. Sometimes the
poet’s name is known, Chrétien de Troies, for instance; but the source
from which he drew is doubtful. It probably was Breton, and Artus once in
Great Britain fought the Saxons like as not. But the growth, the
development, the further composition, of the _matière de Bretagne_ is
predominantly French. In France it grows; from France it passes on across
the Rhine, across the Alps, then back to what may have been its old home
across the British Channel. With equal ease on the wings of universal
human interest it surmounts the Pyrenees. It would have crossed the ocean,
had the New World been discovered.

Far be it from our purpose to enter the bottomless swamp of critical
discussion of the source and history of the Arthurian romances. Two or
three statements--general and probably rather incorrect--may be made.
Marie de France, soon after the middle of the twelfth century, wrote a
number of shortish narrative poems of chivalric manners and romantic love,
which, as it were, touch the hem of Arthur’s cloak. Chrétien de Troies
between 1160 and 1175 composed his _Tristan_ (a story originally having
nothing to do with Arthur), and then his _Erec_ (Geraint), then _Cligés_;
then his (unfinished) _Lancelot_ or the _Conte de la charrette_; then
_Ivain_ or the _Chevalier au lion_, and at last _Perceval_ or the _Conte
du Graal_. How much of the matter of these poems came from Brittany--or
indirectly from Great Britain? This is a large unsolved question! Another
is the relation of Chrétien’s poems to the subsequent Arthurian romances
in verse and prose. And perhaps most disputed of all is the authorship
(Beroul? Robert de Boron? Walter Mapes?) of this mass of Arthurian Old
French literature which was not the work of Chrétien. Without lengthy
_prolegomena_ it would be fruitless to attempt to order and name these
compositions. The Arthurian matters were taken up by German poets of
excellence--Heinrich von Veldeke, Hartmann von Aue, Gottfried von
Strassburg, Wolfram von Eschenbach,--and sometimes the best existing
versions are the work of the latter; for instance, Wolfram’s _Parzival_
and Gottfried’s _Tristan_. And again the relation of these German versions
to their French originals becomes still another problem.

For the chivalry of these romances, one may look to the poems of Chrétien
and to passages in the Old French prose (presumably of the early
thirteenth century), to which the name of Robert de Boron or Walter Mapes
is attached. Chrétien enumerates knightly excellences in his _Cligés_,
and, speaking from the natural point of view of the _jongleur_, he puts
_largesce_ (generosity) at their head. This, says he, makes one a
_prodome_ more than _hautesce_ (high station) or _corteisie_ or _savoirs_
or _jantillesce_ (noble birth) or _chevalerie_, or _hardemanz_ (hardihood)
or _seignorie_, or _biautez_ (beauty).[703]

Such are the knightly virtues, which, however, reach their full worth only
through the aid of that which makes perfect the Arthurian knight, the high
love of ladies, shortly to be spoken of. In the meanwhile let us turn from
Chrétien to the broader tableau of the Old French prose, and note the
beginning of _Artus_, as he is there called. The lineage of the royal boy
remains romantically undiscovered, till the time when he is declared to be
the king. It is then that he receives all kinds of riches from the lords
of his realm. He keeps nothing for himself; but makes inquiry as to the
character and circumstances of his future knights, and distributes all
among them according to their worth. This is the virtue of _largesce_.

Now comes the ceremony of making him a knight, and then of investing him
with, as it were, the supreme knighthood of kingship. The archbishop, it
is told, “fist (made) Artu chevalier, et celle nuit veilla Artus a la
mestre Eglise (the cathedral) jusques au jour.” Then follows the ceremony
of swearing allegiance to him; but Arthur has not yet finally taken his
great sword. When he is arrayed for the mass, the archbishop says to him:
“Allez querre (seek) l’espee et la jostise dont vos devez defendre Saincte
Eglise et la crestiante sauver.”

    “Lors alla la procession au perron, et la demanda li arcevesques a
    Artu, se il est tiels que il osast jurer et creanter Dieu et madame
    Sainte Marie et a tous Sains et toutes Saintes, Sainte Eglise a sauver
    et a maintenir, et a tous povres homes et toutes povres femmes pais et
    loiaute tenir, et conseiller tous desconseillies, et avoier (guide)
    tous desvoies (erring), et maintenir toutes droitures et droite
    justice a tenir, si alast avant et preist l’espee dont nostre sire
    avoit fait de lui election. Et Artus plora et dist: ‘Ensi voirement
    com Dieus est sire de toutes les choses, me donit-il force et povoir
    de ce maintenir que vous avez dit.’

    “Il fu a genols et prit l’espee a jointes mains et la leva de
    l’enclume (anvil) ausi voirement come se ele ne tenist a riens; et
    lors, l’espee toute droite, l’enmenerent a l’autel et la mist sus; et
    lors il le pristrent et sacrerent et l’enoindrent, et li firent
    toutes iceles choses que l’en doit faire a roi.”[704]

All this is good chivalry as well as proper feudalism. And there are other
instances of genuine feudalism in these Romances. Such is the scene
between the good knight Pharien and the bad king Claudas, where the former
renounces his allegiance to the latter (_je declare renoncer a vostre
fief_) and then declares himself to be Claudas’s enemy, and claims the
right to fight or slay him; since Claudas has not kept troth with
him.[705]

There is perhaps nothing lovelier in all these Romances than the story of
the young Lancelot, reared by the tender care of the Lady of the Lake. His
training supplements the genial instincts of his nature, and the result is
the mirror of all knighthood’s qualities. He is noble, he is true, he is
perfect in bravery, in courtesy, in modesty, the Lady imparting the
precepts of these virtues to his ready spirit.[706] There is no knightly
virtue that is not perfect in this peerless youth, as he sets forth to
Arthur’s Court, there to receive knighthood and prove himself the peerless
knight and perfect lover. In this Old French prose his career is set forth
most completely, and most correctly, so to speak. One or two points may be
adverted to.

Lancelot is not strictly Arthur’s knight. Originally he owed no fealty to
him; and he avoided receiving his sword from the king, in order that he
might receive it from Guinever, as he did. And so, from the first,
Lancelot was Guinever’s knight, as he was afterwards her accepted lover.
Consequently his relations to her broke no fealty of his to Arthur.

Again, one notices that the absolute character of Lancelot’s love and
troth to Guinever is paralleled by the friendship of the high prince
Galahaut to him. That has the same _précieuse_ logic; it is absolute. No
act or thought of Galahaut infringes friendship’s least conceived
requirement; while conversely that marvellous high prince leaves undone no
act, however extreme, which can carry out the logic of this absolute
single-souled devotion. At last he dies on thinking that Lancelot is dead;
just as the latter could not have survived the death of Guinever. In spite
of the beauty of Galahaut’s devotion, its logic and preciosity scarcely
throb with manhood’s blood. It will not cause our eyes to swell with human
tears, as did the blind blow and the true words which passed between
Oliver and Roland at Roncesvalles.[707]

Chivalry--the institution and the whole knightly character--began in the
rough and veritable, and progressed to courtlier idealizations. Likewise
that knightly virtue, love of woman, displays a parallel evolution, being
part of the chivalric whole. Beginning in natural qualities, its progress
is romantic, logical, fantastic, even mystical.

Feudal life in the earlier mediaeval centuries did not foster tender
sentiments between betrothed or wedded couples. The chief object of every
landholder was by force or policy to secure his own safety and increase
his retainers and possessions. A ready means was for him to marry lands
and serfs in the robust person of the daughter, or widow, of some other
baron. The marriage was prefaced by scant courtship; and little love was
likely to ensue between the rough-handed husband and high-tempered wife.
Such conditions, whether in Languedoc, Aquitaine, or Champagne, made it
likely that high-blooded men and women would satisfy their amorous
cravings outside the bonds of matrimony. For these reasons, among others,
the Provençal and Old French literature, which was the medium of
development for the sentiment of love, did not commonly concern itself
with bringing lovers to the altar.

In literature, as in life, marriage is usually the goal of bliss and
silence for love-song and love-story: attainment quells the fictile
elements of fear and hope. Entire classes of mediaeval poetry like the
_aube_ (dawn) and the _pastorelle_ had no thought of marriage. The former
_genre_ of Provençal and Old French, as well as Old German, poetry, is a
lyric dialogue wherein the sentiments of lover and mistress become more
tender with the approach of the envious dawn.[708] The latter is the song
of the merry encounter of some clerk or cavalier with a mocking or
complaisant shepherdess. Yet one must beware of speaking too
categorically. For in mediaeval love-literature, marriage is looked
forward to or excluded according to circumstances; and there are instances
of romantic love where the lovers are blessed securely by the priest at
the beginning of their adventures. But whether the lover look to wed his
lady, or whether he have wedded her, or whether she be but his paramour,
is all a thing of incident, dependent on the traditional or devised plot
of the story.[709]

Like all other periods that have been articulate in literature--and those
that have not been, so far as one may guess--the Middle Ages experienced
and expressed the usual ways of love. These need not detain us. For they
were included as elements within those interesting forms of romantic love,
which were presented in the lyrics of the Troubadours and their more or
less conscious imitators, and in the romantic narratives of chivalry. This
literature elaborately expresses mediaeval sentiments and also love’s
passion. Its ideals drew inspiration from Christianity and many a
suggestion from the antique. More especially, in its growth, at last two
currents seem to meet. The one sprang from the fashions of Languedoc and
the courtly centres of the north; the other was the strain of fantasy and
passion constituting the _matière de Bretagne_.

Languedoc had been Romanized before the Christian era, and thereafter did
not cease to be the home of the surviving Latin culture. By the eleventh
century, castles and towns held a gay and aristocratic society, on which
Christianity, honeycombed with heresy, sat lightly, or at least joyfully.
This society was inclined to luxury, and the gentle relationships between
men and women interested it exceedingly. Out of it as the eleventh century
closes, songs of the Troubadours begin to rise and give utterance to
thoughts and feelings of chivalric love. These songs flourished during the
whole of the twelfth century, and then their notes were crushed by the
Albigensian Crusade, which destroyed the pretty life from which they
sprang.

She whom such songs were meant to adulate or win, frequently was the wife
of the Troubadour’s lord. The song might intend nothing beyond such
worship as the lady’s spouse would sanction; or it might give subtle voice
to a real passion, which offered and sought all. To separate the sincere
and passionate from the fanciful in such songs is neither easy nor apt,
since fancy may enhance the expression of passion, or present a pleasing
substitute. At all events, in this very personal poetry, passion and
imaginative enhancings blended in verses that might move a lady’s heart or
vanity.

Love, with the Troubadours and their ladies, was a source of joy. Its
commands and exigencies made life’s supreme law. Love was knighthood’s
service; it was loyalty and devotion; it was the noblest human giving. It
was also the spring of excellence, the inspiration of high deeds. This
love was courteous, delicately ceremonial, precise, and on the lady’s part
exacting and whimsical. A moderate knowledge of the poems and lives of the
Troubadours and their ladies will show that love with its joys and pains,
its passion, its fancies and subtle conclusions, made the life and
business of these men and dames.[710]

In culture and the love of pleasure the great feudal courts of Aquitaine,
Champagne, and even Flanders, were scarcely behind the society of
Languedoc. And at these courts, rather than in Languedoc, courtly love
encountered a new passionate current, and found the tales which were to
form its chief vehicle. These were the lays and stories, as of Tristan and
of Arthur and his knights, which from Great Britain had come to Brittany
and Normandy. They were now attracting many listeners who had no part with
Arthur or Tristan, save the love of love and adventure. Marie de France
had put certain Breton lays into Old French verse. And one or two decades
later, a request from the great Countess Marie de Champagne led Chrétien
de Troies, as we have seen, to recast other Breton tales in a manner
somewhat transformed with thoughts of courtly love. These northern poems
of love and chivalry were written to please the taste of high-born dames,
just as the Troubadours had sung and still were singing to please their
sisters in the south. The southern poems may have influenced the
northern.[711]

In the courtly society of Champagne and Aquitaine diverse racial elements
had long been blending, and acquirements, once foreign, had turned into
personal qualities. Views of life had been evolved, along with faculties
to express them. Likewise modes of feeling had developed. This society
had become what it was within the influence of Christianity and the
antique educational tradition. It knew the Song of Songs, as well as
Ovid’s stories, and likewise his _Ars amatoria_, which Chrétien was the
first to translate into Old French. Possibly its Christianity had learned
of a boundless love of God, and its mortal nature might feel mortal loves
equally resistless. And now, in the early twelfth century, there came from
lands which were or had been Breton, an abundance of moving and catching
stories of adventure and of passion which broke through restraint, or knew
none. Dames and knights and their rhymers would eagerly receive such
tales, and not as barren vessels; for they refashioned and reinspired them
with their own thoughts of the joy of life and love, and with thoughts of
love’s high service and its uplifting virtue for the lover, and again of
its ways and the laws which should direct and guide, but never stem, it.

Thus it came that French trouvères enlarged the matter of these Breton
lays. Their romances reflected the loftiest thoughts and the most eloquent
emotion pertaining to the earthly side of mediaeval life. In these rhyming
and prose compositions, love was resistless in power; it absorbed the
lover’s nature; it became his sole source of joy and pain. So it sought
nothing but its own fulfilment; it knew no honour save its own demands. It
was unimpeachable, for in ecstasy and grief it was accountable to no law
except that of its being. This resistless love was also life’s highest
worth, and the spring of inspiration and strength for doing valorously and
living nobly. The trouvère of the twelfth century created new conceptions
of love’s service, and therewith the impassioned thought that beyond what
men might do in the hope of love’s fruition or at the dictates of its
affection, love was itself a power strengthening and ennobling him who
loved. Thought and feeling joined in this conviction, each helping the
other on, in interchanging rôles of inspirer and inspired. And finally the
two are one:

  “Oltre la spera, che più larga gira,
     Passa il sospiro ch’esce del mio core:
   Intelligenza nuova, che l’Amore
     Piangendo mette in lui, pur su lo tira.”

No one can separate the thought and feeling in this verse. But they were
not always fused. The mediaeval fancy sported with this love; the
mediaeval mind delighted in it as a theme of argument. And the fancy might
be as fantastic as the reasoning was finely spun.

The literature of this love draws no sharp lines between love as
resistless passion and love as enabling virtue; yet these two aspects are
distinguishable. The first was less an original creation of the Middle
Ages than the second. Antiquity had known the passion which overwhelmed
the stricken mortal, and had treated it as something put upon the man and
woman, a convulsive joy, also a bane. Antiquity had analyzed it too, and
had shown its effects, especially its physical symptoms. Much had been
written of its fatal nature; songs had sung how it overthrew the strong
and brought men and women to their death. Looking upon this love as
something put on man and woman, antiquity pictured it mainly as an
insanity cast like a spell upon some one who otherwise would have been
sane. But the Middle Ages saw love transformed into the man and woman, saw
it constitute their will as well as passion, and perceived that it was
their being. If the lover could not avoid or resist it, the reason was
because it was his mightiest self, and not because it was a compulsion
from without; it was his nature, not his disease.

The nature, ways, and laws of this high and ennobling love were much
pondered on and talked of. They were expounded in pedantic treatises, as
well as set forth in tales which sometimes have the breath of universal
life. Ovid’s _Ars amatoria_ furnished the idea that love was an art to be
learned and practised. Mediaeval clerks and rhymers took his light art
seriously, and certain of them made manuals of the rules and precepts of
love, devised by themselves and others interested in such fancies. An
example is the _Flos amoris_ or _Ars amatoria_ of Andrew the Chaplain, who
compiled his book not far from the year 1200.[712] He wrote with his
obsequious head filled with a sense of the authority in love matters of
Marie de Champagne, and other great ladies. His book contains a number of
curious questions which had been laid before one or the other of those
reigning dames, and which they solved boldly in love’s favour. Thus on
solicitation Countess Marie decided that there could be no true love
between a husband and wife; and that the possession of an honoured husband
or beautiful wife did not bar the proffer or acceptance of love from
another. The living literature of love was never constrained by the
foolishness of the first proposition, but was freely to exemplify the
further conclusion which others besides the countess drew.

Andrew gives a code of love’s rules. He would have no one think that he
composed them; but that he saw them written on a parchment attached to the
hawk’s perch, and won at Arthur’s Court by the valour of a certain Breton
knight. They read like proverbs, and undoubtedly represent the ideas of
courtly society upon courtly love. There are thirty-one of them--for
example:

    (1) Marriage is not a good excuse for rejecting love.

    (2) Who does not conceal, cannot love.

    (3) None can love two at once. There is no reason why a woman should
    not be loved by two men, or a man by two women.

    (4) It is love’s way always to increase or lessen.

    (9) None can love except one who is moved by love’s suasion.

    (12) The true lover has no desire to embrace any one except his (or
    her) co-lover (_co-amans_).

    (13) Love when published rarely endures.

    (14) Easy winning makes love despicable; the difficult is held dear.

    (15) Every lover turns pale in the sight of the co-lover.

    (16) The lover’s heart trembles at the sudden sight of the co-lover.

    (18) Prowess (_probitas_) alone makes one worthy of love.

    (20) The lover is always fearful.

    (23) The one whom the thought of love disturbs, eats and sleeps
    little.

    (25) The true lover finds happiness only in what he deems will please
    his co-lover.

    (28) A slight fault in the lover awakens the co-lover’s suspicion.

    (30) The true lover constantly, without intermission, is engrossed
    with the image of the co-lover.

These rules were exemplified in the imaginative literature of courtly
love. Such love and the feats inspired by it made the chief matter of the
Arthurian romances, which became the literary property of western Europe;
and the supreme examples of their darling theme are the careers and
fortunes of the two most famous pairs of lovers in all this gallant cycle,
Tristan and Iseult, Lancelot and Guinevere. In the former story love is
resistless passion; in the latter its virtue- and valour-bestowing
qualities appear. In both, the laws forbidding its fruition are shattered:
in the Tristan story blindly, madly, without further thought; while in the
tale of Lancelot this conflict sometimes rises to consciousness even in
the lovers’ hearts. How chivalric love may reach accord with Christian
precept will be shown hereafter in the progress of the white and scarlet
soul of Parzival, the brave man proving himself slowly wise.

Probably there never was a better version of the story of Tristan and
Iseult than that of Gottfried of Strassburg, who transformed French
originals into his Middle High German poem about the year 1210.[713] The
poet-adapter sets forth his ideas of love in an elaborate prologue. Very
antithetically he shows its bitter sweet, its dear sorrow, its yearning
need; indeed to love is to yearn--an idea not strange to Plato--and
Gottfried uses the words _sene_, _senelîch_, _senedaere_ (all of which are
related to _sehnsucht_, which is yearning) to signify love, a lover, and
his pain. His poem shall be of two noble lovers:

  “Ein senedaere, eine senedaerin.”

The more love’s fire burns the heart, the more one loves; this pain is
full of love, an ill so good for the heart that no noble nature once
roused by it would wish to lose part therein. Who never felt love’s pain
has never felt love:

  “Liep unde leit diu waren ie
   An minnen ungescheiden.”

It is good for men to hear a tale of noble love, yes, a deep good. It
sweetens love and raises the hearer’s mood; it strengthens troth, enriches
life. Love, troth, a constant spirit, honour, and whatever else is good,
are never so precious as when set in a tale of love’s joy and pain. Love
is such a blessed thing, such a blessed striving, that no one without its
teaching has worth or honour. These lovers died long ago; yet their love
and troth, their life, their death, will still give troth and honour to
seekers after these. Their death lives and is ever new, as we listen to
the tale. Evidently, in Gottfried’s mind the Tristan tale of love’s
almighty passion carried the thought of love as the inspiration of a noble
life. Yet that thought was not native to the legend, and finds scant
exemplification in Gottfried’s poem.

The tragic passion of the main narrative is presaged by the story of
Tristan’s parents. His mother was Blancheflur, King Mark’s sister, and his
father Prince Riwalin. She saw him in the May-Court tourney held near
Tintajoel. She took him into her thoughts; he entered her heart, and there
wore crown and sceptre.

She greeted him; he her. She bashfully began: “My lord, may God enrich
your heart and courage; but I harbour something against you.”

“Sweet one, what have I done?”

“You have done violence to my best friend”--it was her heart, she meant.

“Beauty, bear me no hate for that; command, and I will do your bidding.”

“Then I will not hate you bitterly. I will see what atonement you will
make.”

He bowed, and carried with him her image. Love’s will mastered his heart,
as he thought of Blancheflur, of her hair, her brow, her cheek, her mouth,
her chin, and the glad Easter day that smiling lay in her eyes. Love the
heartburner set his heart aflame, and lo! he entered upon another life;
purpose and habit changed, he was another man.

Sad is the short tale of these lovers. Riwalin is killed in battle, and at
the news of his death Blancheflur expires, giving birth to a son. Rual the
Faithful names the child Tristan, to symbolize the sorrow of its birth.

The story of Tristan’s early years draws the reader to the accomplished,
happy youth. He is the delight of all; for his young manhood is
courtliness itself, and valour and generosity. He is loved, and
afterwards recognized and knighted, by his uncle Mark. Then he sets out
and avenges his father’s death; after which he returns to Mark’s Court,
and vanquishes the Irish champion Morold. A fragment of Tristan’s sword
remained in Morold’s head; Tristan himself received a poisoned wound,
which could be healed, as the dying Morold told him, only by Ireland’s
queen, Iseult. Very charming is the story of Tristan’s first visit to
Ireland, disguised as a harper, under the name of Tantris. The queen
hearing of his skill, has him brought to the palace, where she heals him,
and he in return becomes the teacher of her daughter, the younger Iseult,
whom he instructs in letters, music and singing, French and Latin, ethics,
courtly arts and manners, till the girl became as accomplished as she was
beautiful, and could write and read, and compose and sing _pastorelles_
and _rondeaux_ and other songs.

On his return to Cornwall he told Mark of the young Iseult, and then, at
Mark’s request, set forth again to woo her for him. The Irish king has
promised his daughter to whoever shall slay the dragon. Tristan does the
deed, cuts out the dragon’s tongue as proof, and then falls overcome and
fainting. The king’s cupbearer comes by, breaks his lance on the dead
dragon, and, riding on, announces that he has slain the monster; he has
the great head brought to the Court upon a wagon. Iseult is in despair at
the thought of marrying the cupbearer; her mother doubts his story, and
bids Iseult ride out and search for the real slayer. The ladies discover
Tristan, with him the dragon’s tongue. They carry him to the palace to
heal him, and the young Iseult recognizes him as the harper Tantris, and
redoubles her kind care. But after a while she noticed the notch in his
sword, and saw that it fitted the fragment found in Morold’s head--and is
not Tantris just Tristan reversed? This is the man who slew Morold, her
mother’s brother! She seizes the sword and rushes in to kill him in his
bath. Her mother checks her, and at last she is appeased, Tristan letting
them see that an important mission has brought him to Ireland. There is
truce between them, and Tristan goes to the king with Mark’s demand for
Iseult’s hand. Then the cupbearer is discomfited, peace is made between
the Irish king and Mark, and the young Iseult, with Brangaene her cousin,
makes ready to sail with Tristan. The queen secretly gave a love-drink
into Brangaene’s care, which Iseult and Mark should drink together. The
people followed down to the haven, and all wept and lamented that with
fair Iseult the sunshine had left Ireland.

Iseult is sad. She cannot forget that it is Tristan who slew her uncle and
is now taking her from her home. Tristan fails to comfort her. They see
land. Tristan calls for wine to pledge Iseult. A little maid brings--the
love-drink! They drink together, not wine but that endless heart’s pain
which shall be their common death. Too late, Brangaene with a cry throws
the goblet into the sea. Love stole into both their hearts; gone was
Iseult’s hate. They were no longer two, but one; the sinner, love, had
done it. They were each other’s joy and pain; doubt and shame seized them.
Tristan bethought him of his loyalty and honour, struggling against love
vainly. Iseult was like a bird caught with the fowler’s lime; shame drove
her eyes away from him; but love drew her heart. She gave over the contest
as she looked on him, and he also began to yield. They thought each other
fairer than before; love was conquering.

The ship sails on. Love’s need conquered. They talk together of the past,
how he had once come in a little boat, and of the lessons: “Fair Iseult,
what is troubling you?”

“What I know, that troubles me; what I see, the heaven and sea, that
weighs on me; body and life are heavy.”

They leaned toward each other; bright eyes began to fill from the heart’s
spring; her head sank, his arm sustained her;--“Ah! sweet, tell me, what
is it?”

Answered love’s feather-play, Iseult: “Love is my need, love is my pain.”

He answered painfully: “Fair Iseult, it is the rude wind and sea.”

“No, no, it is not wind or sea; love is my pain.”

“Beauty, so with me! Love and you make my need. Heart’s lady, dear Iseult,
you and the love of you have seized me. I am dazed. I cannot find myself.
All the world has become naught, save thee alone.”

“Sir, so is it with me.”

They loved, and in each other saw one mind, one heart, one will. Their
silent kiss was long. In the night, love the physician brought their only
balm. Sweet had the voyage become; alas! that it must end.

With their landing begins the trickery and falsehood compelled by the
situation. The fearful Iseult plotted to murder the true Brangaene, who
alone knew. After a while Mark’s suspicion is aroused, to be lulled by
guile. Plot and counterplot go on; the lovers win and win again; truth and
honour, everything save love’s joy and fear and all-sufficiency, are cast
to the winds. Even the “Judgment of God” is tricked; the hot iron does not
burn Iseult swearing her false oath, literally true. Many a time Mark’s
jealousy has been fiercely stirred, only to be tricked to sleep again. Yet
he knows that Tristan and Iseult are lovers. He calls them to him; he
tells them he will not avenge himself, they are too dear to him. But let
them take each other by the hand and leave him. So, together, they
disappear in the forest.

Then comes the wonderful, beautiful story of the love-grotto and the
lovers’ forest-life; they had the forest and they had themselves, and
needed no more. One morning they arose to the sweet birds’ song of
greeting; but they heard a horn; Mark must be hunting near. So they were
very careful, and again prepared deception. Mark has been told of the
love-grotto in the wood. In the night he came and found it, looked through
its little rustic window as the day began to dawn. There lay the lovers,
apart, a naked sword between them. A sunbeam, stealing through the window,
touches Iseult’s cheek, touches her sweet mouth. Mark loves her anew. Then
fearful lest the sunlight should disturb her, he covered the window with
grass and leaves and flowers, blessed her, and went away in tears. The
lovers waken. They had no need to fear. The lie of the naked sword again
had won. Mark sends and invites them to return.

Insatiable love knew no surcease or pause. The German poet is driven to a
few reflections on the deceits of Eve’s daughters, the anxieties of
forbidden love, and the crown of worth and joy that a true woman’s love
may be. At last the lovers are betrayed--in each other’s arms. They know
that Mark has seen them.

“Heart’s lady, fair Iseult, now we must part. Let me not pass from your
heart. Iseult must ever be in Tristan’s heart. Forget me not.”

Says Iseult: “Our hearts have been too long one ever to know forgetting.
Whether you are near or far, nothing but Tristan enters mine. See to it
that no other woman parts us. Take this ring and think of me. Iseult with
Tristan has been ever one heart, one troth, one body, one life. Think of
me as your life--Iseult.”

The fateful turning of the story is not far off: Tristan has met the other
Iseult, her of the white hands. The poet Gottfried did not complete his
work. He died, leaving Tristan’s heart struggling between the old love and
the new--the new and weaker love, but the more present offering to pain.
The story was variously concluded by different rhymers, in Gottfried’s
time and after. The best ending is the extant fragment of the _Tristan_ by
Thomas of Brittany, the master whom Gottfried followed. In it, the wounded
Tristan dies at the false news of the black sails--the treachery of Iseult
of the white hands. The true Iseult finds him dead; kisses him, takes him
in her arms, and dies.

From the time when on the ship Tristan and Iseult cast shame and honour to
the winds, the story tells of a love which knows no law except itself, a
love which is not hindered or made to hesitate and doubt by any command of
righteousness or honour. Love is the theme; the tale has no sympathy or
understanding for anything else. It is therefore free from the consciously
realized inconsistencies present at least in some versions of the story of
Lancelot and Guinevere. In them two laws of life seem on the verge of
conflict. On the one--the feebler--side, honour, troth to marriage vows,
some sense of right and wrong; on the other, passionate love, which is law
and right unto itself, having its own commands and prohibitions; a love
which is also an inspiration and uplifting power unto the lover; a love
holy in itself and yet because of its high nature the more fatally
impeached by truth and honour trampled on. In the conflict between the two
laws of life in the Lancelot story, the rights and needs and power of love
maintain themselves; yet the end must come, and the lovers live out love’s
palinode in separate convents. For this love to be made perfect, must be
crowned with repentance.

Who first created Lancelot, and who first made the peerless knight love
Arthur’s queen? This question has not yet been answered.[714] Chrétien de
Troies’ poem, _Le Conte de la charrette_, has for its subject an episode
in Lancelot’s long love of Guinevere.[715] Here, as in his other poems,
Chrétien is a facile narrator, with little sense of the significance that
might be given to the stories which he received and cleverly remade. But
their significance is shown in the Old French prose _Lancelot_, probably
composed two or three decades after Chrétien wrote. It contains the lovely
story of Lancelot’s rearing, by the Lady of the Lake, and of his glorious
youth. It brings him to the Court of Arthur, and tells how he was made a
knight--it was the queen and not the king from whom he received his sword.
And he loves her--loves her and her only from the first until his death.
He has no thought of serving any other mistress. And he is aided in his
love by the “haute prince Galehaut,” the most high-hearted friend that
ever gave himself to his friend’s weal.

From the beginning Lancelot’s love is worship, it is holy; and almost from
the beginning it is unholy. From the beginning, too, it is the man’s
inspiration, it is his strength; it makes him the peerless knight,
peerless in courtesy, peerless in emprise; this love gives him the single
eye, the unswerving heart, the resistless valour to accomplish those
adventures wherein all other knights had found their shame--they were not
perfect lovers! Only through his perfect love could Lancelot have
accomplished that greatest adventure of the _Val des faux amants_;--_Val
sans retour_ for all other knights.[716] Lancelot alone had always been,
and to his death remained, a lover absolutely true in act and word and
thought; incomparably more chastely loyal to Guinevere than her kingly
spouse. Against the singleness of this perfect love enchantments fail, and
swords and lances break. Yet this love, fraught with untruth and
dishonour, must conceal itself from that king who, while breaking his own
marriage vows as passion led him, trusted and honoured above all men the
peerless knight whose peerlessness was rooted in his unholy holy love for
Arthur’s queen.

The first full sin between Lancelot and Guinevere was committed when
Arthur was absent on a love-adventure, which brought him to a shameful
prison. He was delivered by Lancelot, and recognizing his deliverer, he
said in royal gratitude: “I yield you my land, my honour, and myself.”
Lancelot blushes! Thereafter, as towards Arthur, Lancelot and Guinevere
are forced into stratagems almost as ignoble as those by which King Mark
was tricked. And Guinevere--she too is peerless among women; perfect in
beauty, perfect in courtliness, perfect in dutifulness to her
husband--saving her love for Lancelot! Guinevere’s dutifulness to Arthur
is not shaken by his outrageous treatment of her because of the “false
Guinevere,” when he cast off and sought to burn his queen. She will
continue to obey him though he has dishonoured her--and all the time,
unknown to her outrageous, unjustly accusing lord, how had she cast her
and his honour down with Lancelot! Only while she is put away from her
lord, and under Lancelot’s guard, for that time she will be true to
marriage vows; and Lancelot assents.[717]

The latter part of the story, when asceticism enters with Galahad,[718]
suggests that the peerless knight of “les temps adventureux” was sinful.
But the main body of the tale put no reproach on Lancelot for his great
love. It told of a love as perfect and as absolute as the author or
compiler could conceive; and the conduct of Lancelot was intended to be
that of a perfect lover, whose sentiments and actions should accord with
the idea of courtly love and exemplify its rules. Their underlying
principle was that love should always be absolute, and that the lover’s
every thought and act should on all occasions correspond with the most
extreme feelings or sentiments or fancies possible for a lover. In the
prose narrative, for example, Lancelot goes mad three times because of his
mistress’s cruelty, a cruelty which may seem to us absurd, but which
represents the adored lady’s insistence, under all circumstances, upon the
most unhesitating and utter devotion from her lover.

Chrétien’s _Conte de la charrette_ is a clear rendering of the idea that
love shall be absolute, and hesitate at nothing; it is an example of
courtly love carried to its furthest imagined conclusions. It displays all
the rules of Andrew the Chaplain in operation. In it Lancelot will do
anything for Guinevere, will show himself a coward knight at her command,
or perform feats of arms; he will desire the least little bit of her--a
tress of hair--more than all else which is not she; he will throw himself
from the window to be near her; engaged in deadly combat, the sight of her
makes him forget his enemy; at the news of her death he seeks at once to
die. Of course his heart loathes the thought of infringing this great love
by the slightest fancy for another woman. On the other hand, when by
marvels of valour Lancelot rescues Guinevere from captivity, she will not
speak to him because for a single instant he had hesitated to mount a
_charrette_, in which no knight was carried save one who was felon and
condemned to death. This was logical on Guinevere’s part; Lancelot’s love
should always have been so absolute as never for one instant to hesitate.
Much of this is extreme, and yet hardly unreal. Heloïse’s love for
Abaelard never hesitated.

Such love, imperious and absolute, shuts out all laws and exigencies save
its own;[719] it must be virtue and honour unto itself; it is careless of
what ill it may do so long as that ill does not infringe love’s laws.
Evidently before it the bonds of marriage break, or pale to
insignificance. It is its own sanction, nor needs the faint blessing of
the priest. The poet--as the actual lover likewise--may even deem that
love can best show itself to be the principle of its own honour when
unsustained by wedlock; thus unsustained and unobscured it stands alone,
fairer, clearer, more interesting and romantic. Again, since mediaeval
marriage in high life was more often a joining of fiefs than a union of
hearts, there would be high-born dames and courtly poets to declare that
love could only exist between knight and mistress, and not between husband
and wife. Marriage shuts out love’s doubts and fears; there is no need of
further knightly services; and husband and wife by law are bound to render
to each other what between lovers is gracious favour; this was the opinion
of Marie de Champagne, it also was the opinion of Heloïse. In chivalric
poetry the lovers, when at last duly married, may continue to call each
other _ami et amie_ rather than wife and lord;[720] or a knight may shun
marriage lest he settle down and lose worship, doing no more adventurous
feats of arms, like Chrétien’s Erec, till his wife Enide stung him by her
speech.[721] Some centuries later Malory has Lancelot utter a like
sentiment: “But to be a wedded man I think never to be, for if I were,
then should I be bound to tarry with my wife, and leave arms and
tournaments, battles and adventures.”

If allowance be made for the difference in topic and treatment between the
Arthurian romances and Guillaume de Lorris’s portion of the _Roman de la
rose_, the latter will be seen to illustrate similar love principles. De
Lorris’s poem is fancy playing with thoughts of love which had inspired
these tales of chivalry. Every one knows its gentle idyllic
character;--how charming, for instance, is the conflict between the
Lover-to-be and Love, who quickly overcomes the ready yielder. So he
surrenders unconditionally, gives himself over; Love may slay him or
gladden him--“le cuers est vostre, non pas miens,” says the lover to Love,
and you shall do with it as you will. Then Love sweetly takes his little
golden key, and locks the lover’s heart, after which he safely may impart
his rules and counsels: the lover must abjure _vilanie_, and foul and
slanderous speech--the opposite of courtesy. Pride also (_orgoil_) must be
abandoned. He should attire himself seemingly, and show cheerfulness; he
must be niggardly in nothing; his heart must be given utterly to one; he
shall undergo toils and endure griefs without complaint; in absence he
will always think of the beloved, sighing for her, keeping his love
aflame; he will be shameful, confused and changing colour in her presence;
at night he will toss and weep for love of her, and dream dreams of
passionate delight; then wakeful, he will rise and wander near her
dwelling, but will not be seen--nor will he forget to be generous to her
waiting-maid. All of this will make the lover pale and lean. To aid him to
endure these agonies, will come Hope with her gentle healings, and
Fond-thought, and Sweet-speech of the beloved with a wise confidant, and
Sweet-sight of her dwelling, maybe of herself. The _Roman de la rose_ is
fancy, and the Arthurian romances are fiction. In the one or the other,
imagination may take the place of passion, and the contents of the poem or
romance afford a type and presentation of the theory of love.




