CHAPTER XX

THE SPOTTED ACTUALITY

    THE TESTIMONY OF INVECTIVE AND SATIRE; ARCHBISHOP RIGAUD’S _REGISTER_;
    ENGELBERT OF COLOGNE; POPULAR CREDENCES


The preceding sketches of monastic qualities and personalities illustrate
the ideals of monasticism. That monastic practices should fall away,
corruptions enter, and when expelled inevitably return, was to be
expected. The cause lay in those qualities of human nature which may be
either power or frailty. The acquisitive, self-seeking, lusting qualities
of men lie at the base of life, and may be essential to achievement and
advance. Yet a higher interpretation of values will set the spiritual
above the earthly, and beatify the self-denial through which man
ultimately attains his highest self, under the prompting of his vision of
the divine. The sight of this far goal is given to few men steadily, and
the multitude, whether cowled or clad in fashions of the world, pursue
more immediate desires.

So human nature saw to it that monasticism should constantly exhibit
frivolity instead of earnestness, gluttony instead of fasting, avarice
instead of alms-giving, anger and malice instead of charity and love,
lustfulness instead of chastity, and, instead of meekness, pride and
vain-glory. The particular forms assumed by these corruptions depended on
the conditions of mediaeval life and the position in it occupied by monks.

It has already been said that the standard of conduct for the secular
clergy was the same in principle as that for monks, though with allowance
made for the stress of a life of service in the cure of souls.[597] But
always the cloister and the hermitage were looked upon as the
abiding-places where one stood the best chance to save one’s soul: the
life of the layman--merchant, usurer, knight--was fraught with instant
peril; that of the secular clergy was also perilous, especially when they
held high office. Dread of ecclesiastical preferment might be well
founded; the reluctance to be a bishop was often real. This sentiment,
like all feelings in the Middle Ages, took the form of a story, with the
usual vision to certify the moral of the tale:

    “It is told of a certain prior of Clairvaux, Geoffrey by name, that
    when he had been elected Bishop of Tournai, and Pope Eugene as well as
    the blessed Bernard, his own abbot, was urging him to take the office,
    he cast himself down at the feet of the blessed Bernard and his
    clergy, and lay prone in the form of a cross, and said: ‘An expelled
    monk I may be, if you drive me out; but I will never be a bishop.’ At
    a later time, as this same prior lay breathing his last, a monk who
    loved him well adjured him in the name of God to bring him news of his
    state beyond the grave, if God would permit it. Some time after, as
    the monk was praying prostrate before the altar, his friend appeared
    and said that it was he. When the monk asked him how he was faring,
    ‘Well,’ he replied, ‘by the grace of God. Yet verily it has been
    revealed to me by the blessed Trinity, that had I been in the number
    of bishops I should have been in the number of the reprobate and
    damned.’”[598]

Through the Middle Ages, Church dignities everywhere were secularized
through the vast possessions, and corresponding responsibilities,
attaching to them. The clerical situation varied in different lands, yet
with a like result. The Italian clergy were secularized through
participation in civic and papal business, the German through their
estates and principalities. In France clerical secularization was most
typically mediaeval, because there the functions and fortunes of the
higher clergy were most inextricably involved in feudalism. Monasteries
and bishoprics were as feudal fiefs: abbots as well as bishops commonly
held lands from an over-lord, and were themselves lords of their
sub-vassals who held lands from them. To the former they owed rent, or
aid, or service; to the latter they owed protection. In either case they
might have to go or send their men to war. They also managed and guarded
their own lands, like feudal nobles, _vi et armis_. When the estates of a
monastery, for example, lay in different places, the abbot might exercise
authority over them through a local potentate, and might also have such a
protector (_vîdame_, _avoué_, _advocatus_) for the home abbey. There was
always a general feeling, often embodied in law or custom, that a Church
dignitary should fight by another’s sword and spear. But this did not
prevent bishop and abbot in countless instances in France, England,
Germany, and Spain, from riding mail-clad under their seignorial banner at
the head of their forces.[599]

Episcopal lands and offices were not inherited:[600] yet with rare
exceptions the bishops came from the noble, fighting, hunting class. They
were noblemen first and ecclesiastics afterwards. The same was true of the
abbots. Noble-born, they became dignitaries of the world through
investiture with the broad lands of the monastery, and then administrators
by reason of the temporal functions involved. As with the episcopal or
monastic heads, so with canons and monks. They, too, for the most part
were well-born. They also were good, bad, or indifferent, warlike or
clerkly, devoted to study, abandoned to pleasure, or following the one and
the other sparingly. Many a holy meditative monk there was; and many a
saintly parish priest, the stay of piety and justice in his village. The
rude times, the ceaseless murder and harrying, uncertainty and danger
everywhere, seemed to beget such holy lives.

Invectives, satires, histories, and records, bear witness to the state of
the clergy. All diatribes are to be taken with allowance. Whoever, for
example, reads Peter Damiani’s _Liber Gomorrhianus_ against the foulness
of the clergy, must bear in mind the writer’s fiercely ascetic temper, the
warfare which the stricter element in the Church was then waging against
simony and priestly concubinage, and the monkish phraseology so common to
ecclesiastical indictment of frivolity and vice.

One cannot quote comfortably from the _Gomorrhianus_. St. Bernard
furnishes more decorous denunciation:

    “Woe unto this generation, for its leaven of the Pharisees which is
    hypocrisy!--if that should be called hypocrisy which cannot be hidden
    because of its abundance, and through impudence does not seek to hide!
    To-day, foul rottenness crawls through the whole body of the Church.
    If a heretic foe should arise openly, he would be cast out and
    withered; or if the enemy raged madly, the Church might hide herself
    from him. But now whom shall she cast out, or from whom hide herself?
    All are friends and all are foes; all necessary and all adverse; all
    of her own household and none pacific; all are her neighbours and all
    seek their own interest. Ministers of Christ, they serve Antichrist.
    They go clothed in the good things of the Lord and render Him no
    honour. Hence that _éclat_ of the courtesan which you daily see, that
    theatric garb, that regal state. Hence the gold-trapped reins and
    saddles and spurs--for the spurs shine brighter than the altars. Hence
    the splendid tables laden with food and goblets; hence the feastings
    and drunkenness, the guitars, the lyres and the flutes; hence the
    swollen wine-presses and the storehouses heaped and running over from
    this one into that, and the jars of perfumes, and the stuffed purses.
    ’Tis for such matters that they wish to be and are the over-seers of
    churches, deacons, archdeacons, bishops, and archbishops. For neither
    do these offices come by merit, but through that sort of business
    which walketh in darkness!”[601]

Such rhetoric gives glimpses of the times, but also springs from that
temper which is always crying _hora novissima, tempora pessima_.
Invectives of this nature have their deepest source in the religious
sense of the ineradicable opposition between this world and the kingdom of
heaven. Yet luxury did in fact pervade the Church of Bernard’s time, and
simony was as wide as western Europe. This crime was the offspring of the
entire social state; it was part and parcel of the feudal system and the
whole matter of lay investitures. One sees that simony was no extraneous
stain to be washed off from the body ecclesiastic, but rather an element
of its actual constitution. The eradication had to come through social and
ecclesiastical evolution, rather than spasmodic reformation.

One may turn from the invectives of the great saint to forms of satire
more frankly literary. The Latin poems “commonly attributed to Walter
Mapes”[602] satirize with biting ridicule, through the mouth of “Bishop
Golias,” the avarice and venality, the gluttony and lubricity of the
Church, secular and monastic. In a quite different kind of poem the satire
directs itself against the rapacity of Rome. She, head of the Church and
Caput Mundi, is shown to be like Scylla and Charybdis and the Sirens.[603]
These powerful verses anticipate the denunciation of the Roman papacy by
the good Germans Walther von der Vogelweide and Freidank,[604] and, a
century later, in the _Vision of Piers Ploughman_.

In this outcry against papal rapacity France was not silent. Most extreme
is the “Bible” of Guiot de Provens: it satirizes the entire age, “siècle
puant et orrible.” As it turns toward the papacy it cries:

  “Ha! Rome, Rome,
   Encor ociras tu maint home!”

The cardinals are stuffed with avarice and simony and evil living; without
faith or religion, they sell God and His Mother, and betray us and their
fathers. Rome sucks and devours us; Rome kills and destroys all. Guiot’s
voice is raised against the entire Church; neither the monks nor the
seculars escape--bishops, priests, canons, the black monks and the white,
Templars and Hospitallers, nuns and abbesses, all bad.[605]

One might extend indefinitely the list of these invectives, which, like
the corruptions denounced by them, were common to all mediaeval centuries.
From the testimony of more definite accounts one perceives the rudeness
and cruelty of mediaeval life, in which the Church likewise was involved.
In order to rise, it had to lift the social fabric. To this end many of
its children struggled nobly, devoting themselves and sometimes yielding
up their lives for the betterment of the society in which their lots were
cast.

One of these capable children of the Church who did his duty in the high
ecclesiastical station to which he was called was Eude Rigaud, or Odo
Rigaldus, Archbishop of Rouen from 1248 to 1275, the year of his death. He
was a scion of a noble house whose fiefs lay in the neighbourhood of
Brie-Comte-Robert (Seine-et-Marne). In 1236 he joined the Franciscans, and
then studied at Paris under Alexander of Hales, one of the Order’s great
theologians. His first fame came from his preaching. As archbishop, he was
a reformer, and abetted the endeavours of Pope Gregory IX. He was also a
counsellor of Saint Louis, and followed him upon that last crusade from
which the king did not return alive.[606]

The good archbishop was a man of method, and kept a record of his official
acts. This monumental document exists, the _Register_ of Rigaud’s
visitations among the monks and secular clergy within his wide
jurisdiction, between the years 1248 and 1269.[607] Consisting of entries
made at the time, it is a mirror of actual conditions, presumably similar
to those existing in other parts of France. Rigaud visited many
monasteries and parishes where he found nothing to reform, and merely made
a memorandum of having been there; wherever abuses were found, the entry
expands to a statement of them and the measures taken for their remedy.
Consequently one may not infer that the blameworthy or abominable
conditions recorded in the particular instance obtained universally in
Normandy. Occasionally Rigaud records in more detail the good condition of
some monastery. A few instructive extracts may be given.

    “Calends of October (1248). We were again at Ouville (Ovilla). We
    found that the prior wanders about when he ought to stay in the
    cloister; he is not in the cloister one day in five. Item, he is a
    drunkard, and of such vile drunkenness that he sometimes lies out in
    the fields because of it. Item, he frequents feasts and drinking-bouts
    with laymen. Item, he is incontinent, and is accused in respect to a
    certain woman of Grainville, and also with the wife of Robertot, and
    also with a woman of Rouen named Agnes. Item, brother Geoffrey was
    publicly accused with respect to the wife of Walter of Esquaquelon who
    recently had a child from him. Item, they do not keep proper accounts
    of their revenues. We ordered that they should keep better
    accounts.”[608]

Such an entry needs no comment. But it is illuminating to observe the
strictness or leniency with which Rigaud treats offences. Doubtless he was
guided by what he thought he could enforce.

Apparently near the Ouville priory, the archbishop was scandalized by the
priest of St. Vedasti de Depedale, who was convicted of taking part in the
rough ball-play, common in Normandy, in which game, as might easily
happen, he had injured some one. “He took oath before us that if again
convicted he would hold himself to have resigned from his church.”[609]
Rigaud did not approve of these somewhat too merry games for his parish
priests, who were not angels. The archbishop finds of the priest of
Lortiey “that he but rarely wears his capa, that he does not confess to
the _penitentiarius_, that he is gravely accused concerning two women, by
whom he has had many children, and he is drunken.”[610]

Rigaud enters the cases of other parish priests as follows:

    “We found that the priest of Nigella was accused as to a woman, and of
    being engaged in trade and of treating his father despitefully, who is
    patron of the church which he holds, and that with drawn sword he
    fought with a certain knight, with a riotous following of relatives
    and friends. Item, the priest of Basinval is accused as to a woman
    whom he takes about with him to the market-places and taverns.
    Likewise the priest of Vieux-Rouen is accused of incontinency, and
    goes about wearing a sword in shameless garb. Likewise the priest of
    Cotigines is a dicer and plays at quoits and frequents taverns, and is
    incontinent, and although corrected as to these matters,
    perseveres.”[611]

Sometimes accusations were brought to the archbishop by the suffering
parishioners:

    “Calends of August (1255). Passing through the village of Brai, the
    parishioners of the church there accused the rector of the church in
    our presence. They said that he went about in the night through the
    village with arms, that he was quarrelsome and scurrilous and abusive
    to his parishioners, and was incontinent.”

Summoning this priest before his ecclesiastical tribunal, the archbishop
says, “We admonished him to abstain from such ill-conduct; or that
otherwise we should proceed against him.”[612]

Either this priest or another of “Brayo subtus Baudemont,” named Walter,
was subsequently deprived of his priesthood on his own confession as
follows:

    “He confessed that the accusation against him concerning a woman of
    his parish, which he had denied under oath, was supported by truth;
    item, he confessed in regard to a waxen image made to be used in
    divining; he confessed (various other incontinencies and his
    fatherhood of various children); item, he confessed his ill-repute for
    usury and base gain; he admitted that he had led the dances at the
    nuptials of a certain prostitute whom he had married.”[613]

Rigaud continually records accusations against parish priests, commonly
for incontinency and drunkenness and generally unbecoming conduct, and
sometimes for homicide.[614] But his own examinations kept out many a
turbulent and ignorant clerk, presented by the lay patron for the
benefice; and so he prevented improper inductions as he might. The
_Register_ gives a number of instances of crass illiteracy in these
candidates, a matter to cause no surprise, for the feudal patrons of the
living naturally presented their relatives. Some of these candidates
appealed to Rome from the archbishop’s refusal, probably without
success.[615]

A monk might be as bad as any parish priest:

    “Brother Thomas ... wore gold rings. He went about in armour, by
    night, and without any monastic habit, and kept bad company. He
    wounded many clergy and laity at night, and was himself wounded,
    losing a thumb. We commanded the abbot to expel him; or that otherwise
    we should seize the place and expel the monks.”[616]

Life in a nunnery was the feminine counterpart of life in a monastery.
There were good and bad nunneries, and nuns good and bad, serious and
frivolous. Many had the foibles, and were addicted to the diversions,
comforts, or fancies of their sex: they were always wanting to keep dogs
and birds, and have locks to their chests!

    “Nones of May (1250). We visited the Benedictine convent of nuns of
    St. Sauveur at Evreux. There were sixty-one nuns there. Sometimes they
    drank, not in the refectory or infirmary, but in their chambers. They
    kept little dogs, squirrels, and birds. We ordered that all such
    things be removed. They do not observe the _regula_. They eat flesh
    needlessly. They have locked chests. We directed the abbess to inspect
    their chests often and unexpectedly, or to take off the locks. We
    directed the abbess to take away their girdles ornamented with
    ironwork and their fancy pouches, and the silk cushions they were
    working.”[617]

Again, the picture is more terrible:

    “Nones of July (1249). We visited the priory of Villa Arcelli.
    Thirty-three nuns are there and three lay sisters. They confess and
    communicate six times a year. Only four of the nuns have taken the
    vows according to the _regula_. Many of them had cloaks of rabbit-fur,
    or made from the fur of hares and foxes. In the infirmary they eat
    flesh needlessly. Silence is not observed; nor do they keep within the
    cloister. Johanna of Aululari once went out and lived with some one,
    by whom she had a child; and sometimes she goes out to see that child:
    she is also suspected with a certain man named Gaillard. Isabella la
    Treiche (?) is a fault-finder, murmuring against the prioress and
    others. The stewardess is suspected with a man named Philip de
    Vilarceau. The prioress is too remiss; she does not reprove. Johanna
    de Alto Villari kept going out alone with a man named Gayllard, and
    within a year had a child by him. The subprioress is suspected with
    Thomas the carter; Idonia, her sister, with Crispinatus; and the Prior
    of Gisorcium is always coming to the house for Idonia. Philippa of
    Rouen is suspected with a priest of Suentre, of the diocese of
    Chartres; Marguarita, the treasuress, with Richard de Genville, a
    clerk. Agnes de Fontenei, with a priest of Guerrevile, diocese of
    Chartres. The Tooliere (?) with Sir Andrew de Monciac, a knight. All
    wear their hair improperly and perfume their veils. Jacqueline came
    back pregnant from visiting a certain chaplain, who was expelled from
    his house on account of this. Agnes de Monsec was suspected with the
    same. Emengarde and Johanna of Alto Villari beat each other. The
    prioress is drunk almost any night; she does not rise for matins, nor
    eat in the refectory or correct excesses.”

The archbishop thereupon issues an order, regulating this extraordinary
convent, and prescribing a better way of living. He threatens to lay a
heavier hand on them if they do not obey.[618] This was what a loosely
regulated nunnery might come to. We close with the sketch of a good
monastery which had an evil abbot:

    “Nones of August (1258). Through God’s grace we visited the monastery
    of Jumiéges. Forty-three monks were there, and twenty-one outside. All
    of these who dwelt there, except eleven, were priests (_sacerdotes_).
    We found, by God’s grace, the convent well-ordered in its services and
    observances, yet greatly troubled by what was said of the abbot within
    and without its walls. For opinion was sinister regarding him, and
    there, in full chapter, brother Peter of Neubourg, a monk of the
    monastery, leaping up, made shameful charges against him. And he read
    the following schedule: I, brother Peter of Neubourg, a monk of
    Jumiéges, in my name and in the name of the monastery and for the
    benefit of the monastery, bring before you, Reverend Father,
    Archbishop of Rouen, for an accusation against Richard, Abbot of
    Jumiéges, that he is a forger (_falsarius_) because he wrote or caused
    to be written certain letters in the name of our convent, falsely
    alleging our approval of them although we were absent and ignorant;
    and secretly by night he sealed them with the convent’s seal....”

The letters related to an important controversy in which the monastery was
involved. Monk Peter offers to prove his case. A day is set for the
hearing. But, instead, the very next day, in order to avoid scandal, the
archbishop called the abbot before him and his counsellors; and

    “We admonished him specially regarding the following matters: To wit:
    that he should not keep dogs and birds of chase; that he should send
    strolling players away from his premises; that he should abstain from
    extravagant expenses; that he should not eat in his own chambers; that
    he should keep from consorting with women altogether; that he should
    order his household decently; that he should lease out the farms as
    well as might be; that he should not burden the monks unduly; that he
    should be more in the convent with them, and bear himself more
    soberly. He made promises as to all these matters and took oath upon
    holy relics that if he failed to obey our admonition he should be held
    to do whatever we should decree in the premises.”[619]

Rigaud seems to have been lenient here, but may have known the wisest
course to take.

A peaceful death terminated Rigaud’s long career. We may leave his diocese
of Rouen, and travel north-easterly to the German archiepiscopal dukedom
of Cologne for a very different example of a brave prelate who brought
death upon himself.

The man who was chosen Archbishop of Cologne in 1216 was of the highest
birth. It was Engelbert, son of Count Engelbert of Berg. A young nobleman,
related by blood to the local powers, lay and ecclesiastic, and destined
for Church dignities, would be quickly given benefices. Engelbert received
such, and also was appointed Provost of the Cathedral. Strong of body,
rich, he led a boisterous martial life, and took a truculent part in the
political dissensions which were undoing the German realm. With his
cousin, the Archbishop Adolph, he went over to the side of Philip of
Suavia. For this the archbishop and his provost were deposed and
excommunicated by Pope Innocent III. There ensued years of turbulence and
fighting, during which Engelbert’s hand followed his passions. But with
the turning of events in 1208 he was reconciled to the Pope, restored to
his offices, and went crusading against the Albigenses in atonement for
his sins. He stood by the young Frederick, then favoured by Innocent, and
after some intervening years of proof, was, with general approval, elected
Archbishop of Cologne. He was about thirty-one years old.

There had been power and bravery in the man from the beginning; and his
faculties gained poise and gathered purpose through the stormy springtime
of his life. Now he stood forth prince-bishop, feudal duke; a man strong
of arm and clear of vision, steadfast against the violence of his brother
nobles who oppressed the churches and cloisters within their lordships.
The weak found him a rock of defence. Says his biographer, Caesar of
Heisterbach:

    “He was a defender of the afflicted and a hammer of tyrants,
    magnanimous and meek, lofty and affable, stern and gentle, dissembling
    for a time, and when least expected girding himself for vengeance.
    With the bishopric he had received the spiritual sword, and the
    material sword with the dukedom. He used either weapon against the
    rebellious, excommunicating some and crushing some by war.”

Under him archbishopric and dukedom prospered, their well-managed revenues
increased, palaces and churches rose. No mightier prince of the Church, no
stronger, juster ruler could be found. Said Pope Honorius after
Engelbert’s death: “All men in Germany feared me from fear of him.” From
the lay and German side is heard the hearty voice of Walther von der
Vogelweide, no friend of priests! “Worthy Bishop of Cologne, happy should
you be! You have well served the realm, and served it so that your praise
rises and waves on high. Master of princes! if your might weighs hard on
evil cowards, deem that as nothing! King’s guardian, high is your state,
unequalled Chancellor!”[620]

Archbishop of Cologne, duke of its double dukedom, and Regent of the
German realm, Engelbert was well-nigh Germany’s greatest figure during
these years. If his arm was strong, his also was the spirit of counsel and
wisdom. And although bearing himself as prince and ruler, he had within
him the devotion and humility of a true bishop. Said one of Engelbert’s
chaplains, speaking to the Abbot of Heisterbach: “Although my lord seems
as of the world, within he is not as he appears outwardly. Know that he
has many secret comfortings from God.”

The iron course of Engelbert’s life brought queryings to the monkish mind
of his biographer. Caesar felt that it was not easy for any bishop to be
saved; how much harder was it for a statesman-warrior-prelate so to
conduct himself in the warfare of this world as to attain at last “the
peace of divine contemplation.” Not thither did such a career seem to
lead! But there was a way, or at least an exit, which surely opened upon
heaven’s gate. This was the purple steep, the _purpureum ascensum_, of
martyrdom. Caesar was not alone in thinking thus, as to the saving close
of Engelbert’s career; for a devout and learned priest, who in earlier
years had been co-canon with Engelbert, said to Caesar after the
archbishop’s murder: “I do not think there was another way through which a
man so placed (_in statu tali positus_) could have entered the door of the
kingdom of heaven, which is narrow.”

Caesar tells the story of this martyrdom in all its causes and details of
plot. That plot succeeded because it was the envenomed culmination of the
hatred for the archbishop felt by the nobles--bishops among them too--whom
he restrained with his authority and unhesitating hand. Frederic, Count of
Isenburg, a kinsman of Engelbert as well as of the former archbishop, was
the feudal warden of the nunnery of Essen, which he greedily oppressed.
The abbess turned to Engelbert, as she had to his predecessor. The
archbishop hesitated to proceed against a relative. So the abbess appealed
to Rome. Papal letters came back causing Engelbert to take the matter up.
He acted with forbearance and generosity; for he even offered to make up
from his own revenues any loss the count might sustain from acting justly
toward the nunnery. In vain. Frederic, so we read, would have none of his
interference. The devil hardened his heart; and he began to incite his
friends and kinsmen (who were also the kin of Engelbert) to a treacherous
attack upon the man they could not openly withstand.

Rumours of the plot were in the air. Said a monk of Heisterbach to his
abbot: “Lord, if you have any business with the archbishop, do it quickly,
for his death is near.” Engelbert himself was not unwarned. A letter came
to him revealing the matter. Upon reading it, he threw it in the fire. Yet
he told its contents to his friend the Bishop of Minden, who was present.
Said the latter: “Have a care for thyself, my lord, for God’s sake, and
not for thyself alone, but for the welfare of your church and the safety
of the whole land.”

The archbishop answered: “Dangers are all about me, and what I should do
the Lord knows and not I. Woe is me, if I keep quiet! Yet if I should
accuse them of this matter, they would complain to every one that I was
fastening the crime of parricide on them. From this hour I commit my body
and soul to the divine care.”

    “Then taking the bishop alone into his chapel, he began to confess all
    his sins from his very youth, with a shower of tears that wetted all
    his breast, and, as we hope, washed the stains from his heart. And
    when the Lord of Minden said: ‘I fear there is still something on thy
    conscience which thou hast not told me,’ he answered: ‘The Lord knows
    that I have concealed nothing consciously.’ But thinking over his sins
    more fully, the next morning he took his confessor again into the same
    chapel and with meek and contrite soul and floods of tears confessed
    everything that had recurred to his mind. Then his conscience being
    clear, he said fearlessly: ‘Now let God’s will regarding me be done.’

    “In the meanwhile some one was knocking at the door of the chapel. The
    archbishop would not let it be opened because his eyes were wet with
    tears. But the knocking continued, and it was announced that the
    bishops of Osnabrück and Münster (brothers of Count Frederic) were
    there. After he had dried his eyes and wiped his face, he allowed them
    to be shown in, and said when they had entered: ‘You lords both are
    kin of mine, and I have injured you in nothing, as you know well, but
    have advanced your interests, as I might, and your brother’s also. And
    look you, from all sides by word and letter I hear that your brother
    Count Frederic, whom I have loved heartily and never harmed, is
    devising ill to me and seeks to kill me.’

    “They protested, trembling in their deceit: ‘Lord, may this never,
    never, be! You need have no fear; such a thought has never entered his
    heart. We all have been honoured and enriched and lifted up by you.’
    Which last was true.”

This was after the festival of All Saints in the first days of November
1225; and Count Frederic, the better to conceal his purpose, came and
accepted the archbishop’s terms. Together they set out from Cologne, the
count knowing that the now unsuspecting Engelbert would stop the next day
to dedicate a church at Swelm. So it turned out, and the count took that
opportunity to excuse himself and rode off to set his men in ambush. Just
then a widow rose up from the roadside, and demanded judgment as to a fief
withheld from her. At once the archbishop dismounted, and took his seat as
duke to hear the cause. It went against the widow, and in favour of him
who sat as judge. But he said: “Lady, this fief which you demand is taken
from you by decree and adjudged to me. But for the sake of God, pitying
your distress, I relinquish it to you.”

The archbishop rode on. About midday Frederic came up again to see which
way he was taking. Engelbert invited the count to pass the night with him.
But he declined on some pretext, and rode away. The archbishop and his
company proceeded on their road until the hour of vespers. Vespers were
said, and again the count appeared. Observing him, a nobleman in
Engelbert’s train said: “My lord, this coming and going of the count looks
suspicious. For the third time he is approaching, and now not as before on
his palfrey but on his war-horse. I advise you to mount your war-horse
too.”

But the archbishop said that would be too noticeable, and there was
nothing to fear. As the count drew near, they saw that the colour had left
his face. The archbishop spoke to him: “Now, kinsman, I am sure you will
stay with me.” He answered nothing, and they went on together. Suspicious
and alarmed, some of the clergy and some of the knights withdrew, so that
but a small company remained; for a good part of the episcopal household
with the cooks had gone ahead to prepare the night’s lodgings.

It was dusk as they drew near the place of ambush. The count grew
agitated, and was blaming himself to his followers for planning to kill
his lord and kinsman, but they egged him on. Now the foot of the Gevelberg
was reached, and the count said as they began to ascend, “My lord, this is
our path.” “May the Lord protect us,” replied Engelbert, for he was not
without suspicion.

The company was entering the hollow way leading over the summit of the
mountain, when suddenly the followers of Frederic, who were ahead, turned
on them, and others leaped from hiding, while a shrill whistle sounded,
startling the horses. “My lord, mount your war-horse; death is at the
door,” cried a knight. It was indeed. The archbishop’s company made no
resistance, except the faithful noble who first had scented danger. The
rest fled while the murderers rushed upon Engelbert, unable to turn in the
narrow way, and struck at him with swords and daggers. One seized him by
the cloak and the two rolled together on the ground; but the strong and
active prelate dragged himself and his antagonist out of the roadway into
a thicket. There he was again set upon by the mad crew, urged on by the
count, and was hacked and stabbed to death. He breathed his last beneath
an oak ten paces from the roadway.

There is no need to recount the finding of the gashed and stripped body,
its solemn interment in the Cathedral Church of St. Peter’s at Cologne,
the canonization of Engelbert, and the building of a chapel, succeeded by
a cloister, to mark the place of his martyrdom. Nor need one follow with
Caesar the banning of the murderers, and the unhappy ways in which their
deaths made part atonement for the injury which their wicked deed had done
the German realm.[621]

       *       *       *       *       *

The ideals and shortcomings of monasticism were closely connected with
popular beliefs. The monastic ideal had its inception in the thought of
sin as entailing either purgatorial or everlasting punishment, and in the
thought of holiness as ensuring eternal bliss. Whatever other motives
participated, the knot of the monastic purpose was held in the jaws of
this antithesis, which for itself drew form, colour, picturesqueness, from
popular beliefs, and was made tangible in countless stories telling of
purity and love and meekness impaired by lust and cruelty and pride, and
of retribution avoided by some shifty supernatural adjustment of the sin.
Such stories might be accepted as well by the learned as by the
illiterate. The brooding soul of the Middle Ages, with its knowledge of
humanity and its reaches of spiritual insight, was undisturbed by the
crass superstitions so queerly at odds with its deeper inspiration--a
remark specifically applicable to thoughtful or spiritually-minded
individuals in the mediaeval centuries.

As we descend the spiritual scale, the crude superstitious elements become
more prominent or apparently the whole matter. Likewise as we descend the
moral scale; for the more vicious the individual, the more utterly will he
omit the spiritual from his working faith, and the more mechanical will be
his methods of squaring his conduct with his fears of the supernatural.
Nevertheless, in estimating the ethical shortcomings of mediaeval
superstitions, one must remember how easily in a simple mind all sorts of
superstition may co-exist with a sweet religious and moral tone.

Sins unatoned for and uncondoned bring purgatorial or perpetual torment
after death, even as holiness brings eternal bliss. But how were sins
thought to come to men and women in the Middle Ages, and especially to
those who were earnestly striving to escape them? Rather than fruit of the
naughtiness of the human heart, they came through the malicious
suggestions, the temptations, of a Tempter. They were in fine the
machinations of the devil. This was the popular view, and also the
authoritative doctrine, expressed, re-expressed, and enforced in myriad
examples, by all the saints and magnates of the Church who had lived since
the time when Athanasius wrote the life of Anthony in devil-fighting
heroics.

Against the devil, every man had staunch allies; the readiest were the
Virgin Mary and the saints, for Christ was very high above the conflict,
and at the Judgment Day must be its final umpire. The object of the
cunning enemy was to trip man into hell, an object hostile alike to God
and man. Saintly aid enabled man to overcome the devil, or if he succumbed
to temptation and committed mortal sin, there was still a chance to
frustrate the devil’s plot, and save the soul by wiles or force. The
sinner may use every stratagem to defeat the devil and escape the results
of sins committed by himself, but prompted by his enemy. This was war and
the ethics of war, in which man was the central struggling figure,
attacked by the devil and defended by the saints. The latter also help
man’s earthly fortunes, and devotion to them may ensure one’s welfare in
this very palpable and pressing life of earth.

This popular and yet authoritative view of mortal peril and saintly aid is
illustrated in the tales from sermons and other pious writings. In them
any uncanny or untoward experience was ascribed to the devil. So it was in
monkish Chronicles, _Vitae sanctorum_, _Dialogi miraculorum_, or indeed in
any edifying writing couched in narrative form or containing illustrative
tales. Throughout this literature the devil inspires evil thoughts,
instigates crimes, and causes any unhappy or immoral happening. It is just
as much a matter of course as if one should say to-day, I have a cold, or
John stole a ring, or James misbehaved with So-and-so.[622] Any man might
meet the devil, and if sinful, suffer physical violence from him. If any
one disappeared the devil might be supposed to have carried him off.
Details of the abduction might be given, or the whole matter take place
before witnesses.

    “A rich usurer, with little fear of God in him, had dined well one
    evening, and was in bed with his wife, when he suddenly leaped up. She
    asked what ailed him. He replied: ‘I was just snatched away to God’s
    judgment seat, where I heard so many accusations that I did not know
    what to answer. And while I waited for something to happen, I heard
    the final sentence given against me, that I should be handed over to
    demons, who were to come and get me to-day.’ Saying this, he flung on
    a coat, and ran out of the house, for all his wife could do to stop
    him. His servants, following, discovered him almost crazed in a church
    where monks were saying their matins. There they kept him in custody
    for some hours. But he made no sign of willingness to confess or make
    restitution or repent. So after mass they led him back toward his
    house, and as they came by a river, a boat was seen coming rapidly up
    against the current, manned apparently by no one. But the usurer said
    that it was full of demons, who had come to take him. The words were
    no sooner uttered, than he was seized by them, and put in the boat,
    which suddenly turned on its course and disappeared with its
    prey.”[623]

One observes that this usurer had received sentence at God’s tribunal, and
the devils carried it out: the sentence gave them power. Any man may be
tempted; but falls into his enemy’s power only by sinning. His yielding is
an act of acquiescence in the devil’s will, and may be the commencement of
a state of permanent consent. With this we reach the notion of a formal
pact with the devil, of which there were many instances. But still the
pact is with the Enemy; the man is not bound beyond the letter, and may
escape by any trick. It is still the ethics of war; we are very close to
the principle that a man by stratagem or narrow observance of the letter
may escape the eternal retribution which God decrees conditionally and the
devil delights in.

The sacraments prescribed by the Church were the common means of escaping
future punishment. Confession is an example. The correct doctrine was that
without penitence it was ineffective. But popularly the confession
represented the whole fact. It was efficacious of itself, and kept the
soul from hell. It might even prevent retribution in this life. Caesar of
Heisterbach has a number of illustrative stories, rather immoral as they
seem to us. There was, for instance, a person possessed (_obsessus_) of a
devil who dwelt in him, and through his lips would make known the
_unconfessed_ sins of any one brought before him; but the devil could not
remember sins which had been confessed. A certain knight suspected (quite
correctly) a priest of sinning with his wife. So he haled him before this
_obsessus_. On the way the priest managed to elude his persecutor for an
instant, and, darting into a barn, confessed his sin to a layman he found
there. Returning, he went along with the knight, and, behold, the sin was
obliterated from the memory of the devil in the _obsessus_, and the priest
remained undetected.[624]

Men and women sometimes escaped the wages of sin by the aid of a saint,
but more often through the incarnate pity of the Virgin Mary. The Virgin
and the saints were ready to take up any cause, however desperate, against
the devil; which means that they were ready to intervene between the
sinner and the impending punishment. People took kindly to these thoughts
of irregular intervention, since everlasting torment for transient sin was
so extreme; but a surer source of their approval lay in the incomplete
spiritualization of the popular religion and its ethics.

To thwart the devil was the office of the Virgin and the saints. Their aid
was given when it was besought. Sometimes they intervened voluntarily to
protect a votary whose devotions had won their favour. The stories of the
pitying intervention of the Virgin to save the sinner from the wages of
his sin, and frustrate the devil, are among the fragrant flowers of the
mediaeval spirit. Ethically some of them leave much to ask for; but others
are tales of sweet forgiveness upon heart-felt repentance.

Jacques of Vitry has a story (scarcely fit to repeat) of a certain very
religious Roman widow-lady, who had an only son, with whom she sinned at
the devil’s instigation. She was a devoted worshipper of the Virgin; and
the devil, fearing that she would repent, plotted to bring her to trial
and immediate condemnation before the emperor’s tribunal, for her incest.
When the widow knew of her impending ruin, she went with tears to the
confessional, and then day and night besought the Virgin to deliver her
from infamy and death. The day of trial came. Suddenly the accuser, who
was the devil in disguise, began to quake and groan, and could not answer
when the emperor asked what ailed him. But as the woman drew near the
judgment seat, he uttered a horrid howl, exclaiming: “See! Mary is coming
with the woman, holding her hand.” And in a fetid whirlwind he
disappeared. “And thus,” says Jacques of Vitry, “the widow was set free
through confession and the Virgin’s aid, and afterwards persevered in the
service of God more cautiously.”[625]

Such a tale sounds immoral; yet there is some good in saving any soul from
hell; and here there was repentance. Caesar of Heisterbach has another, of
the Virgin taking the place of a sinning nun in the convent until she
repented and returned. Again repentance and forgiveness make the sinner
whole.[626]

The _Miracles de Nostre Dame_[627] are an interesting repertory of the
Virgin’s interventions. These “Mysteries” or miracle plays in Old French
verse are naïve enough in their kindly stratagems, by which the votary is
saved from punishment in this life and his soul from torment in the next.
The first “Miracle” in this collection runs thus: A pious dame and her
knightly husband, from devotion to the Virgin Mary took the not unusual
vow of married continence. But under diabolic incitement, the knight
over-persuaded his lady, who in her chagrin at the broken vow devoted the
offspring to the devil. A son was born, and in due time the devil came to
claim it. Thereupon a huge machinery, of pope and cardinals, hermits and
archangels, is set in motion. At last the case is brought before God,
where the devils show cause on one side, and “Nostre Dame” pleads on the
other. Our Lady wins on the ground that the mother could not devote her
offspring to the devil without the father’s consent, which was not shown.

There is surely no harm in this pleasant drama; for the devil ought not to
have had the boy. But there follow quite different “Miracles” of Our Lady.
The next one is typical. An abbess sins with her clerk. Her condition is
observed by the nuns, and the bishop is informed. The abbess casts herself
on the mercy of Mary, who miraculously delivers her of the child and gives
it into the care of a holy hermit. An examination of the abbess takes
place, after which she is declared innocent by the bishop. But she is at
once moved to repentance, and confesses all to him. In the bishop’s mind,
however, the Virgin’s intervention is sufficient proof of the abbess’s
holiness. He absolves her, and goes to the hermitage and takes charge of
the child.[628]

Such is an example of the kindly but peculiar miracles, in which the
Virgin saves her friends who turn to her and repent. Many other tales,
quite lovely and unobjectionable, are told of her: how she keeps her
tempted votaries from sinning, or helps them to repent:[629] or blesses
and leads on to joy those who need no forgiveness. Such a one was the
monk-scribe who illuminated Mary’s blessed name in three lovely colours
whenever it occurred in the works he copied, and then kissed it devoutly.
As he lay very ill, having received the sacraments, another brother saw in
vision the Virgin hover above his couch and heard her say: “Fear not, son,
thou shalt rejoice with the dwellers in heaven, because thou didst honour
my name with such care. Thine own name is written in the book of life.
Arise and come with me.” Running to the infirmary the brother found his
brother dying blissfully.[630]

There are lovely stories too of passionate repentance, coming
unmiraculously to those devoutly thinking on the Virgin and her infant
Son. “For there was once a nun who forsook her convent and became a
prostitute, but returned after many years. As she thought of God’s
judgment and the pains of hell, she despaired of ever gaining pardon; as
she thought of Paradise, she deemed that she, impure, could never enter
there; and when she thought upon the Passion, and how great ills Christ
had borne for her and how great sins she had committed, she still was
without hope. But on the Day of the Nativity she began to think that unto
us a Child is born, and that children are appeased easily. Before the
image of the Virgin she began to think of the Saviour’s infancy, and, with
floods of passionate tears, besought the Child through the benignity of
His childhood to have mercy upon her. She heard a voice saying to her that
through the benignity of that childhood which she had invoked, her sins
were forgiven.”[631]

But enough of these stories. Nor is there need to enlarge upon the
relic-worship and other superstitions of the Middle Ages. One sees such
matters on every side. It was all a matter of course, and disapprovals
were rare. Such conceptions of sin and the devil’s part in it affected the
morality of clergy as well as laity. The morals of the latter could not
rise above those of their instructors; and the layman’s religion of
masses, veneration of relics, pilgrimages, almsgiving and endowment of
monasteries, scarcely interfered with the cruelty and rapine to which he
might be addicted.




