BOOK III

THE IDEAL AND THE ACTUAL: THE SAINTS




CHAPTER XV

THE REFORMS OF MONASTICISM

    MEDIAEVAL EXTREMES; BENEDICT OF ANIANE; CLUNY; CITEAUX’S _CHARTA
    CHARITATIS_; THE _VITA CONTEMPLATIVA_ ACCEPTS THE _VITA ACTIVA_


The present Book and the following will set forth the higher
manifestations of the religious energies of the Middle Ages, and then the
counter ideals which knights and ladies delighted to contemplate, and
sometimes strove to reach. In religious as well as mundane life, ideals
admired and striven for constitute human facts, make part of the human
story, quite as veritably as the spotted actuality everywhere in evidence.
The tale of piety is to be gathered from those efforts of the religious
purpose which almost attain their ideal; while as a comment on them, and a
foil and contrast, the deflections of human frailty may be observed.
Likewise the full reality of chivalry lies in its ideals, supplemented by
the illuminating contrast of failure and oppression, making what we may
call its actuality. The emotional element, reviewed in the last chapter,
will for the time be dominant.

       *       *       *       *       *

Practice always drops below the ethical standards of a period. The
contrast appears in the history of Greece and Rome. Yet in neither Greece
nor Rome could there exist the abysms of contradiction which disclose
themselves after the conversion of western Europe to the religion of
Christ.

And for the following reasons. Greek and Roman standards were finite; they
regarded only the mortal happiness of the individual and the terrestrial
welfare of the State. To Greek thought the indefinite or limitless was as
the monstrous and unformed; and therefore abhorrent to the classic ideals
of perfection. Again, Greek and Roman standards demanded only what Greek
and Roman humanity could fulfil in the mortal life of earth. But the
Christian ideal of conduct assumes the universal imperfection and infinite
perfectibility of man. It has constant regard to immortality, and eternity
is needed for its fulfilment. Moreover, whether or not Christ’s Gospel set
forth any inherent antagonism between the fulness of mortal life and the
sure attainment of heaven, its historical interpretations have never
effected a complete reconcilement. They have always presented a conflict
between the finite and the eternal, unconceived and unsuspected by the
pagan ethics of Greece and Rome.

This conflict dawned in the Apostolic age. During the patristic period it
worked itself out to a formulated opposition between the world and the
City of God. Of this, monasticism was the chief expression. Nevertheless,
pagan principle and feeling lived on in the reasonings and characters of
the Church Fathers. The Roman qualities in Ambrose, the general survival
of antique greatness in Augustine, preserved them from the rhetorical
hysteria of Jerome and the exaggeration of phrase which affects the
writings of Gregory the Great.[432] With the decadence preceding, and the
confusion following, the Carolingian period, antique qualities passed
away; and when men began again to think and feel constructively, there
remained no antique poise to restrain the strife of those mighty
opposites--the joys of life and the terrors of the Judgment Day.

This conflict, inherent in mediaeval Christianity, was in part a struggle
between temporal desires which many men approved, and their renunciation
for eternal joy. From this point of view it was a conflict of ideals,
though, to be sure, life’s common cravings were on one side, and often
unideally turned the scale. We are not immediately concerned, however,
with this conflict of ideals; but with the contrasts presented between
the actual and the ideal, between conduct and the principles which should
have controlled it. The opposition between this life and eternity is
mentioned in order to make clear the tremendous demands of the Christian
ethical ideal, and the unlikelihood of its fulfilment by mediaeval
humanity. So one may perceive a reason why the Middle Ages were to show
such extremes of contrast between principles and practices. The standards
recognized as holiest countered the natural lives of men; and for that
reason could be lived up to only under transient spiritual enthusiasm or
by exceptional people. Monasticism held the highest ideals of Christian
living, and its story illustrates the continual falling away of conduct
from the recognized ideal.

Without regard to the contrast between the ideal and the actual, the
Middle Ages were a period of extremes--of extreme humility and love as
well as cruelty and hate. Such extremes may be traceable to a certain
unlimited quality in Christian principles, according to which no man could
have too much humility or Christian love, or could too strenuously combat
the enemies of Christ. To be sure, an all-proportioning principle of
conduct lay in man’s love of God, answering to God’s love which
encompassed all His creatures. But such proportionment is difficult for
simple minds, and many of the extremes which meet us in the Middle Ages
were directly due to the simplicity with which mediaeval men and women
carried out such Christian precepts as they were taken with, in disregard
of all else that commonly balances and conventionalizes human lives.

For this reason also the Middle Ages are picturesque and poetic. Nothing
could be more picturesque and more like a poem than the simple
absoluteness with which St. Francis interpreted and lived out his Lord’s
principle of love, and made universal application of his Lord’s injunction
to the rich young man, to go and sell his goods and give to the poor, and
then come follow Him. This particular solution of the problem of God’s
service was taken by Francis, and by many another, as of general
application, and was literally carried out; just as Francis with
exquisite simplicity carried out other precepts of his Lord in a way that
would be foolishness were it not so beautiful.

There was no contrast between conduct and principle in the life of
Francis; and in other men conduct might agree with such principles as they
understood. Many a rustic layman, many a good knight, fulfilled the
standards of his calling. Many a parish priest did his whole duty, as he
thought it. And many a monk and nun lived up to their monastic _regula_,
if indeed never satisfying the inner yearning of the soul unquenchably
striving for perfection. Indeed, for the monk ever to have been satisfied
with himself would have meant a fall from humility to vainglory.

The precepts of the Gospel were for every man and woman. Nevertheless, the
same rules of living did not apply to all. In this regard, mediaeval
society falls into the two general divisions of clergy and laity, meaning
by the former all persons making special profession of religion or engaged
in the service of the Church.[433] This would include anchorites and monks
(also the _conversi_[434] or lay-brethren) and the secular clergy from the
rank of bishop downward. To such (excepting seculars below the grade of
sub-deacon) the rule of celibacy applied, as well as other ascetic
precepts dependent on the vows they had taken or the regulations under
which they lived. Conversely, certain rules like those relating to the
conduct of man and wife would touch the laity alone.

A general similarity of principle pervaded the rules of conduct applying
to all orders of the clergy, secular and regular.[435] Yet there was a
difference in the severity of the rules and the stringency of their
application. The mediaeval code of religious ethics applied in its utter
strenuousness only to monks and nuns. They alone had seriously undertaken
to obey the Gospel precept, _esto perfecti_; and they alone could be
regarded as living the life of complete Christian militancy against the
world, the flesh, and the devil. The trials, that is to say the
temptations, of this warfare could be fully known only to the monk.
“Tentatio,” says Caesar of Heisterbach, “est militia,” _i.e._ warfare; it
is possible only for those who live humanly and rationally, after the
spirit, which is to say, as monks; “the seculars (_i.e._ the clergy who
were not monks) and the carnal (_i.e._ the laity) who walk according to
the flesh, are improperly said to be tempted; for as soon as they feel the
temptation they consent, or resist lukewarmly, like the horse and the mule
who have no understanding.”[436]

We have spoken of the inception of monasticism, and of its early
motives,[437] which included the fear of hell, the love of Christ, and the
conviction of the antagonism between pleasure and that service which opens
heaven’s gates. Such sentiments were likely to develop and expand. The
fear of hell might be inflamed and made visible by the same imagination
that festered over the carnality of pleasure; the heart could impassion
and extend the love of Christ through humanity’s full capacity for loving
what was holiest and most lovable; and the mind could attain to an
overmastering conviction of the incompatibility of pleasure with absolute
devotion. Through the Middle Ages these motives developed and grew
together, until they made a mode of life, and fashioned human characters
into accord with it. Century after century the lives of thousands
fulfilled the monastic spirit, and often so perfectly as to belie
humanity’s repute for frailty. Their virtues shunned encomium. Record was
made of those whose mind and energy organized and wrought, or whose piety
and love of God burned so hotly that others were enkindled. But legion
upon legion of tacit lives are registered only in the Book with seven
seals.

Monastic abuses have usually spoken more loudly than monastic regularity.
In Christian monasticism there is an energy of renovation which constantly
cries against corruption. Its invective reaches us from all the mediaeval
centuries; while monastic regularity has more commonly been unreported. It
is well to bear this in mind when reading of monastic vice. It always
existed, and judging from the fiery denunciations which it awakened, it
was often widely prevalent. In fact, the monastic life required such love
of God or fear of hell, such renunciation of this world, its ambitions,
its lusts and its lures, that monks were likely to fall below the
prescribed standards, and then quickly into all manner of sin, from lack
of the restraints, or outlets, of secular life.

Consequently the most patent history of monasticism is the history of its
attempts to reform and renew itself. Its heroes come before us as
reformers or refounders, whose endeavour is to reinstitute the perfect
way, impassion men anew to follow it, by added precepts discipline them
for its long ascents, and so occupy them in the practice of its virtues
that all distracting impulses shall perish. Their apparent endeavour (at
least until the day of Francis of Assisi) is to renew a life from which
their contemporaries have fallen away. And yet through all there was
unconscious innovation and progress.

The greater part of the fervent piety of the Middle Ages dwelt in
cloisters, when not drawn forth unwillingly to serve the Lord in the
world. Mediaeval saints were, or yearned to be, monks or nuns.
Consequently monastic reforms, as well as attempts to raise the condition
of the secular clergy, emanated from within monasticism. Its own rules of
living had been set from within by Benedict of Nursia, and others who were
monks. There was much irregularity at first; but the seventh and eighth
centuries witnessed the conflict between different types of monastic
organization, and then the general victory of the Benedictine _regula_.
This was also a victory for monastic reform; for moral looseness,
accompanied by heathenish irregularities, easily penetrated cloisters when
not protected by a common and authoritative rule. As it was, the energy of
Benedictine uniformity seemed exhausted in the contest.

But a Benedictine refounder arose. This was the high-born Witiza of
Aquitaine, the ascetic virtuosity of whose early life had won him repute.
Assuming the name of Benedict, he established a monastery on the bank of
the little Aniane, in Aquitaine, in the year 779. His foundation
flourished in righteousness and increased in numbers, till it drew the
attention of Alcuin and Charlemagne to its abbot. Benedict was given the
task of reforming the monasteries of Aquitaine. Afterwards Louis the Pious
extended his authority; till in 817 a reforming synod, over which he
presided, was held at Aix, and the king’s authority was attached to its
decrees. All Frankish monasteries were therein commanded to observe the
_regula_ of Benedict of Nursia, with many further precepts set by him of
Aniane, aggravating the severity of the older rule; for example, by
enforcing a more rigid silence among the monks when at labour, and
restricting their intercourse with the laity. Great stress was laid upon
the labours of the field. There was little novelty in the work of this
reorganizer, with his consistent ascetic contempt for profane literature.
His labours were typical of those of many a monastic reformer after him,
who likewise sought to re-establish the strictness of the old Benedictine
rule, and in fact added to its austerities.

The next example of reform is Cluny, founded in the year 910. Its cloister
discipline followed the _regula_ of Benedict with the additions decreed by
the synod of Aix. Under Odo (d. 942) Majolus (d. 994) and Odilo (d. 1048)
it rose to unprecedented power and influence. Mainly because of the
winning and commanding qualities of its abbots, it received the support of
kings and popes; its authority and privileges were increased, until it
became the head of more than three hundred cloisters distributed through
France, Italy, Germany, and Spain. In ecclesiastical policy it stood for
decency and reform, but without giving extreme support to either emperor
or pope. Balance and temperance characterized its career. It was a
monastic organization which by precept and example, and by the wide
supervising powers it received from the papacy and from temporal
authorities, promoted regularity and propriety of life among monks, and
also among the secular clergy. The “reforms of Cluny” do not represent any
specific intensifying of monastic principles, but rather the general
endeavour of the better elements in Burgundian and French monasticism to
overcome the crass secularization of the Church, within and without the
cloister. Cluny’s influence told generally against monastic degradation,
rather than in favour of any special ascetic or ecclesiastic policy. The
prevailing simony, the clerical concubinage, the rough and warlike ways of
bishops and abbots were all corruptions standing in the way of any
monastic or ecclesiastical improvement; and Cluny opposed them, in
moderation however, and with considerable acquiescence in the apparently
necessary conditions of the time.[438]

After the comparative strictness of its first abbots, Cluny’s discipline
moderated almost to laxity; and the interests of the rich and magnificent
monastery became elegant and somewhat secular. It still maintained
monastic decencies while not going beyond their demands. Its face was no
longer set against comfortable living, nor against art and letters. And
the time came when fervent spirits demanded a more uncompromising attack
upon the world and the flesh.

Such came from Citeaux (near Dijon), where a few monks founded a
struggling monastery in 1098. Its fortunes were small and feeble until the
time of its third abbot, the Englishman, Stephen Harding (1109-1134),
whose genius set the lines of Citeaux’s larger destinies. Her great period
began when, shortly after Harding’s entrance on his abbacy, there arrived
a band of well-born youths, led by one Bernard. Then of a truth the
cloister burned with ardour. Its numbers grew, and Bernard was sent with a
Cistercian band to found a daughter monastery at Clairvaux (1115).

Like Stephen Harding, Bernard was an ascetic, and the Cistercian Order
represents a stern tightening of the reins which Cluny left lying somewhat
slackly upon the backs of her stall-fed monks.[439] Controversies arose
between the Cluniac Benedictines and the Cistercian Benedictines insisting
on a stricter rule. Bernard himself entered into heated controversy with
that great temperate personality of the twelfth century, Peter the
Venerable, Cluny’s revered lord.

The original _regula_ of Benedict provided an admirable constitution for
the single monastery, but no plan for the supervision of one monastery by
another. The mediaeval advance in monastic organization consisted in the
authoritative supervision of subordinate or “daughter” foundations by the
superior or primal monastery of the Order. The Abbot of Cluny exercised
such authority over Cluniac foundations, as well as over monasteries
which, at the instance of the secular lord of the land, had been
reorganized by Cluny.

The Cistercian Order represents a less monarchical, or more decentralized
subordination, on a plan similar to the feudal principle of
sub-infeudation, whereby the holder of the fief owed his duties to his
immediate lord, who in turn owed duties to his own lord, still above him.
Thus in the Cistercian Order the visitatorial authority over each
foundation was vested in the immediate mother abbey, rather than in the
primal abbey of Citeaux, from which the intervening mother abbey had gone
forth.

This plan was formulated by Stephen Harding’s _Charta Charitatis_,[440]
the charter of the Cistercian Order and a monument of constructive genius.
Apparently mindful of the various privileges recognized by the feudal
system, it begins by renouncing on the part of the superior monastery all
claim to temporal emolument from the daughter foundations: “Nullam
terrenae commoditatis seu rerum temporalium exactionem imponimus.” “But
for love’s sake (_gratia-charitatis_) we desire to retain the care of
their souls; so that should they swerve from the holy way and the
observance of the Holy Rule, they may through our solicitude return to
rectitude of life.”

Then follows the command that all Cistercian foundations obey implicitly
the _regula_ of Benedict, as understood and practised at Citeaux, and that
all follow the customs of Citeaux, and the same forms of chant and prayer
and service (for we receive their monks in our cloister, and they ours),
“so that without discordant actions we may live by one love, one rule, and
like practices (_una charitate, una regula, similibusque vivamus
moribus_).” A short sentence follows, forbidding all monasteries and
individual monks to accept from any source any privilege inconsistent with
the customs of the Order.

So the _Charta_ enjoined a uniformity of discipline. Wise and temperate
provision was made for the enforcement of the same when necessary by the
immediate parent monastery of the delinquent foundation. “Whenever the
Abbot of Citeaux comes to a monastery to visit it, its abbot shall make
way for him, and he shall there hold the office of abbot. Yet let him not
presume to order or conduct affairs against the wishes of its abbot and
the brethren. But if he sees that the precepts of the _Regula_ or of our
Order are transgressed, let him seek to correct the brethren with the
advice and in the presence of the abbot. If the abbot be absent, he may
still proceed.” Once a year the Abbot of Citeaux, in person or through one
of his co-abbots, must visit all the monasteries (coenobia) which he has
founded, and if more often, the brethren should the more rejoice. Likewise
must the four primary abbots of La Ferté, Pontigny, Clairvaux, and
Morimond, together visit Citeaux once a year, at such time as they may
choose, except that set for the annual meeting of the general Chapter. At
Citeaux also, let any visiting abbot be treated as if he were abbot there.

    “Whenever any of our churches (monasteries) by God’s grace so
    increases that it is able to found another brotherhood, let the same
    relationship (_definitio_) obtain between them which obtains between
    us and our _cofratres_, except that they may not hold an annual
    Chapter; but rather let all abbots come without fail every year to the
    annual Chapter at Citeaux.

    “At which Chapter let them take measures for the safety of their
    souls; if in the observance of the holy _Regula_ or the Order,
    anything should be amended or supplemented, let them ordain it; let
    them re-establish the bond of peace and love among themselves.”

The annual Chapter is also given authority to correct any abbot and settle
controversies between abbots; but when an abbot appears unworthy of his
charge, and the Chapter has not acted, it is the duty of the abbot of his
mother church to admonish him, and, upon his obduracy, summon other abbots
and move for his deposition. Thus the _Charta Charitatis_ apportioned
authority among the abbots of the Order, providing, as it were, a mutual
power of enforcement in which every abbot had part. One notices also that
the _Charta_ is neither monarchical nor democratic, but aristocratic; for
the abbots (not the Abbot of Citeaux alone) manage and control the Order,
and without any representation of the monks at the annual Chapter.[441]
The _Charta Charitatis_ seems a spiritual mirror of the feudal system.

Mediaeval monasticism, whether cloistered or sent forth into the world,
was predominantly coenobitic or communal. Yet through the Middle Ages the
anchorite or hermit way of life was not unrepresented. Both monk and
hermit existed from the beginning of Christian monasticism; they
recognized the same purpose, but employed different means to achieve it.
For their common aim was to merit the kingdom of heaven through the
suppression of sense-desires and devotion to spiritual righteousness. But
the communal system recognized the social nature of man, his essential
weakness in isolation, and his inability to satisfy his bodily wants by
himself. Thus admitting the human need of fellowship and correction, it
deemed that man’s spiritual progress could be best advanced in a way of
life which took account of these facts. On the other hand, anchoritism
looked rather to man’s self-sufficiency alone with God--and the devil. It
held that man could best conquer his carnal nature in solitude, and in
solitude best meditate upon his soul and God. The society of one’s
fellows, even though they be likeminded, is a distraction and a hindrance.
Obviously, the devoted temper has its variants; and some souls will draw
from solitude that strength which others gain from support and sympathy.

Both the coenobitic and the hermit life were, from the time of their
inception, phases of the _vita contemplativa_. Yet more active duties had
constantly been recognized, until at last monasticism, in an ardour of
love for fellow-men, broke from the cloister and went abroad in the steps
of Francis and Dominic. Even this active and uncloistered monasticism drew
its strength from its hidden meditation, and, strengthened from within
itself, entered upon the _vita activa_, and practised among men the
virtues which it had acquired through contemplation and the quiet
discipline of the cloister. So if we people of the world would have
understanding of the matter, we must never forget that at its source and
in its essence the monastic life is a _vita contemplativa_, whether the
monastic man, as a member of a fervent community, be sustained through the
support of his brethren and the counsel or command of his superior, or
whether, as an anchorite, he seclude himself in solitude. And the essence
of this _vita contemplativa_ is not to do or act, but to contemplate,
meditate upon God and the human soul. By one line of ancestry it is a
descendant of Aristotle’s βίος θεωρητικός. But its mightier parent was the
Saviour’s manifestation of God’s love of man and man’s love of God. From
this source came the emotional elements (and they were the predominant and
overwhelming) of the Christian _vita contemplativa_, its terror and
despair, its tears and hope, and its yearning love. Through these any
Hellenic calm was transformed to storm-tossed Christian ecstasy.

Monastic quietism might at any time be drafted into Christian militancy.
In the crises of the Church, or when there was call to go forth and
convert the heathen or the carnal, both monk and hermit became zealots in
the world. Yet important and frequent as these active functions were, they
were not commanded by the Benedictine _regula_, either in its original
form or in its many modifications, Cluniac, Cistercian, or Carthusian;
hence they were not treated as part of the monastic life. There was to
come a change. The _vita contemplativa_ was to take to itself the _vita
activa_ as a regular and not an occasional function of perfect Christian
piety. An evangelization of monasticism, according to the more active
spirit of the Gospel, was at hand. The monastic ideal was to become humane
and actively loving. In principle and theory, as well as practice,
Christian piety was no longer to find its entire end and aim in
contemplation, in asceticism, in purity: it was _regularly_ henceforth to
occupy itself with a loving beneficence among men.

Some of the ardent beginnings of this movement did not receive the
sanction of the Church. The Poor of Lyons, the Humbled Folk (_Humiliati_)
of Lombardy, the Beghards of Liége, were pronounced to be heretics.
Predominantly lay and ecclesiastically somewhat bizarre, they were
scarcely monks. Yet these irregular evangelists of the latter part of the
twelfth century were forerunners of that chief evangelizer of Monasticism,
Francis of Assisi.[442]

The life of Francis, as all men know, fulfilled the current demands of
monasticism. He lived and taught obedience, chastity, humility, and a more
absolute poverty than had been before conceived. With respect to the first
three virtues, it was only through his loving way of living them that
Francis set anything new before his brethren. As for the last, it may be
said that monks had always been forbidden to own property; only the
monastery or the Order might. Francis’s absolute acceptance of poverty
comes to us as inspired by the command of Christ to the rich young man: Go
and sell all, and give to the poor, and then come follow me. But had no
Christian soul read this before and accepted it absolutely? The Athanasian
Life of St. Anthony, at the very beginning of Christian monasticism, has
the same account; he too gave up all he had on reading this passage. But
then he fled to the desert, while Francis, when he had given up all,
opened his arms to mankind. In accordance with his brotherly and social
evangelization of monasticism, Francis modified certain of its practices.
He removed restrictions upon intercourse among the brethren, and took away
the barriers, save those of holiness, between the brethren and the world.
Then he lifted the veil of silence from the brethren’s lips. They should
thenceforth speak freely, in love of God and man. So monasticism stepped
forth, at last uncloistered, upon its course of love and teaching in the
world.

In spite of the temperamental differences between Francis and Dominic, and
in spite of the different tasks which they set before their Orders, the
analogy between Franciscans and Dominicans was fundamental; for the
latter, as well as the former, regularly undertook to evoke the _vita
activa_ from the _vita contemplativa_. The Dominicans were to preach and
teach true Christian doctrine, and as veritable _Domini canes_ destroy the
wolves of heresy menacing the Christian fold.

Dominic received from Pope Honorius III., in 1217, the confirmation of his
Order, as an Order of Canons according to the _Regula_ supposed to have
been taught by Augustine. The Preaching Friars were never cloistered by
their _regula_, any more than were the Minorites. Two or three years
later, Dominic added, or emphasized anew, the principle of voluntary
poverty, not only in the individuals but in the Order as a corporate
whole. Whencesoever he derived this idea--whether from the Franciscans, or
because it was rife among men--at all events it was not his originally;
for Dominic had accepted at an earlier period the one-sixth of the
revenues of the Bishop of Toulouse. This he now renounced, and instead
accepted voluntary poverty.

It was not given to Dominic to love as Francis loved. Nor was he an
incarnate poem. But it was in the spirit of Christian devotion that he
undertook and laid upon his Order the performance of active duties in the
world, especially of preaching true doctrines for the salvation of souls.
Dominic took no personal part in the Albigensian blood-shedding; and he
was not the founder of the Inquisition, although his Order was so soon to
be identified with it. He was a theologian, a teacher, and an ardent
preacher; a devoted man, given to tears. Almost the only words we have
from him are those of his Testament: “Caritatem habete, humilitatem
servate, paupertatem voluntariam possedete.”[443]




