letter carries his yearning love to his dear ones there:

    “Sad is my soul, and not to be consoled, until I may return. For what
    consolation save you in the Lord have I in an evil time and in the
    place of my pilgrimage? Wherever I go, your sweet recollection does
    not leave me; but the sweeter the memory the more vexing is the
    absence. Alas! my wandering not only is prolonged but aggravated. Hard
    enough is exile from the Lord, which is common to us all while we are
    pilgrims in the body. But I endure a special exile also, compelled to
    live away from you.

    “For a third time my bowels are torn from me.[492] Those little
    children are weaned before the time; the very ones whom I begot
    through the Gospel I may not educate. I am forced to abandon my own,
    and care for the affairs of others; and it is not easy to say whether
    to be dragged from the former, or to be involved in the latter is
    harder to bear. Thus, O good Jesus, my whole life is spent in grief
    and my years in groaning! It is good for me, O Lord, to die, rather
    than to live and not among my brothers, my own household, my own
    dearest ones.”[493]

Bernard had a younger brother, Gerard, whom he deeply loved. In 1138 he
died while still young, and having recently returned with Bernard from
Italy. Bernard, dry-eyed, read the burial-service over his body; so says
his biographer wondering, for the saint was not wont to bury even
strangers without tears.[494] No other eyes were dry at that funeral.
Afterwards he preached a sermon;[495] it began with restraint, then became
a long cry of grief.

The saint took the text from Canticles where he had left off in his
previous sermon--“I am black, but comely, as the tents of Kedar.” He
proceeded to expound its meaning: the tents are our bodies, in which we
pilgrims dwell and carry on our war. Then he spoke of other portions of
the text--and suddenly deferred the whole subject till his next sermon:
Grief ordains an end, “and the calamity which I suffer.”

    “For why dissemble, or conceal the fire which is scorching my sad
    breast? What have I to do with this Song, I who am in bitterness? The
    power of grief turns my intent, and the anger of the Lord has parched
    my spirit. I did violence to my soul and dissembled till now, lest
    sorrow should seem to conquer faith. Others wept, but with dry eyes I
    followed the hateful funeral, and dry-eyed stood at the tomb, until
    all the solemnities were performed. In my priestly robes I finished
    the prayers, and sprinkled the earth over the body of my loved one
    about to become earth. Those who looked on, weeping, wondered that I
    did not. With such strength as I could command, I resisted and
    struggled not to be moved at nature’s due, at the fiat of the
    Powerful, at the decree of the Just, at the scourge of the Terrible,
    at the will of the Lord. But though tears were pressed back, I could
    not command my sadness; and grief, suppressed, roots deeper. I confess
    I am beaten. My sorrow will out before the eyes of my children who
    understand and will console.

    “You know, my sons, how just is my grief. You know what a comrade has
    left me in the path wherein I was walking. He was my brother in blood
    and still closer by religion. I was weak in body, and he carried me;
    faint-hearted, and he comforted me; lazy, and he spurred me;
    thoughtless, and he admonished me. Whither art thou snatched away,
    snatched from my hands! O bitter separation, which only death could
    bring; for living, thou wouldst never leave me. Why did we so love,
    and now have lost each other! Hard state, but my fortune, not his, is
    to be pitied. For thou, dear brother, if thou hast lost dear ones,
    hast gained those who are dearer. Me only this separation wounds.
    Sweet was our presence to each other, sweet our consorting, sweet our
    colloquy; I have lost these joys; thou hast but changed them. Now,
    instead of such a worm as me, thou hast the presence of Christ. But
    what have I in place of thee? And perhaps though thou knewest us in
    the flesh, now that thou hast entered into the power of the Lord, thou
    art mindful only of His righteousness, forgetting us.

    “I seem to hear my brother saying: ‘Can a woman forget her sucking
    child; even so, yet will I not forget thee.’ That does not help, where
    no hand is stretched out.”

Bernard speaks of Gerard’s unfailing helpfulness to him and every one, and
of his piety and religious life. He feels the cares of his life and
station closing around him, and his brother gone. Then he justifies his
grief, and pours it forth unrestrained. Would any one bid him not to weep?
as well tell him not to feel when his bowels were torn from him; he feels,
for his flesh is not brass; he grieves, and his grief is ever before him:

    “I confess my sorrow. Will some one call me carnal? Certainly I am
    human, since I am a man. Nor do I deny being carnal, for I am, and
    sold under sin, adjudged to death and punishment. I am not insensible
    to punishments; I shudder at death, my own or others’. Mine was
    Gerard, mine! He is gone, and I feel, and am wounded, grievously!

    “Pardon me, my sons; or rather lament your father’s state. Pity me,
    and think how grievously I have been requited for my sins by the hand
    of God. Though I feel the punishment, I do not impugn the sentence.
    This is human; that would be impious. Man must needs be affected
    towards those dear to him, with gladness at their presence, with
    sorrow at their absence. I grieve over thee, Gerard, my beloved, not
    because thou art to be pitied, but because thou art taken away. May it
    be that I have not lost thee, but sent thee on before! Be it granted
    me some time to follow whither thou art gone; for thou hast joined the
    company of those heavenly ones on whom in thy last hours thou didst
    call exultingly to praise the Lord. For thee death had no sting, nor
    any fear. Through his jaws Gerard passed to his Fatherland safe and
    glad and exulting. When I reached his side, and he had finished the
    psalm, looking up to heaven, he said in a clear voice: ‘Father, into
    thy hands I commend my spirit.’ Then saying over again and again the
    word, ‘Father, Father,’ he turned his joyful face to me, and said:
    ‘What great condescension that God should be father to men! What glory
    for men to be sons of God and heirs of God!’ So he rejoiced, till my
    grief was almost turned to a song of gladness.

    “But the pang of sorrow calls me back from that lovely vision, as care
    wakens one from light slumber. I grieve, but only over myself; I
    lament his loss to this household, to the poor, to all our Order; whom
    did he not comfort with deed and word and example? Grievously am I
    afflicted, because I love vehemently. And let no one blame my tears;
    for Jesus wept at Lazarus’s tomb. His tears bore witness to His
    nature, not to His lack of faith. So these tears of mine; they show my
    sorrow, not my faithlessness. I grieve, but do not murmur. Lord, I
    will sing of thy mercy and righteousness. Thou gavest Gerard; thou
    hast taken him. Though we grieve that he is gone, we thank thee for
    the gift.

    “I bear in mind, O Lord, my pact and thy commiseration, that thou
    mightest the more be justified in thy word. For when last year we were
    in Viterbo, and he fell sick, and I was afflicted at the thought of
    losing him in a strange land and not bringing him back to those who
    loved him, I prayed to thee with groans and tears: ‘Wait, O Lord,
    until our return. When he is restored to his friends, take him, if
    thou wilt, and I will not complain.’ Thou heardest me, God; he
    recovered; we finished the work thou hadst laid on us, and returned in
    gladness bringing our sheaves of peace. Then I was near to forget my
    pact, but not so thou. I shame me of these sobs, which convict me of
    prevarication. Thou hast recalled thy loan, thou hast taken again what
    was thine. Tears set an end to words; thou, O Lord, wilt set to them
    limit and measure.”[496]

We may now turn to Bernard’s love of God, and rise with him from the
fleshly to the spiritual, from the conditioned to the absolute. There is
no break; love is always love. More especially the love of Christ, the
God-man is the mediating term: He presents the Godhead in human form; to
love Him is to know a love attaching to both God and man.

Guigo, Prior of the “Grande Chartreuse,” whose _Meditations_ have been
given,[497] was Bernard’s friend, and wrote to him upon love. Bernard
replies: “While I was reading it, I felt sparks in my breast, from which
my heart glowed within me as from that fire which the Lord sent upon the
earth!” He hesitates to suggest anything to Guigo’s fervent spirit, as he
would hesitate to rouse a bride quiet in the bridegroom’s arms. Yet “what
I do not dare, love dares; it boldly knocks at a friend’s door, fearing no
repulse, and quite careless of disturbing your delightful ease with its
affairs.” Bernard is here speaking of love’s importunate devotion; his
words characterize the soul’s importuning of God:

    “I should call love undefiled because it keeps nothing of its own.
    Indeed it has nothing of its own, for everything which it has is
    God’s. The undefiled law of the Lord is love, which seeks not what
    profits itself but what profits many. It is called the law of the
    Lord, either because He lives by it, or because no one possesses it
    save by His gift. It is not irrational to speak of God as living by
    law, that law being love. Indeed in the blessed highest Trinity what
    preserves that highest ineffable unity, except love?”

So far, Bernard has been using the word _charitas_. Now, in order to
indicate love’s desire, he begins to use the words _cupiditas_ and
_amor_.[498] When these yearning qualities are rightly guided by God’s
grace, what is good will be cherished for the sake of what is better, the
body will be loved for the soul’s sake, the soul for God’s sake, and God
for His own sake.

    “Yet because we are of the flesh (_carnales_) and are begotten through
    the flesh’s concupiscence, our yearning love (_cupiditas vel amor
    noster_) must begin from the flesh; yet if rightly directed, advancing
    under the leadership of grace, it will be consummated in spirit. For
    that which is first is not spiritual, but that which is natural
    (_animale_); then that which is spiritual. First man loves (_diligit_)
    himself for his own sake. For he is flesh, and is able to understand
    nothing beyond himself. When he sees that he cannot live
    (_subsistere_) by himself alone, he begins, as it were from necessity,
    to seek and love God. Thus, in this second stage, he loves God, but
    only for his own sake. Yet as his necessities lead him to cultivate
    and dwell with God in thinking, reading, praying, and obeying, God
    little by little becomes known and becomes sweet. Having thus tasted
    how sweet is the Lord, he passes to the third stage, where he loves
    God for God’s sake. Whether any man in this life has perfectly
    attained the fourth stage, where he loves himself for God’s sake, I do
    not know. Let those say who have knowledge; for myself, I confess it
    seems impossible. Doubtless it will be so when the good and faithful
    servant shall have entered into the joy of his Lord, and shall be
    drunk with the flowing richness of God’s house. Then oblivious to
    himself, he will pass to God and become one spirit with Him.”[499]

So one sees the stages through which love of self and lust of fellow
become love of God. A responsive emotion attends each ascending step in
the saint’s intellectual apprehension of love--as one should bear in mind
while following the larger exposition of the theme in Bernard’s _De
deligendo Deo_.[500]

The cause and reason for loving God is God; the _mode_ is to love without
measure: “Causa diligendi Deum, Deus est; modus, sine modo diligere.”
Should we love God because of His desert, or our advantage? For both
reasons. On the score of His desert, because He first loved us. What stint
shall there be to my love of Him who is my life’s free giver, its
bounteous administrator, its kind consoler, its solicitous ruler, its
redeemer, eternal preserver and glorifier? On the other hand, “God is not
loved without reward; but He should be loved without regard to the
reward. _Charitas_ seeks not its own. It is affection and not a contract;
it is not bought, nor does it buy. _Amor_ is satisfied with itself. It has
the reward, which is what is loved. True love demands no reward, but
merits one. The reward, although not sought by the lover, is due him, and
will be rendered if he perseveres.”

Bernard proceeds to expound the four stages or grades (_gradus_) of love:

    “Love is a natural affection, one of the four.[501] As it exists by
    nature, it should diligently serve the Author of nature first of all.
    But as nature is frail and weak, love is compelled by necessity first
    to serve itself. This is carnal love, whereby, above everything, man
    loves himself for his own sake. It is not set forth by precept, but is
    rooted in nature; for who hates his own flesh? As love becomes more
    ready and profuse, it is not content with the channel of necessity,
    but will pour forth and overspread the broad fields of pleasure. At
    once the overflow is bridled by the command, ‘Thou shalt love thy
    neighbour as thyself.’ This is just and needful, lest what is part of
    nature should have no part in grace. A man may concede to himself what
    he will, so long as he is mindful to provide the same for his
    neighbour. The bridle of temperance is imposed on thee, O man, out of
    the law of life and discipline, in order that thou shouldst not follow
    thy desires, nor with the good things of nature serve the enemy of the
    soul, which is lust. If thou wilt turn away from thy pleasures, and be
    content with food and raiment, little by little it will not so burden
    thee to keep thy love from carnal desires, which war against the soul.
    Thy love will be temperate and righteous when what is withdrawn from
    its own pleasures is not denied to its brother’s needs. Thus carnal
    love becomes social when extended to one’s kind.

    “Yet in order that perfect justice should exist in the love of
    neighbour, God must be regarded (_Deum in causa haberi necesse est_).
    How can one love his neighbour purely who does not love in God? God
    makes Himself loved, He who makes all things good. He who founded
    nature so made it that it should always need to be sustained by Him.
    In order that no creature might be ignorant of this, and arrogate for
    himself the good deeds of the Creator, the Founder wisely decreed that
    man should be tried in tribulations. By this means, when he shall have
    failed and God have aided, God shall be honoured by him whom He has
    delivered. The result is that man, animal and carnal, who knew not how
    to love any one beside himself, begins for his own sake to love God;
    because he has found out that in God he can accomplish everything
    profitable, and without Him can do nothing.

    “So now for his own interest, he loves God--love’s second grade; but
    does not yet love God for God’s sake. If, however, tribulation keeps
    assailing him, and he continually turns to God for aid, and God
    delivers him, will not the man so oft delivered, though he have a
    breast of iron and a heart of stone, be drawn to cherish his
    deliverer, and love Him not only for His aid but for Himself? Frequent
    necessities compel man to come to God incessantly; repeatedly he
    tastes and, by tasting, proves how sweet is the Lord. At length God’s
    sweetness, rather than human need, draws the man to love Him.
    Thereafter it will not be hard for the man to fulfil the command to
    love his neighbour. Truly loving God, he loves for this reason those
    who are God’s. He loves chastely, and is not oppressed through obeying
    the chaste command; he loves justly, and willingly embraces the just
    command. That is the third grade of love, when God is loved for
    Himself.

    “Happy is he who attains to the fourth grade, where man loves himself
    only on account of God. Thy righteousness, O God, is as the mountain
    of God; love is that mountain, that high mountain of God. Who shall
    ascend into the mountain of the Lord? Who will give me the wings of a
    dove and I will fly away and be at rest. Alas! for my long-drawn
    sojourning! When shall I gain that habitation in Zion, and my soul
    become one spirit with God? Blessed and holy will I call him to whom
    in this mortal life such has been given though but once. For to be
    lost to self and not to feel thyself, and to be emptied of thyself and
    almost to be made nothing, that pertains to heavenly intercourse, not
    to human affection. And if any one among mortals here gain admission
    for an instant, at once the wicked world is envious, the day’s evil
    disturbs, the body of death drags down, fleshly necessity solicits,
    corruption’s debility does not sustain, and, fiercest of all,
    brotherly love calls back! Alas! he is dragged back to himself, and
    forced to cry: ‘O Lord, I suffer violence, answer thou for me’ (Isa.
    xxxviii. 14); ‘Who will deliver me from the body of this death?’ (Rom.
    vii. 24).

    “Yet Scripture says that God made all things for His own sake; that
    will come to pass when the creation is in full accord with its Author.
    Therefore we must sometime pass into that state wherein we do not wish
    to be ourselves or anything else, except for His sake and by reason of
    His will, not ours. Then not our need or happiness, but His will, will
    be fulfilled in us. O holy love and chaste! O sweet affection! O pure
    and purged intention of the will, in which nothing of its own is
    mingled! This is it to be made God (_deificari_). As the drop of water
    is diffused in a jar of wine, taking its taste and colour, and as
    molten iron becomes like to fire and casts off its form, and as the
    air transfused with sunlight is transformed into that same brightness
    of light, so that it seems not illumined, but itself to be the light,
    thus in the saints every human affection must in some ineffable mode
    be liquefied of itself and transfused into the will of God. How could
    God be all in all if in man anything of man remained? A certain
    substance will remain, but in another form, another glory, another
    power.”

Hereupon St. Bernard considers how this fourth grade of love will be
attained in the resurrection, and “perpetually possessed, when God only is
loved and we love ourselves only for His sake, that He may be the
recompense and aim (_praemium_) of those who love themselves, the eternal
recompense of those who love eternally.”

Christ is the universal Mediator between God and man, not only because
reconciling them, but as forming the intervening term, the concrete
instance of the One suited to the comprehension of the other. Such
thoughts and sentiments as commonly apply to man, when they are applied to
Christ become fit to apply to God. Herein especially may be perceived the
continuing identity of love, whether relating to human beings or to God.
The soul’s love of Christ is mediatorial, and symbolic of its love of God.
All of which Bernard has demonstrated with conjoined power of argument and
feeling in his famous _Sermons on Canticles_.[502]

The human personality of Christ draws men to love Him, till their love is
purged of carnality and exalted to a perfect love of God:

    “Observe that the heart’s love is partly carnal; it is affected
    through the flesh of Christ and what He said and did while in the
    flesh. Filled with this love, the heart is readily touched by
    discourse upon His words and acts. It hears of nothing more willingly,
    reads nothing more carefully, recalls nothing more frequently, and
    meditates upon nothing more sweetly. When man prays, the sacred image
    of the God-man is with him, as He was born or suckled, as He taught or
    died, rose from the dead or ascended to heaven. This image never fails
    to nerve man’s mind with the love of virtue, cast out the vices of the
    flesh and quell its lusts. I deem the principal reason why the
    invisible God wished to be seen in the flesh, and, as man, hold
    intercourse with men, was that He might draw the affections of carnal
    men, who could only love carnally, to a salutary love of His flesh,
    and then on to a spiritual love.”

Conversely, the Saviour’s example teaches men how they should love Him:

    “He loved sweetly, wisely, and bravely: sweetly, in that He put on
    flesh; wisely, in that He avoided fault; bravely, in that He bore
    death. Those, however, with whom He sojourned in the flesh, He did not
    love carnally, but in prudence of spirit. Learn then, Christian, from
    Christ how to love Christ.”

Bernard shows how even the Apostles failed sometimes to love Him according
to His perfect teaching and example:

    “Good, indeed, is this carnal love,” he concludes, “through which a
    carnal life is shut out; and the world is despised and conquered. This
    love progresses as it becomes rational, and perfected as it becomes
    spiritual.”[503]

From his own experiences Bernard could have spoken much of the winning
power of Jesus, and could have told how sweetly it drew him to love his
Saviour’s steps from Bethlehem to Calvary. The fifteenth sermon upon
Canticles is on the healing power of Jesus’ name.

    “Dry is all food for the soul unless anointed with that oil. Whatever
    you write is not to my taste unless I read Jesus there. Your talk and
    disputation is nothing unless that name is rung. Jesus is honey in the
    mouth, melody in the ear, joy in the heart. He is medicine as well. Is
    any one troubled, let Jesus come into the heart and thence leap to the
    lips, and behold! at the rising of that bright name the clouds scatter
    and the air is again serene. If any one slips in crime, and then
    desponds amid the snares of death, will he not, invoking that name of
    life, regain the breath of life? In whom can hardness of heart, sloth,
    rancour, languishment stand before that name? In whom at its
    invocation will not the dried fount of tears burst forth more
    abundantly and sweetly? To what fearful trembler did the power of that
    name ever fail to bring back confidence? To what man struggling amid
    doubts did not the clear assurance of that name, invoked, shine forth?
    Who despairing in adversity lacked fortitude if that name sounded?
    These are the languors and sickness of the soul, and that the
    medicine. Nothing is as potent to restrain the attack of wrath, or
    quell the tumour of pride, or heal envy’s wound, or put out the fire
    of lust, or temper avarice. When I name Jesus, I see before me a man
    meek and humble of heart, benignant, sober, chaste, pitying, holy, who
    heals me with His example and strengthens me with aid. I take example
    from the Man, and draw aid from the Mighty One. Here hast thou, O my
    soul, an herb of price, hidden in the vessel of that name, bringing
    thee health surely and in thy sickness failing thee never.”

This is a little illustration of Bernard’s love of the Christ-man, a love
which is ever taking on spiritual hues and changing to a love of the
Christ-God. Christians, from the time of Origen, had recognized the many
offices of Christ, the many saving potencies in which He ministered unto
each soul according to its need. And so Bernard preaches that the sick
soul needs Christ as the physician, but that the saintly soul has other
yearnings for a more perfect communion.

This perfect communion, this most complete relationship which in this
mortal life a soul can have with Christ, with God, had been symbolized,
likewise ever since the time of Origen, by the words Bride and Bridegroom,
and the Song of Songs had furnished the burning phrases. With surpassing
spirituality Bernard uses the texts of Canticles to set forth the
relationship of the soul to Christ, of man to God. The texts are what they
are, burning, sensuous, fleshly, intense, and beautiful--every one knows
them; but in Bernard’s sermons flesh fades before the spirit’s whiter
glow.

    “O love (_amor_), headlong, vehement, burning, impetuous, that canst
    think of nothing beyond thyself, detesting all else, despising all
    else, satisfied with thyself! Thou dost confound ranks, carest for no
    usage, knowest no measure. In thyself dost thou triumph over apparent
    opportuneness, reason, shame, council and judgment, and leadest them
    into captivity. Everything which the soul-bride utters resounds of
    thee and nothing else; so hast thou possessed her heart and
    tongue.”[504]

What Bernard here ejaculates as to the overwhelming sufficiency of love,
he sets forth finally in a sustained and reasoned passage, in which man’s
ways of loving God are cast together in a sequence of ardent thought and
image. He has been explaining the soul’s likeness to the Word. Although it
be afflicted and defiled by sin, it may yet venture to come to Him whose
likeness it retains, however obscured. The soul does not leave God by
change of place, but, in the manner of spiritual substance, by becoming
depraved. The return of the soul is its conversion, in which it is made
conformable to God.

    “Such conformity marries the soul to the Word, whom it is like by
    nature, and may show itself like in will, loving as it is loved. If it
    loves perfectly it weds. What more delightful than this conformity,
    what more desirable than this love, through which thou, O soul,
    faithfully drawest near to the Word, with constancy cleavest to the
    Word, consulting Him in everything, as capable in intellect as
    audacious in desire. Spiritual is the contracting of these holy
    nuptials, wherein always to will the same makes one spirit out of two.
    No fear lest the disparity of persons make but a lame concurrence of
    wills: for love does not know respect. The name love comes from loving
    and not from honouring. He may honour who dreads, who is struck dumb
    with fear and wonder. Not so the lover. Love aboundeth in itself, and
    derides and imprisons the other emotions. Wherefore she who loves,
    loves, and knows nothing else. And He who is to be honoured and
    marvelled at, still loves rather to be loved. Bridegroom and Bride
    they are. And what necessity or bond is there between spouses except
    to be loved and love?

    “Think also, that the Bridegroom is not only loving but very love. Is
    He also honour? I have not so read. I have read that God is love; not
    that He is honour, or dignity. God indeed demands to be feared as
    Lord, to be honoured as Father, and as Bridegroom to be loved. Which
    excels the rest? Love, surely. Without it, fear is penal, and honour
    graceless. Fear is slavish till manumitted by love; and the honour
    which does not rise from love is adulation. To God alone belong honour
    and glory; but He will accept neither unless it is flavoured with
    love’s honey.

    “Love asks neither cause nor fruit beyond itself. I love because I
    love; I love that I may love. A great thing is love. Among all the
    movements, sensations, and affections of the soul, it is the only one
    wherein the creature can make a return to its Author. If God be angry
    with me, shall I likewise be angry with Him? Nay, I will fear and
    tremble and beseech. If He accuse me, I will make no counter-charge,
    but plead before Him. If He judge me, I will not judge but worship.
    And when He saves me, He asks not to be saved by me; nor does He who
    frees all ask to be freed of any one. Likewise if He commands, I obey,
    and do not order Him. Now see how different it is with love. For when
    God loves, He wishes only to be loved; He loves with no other end than
    to be loved, knowing that those who love are blessed with love itself.


    “A great thing is love; but there are grades in it. The Bride stands
    at the summit. Sons love, but they are thinking of their inheritance.
    Fearing to lose that, they honour, rather than love, him from whom
    they expect it. Love is suspect when its suffrage appears to be won by
    hope of gain. Weak is it, if it cease or lessen with that hope
    withdrawn. It is impure if it desires anything else. Pure love is not
    mercenary: it gains no strength from hope, nor weakens with lack of
    trust. This love is the Bride’s, because she is what she is by love.
    Love is the Bride’s sole hope and interest. In it the Bride abounds
    and the Bridegroom is content. He seeks nothing else, nor has she
    ought beside. Hence he is Bridegroom and she Bride. This belongs to
    spouses which none else, not even a son, can attain. Man is commanded
    to honour his father and mother; but there is silence as to love.
    Which is not because parents are not to be loved by their sons; but
    because sons are rather moved to honour them. The honour of the King
    loves judgment; but the Bridegroom’s love--for He is love--asks only
    love’s return and faith.

    “Rightly renouncing all other affections, the Bride reposes on love
    alone, and returns a love reciprocal. And when she has poured her
    whole self out in love, what is that compared with the perennial flood
    of that fountain? Not equals in abundance are this loving one and
    Love, the soul and the Word, the Bride and Bridegroom, creature and
    Creator--no more than thirst equals the fount. What then? shall she
    therefore despair, and the vow of the would-be Bride be rendered
    empty? Shall the desire of this panting one, the ardour of this loving
    one, the trust of this confiding one be baffled because she cannot
    keep pace with the giant’s course, in sweetness contend with honey, in
    mildness with the Lamb, in whiteness with the Lily, in brightness with
    the Sun, in love with Him who is love? No. For although the creature
    loves less, because she is less, yet if she loves with her whole self,
    nothing lacks where there is all. Wherefore, as I have said, so to
    love is to have wedded; for no one can so love and yet be loved but
    little, and in mutual consent stands the entire and perfect
    marriage.”[505]

Who has not marvelled that the relationship of marriage should make so
large a part of the symbolism through which monks and nuns expressed the
soul’s love of God? Historically it might be traced to Paul’s precept,
“Husbands love your wives, as Christ loved the Church”; still more
potently it was derived from the Song of Songs. But beyond these almost
adventitious influences, did not the holy priest, the monk, the nun, feel
and know that marriage was the great human relationship? So they drew from
it the most adequate allegory of the soul’s communion with its Maker:
differently according to their sex, with much emotion, and even with
unseemly imaginings, they thought and felt the love of God along the ways
of wedded union or even bridal passion.[506]




