CHAPTER XVI

THE HERMIT TEMPER

    PETER DAMIANI; ROMUALD; DOMINICUS LORICATUS; BRUNO AND GUIGO,
    CARTHUSIANS


To contemplate goodness in God, and strain toward it in yearning love, is
the method of the Christian _vita contemplativa_. In this way the recluse
cultivates humility, patience, purity, and love, and perfects his soul for
heaven. And herein, in that it is more undistracted and more undisturbed,
lies the superiority of the solitary life over the coenobitic.

Yet this conceived superiority is but the reason and the conscious motive
for the solitary life. The call to it is felt as well as intellectually
accepted. It is temperament that makes the recluse; his reasons are but
his justification. In solitude he lives the reaches of his life; from
solitude he draws his utmost bliss. To leave it involves the torture of
separation, and then all the petty pains of unhappy labour and distasteful
intercourse with men. “Whoever would reach the summit of perfection should
keep within the cloister of his seclusion, cherish spiritual leisure, and
shudder at traversing the world, as if he were about to plunge into a sea
of blood. For the world is so filthy with vices, that any holy mind is
befouled even by thinking about it.”[444]

Here speaks the hermit temper, by the mouth of a supreme exponent. If
Hildebrand, who compelled all men to his purposes, kept Peter Damiani in
the world, that ascetic soul did not cease to yearn for the hermit life.
His skilful pen served it untiringly. Its temper, its merits, and its
grounds, appear with unique clarity in the writings of him who, sore
against his will, was the Cardinal-Bishop of Ostia.[445]

    “The solitary life is the school of celestial doctrine and the divine
    arts (_artes divinae_),” says Damiani, meaning every word. “For there
    God is the whole that is learned. He is also the way by which one
    advances, through which one attains knowledge of the sum of
    truth.”[446] To obtain its benefits, it must be led assiduously and
    without break or wandering abroad among men: “Habit makes his cell
    sweet to the monk, but roving makes it seem horrible.... The unbroken
    hermit life is a cooling refreshment (_refrigerium_); but, if
    interrupted, it seems a torment. Through continued seclusion the soul
    is illuminated, vices are uncovered, and whatever of himself had been
    hidden from the man, is disclosed.”[447]

Peter argues that the hermit life is free from temptations (!) and offers
every aid to victory.

    “The wise man, bent on safeguarding his salvation, watches always to
    destroy his vices; he girds his loins--and his belly--with the girdle
    of perfect mortification. Truly that takes place when the itching
    palate is suppressed, when the pert tongue is held in silence, the ear
    is shut off from distractions and the eye from unpermitted sights;
    when the hand is held from cruel striking, and the foot from vainly
    roving; when the heart is withstood, that it may not envy another’s
    felicity, nor through avarice covet what is not its own, nor through
    anger sever itself from fraternal love, nor vaunt itself arrogantly
    above its fellows, nor yield to the ticklings of lust, nor
    immoderately sink itself in grief or abandon itself wantonly to joy.
    Since, then, the human mind has not the power to remain entirely
    empty, and unoccupied with the love of something, it is girt around
    with a wall of the virtues.

    “In this way, then, our mind begins to be at rest in its Author and to
    taste the sweetness of that intimacy. At once it rejects whatever it
    deems contrary to the divine law, shrinks from what does not agree
    with the rule of supernal righteousness. Hence true mortification is
    born; hence it comes that man kissing the Cross of his Redeemer seems
    dead to the world. No longer he delights in silly fables, nor is
    content to waste his time with idle talk. But he is free for psalms
    and hymns and spiritual songs; he seeks seclusion, he longs for a
    hiding-place; he avoids the monastery’s conversation-rooms and
    rejoices in nooks and corners; and that he may the more freely attend
    to the contemplation of his Creator, so far as he may he declines
    colloquy with men.”[448]

    “In fine,” says Damiani, in another treatise, “our entire conversion,
    and renunciation of the world, aims at nothing else than rest. This
    rest is won through the man’s prior discipline in the toils of strife,
    in order that when the tumult of disturbance ceases, his mind, through
    the grace of contemplation, may be translated to gaze upon the face of
    truth. But since one attains to this rest only through labour and
    conflict, how can one reach it who has not gone down into the strife?
    By what right can one enter the halls of the King who has not
    traversed the arena before the doors?”[449]

    “It further behoves each brother who with his whole heart has
    abandoned the world, to unlearn and forget forever whatever is
    injurious. He should not be disputatious as to cookery, nor clever in
    the petty matters of the town; nor an adept in rhetoric’s jinglings,
    or in jokes or wordplay. He should love fasts and cherish penury; he
    should flee the sight of man, restrain himself under the censorship of
    silence, withdraw from affairs, keep his mouth from idle talk, and
    seek the hiding-place of his soul, and in such hiding be on fire to
    see the face of his Creator. Let him pant for tears, and implore God
    for them by daily prayer.”

With this last sentence Damiani makes his transition to the emotional side
of the Christian _vita contemplativa_. He will now pour himself out in a
rhapsody of praise of tears, which purify and refresh the soul, and open
it to the love of God.

    “From the fire of divine love rises the grace of contrition (_gratia
    compunctionis_), and again from the contrition of tears (_ex
    compunctione lacrymarum_) the ardour of celestial yearning is
    increased. The one hangs from the other, and each promotes the other;
    while the contrition of tears flows from the love of God, through
    tears again our soul burns more fervidly toward the love of God. In
    this reciprocal and alternating action, the soul is purged of the
    filth of its offence.”[450]

Elsewhere Damiani suggests how the hermit may acquire the “grace of
tears”:

    “Seclude thyself from the turmoil of secular affairs and often even
    from talk with thy brethren. Cut off the cares and anxieties of
    mundane action; clear them away as a heap of rubbish which stops the
    fountain’s flow. As water in a cavern of the earth wells up from the
    abyss, so sadness (_tristitia_) wells in a human heart from
    contemplation of the profundity of God’s Judgment, and yet will not
    flow forth in tears if checked by the clods of earthly hindrance.
    Sadness is the material of tears. But in order that the veins of this
    fount may flow more abundantly, do thou clear away all obstacles of
    secular business--and other matters also, as I know from experience.
    Even spiritual zeal in the punishment of delinquents, and the labour
    of preaching, and like matters, holy as they are and commanded by
    divine authority, nevertheless are certainly obstacles to tears.

    “So if you would attain the grace of tears, you must even curb the
    exercise of spiritual duties, eliminate malice, anger, and hatred, and
    the other pests from your heart. And do not let your own accusing
    conscience dry up the dew of tears with the aridity of fear. Indeed
    the confidence of holiness (_sanctitatis fiducia_) and a conscience
    bearing witness to its own innocence, waters the pure soul with the
    celestial rivulets of grace, softens the hardness of the impure heart,
    and opens the floodgates of weeping.”[451]

    “Many are the ways,” says Damiani in words sounding like a final
    reflection upon the solitary life--“many are the ways by which one
    comes to God; diverse are the orders in the society of the faithful;
    but among them all there is no way so straight, so sure, so unimpeded,
    so free from obstacles which trip one’s feet, as this holy life. It
    eliminates occasions for sin; it cultivates the greatest number of
    virtues by which God may be pleased; and thus, as it removes the
    opportunities of delinquency, it lays upon good conduct the added
    strength of necessity’s insistence.”[452]

Peter Damiani, exiled from solitude, found no task more grateful than that
of writing the Life of his older contemporary, St. Romualdus, the founder
of Camaldoli and other hermit communities in Italy. That man had
completely lived the life from which the Church’s exigencies dragged his
biographer. Peter put himself, as well as his best literary powers, into
this _Vita Romualdi_, and made it one of the most vivid of mediaeval
_Vitae sanctorum_. If Romuald was a hermit in the flesh, Damiani had the
imagination to make the hermit spirit speak.[453]

    “Against thee, unclean world, we cry, that thou hast an intolerable
    crowd of the foolish wise, eloquent as regards thee, mute as to God.
    Wise are they to do evil; they know not how to do good. For behold
    almost three _lustra_[454] have passed since the blessed Romualdus,
    laying aside the burden of flesh, migrated to the heavenly realm, and
    no one has arisen from these wise people to place upon the page of
    history even a few of the lessons of that wonderful life.”

The tone of this prologue suggests the kind of lessons found by the
biographer in the Life of Romuald. He was born of an illustrious Ravenna
family about the year 950. In youth his devout mind became conscious of
the sinfulness of the flesh. Whenever he went hunting, as was his wont,
and would come to a retired nook in the woods, the hermit yearning came
over him--and in love, says Damiani, he was prescient of what he was later
to fulfil in deed.

His father chanced to kill a neighbour in knightly brawl; and for this
homicide the son entered the monastery of St. Apollinaris in Classe, to do
forty days’ penance for his parent. This introduction to the cloister had
its natural effect on such a temper. Goaded by a vision of the saint,
Romuald became a monk. He soon showed himself no easy man. His harsh
censure of the brethren’s laxities caused a plot to murder him, the first
of many attempts upon his life.

Three years he dwelt there. Then the yearning for perfection drove him
forth, and, for a master, he sought out a hermit named Marinus, who lived
in the Venetian territory, a man well meaning, but untaught as to the
method of the hermit life. He and his disciple would issue from their cell
and wander, singing together twenty psalms under one tree, and then thirty
or forty under another. The disciple was unlettered, and the master rude.
Romuald experienced intolerable tedium from straining his fixed eyes upon
a psalter, which he could not read. He may have betrayed his _ennui_. At
all events Marinus, grasping his rod in his right hand, and sitting on his
disciple’s left, continually beat him, and always on the left side of his
head. At length Romuald said humbly: “Master, if you please, would you
henceforth beat me on the right side, as I have lost the hearing of my
left ear.”

In the neighbourhood there dwelt a duke whose rapacity had brought him
into peril. It happened that the abbot of a monastery situated not far
from Chalons-sur-Marne in France came pilgrimaging that way, and the duke
took counsel of him. The two hermits were also called; and the advice to
the duke was to flee the world. So the whole party set forth, crossed the
Alps, and travelled to the abbot’s monastery. There the duke became a
monk, while Romuald and Marinus dwelt as solitaries a little way off.

From this time Romuald increased in virtue, far outstripping all the
brethren. He supplied his wants by tilling the soil, and fasted
exceedingly. He sustained continual conflicts with the devil, who was
always bringing into his mind the loves and hates of his former life in
the world.

    “The devil would come striking on his cell, just as Romuald was
    falling asleep, and then no sleep for him. Every night for nearly five
    years the devil pressed crosses upon his feet, and weighted them with
    the likeness of a phantom weight, so that Romuald could scarcely turn
    on his couch. How often did the devil let loose the raging beasts of
    the vices! and how often did Romuald put them to flight by his dire
    threats! Hence if any of the brethren came in the silence, knocking at
    his door, the soldier of Christ, always ready for battle, taking him
    for the devil, would threaten and cry out: ‘What now, wretch! what is
    there for thee in the hermitage, outcast of heaven! Back, unclean dog!
    Vanish, old snake!’ He declared that with such words as these he gave
    battle to malignant spirits; and with the arms of faith would go out
    and meet the challenge of the foe in a neighbouring field.”

Marvellously Romuald increased his fasts and austerities, after the manner
of the old anchorites of Egypt.[455] Miraculous powers became his. But
news came of his father which drew him back to Italy. That noble but
sinful parent had entered a monastery where, under the persuasion of the
devil, he was soon sorry for his conversion, and sought to return to the
world. Romuald decided to go to his perishing father’s aid. But the people
of the region hearing of it, were distressed to lose a man of such
spiritual might. They took counsel how to prevent his departure, and with
impious piety (_impia pietate_) decided to send men to kill him, thinking
that since they could not retain him alive, they would have his corpse as
a protection for the land (_pro patrocinio terrae_). Knowing of this,
Romuald shaved his head, and as the murderers approached his cell in the
dusk of morning, he began to eat ravenously. Thinking him demented, they
did him no injury. He then set forth, staff in hand, and walked from the
centre of Gaul, even to Ravenna. There finding his father still seeking to
return to the world, he tied the old sinner’s feet to a beam, fettered him
with chains, flogged him, and at length by pious severity so subjugated
his flesh that with God’s aid he brought his mind back to a state of
salvation.[456]

Thus far Romuald’s life affords striking illustration of the fact that
prodigious austerities and the consequent repute for miracles were the
chief elements in mediaeval sainthood; also of the fact that the saint’s
dead body might be as good as he. But while he lived, Romuald was much
more than a miracle-working relic. He was a strong, domineering
personality. It was soon after he brought his father back to the way of
holiness that the old man saw a vision, and happily yielded up the ghost.
The son continued to advance in his chosen way of life and in the elements
of character which it fostered. He became a prodigious solitary; one to
whom men and their ways were intolerable, and who himself was sometimes
found intolerable by men. Even his appearance might be exceptional:

    “The venerable man dwelt for a while in a swamp (near Ferrara). At
    length the poisonous air and the stench of the marsh drove him out;
    and he emerged hairless, with his flesh puffed and swollen
    (_tumefactus et depilatus_), not looking as if belonging to the _genus
    homo_; for he was as green as a newt.”[457]

Such a story displays the very extravagance of fleshly mortification. It
has also its local colour. But one should seek its explanation in the
grounds of the hermit life as set forth by Peter Damiani. Then the
incidents of Romuald’s life will appear to spring from these hermit
motives and from the hermit temperament, which became of terrible
intensity with him. Also the egotism, so frequently an element of that
temperament, rose with him to spiritual megalomania:

    “One day (apparently in the latter part of his life) some disciples
    asked him, ‘Master, of what age does the soul appear, and in what form
    is it presented for Judgment?’ He replied, ‘I know a man in Christ,
    whose soul is brought before God shining like snow, and indeed in
    human form, with the stature of the perfect time of life.’ Asked again
    who that man might be, he would not speak for indignation. And then
    the disciples talked it over, and recognized that he was certainly the
    man.”[458]

In another part of the _Vita_, Damiani, having told of his hero’s sojourn
with a company of hermits who preferred their will to his, thus continues:
“Romuald, therefore, impatient of sterility, began to search with anxious
eagerness where he might find a soil fit to bear a fruitage of souls.” It
was his passion to change men to anchorites: he yearned to convert the
whole world to the solitary life. Many were the hermit communities which
he established. But he could not endure his hermit sons for long, nor they
him. His intolerant soul revolted from the give and take of intercourse.
Such intolerance and his passion to make more converts drove him from
place to place. He seemed inspired with a superhuman power of drawing men
from the world. Now

    “therefore he sent messengers to the Counts of Camerino. When these
    heard the name of Romuald they were beside themselves with joy, and
    placed their possessions, mountains, woods, and fields at his
    disposal, to select from. He chose a spot suited to the hermit way of
    living, intrenched amid forests and mountains, and affording an ample
    space of level fruitful ground, watered with crystal streams. The
    place was called of old the Valley of the Camp (Vallis de Castro), and
    a little church was there with a convent of women who had turned from
    the world. Here having built their cells, the venerable man and his
    disciples took up their abode.

    “And what fruitage of souls the Lord there won through him, pen cannot
    describe nor tongue relate. From all directions men began to pour in,
    for penance and to bequeath in pity their goods to the poor, while
    others utterly forsook the world and with fervent spirit hastened to
    the holy way of life. For this most blessed man was as one of the
    Seraphim, himself burning with the flame of divine love, and kindling
    others, wherever he went, with the fires of his holy preaching. Often,
    while speaking, a vast contrition brought him to such floods of tears
    that, breaking off his sermon, he would flee anywhere for refuge, like
    one demented. And also when travelling on horseback with the brethren,
    he followed far behind them, always singing psalms, as if he were in
    his cell, and never ceasing to shed tears.”[459]

In that age, the hopes and fears and wonderment of men looked to the
recluse as the perfected saint. No wonder that those Italian lands, so
blithely sinful and so grievously penitent, were moved by this volcanic
tempest of a man, fierce, merciless to the flesh, convulsed with scorching
tears, famed for austerities and miracles. He lashed men from their sins;
men feared before one whose presence was a threat of hell. Said the
Marquis of Tuscany: “Not the emperor nor any mortal man, can put such fear
in me as Romuald’s look. Before his face I know not what to say, nor how
to defend myself or find excuses.” And the biographer adds that “of a
truth the holy man had this grace from the divine favour, that sinners,
and especially the great of this world, quaked in their bowels before him
as if before the majesty of God.”[460]

But some men hated, and especially those of his own persuasion who could
not endure his harshness. From such came attempts at murder, from such
also came milder outbreaks of detestation and revolt. No other founder of
ascetic communities seems to have been so rebelled against. He went from
the Valley of the Camp to Classe, where a simoniac abbot attempted to
strangle him; then he returned, but not for long, for the abbot
established in his place rejected his reproofs, and maligned him with the
lords of the land. “And in that way,” says Damiani, “the tall cedar of
Paradise was cast forth from the forest of earthly men.”[461]

His next sojourn was Vallombrosa, where after his decease one of his
disciples was to found a famous cloister. From that nest in the Tuscan
Apennines, he went to dwell permanently on the Umbrian mount of Sytrio.
At this point his biographer proceeds:

    “Whoever hears that the holy man so often changed his habitation, must
    not ascribe this to the vice of levity. For the cause of these changes
    was that wherever he stayed, an almost countless crowd assembled, and
    when he saw one place filled with converts he very properly would
    appoint a prior and at once hasten to fill another.

    “In Sytrio what insults and what indignities he endured from his
    disciples! We will set down one instance, and omit the rest for
    brevity. There was a disciple named Romanus, noble by birth, but
    ignoble by deed. Him the holy man for his carnal impurity not only
    chided by word but corrected with heavy beatings. That diabolic man
    dared to retort with the fabrication of the same charge, and to bark
    with sacrilegious mouth against this temple of the Holy Spirit, saying
    forsooth that the holy man was spotted with this same infection. The
    rage of the disciples broke out immediately against Romuald. All were
    his enemies: some declared that the wicked old man ought to be hanged
    from a gallows, others that he should be burned in his cell.

    “One cannot understand how spiritual men could have believed such
    wickedness of a decrepit old man, whose frigid blood and aridity of
    attenuated frame would have forbade him, had he had the will. But
    doubtless it is to be deemed that this scourge of adversity came upon
    the holy man by the will of Heaven, to augment his merit. For he said
    himself that he had foreknown it with certainty in the solitude which
    he had left just before, and had come with alacrity to undergo this
    shame. But that false monkish reprobate who brought the charge against
    the holy man, afterwards became Bishop of Noceria through simony, and
    in the first year of his occupancy, saw, as he deserved, his house
    with his books and bells and the rest of his sacred paraphernalia
    burned; and in the second year, the divine sentence struck him and he
    wretchedly lost both his dignity and his life.

    “In the meanwhile the disciples put a penance on the holy man as if he
    had been guilty, and deprived him of the right to celebrate the holy
    mysteries. He willingly accepted this false judgment, and took his
    penance like a culprit, not presuming to approach the altar for
    well-nigh six months. At length, as he afterwards told his disciples,
    he was divinely commanded to celebrate mass. On the next day, when
    proceeding with the sacrifice, he became rapt in ecstasy, and
    continued speechless for so long a time that all present marvelled.
    When afterwards asked the reason of his delay, he replied: ‘Carried
    into heaven, I was borne before God; and the divine voice commanded
    me, that with such intelligence as God had set in me, I should write
    and commend for use a Commentary on the Psalms. Overcome with terror,
    I could only respond: so let it be, so let it be.’ For this reason the
    holy man made a Commentary on the whole Psalter; and although its
    grammar was bad, its sense was sound and clear.”[462]

Various attempts were made in the Middle Ages to render the hermit life
practicable, through permitting a limited intercourse among a cluster of
like-minded ascetics, as well as to regulate it under the direction of a
superior. In Italy, in the tenth and eleventh centuries, the picturesque
energy of the individual hermit is prodigious, while in the north, as in
the establishment of the Carthusian Order, the organization is better, the
result more permanent, but the imaginative and consistent extravagance of
personality is not there. In the hermit communities founded by Romuald
there was a prior or abbot, invested with some authority. Yet the
organization was less complete than in coenobitic monasteries; for
Romuald’s hermit methods sought to minimize the intercourse among the
brethren, to an extent which was scarcely compatible with effective
organization. An idea of these communities may be had from Damiani’s
description of one of them:

    “Such was the mode of life in Sytrio, that not only in name but in
    fact it was as another Nytria.[463] The brethren went barefoot;
    unkempt and haggard; they were content with the barest necessaries.
    Some were shut in with doomed doors (_damnatis januis_), seemingly as
    dead to the world as if in a tomb. Wine was unknown, even in extreme
    illness. The attendants of the monks (_famuli monachorum_) and those
    who kept the cattle, fasted and preserved silence. They made
    regulations among themselves, and laid penances for speaking.”[464]

For seven years Romuald lived at Sytrio as an _inclusus_, shut up in his
cell, and preserving unbroken silence. Yet though his tongue was dumb his
life was eloquent. He lived on, setting a shining example of squalor and
austerity, eating only vile food, and handing back untouched any savoury
morsel. His conflicts with the devil continued; nor was he ever
vanquished. Advancing years intensified his aversion to human society and
his passion for solitude. In proportion as he made his ways displeasing to
men, his self-approval was enhanced.[465] A solitary death kept tally with
the temper of a recluse life.

    “When he saw his end draw near he returned to the Valley of the Camp,
    and had a cell with an oratory prepared, in which to immure himself
    and keep silence until death. Twenty years before, he had foretold to
    his disciples that there he should attain his peace; and had declared
    his wish to breathe forth his spirit with no one standing by or
    bestowing the last rites. When this cell of immurement (_reclusorium_)
    was ready, the mind in Romuald was so that it scarcely could be
    imprisoned. But his body grew heavy with the increasing ills of
    extreme age, and the hard breathing of tussis. Yet not for this would
    the holy man lie on a bed or relax his fasts. One day his strength
    gradually forsook him, and he found himself sinking with fatigue. So
    as the sun was setting he directed two brothers who stood by to go out
    and shut the door of his cell after them. He told them that when the
    time came for them to celebrate the matin hymns at dawn, they might
    return. Unwillingly they went out, but did not go at once to rest; and
    waited anxiously, concealing themselves by the master’s cell. After a
    while, as they listened intent and could hear no movement of his body
    nor any sound of his voice, correctly conjecturing what had happened,
    they broke open the door, rushed in and lighted the light; and there,
    the blessed soul having been transported to heaven, they found the
    holy corpse supine. It lay as a celestial pearl neglected, but
    hereafter to be placed with honour in the treasury of the King.”[466]

The spiritual unity which lies beneath the actions of Romuald should be
sought in the reasons and temper of the hermit life. To perfect the soul
for its passage to eternity is the fundamental motive. Monastic logic
convinces the man that this can best be accomplished through withdrawal
from the temptations of the world; and the hermit temper draws
irresistibly to solitude. The only consistent social function left to such
a man is that of turning the steps of his fellows to his own recluse path
of perfection. Romuald’s life manifests such motives and such temper, and
also this one function passionately performed. We see in him no love of
kind, but only a fiery passion for their salvation. Also we see the
absorption of self in self with God, the harsh intolerance of other men,
the fierce aversions and the passionate cravings which are germane to the
hermit life.

Physical self-mortification is the element of the hermit life most
difficult for modern people to understand. Yet nothing in Romuald extorted
more entire admiration from his biographer than his austerities. And if
there was one man on earth whom Peter admired as much as he did Romuald,
it was a certain mail-coated Dominicus, a virtuoso in self-mortification.
He exhibits its purging and penitential motives. Scourging purifies the
body from carnality; that is one motive. It also atones for sins, and
lessens the purgatorial period after death; this is another. There is a
third which is rooted rather in temperament than in reason. This is
contrition; the contrite heart may love to flagellate itself in love of
Him who suffered sinless.

Dominicus was surnamed Loricatus because he wore a coat of mail against
the attacks of the devil through the frailties of the too-comfortable
flesh. In his youth, family influence had installed him in a snug
ecclesiastic berth. As he reached maturity and bethought himself, the
sense of this involuntary simoniacal contamination filled him with
remorse. He abjured the world and became a member of the hermit community
of Fonte Avellana, where Damiani exercised the authority of prior. Yet the
latter looked on Dominic as his master, whom he admired to the pitch of
marvel, while regretting that he lacked himself the strength and leisure
to equal his flagellations. So Peter was enraptured with this wonder of a
Dominic, and wrote his biography, which deserved telling if, as Peter
says, his entire life, his _tota quippe vita_, was a preaching and an
edification, instruction and discipline (_praedicatio, aedificatio,
doctrina, disciplina_).

One descriptive passage from it will suffice:

    “I am speaking of Dominic, my teacher and my master, whose tongue
    indeed is rustic, but whose life is polished and accomplished
    (_artificiosa satis et lepida_). His life indeed preaches more
    effectively by its living actions (_vivis operibus_) than a barren
    tongue which inanely weighs out the balanced phrases of a bespangled
    urbanity (_phaleratae urbanitatis_). Through a long course of gliding
    years, girt with iron mail, he has waged truceless war against the
    wicked spirits; with cuirassed body and heart always ready for battle,
    he marches eager warrior against the hostile array.

    “Likewise it is his regular and unremitting habit, with a rod in each
    hand every day to beat time upon his naked body, and thus scourge out
    two psalters. And this even in the slacker season. For in Lent or when
    he has a penance to perform (and he often undertakes a penance of a
    hundred years), each day, while he plies himself with his rods, he
    pays off at least three psalters repeating them mentally
    (_meditando_).

    “The penance of a hundred years is performed thus: With us three
    thousand blows satisfies a year of penance; and the chanting
    (_modulatio_) of ten psalms, as has often been tested, admits one
    thousand blows. Now, clearly, as the Psalter consists of one hundred
    and fifty psalms, any one computing correctly will see that five years
    of penance lie in chanting one psalter, with this discipline. Now,
    whether you take five times twenty or twenty times five you have a
    hundred. Consequently whoever chants twenty psalters, with this
    accompanying discipline, may be confident of having performed a
    hundred years of penance. Herein our Dominic outdid those who struck
    with only one hand; for he, a true son of Benjamin, warred
    indefatigably with both hands against the lawless rebels of the flesh.
    He has told me himself that he easily accomplished a penance of a
    hundred years in six days.”[467]

This loricated Dominic was conscious of his virtuosity. We find him at the
beginning of a certain Lent, requesting the imposition of a penance of a
thousand years! Again, he comes after vespers to Damiani’s cell to tell
him that between morning and evening he has broken his record by “doing”
eight psalters! And once more we read of his coming troubled to his
master, saying: “You have written, as I have just heard, that in one day I
chanted nine psalters with corporeal discipline. When I heard it, I turned
pale and groaned. ‘Woe is me,’ I said; ‘without my knowledge, this has
been written of me, and yet I do not know whether I could do it.’ So I am
going to try again, and I shall certainly find out.”[468]

Dominic probably derived more pleasure than pain from his scourgings. For
besides the vanity of achievement, and some ecstasy of contrition, the
flesh itself turns morbid and rejoices in its laceration. Yet such
austerity is pre-eminently penal, and is initially impelled by fear. With
Dominic, with Romuald, with Damiani, the fear of hell entered the motives
of the secluded life. To observe this fear writ large in panic terror, we
turn to the old legend regarding the conversion of Bruno of Cologne, the
founder of the Carthusian Order. The scene is laid in Paris, where (with
much improbability) Bruno is supposed to be studying in the year 1082. One
of the most learned and pious of the doctors of theology died. His funeral
had been celebrated, and his body was about to be carried to the grave,
when the corpse raised its head and cried aloud with a dreadful voice:
“Justo Dei judicio accusatus sum.” Then the head fell back. The people,
terror-stricken, postponed the interment to the following day, when again,
as before, with a grievous and terrible voice the corpse raised its head
and cried: “Justo Dei judicio judicatus sum.” Amid general terror the
interment was again postponed to the next day, when, as before, with a
horrible cry the corpse shrieked: “Justo Dei judicio condemnatus sum.”

At this, Bruno, impressed and terrified, said to his friends: “Beloved,
what shall we do? Unless we fly we shall all perish utterly. Let us
renounce the world, and, like Anthony and John the Baptist, seek the caves
of the desert, that we may escape the wrath of the Judge, and reach the
port of salvation.” So they flee, and the Carthusian Order, with its
terrific asceticism, begins.[469]

This story, aside from its marvellous character, does not harmonize with
the more authentic facts of Bruno’s life. It is, however, a striking
expression of the ascetic fear; it also reflects psychologic truth. Who
but the man himself knows the naughtiness of his own heart? its
never-to-be disclosed vile and morbid thoughts? The modern may realize
this. Hamlet did. And it was just such a phase of self-consciousness as
the mediaeval imagination would transform into a tale of horror. Bruno
himself had been a learned doctor, a teacher, and the head of the
cathedral school at Rheims; he had been a zealous soldier of the Church.
In all this he had not found peace. The profession of a doctor of
theology, even when coupled with more active belligerency for the Church,
afforded no certain salvation. The story of the Paris doctor may have
symbolized the anxieties which dwelt in Bruno’s breast, until under their
stimulus the yearnings of a solitary temper gathered head and at last
brought him with six followers to Carthusia (_la grande Chartreuse_),
which lies to the north of Grenoble. 1084 is the year of its beginning.

It was a hermit community, the brethren living two by two in isolated
cells, but meeting for divine service in a little chapel. Camaldoli may
have been the model. Bruno wrote no _regula_ for his followers, and the
practices of the Order were first formulated by Guigo, the fifth prior, in
his _Consuetudines Cartusiae_, about the year 1130.[470] These permit a
limited intercourse among the brethren, for the service of God and the
regulation of their own lives. Yet the broader object was seclusion. Not
only severance from the world, but the seclusion of the brethren from each
other, in solitary labour and contemplation, was their ideal. The
asceticism of these _Consuetudines_ is of the strictest. And somehow it
would seem as if in the Carthusian Order the frailties of the spirit and
the lusts of the flesh were to be permanently vanquished by this set life
of labour, meditation, and rigid asceticism. _Carthusia nunquam reformata,
quia nunquam deformata_, remained true century after century. This long
freedom from corruption was partly due to the lofty and somewhat
exclusive character of the brotherhood. Carthusia was no broad way for the
monastic multitude. Its monks were relatively few and holy, the select of
God. Men of devout piety, they must be. It was also needful that they
should be possessed of such intellectual endowment and meditative capacity
as would with God’s grace yield provision for a life of solitary thought.

The intellectual piety of Carthusia finds its loftiest expression in the
_Meditationes_ of this same prior Guigo,[471] the form of which calls to
mind the Reflections of Marcus Aurelius or Epictetus. In substance they
reflect Augustine’s intellectual devoutness and many of his thoughts. But
they seem Guigo’s very own, fruit of his own reflection; and thus
incidentally they afford an illustration of the general principle that by
the twelfth century the Middle Ages had made over into themselves what
they had drawn from the Fathers or from the pagan antique. Guigo’s
_Meditations_ possess spiritual calm; their logic is unhesitating; it is
remorselessly correct, however incomplete may be its premises or its
comprehension of life’s data. Whoever wishes to know the high
contemplative mind of monastic seclusion in the twelfth century may learn
it from this work. A number of its precepts are given here for the sake of
their illustrative pertinency and intrinsic merit, and because our author
is not very widely known. He begins with general reflections upon Veritas
and Pax:

    “Truth should be set in the middle, as something beautiful. Nor, if
    any one abhors it, do thou condemn, but pity. Thou indeed, who
    desirest to come to it, why dost thou spurn it when it chides thy
    faults?

    “Without form and comeliness and fastened to the cross, truth is to be
    worshipped.

    “If thou speakest truth not from love of truth but from wish to injure
    another, thou wilt not gain the reward of a truthspeaker but the
    punishment of a defamer.

    “Truth is life and eternal salvation. Therefore you ought to pity any
    one whom it displeases. For to that extent he is dead and lost. But
    you, perverse one, would not tell him the truth unless you thought it
    bitter and intolerable to him. You do still worse when in order to
    please men you speak a truth which delights them as much as if it
    were lies and flattery. Not because it displeases or pleases should
    truth be spoken, but as it profits. Yet be silent when it would do
    harm, as light to weak eyes.

    “Blessed is he whose mind is moved or affected only by the perception
    and love of truth, and whose body is moved only by his mind. Thus the
    body, like the mind, is moved by truth alone. For if there is no
    stirring in the mind save that of truth, and none in the body save
    that from the mind, then also there is no stirring in the body save
    from truth, that is from God.

    “Thou dost all things for the sake of peace, toward which the way lies
    through truth alone, which is thine adversary in this life. Therefore
    either subject thee to it or it to thee. For nothing else is left
    thee.

    “The lake does not boast because it abounds in water; for that is from
    the source. So as to thy peace. Its cause is always something else.
    Therefore thy peace is shifting and inconstant in proportion to the
    instability of its cause. How worthless is it when it arises from the
    pleasingness of a human face!

    “Let not temporal things be the cause of thy peace; for then wilt thou
    be as worthless and fragile as they. You would have such a peace in
    common with the brutes; let thine be that of the angels, which
    proceeds from truth.

    “The beginning of the return to truth is to be displeased with
    falsity. Blame precedes correction.

    “In the cares which engage thee for thy salvation, no service or
    medicine is more useful than to blame and despise thyself. Whoever
    does this for thee is thy helper.

    “Easy is the way to God, since it advances by laying down burdens.
    Thou dost unburden thyself so far as thou deniest thyself.

    “When anything good is said of thee, it is but as a rumour regarding
    which thou knowest better.

    “Consider the two experiences of filling and emptying (_ingestionis et
    egestionis_); which blesses thee more? That burdens thee with useless
    matters; this disburdens thee. To have had that is to have devoured it
    altogether. Nothing remains for hope. So in all things of sense. They
    perish all. And what of thee after these? Set thy love and hope on
    what will not pass.

    “Bestial pleasure comes from the senses of the flesh; it is diabolic,
    a thing of arrogance, envy, and deceit; philosophic pleasure is to
    know the creature; the angelic pleasure is to know and love God.

    “When we take our pleasure from that from which brutes draw
    pleasure--from lust like dogs, or from gluttony like swine--our souls
    become like theirs. Yet we do not shudder. I had rather have a dog’s
    body than his soul. It would be more tolerable if our body changed to
    bestial shape, while our soul remained in its dignity, that is, in the
    likeness of God.

    “Readily man entangles himself in love of bodies and of vanity; but,
    willy, nilly, he is torn with fear and grief at their dissolution. For
    the love of perishable things is as a fountain of useless fears and
    sorrows. The Lord frees the poor man from the mighty, by loosing him
    from the fetter of earthly love.

    “The human soul is tortured in itself as long as it can be tortured,
    that is, as long as it loves anything besides God.

    “Thou hast been clinging to one syllable of a great song, and art
    troubled when that wisest Singer proceeds in His singing. For the
    syllable which alone thou wast loving is withdrawn from thee, and
    others succeed in order. He does not sing to thee alone, nor to thy
    will, but His. The syllables which succeed are distasteful to thee
    because they drive on that one which thou wast loving evilly.

    “All matters which are called adverse are adverse only to the wicked,
    that is, those who love the creature instead of the Creator.

    “If in any way thou art tormented by fear, or anger or hate or grief
    of any kind, lay it to thyself, that is, to thy concupiscence,
    ignorance, or sloth. And if any one wishes to injure thee, lay that to
    his concupiscence. Thy distress is evidence of thy sin in loving
    anything destructible, having dismissed God. Thou dost grieve over the
    ruined show; lay it to thee and thine error because thou hast been
    cleaving to things that may be broken.

    “He seeks a long temptation who seeks a long life.

    “What God has not loved in His friends--power, rank, riches,
    dignities--do not thou love in thine.

    “Snares thou eatest, drinkest, wearest, sleepest in; all things are
    snares.

    “We are exiles through love and wantonness and inclination, not
    through locality; exiles in the country of defilement, of dark
    passions, of ignorance, of wicked loves and hates.

    “In so far as thou lovest thyself--that is, this temporal life--so far
    dost thou love what is transitory.

    “Adverse matters do not make thee wretched, but rather show thee to
    have been so; prosperity blinds the soul, by covering and increasing
    misery, not by removing it.

    “Every one ought to love all men. Whoever wishes another to show
    special love toward him is a robber, and an offender against all.

    “Mixed through this body, thou wast wretched enough; for thou wast
    subject to all its corruptions, even to the bite of the flea or the
    sorunculus. This did not suffice thee. Thou hast mixed thyself up with
    other quasi bodies, the opinion of men, admiration, love, honour, fear
    and the like. When these are harmed, pain comes to thee, as from
    bodily hurt. Thy honour is hurt when contempt is shown thee; and so
    with the rest. Think also thus regarding bodily forms.

    “Unless thou hast despised whatever men can do to thwart or aid thee,
    thou wilt not be able to contemn their disposition toward thee, their
    hate and love, their opinions, good or bad.

    “Why dost thou wish to be loved by men?

    “Who rejoices in praise, loses praise.

    “Who is pained or angered by the loss of any temporal thing, shows
    himself worth what he has lost.

    “No thing ought to wish to be loved as good, unless it blesses its
    lover in the very matter for which it is loved. But no thing does this
    if it needs its lover, or is helped by loving or being loved by
    another. Most cruel, then, is the thing which wishes another to place
    affection and hope on it when it cannot benefit that other. The devils
    do this, who wish men to be engrossed in their service instead of
    God’s. So cry to thy lovers, Cease, ye wretched, to admire or respect
    or honour me; for I, miserable wretch, can neither aid myself nor you,
    but rather need your aid.

    “So far as in thee is, thou hast destroyed all men, for thou hast put
    thyself between them and God, so that gazing on thee and ignoring God,
    they might admire and praise thee alone. This is utterly profitless to
    thee and them, not to say destructive.

    “Whatever form thou dost enjoy is as the male to thy mind. For thy
    mind yields and lies down to it. Thou dost not assimilate it, but it
    thee. Its image endures, like an idol in its temple, to which thou
    dost sacrifice neither ox nor goat, but thy rational soul and thy
    body, to wit, thy whole self, when thou enjoyest it.

    “See how, as in a wine-shop, thou dost prostitute thine as a venal
    love, and to the measure of pay weighest thyself out to men. In this
    wine-shop he receives nothing who gives nothing. And yet thou wouldst
    not have that which thou dost sell, unless freely from above it had
    been given to thee who gave nothing. Therefore thou hast received thy
    pay.

    “To be empty and removed from God is to make ready for lust.

    “Who wishes to enjoy thee in thyself, deserves from thee the thanks of
    flies and fleas who suck thy blood.

    “This is the very sum of human depravity to forsake the better, which
    is God, and to regard the lesser and cleave to them by delighting in
    them--these temporalities!

    “The beetle as it flies sees everything, and then selects nothing that
    is beautiful or wholesome or durable, but settles down upon dung. So
    thy soul in mental flight (_intuitu pervolans_) surveying heaven and
    earth and whatever is great and precious therein, cleaves to none of
    these, but embraces the cheap and dirty things occurring to its
    thought. Blush for this.

    “When thou pleadest with God not to take from thee something to which
    thou cleavest by desire, it is as if an adulteress caught by her
    husband in the act, should not ask pardon for her crime, but beg him
    not to interrupt her pleasure. It is not enough for thee to go
    wantoning from God, but thou must incline Him to save and approve the
    things in which thou takest delight to thy undoing--the forms of
    bodies, their savours and their colours.

    “The poverty of thine inner vision of God, purblind as thou art,
    although He is there, makes thee willing to go out of doors from thine
    own hearth, refusing to linger within thyself, as in the dark. So thou
    hast nothing to do but go gaping after the external forms of bodies
    and the opinions of men. Thou dost carry thyself in this world as if
    thou hadst come hither to gaze and wonder at the forms of bodies.

    “May God be gracious to thee, that the feet of thy mind may find no
    resting-place, so that somehow, O soul, thou mayest return to the Ark,
    like Noah’s dove.

    “Prosperity is a snare, adversity the knife that cuts it; prosperity
    imprisons us from the love of God; adversity breaks the dungeon in
    pieces.

    “Since you are taken only by pleasure, you should shun whatever gives
    it. The Christian soul is safe only in adversity. From what thou
    cherishest God makes thee rods.

    “The only medicine for every pain and torment is contempt for whatever
    in thee is hurt by them, and the turning of the mind to God.

    “As many carnal pleasures as thou spurnest, just so many snares of the
    devil dost thou escape. As many tribulations--especially those for
    truth’s sake--as thou dost flee, so many salutary remedies thou
    spurnest.

    “In hope thou mayest cherish the unripened grain; thus love those who
    are not yet good, Be such toward all as the Truth has shown itself
    toward thee. Just as it has sustained and loved thee for thy
    betterment, so do thou sustain and love men in order to better them.

    “You are set as a standard to blunt the darts of the enemy, that is,
    to destroy evil by opposing good to it. You should never return evil
    for evil, except very medicinally; which is not to return evil but
    good.

    “If to cleave to God is thine whole and only good, thine whole and
    only evil is separation from Him.

    “Who loves all will be saved without doubt; but who is loved by men
    will not for that reason be saved.”

The unity of these _Meditations_ lies in the absolute manner in which the
meditating soul attaches itself to God as its whole and only good. Herein
Guigo’s thoughts are Augustinian. One notes their clear intellectual tone.
Nothing lures the thinker from his aim and goal of God. He abhors whatever
might distract him; and as to all except God and God’s commands, he is
indifferent. Guigo detests impermanence as keenly as did the Brahmin and
Buddhist meditators of India. He has as high regard as any Indian or Greek
philosopher for a life of thought. But there are differences between the
Carthusian prior and the Greek or Indian sage. Guigo’s renunciation does
not (from his standpoint) penetrate life as deeply as Gotama’s; for Guigo
renounces only things comparatively insignificant, so utterly transient
are they, so completely they pale before the light of his goal of God.
Therein shall lie clearer attainment than lay at the end of any Indian
chain of reasoning. So note well, that Guigo, like other Christians, is
not essentially a renouncer, but one who attains and receives.

The difference between him and the Greek is also patent. The source of his
blue lake of thought is not himself, but God. Although calm and sustained
by reason, he is rationally the opposite of self-reliant, and so the
opposite of the ideal Stoic or Aristotelian. God is his Creator, the
source of his thoughts, the loadstar of his meditations, the
all-comprehending object of his desire.

We find in Guigo further specific elements of Christian asceticism, which
sharpen his repugnances for the world of transient phenomena. Those
phenomena mostly contain elements of sin: all pleasure is temptation and a
snare; adversity keeps the soul’s wings trimmed true. So the main content
of passing mortal life, while not evil in itself, is so charged with
temptation and allure, that it is worthy only of avoidance. The transient,
the physical, the brutal, the diabolic--one shades into the next, and
leads on to the last. Have none of them, O soul! They are snares all.

Of course, Guigo has the specific monkish horror of sexual lust, that
chief of fleshly snares. But he goes further. With him all particular,
disproportionate love is wrong; love no one, and desire not to be loved,
out of the proportionment of the common love which God has for all His
creatures: so love you, and not otherwise. Others, even women, attained
this standard. In the legend, St. Elizabeth of Hungary gives thanks that
she loves her own children no more than others’. She is no mother, but a
saint. So Guigo will love all--love indeed? one queries. Thus also will he
have others hold themselves toward him, lest he be a stumbling-block in
their or his salvation.

Yea, salvation! If indeed this monk shall not have attained that, of a
truth he would be of all men most miserable--save for the quiet,
thought-filled calm which is his inner and his veritable life. It is a
calm not riven by the storms which drove the soul of Peter Damiani. God
was not less to Guigo; but the temperaments of the two men differed. Not
beyond or out of one’s nature can one love or yearn, or even know the
stress of storm.




