BOOK II

THE EARLY MIDDLE AGES




CHAPTER X

CAROLINGIAN PERIOD: THE FIRST STAGE IN THE APPROPRIATION OF THE PATRISTIC
AND ANTIQUE


With the conversion of Teuton peoples and their introduction to the Latin
culture accompanying the new religion, the factors of mediaeval
development came at last into conjunction. The mediaeval development was
to issue from their combined action, rather than from the singular nature
of any one of them.[237] Taking up the introductory theme concerning the
meeting of these forces, we followed the Latinizing of the West resulting
from the expansion of the Roman Republic, which represents the political
and social preparation of the field. Then we considered the antique pagan
gospel of philosophy and letters, which had quickened this Latin
civilization and was to form the spiritual environment of patristic
Christianity. Next in order we observed the intellectual interests of the
Latin Fathers, and then turned to the great Latin transmitters of the
somewhat amalgamated antique and patristic material--Boëthius,
Cassiodorus, Gregory the Great, and Isidore of Seville--who gathered what
they might, and did much to reduce the same to decadent forms, suited to
the barbaric understanding. Then the course of the barbaric disruption of
the Empire was reviewed; and this led to a consideration of the qualities
and circumstances of the Celts and Teutons, both those who to all
appearances had been Latinized, and those who took active part in the
barbarization and disruption of the Roman order. And finally we closed
these introductory, though essential, chapters by tracing the ways in
which Christianity, with the now humbled and degraded antique culture, was
presented to this renewed and largely Teutonic barbarism.

Having now reached the epoch of conjunction of the various elements of the
mediaeval evolution, it lies before us to consider the first stage in the
action of true mediaeval conditions upon the two chief spiritual forces,
the first stage, in other words, of the mediaeval appropriation of the
patristic and antique material. The period is what is called Carlovingian
or Carolingian, after the great ruler Charlemagne. Intellectually
considered, it may be said to have begun when Charles palpably evinced his
interest in sacred and liberal studies by calling Alcuin and other
scholars to his Court about the year 781. Let us note the political and
social situation.

The Merovingian kingdom created by Clovis and his house has been spoken
of.[238] One may properly refer to it in the singular, although
frequently, instead of one, there were several kingdoms, since upon the
death of a Merovingian monarch his realm was divided among his sons. But
no true son of the house could leave the others unconquered or unmurdered;
and therefore if the Merovingian kingdom constantly was divided, it also
tended to coalesce again, coerced to unity. Constituted both of Roman and
Teutonic elements, it operated as a mediating power between Latin
Christendom and barbaric heathendom. Its energies were great, and were not
waning when its royal house was passing into insignificance before the
power of the nobles and the chief personage among them who had become the
_major domus_ (“Mayor of the palace”) and virtual ruler. Moreover,
experience, contact with Latin civilization, membership in the Roman
Catholic Church, were informing the Merovingian energies. They were
becoming just a little less barbarous and a little more instructed; in
fine, were changing from Merovingian to Carolingian.

In the latter part of the seventh century, Pippin, called “of Heristal,”
ruled as _major domus_ (as one or more of his ancestors before him) in
Austrasia, the eastern Frankish kingdom. Many were his wars, especially
with the Neustrian or western Frankish kingdom, under its _major domus_,
Ebroin. This somewhat unconquerable man at last was murdered, and one of
the two Merovingian kings being murdered likewise, Pippin about the year
688 became _princeps regiminis ac major domus_ for the now united realm.
From this date the Merovingians are but shadow kings, whose names are not
worth recording. Pippin’s rule marks the advent of his house to virtual
sovereignty, and also the passing of the preponderance of power from
Neustria to Austrasia. These two facts became clear after Pippin’s death
(714), when his redoubtable son Charles in a five years’ struggle against
great odds made himself sole _major domus_, and with his Austrasians
overwhelmed the Neustrian army. Thenceforth this Charles, called Martell
the Hammer, mightily prevailed, smiting Saxons, Bavarians, and Alemanni,
and, after much warfare in the south with Saracens, at last vindicated the
Cross against the Crescent at Tours in 732. Nine years longer he was to
reign, increasing his power to the end, and supporting the establishment
of Catholicism in Frisia, by the Anglo-Saxon Willibrord, and in heathen
German lands by St. Boniface.[239] He died in 741, dividing what virtually
was his realm between his sons Carloman and Pippin: the former receiving
Austrasia, Alemannia, Thuringia; the latter, Neustria, Burgundy, Provence.

These two sons valiantly took up their task, reforming the Church under
the inspiration of Boniface, and ruling their domains without conflict
with each other until 747, when Carloman retired and became a monk,
leaving the entire realm to Pippin. The latter in 751 at Soissons, with
universal approval and the consent of the Pope, was crowned king, and
anointed by the hand of Boniface. This able and energetic sovereign
pursued the course of his father and grandfather, but on still larger
scale; aiding the popes and reducing the Lombard power in Italy, carrying
on wars around the borders of his realm, bringing Aquitania to full
submission, and expelling the Saracens from Narbonne and other fortress
towns. In 768 he died, again dividing his vast realm between his two sons
Carloman and Charles.

These bore each other little love; but fortunately the former died (771)
before an open breach occurred. So Charles was left to rule alone, and
prove himself, all things considered, the greatest of mediaeval
sovereigns. Having fought his many wars of conquest and subjugation
against Saracens, Saxons, Avars, Bavarians, Slavs, Danes, Lombards; having
conquered much of Italy and freed the Pope from neighbouring domination;
having been crowned and anointed emperor in the year 800; having restored
letters, uplifted the Church, issued much wise legislation, and
Christianized with iron hand the stubborn heathen; and above all, having
administered his vast realm with never-failing energy, he died in
814--just one hundred years after the time when his grandfather Charles
was left to fight so doughtily for life and power.

Poetry and history have conspired to raise the fame of Charlemagne. In
more than one _chanson de geste_, the old French _épopée_ has put his name
where that of Pippin, Charles Martell, or perhaps that of some Merovingian
should have been.[240] Sober history has not thus falsified its matter,
and yet has over-dramatized the incidents of its hero’s reign. For
example, every schoolboy has been told of the embassy to Charlemagne from
Harun al Raschid, Caliph of Bagdad. But not so many schoolboys know that
Pippin had sent an embassy to a previous caliph, which was courteously
entertained for three years in Bagdad;[241] and Pippin, like his son,
received embassies from the Greek emperor. The careers of Charles Martell
and Pippin have not been ignored; and yet historical convention has
focused its attention and its phrases upon “the age of Charlemagne.” One
should not forget that this exceedingly great man stood upon the shoulders
of the great men to whose achievement he succeeded.

Neither politically, socially, intellectually, nor geographically[242] was
there discontinuity or break or sudden change between the Merovingian and
the Carolingian periods.[243] The character of the monarchy was scarcely
affected by the substitution of the house of Pippin of Heristal for the
house of Clovis. The baleful custom of dividing the realm upon a monarch’s
death survived; but Fortune rendered it innocuous through one strong
century, during which (719-814) the realm was free from internecine war,
while the tossing streams of humanity were driven onward by three great
successive rulers.

The Carolingian, like the Merovingian, realm included many different
peoples who were destined never to become one nation; and the whole
Carolingian system of government virtually had existed in the Merovingian
period. Before, as well as after, the dynastic change, the government
throughout the realm was administered by _Counts_. Likewise the famous
_missi dominici_, or royal legates, are found in Merovingian times; but
they were employed more effectively by Charles Martell, Pippin, and,
finally, by Charlemagne, who enlarged their sphere of action. He
elaborately defined their functions in a famous Capitulary of the year
802. It was set forth that the emperor had chosen these legates from among
his best and greatest (_ex optimatibus suis_), and had authorized them to
receive the new oaths of allegiance, and supervise the observance of the
laws, the execution of justice, the maintenance of the military and fiscal
rights of the emperor. They were given power to see that the permanent
functionaries (the counts and their subordinates) duly administered the
law as written or recognized. The _missi_ had jurisdiction over
ecclesiastical as well as lay officials; and many of them were entrusted
with special powers and duties in the particular instance.

Thus Charlemagne developed the functions of these ancient officers.
Likewise his Court and royal council, the synods and assemblies of his
reign, the military service, modes of holding land, methods of collecting
revenue, were not greatly changed from Merovingian prototypes. Yet the old
institutions had been renewed and bettered. A vast misjoined and unrelated
realm was galvanized into temporary unity. And, most impressive and
portentous thing of all, an _Empire_--the _Holy_ Roman Empire--was
resurrected for a time in fact and verity: the same was destined to endure
in endeavour and contemplation.

So there was no break politically or socially between the Carolingian
Empire and its antecedents, which had made it possible. Likewise there was
no discontinuity spiritually and intellectually between the earlier time
and that epoch which begins with Charlemagne’s first endeavours to restore
knowledge, and extends through the ninth and, if one will, even the tenth
century.[244] Western Europe (except Scandinavia) had become nominally
Christian, and had been made acquainted with Latin education to the extent
indicated in the preceding chapter, the purpose of which was to tell how
Christianity and the antique culture were brought to the northern peoples.
The present chapter, on the other hand, seeks to describe how the eighth
and ninth centuries proceeded to learn and consider and react upon this
newly introduced Christianity and antique culture, out of which the
spiritual destinies of the Middle Ages were to be forged. The task of
Carolingian scholars was to learn what had been brought to them. They
scarcely excelled even the later intermediaries through whom this
knowledge had been transmitted. One need not look among them for better
scholarship than was possessed by Bede, who died in 735, the birth year of
Alcuin who drew so much from him, and was to be the chief luminary of the
palace school of Charlemagne. Undoubtedly, Charlemagne’s exertions caused
a revival of sacred and profane studies through the region of the present
France and Rhenish Germany. His primary motive was the purification and
extension of Catholic Christianity. Here Charles Martell and Pippin (with
his brother Carloman) had done much, as their support of Boniface bears
witness to. But Charlemagne’s efforts went beyond those of his
predecessors. More clearly than they he understood the need of education,
and he was himself intensely interested in knowledge. Hence his
endeavours, primarily to uplift the Faith, brought a revival of learning
and a literary productivity, consisting mostly in reproduction or
rearrangement of old material, doctrinal or profane.[245]

Another preliminary consideration may help us to appreciate the
intellectual qualities of the period before us. Charlemagne was primarily
a ruler in the largest sense, conqueror, statesman, law-giver, one who
realized the needs of the time, and met or forestalled them. His monarchy,
with its powers inherited, as well as radiating from his own personality,
provided an imperial government for western Europe. The chief activities
of this ruler and his epoch were practical, to wit, political and
military. In laws, in institutions, and in deeds, he and his Empire
represent creativeness and progress; although, to be sure, that
conglomerate empire of his had itself to fall in pieces before there could
take place a more lasting and national evolution of States. And, of
course, Carolingian political creativeness included the conservation of
existing social, political, and, above all, ecclesiastical, institutions.
In fine, this period was creative and progressive in its practical
energies. The factors were the pressing needs and palpable opportunities,
which were met or availed of. And to the same effective treatment of
problems ecclesiastical and doctrinal was due the modicum of originality
in the Carolingian literature. Aside from this, the period’s intellectual
accomplishment, in religious as well as secular studies, shows merely a
diligent learning and imitation of pagan letters, and a rehandling and
arrangement of the work of the Church Fathers and their immediate
successors. Its efforts were exhausted in rearranging the heritage of
Christian teaching coming from the Church Fathers, or in endeavours to
acquire the transmitted antique culture and imitate the antique in phrase
and metre. The combined task, or occupation, absorbed the minds of men.
The whole period was at school, where it needed to be: at school to the
Church Fathers, at school to the transmitters of antique culture. Its task
was one of adjustment of its materials to itself, and of itself to its
materials.

The reinvigoration of studies marking the life-time of Charlemagne did not
extend to Italy, where letters, although decayed, had never ceased, nor to
Anglo-Saxon England, where Bede had taught and whence Alcuin had come. The
revival radiated, one may say, from the palace school attached to the
Court, which had its least intermittent domicile at Aix-la-Chapelle. It
extended to the chief monastic centres of Gaul and Germany, and to
cathedral schools where such existed. From many lands scholars were drawn
by that great hand so generous in giving, so mighty to protect. Some came
on invitation more or less compelling, and many of their own free will.
The first and most famous of them all was the Anglo-Saxon, Alcuin of York.
Charles first saw him at Parma in the year 781, and ever after kept him in
his service as his most trusted teacher and director of studies. Love of
home drew Alcuin back, once at least, to England. In 796 Charles permitted
him to leave the Court, and entrusted him with the re-establishment of the
Abbey of St. Martin at Tours and its schools. There he lived and laboured
till his death in 804.

Another scholar was Peter of Pisa, a grammarian, who seems to have shared
with Alcuin the honourable task of instructing the king. Of greater note
was Paulus Diaconus, who, like Alcuin himself, was to sigh for the pious
or scholarly quiet which the seething, half-barbarous, and loose-mannered
Court did not afford. Paulus at last gained Charles’s consent to retire
to Monte Cassino. He was of the Lombard race, like another favourite of
Charles, Paulinus of Aquileia. From Spain, apparently, came Theodulphus,
by descent a Goth, and reputed the most elegant Latin versifier of his
time. Charles made him Bishop of Orleans. A little later, Einhart the
Frank appears, who was to be the emperor’s secretary and biographer.
Likewise came certain sons of Erin, among them such a problematic poet as
he who styled himself “Hibernicus Exul”--not the first or last of his
line!

These belonged to the generation about the emperor. Belonging to the next
generation, and for the most part pupils of the older men, were Abbot
Smaragdus, grammarian and didactic writer; the German, Rabanus Maurus,
Abbot of Fulda and, against his will, Archbishop of Mainz, an
encyclopaedic excerpter and educator, _primus praeceptor Germaniae_; his
pupil was Walafrid Strabo, the cleverest putter-together of the excerpt
commentary, and a pleasing poet. In Lorraine at the same time flourished
the Irishman, Sedulius Scotus, and in the West that ardent classical
scholar, Servatus Lupus, Abbot of Ferrières, and Agobard, Bishop of Lyons,
a man practical and hard-headed, with whom one may couple Claudius, Bishop
of Turin, the opponent of relic-worship. One might also mention those
theological controversialists, Radbertus Paschasius and Ratramnus,
Hincmar, the great Archbishop of Rheims, and Gottschalk, the unhappy monk,
ever recalcitrant; at the end John Scotus Eriugena should stand, the
somewhat too intellectual Neo-Platonic Irishman, translator of
Pseudo-Dionysius, and announcer of various rationalizing propositions for
which men were to look on him askance.

There will be occasion to speak more particularly of a number of these
men. They were all scholars, and interested in the maintenance of
elementary Latin education as well as in theology. They wished to write
good Latin, and sometimes tried for a classical standard, as Einhart did
in his _Vita Caroli_. Few of them refrained from verse, for they were
addicted to metrical compositions made of borrowed classic phrase and
often of reflected classic sentiment, sometimes prettily composed, but
usually insipid, and in the mass, which was great, exceptionally
uninspired. Such metrical effort, quite as much as Einhart’s consciously
classicizing Latin prose, represents a survival of the antique excited to
recrudescence in forms which, if they were not classical, at least had not
become anything else. Stylistically, and perhaps temperamentally, it
represented the ending of what had nearly passed away, rather than the
beginning of the more organic development which was to come.[246]

Among these men, Alcuin and Rabanus broadly represent at once the
intellectual interests of the period and the first stage in the process of
the mediaeval appropriation of the patristic and antique material. The
affectionate and sympathetic personality of the former[247] appears
throughout his voluminous correspondence with Charles and others, which
shows, among other matters, the interest of the time in elementary points
of Latinity, and the alertness of the mind of the great king, who put so
many questions to his genial instructor upon grammar, astronomy, and such
like knowledge. An examination of the works of Alcuin will indicate the
range and character of the educational and more usual intellectual
interests of the epoch. In fact, they are outlined in a simple fashion
suited to youthful minds in his treatise upon Grammar.[248] Its opening
colloquy presents a sort of programme and justification of elementary
secular studies.

“We have heard you saying,” begins Discipulus, “that philosophy is the
teacher (_magistra_) of all virtues, and that she alone of secular riches
has never left the possessor miserable. Lend a hand, good Master,”--and
the pupil becomes self-deprecatory. “Flint has fire within, which comes
out only when struck; so the light of knowledge exists by nature in human
minds, but a teacher is needed to knock it out.”

“It is easy,” responds the Master, “to show you wisdom’s path, if only you
will pursue it for the sake of God, for the sake of the soul’s purity and
to learn the truth, and also for its own sake, and not for human praise
and honour.”

We confess, answers little Discipulus, that we love happiness, but know
not whether it can exist in this world. And the dialogue rambles on in
discursive comment upon the superiority of the lasting over the
transitory, with some feeble echoing of notes from Boëthius’s _De
consolatione_. There is talk to show that man, a rational animal, the
image of his Creator, and immortal in his better part, should seek what is
truly of himself, and not what is alien, the abiding and not the fugitive.
In fine, one should adorn the soul, which is eternal, with wisdom, the
soul’s true lasting dignity. There is some coy demurring over the
steepness of the way; but the pupil is ardent, and the Master confident
that with the aid of Divine Grace they will ascend the seven grades of
philosophy, by which philosophers have gained honour brighter than that of
kings, and the holy doctors and defenders of our Catholic Faith have
triumphed over all heresiarchs. “Through these paths, dearest son, let
your youth run its daily course, until its completed years and
strengthened mind shall attain to the heights of the Holy Scriptures upon
which you and your like shall become armed defenders of the Faith and
invincible assertors of its truth.” This means, of course, that the
Liberal Arts are the proper preparation for the study of Scripture, that
is, theology. But Alcuin’s discourse seems to tarry with those studies as
if detained by some love of them for their own sake.

The body of this treatise is in form a disputation between two youthful
pupils, a Frank and a Saxon. A _Magister_ makes a third interlocutor, and
sets the subject of the argument. These _personae_ discuss letters and
syllables in definitions taken from Donatus, Priscian, or Isidore; and
whenever Alcuin permits any one of them to stray from the words of those
authorities, the language shows at once his own confused ideas regarding
the parts of speech. He uses terms without adequately comprehending them,
and thus affords one of the myriad examples of how, under decadent or
barbarized conditions, phrases may outlive an intelligent understanding of
their meaning. “Grammar,” says the _Magister_, when solicited to define
it, “is the science of letters, and the guardian of correct speech and
writing. It rests on nature, reason, authority, and custom.” “In how many
species is it divided?” “In twenty-six: words, letters, syllables,
clauses, dictions, speeches, definitions, feet, accent, punctuation,
signs, spelling, analogies, etymologies, glosses, differences, barbarism,
solecism, faults, metaplasm, schemata, tropes, prose, metre, fables and
histories.”[249] The actual treatise does not cover these twenty-six
topics, but confines itself to the division of grammar commonly called
Etymology.

Though the mental processes of an individual preserve a working harmony,
some of them appear more rational than others. Such disparities may be
glaring in men who enter upon the learning of a higher civilization
without proper pilotage. How are they to discriminate between the valuable
and the foolish? The common sense, which they apply to familiar matters,
contrasts with their childlike lucubrations upon novel topics of education
or philosophy. And if that higher culture to which such pupils are
introduced be in part decadent, it will itself contain disparities between
the stronger thinking held in the surviving writings of a prior time and
the later degeneracies which are declining to the level, it may be, of
these new learners.

There would naturally be disparities in the mental processes of an
Anglo-Saxon like Alcuin introduced to the debris of Latin education and
the writings of the Fathers; and his state would typify the character of
the studies at the palace school of Charlemagne and at monastic schools
through his northern realm. This newly stimulated scholarship held the
same disparities that appear in the writings of Alcuin. He may seem to be
adapting his teaching to barbaric needs, but it is evident that his matter
accords with his own intellectual tastes, as, for example, when he
introduces into his educational writings the habit of riddling in
metaphors, so dear to the Anglo-Saxon.[250] The sound but very elementary
portions of his teaching were needed by the ignorance of his scholars. For
instance, no information regarding Latin orthography could come amiss in
the eighth century. And Alcuin in his treatise on that subject[251] took
many words commonly misspelled and contrasted them with those which
sounded like them, but were quite different in meaning and derivation. One
should not, for example, confuse _habeo_ with _abeo_; or _bibo_ and
_vivo_. Such warnings were valuable. The use of the vulgar Romance-forms
of Latin spoken through a large part of Charles’s dominions implied no
knowledge of correct Latinity. Even among the clergy, there was almost
universal ignorance of Latin orthography and grammar.

As a companion to his _Grammar_ and _Orthography_, Alcuin composed a _De
rhetorica et virtutibus_,[252] in the form of a dialogue between Charles
and himself. The king desired such instruction to equip him for the civil
disputes (_civiles quaestiones_) which were brought before him from all
parts of his realm. And Alcuin proceeded to furnish him with a compend of
the _scientia bene dicendi_, which is Rhetoric. This crude epitome was
based chiefly on Cicero’s _De inventione_, but indicates a use of other of
his oratorical writings, and has bits here and there which apparently have
filtered through from the _Rhetoric_ of Aristotle. Some illustrations are
taken from Scripture. The work is most successful in showing the
difference between Cicero and Alcuin. The genius, the spirit, the art of
the great orator’s treatises are lost; a naked skeleton of statement
remains. We have words, terms, definitions, even rules; and Alcuin is not
conscious that beyond them there is the living spirit of discourse.

A more complete descent from substance to a clatter of words and
definitions is exhibited by Alcuin’s _De dialectica_.[253] In logical
studies _facilis descensus_! Others had illustrated this before him. His
treatise is again a dialogue, with Charlemagne for questioner. Opening
with the stock definitions and divisions of philosophy, it arrives at
logic, which is composed (as Isidore and Cassiodorus said) of dialectic
and rhetoric, “the shut and open fist,” a simile which had come down from
Varro. Says Charles: “What are the _species_ of dialectic?” Answers
Alcuin: “Five principal ones: Isagogae, categories, forms of syllogisms
and definitions, topics, periermeniae.” What a classification!
Introductions, categories, syllogisms, topics, _De interpretatione_-s! It
is not a classification but in reality an enumeration of the treatises
which had served as sources for those men from whom Alcuin drew! Evidently
this excerpter is not really thinking in the terms and categories of his
subject. His work shows no intelligence beyond Isidore’s, from whose
_Etymologies_ it is largely taken. And the genius of our author for
metaphysics may be perceived from the definition which he offers Charles
of substance--_substantia_ or _usia_ (_i.e._ οὐσία): it is that which is
discerned by corporeal sense; while _accidens_ is that which changes
frequently and is apprehended by the mind. _Substantia_ is the underlying,
the _subjacens_, in which the _accidentia_ are said to be.[254] One
observes the crassness and inconsistency of these statements.

There are illustrations of the knowledge and methods shown in the
educational writings of the man who, next to Charles himself, was the
guiding spirit of the intellectual revival. No mention has been made of
those of his works that were representative of the chief intellectual
labour of the period--that of exploiting the Patristic material. Here
Alcuin contributed a compend of Augustine’s doctrines on the Trinity,[255]
and a book on the Vices and Virtues, drawn chiefly from Augustine’s
sermons.[256] Like most of his learned contemporaries, he also compiled
Commentaries upon Scripture, the method of which is prettily told in a
prefatory epistle placed by him before his Commentary on the Gospel of
John, and addressed to two pious women:

    “Devoutly searching the pantries of the holy Fathers, I let you taste
    whatever I have been able to find in them. Nor did I deem it fitting
    to cull the blossoms from any meadow of my own, but with humble heart
    and head bowed low, to search through the flowering fields of many
    Fathers, and thus safely satisfy your pious pleasure. First of all I
    seek the suffrage of Saint Augustine, who laboured with such zeal upon
    this Gospel; then I draw something from the tracts of the most holy
    doctor Saint Ambrose; nor have I neglected the homilies of Father
    Gregory the pope, or those of the blessed Bede, nor, in fact, the
    works of others of the holy Fathers. I have cited their
    interpretations, as I found them, preferring to use their meanings and
    their words, than trust to my own presumption.”[257]

In the next generation, a most industrious compiler of such Commentaries
was Alcuin’s pupil, Rabanus Maurus.[258] More deeply learned than his
master, his conception of the purposes of study has not changed
essentially. Like Alcuin, he sets forth a proper intellectual programme
for the instruction of the clergy: “The foundation, the state, and the
perfection, of wisdom is knowledge of the Holy Scriptures.” The Seven Arts
are the ancillary _disciplinae_; the first three constitute that
grammatical, rhetorical, and logical training which is needed for an
understanding of the holy texts and their interpretation. Likewise
arithmetic and the rest of the quadrivium have place in the cleric’s
education. A knowledge of pagan philosophy need not be avoided: “The
philosophers, especially the Platonists, if perchance they have spoken
truths accordant with our faith, are not to be shunned, but their truths
appropriated, as from unjust possessors.”[259] And Rabanus continues with
the never-failing metaphor of Moses despoiling the Egyptians.

Raban, however, had somewhat larger thoughts of education than his master.
For example, he takes a broader view of grammar, which he regards as the
_scientia_ of interpreting the poets and historians, and the _ratio_ of
correct speech and writing.[260] Likewise he treats _Dialectica_ more
seriously. With him it is the “_disciplina_ of rational investigation, of
defining and discussing, and distinguishing the true from the false. It is
therefore the _disciplina disciplinarum_. It teaches how to teach and how
to learn; in this same study, reason itself demonstrates what it is and
what it wills. This art alone knows how to know, and is willing and able
to make knowers. Reasoning in it, we learn what we are, and whence, and
also to know Creator and creature; through it we trace truth and detect
falsity, we argue and discover what is consequent and what inconsequent,
what is contrary to the nature of things, what is true, what is probable,
and what is intrinsically false in disputations. Wherefore the clergy
ought to know this noble art, and have its laws in constant meditation, so
that subtly they may discern the wiles of heretics, and confute their
poisoned sayings with the conclusions of the syllogism.”[261]

This somewhat extravagant but not novel view of logic’s function was
prophetic of the coming scholastic reliance upon it as the means and
instrument of truth. Rabanus had no hesitancy in commending this edged
tool to his pupils. But the operations of his mind were predominantly
Carolingian, which is to say that ninety-nine per cent of the contents of
his _opera_ consist of material extracted from prior writers. His
Commentaries upon Scripture outbulk all his other works taken together,
and are compiled in this manner. So is his encyclopaedic compilation, _De
universo libri XXII._,[262] two books more than those of Isidore’s
_Etymologies_, from which he chiefly drew; but he changed the arrangement,
and devoted a larger part of his parchment to religious topics; and he
added further matter gleaned from the Church Fathers, from whom he had
drawn his Commentaries. This further matter consisted of the mystical
interpretations of things, which he subjoined to their “natural”
explanations. He says, in his Praefatio, addressed to King Louis:

    “Much is set forth in this work concerning the natures of things and
    the meanings of words, and also as to the mystical signification of
    things. Accordingly I have arranged my matter so that the reader may
    find the historical and mystical explanations of each thing set
    together--_continuatim positam_; and may be able to satisfy his desire
    to know both significations.”

These allegorical elaborations accorded with the habits of this compiler
of allegorical comment upon Scripture.[263]

Rabanus was a full Teutonic personality, a massive scholar for his time,
untiring in labour and intrinsically honest. Except when involved in the
foolishness of the mystic qualities of numbers, or following the
will-o’-wisps of allegory, he evinces much sound wisdom. He abhors the
pretence of teaching what one has not first diligently learned; and his
good sense is shown in his admonition to teachers to use words which their
pupils or audience will understand. His views upon profane knowledge were
liberal: one should use the treasured experience and accumulated wisdom of
the ancients, for that is still the mainstay of human society; but one
should shun their vain as well as pernicious idolatries and
superstitions.[264] Let us by all means preserve their sound educational
learning and the elements of their philosophy which accord with the
verities of Christian doctrine. Raban also realized the sublimity of the
study of Astronomy, which he deemed “a worthy argument for the religious
and a torment for the curious. If pursued with chaste and sober mind, it
floods our thoughts with immense love. How admirable to mount the heavens
in spirit, and with inquiring reason consider that whole celestial fabric,
and from every side gather in the mind’s reflective heights what those
vast recesses veil.”[265] He then rebukes the folly of those who vainly
would draw auguries from the stars.[266]

Raban’s mental activities were commonly constrained by the need felt by
him and his pious contemporaries to master the works of the Latin Fathers.
Perhaps more than any other one man (though here his pupil Walafrid Strabo
made a skilful second) he contributed to what necessarily was the first
stage in this mediaeval achievement of appropriating patristic
Christianity, to wit, the preliminary task of rearranging the doctrinal
expositions of the Fathers conveniently, and for the most part in
Commentaries following verse and chapter of the canonical books of
Scripture. But, like many of his contemporaries, Raban, when compelled by
controversial exigencies, would think for himself if the situation could
not be met with matter taken from a Father. Accordingly, individual and
personal views are vigorously put in some of his writings, as in his
_Liber de oblatione puerorum_,[267] directed against the attempt of the
interesting Saxon, Gottschalk, to free himself from the vows made by those
who dedicated him in boyhood as an _oblatus_ at the monastery of Fulda, of
which Raban was abbot. Raban’s tract maintained that the monastic vows
made upon such dedication of children could not be broken by the latter on
reaching years of discretion.

This same Gottschalk was the centre of the storm, which he indeed blew up,
over Predestination; and again Raban was his fierce opponent. This
controversy, with that relating to the Eucharist, will serve to illustrate
the doctrinal interests of the time, and also to exemplify the
quasi-originality of its controversial productions.

Of course Predestination and the Eucharist had been exhaustively discussed
by the Latin Fathers. No man of the ninth century could really add
anything to the arguments touching the former set forth in the works of
Augustine and his Pelagian adversaries. And the substance of the
discussion as to the eucharistic Body and Blood of Christ had permeated
countless tomes, both Greek and Latin, from the time of Irenaeus, Bishop
of Lyons (d. 202); and yet neither as to the impossible topic of
Predestination, nor as to the distinctly Christian mystery of the
Eucharist, had the Latin Church authoritatively and finally fixed doctrine
in dogma or put together the arguments. The ninth century with its lack of
elastic thinking, and its greater need of tangible authority, was
compelled by its mental limitations to attempt in each of these matters to
drag a definite conclusion from out of its entourage of argument, and
strip it of its decently veiling obscurities. Thereupon, and with its
justifying and balanced foundation of reasons and considerations knocked
from under, the conclusion had to sustain itself in mid air, just at the
level of the common eye.

Such, obviously, was the result of the Eucharistic or Paschal controversy.
The symbol, all indecision brushed away, hardened into the tangible
miraculous reality. Radbertus, Abbot of Corbie, who was so rightly named
Paschasius, was the chief agent in the process. His method of procedure,
just as the result which he obtained, was what the time required. The
method was almost a bit of creation in itself: he put the matter in a
separate monograph, _De corpore et sanguine Domini_,[268] the first work
exclusively devoted to the subject. This was needed as a matter of
arrangement and presentation. Men could not endure to look here and
thither among many books on many subjects, for arguments one way and the
other. That was too distraught. There was call for a compendium, a manual
of the matter; and in providing it Paschasius was a master mechanic for
his time. Inevitably the discussion and the conclusion took on a new
definiteness. It is impossible to glean and gather arguments and matter
from all sides, and bring them together into a single composition, without
making the thesis more organic, tangible, definite. Thus Paschasius
presented the scattered, wavering discussion--the victorious side of
it--as a clear dogma reached at last. And whatever qualification of
counter-doctrine there was in his grouped arguments, there was none in the
conclusion; and the definite conclusion was what men wanted.

And practically for the whole western Church, clergy and laity, the
conclusion was but one, and accorded with what was already the current
acceptance of the matter. Radbert’s arguments embraced the spiritual
realism of Augustine, according to which the ultra reality of the
eucharistic elements consisted in the _virtus sacramenti_, that is in
their miraculous and real, but invisible, transformation into the
veritable substance of Christ’s veritable body. This took place through
priestly consecration, and existed only for believers. For the brute to
eat the elements was nothing more than to consume other similar natural
substances. For the misbeliever it was not so simple. He indeed ate not
Christ’s body, but his own _judicium_, his own deeper damnation. Here lay
the terror, which made more anxious, more poignant, the believer’s hope,
that he was faithful and humbled, and was eating the veritable Christ-body
to his sure salvation. For the Eucharist could not fail, though the
partaker might.

Out of all of this emerged the one clear thing, the point, the practical
conclusion, which was transubstantiation, though the word was not yet
made. Here it is in Paschasius; says he: “That body and blood veritably
come into existence (_fiat_) by the consecration of the Mystery, no one
doubts who believes the divine words; hence Truth says, ‘For my flesh
verily is food, and my blood verily is drink’ (John vi. 55). And that it
should be clearer to the disciples who did not rightly understand of what
flesh He spoke, or of what blood, He added, to make this plain, ‘Whoso
eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, abideth in me and I in him’
(_ibid._ 56). Therefore, if it is veritably food, it is veritable flesh;
and if it is veritably drink, it also is veritable blood. Otherwise how
could He have said, ‘The bread which I will give is my flesh for the life
of the world’ (_ibid._ 52)?”

Could anything be more positive and simplified? At first sight it is a
marvel how Paschasius, even though treading in the steps of so many who
had gone before, could give a literal interpretation to words which
Christ seems to have used as figuratively as when He said, “I am the vine,
ye are the branches.” A marvel indeed, when we think that Paschasius and
all of his generation, as well as those who went before, had abandoned
themselves to the most wonderful and far-fetched allegorical
interpretations of every historical and literal statement in the
Scriptures. And this same Paschasius, and all the rest too, do not
hesitate to interpret and explain by allegory the significance of every
accompanying act and circumstance of the mass. This might seem the climax
of the marvel, but it is a step toward explaining it. For the literal
interpretation of the phrases which Paschasius quotes was followed for the
sake of the more absolute miracle, the deeper mystery, the fuller
florescence of encompassing allegorical meaning. Only thus could be
brought about the transformation of the palpable symbol into the
miraculous reality; and only _then_ could that bread and wine be what
Cyril of Alexandria and others, five hundred years before Paschasius, had
called it: “the drug of immortality.” Only through the miraculous and real
identity of the elements of the Eucharist with the body and blood of
Christ could they save the souls of the partakers.

In partial disagreement with these hard and fast conclusions, Ratramnus,
also of Corbie,[269] and others might still try to veil the matter, with
utterances capable of more equivocal meaning; might try to make it all
more dim, and therefore more possibly reasonable. That was not what the
Carolingian time, or the centuries to come, wanted; but rather the
definite tangible statement, which they could grasp as readily as they
could see and touch the elements before their eyes. In disenveloping the
question and conclusion from every wavering consideration and veiling
ambiguity, the Carolingian period was creative in this Paschal
controversy. New propositions were not devised; but the old, such of them
as fitted, were put together and given the unity and force of a
projectile.

It was the same and yet different with the Predestination strife.
Gottschalk, who raised the storm, stated doctrines of Augustine. But he
set them out naked and alone, with nothing else as counterpoise, as
Augustine had not done. Thus to draw a single doctrine out from the
totality of a man’s work and the demonstrative suggestiveness of all the
rest of his teachings, whether that man be Paul or Augustine, is to
present it so as to make it something else. For thereby it is left naked
and alone, and unadjusted with the connected and mitigating considerations
yielded by the rest of the man’s opinions. Such a procedure is a garbling,
at least in spirit. It is almost like quoting the first half of a sentence
and leaving off everything following the author’s “but” in the middle of
it.

At all events the hard and fast, complete and twin (_gemina_), divine
predestination, unto hell as well as heaven, was too unmitigated for the
Carolingian Church. This doctrine, and his own intractible temper, immured
the unhappy announcer of it in a monastic dungeon till he died. It was
monstrous, as monstrous as transubstantiation, for example! But
transubstantiation saved; and while the Church could stand the doctrine of
the election of the Elect to salvation, it revolted from the
counter-inference, of the election of the damned to hell, which
contradicted too drastically the sweet and lovely teaching that Christ
died for all. The theologians of one and more generations were drawn into
the strife, which was to have a less definitive result than the Paschal
controversy. Even to-day the adjustment of human free-will with omnipotent
foreknowledge has not been made quite clear.[270]

There was one man who was drawn into the Predestination strife, although
for him it lacked cardinal import. For the Neo-Platonic principles of John
Scotus Eriugena scarcely permitted him to see in evil more than
non-existence, and led him to trace all phases of reality downward from
the primal Source. His intellectual attitude, interests, and faculties
were exceptional, and yet nevertheless partook of the characteristics of
his time, out of which not even an Eriugena could lift himself. He was an
Irishman, who came to the Court of Charles the Bald on invitation, and
for many years, until his orthodoxy became too suspect, was the head of
the palace school. He may have died about the year 877.

Eriugena was in the first place a man of learning, widely read in the
works of the Greek Fathers. From the _Celestial Hierarchy_ of
Pseudo-Dionysius and other sources, he had absorbed huge draughts of
Neo-Platonism. One must not think of him always as an original thinker. A
large part of his literary labours correspond with those of
contemporaries. He was a translator of the works of Pseudo-Dionysius, for
he knew Greek. Then he composed or compiled Commentaries upon those
writings. He cared supremely for the fruits of those faculties with which
he was pre-eminently endowed. He, the man of acquisitive powers, loved
learning; and he, the man with a faculty of constructive reason, loved
rational truth and the labour of its systematic and syllogistic
presentation. He ascribed primal validity to what was true by force of
logic, and in his soul set reason above authority. Certain of his
contemporaries, with a discernment springing from repugnance, perceived
his self-reliant intellectual mood. The same ground underlay their
detestation, which centuries after underlay St. Bernard’s, for Abaelard.
That Abaelard should deem himself to be something! here was the root of
the saint’s abhorrence. And, similarly, good Deacon Florus of Lyons wrote
a vituperative polemic quite as much against the man Eriugena as against
his detestable views of Predestination. Eriugena, forsooth, would be
disputing with human argument, which he draws from philosophy, and for
which he would be accountable to none. He proffers no authority from the
Fathers, “as if daring to define with his own presumption what should be
held and followed.”[271] Such was not the way that Carolingian Churchmen
liked to argue, but rather with attested sentences from Augustine or
Gregory. Manifestly Eriugena was not one of them.

Had his works been earlier understood, they would have been earlier
condemned. But people did not realize what sort of Neo-Platonic,
pantheistic and emanational, principles this Irishman from over the sea
was setting forth. St. Denis, the great saint who was becoming St. Denis
of France, had been authoritatively (and most preposterously) identified
with Dionysius the Areopagite who heard Paul preach, and, according to the
growing legend, won a martyr’s crown not far from Paris. This was set
forth in his Life by Abbot Hilduin;[272] this was confirmed by Hincmar,
the great Archbishop of Rheims, who said, closing his discussion of the
matter: “veritas saepius agitata magis splendescit in lucem!”[273]
Eriugena seemed to be a translator of his holy writings, and might be
regarded as a setter forth of his exceptionally resplendent truths. He
could use the Fathers’ language too. So in his book on Predestination he
quotes Augustine as saying, Philosophy, which is the study of wisdom, is
not other than religion.[274] But he was not going to keep meaning what
Augustine meant. He slowly extends his talons in the following sentences
which do _not_ stand at the _beginning_ of his great work _De divisione
naturae_.

Says the Magister, for the work is in dialogue form: “You are aware, I
suppose, that what is prior by nature is of greater dignity than what is
prior in time.”

Answers Discipulus: “This is known to almost all.”

Continues Magister: “We learn that reason is prior by nature, but
authority prior in time. For although nature was created at the same
moment with time, authority did not begin with the beginning of time and
nature. But reason sprang with nature and time from the beginning of
things.”

Discipulus clenches the matter: “Reason itself teaches this. Authority
sometimes proceeds from reason; but reason never from authority. For all
authority which is not approved by true reason seems weak. But true
reason, since it is stablished in its own strength, needs to be
strengthened by the assent of no authority.”[275]

No doubt of the talons here! Reason superior to authority--is it not also
prior to faith? Eriugena does not press that reversal of the Christian
position. But his _De divisione naturae_ was a reasoned construction,
although of course the materials were not his own. It was no loosely
compiled encyclopaedia, such as Isidore or Bede or Rabanus would have
presented under such a title. It did not describe every object in nature
known to the writer; but it discussed Nature metaphysically, and presented
its lengthy exposition as a long argument in linked syllogistic form. Yet
it respected its borrowed materials, and preserved their
characteristics--with the exception of Scripture, which Eriugena
recognized as supreme authority! That he interpreted figuratively of
course; so had every one else done. But he differed from other
commentators and from the Church Fathers, in degree if not in kind. For
his interpretation was a systematic moulding of Scriptural phrase to suit
his system. He transformed the meaning with as clear a purpose as once
Philo of Alexandria had done. The pre-Christian Jew changed the
Pentateuch--holding fast, of course, to its authority!--into a Platonic
philosophy; and so, likewise by figurative interpretations, Eriugena
turned Scripture into a semi-Christianized Neo-Platonic scheme.[276] The
logical nature of the man was strong within him, so strong, indeed, that
in its working it could not but present all topics as component parts of a
syllogistic and systematized philosophy.[277] If he borrowed his
materials, he also made them his own with power. He appears as the one man
of his time that really could build with the material received from the
past.

Even beyond the range of such acute theological polemics as we have been
considering, the pressing exigencies of political or ecclesiastical
controversy might cause a capable man to think for himself even in the
ninth century. Such a man was Claudius, Bishop of Turin, the foe of image
and relic-worship, and of other superstitions too crass for one who was a
follower of Augustine.[278] And another such a one even more palpably was
Agobard, Archbishop of Lyons (d. 840), a brave and energetic man,
clear-seeing and enlightened, and incessantly occupied with questions of
living interest, to which his nature responded more quickly than to
theologic lore. Absorbed in the affairs of his diocese, of the Church at
large, and of the Empire, he expresses views which he has made his own.
Practical issues, operating upon his mind, evoked a personal originality
of treatment. His writings are clear illustrations of the originality
which actual issues aroused in the Carolingian epoch. They were directed
against common superstitions and degraded religious opinion, or against
the Jews whose aggressive prosperity in the south of France disturbed him;
or they were political. In fine, they were the fruit of the living issue.
For example, his so often-cited pamphlet, “Against the silly opinion of
the crowd as to hail and thunder,”[279] was doubtless called forth by the
intolerable conditions stated in the first sentence:

    “In these parts almost all men, noble and common, city folk and
    country folk, old and young, think that hail storms and thunder can be
    brought about at the pleasure of men. People say when they hear
    thunder and see lightning ‘_Aura levatitia est_.’ When asked what
    _aura levatitia_ may be, some are ashamed or conscience-stricken,
    while others, with the boldness of ignorance, assert that the air is
    raised (_levata_) by the incantations of men called Tempestarii, and
    so is called ‘raised air.’”

Agobard does not marshal physical explanations against this folly, but
texts of Scripture showing that God alone can raise and lay the storms.
Perhaps he thought such texts the best arguments for those who needed any.
The manner of the writing is reasonable, and the reader perceives that the
clear-headed archbishop, apart from his Scriptural arguments, deemed these
notions ridiculous, as well as harmful.[280]

In like spirit Agobard argued against trials by combat and ordeal.
Undoubtedly, God might thus announce His righteous judgment, but one
should not expect to elicit it in modes so opposed to justice and
Scripture; again, he cites many texts while also considering the matter
rationally.[281] On the other hand, his book against image-worship is made
up of extracts from Augustine and other Church authorities. There was no
call for originality here, when the subject seemed to have been so
exhaustively and authoritatively treated.[282]

One cannot follow Agobard so comfortably in his rancorous tracts against
the Jews. Doubtless this subject also presented itself to him as an
exigency requiring handling, and he was just in his contention that
heathen slaves belonging to Jews might be converted and baptized, and then
should not be given back to their former masters, but a money equivalent
be made instead. The question was important from its frequency. Yet one
would be loath to approve his arguments, unoriginal as they are. He gives
currency to the common slanders against the Jews, and then at great length
cites passages from the Church Fathers, to show in what detestation they
held that people. Then he sets forth the abominable opinions of the hated
race, and ransacks Scripture to prove that the Jews are therein
authoritatively and incontestably condemned.[283]

The years of Agobard’s maturity belong to the troubled time which came
with the accession of the incompetent Louis, in 814, to the throne of his
father Charlemagne. In the contentions and wars that followed, Agobard
proved himself an apt political partisan and writer. His political tracts,
notwithstanding their constant citation of Scripture, are his own, and
evince an originality evoked by the situation which they were written to
influence.

Something of the originality which the pressing political exigency
imparted to these tracts of Agobard might be transmitted to such history
as was occupied with contemporary events. As long as the historian was a
mere excerpting chronicler extracting his dry summaries from the writings
of former men, his work would not rouse him to independence of conception
or presentation. That would have come with criticism upon the old
authorities. But criticism had scarcely begun to murmur among the
Carolingians, too absorbed with the task of grasping their inherited
material to weigh it, and too overawed by the authority of the past to
question the truth of its transmitted statements. Excerpts, however, could
not be made to tell the stirring events of the period in which the
Carolingian historian lived. He would have to set forth his own perception
and understanding of them, and in manner and language which to a less or
greater extent were his own: to a less extent with those feebly beginning
Annals, or Year-books, which set down the occurrences of cloister life or
the larger happenings of which the report penetrated from the outer
world;[284] to a greater extent, however, with a more veritable history of
some topic of living and coherent interest. In the latter case the writer
must present his conception of events, and therewith something of
himself.[285]

An example of this necessitated originality in the writing of contemporary
history is the work of Count Nithard. He was the son of Charlemagne’s
daughter Bertha and of Angilbert, the emperor’s counsellor and lifelong
friend. His parents were not man and wife, because Charles would not let
his daughters marry, from reasons of policy; but the relationship between
them was open, and apparently approved by the lady’s sire. Angilbert
studied in the palace school with Charlemagne, and became himself a writer
of Latin verse. He was often his sovereign’s ambassador, and continued
active in affairs until his closing years, when he became the lay-abbot of
a rich monastery in Picardy, and received his emperor and virtual
father-in-law as his guest. He died the same year with Charles.

Like his father, Nithard was educated at the palace school, perhaps with
his cousin who was to become Charles the Bald. His loyalty continued
staunch to that king, whose tried confidant he became. He was a
diplomatist and a military leader in the wars following the death of Louis
the Pious; and he felt impelled to present from his side the story of the
strife among the sons of Louis, in “four books of histories” as they grew
to be.[286] Involved with his king in that same hurricane (_eodem
turbine_) he describes those stormy times which they were fighting out
together even while he was writing. This man of action could not but
present himself, his views, his temperament, in narrating the events he
moved in. Throughout, one perceives the pen of the participant, in this
case an honest partisan of his king, and the enemy of those whose conduct
had given the divided realm over to rapine. So the vigorous narrative of
this noble Frank partakes of the originality which inheres in the writings
of men of action when their literary faculty is sufficient to enable them
to put themselves into their compositions.

Engaged, as we have been, with the intellectual or scholarly interests of
the Carolingian period, we should not forget how slender in numbers were
the men who promoted them, and how few were the places where they throve.
There was the central group of open-minded laymen and Churchmen about the
palace school, or following the Court in its journeyings, which were far
and swift. Then there were monastic or episcopal centres of education as
at Tours, or Rheims, or Fulda. The scholars carried from the schools their
precious modicum of knowledge, and passed on through life as educated men
living in the world, or dwelt as learned compilers, reading in the
cloister. But scant were the rays of their enlightening influence amidst
that period’s vast encompassing ignorance.

To have classified the Carolingian intellectual interests according to
topics would have been misleading, since that would have introduced a
fictitious element of individual preference and aptitude, as if the
Carolingian scholar of his spontaneous volition occupied himself with
mathematical studies rather than grammar, or with astronomy rather than
theology. In general, all was a matter of reading and learning from such
books as Isidore’s _Origines_, which handled all topics indiscriminately,
or from Bede, or from the works of Augustine or Gregory, in which every
topic did but form part of the encyclopaedic presentation of the
relationship between the soul and God, and the soul’s way to salvation.

What then did these men care for? Naturally, first of all, for the
elements of their primary education, their studies in the Seven Arts. They
did what they might with Grammar and Rhetoric, and with Dialectic, which
sometimes was Rhetoric and formal Logic joined. Logic, for those who
studied it seriously, was beginning to form an important mental
discipline. The four branches of the quadrivium were pursued more
casually. Knowledge of arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy (one may
throw in medicine as a fifth) was as it might be in the individual
instance--always rudimentary, and usually rather less than more.

All of this, however, and it was not very much, was but the preparation,
if the man was to be earnest in his pursuit of wisdom. Wisdom lay chiefly
in Theology, to wit, the whole saving contents of Scripture as understood
and interpreted by Gregory and Augustine. There was little mortal
knowledge which this range of Scriptural interpretation might not include.
It compassed such knowledge of the physical world as would enable one to
understand the work of Creation set forth in Genesis; it embraced all that
could be known of man, of his physical nature, and assuredly of his
spiritual part. Here Christian truth might call on the better pagan
philosophy for illustration and rational corroboration, so far as that did
corroborate. When it did not, it was pernicious falsity.

So Christian piety viewed the matter. But the pious commonly have their
temporal fancies, sweet as stolen fruit. These Carolingian scholars, the
man in orders and the man without, studied the Latin poets, historians,
and orators. And in their imaginative or poetic moods, as they followed
classic metre, so they reproduced classic phrase and sentiment in their
verses. The men who made such--it might be Alcuin, or Theodulphus, or
Walafrid Strabo--chose what they would as the subject of their poems; but
the presentation took form and phrase from Virgil and other old poets. The
antique influence so strong in the Carolingian period, included much more
than matters of elegant culture, like poetry and art, or even rhetoric and
grammar. It held the accumulated experience in law and institution, which
still made part of the basis of civic life. Rabanus Maurus recognized it
thus broadly. And, thus largely taken, the antique survives in the
Carolingian time as a co-ordinate dominant, with Latin Christianity.
Neither, as yet, was affected by the solvent processes of transmutation
into new human faculty and power. None the less, this same antique
survival was destined to pass into modes and forms belonging quite as much
to the Middle Ages as to antiquity; and, thus recast, it was to become a
broadening and informing element in the mediaeval personality.

Likewise with the patristic Christianity which had been transmitted to the
Carolingian time, to be then and there not only conned and studied, but
also rearranged by these painful students, so that they and their
successors might the better comprehend it. It was not for them to change
the patristic forms organically, by converting them into the modes of
mediaeval understanding of the same. These would be devised, or rather
achieved, by later men, living in centuries when the patristic heritage of
doctrine, long held and cherished, had permeated the whole spiritual
natures of mediaeval men and women, and had been itself transmuted in what
it had transformed.




