CHAPTER XI

MENTAL ASPECTS OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY: ITALY

      I. FROM CHARLEMAGNE TO HILDEBRAND.

     II. THE HUMAN SITUATION.

    III. THE ITALIAN CONTINUITY OF ANTIQUE CULTURE.

     IV. ITALY’S INTELLECTUAL PIETY: PETER DAMIANI AND ST. ANSELM.


I

The Empire of Charlemagne could not last. Two obvious causes, among
others, were enough to prevent it. No single government (save when
temporarily energized by some extraordinary ruler) could control such
enormous and widely separated regions, which included much of the present
Germany and Austria, the greater part of Italy, France, and the Low
Countries. Large portions of this Empire were almost trackless, and
nowhere were there good roads and means of transportation. Then, as the
second cause, within these diverse and ununited lands dwelt or moved many
peoples differing from each other in blood and language, in conditions of
life and degrees of civilization or barbarism. No power existed that could
either hold them in subjection or make them into proper constituents of an
Empire.[287]

There were other, more particular, causes of dissolution: the Frankish
custom of partitioning the realm brought war between Louis the Pious and
his sons, and then among the latter; no scion of the Carolingian house was
equal to the situation; under the ensuing turbulence, the royal power
weakened, and local protection, or oppression, took its place; constant
war exhausted the strength of the Empire, and particularly of Austrasia,
while from without Norsemen, Slavs, and Saracens were attacking, invading,
plundering everywhere. These marauders still were heathen, or obstinate
followers of the Prophet; while Christianity was the bond of unity and
empire. Charlemagne and his strong predecessors had been able thus to view
and use the Church; but the weaker successors, beginning with Louis the
Pious, too eager for the Church’s aid and condonation, found their
subservience as a reed that broke and pierced the hand.

These causes quickly brought about the Empire’s actual dissolution. On the
other hand, a potent conception had been revived in western Europe. Louis
the Pious, himself made emperor in Charlemagne’s lifetime, associated his
eldest son with him as co-emperor, and made his two younger sons kings,
hoping thus to preserve the Empire’s unity. If that unity forthwith became
a name, it was a name to conjure with; and the corresponding imperial fact
was to be again made actual by the first Saxon Otto, a man worthy to reach
back across the years and clasp the hand of the great Charles.

That intervening century and a half preceding the year 962 when Otto was
crowned emperor, carried political and social changes. To the West, in the
old Neustrian kingdom which was to form the nucleus of mediaeval France,
the Carolingian line ran out in degenerates surnamed the Pious, the Bald,
the Stammerer, the Simple, and the Fat. The Counts of Paris, Odo, Robert,
Hugh the Great, and, finally, Hugh Capet, playing something like the old
rôle of the palace mayors, were becoming the actual rulers, although not
till 987 was the last-named Hugh formally elected and anointed king.

Other great houses also had arisen through the land of France, which was
very far from being under the power of the last Carolingians or the first
Capetians. The year 911 saw the treaty between Norman Rollo and Charles
the Simple, and may be taken to symbolize the settling down of Norsemen
from freebooters to denizens, with a change of faith. Rollo received the
land between the Epte and the sea, to the borders of Brittany, along with
temporary privileges, granted by the same Simple Charles, of sack and
plunder over the latter. But a generation later the valiant Count Alan of
the Twisted Beard drove out the plunderers, and established the feudal
duchy long to bear the name of Brittany. Likewise, aided by the need of
protection against invading plunderers, feudal principalities were formed
in Flanders, Champagne, Burgundy, Aquitaine, Languedoc.

At the time when Hugh Capet drew near his royal destiny, his brother was
Duke of Burgundy, the Dukes of Normandy and Aquitaine were his
brothers-in-law, and Adalberon, Archbishop of Rheims, was his partisan. As
a king elected by his peers, his royal rights were only such as sprang
from the feudal homage and fidelity which they tendered him. Yet he, with
the clergy, deemed that his consecration by the Church gave him the
prerogatives of Frankish sovereigns, which were patterned on those of
Roman emperors and Old Testament kings. It was to be the long endeavour of
the Capetian line to make good these higher claims against the
counter-assumptions of feudal vassals, who individually might be stronger
than the king.[288]

Austrasia, the eastern Frankish kingdom, formed the centre of those
portions of the Carolingian Empire which were to remain German. Throughout
these lands, as in the West, feudal disintegration was progressing. The
great territorial divisions were set by differences of race or _stamm_.
Saxons, Franks, Bavarians, Suabians, had never been one people. In the
tenth century each of these _stamms_, with the land it dwelt in, made a
dukedom; and there were besides marks or frontier lordships, each under
its markgrave, upon whom lay the duty of repelling outer foes. These
divisions, fixed in differences of law, language, and blood, were
destined to prevent the formation of a strong kingdom like that of France.

Yet what was to prove a veritable German royalty sprang from the ducal
Saxon house. Upon the failure of the German Carolingian branch in 911,
Conrad, Duke of Franconia, was elected king, the Saxons and Suabians
consenting. After struggling a few years, mainly against the power of the
Saxon duke Henry, Conrad at his death in 918 pronounced in favour of his
stronger rival. Thereupon Henry, called by later legend “The Fowler,”
became king, and having maintained his royal authority against
recalcitrants, and fought successfully with Hungarians and Bohemians, he
died in 936, naming his son Otto as his successor.

The latter’s reign was to be a long and great one. He was consecrated at
Aix-la-Chapelle in Charlemagne’s basilica, thus at the outset showing what
and whom he had in mind. Then and thereafter all manner of internal
opposition had to be suppressed. His own competing brothers were, first of
all, to be put down; and with them the Dukes of Bavaria, Franconia, and
Lorraine, whom Otto conquered and replaced with men connected with him by
ties of blood or marriage. Far to the West he made his power felt,
settling affairs between Louis and Hugh the Great. Hungarians and Slavs
attacked his realm in vain. New _marks_ were established to hold them in
check, and new bishoprics were founded, fonts of missionary Christianity
and fortresses of defence.

Thereupon Otto looked southward, over the Alps. To say that Italy was sick
with turmoil and corruption, and exposed to the attack of every foe, is to
give but the negative and least interesting side. She held more of
civilized life and of education than any northern land; she differed from
the north in her politics and institutions. Feudalism did not fix itself
widely there, although the Roman barons, who made and unmade popes,
represented it; and in many regions, as later among the Normans in the
south, there was to be a feudal land-holding nobility. But in Italy, it
was the city, whether under civic or episcopal government, or in a
despot’s grip, that took the lead, and was to keep the life of the
peninsula predominantly urban, as it had been in the Roman time.

Tenth-century Italy contained enough claimants to the royal, even the
imperial, title. Rome reeked with faction; and the papal power was nearly
snuffed out. Pope followed pope, to reign or be dragged from his
throne--eight of them between 896 and 904. Then began at Rome the
domination of the notorious, but virile, Theodora and her daughter
Marozia, makers and perhaps mistresses of popes, and leaders in feudal
violence. Marozia married a certain valiant Alberic, “markgrave of
Camerino” and forerunner of many a later Italian soldier and tyrant of
fortune. When he fell, she married again, and overthrew Pope John X., who
had got the better of her first husband. In 931 she made her son pope as
John XI. For yet a third husband she took a certain King Hugo, a
Burgundian; but another son of hers, a second Alberic, roused the city,
drove him out, and proclaimed himself “Prince and Senator of all the
Romans.”

It was in this Italy that Otto intervened, in 951, drawn perhaps by the
wrongs of Queen Adelaide, widow of Hugo’s son, Lothaire, a landless king,
since Markgrave Berengar had ousted him from his Italian holdings. This
Berengar now persecuted and imprisoned the queen-widow. She escaped; Otto
descended from the Alps, and married her; Lombardy submitted; Berengar
fled. This time Otto did not advance to Rome, being impeded by many
things--Alberic’s refusal to admit him, and behind his back in Germany the
rebellion of his own son Liudolf aided by the Archbishop of Mainz, and
later by those whom Otto left in Italy to represent him as he hurried
north. These were straitened times for the king, and the Hungarians poured
over the boundaries to take advantage of the confusion. But Otto’s star
triumphed over both rebels and Hungarians--a bloody star for the latter,
as the plains of Lech might testify, where they were so handled that they
never ravaged German lands again.

Otto’s power now reached its zenith. He reordered the German dukedoms,
filled the archbishoprics with faithful servants, bound the German clergy
to himself with gifts and new foundations, and ruled them like another
Charlemagne. It was his time to become emperor, an emperor like
Charlemagne, and not like later weaklings. In 961 he again entered Italy,
to be greeted with universal acclaim as by men longing for a deliverer. He
was crowned king in Pavia; the levies of the once more hostile Berengar
dispersed before him. In February 962 he was anointed emperor at Rome by
John XII., son of that second Alberic who had refused to open the gates,
but whose debauched son had called for aid upon the mighty German. Once
more the Holy Roman Empire of the Germans was refounded to endure a while
with power, and continue a titular existence for eight centuries.

The power of the first Otto was so overwhelming that the papacy could not
escape the temporary subjection which its vile state deserved. And the
Empire was its honest patron, for the good of both. So on through the
reigns of Otto II., who died in 983, aged twenty-eight, and his son Otto
III., who died in 1002, at the age of twenty-two, a dreamer and would-be
universal potentate. Then came the practical-minded rule of the second
Henry (1002-1024), who still aided and humbly ruled the Church. Conrad
II., of Franconia, followed, faithful to the imperial tradition.[289] He
was succeeded in 1039 by his son Henry III., beneficent and prosperous, if
not far-seeing, who again cared for both Church and State, and imperially
constrained the papacy, itself impotent in the grip of the Roman barons
and the Counts of Tusculum. Henry did not hesitate to clear away at once
three rival popes (1046) and name a German, Clement II. It was this worthy
man, but still more another German, his successor, Leo IX. (1049-1054),
who lifted the papacy from its Italian mire, and launched it full on its
course toward an absolute spiritual supremacy that was to carry the
temporal control of kings and princes. But the man already at the helm was
a certain deacon Hildebrand, who was destined to guide the papal policy
through the reigns of successive popes until he himself was hailed as
Gregory VII. (1073-1085).[290]

With Hildebrand’s pontificate, which in truth began before he sat in
Peter’s chair, the reforming spirits among the clergy, aroused to his keen
policy, set themselves to the uplifting of their order. In all countries
the Church, heavy with its possessions, seemed about to become feudal and
secular. Bishops and abbots were appointed by kings and the great
feudatories, and were by them _invested_ with their lands as fiefs, for
which the clerical appointee did homage, and undertook to perform feudal
duties. Church fiefs failed to become hereditary only because bishops and
abbots could not marry; yet in fact great numbers of the lower clergy
lived in a state of marriage or “concubinage.” Evidently the celibacy of
the clergy was a vital issue in Church reform; and so were investitures
and the matter of simony. Under mediaeval conditions, the most open form
of this “heresy” called after Simon Magus, was the large gift from the new
incumbent to his feudal lord who had invested him with abbey or bishopric.
Such simony was not wrong from the feudal point of view, and might
properly represent the duty of bishop or abbot to his lord.

Obviously, for the reform and emancipation of the Church, and in order
that it should become a world-power, and not remain a semi-secular local
institution in each land, it was necessary that the three closely
connected corruptions of simony, lay investitures, and clerical
concubinage should be destroyed. To this enormous task the papacy
addressed itself under the leadership of Hildebrand.[291] In his
pontificate the struggle with the supreme representative of secular power,
to wit, the Empire, came to a head touching investitures. Gregory’s
secular opponent was Henry IV., of tragic and unseemly fame; for whom the
conflict proved to be the road by which he reached Canossa, dragged by the
Pope’s anathema, and also driven to this shame by a rebellious Germany
(1076, 1077). Henry was conquered, although a revulsion of the
long-swaying war drove Gregory from Rome, to die an exile for the cause
which he deemed that of righteousness.

Between the papacy and the secular power represented in this struggle by
the Empire, a peaceful co-equality could not exist. The superiority of the
spiritual and eternal over the carnal and temporal had to be vindicated;
and in terms admitting neither limit nor condition, Hildebrand maintained
the Church’s universal jurisdiction upon earth. The authority granted by
Christ to Peter and his successors, the popes, was absolute for eternity.
Should it not include the passing moment of mortal life, important only
because determining man’s eternal lot? The divine grant was made without
qualification or exception _in saeculo_ as well as for the life to come.
If spiritual men are under the Pope’s jurisdiction, shall he not also
constrain secular folk from their wickedness?[292] Were kings excepted
when the Lord said, Thou art Peter?[293] Nay; the salvation of souls
demands that the Pope shall have full authority _in terra_ to suppress the
waves of pride with the arms of humility. The _dictatus papae_ of the year
1075 make the Pope the head of the Christian world: the Roman Church was
founded by God alone; the Roman pontiff alone by right is called
_universal_; he alone may use the imperial insignia; his feet alone shall
be kissed by all princes; he may depose emperors and release subjects from
fealty; and he can be judged by no man.[294]

In the century and a half following Gregory’s reign the papacy well-nigh
attained the realization of the claims made by this great upbuilder of its
power.[295] Constantine’s forged donation was outdone, in fact; and the
furthest hopes of Leo I. and the first, second, and third Gregories were
more than realized.


II

One might liken the Carolingian period to a vessel at her dock, taking on
her cargo, casks of antique culture and huge crates of patristic theology.
Then western Europe in the eleventh century would be the same vessel
getting under way, well started on the mediaeval ocean.

This would be one way of putting the matter. A closer simile already used
is the likening of the Carolingian period to the lusty schoolboy learning
his lessons, thinking very little for himself. By the eleventh century he
will have left school, though still impressionable, still with much to
learn; but he has begun to turn his conned lessons over in his mind, and
to think a little, in the terms, of what he has acquired--has even begun
to select therefrom tentatively, and still under the mastery of the whole.
He perceives the charm of the antique culture, of the humanly inspiring
literature, so exhaustless in its profane fascinations; he is realizing
the spiritual import of the patristic share of his instruction, and
already feels the power of emotion which lay implicit in the Latin
formulation of the Christian Faith. Withal he is beginning to evolve an
individuality of his own.

Speaking more explicitly, it should be said that instead of one such
hopeful youth there are several, or rather groups of them, differing
widely from each other. The forefathers of certain of these groups were
civilized and educated men, at home in the antique and patristic
curriculum with which our youths are supposed to have been busy. The
forefathers of other groups were rustics, or rude herdsmen and hunters,
hard-hitting warriors, who once had served, but more latterly had rather
lorded it over, the cultivated forbears of the others. Still, again, the
forefathers of other numerous groups had been partly cultivated and partly
rude. Evidently these groups of youths are diverse in blood and in
ancestral traits; evidently also the antique and patristic curriculum is
quite a new thing to some of them, while others had it at their fathers’
knees.

Our different youthful groups represent Italians, Germans, and the
inhabitants of France and the British Isles. One may safely speak of the
ninth-century Germans as schoolboys just brought face to face with
Christianity and the antique culture. So with the Saxon stock in England.
The propriety is not so clear as to the Italians; for they are not newly
introduced to these matters. Yet their household affairs have been
disturbed, and they themselves have slackened in their study. So they too
have much to learn anew, and may be regarded as truants, dirtied and
muddied, and perhaps refreshed, by the scrambles of their time of truancy,
and now returning to lessons which they have pretty well forgotten.

Obviously, in considering the intellectual condition of western Europe in
the tenth and eleventh centuries, it will be convenient to regard each
country in turn: and, besides, a geographical is more appropriate than a
topical arrangement, because there was still little choice of one branch
of discipline rather than another. The majority still were conning
indiscriminately what had come from the past, studying heterogeneous
matters in the same books, the same forlorn compendia. They read the
_Etymologies_ of Isidore or the corresponding works of Bede, and followed
as of course the Trivium and Quadrivium. In sacred learning they might
read the Scriptural Commentaries of Rabanus Maurus or Walafrid Strabo, or
study the works of Augustine. This was still the supreme study, and all
else, properly viewed, was ancillary to it. Nevertheless, as between
sacred study and profane literature, an even violent divergence of choice
existed. Everywhere there were men who loved the profanities in
themselves, and some who felt that for their souls’ sake they must abjure
them.

For further diverging lines of preference, one should wait for the twelfth
century. Many men will then be found absorbed in religious study, while
others cultivate logic and metaphysics, with the desire to know more
active in them than the fear of hell. Still others will study “grammar”
and the classics, or, again, with conscious specializing choice, devote
their energies to the civil or the canon law. In later chapters, and
mainly with reference to this culminating mediaeval time which includes
the twelfth, the thirteenth, and at least, for Dante’s sake, the first
part of the fourteenth, century, we shall review these various branches of
intellectual endeavour in topical order. But for the earlier time which
still enshrouds us, we pass from land to land as on a tour of intellectual
inspection.


III

We start with Italy. There was no break between her antique civilization
and her mediaeval development, but only a period of depression and decay.
Notwithstanding the change from paganism to Christianity and the influx of
barbarians, both a race-continuity and a continuity of culture persisted.
The Italian stock maintained its numerical preponderance, as well as the
power of transforming newcomers to the likeness of itself. The natural
qualities of the country, and the existence of cities and antique
constructions, assisted in the Italianizing of Goth, Lombard, German,
Norman. Latin civic reminiscence, tradition, custom, permeated society,
and prevented the growth of feudalism. Italy remained urban, and continued
to reflect the ancient time. “Consuls” and “tribunes” long survived the
passing of their antique functions, and the fame endured of antique
heroes, mythical and historical. Florence honoured Mars and Caesar; Padua
had Antenor, Cremona Hercules. Such names remained veritably eponymous.
Other cities claimed the birthplace of Pliny, of Ovid, of Virgil. An altar
might no longer be dedicated to a pagan hero, yet the town would preserve
his name upon monuments, would adorn his fancied tomb, stamp his effigy on
coins or keep it in the communal seal. Of course the figments of the
Trojan Saga were current through the land, which, however divided, was
conscious of itself as Italy. _Te Italia plorabit_ writes an
eleventh-century Pisan poet of a young Pisan noble fallen in Africa.

In Italy, as in no other country, the currents of antique education,
disturbed yet unbroken, carried clear across that long period of
invasions, catastrophes, and reconstructions, which began with the time of
Alaric. Under the later pagan emperors, and under Constantine and his
successors, the private schools of grammar and rhetoric had tended to
decline. There were fewer pupils with inclination and ability to pay. So
the emperors established municipal schools in the towns of Italy and the
provinces. The towns tried to shirk the burden, and the teachers, whose
pay came tardily, had to look to private pupils for support. In Italy
there was always some demand for instruction in grammar and law. The
supply rose and fell with the happier or the more devastated condition of
the land. Theodoric, the Ostrogoth, re-established municipal schools
through his dominion. After him further troubles came, for example from
the Lombards, until they too became gentled by Italian conditions, and
their kings and nobles sought to encourage and acquire the education and
culture which their coming had disturbed. In the seventh and eighth
centuries the grade of instruction was very low; but there is evidence of
the unintermitted existence of lay schools, private or municipal, in all
the important towns, from the eighth century to the tenth, the eleventh,
and so on and on. These did not give religious instruction, but taught
grammar and the classic literature, law and the art of drawing documents
and writing letters. The former branches of study appear singularly
profane in Italy. The literature exemplifying the principles of grammar
was pagan and classical, and the fictitious themes on which the pupils
exercised their eloquence continued such as might have been orated on in
the time of Quintilian. Intellectually the instruction was
poverty-stricken, but the point to note is, that in Italy there never
ceased to be schools conducted by laymen for laymen, where instruction in
matters profane and secular was imparted and received for the sake of its
profane and secular value, without regard to its utility for the saving of
souls. There was no barbaric contempt for letters, nor did the laity fear
them as a spiritual peril. Gerbert before the year 1000 had found Italy
the field for the purchase of books;[296] and about 1028 Wipo, a native of
Burgundy and chaplain of the emperor Conrad II., contrasts the ignorance
of Germany with Italy, where “the entire youth (_tota juventus_) is sent
to sweat in the schools”;[297] and about the middle of the twelfth
century, Otto of Freising suggests a like contrast between the Italy and
Germany of his time.[298]

In Italy the study of grammar, with all that it included, was established
in tradition, and also was regarded as a necessary preparation for the
study both of law and medicine. Even in the eleventh century these
professions were followed by men who were “grammarians,” a term to be
taken to mean for the early Middle Ages the profession of letters. In the
eleventh century, a lawyer or notary in Italy (where there were always
such, and some study of law and legal forms) needed education in a
Latinity different from the vulgar Latin which was turning into Italian. A
little later, Irnerius, the founder of the Bologna school, was a teacher
of “grammar” before he became a teacher of law.[299] As for medicine, that
appears always to have been cultivated at least in southern Italy; and a
knowledge of grammar, even of logic, was required for its study.[300]

The survival of medical knowledge in Italy did not, in means and manner,
differ from the survival of the rest of the antique culture. Some
acquaintance had continued with the works of Galen and other ancient
physicians; but more use was made of compendia, the matter of which may
have been taken from Galen, but was larded with current superstitions
regarding disease. Such compendia began to appear in the fifth century,
and through these and other channels a considerable medical knowledge
found its way to a congenial home in Salerno. There are references to this
town as a medical community as early as the ninth century. By the
eleventh, it was famous for its medicine. About the year 1060 a certain
Constantine seems to have brought there novel and stimulating medical
knowledge which he had gained in Africa from Arabian (ultimately Greek)
sources. Nevertheless, translations from the Arabic seem scarcely to have
exerted much influence upon medicine for yet another hundred years.[301]

Thus in Italy the antique education never stopped, antique reminiscence
and tradition never passed away, and the literary matter of the pagan past
never faded from the consciousness of the more educated among the laity
and clergy. Some understanding of the classic literature, as well as a
daily absorption of the antique from its survival in habits, laws, and
institutions, made part of the capacities and temperament of Italians.
Grammarians, lawyers, doctors, monks even, might think and produce under
the influence of that which never had quite fallen from the life of Italy.
And just as the ancient ways of civic life and styles of building became
rude and impoverished, and yet passed on without any abrupt break into the
tenth and the eleventh centuries, so was it with the literature of Italy,
or at least with those productions which were sheer literature, and not
deflected from traditional modes of expression by any definite business or
by the distorting sentiments of Christian asceticism. This literature
proper was likely to take the form of verse in the eleventh century. A
practical matter would be put in prose; but the effervescence of the
soul, or the intended literary effort, would fall into rhyme or resort to
metre.

We have an example of the former in those often-cited tenth-century verses
exhorting the watchers on the walls of Modena:

  “O tu qui servas armis ista moenia,
   Noli dormire, moneo, sed vigila.
   Dum Hector vigil extitit in Troia,
   Non eam cepit fraudulenta Graecia.

  “Vigili voce avis anser candida
   Fugavit Gallos ex arce Romulea.”

The antique reminiscence fills this jingle, as it does the sensuous

  “O admirabile Veneris ydolum
   Cuius materiae nichil est frivolum:
   Archos te protegat, qui stellas et polum
   Fecit et maria condidit et solum.”[302]

And so on from century to century. At the beginning of the twelfth, a
Pisan poet celebrates Pisa’s conquest of the Balearic Isles:

  “Inclytorum Pisanorum scripturus historiam,
   Antiquorum Romanorum renovo memoriam,
   Nam ostendit modo Pisa laudem admirabilem,
   Quam olim recepit Roma vincendo Carthaginem.”

For an eleventh-century example of more literary verse, one may turn to
the metres of Alphanus, a noble Salernian, lover of letters, pilgrim
traveller, archbishop of his native town, and monk of Monte Cassino, the
parent Benedictine monastery, which had been the cultured retreat of
Paulus Diaconus in the time of Charlemagne. It was destroyed by the
Saracens in 884. Learning languished in the calamitous decades which
followed. But the convent was rebuilt, and some care for learning
recommences there under the abbot Theobald (1022-1035). The monastery’s
troubles were not over; but it re-entered upon prosperity under the
energetic rule of the German Richer (1038-1055).[303] Shortly after his
death two close friends were received among its monks, Alphanus and
Desiderius. The latter was of princely Lombard stock, from Beneventum. He
met Alphanus at Salerno, and there they became friends. Afterwards both
saw something of the world and experienced its perils. Desiderius was born
to be monk, abbot, and at last pope (Victor III.) against his will.
Alphanus, always a man of letters, was drawn by his friend to monastic
life. Long after, when Archbishop of Salerno, he gave a refuge and a tomb
to the outworn Hildebrand.

The rebuilding and adorning of Monte Cassino by Desiderius with the aid of
Greek artists is a notable episode in the history of art.[304] Under the
long rule of this great abbot (1058-1087) the monastery reached the summit
of its repute and influence. It was the home of theology and
ecclesiastical policy. There law and medicine were studied. Likewise
“grammar” and classic literature, the latter not too broadly, as would
appear from the list of manuscripts copied under Desiderius--Virgil, Ovid,
Terence, Seneca, Cicero’s _De natura deorum_. But then there was the whole
host of early Christian poets, historians, and theologians. Naturally,
Christian studies were dominant within those walls.

Alphanus did not spend many of his years there. But his loyalty to the
great monastery never failed, nor his intercourse with its abbot and
monks. He has left an enthusiastic poem descriptive of the place and the
splendour of its building.[305] A general and interesting feature of his
poetry is the naturalness of its classical reminiscence and its feeling
for the past, which is even translated into the poet’s sentiments toward
his contemporaries and toward life. In his metrical verses _ad
Hildebrandum archidiaconum Romanum_, his stirring praise of that statesman
is imbued with pagan sentiment.

    “How great the glory which so often comes to those defending the
    republic, has not escaped thy knowledge, Hildebrand. The Via Sacra
    and the Via Latina recall the same, and the lofty crown of the
    Capitol, that mighty seat of empire.... The hidden poison of envy
    implants its infirmity in wretched affairs, and brings overthrow only
    to such. That thou shouldst be envied, and not envy, beseems thy
    skill.... How great the power of the anathema! Whatever Marius and
    Julius wrought with the slaughter of soldiers, thou dost with thy
    small voice.... What more does Rome owe to the Scipios and the other
    Quirites than to thee?”

Perhaps the glyconic metre of this poem was too much for Alphanus. His
awkward constructions, however, constantly reflect classic phrases. And
how naturally his mind reproduced the old pagan--or fundamental
human--views of life, appears again in his admiring sapphics to Romuald,
chief among Salerno’s lawyers:

  “Dulcis orator, vehemens gravisque,
   Inter omnes causidicos perennem
   Gloriam juris tibi, Romoalde,
       Prestitit usus.”

Further stanzas follow on Romuald’s wealth, station, and mundane felicity.
Then comes the sudden turn, and Romuald is praised for having spurned them
all:

  “Cumque sic felix, ut in orbe sidus
   Fulseris, mundum roseo jacentem
   Flore sprevisti....”

Apparently Romuald had become a monk:

  “Rite fecisti, potiore vita
        Perfruiturus.”[306]

This turn of sentiment curiously accorded with the poet’s own fortune and
way of life; for Alphanus, with all his love of antique letters, was also
a monk and an ascetic, of whom a contemporary chronicler tells that in
Lent he ate but twice a week and never slept on a bed. Yet monk, and
occasional ascetic, as he was, the ordinary antique-descended education
and inherited strains of antique feeling made the substratum of his
nature, and this although he could inveigh against the philosophic and
grammatical studies flourishing in a neighbouring monastery, and advise
one of its studious youths to turn from such:

  “Si, Transmunde, mihi credis, amice,
   His uti studiis desine tandem;
   Fac cures monachi scire professum,
   Ut vere sapiens esse puteris.”[307]

Eleventh-century Italian “versificatores” were interested in a variety of
things. Some of them gave the story of a saint’s or bishop’s life, or were
occupied with an ecclesiastic theme. Others sang the fierce struggle
between rival cities, or some victory over Saracens, or made an idyl of
very human love with mythological appurtenances. The verse-forms either
followed the antique metres or were accentual deflections from them with
the new added element of rhyme; the ways of expression copied antique
phrase and simile, except when the matter and sentiment of the poem
compelled another choice. In that case the Latin becomes freer, more
mediaeval, ruder, if one will; and still antique turns of expression and
bits of sentences show how naturally it came to these men to construct
their verses out of ancient phrases. Yet borrowed phrases and the
constraint of metre impeded spontaneity, and these feeble versifiers could
hardly create in modes of the antique. A fresher spirit breathes in
certain anonymous poems, which have broken with metre, while they give
voice to sentiments quite after the feeling of the old Italian paganism.
In one of these, from Ivrea, the poet meets a nymph by the banks of the
Po, and in leonine elegiacs bespeaks her love, with all the paraphernalia
of antique reference, assuring her that his verse shall make her immortal,
a perfectly pagan sentiment--or affectation:

  “Sum sum sum vates, musarum servo penates,
     Subpeditante Clio queque futura scio.
   Me minus extollo, quamvis mihi cedit Apollo,
     Invidet et cedit, scire Minerva dedit.
   Laude mea vivit mihi se dare queque cupivit,
     Immortalis erit, ni mea Musa perit.”[308]

It is obvious that in the tenth and eleventh centuries there were Italians
whose sentiments and intellectual interests were profane, humanistic in a
word. These men might even be high ecclesiastics, like Liutprand, Bishop
of Cremona (d. 972).[309] He was of Lombard stock, and yet a genuine
Italian, bred in an atmosphere of classical reminiscence and contemporary
gossip and misdeed. Politically, at least, the Italy of John XII. was not
so much better than its pope; and the _Antapodosis_ of Liutprand goes
along in its easy, and often dramatic way, telling of crime and perfidy,
and showing scant horror. It was a general history of the historian’s
times, written while in exile in Germany; for Liutprand had been driven
out of Italy by King Berengar, whom he had once served. He hated Berengar
and his wife, and although well received at the Court of the great Otto,
he did not love his place of exile.[310]

In exile Liutprand wrote his book to requite Berengar. The work had also a
broader purpose, yet one just as consolatory to the writer. It should
acknowledge and show the justice of the divine judgments exemplified in
history. Herein lay a fuller, although less Italian, consolation for his
exile than in Berengar’s requital. Liutprand keeps in mind Boëthius and
his _De consolatione_, and regards his own work as a Consolation of
History, as that of Boëthius was a Consolation of Philosophy. The paths of
Liutprand’s Consolation are as broad as the justice and power of the
Trinity, “which casts down these for their wicked deeds and raises up
those for their merits’ sake.”[311]

Quite explicitly he explains the title and reason of his work at the
opening of its third book:

    “Since it will show the deeds of famous men, why call it Antapodosis?
    I reply: Its object is to set forth and cry aloud the acts of this
    Berengar who at this moment does not reign but tyrannize in Italy, and
    of his wife Willa, who for the boundlessness of her tyranny should be
    called a second Jezebel, and Lamia for her insatiate rapines. Me and
    my house, my family and kin, have they harassed with so many javelins
    of lies, so many spoliations, so many essays of wickedness, that
    neither tongue nor pen can avail to set them forth. May then these
    pages be to them an antapodosis, that is retribution, to make their
    wickedness naked before men living and unborn. None the less may it
    prove an antapodosis for the benefits conferred on me by holy and
    happy men.”[312]

Liutprand’s narrative is breezy and interspersed with ribald tales. The
writer meant to amuse his readers and himself. These literary qualities
give picturesqueness to his well-known _Embassy to Constantinople_, where
he was sent by Otto the Great, for purposes of peace and to ask the hand
of the Byzantine princess for Otto II. The highly coloured ceremonial life
of the Greek Court, the chicane and contemptuous treatment met with, the
spirited words of Liutprand, and the rancour of this same thwarted envoy,
all appear vividly in his report.[313]

There were also many laymen occupied with Latin studies. Such a one was
Gunzo of Novara, a curiously vain grammarian of the second half of the
tenth century. According to his own story, the fame of his learning
incited Otto the Great to implore his presence in Germany. So he
condescended to cross the Alps, with all his books, perhaps in the year
965. On his way he stopped with the monks of St. Gall, themselves proud of
their learning, and perhaps jealous of the southern scholar. As the weary
Gunzo was lifted, half frozen, from his horse at the convent door, and the
brethren stood about, a young monk caught at a slip in grammar, and made a
skit on him--because, forsooth, he had used an accusative when it should
have been an ablative.

Gunzo neither forgave nor forgot. Passing on to the rival congregation of
Reichenau, he composed a long and angry epistle of pedantic excuse and
satirical invective, addressed to his former hosts.[314] In it he parades
his wide knowledge of classic authors, justifies what the monks of St.
Gall had presumed to mock as a ridiculous barbarism, and closes with a
prayer for them in hexameters. His letter contains the interesting avowal,
that, although the monk of St. Gall had wrongly deemed him ignorant of
grammar, his Latin sometimes was impeded by the “usu nostrae vulgaris
linguae, quae latinitati vicina est.” So a slip would be due not to
unfamiliarity with Latin, but to an excessive colloquial familiarity with
the vulgar tongue which had scarcely ceased to be Latin--an excuse no
German monk could have given. It is amusing to see an Italian grammarian
of this early period enter the lists to defend his reputation and assuage
his wounded vanity. Later, such learned battles became frequent.[315]

Gunzo died as the tenth century closed. Other Italians of his time and
after him crossed the Alps to learn and teach and play the orator. From
the early eleventh century comes a satirical sketch of one. The subject
was a certain Benedict, Prior of the Abbey of St. Michael of Chiusa, and
nephew of its abbot--therefore doubtless born to wealth and position. At
all events as a youth he had moved about for nine years “per multa loca in
Longobardia et Francia propter grammaticam,” spending the huge sum of two
thousand gold soldi. His pride was unmeasured. “I have two houses full of
books; there is no book on the earth that I do not possess. I study them
every day. I can discourse on letters. There is no instruction to be had
in Aquitaine, and but little in Francia. Lombardy, where I learned most,
is the cradle of knowledge.” So the satire makes Benedict speak of
himself. Then it makes a monk sketch Benedict’s sojourn at a convent in
Angoulême: “He knows more than any man I ever saw. We have heard his
chatter the whole day. _O quam loquax est!_ He is never tired. Wherever he
may be, standing, sitting, walking, lying, words pour from his mouth like
water from the Tigris. He orders the whole convent about as if he were
Abbot. Monks, laity, clergy, do nothing without his nod. A multitude of
the people, knights too, were always hastening to hear him, as the goal of
their desires. Untired, hurling words the entire day, he sends them off
worn out. And they depart, saying: Never have we seen sic eloquentem
grammaticum.”[316]

Another of these early wandering Italian humanists won kinder notice, a
certain Lombard Guido, who died where he was teaching in Auxerre, in 1095,
and was lamented in leonine hexameters: “Alas, famous man, so abounding,
so diligent, so praised, so venerated through many lands--

  “Filius Italiae, sed alumnus Philosophiae.

Let Gaul grieve, and thou Philosophy who nourished him: Grieve Grammar,
thou. With his death the words of Plato died, the work of Cicero is
blotted out, Maro is silent and the muse of Naso stops her song.”[317]

A final instance to close our examples. In the middle of the eleventh
century flourished Anselm the Peripatetic, a rhetorician and humanist of
Besate (near Milan). In his _Rhetorimachia_ he tells of a dream in which
he finds himself in Heaven, surrounded and embraced by saintly souls.
Their spiritual kisses were still on his lips when three virgins of
another ilk appear, to reproach him with forsaking them. These are
Dialectic and Rhetoric and Grammar--we have met them before! Now the
embraces of the saints seem cold! and to the protests of the blessed
throng that Anselm is theirs, the virgins make reply that he is altogether
their own fosterling. Anselm gives up the saints and departs with the
three.[318] This was his humanistic choice.

This rather pleasant dream discloses the conflict between Letters and the
call of piety, which might harass the learned and the holy in Italy.
Distrust of the enticements of pagan letters might transform itself to
diabolic visions. Such a tale comes from the neighbourhood of Ravenna, in
the late tenth century. It is of one Vilgard, a grammarian, who became
infatuated with the great pagan poets, till their figures waved through
his dreams and he heard their thanks and assurances that he should
participate in their glory. He foolishly began to teach matters contrary
to the Faith, and in the end was condemned as a heretic. Others were
infected with his opinions, and perished by the sword and fire.[319]

Evidently Vilgard’s profane studies made him a heretic. But, ordinarily,
the Italians with their antique descended temperament were not troubled in
the observance and the expression of their Faith by the paganism of their
intellectual tastes. Such tastes did not produce open heretics in Italy in
the eleventh century any more than in the fifteenth. A pagan disposition
seldom prevented an Italian from being a good Catholic.

Yet the monastic spirit in Italy, as elsewhere, in the eleventh century
defied and condemned the pagan literature, and in fact all Latin studies
beyond the elements of grammar. The protest of the monk or hermit might
represent his individual ignorance of classic literature; or, as in the
case of Peter Damiani, the ascetic soul is horrified at the seductive
nature of the pagan sweets which it knows too well. Peter indeed could say
in his sonorous Latin: “Olim mihi Tullius dulcescebat, blandiebantur
carmina poetarum, philosophi verbis aureis insplendebant, et Sirenes usque
in exitium dulces meum incantaverunt intellectum.”[320] So a few decades
after Peter’s death, Rangerius, Bishop of Lucca, writes the life of an
episcopal predecessor in elegiacs which show considerable knowledge of
grammar and prosody; and yet he protests against liberal
studies--philosophy, astronomy, grammar--with pithy commonplace:

  “Et nos ergo scholas non spectamus inanes

         *       *       *       *       *

   Scire Deum satis est, quo nulla scientia maior.”[321]

So with the Italians the antique never was an influence brought from
without, but always an element of their temperament and faculties. We have
not seen that they recast it into novel and interesting forms in the
eleventh century; yet they used it familiarly as something of their own,
being quite at home with it. As one may imagine some grand old Roman
garden, planned and constructed by rich and talented ancestors, and still
remaining as a home and heritage to descendants whose wealth and
capacities have shrunken. The garden is somewhat ruinous, and fallen to
decay; yet these sons are still at home in it, their daily steps pursue
its ancient avenues; they still recline upon the marble seats by the
fountains where perhaps scant water runs. Fauns and satyrs--ears gone and
noses broken--with even an occasional god, still haunt the courts and
sylvan paths, while everywhere, above and about these lazy sons, the
lights still chase the shadows, and anon the shadows darken the green and
yellow flashes. Perhaps nothing in the garden has become so subtly in and
of the race as this play of light and shade. And when the Italian genius
shall revive again, and children’s children find themselves with power,
still within this ancient garden the great vernacular poems will be
composed; great paintings will be painted in its light and shade and under
the influence of its formal beauties; and Italian buildings will never
escape the power of the ruined structures found therein.


IV

In the tenth and eleventh centuries, as remarked already, studiously
inclined people made no particular selection of one study rather than
another. But men discriminated sharply between religious devotion and all
profane pursuits. Energies which were regarded as religious might have a
political-ecclesiastical character, and be devoted to the purification and
upbuilding of the Church; or they might be intellectual and aloof; or
ascetic and emotional. All three modes might exist together in
religious-minded men; but usually one form would dominate, and mark the
man’s individuality. Hildebrand, for example, was a monk, fervent and
ascetic; but his strength was devoted to the discipline of the clergy and
the elevation of the papal power. In the great Hildebrandine Church which
was his more than any other man’s achievement, the organizing and
political genius of Rome re-emerges, and Rome becomes again the seat of
Empire.[322]

Eminent examples of Italians who illustrate the ascetic-emotional and the
intellectual mode of religious devotion are the two very different saints,
Peter Damiani and Anselm. The former, to whom we shall again refer when
considering the ideals of the hermit life, was born in Ravenna not long
after the year 1000. His parents, who were poor, seem to have thought him
an unwelcome addition to their already burdensome family. His was a hard
lot until he reached the age of ten, when his elder brother Damianus was
made an archpresbyter in Ravenna and took Peter to live with him, to
educate the gifted boy. From his brother’s house the youth proceeded in
search of further instruction, first to Faenza, then to Parma. He became
proficient in the secular knowledge comprised in the Seven Liberal Arts,
and soon began to teach. A growing reputation brought many pupils, who
paid such fees that Peter had amassed considerable property when he
decided upon a change of life. For some years he had been fearful of the
world, and he now turned from secular to religious studies. He put on
haircloth underneath the gentler garb in which he was seen of men, and
became earnest in vigils, fasts, and prayers. In the night-time he quelled
the lusts of the flesh by immersing himself in flowing water; he overcame
the temptations of avarice and pride by lavishly giving to the poor, and
tending them at his own table. Still he felt unsafe, and yearned to escape
the dangers of worldly living. A number of hermits dwelt in a community
known as the Hermitage of the Holy Cross of Fonte Avellana, near Faenza;
Peter became one of them shortly before his thirtieth year. They lived
ascetically, two in a cell together, spending their time in watching,
fasting, and prayer: thus they fought the Evil One. Damiani was not
satisfied merely with following the austerities practised at Fonte
Avellana. Quickly he surpassed all his fellows, except a certain mail-clad
Dominic, whose scourgings he could not equal. His chief asceticism lay in
the temper of his soul.

From this congenial community (the hermits had made him their prior)
Damiani was drawn forth to serve the Church more actively, sorely against
his will, and was made Cardinal-Bishop of Ostia by Pope Stephen IX. in
1058. It was indeed the hand of Hildebrand, already directing the papal
policy, that had fastened on this unwilling yet serviceable tool. Peter
feared and also looked askance upon the relentless spirit, whom he called
Sanctus Satanas, not deeming him to be altogether of the kingdom of
heaven. He deprecates his censure upon one occasion: “I humbly beg that my
Saint Satan may not rage so cruelly against me, and that his worshipful
pride may not destroy me with long-reaching rods; rather, may it,
appeased, quiet to a calm around his servant.” In this same letter, which
is addressed to the two conspiring souls, Pope Alexander II. and
Archdeacon Hildebrand, he sarcastically likens them to the Wind and the
Sun of Aesop’s fable, who contended as to which could the sooner strip the
Traveller of his cloak.[323] Peter’s tongue was sharp enough, and apt to
indulge in epigram:

  “Wilt thou live in Rome, cry aloud:
   The Pope’s lord more than the Pope I obey.”

And another squib he writes on Hildebrand:

  “Papam rite colo, sed te prostratus adoro;
   Tu facis hunc dominum, te facit iste deum.”[324]

It was, however, for his own soul that Damiani feared, while in the
service of the Curia. To Desiderius, Abbot of Monte Cassino, he exclaims:
“He errs, Father, errs indeed, who imagines he can be a monk and at the
same time serve the Curia. Ill he bargains, who presumes to desert the
cloister, that he may take up the warfare of the world.”[325]

Albeit against his will, Damiani became a soldier of the Church in the
fields of her secular militancy against the world. He was sent on more
than one important mission--to Milan, to crush the married priests and
establish the Pope’s authority, or to Mainz, there to quell a rebellious
archbishop and a youthful German king. Such missions and others he might
accomplish with holy strenuousness; his more spontaneous zeal, however,
was set upon the task of cleansing the immoralities of monks and clergy.
In spite of his enforced relations with the powers of the world, he was a
fiery reforming ascetic, a scourge of his time’s wickedness, rather than a
statesman of the Church. His writings were a vent for the outcries of his
horror-stricken soul. The corruption of the clergy filled his nostrils:
they were rotten, like the loin-cloth of Jeremiah, hidden by the
Euphrates; their bellies were full of drunkenness and lust.[326] As for
the apostolic see:

  “Heu! sedes apostolica,
   Orbis olim gloria,
   Nunc, proh dolor! efficeris
   Officina Simonis.”[327]

These, with other verses written in tears, relate to schisms of pope and
antipope which so often rent the papacy in Peter’s lifetime.[328] He never
ceased to cry out against monks and clergy, denouncing their simony and
avarice, their luxury, intemperance and vile unchastity, their viciousness
of every kind. Such denunciations fill his letters, while many of his
other writings chiefly consist of them.[329] They culminate in his
horrible _Liber Gomorrhianus_, which was issued with the approval of one
pope, to be suppressed by another as too unspeakable.

Naturally over so foul a world, flame and lower the terrors of the Day of
Judgment. For Damiani it was near at hand. He writes to a certain judge:

    “Therefore, most dear brother now while the world smiles for thee,
    while thy body glows in health, while the prosperity of earth is sweet
    and fair, think upon those things which are to come. Deem whatever is
    transitory to be but as the illusion of a dream. And that terrible day
    of the last Judgment keep ever present to thy sight, and brood with
    quaking bowels over the sudden coming of such majesty--nor think it to
    be far off!”[330]

Beware of penitence postponed!

    “O how full of grief and dole is that late unfruitful repentance, when
    the sinful soul, about to be loosed from its dungeon of flesh, looks
    behind it, and then directs its gaze into the future. It sees behind
    it that little stadium of mortal life, already traversed; it sees
    before it the range of endless aeons. That flown moment which it has
    lived it perceives to be an instant; it contemplates the infinite
    length of time to come.”[331]

From Damiani’s stricken thoughts upon the wickedness of the age, we may
turn to the more personal disclosures of one who wrote himself _Petrus
peccator monachus_. There is one tell-tale letter of confession to his
brother Damianus, whom he loved and revered:

    “To my lord Damianus, my best loved brother, Peter, sinner and monk,
    his servant and son.

    “I would not have it hid from thee, my sweetest father and lord in
    Christ, that my mind is cast down with sadness while it contemplates
    its own exit which is so near. For I count now many long years that I
    wait to be thrown to dogs; and I notice that in whatever monastery I
    come nearly all are younger than myself. When I consider this, I
    ponder upon death alone, I meditate upon my tomb; I do not withdraw
    the eyes of my mind from my tomb. Nor is my mind content to limit its
    fear and its consideration to the death of the body; for it is at once
    haled to judgment, and meditates with terror upon what might be its
    plea and defence. Wretched me! with what fountains of tears must I
    lament! I who have done every evil, and through my long life have
    fulfilled scarce one commandment of the divine law. For what evil have
    not I, miserable man, committed? Where are the vices, where are the
    crimes in which I am not implicated; I confess my life has fallen in a
    lake of misery; my soul is taken in its iniquities. Pride, lust,
    anger, impatience, malice, envy, gluttony, drunkenness, concupiscence,
    robbery, lying, perjury, idle talking, scurrility, ignorance,
    negligence, and other pests have overthrown me, and all the vices like
    ravening beasts have devoured my soul. My heart and my lips are
    defiled. I am contaminate in sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch.
    And in every way, in cogitation, in speech or action, I am lost. All
    these evils have I done; and alas! alas! I have brought forth no fruit
    meet for repentance.

    “One pernicious fault, among others, I acknowledge: scurrility has
    been my besetting sin; it has never really left me. For howsoever I
    have fought against this monster, and broken its wicked teeth with the
    hammer of austerity, and at times repelled it, I have never won the
    full victory. When, in the ways of spiritual gladness, I wish to show
    myself cheerful to the brethren, I drop into words of vanity; and when
    as it were discreetly for the sake of brotherly love, I think to throw
    off my severity, then indiscreetly my tongue unbridled utters
    foolishness. If the Lord said: ‘Blessed are they that mourn, for they
    shall be comforted,’ what judgment hangs over those who not only are
    slack at weeping, but act like buffoons with laughter and vain
    giggling. Consolation is due to those who weep, not to those who
    rejoice; what consolation may be expected from that future Judge by
    those who now are given to foolish mirth and vain jocularity? If the
    Truth says: ‘Woe unto ye who laugh, for ye shall weep,’ what fearful
    judgment shall be theirs who not only laugh themselves, but with
    scurrilities drag laughter from their listeners?”

The penitent saint then shows from Scripture how that our hearts ought to
be vessels of tears, and concludes with casting himself at the feet of his
beloved “father” in entreaty that he would interpose the shield of his
holy prayers between his petitioner and that monster, and exorcise its
serpentine poison, and also that he would ever pour forth prayers to God,
and beseech the divine mercy in behalf of all the other vices confessed in
this letter.[332]

A strange confession this--or, indeed, is it strange? This cowled Peter
Damiani who passes from community to community, seeing more keenly than
others may, denouncing, execrating every vice existent or imagined, who
wears haircloth, goes barefoot, lives on bread and water, scourges himself
with daily flagellations, urging others to do likewise,--this Peter
Damiani is yet unable quite to scourge out the human nature from him, and
evidently cannot always refrain from that jocularity and _inepta laetitia_
for which the Abbess Hildegard also saw sundry souls in hell.[333]
Perhaps, with Peter, revulsions from the strain of austerity took the form
of sudden laughter. His imagination was fine, his wit too quick for his
soul’s safety. His confession was no matter of mock humility, nor did he
deem laughter vulgar or in bad taste. He feared to imperil his soul
through it. Of course, in accusing himself of other, and as we should
think more serious crimes--drunkenness, robbery, perjury--Peter was merely
carrying to an extreme the monkish conventions of self-vilification.

If it appears from this letter that Damiani had been unable quite to
scourge his wit out of him, another letter, to a young countess, will show
more touchingly that he had been unable quite to fast out of him his human
heart.

    “To Guilla, most illustrious countess, Peter, monk and sinner, [sends]
    the instancy of prayer.

    “Since of a thing out of which will issue conflict it is better to
    have ignorance without cost, than with dear-bought forgetting wage
    hard war, we prudently accord to young women, whose aspect we fear,
    audience by letter. Certainly I, who now am an old man, may safely
    look upon the seared and wrinkled visage of a blear-eyed crone. Yet
    from sight of the more comely and adorned I guard my eyes as boys from
    fire. Alas my wretched heart which cannot hold Scriptural mysteries
    read through a hundred times, and will not lose the memory of a form
    seen but once! There where the divine law remains not, no oblivion
    blurs vanity’s image. But of this another time. Here I have not to
    write of what is hurtful to me but of what may be salutary for thee.”

Peter then continues with excellent advice for the young noblewoman,
exhorting her to deeds of mercy and kindness, and warning her against the
enjoyment of revenues wrung from the poor.[334] Indeed Damiani’s writings
contain much that still is wise. His advice to the great and noble of the
world was admirable,[335] and though couched in austere phrase, it
demanded what many men feel bound to fulfil in the twentieth century. His
little work on Almsgiving[336] contains sentences which might be spoken
to-day. He has been pointing out that no one can be exercising the ascetic
virtues all the time: no one can be always praying and fasting, washing
feet and subjecting the body to pain. Some people, moreover, shun such
self-castigation. But one can always be benevolent; and, though fearing to
afflict the body, can stretch forth his hand in charity: “Those then who
are rich should seek to be dispensers rather than possessors. They ought
not to regard what they have as their own: for they did not receive this
transitory wealth in order to revel in luxury, but that they should
administer it so long as they continue in their stewardship. Whoever gives
to the poor does not distribute his own but restores another’s.”[337]

This sounds modern--it also sounds like Seneca.[338] Yet Damiani was no
modern man, nor was he antique, but very fearful of the classics. Having
been a rhetorician and grammarian, when he became a hermit-monk he made
Christ his grammar (_mea grammatica Christus est_).[339] Horror-stricken
at the world, and writhing under his own contamination, he cast body and
soul into the ascetic life. That was the harbour of escape from the carnal
temptations which threatened the soul’s hope of pardon from the Judge at
the Last Day. Therefore Peter is fierce in execration of all lapses from
the hermit-life, so rapturously praised with its contrition, its
penitence, and tears. His ascetic rhapsodies, with which, as a poet might,
he delighted or relieved his soul, are eloquent illustrations of the
monastic ideal.[340]

Other men in Italy less intelligent than Damiani, but equally picturesque,
were held by like ascetic and emotional obsession. Intellectual interest,
however, in theology was less prominent, because the Italian concern with
religion was either emotional or ecclesiastical, which is to say,
political. The philosophic or dialectical treatment of the Faith was to
run its course north of the Alps; and those men of Italian birth--Anselm,
Peter Lombard, Bonaventura, and Aquinas--who contributed to Christian
thought, early left their native land, and accomplished their careers
under intellectual conditions which did not obtain in Italy. Nevertheless,
Anselm and Bonaventura at least did not lose their Italian qualities; and
it is as representative of what might come out of Italy in the eleventh
century that the former may detain us here.

The story of Anselm is told well and lovingly by his companion
Eadmer.[341] His life, although it was drawn within the currents of
affairs, remained intellectual and aloof, a meditation upon God. It opens
with a dream of climbing the mountain to God’s palace-seat. For Anselm’s
boyhood was passed at Aosta, within the shadows of the Graian Alps.[342]
Surely the heaven rested upon them. Might he not then go up to the hall
where God, above in the heaven, as the boy’s mother taught, ruled and held
all?

    “So one night it seemed he must ascend to the summit of the mountains,
    and go to the hall of the great King. In the plain at the first
    slopes, he saw women, the servants of the King, reaping grain
    carelessly and idly. He would accuse them to their Lord. He went up
    across the summit and came to the King’s hall. He found Him there
    alone with His seneschal, for it was autumn and He had sent His
    servants to gather the harvest. The Lord called the boy as he entered;
    and he went and sat at His feet. The Lord asked kindly (_jucunda
    affabilitate_) whence he came and what he wished. He replied just as
    he knew the thing to be (_juxta quod rem esse sciebat_). Then, at the
    Lord’s command, the Seneschal brought him bread of the whitest, and he
    was there refreshed in His presence. In the morning he verily believed
    that he had been in Heaven and had been refreshed with the bread of
    the Lord.”

A pious mother had been the boy’s first teacher. Others taught him
Letters, till he became proficient, and beloved by those who knew him. He
wished to be made a monk, but a neighbouring abbot refused his request,
fearing the displeasure of Anselm’s father, of whom the biographer has
nothing good to say. The youth fell sick, but with returning health the
joy of living drew his mind from study and his pious purpose. Love for his
mother held him from over-indulgence in pastimes. She died, and with this
sheet-anchor lost, Anselm’s ship was near to drifting out on the world’s
slippery flood. But here the impossible temper of the father wrought as
God’s providence, and Anselm, unable to stay with him, left his home, and
set out across Mount Senis attended by one clericus. For three years he
moved through Burgundy and Francia, till Lanfranc’s repute drew him to
Bec. Day and night he studied beneath that master, and also taught. The
desire to be a monk returned; and he began to direct his purpose toward
pleasing God and spurning the world.

But where? At either Cluny or Bec he feared to lose the fruit of his
studies; for at Cluny there was the strictness of the rule,[343] and at
Bec Lanfranc’s eminent learning would “make mine of little value.” Anselm
says that he was not yet subdued, nor had the contempt of the world become
strong in him. Then the thought came: “Is this to be a monk to wish to be
set before others and magnified above them? Nay,--become a monk where, for
the sake of God, you will be put after all and be held viler than all.
And where can this be? Surely at Bec. I shall be of no weight while he is
here, whose wisdom and repute are enough for all. Here then is my rest,
here God alone will be my purpose, here the single love of Him will be my
thought, and here the constant remembrance of Him will be a happy
consolation.”

Scripture bade him: Do all things with counsel. Whom but Lanfranc should
he consult? So he laid three plans before him--to become a monk, a hermit,
or (his father being dead) for the sake of God administer his patrimony
for the poor. Lanfranc persuaded Anselm to refer the decision to the
venerable Archbishop of Rouen. Together they went to him, and such, says
the biographer, was Anselm’s reverence for Lanfranc, that on the way,
passing through the wood near Bec, had Lanfranc bade him stay in that
wood, he would not have left it all his days.

The archbishop decided for the monastic life. So Anslem took the vows of a
monk at Bec, being twenty-seven years of age. Lanfranc was then Prior, but
soon left to become Abbot of St. Stephen’s at Caen.[344] Made Prior in his
place, Anselm devoted himself in gentleness and wisdom to the care of the
monks and to meditation upon God and the divine truths. He was especially
considerate of the younger monks, whose waywardness he guided and whose
love he won. The envy of cavillers was stilled. Yet the business of office
harassed one whose thoughts dwelled more gladly in the blue heaven with
God. Again he sought the counsel of the archbishop; for Herluin, the first
Abbot and founder of Bec, still lived on, old and unlettered, and
apparently no great fount of wisdom. The archbishop commanded him _per
sanctam obedientiam_ not to renounce his office, nor refuse if called to a
higher one. So, sad but resolute, he returned to the convent, and resumed
his burdens in such wise as to be held by all as a loved father. It was at
this period that he wrote several treatises upon the high doctrinal themes
which filled his thoughts. Gradually his mind settled to the search after
some single proof of that which is believed concerning God--that He
exists, and is eternal, unchanging, omnipotent, just, and pitying, and is
truth and goodness. This thing caused him great difficulty. Not only it
kept him from food and drink and sleep, but what weighed upon him more, it
interfered with his devotion to God’s service. Reflecting thus, and unable
to reach a valid conclusion, he decided that such speculation was a
temptation of the devil, and tried to drive it from his thoughts. But the
more he struggled, the more it beset him. And one night, at the time of
the nocturnal vigils, the grace of God shed light in his heart, and the
argument was clear to his mind, and filled his inmost being with an
immense jubilation. All the more now was he confirmed in the love of God
and the contempt of the world, of which one night he had a vision as of a
torrent filled with obscene filth, and carrying in its flood the countless
host of people of the world, while apart and aloof from its slime rose the
sweet cloister, with its walls of silver, surrounded by silvery herbage,
all delectable beyond conception.

In the year 1078 old Herluin died. Anselm long had guided the convent, and
with one voice the brethren chose him Abbot. He reasoned and argued, but
could not dissuade them, and in his anxiety he knew not what to do. Some
days passed. He had recourse to entreaties; with tears he flung himself
prostrate before them all, praying and protesting in the name of God, and
beseeching them, if they had any bowels of compassion, to permit him to
remain free from this great burden. But they only cast themselves upon the
earth, and prayed that he would rather commiserate them, and not disregard
the convent’s good. At length he yielded, for the command of the
archbishop came to his mind. Such a scene occurs often in monastic
history. None the less is it moving when the participants are in earnest,
as Anselm was, and his monks.

So Anselm’s life opened; so it sought counsel, gathered strength, and
centred to its purpose, pursuing as its goal the thought of God. Anselm
had love and gentleness for his fellows; he drew their love and reverence.
Yet, aloof, he lived within his spirit. Did he open its hidden places even
to Lanfranc? Although one who in his humility always desired counsel,
perhaps neither Lanfranc nor Eadmer, the friend whom the Pope gave him for
an adviser, knew the meditations of his heart. We at all events should
discern little of them by following the outer story of his life. It might
even be fruitless to sail with him across the channel to visit Lanfranc,
now Primate of England. The biographer has nothing to tell of the converse
between the two, although quite rightly impressed at the meeting between
him who was pre-eminent in _auctoritas_ and _scientia_ and him who
excelled in _sanctitas_ and _sapientia Dei_. Nor would it enlighten us to
follow Anselm’s archiepiscopal career, save so far as to realize that he
who lives in the thought of God will fear no brutal earthly majesty, such
as that of William Rufus, to admonish whom Anselm once more crossed the
Channel after Lanfranc’s death. Whatever this despoiler of bishoprics then
thought, he fell sick afterwards, and, being terrified, named Anselm
archbishop, this being in the year 1093. One may imagine the unison
between them! and how little the Red King’s ways would turn the enskied
steadfastness of Anselm’s soul. But the king had the power, and could keep
the archbishop in trouble and in peril. Anselm asked and asked again for
leave to go to Rome, and the king refused. After more than one stormy
scene--the storm being always on the Red King’s part--Anselm made it plain
that he would obey God rather than man in the matter. At the very last he
went in to the king and his Court, and seating himself quietly at the
king’s right he said: “I, my lord, shall go, as I have determined. But
first, if you do not decline it, I will give you my blessing.” So the king
acquiesced.

The archbishop went first to Canterbury, to comfort and strengthen his
monks, and spoke to them assembled together:

    “Dearly beloved brothers and sons, I am, as you know, about to leave
    this kingdom. The contention with our lord the king as to Christian
    discipline, has reached this pass that I must either do what is
    contrary to God and my own honour, or leave the realm. Gladly I go,
    hoping through the mercy of God that my journey may advance the
    Church’s liberty hereafter. I am moved to pity you, upon whom greater
    tribulations will come in my absence. Even with me here you have not
    been unoppressed, yet I think I have given you more peace than you
    have had since the death of our Father Lanfranc. I think those who
    molest you will rage the more with me away. You, however, are not
    undisciplined in the school of the Lord. Nevertheless I will say
    something, because, since you have come together within the close of
    this monastery to fight for God, you should always have before your
    eyes how you should fight.

    “All retainers do not fight in the same way either for an earthly
    prince, or for God whose are all things that are. The angels
    established in eternal beatitude wait upon Him. He has also men who
    serve Him for earthly benefits, like hired knights. He has also some
    who, cleaving to His will, contend to reach the kingdom of heaven,
    which they have forfeited through Adam’s fault. Observe the knights
    who are in God’s pay. Many you see leading a secular life and cleaving
    to the household of God for the good things which they gain in His
    service. But when, by God’s judgment, trial comes to them, and
    disaster, they fly from His love and accuse Him of injustice. We
    monks--would that we were such as not to be like them! For those who
    cannot stand to their professed purpose unless they have all things
    comfortable, and do not wish to suffer destitution for God, how shall
    they not be held like to these? And shall such be heirs of the kingdom
    of heaven? Faithfully I say, No, never, unless they repent.

    “He who truly contends toward recovering the kingdom of life, strives
    to cleave to God through all; no adversity draws him from God’s
    service, no pleasure lures him from the love of Him. _Per dura et
    aspera_ he treads the way of His commands, and from hope of the reward
    to come, his heart is aflame with the ardour of love, and sings with
    the Psalmist, Great is the glory of the Lord. Which glory he tastes in
    this pilgrimage, and tasting, he desires, and desiring, salutes as
    from afar. Supported by the hope of attaining, he is consoled amid the
    perils of the world and gladly sings, Great is the glory of the Lord.
    Know that this one will in no way be defrauded of that glory of the
    Lord, since all that is in him serves the Lord, and is directed to
    winning this reward. But I see that there is no need to say to you
    another word. My brothers, since we are separated now in grief, I
    beseech you so to strive that hereafter we may be united joyfully
    before God. Be ye those who truly wish to be made heirs of God.”

The clarity and gentle love of this high argument is Anselm. Now the story
follows of Anselm and Eadmer and another monk travelling on, sometimes
unknown, sometimes acclaimed, through France to Italy and Rome. Anselm’s
face inspired reverence in those who did not know him, and the peace of
his countenance attracted even Saracens. Had he been born and bred in
England, he might have managed better with the Red King. He never got an
English point of view, but remained a Churchman with Italian-Hildebrandine
convictions. Of course, two policies were clashing then in England, where
it happened that there was on one side an able and rapacious tyrant, while
the other was represented by a man with the countenance and temperament of
an angel. But we may leave Anselm now in Italy, where he is beyond the Red
King’s molestation, and turn to his writings.

Their choice and treatment of subject was partly guided by the needs of
his pupils and friends at Bec and elsewhere in Normandy or Francia or
England. For he wrote much at their solicitation; and the theological
problems of which solutions were requested, suggest the intellectual
temper of those regions, rather than of Italy. In a way Anselm’s works,
treating of separate and selected Christian questions, are a proper
continuation of those composed by northern theologians in the ninth
century on Predestination and the Eucharist.[345] Only Anselm’s were not
evoked by the exigency of actual controversy as much as by the insistency
of the eleventh-century mind, and the need it felt of some adjustment
regarding certain problems. Anselm’s theological and philosophic
consciousness is clear and confident. His faculties are formative and
creative, quite different from the compiling instincts of Alcuin or
Rabanus. The matter of his argument has become his own; it has been remade
in his thinking, and is presented as from himself--and God. He no longer
conceives himself as one searching through the “pantries” of the Fathers
or culling the choice flowers of their “meadows.” He will set forth the
matter as God has deigned to disclose it to him. In the _Cur Deus homo_ he
begins by saying that he has been urged by many, verbally and by letter,
to consider the reasons why God became man and suffered, and then,
assenting, says: “Although, from the holy Fathers on, what should suffice
has been said, yet concerning this question I will endeavour to set forth
for my inquirers what God shall deign to disclose to me.”[346]

Certain works of Anselm, the _Monologion_, for instance, present the dry
and the formal method of reasoning which was to make its chief home in
France; others, like the _Proslogion_, seem to be Italian in a certain
beautiful emotionalism. The feeling is very lofty, even lifted out of the
human, very skyey, even. The _Proslogion_, the _Meditationes_, do not
throb with the red blood of Augustine’s _Confessions_, the writing which
influenced them most. The quality of their feeling suggests rather Dante’s
_Paradiso_; and sometimes with Anselm a sense of formal beauty and
perfection seems to disclose the mind of Italy. Moreover, Anselm’s Latin
style appears Italian. It is elastic, even apparently idiomatic, and
varies with the temper and character of his different works. Throughout,
it shows in Latin the fluency and simple word-order natural to an author
whose _vulgaris eloquentia_ was even closer to Latin in the time of Anselm
than when Dante wrote.

So Anselm’s writings were intimately part of their author, and very part
of his life-long meditation upon God. Led by the solicitations of others,
as well as impelled by the needs of his own faculties and nature, he takes
up one Christian problem after another, and sets forth his understanding
of it with his conclusion. He is devout, an absolute believer; and he is
wonderfully metaphysical. He is a beautiful, a sublimated, and idealizing
reasoner, convinced that a divine reality must exist in correspondence
with his thought, which projects itself aloft to evoke from the blue an
answering reality. The inspiration, the radiating point of Anselm’s
intellectual interest, is clearly given--to understand that which he first
believes. It is a spontaneous intellectual interest, not altogether
springing from a desire to know how to be saved. It does not seek to
understand in order to believe; but seeks the happiness of knowing and
understanding that which it believes and loves. Listen to some sentences
from the opening of the _Proslogion_:

    “Come now, mannikin, flee thy occupations for a little, and hide from
    the confusion of thy cares. Be vacant a little while for God, and for
    a little rest in Him.... Now, O Lord my God, teach my heart where and
    how to seek thee, where and how to find thee. Lord, Lord, illuminate
    us; show us thyself. Pity us labouring toward thee, impotent without
    thee.... Teach me to seek thee, and show thyself to my search; for I
    cannot seek thee unless thou dost teach, nor find thee unless thou
    dost show thyself.... I make no attempt, Lord, to penetrate thy
    depths, for my intellect has no such reach; but I desire to understand
    some measure of thy truth, which my heart believes and loves. I do not
    seek to know in order that I may believe; but I believe, that I may
    know. For I believe this also, that unless I shall have believed, I
    shall not understand.”[347]

So Anselm is first a believer, then a theologian; and his reason devotes
itself to the elucidation of his faith. Faith prescribes his intellectual
interests, and sets their bounds. His thought does not occupy itself with
matters beyond. But it takes a pure intellectual delight in reasoning upon
the God which his faith presents and his heart cleaves to. The motive is
the intellectual and loving delight which his mind takes in this pursuit.
His faith was sure and undisturbed, and ample for his salvation. His
intellect, affected by no motive beyond its own strength and joy, delights
in reasoning upon the matter of his faith.[348]

We may still linger for a moment to observe how closely part of Anselm’s
nature was his proof of the existence of God.[349] It sprang directly from
his saintly soul and the compelling idealism of his reason. In the
_Monologion_ Anselm ranged his many arguments concerning the nature and
attributes of the _summum bonum_ which is God. Its chain of inductions
failed to satisfy him and his pupils. So he set his mind to seek a sole
and unconditioned proof (as Eadmer states in the _Vita_) of God’s
existence and the attributes which faith ascribes to Him. Anselm says the
same in the Preface to the _Proslogion_:

    “Considering that the prior work was woven out of a concatenation of
    many arguments, I set to seek within myself (_mecum_) whether I might
    not discover one argument which needed nothing else than itself alone
    for its proof; and which by itself might suffice to show that God
    truly exists, and that He is the _summum bonum_ needing nothing else,
    but needed by all things in order that they may exist and have
    well-being (_ut sint et bene sint_); and whatever we believe
    concerning the divine substance.”

The famous proof which at length flashed upon him is substantially this:
By very definition the word _God_ means the greatest conceivable being.
This conception exists even in the atheist’s mind, for he knows what is
meant by the words, the absolutely greatest. But the greatest cannot be in
the intellect alone, for then conceivably there would be a greater which
would exist in reality as well. And since, by definition, God is the
absolutely greatest, He must exist in reality as well as in the mind.[350]
Carrying out the scholia to this argument, Anselm then proves that God
possesses the various attributes ascribed to Him by the Christian Faith.

That from a definition one may not infer the existence of the thing
defined, was pointed out by a certain monk Gaunilo almost as soon as the
_Proslogion_ appeared. Anselm answered him that the argument applied only
to the greatest conceivable being. Since that time Anselm’s proof has been
upheld and disproved many times. It was at all events a great dialectic
leap; but likely one may not with such a bound cross the chasm from
definition to existence--at least one will be less bold to try when he
realizes that this chasm is there. Temperamentally, at least, this proof
was the summit of Anselm’s idealism: he could not but conceive things to
exist in correspondence to the demands of his conceptions. He never made
another so palpable leap from conception to conviction as in this proof of
God’s existence; yet his theology proceeded through like processes of
thought. For example, he is sure of God’s omnipotence, and also sure that
God can do nothing which would detract from the perfection of His nature:
God cannot lie: “For it does not follow, if God wills to lie that it is
just to lie; but rather that He is not God. For only that will can will to
lie in which truth is corrupted, or rather which is corrupted by forsaking
truth. Therefore when one says ‘if God wills to lie,’ he says in
substance, ‘if God is of such a nature as to will to lie.’”[351]

Anselm’s other famous work was the _Cur Deus homo_, upon the problem why
God became man to redeem mankind. It was connected with his view of sin,
and the fall of the angels, as set forth chiefly in his dialogue _De casu
Diaboli_. One may note certain cardinal points in his exposition: Man
could be redeemed only by God; for he would have been the bond-servant of
whoever redeemed him, and to have been the servant of any one except God
would not have restored him to the dignity which would have been his had
he not sinned.[352] Or again: The devil had no rights over man, which he
lost by unjustly slaying God. For man was not the devil’s, nor does the
devil belong to himself but to God.[353] Evidently Anselm frees himself
from the conception of any ransom paid to the devil, or any trickery put
on him--thoughts which had lowered current views of the Atonement.
Anselm’s arguments (which are too large, and too interwoven with his views
upon connected subjects, to be done justice to by any casual statement)
are free from degrading foolishness. His reasonings were deeply felt, as
one may see in his _Meditationes_, where thought and feeling mutually
support and enhance each other. So he recalls Augustine, the great model
and predecessor whom he followed and revered. And still the feeling in
Anselm’s _Meditationes_, as in the _Proslogion_, is somewhat sublimated
and lifted above human heart-throbs. Perhaps it may seem rhetorical, and
intentionally stimulated in order to edify. Even in the _Meditationes_
upon the humanity and passion of Jesus, Anselm is not very close to the
quivering tenderness of St. Bernard, and very far from the impulsive and
passionate love of Francis of Assisi. One thinks that his feelings rarely
distorted his countenance or wet it with tears.[354]




