CHAPTER XIX

MYSTIC VISIONS OF ASCETIC WOMEN

    ELIZABETH OF SCHÖNAU; HILDEGARD OF BINGEN; MARY OF OGNIES; LIUTGARD OF
    TONGERN; MECHTHILD OF MAGDEBURG


We pass to matters of a different complexion from anything presented in
the last few chapters. Thus far, besides Bernard and Francis, matchless
examples of monastic ideals, there have been instances of contemplation
and piety, with much emotion, and a sufficiency of experience having small
part in reason; also hallucinations and fantastic conduct, as in the case
of Romuald. The last class of phenomena, however, have not been prominent.
Now for a while we shall be wrapt in visions, rational, imitative,
fashioned with intent and plan; or, again, directly experienced,
passionate, hallucinative. They will range from those climaxes of the
constructive or intuitive imagination,[548] which are of the whole man, to
passionate or morbid delusions representing but a partial and passing
phase of the subject’s personality. Moreover, we have been occupied with
hermits and monks, that is to say, with men. The present chapter has to do
with nuns; who are more prone to visions, and are occasionally subject to
those passionate hallucinations which are prompted by the circumstance
that the Christian God was incarnate in the likeness of a man.

Besides the conclusions which the mind draws from the data of sense, or
reaches through reflection, there are other modes of conviction whose
distinguishing mark is their apparent immediacy and spontaneity. They are
not elicited from antecedent processes of thought, as inferences or
deductions; rather they loom upon the consciousness, and are experienced.
Yet they are far from simple, and may contain a multiplicity of submerged
reasonings, and bear relation to countless previous inferences. They are
usually connected with emotion or neural excitement, and may even take the
guise of sense-manifestations. Through such convictions, religious minds
are assured of God and the soul’s communion with Him.[549] While not
issuing from argument, this assurance may be informed with reason and
involve the total sum of conclusions which the reasoner has drawn from
life.

In devout mediaeval circles, the consciousness of communion with God, with
the Virgin, with angels and saints, and with the devil, often took on the
semblance of sense-perception. The senses seemed to be experiencing:
stenches of hell, odours of heaven, might be smelled, or a taste infect
the mouth; the divine or angelic touch was felt, or the pain of blows;
most frequently voices were heard, and forms were seen in a vision. In
these apparent testimonies of sight and hearing, the entire spiritual
nature of the man or woman might set the vision, dramatize it with his or
her desires and aversions, and complete it from the store of knowledge at
command.

The visions of an eleventh-century monk named Othloh have been observed at
some length.[550] Intimate and trying, they were also, so to speak, in and
of the whole man: his tastes, his solicitudes, his acquired knowledge and
ways of reasoning, joined in these vivid experiences of God’s truth and
the devil’s onslaughts. One may be mindful of Othloh in turning to the
more impersonal visions of certain German nuns, which likewise issued
from the entire nature and intellectual equipment of these women.[551]

On the Rhine, fifteen miles north-east of Bingen, lies the village of
Schönau, where in the twelfth century flourished a Benedictine monastery,
and near it a cloister for nuns. At the latter a girl of twelve named
Elizabeth was received in the year 1141. She lived there as nun, and
finally as abbess, till her death in 1165. Like many other lofty souls
dwelling in the ideal, she was a stern censor of the evils in the world
and in the Church. The bodily infirmities from which she was never free,
were aggravated by austerities, and usually became most painful just
before the trances that brought her visions. Masses and penances, prayer
and meditation, made her manner of approach to these direct disclosures of
eternity, wherein the whole contents of her faith and her reflection were
unrolled. Frequently she beheld the Saints in the nights following their
festivals; her larger visions were moulded by the Apocalypse. These
experiences were usually beatific, though sometimes she suffered insult
from malignant shapes. What humility bade her conceal, the importunities
of admirers compelled her to disclose: and so her visions have been
preserved, and may be read in the _Vita_ written by her brother Eckbert,
Abbot of Schönau.[552] Here is an example of how the saint and seeress
spoke:

    “On the Sunday night following the festival of St. James (in the year
    1153), drawn from the body, I was borne into an ecstasy (_avocata a
    corpore rapta sum in exstasim_). And a great flaming wheel flared in
    the heaven. Then it disappeared, and I saw a light more splendid than
    I was accustomed to see; and thousands of saints stood in it, forming
    an immense circle; in front were some glorious men, having palms and
    shining crowns and the titles of their martyrdoms inscribed upon their
    foreheads. From these titles, as well as from their pre-eminent
    splendour, I knew them to be the Apostles. At their right was a great
    company having the same shining titles; and behind these were others,
    who lacked the signs of martyrdom. At the left of the Apostles shone
    the holy order of virgins, also adorned with the signs of martyrdom,
    and behind them another splendid band of maidens, some crowned, but
    without these signs. Still back of these, a company of venerable women
    in white completed the circle. Below it was another circle of great
    brilliancy, which I knew to be of the holy angels.”

    “In the midst of all was a Glory of Supreme Majesty, and its throne
    was encircled by a rainbow. At the right of that Majesty I saw one
    like unto the Son of Man, seated in glory; at the left was a radiant
    sign of the Cross.... At the right of the Son of Man sat the Queen of
    Kings and Angels on a starry throne circumfused with immense light. At
    the left of the Cross four-and-twenty honourable men sat facing it.
    And not far from them I saw two rams sustaining on their shoulders a
    great shining wheel. The morning after this, at terse, one of the
    brothers came to the window of my cell, and I asked that the mass for
    the Holy Trinity might be celebrated.

    “The next Sunday I saw the same vision, and more: for I saw the Lamb
    of God standing before the throne, very lovable, and with a gold
    cross, as if implanted in its back. And I saw the four Evangelists in
    those forms which Holy Scripture ascribes to them. They were at the
    right of the Blessed Virgin, and their faces were turned toward her.”

And Elizabeth saw the Virgin arise and advance from out the great light
into the lower ether, followed by a multitude of women saints, and then
return amid great praise.

In another vision she saw the events of the Saviour’s last days on earth:
saw Him riding into Jerusalem, and the multitude throwing down branches;
saw Him washing the disciples’ feet, then the agony in the garden, the
betrayal, the crowning with thorns, the spitting, the Lord upon the Cross,
and the Mother of God full of grief; she saw the piercing of His side, the
dreadful darkness,--all as in Scripture, and then the Scriptural incidents
following the Resurrection. Upon this, her vision took another turn, and
words were put in her mouth to chastise the people for their sins.

Apparently more original was Elizabeth’s vision of the _Paths of God_ (the
_Viae Dei_). In it three paths went straight up a mountain from opposite
sides, the first having the hyacinthine hue of the deep heaven; the second
green, the third purple. At the top of the mountain was a man, clad with a
hyacinthine tunic, his reins bound with a white girdle; his face was
splendid as the sun, his eyes shone as stars, and his hair was white; from
his mouth issued a two-edged sword; in his right hand he held a key and
in his left a sceptre. Elizabeth interprets: the man is Christ; and the
mountain represents the loftiness of celestial beatitude; the light at the
top is the brightness of eternal life; the three paths are the diverse
ways in which the elect ascend. The hyacinthine path is that of the _vita
contemplativa_; the green path is that of the religious _vita activa_; and
the purple path is the way of the blessed martyrs.

There were also other paths up the mountain, one beset with brambles until
half way up, where they gave place to flowers. This is the way of married
folk, who pass from brambles to flowers when they abandon the pleasures of
the flesh; for the flowers are the virtues which adorn a life of
continence. Still other ways there were, for prelates, for widows, and for
solitaries. And Elizabeth turns her visions into texts, and preaches
vigorous sermons, denouncing the vices of the clergy as well as laity. In
other visions she had seen prelates and monks and nuns in hell.

The visions of this nun appear to have been the fruit of the constructive
imagination working upon data of the mind. Yet she is said to have seen
them in trances, a statement explicitly made in the account of those last
days when life had almost left her body. Praying devoutly in the middle of
the night before she died, she seemed much troubled; then she passed into
a trance (_exstasim_). Returning to herself, she murmured to the sister
who held her in her arms: “I know not how it is with me; that light which
I have been wont to see in the heavens is dividing.” Again she passed into
a trance, and afterwards, when the sisters begged her to disclose what she
had seen, she said her end was at hand, for she had seen holy visions
which, many years before, God’s angel had told her she should not see
again until she came to die. On being asked whether the Lord had comforted
her, she answered, “Oh! what excellent comfort have I received!”

       *       *       *       *       *

A more imposing personality than Elizabeth was Hildegard of Bingen,[553]
whose career extends through nearly the whole of the twelfth century; for
she was born in 1099 and died in 1179. Her parents were of the lesser
nobility, holding lands in the diocese of Mainz. A certain holy woman, one
Jutta, daughter of the Count of Spanheim, had secluded herself in a
solitary cell at Disenberg--the mount of St. Disibodus--near a monastery
of Benedictine monks. Drawn by her reputation, Hildegard’s parents brought
their daughter to Jutta, who received her to a life like her own. The
ceremony, which took place in the presence of a number of persons, was
that of the last rites of the dead, performed with funeral torches.
Hildegard was buried to the world. She was eight years old. At the same
time a niece of Jutta also became a recluse, and afterwards others joined
them.

On the death of Jutta in 1136, Hildegard was compelled to take the office
of Prioress. But when the fame of the dead Jutta began to draw many people
to her shrine, and cause a concourse of pilgrims, Hildegard decided to
seek greater quiet, and possibly more complete independence; for the
authority of the new abbot at the monastery may not have been to her
liking. She was ever a masterful woman, better fitted to command than to
obey. So in 1147 she and her nuns moved to Bingen, and established
themselves permanently near the tomb of St. Rupert. From this centre the
energies and influence of Hildegard, and rumours of her visions, soon
began to radiate. Her advice was widely sought, and often given unasked.
She corresponded with the great and influential, admonishing dukes and
kings and emperors, monks, abbots, and popes. Her epistolary manner
sometimes reminds one of Bernard, who was himself among her
correspondents. The following letter to Frederick Barbarossa would match
some of his:

    “O King, it is very needful that thou be foreseeing in thy affairs.
    For, in mystic vision, I see thee living, small and insensate, beneath
    the Living Eyes (of God). Thou hast still some time to reign over
    earthly matters. Therefore beware lest the Supreme King cast thee down
    for the blindness of thine eyes, which do not rightly see how thou
    holdest the rod of right government in thy hand. See also to it that
    thou art such that the grace of God may not be lacking in thee.”[554]

This is the whole letter. Hildegard’s communications were not wont to
stammer. They were frequently announced as from God, and began with the
words “Lux vivens dicit.”

Hildegard was a woman of intellectual power. She was also learned in
theology, and versed in the medicine and scanty natural science of an
epoch which preceded the reopening of the great volume of Aristotelian
knowledge in the thirteenth century. Yet she asserts her illiteracy, and
seems always to have employed learned monks to help her express, in
awkward Latin, the thoughts and flashing words which, as she says, were
given her in visions. Her many gifts of grace, if not her learning,
impressed contemporaries, who wrote to her for enlightenment upon points
of doctrine and biblical interpretation; they would wait patiently until
she should be enabled to answer, since her answers were not in the power
of her own reflection, but had to be seen or heard. For instance, a monk
named Guibert, who afterwards became the saint’s amanuensis and
biographer, propounded thirty-eight questions of biblical interpretation
on behalf of the monks of the monastery of Villars. In the course of time
Hildegard replies: “In visione animae meae, haec verba vidi et audivi,”
and thereupon she gives a text from Canticles with an exposition of it,
which neither she nor the monks regarded quite as hers, but as divinely
revealed. At the end of the letter she says that she, insignificant and
untaught creature, has looked to the “true light,” and through the grace
of God has laboured upon their questions and has completed the solutions
of fourteen of them.[555]

In some of Hildegard’s voluminous writings, visions were apparently a form
of composition; again, more veritable visions, deemed by her and by her
friends to have been divinely given, made the nucleus of the work at
length produced by the labour of her mind. Guibert recognized both
elements, the God-given visions of the seeress and her contributory
labour. In letters which had elicited the answers above mentioned, he
calls her _speculativa anima_, and urges her to direct her talents
(_ingenium_) to the solution of the questions. But he also addresses her
in words just varied from Gabriel’s and Elizabeth’s to the Virgin:

    “Hail--after Mary--full of grace; the Lord is with thee; blessed art
    thou among women, and blessed is the word of thy mouth.... In the
    character of thy visions, the logic of thy expositions, the orthodoxy
    of thy opinions, the Holy Spirit has marvellously illuminated thee,
    and revealed to babes divers secrets of His wisdom.”[556]

In answer to more personal inquiries from the deeply-interested Guibert,
Hildegard (who at the time was venerable in years and in repute for
sanctity) explains how she saw her visions, and how her knowledge of
Scripture came to her:

    “From infancy, even to the present time when I am more than seventy
    years old, my soul has always beheld this _visio_,[557] and in it my
    soul, as God may will, soars to the summit of the firmament and into a
    different air, and diffuses itself among divers peoples, however
    remote they may be. Therefore I perceive these matters in my soul, as
    if I saw them through dissolving views of clouds and other objects. I
    do not hear them with my outer ears, nor do I perceive them by the
    cogitations of my heart, or by any collaboration of my five senses;
    but only in my soul, my eyes open, and not sightless as in a trance;
    wide awake, whether by day or night, I see these things. And I am
    perpetually bound by my infirmities and with pains so severe as to
    threaten death, but hitherto God has raised me up.

    “The brightness which I see is not limited in space, and is more
    brilliant than the luminous air around the sun, nor can I estimate its
    height or length or breadth. Its name, which has been given me, is
    Shade of the living light (_umbra viventis luminis_). Just as sun,
    moon, or stars appear reflected in the water, I see Scripture,
    discourses, virtues and human actions shining in it.

    “Whatever I see or learn in this vision, I retain in my memory; and as
    I may have seen or heard it, I recall it to mind, and at once see,
    hear, know; in an instant I learn whatever I know. On the other hand,
    what I do not see, that I do not know, because I am unlearned; but I
    have had some simple instruction in letters. I write whatever I see
    and hear in the vision, nor do I set down any other words, but tell my
    message in the rude Latin words which I read in the vision. For I am
    not instructed in the vision to write as the learned write; and the
    words in the vision are not as words sounding from a human mouth, but
    as flashing flame and as a cloud moving in clear air.

    “Nor have I been able to perceive the form of this brightness, just as
    I cannot perfectly see the disk of the Sun. In that brightness I
    sometimes see another light, for which the name _Lux vivens_ has been
    given me. When and how I see it I cannot tell; but sometimes when I
    see it, all sadness and pain is lifted from me, and then I have the
    ways of a simple girl and not those of an old woman.”[558]

The obscure Latin of this letter gives the impression of one trying to put
in words what was unintelligible to the writer. And the same sense of
struggle with the inadequacies of speech comes from the prologue of a work
written many years before:

    “Lo, in the forty-third year of my temporal course, while I, in fear
    and trembling, was intent upon the celestial vision, I saw a great
    splendour in which was a voice speaking to me from heaven: Frail
    creature, dust of the dust, speak and write what thou seest and
    hearest. But because that thou art timid of speech and unskilled in
    writing, speak and write these things not according to human utterance
    nor human understanding of composition; but as thou seest and hearest
    in the heavens above, in the marvels of God, so declare, as a hearer
    sets forth the words of his preceptor, preserving the fashion of his
    speech, under his will, his guidance and his command. Thus thou, O man
    (_homo_), tell those things which thou seest and hearest, and write,
    not according to thyself or other human being, but according to the
    will of Him who knows and sees and disposes all things in the secrets
    of His mysteries.

    “And again, I heard a voice saying to me from heaven: Tell these
    marvels and write them, taught in this way, and say: It happened in
    the year one thousand one hundred and forty-one of the incarnation of
    Jesus Christ the Son of God, when I was forty-two years old, that a
    flashing fire of light from the clear sky transfused my brain, my
    heart, and my whole breast as with flame; yet it did not burn but only
    warmed me, as the sun warms an object upon which it sheds its rays.
    And suddenly I had intelligence of the full meaning of the Psalter,
    the Gospels, and the other books of the Old and New Testaments,
    although I did not have the exact interpretation of the words of their
    text, nor the division of syllables nor knowledge of cases and moods.”

The writer continues with the statement:

    “The visions which I saw, I did not perceive in dreams or sleeping,
    nor in delirium, nor with the corporeal ears and eyes of the outer
    man; but watchful and intent in mind I received them according to the
    will of God.”[559]

Hildegard spoke as truthfully as she could about her visions and the
source of her knowledge, matters hard for her to put in words, and by no
means easy for others to classify in categories of seeming explanation.
Guibert may have read the work in question. At all events, his interesting
correspondence with her, and her great repute, led him to come to see for
himself and investigate her visions; for he realized that deceptions were
common, and wished to follow the advice of Scripture to prove all things.
So he made the journey to Bingen, and stayed four days with Hildegard.
This was in 1178, about a year before her death. “So far as was possible
in this short space of time, I observed her attentively; and I could not
perceive in her any invention or untruth or hypocrisy, or indeed anything
that could offend either us or other men who follow reason.”[560]

Springing from her rapt faith, the visions of this seeress and _anima
speculativa_ disclose the range of her knowledge and the power of her
mind. The visions all were allegories; but while some appear as sheer
spontaneous visions, in others the mind of Hildegard, aware of the
intended allegorical significance, constructs the vision, and fashions its
details to suit the spiritual meaning. This woman, fit sister to her
contemporaries Hugo of St. Victor and Bernard of Clairvaux, was ancestress
of him who saw his _Commedia_ both as fact and allegory, and with intended
mind laboured upon that inspiration which kept him lean for twenty years.

Let us now follow these visions for ourselves, and begin with the _Book of
the Rewards of Life_ revealed by the Living Light through a simple
person.[561]

    “When I was sixty years old, I saw the strong and wonderful vision
    wherein I toiled for five years. And I saw a Man of such size that he
    reached from the summit of the clouds of heaven even to the Abyss.
    From his shoulders upward he was above the clouds in the serenest
    ether. From his shoulders down to his hips he was in a white cloud;
    from his hips to his knees he was in the air of earth; from the knees
    to the calves he was in the earth; and from his calves to the soles of
    his feet he was in the waters of the Abyss, so that he stood upon the
    Abyss. And he turned to the East. The brightness of his countenance
    dazzled me. At his mouth was a white cloud like a trumpet, which was
    full of all sounds sounding quickly. When he blew in it, it sent forth
    three winds, of which one sustained above itself a fiery cloud, and
    one a storm-cloud, and one a cloud of light. But the wind with the
    fiery cloud above it hovered before the Man’s face, while the two
    others descended to his breast and blew there.

    “And in the fiery cloud there was a living fiery multitude all one in
    will and life. Before them was spread a tablet covered with quills
    (_pennae_) which flew in the precepts of God. And when the precepts of
    God lifted up that tablet where God’s knowledge had written certain of
    its secrets, this multitude with one impulse gazed on it. And as they
    saw the writing, God’s virtue was so bestowed upon them that as a
    mighty trumpet they gave forth in one note a music manifold.

    “The wind having the storm-cloud over it, spread, with that cloud,
    from the south to the west. In it was a multitude of the blessed, who
    possessed the spirit of life; and their voice was as the noise of many
    waters as they cried: We have our habitations from Him who made this
    wind, and when shall we receive them? But the multitude that was in
    the fiery cloud chanted responding: When God shall grasp His trumpet,
    lightning and thunder and burning fire shall He send upon the earth,
    and then in that trumpet shall ye have your habitation.

    “And the wind which had over it the cloud of light spread with that
    cloud from the east to the north. But masses of darkness and thick
    horror coming from the west, extended themselves to the light cloud,
    yet could not pass beyond it. In that darkness was a countless crowd
    of lost souls; and these swerved in their course whenever they heard
    the song of those singing in the storm-cloud, as if they shunned their
    company.

    “Then I saw coming from the north, a cloud barren of delight,
    untouched by the Sun’s rays. It reached towards the darkness
    aforesaid, and was full of malignant spirits, who go about devising
    snares for men. And I heard the old serpent saying, ‘I will prepare my
    men of might and will make war upon mine enemies.’ And he spat forth
    among men a spume of things impure, and inflated them with derision.
    Then he blew up a foul mist which filled the whole earth as with black
    smoke, out of which was heard a groaning; and in that mist I saw the
    images of every sin.”[562]

These images now speak in their own defence, and are answered by the
virtues, speaking from the storm-cloud, Heavenly Love replying to Love of
this World, Discipline answering Petulance, Shame answering Ribaldry (the
vice of the _jongleours_) after the fashion of such mediaeval allegorical
debates. The virtues are simply voices; but the monstrous or bestial image
of each sin is described:

    “Ignavia (cowardly sloth) had a human head, but its left ear was like
    the ear of a hare, and so large as to cover the head. Its body and
    limbs were worm-like, apparently without bones; and it spoke
    trembling.”[563]

Hildegard explains the general features of her vision: God with secret
inquisition, reviewing the profound disposal of His will, made three ways
of righteousness, which should advance in the three orders of the blessed.
These are the three winds with the three clouds above them. The first wind
bears over it the fiery cloud, which is the glory of angels burning with
love of God, willing only what He wills; the wind bearing over it the
storm-cloud represents the works of men, stormy and various, done in
straits and tribulations; the third way of righteousness, through the
Incarnation of our Lord, bears above it a white and untouched virginity,
as a cloud of light.[564]

Then Hildegard sees the punishments of those who die in their sins
impenitent. They were in a pit having a bottom of burning pitch, out of
which crawled fiery worms; and sharp nails were driven about in that pit
as by a wind.

    “I saw a well deep and broad, full of boiling pitch and sulphur, and
    around it were wasps and scorpions, who scared but did not injure the
    souls of those therein; which were the souls of those who had slain in
    order not to be slain.

    “Near a pond of clear water I saw a great fire. In this some souls
    were burned and others were girdled with snakes, and others drew in
    and again exhaled the fire like a breath, while malignant spirits cast
    lighted stones at them. And all of them beheld their punishments
    reflected in the water, and thereat were the more afflicted. These
    were the souls of those who had extinguished the substance of the
    human form within them, or had slain their infants.

    “And I saw a great swamp, over which hung a black cloud of smoke,
    which was issuing from it. And in the swamp there swarmed a mass of
    little worms. Here were the souls of those who in the world had
    delighted in foolish merriment (_inepta laetitia_).[565]

    “And I saw a great fire, black, red, and white, and in it horrible
    fiery vipers spitting flame; and there the vipers tortured the souls
    of those who had been slaves of the sin of uncharitableness
    (_acerbitas_).

    “And I saw a fire burning in a blackness, in which were dragons, who
    blew up the fire with their breath. And near was an icy river; and the
    dragons passed into it from time to time and disturbed it. And a fiery
    air was over both river and fire. Here were punished the souls of
    liars; and for relief from the heat, they pass into the river, and
    again, for the cold, they return to the fire, and the dragons torment
    them. But the fiery air afflicts only those who have sworn
    falsely.[566]

    “I saw a hollow mountain full of fire and vipers, with a little
    opening; and near it a horrible cold place crawling with scorpions.
    The souls of those guilty of envy and malice suffer here, passing for
    relief from one place of torment to the other.

    “And I saw a thickest darkness, in which the souls of the disobedient
    lay on a fiery pavement and were bitten by sharp-toothed worms. For
    blind were they in life, and the fiery pavement is for their wilful
    disobedience, and the worms because they disobeyed their prelates.

    “And I beheld at great height in the air a hail of ice and fire
    descending. And from that height, the souls of those who had broken
    their vows of chastity were falling, and then as by a wind were
    whirled aloft again wrapped in a ligature of darkness, so that they
    could not move; and the hail of cold and fire fell upon them.

    “And I saw demons with fiery scourges beating hither and thither,
    through fires shaped like thorns and sharpened flails, the souls of
    those who on earth had been guilty bestially.”[567]

After the vision of the punishment, Hildegard states the penance which
would have averted it, and usually follows with pious discourse and
quotations from Scripture. Apparently she would have the punishments seen
by her to be taken not as allegories, but literally as those actually in
store for the wicked.

It is different with her visions of Paradise. In Hildegard, as in Dante,
descriptions of heaven’s blessedness are pale in comparison with the
highly-coloured happenings in hell. And naturally, since Paradise is won
by those in whom spirit has triumphed over carnality. But flesh triumphed
in the wicked on earth, and hell is of the flesh, though the spirit also
be agonized. Hildegard sees many blessed folk in Paradise, but all is much
the same with them: they are clad in splendid clothes, they breathe an air
fragrant with sweetest flowers, they are adorned with jewels, and many of
them wear crowns. For example, she sees the blessed virgins standing in
purest light and limpid splendour, surpassing that of the sun. They are
clad “quasi candidissima veste velut auro intexta, et quasi pretiosissimis
lapidibus a pectore usque ad pedes, in modum dependentis zonae, ornata
induebantur, quae etiam maximum odorem velut aromatum de se emittebat. Sed
et cingulis, quasi auro et gemmis ac margaritis supra humanum intellectum
ornatis, circumcingebantur.”

This seems a description of heavenly millinery. Are these virgins rewarded
in the life to come with what they spurned in this? What would the saint
have thought of virgins had she seen them in the flesh clad in the whitest
vestment ornamented with interwoven gold and gems, falling in alluring
folds from their breasts to their feet, giving out aromatic odours, and
belted with girdles of pearls beyond human conception? Could it be
possible that the woman surviving in the nun took delight in contemplating
the blissful things forbidden here below? However this may be, the quasi-s
and velut-s suggest the symbolical character of these marvels. This
indication becomes stronger as Hildegard, in language wavering between the
literal and the symbolical, explains the appropriateness of ornaments and
perfumes as rewards for the virtues shown by saints on earth. At last all
is made clear: the _Lux vivens_ declares that these ornaments are
spiritual and eternal; gold and gems, which are of the dust, are not for
the eternal life of celestial beings; but the elect are spiritually
adorned by their righteous works as people are bodily adorned with costly
ornaments. So one gains the lesson that the bliss of heaven can only be
shown in allegories, since it surpasses the understanding of men while
held in mortal flesh.[568]

These visions from Hildegard’s _Book of the Rewards of Life_ may be
supplemented by one or two selected from the curious and lengthy work
which she named _Scivias_, signifying _Scito vias domini_ (know the ways
of the Lord). In this work, on which she laboured for nine years, the
seeress shows forth the Church, in images seen in visions, and the whole
dogmatic scheme of Christian polity. The allegories form the texts of
expository sermons. For example, the first vision in the first Book is of
an iron-coloured mountain, which is at once explained as an image of the
stability of God’s eternal kingdom. The third vision is of a fiery,
egg-shaped object, very complicated in construction, and devised to
illustrate the truth that things visible and temporal shadow forth the
invisible and eternal, in the polity of God.[569] In the fourth vision,
globes of fire are seen to enter the human form at birth, and are then
attacked by many whirlwinds rushing in upon them. This is an allegory of
human souls and their temptations, and forms the text for a long discourse
on the nature of the soul.

The fifth vision is of the Synagogue, the _Mater incarnationis Filii Dei_:

    “Then I saw as it were the image of a woman, pale from the top to the
    navel, and black from the navel to the feet, and its feet were
    blood-colour, and had about them a very white cloud. This image lacked
    eyes, and kept its hands under its arm-pits. It stood by the Altar
    that is before the eyes of God, but did not touch it.”

The pale upper part of this image represents the prescience of the
patriarchs and prophets, who had not the strong light of the Gospel; the
black lower portion represents Israel’s later backslidings; and the bloody
feet surrounded by a white cloud, the slaying of Christ, and the Church
arising from that consummation. The image is sightless--blind to
Christ--and stands before His altar, but will have none of it; and its
slothful hands keep from the work of righteousness.[570]

The sixth vision is of the orders of celestial spirits, and harks back to
the _Celestial Hierarchy_ of Dionysius the Areopagite. In the height of
the celestial secrets Hildegard sees a shining company of supernal spirits
having as it were wings (_pennas_) across their breasts, and bearing
before them a face like the human countenance, in which the look of man
was mirrored. These are angels spreading as wings the desires of their
profound intelligence; not that they have wings, like birds; but they
quickly do the will of God in their desires, as a man flees quickly in his
thoughts.[571] They manifest the beauty of rationality through their
faces, wherein God scrutinizes the works of men. For these angels see to
the accomplishment of the will of God in men; and then in themselves they
show the actions of men.

Another celestial company was seen, also having as it were wings over
their breasts, and bearing before them a face like the human countenance
in which the image of the Son of Man shone as in a mirror. These are
archangels contemplating the will of God in the desires of their own
intelligences, and displaying the grace of rationality; they glorify the
incarnate Word by figuring in their attributes the mysteries of the
Incarnation. This vision, symbolizing the angelic intelligence, is
consciously and rationally constructed.

Perhaps the same may be said of the second vision of the second Book:[572]

    “Then I saw a most glorious light and in it a human form of sapphire
    hue, all aflame with a most gentle glowing fire; and that glorious
    light was infused in the glowing fire, and the fire was infused in the
    glorious light; and both light and fire transfused that human
    form--all inter-existent as one light, one virtue, and one power.”

This vision of the Trinity, in which the glorious light is the Father, the
human form is the Son, and the fire is the Holy Spirit, may remind the
reader of the closing “vision” of the thirty-third canto of Dante’s
_Paradiso_.

The third Book contains manifold visions of a four-sided edifice set upon
a mountain, and built with a double (_biformis_) wall. Here an infinitude
of symbolic detail illustrates the entire Christian Faith. Observe a part
of the symbolism of the twofold wall: the wall is double (_in duabus
formis_). One of its formae[573] is speculative knowledge, which man
possesses through careful and penetrating investigation of the speculation
of his mind; so that he may be circumspect in all his ways. The other
forma of the wall represents the _homo operans_.

    “This speculative knowledge shines in the brightness of the light of
    day, that through it men may see and consider their acts. This
    brightness is of the human mind carefully looking about itself; and
    this glorious knowledge appears as a white mist permeating the minds
    of the peoples, as quickly as mist is scattered through the air; it is
    light as the light of day, after the brightness of that most glorious
    work which God benignly works in men, to wit, that they shun evil and
    do the good which shines in them as the light of day.... This
    knowledge is speculative, for it is like a mirror (_speculum_) in
    which a man sees whether his face be fair or blotched; thus this
    knowledge views the good and evil in the deed done.”[574]

The _Scivias_ closes with visions of the Last Judgment, splendid, ordered,
tremendous, and rendered audible in hymns rising to the Virgin and to
Christ. Apostles, martyrs, saints chant the refrains of victory which echo
the past militancy of this faithful choir.

       *       *       *       *       *

The visions of Elizabeth of Schönau and Hildegard of Bingen set forth
universal dogmas and convictions. They show the action of the imaginative
and rational faculties and the full use of the acquired knowledge
possessed by the women to whom they came. Such visions spring from the
mind--quite different are those born of love. Emotion dominates the
latter; their motives are subjective; they are personal experiences having
no clear pertinency to the lives of others. If the visions of Hildegard
were object lessons, the blissful ecstasies of Mary of Ognies and Liutgard
of Tongern were specifically their own, very nearly as the intimate
consolation of a wife from a husband, or a lady from her faithful knight,
would be that woman’s and none other’s.

One cannot say that there was no love of God before Jesus was born; still
less that men had not conceived of God as loving them. Nevertheless in
Jesus’ words God became lovable as never before, and God’s love of man was
shown anew, and was anew set forth as the perfect pattern of human love.
In Christ, God offered the sacrifice which afore He had demanded of
Abraham: for “God so loved the world that He gave His only-begotten Son.”
That Son carried out the Father’s act: “Greater love hath no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for his friend.” So men learned the
final teaching: “God is love.”

A new love also was aroused by the personality of Jesus. Was this the love
of God or love of man? Rather, it was such as to reveal the two as one. In
Jesus’ teachings, love of God and love of man might not be severed: “As ye
have done it unto one of the least of these, my brethren, ye have done it
unto me.” And the love which He inspired for himself was at once a love of
man and love of God.[575] Think of that love, new in the world, with
which, more than with her ointment or her tears, the woman who had been a
sinner bathed the Master’s feet.

This woman saw the Master in the flesh; but the love which was hers was
born again in those who never looked upon His face. Through the Middle
Ages the love of Christ with which saintly women were possessed was as
impulsive as this sinner’s, and also held much resembling human passion.
Their burning faith tended to liquefy to ecstatic experiences. They had
renounced the passionate love of man in order to devote themselves to the
love of Christ; and as their thoughts leapt toward the Bridegroom, the
Church’s Spouse and Lord, their visions sometimes kept at least the colour
of the love for knight or husband which they had abjured.[576]

At the height of the horrors of the Albigensian Crusade, in the year 1212,
Fulco, Bishop of Toulouse, was driven from his diocese by the incensed but
heretical populace. He travelled northward through France, seeking aid
against these foes of Christ, and came to the diocese of Liége. There he
observed with joy the faith and humility of those who were leading a
religious life, and was struck by the devotion of certain saintly women
whose ardour knew no bounds. It was all very different from Toulouse.
“Indeed I have heard you declare that you had gone out of Egypt--your own
diocese--and having passed through the desert, had reached the promised
land--in Liége.”

Jacques de Vitry is speaking. His friend the bishop had asked him to write
of these holy women, who brought such glory to the Church in troubled
times. Jacques was himself a clever Churchman, zealous for the Church’s
interests and his own. He afterwards became Bishop and Cardinal of
Tusculum; and as papal legate consecrated the holy bones of her whom the
Church had decided to canonize, the blessed Mary of Ognies, the paragon of
all these other women who rejoiced the ecclesiastical hearts of himself
and Fulco. Jacques had known her and had been present at her pious death;
and also had witnessed many of the matters of which he is speaking at the
commencement of his _Vita_ of this saint.[577]

Many of these women, continues Jacques, had for Christ spurned carnal
joys, and for Him had despised the riches of this world, in poverty and
humility clinging to their heavenly Spouse.

    “You saw,” says Jacques, again addressing Fulco, “some of these women
    dissolved with such a particular and marvellous love toward God (_tam
    speciali et mirabili in Deum amoris affectione resolutas_) that they
    languished with desire, and for years had rarely been able to rise
    from their cots. They had no other infirmity, save that their souls
    were melted with desire of Him, and, sweetly resting with the Lord, as
    they were comforted in spirit they were weakened in body. They cried
    in their hearts, though from modesty their lips dissimulated:
    “Fulcite me floribus, stipate me malis, quia amore langueo.”[578] The
    cheeks of one were seen to waste away, while her soul was melted with
    the greatness of her love. Another’s flow of tears had made visible
    furrows down her face. Others were drawn with such intoxication of
    spirit that in sacred silence they would remain quiet a whole day,
    ‘while the King was on His couch’ (_i.e._ at meat),[579] with no sense
    or feeling for things without them, so that they could not be roused
    by clamour or feel a blow. I saw another whom for thirty years her
    Spouse had so zealously guarded in her cell, that she could not leave
    it herself, nor could the hands of others drag her out. I saw another
    who sometimes was seized with ecstasy five-and-twenty times a day, in
    which state she was motionless, and on returning to herself was so
    enraptured that she could not keep from displaying her inner joy with
    movements of the body, like David leaping before the Ark. And I saw
    still another who after she had lain for some time dead, before burial
    was permitted by the Lord to return to the flesh, that she might on
    earth do purgatorial penance; and long was she thus afflicted of the
    Lord, sometimes rolling herself in the fire, and in the winter
    standing in frozen water.”[580]

But what need to say more of these, as all their graces are found in one
precious and pre-excellent pearl--and Jacques proceeds to tell the life of
Mary of Ognies. She was born in a village near Namur in Belgium, about the
year 1177. She never took part in games or foolishness with other girls;
but kept her soul free from vanity. Married at fourteen to a young man,
she burned the more to afflict her body, passing the nights in austerities
and prayer. Her husband soon was willing to dwell with her in continence,
himself sustaining her in her holy life, and giving his goods to the poor
for Christ’s sake.

There was nothing more marvellous with Mary than her gift of tears, as
her soul dwelt in the passion of her Lord. Her tears--so says her
biographer--wetted the pavement of the Church or the cloth of the altar.
Her life was one of body-destroying austerities: she went barefoot in the
ice of the winter; often she took no food through the day, and then
watched out the night in prayer. Her body was afflicted and wasted; her
soul was comforted. She had frequent visions, the gift of second sight,
and great power over devils. Once for thirty-five days in silent trance
she rested sweetly with the Lord, only occasionally uttering these words:
“I desire the body of our Lord Jesus Christ” (_i.e._ the Eucharist); and
when she had received it, she turned again to silence.[581] Always she
sought after her Lord: He was her meditation, and example in speech and
deed. She died in the year 1213, at the age of thirty-six. She was called
Mary of Ognies, from the name of the town where a church was dedicated to
her, and where her relics were laid to rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

Emotionally, another very interesting personality was the blessed virgin,
Liutgard of Tongern, a younger contemporary of Mary of Ognies. In
accordance with her heart’s desire, she was providentially protected from
the forceful importunities of her wooers, and became a Benedictine nun.
After some years, however, seeking a more strenuous rule of life, she
entered the Cistercian convent at Aquiria, near Cambray.[582]

Liutgard’s experiences were sense-realizations of her faith, but chiefly
of her love of Christ. Sometimes her senses realized the imagery of the
Apocalypse; as when singing in Church she had a vision of Christ as a
white lamb. The lamb rests a foot on each of her shoulders, sets his mouth
to hers, and draws out sweetest song. Far more frequently she realized
within her heart the burning words of Canticles. Her whole being yearned
continually for the Lord, and sought no other comfort. For five years she
received almost daily visits from the Mother of Christ, as well as from
the Apostles and other saints; the angels were continually with her. Yet
in all these she did not find perfect rest for her spirit, till she found
the Saint of saints, who is ineffably sweeter than them all, even as He is
their sanctifier. Smitten as the bride in Canticles, she is wounded, she
languishes, she pants, she arises; “in the streets” she seeks the Saints
of the New Dispensation, and through “the broad places” the Patriarchs of
the Old Testament. Little by little she passes by them “because He is not
far from every one of us”; she finds Him whom her soul cherishes. She
finds, she holds Him, because He does not send her away; she holds Him by
faith, happy in the seeking, more happy in the holding fast.[583]

There are three couches in Canticles:[584] the first signifies the soul’s
state of penitence; the second its state of warfare; the third the state
of those made perfect in the _vita contemplativa_. On the first couch the
soul is wounded, on the second it is wearied, on the third it is made
glad. The saintly Liutgard sought her Beloved perfectly on the couch of
penitence, and watered it with her tears, although she never had been
stung by mortal sin. On the second couch she sought her Beloved, battling
against the flesh with fasting and endeavour; with poverty and humility
she overcame the world, and cast down the devil with prayer and remedial
tears. On the third couch, which is the couch of quiet, she perfectly
sought her Beloved, since she did not lean upon the angels or saints, but
through contemplation rested sweetly only upon the couch of the Spouse.
This couch is called flowery (_floridus_) from the vernal quality of its
virtues; and it is called “ours” because common to husband and wife: in it
she may say, “My Beloved is mine and I am His,” and, “I am my Beloved’s,
and His desire is towards me.” Why not say that? exclaims the biographer,
quoting the lines:

  “Nescit amor Dominum; non novit amor dominari,
   Quamlibet altus amet, non amat absque pari.”

Thenceforth her spirit was absorbed in God, as drops of water in a jar of
wine. When asked how she was wont to see the visage of Christ in
contemplation, she answered: “In a moment there appears to me a splendour
inconceivable, and as lightning I see the ineffable beauty of His
glorification; the sight of which I could not endure in this present life,
did it not instantly pass from my view. A mental splendour remains, and
when I seek in that what I saw for an instant, I do not find it.”

A little more than a year before her death the Lord Jesus Christ appeared
to her, with the look as of one who applauds, and said: “The end of thy
labour is at hand: I do not wish thee longer to be separated from me. This
year I require three things of thee: first, that thou shouldst render
thanks for all thy benefits received; secondly, that thou pour thyself out
in prayer to the Father for my sinners; and thirdly, that, without any
other solicitude, thou burn to come to me, panting with desire.”[585]

The religious yearning which with Liutgard touches sense-realization,
seems transformed completely into the latter in the extraordinary German
book of one Sister Mechthild, called of Magdeburg.[586] The authoress
probably was born not far from that town about the year 1212. To judge
from her work, she belonged to a good family and was acquainted with the
courtly literature of the time. She speaks of her loving parents, from
whom she tore herself away at the age of twenty-three, and entered the
town of Magdeburg, there to begin a life of rapt religious mendicancy, for
which Francis had set the resistless example. Sustained by love for her
Lord, she led a despised and homeless life of hardship and austerity for
thirty years. At length bodily infirmities brought her to rest in a
Cistercian cloister for nuns at Helfta, near Eisleben, where ruled a wise
and holy abbess, the noble Gertrude of Hackeborn. Here Mechthild remained
until her death in 1277. For many years it had been her custom to write
down her experiences of the divine love in a book which she called _The
Flowing Light of God_, in which she also wrote the prophetic
denunciations, revealed to her to be pronounced before men, especially in
the presence of those who were great in what should be God’s holy
Church.[587]

“Frau Minne (Lady Love) you have taken from me the world’s riches and
honour,” cries Mechthild.[588] Love’s ecstasy came upon her when she
abandoned the world and cast herself upon God alone. Then first her soul’s
eyes beheld the beautiful manhood of her Lord Jesus Christ, also the Holy
Trinity, her own guardian angel, and the devil who tempted her through the
vainglory of her visions and through unchaste desire. She defended herself
with the agony of our Lord. For Mechthild, hell is the “city whose name is
eternal hate.” With her all blessedness is love, as her book will now
disclose.

Cries the Soul to Love (_Minne_) her guardian: “Thou hast hunted and
taken, bound and wounded me; never shall I be healed.”

Love answers: “It was my pleasure to hunt thee; to take thee captive was
my desire; to bind thee was my joy. I drove Almighty God from His throne
in heaven, and took His human life from Him, and then with honour gave
Him back to His Father; how couldst thou, poor worm, save thyself from
me!”[589]

What then will love’s omnipotence exact from this poor Soul? Merely all.
Drawn by yearning, the Soul comes flying, like an eagle toward the sun.
“See, how she mounts to us, she who wounded me”--it is the Lord that is
speaking. “She has thrown away the ashes of the world, overcome lust, and
trodden the lion of pride beneath her feet--thou eager huntress of love,
what bringest thou to me?”

“Lord, I bring thee my treasure, which is greater than mountains, wider
than the world, deeper than the sea, higher than the clouds, more
beautiful than the sun, more manifold than the stars, and outweighs the
riches of the earth.”

“Image of my Divinity, ennobled by my manhood, adorned by my Holy Spirit,
how is thy treasure called?”

“Lord, it is called my heart’s desire: I have withdrawn it from the world,
withheld it from myself, forbidden it all creatures. I can carry it no
farther; Lord, where shall I lay it?”

“Thou shalt lay thy heart’s desire nowhere else than in my divine heart
and on my human breast. There only wilt thou be comforted and kissed with
my spirit.”

Love casts out fear and difference, and lifts the Soul to equality with
the divine Lover. Through the passion of love the Soul may pass into the
Beloved’s being, and become one with Him: “He, thy life, died from love
for thy sake; now love Him so that thou mayest long to die for His sake.
Then shalt thou burn for evermore unquenched, like a shining spark in the
great fire of the Living Majesty.”

These are passion’s vision-flights. But God himself points out the way by
which the Soul that loves shall come to Him: she--the Soul--shall come,
surmounting the need of penitence and penance, surmounting love of the
world, conflicts with the devil, carnal appetite, and the promptings of
her own will. Thereupon, exhausted, she shall yearn resistlessly for that
beautiful Youth (Christ). He will be moved to come to meet her. Now her
guardians (the Senses) bid her attire herself. “Love, whither shall I
hence?” she cries. The Senses make answer: “We hear the murmur; the Prince
will come to meet you in the dew and the sweet-bird song. Courage, Lady,
He will not tarry.”

The Soul clothes herself in a garment of humility, and over it draws the
white robe of chastity, and goes into the wood. There nightingales sing of
union with God, and strains of divine knowledge meet her ears. She then
strives to follow in festal dance (_i.e._ to imitate) the example of the
prophets, the chaste humility of the Virgin, the virtues of Jesus, and the
piety of His saints. Then comes the Youth and says: “Maiden, thou hast
danced holily, even as my saints.”

The Soul answers: “I cannot dance unless thou leadest. If thou wouldst
have me spring aloft, sing thou: and I will spring--into love, and from
love to knowledge, and from knowledge to ecstasy, above all human sense.”

The Youth speaks: “Maiden, thy dance of praise is well performed. Since
now thou art tired, thou shalt have thy will with the Virgin’s Son. Come
to the brown shades at midday, to the couch of love, and there shalt thou
cool thyself with Him.”

Then the Soul speaks to her guardians, the Senses: “I am tired with the
dance; leave me, for I must go where I may cool myself.” The Senses bid
her cool herself in the tears of love shed by St. Mary Magdalen.

“Hush, good sirs: ye know not what I mean. Unhindered, for a little I
would drink the unmixed wine.”

“Lady, in the Virgin’s chastity the great love is reached.”

“That may be--with me it is not the highest.”

“You, Lady, might cool yourself in martyr-blood.”

“I have been martyred many a day.”

“In the counsel of Father Confessors, the pure live gladly.”

“Good is their counsel, but it helps not here.”

“Great safety would you find in the Apostles’ wisdom.”

“Wisdom I have myself--to choose the best.”

“Lady, bright are the angels, and lovely in love’s hue; to cool yourself,
be lifted up with them.”

“The bliss of angels brings me love’s woe, unless I see their lord, my
Bridegroom.”

“Then cool you in the hard, holy life that John the Baptist showed.”

“I have tried that painful toil; my love passes beyond that.”

“Lady, would you with love cool yourself, approach the Child in the
Virgin’s lap.”

“That is a childish love, to quiet children with. I am a full-grown bride
and will have my Bridegroom.”

“Lady, there we should be smitten blind. The Godhead is so fiery hot.
Heaven’s glow and all the holy lights flow from His divine breath and
human mouth by the counsel of the Holy Spirit.”

But the Soul feeling its nature and its affinity with God, through love,
makes answer boldly: “The fish cannot drown in the water, nor the bird
sink in the air, nor gold perish in the flame, where it gains its bright
clarity and colour. God has granted to all creatures to follow their
natures; how can I withstand mine? To God will I go, who is my Father by
nature, my Brother through His humility, my Bridegroom through love, and I
am His forever.”[590] Not long after this the Soul’s rapture bursts forth
in song:

  “Ich sturbe gern von minnen, moehte es mir geschehen,
   Denn jenen den ich minnen, den han ich gesehen
   Mit minen liehten ougen in miner sele stehen.”[591]

Mechthild’s book is heavy with passion--with God’s passionate love for the
Soul, and the Soul’s passionate response. No speech between lovers could
outdo the converse between them. God calls the Soul, sweet dove, dear
heart, my queen; and with like phrase the quivering Soul responds upward,
as it were, to the great countenance glowing above it. Throughout, there
is passion and impatient yearning--or satisfaction. The pain of the Soul
severed, not yet a bride, is deeper than the abyss, bitterer than the
world; but her joy shall exceed that of seraphs, she, Bride of the
Trinity.[592]

The Soul must surrender herself, and become sheer desire for God.[593]
God’s own yearning has begotten this desire. As glorious prince, as
knight, as emperor, God comes; also in other forms:

  “I come to my Beloved
   As dew upon the flowers.”[594]

For each other are these lovers wounded, for each other these lovers
bleed, and each to the other is joy unspeakable and unforgettable. From
the wafer of the holy Eucharist, the Lamb looks out upon me “with such
sweet eyes that I never can forget.”

  “His eyes in my eyes; His heart in my heart,
   His soul in my soul,
   Embraced and untroubled.”[595]

No need to say that in the end love draws the Soul to heaven’s gate, which
the Lord opens to her. All is marvellous; but, far more, all is love: the
Lord kisses her--what else than love can the soul thereafter know or
feel.[596]

Mechthild, of course, is what is called a “mystic,” and a forerunner
indeed of many another--Eckhart, Suso, Tauler--of German blood. With
direct and utter passion she realizes God’s love; also she feels and
thinks in symbols, which, with her, never cease to be the things they
literally are. They remain flesh and blood, while also signifying the
mysteries of God. Jesus was a man, Mechthild a woman. Her love not only
uses lovers’ speech, but actually holds affinity with a maid’s love for
her betrothed. If it is the Soul’s love of God, it is also the woman’s
love of Him who overhung her from the Cross.




