CHAPTER XII

MENTAL ASPECTS OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY: FRANCE

      I. GERBERT.

     II. ODILO OF CLUNY.

    III. FULBERT AND THE SCHOOL OF CHARTRES; TRIVIUM AND QUADRIVIUM.

     IV. BERENGAR OF TOURS, ROSCELLIN, AND THE COMING TIME.


I

It appeared in the last chapter that Anselm’s choice of topic was not
uninfluenced by his northern domicile at Bec in Normandy, from which, one
may add, it was no far cry to the monastery (Marmoutier) of Anselm’s sharp
critic Gaunilo. These places lay within the confines of central and
northern France, the home of the most originative mediaeval development.
For this region, the renewed studies of the Carolingian period were the
proper antecedents of the efforts of the eleventh century. The topics of
study still remained substantially the same; yet the later time represents
a further stage in the appropriation of the antique and patristic
material, and its productions show the genius of the authors more clearly
than Carolingian writings, which were taken piecemeal from patristic
sources or made of borrowed antique phrase.

The difference is seen in the personality and writings of Gerbert of
Aurillac,[355] the man who with such intellectual catholicity opens the
story of this period. One will be struck with the apparently arid crudity
of his intellectual processes. Crude they were, and of necessity; arid
they were not, being an unavoidable stage in the progress of mediaeval
thinking. Yet it is a touch of fate’s irony that such an interesting
personality should have been afflicted with them. For Gerbert was the
redeeming intellect of the last part of the tenth century. The cravings of
his mind compassed the intellectual predilections of his contemporaries in
their entirety. Secular and by no means priestly they appear in him; and
it is clear that religious motives did not dominate this extraordinary
individual who was reared among monks, became Abbot of Bobbio, Archbishop
of Rheims, Archbishop of Ravenna, and pope at last.

He appears to have been born shortly before the year 950. From the
ignorance in which we are left as to his parents and the exact place of
his birth in Aquitaine, it may be inferred that his origin was humble.
While still a boy he was received into the Benedictine monastery of St.
Geraldus at Aurillac in Auvergne. There he studied grammar (in the
extended mediaeval sense), under a monk named Raymund, and grew to love
the classics. A loyal affectionateness was a life-long trait of Gerbert,
and more than one letter in after life bears witness to the love which he
never ceased to feel for the monks of Aurillac among whom his youthful
years were passed, and especially for this brother Raymund from whom he
received his first instruction.

Raymund afterwards became abbot of the convent. But it was his
predecessor, Gerald, who had received the boy Gerbert, and was still to do
something of moment in directing his career. A certain duke of the Spanish
March came on a pilgrimage to Aurillac; and Gerald besought him to take
Gerbert back with him to Spain for such further instruction as the convent
did not afford. The duke departed, taking Gerbert, and placed him under
the tuition of the Bishop of Vich, a town near Barcelona. Here he studied
mathematics. The tradition that he travelled through Spain and learned
from the Arabs lacks probability. But in the course of time the duke and
bishop set forth to pray for sundry material objects at the fountainhead
of Catholicism, and took their _protégé_ with them to Rome.

In Rome, Gerbert’s destiny advanced apace. His patrons, doubtless proud of
their young scholar, introduced him to the Pope, John XIII., who also was
impressed by Gerbert’s personality and learning. John told his own
protector, the great Otto, and informed him of Gerbert’s ability to teach
mathematics; and the two kept Gerbert in Rome, when the Spanish duke and
bishop returned to their country. Gerbert began to teach, and either at
this time or later had among his pupils the young Augustus, Otto II. But
he was more anxious to study logic than to teach mathematics, even under
imperial favour. He persuaded the old emperor to let him go to Rheims with
a certain archdeacon from that place, who was skilled in the science which
he lacked. The emperor dismissed him, with a liberal hand. In his new home
Gerbert rapidly mastered logic, and impressed all with his genius. He won
the love of the archbishop, Adalberon, who shortly set the now triply
accomplished scholar at the head of the episcopal school. Gerbert’s
education was complete, in letters, in mathematics including music, and in
logic. Thenceforth for ten years (972-982), the happiest of his life, he
studied and also taught the whole range of academic knowledge.

Fortune, not altogether kind, bestowed on Gerbert the favour of three
emperors. The graciousness of the first Otto had enabled him to proceed to
Rheims. The second Otto listened to his teaching, admired the teacher, and
early in the year 983 made him Abbot and Count of Bobbio. Long afterwards
the third Otto made him Archbishop of Ravenna, and then pope.

Bobbio, the chief foundation of Columbanus, situated not far from Genoa,
was powerful and rich; but its vast possessions, scattered throughout
Italy, had been squandered by worthless abbots or seized by lawless
nobles. The new count-abbot, eager to fulfil the ecclesiastical and feudal
functions of his position, strove to reclaim the monastery’s property and
bring back its monks to decency and learning. In vain. Now, as more than
once in Gerbert’s later life, brute circumstances proved too strong. Otto
died. Gerbert was unsupported. He struggled and wrote many letters which
serve to set forth the situation for us, though they did not win the
battle for their writer:

    “According to the largeness of my mind, my lord (Otto II.) has
    enriched me with most ample honours. For what part of Italy does not
    hold the possessions of the blessed Columbanus? So should this be,
    from the generosity and benevolence of our Caesar. Fortune, indeed,
    ordains it otherwise. Forsooth according to the largeness of my mind
    she has loaded me with most ample stores of enemies. For what part of
    Italy has not my enemies? My strength is unequal to the strength of
    Italy! There is peace on this condition: if I, despoiled, submit, they
    cease to strike; intractable in my vested rights, they attack with the
    sword. When they do not strike with the sword, they thrust with
    javelins of words.”[356]

Within a year Gerbert gave up the struggle at Bobbio, and returned to
Rheims to resume his duties as head of the school, and secretary and
intimate adviser of Adalberon. Politically the time was one of uncertainty
and turmoil. The Carolingian house was crumbling, and the house of Capet
was scheming and struggling on to a royalty scarcely more considerable. In
Germany intrigue and revolt threatened the rights of the child Otto III.
Archbishop Adalberon, guided by Gerbert, was a powerful factor in the
dynastic change in France; and the two were zealous for Otto. Throughout
these troubles Gerbert constantly appears, directing projected measures
and divining courses of events, yet somehow, in spite of his unmatched
intelligence, failing to control them.

Time passed, and Adalberon died at the beginning of the year 989. His
successor, Arnulf, a scion of the falling Carolingian house, was
subsequently unseated for treason to the new-sprung house of Capet. In 991
Gerbert himself was made archbishop. But although seeming to reach his
longed-for goal, troubles redoubled on his head. There was rage at the
choice of one so lowly born for the princely dignity. The storm gathered
around the new archbishop, and the See of Rome was moved to interfere,
which it did gladly, since at Rome Gerbert was hated for the reproaches
cast upon its ignorance and corruption by bishops at the council which
elected him and deposed his predecessor. In that deposition and election
Rome had not acquiesced; and we read the words of the papal legate:

    “The acts of your synod against Arnulf, or rather against the Roman
    Church, astound me with their insults and blasphemies. Truly is the
    word of the Gospel fulfilled in you, ‘There shall be many
    anti-Christs.’... Your anti-Christs say that Rome is as a temple of
    idols, an image of stone. Because the vicars of Peter and their
    disciples will not have as master Plato, Virgil, Terence or the rest
    of the herd of Philosophers, ye say they are not worthy to be
    door-keepers--because they have no part in such song.”[357]

The battle went against Gerbert. Interdicted from his archiepiscopal
functions, he left France for the Court of Otto III., where his intellect
at once dominated the aspirations of the young monarch. Otto and Gerbert
went together to Italy, and the emperor made his friend Archbishop of
Ravenna. The next year, 999, Gregory V. died, and the archbishop became
Pope Sylvester II. For three short years the glorious young imperial
dreamer and his peerless counsellor planned and wrought for a great united
Empire and Papacy on earth. Then death took first the emperor and soon
afterwards the pope-philosopher.

Gerbert was the first mind of his time, its greatest teacher, its most
eager learner, and most universal scholar. His pregnant letters reflect a
finished man who has mastered his acquired knowledge and transformed it
into power. They also evince the authorship of one who had uniquely
profited from the power and spirit of the great minds of the pagan past,
had imbibed their sense of form and pertinency, and with them had become
self-contained and self-controlled, master of himself and of all that had
entered in and made him what he was. Notice how the personality of the
writer, with his capacities, tastes, and temperament, is unfolded before
us in a letter to a close friend, abbot of a monastery at Tours:

    “Since you hold my memory in honour, and in virtue of relationship
    declare great friendship, I deem that I shall be happy for your
    opinion, if only I am one who in the judgment of so great a man is
    found worthy to be loved. But since I am not one who, with Panetius,
    would sometimes separate the good from the useful, but rather with
    Tully would mingle it with everything useful, I wish these best and
    holiest friendships never to be void of reciprocal utility. And as
    morality and the art of speech are not to be severed from philosophy,
    I have always joined the study of speaking well with the study of
    living well. For although by itself living well may be nobler than
    speaking well, and may suffice without its fellow for one absolved
    from the direction of affairs; yet for us, busied with the State, both
    are needed. For it is of the greatest utility to speak appositely when
    persuading, and with mild discourse check the fury of angry men. In
    preparing for such business, I am eagerly collecting a library; and as
    formerly at Rome and elsewhere in Italy, so likewise in Germany and
    Belgium, I have obtained copyists and manuscripts with a mass of
    money, and the help of friends in those parts. Permit me likewise to
    beg of you also to promote this end. We will append at the end of this
    letter a list of those writers we wish copied. We have sent for your
    disposal parchment for the scribes and money to defray the cost, not
    unmindful of your goodness. Finally, lest by saying more we should
    abuse epistolary _convenances_, the cause of so much trouble is
    contempt of faithless fortune; a contempt which not nature alone has
    given to us--as to many men--but careful study. Consequently when at
    leisure and when busied in affairs, we teach what we know, and learn
    where we are ignorant.”[358]

Gerbert’s letters are concise, even elliptical to the verge of obscurity.
He discloses himself in a few words to his old friend Raymund at the
monastery of Aurillac: “With what love we are bound to you, the Latins
know and also the barbarians,[359] who share the fruit of our studies.
Their vows demand your presence. Amid public cares philosophy is the sole
solace; and from her study we have often been the gainer, when in this
stormy time we have thus broken the attack of fortune raging grievously
against others or ourselves....”[360]

Save for the language, one might fancy Cicero speaking to some friend, and
not the future pope of the year 1000 to a monk. The sentiment is quite
antique. And Gerbert not only uses antique phrase but is touched, like
many a mediaeval man, with the antique spirit. In another letter he
writes of friendship, and queries whether the divinity has given anything
better to mortals. He refers to his prospects, and remarks: “sed involvit
mundum caeca fortuna,” and he is not certain whither it will cast
him.[361]

Doubtless such antique sentiments were a matter of mood with Gerbert; he
can readily express others of a Christian colour, and turn again to still
other topics very readily, as in the following letter--a curious one. It
is to a monk:

    “Think not, sweetest brother, that it is through my fault I lack my
    brethren’s society. After leaving thee, I had to undertake many
    journeys in the business of my father Columbanus.[362] The ambitions
    of the powers, the hard and wretched times, turn right to wrong. No
    one keeps faith. Yet since I know that all things hang on the decree
    of God, who changes both hearts and the kingdoms of the sons of men, I
    patiently await the end of things. I admonish and exhort thee,
    brother, to do the same. In the meanwhile one thing I beg, which may
    be accomplished without danger or loss to thee, and will make me thy
    friend forever. Thou knowest with what zeal I gather books everywhere,
    and thou knowest how many scribes there are in Italy, in town and
    country. Come then, quietly procure me copies of Manlius’s (Boëthius)
    _De astrologia_, Victorinus’s _Rhetoric_, Demosthenes’s
    _Optalmicus_.[363] I promise thee, brother, and will keep my word, to
    preserve a sacred silence as to thy praiseworthy compliance, and will
    remit twofold whatever thou dost demand. Let this much be known to the
    man, and the pay too, and cheer us more frequently with a letter; and
    have no fear that knowledge will come to any one of any matter thou
    mayest confide to our good faith.”[364]

When he wrote this letter, about the year 988, Gerbert was dangerously
deep in politics, and great was the power of this low-born titular Abbot
of Bobbio, head of the school at Rheims and secretary to the archbishop.
The tortuous statecraft and startling many-sidedness of this “scholar in
politics” must have disturbed his contemporaries, and may have roused the
suspicions from which grew the stories, told by future men, that this
scholar, statesman, and philosopher-pope was a magician who had learned
from forbidden sources much that should be veiled. Withal, however, one
may deem that the most veritable inner bit of Gerbert was his love of
knowledge and of antique literature, and that the letters disclosing this
are the subtlest revelation of the man who was ever transmuting his
well-guarded knowledge into himself and his most personal moods.

    “For there is nothing more noble for us in human affairs than a
    knowledge of the most distinguished men; and may it be displayed in
    volumes upon volumes multiplied. Go on then, as you have begun, and
    bring the streams of Cicero to one who thirsts. Let M. Tullius thrust
    himself into the midst of the anxieties which have enveloped us since
    the betrayal of our city, so that in the happy eyes of men we are held
    unhappy through our sentence. What things are of the world we have
    sought, we have found, we have accomplished, and, as I will say, we
    have become chief among the wicked. Lend aid, father, in order that
    divinity, expelled by the multitude of sinners, bent by thy prayers,
    may return, may visit us, may dwell with us--and if possible, may we
    who mourn the absence of the blessed father Adalberon, be rejoiced by
    thy presence.”[365]

So Gerbert wrote from Rheims, himself a chief intriguer in a city full of
treason.

Gerbert was a power making for letters. The best scholars sat at his feet;
he was an inspiration at the Courts of the second and third Ottos, who
loved learning and died so young; and the great school of Chartres, under
the headship of his pupil Fulbert, was the direct heir to his instruction.
At Rheims, where he taught so many years, he left to others the elementary
instruction in Latin. A pupil, Richer, who wrote his history, speaks of
courses in rhetoric and literature, to which he introduced his pupils
after instructing them in logic:

    “When he wished to lead them on from such studies to rhetoric, he put
    in practice his opinion that one cannot attain the art of oratory
    without a previous knowledge of the modes of diction which are to be
    learned from the poets. So he brought forward those with whom he
    thought his pupils should be conversant. He read and explained the
    poets Virgil, Statius, and Terence, the satirists Juvenal and Persius
    and Horace, also Lucan the historiographer. Familiarized with these,
    and practised in their locutions, he taught his pupils rhetoric.
    After they were instructed in this art, he brought up a sophist, to
    practise them in disputation, so that practised in this art as well,
    they might seem to argue artlessly, which he deemed the height of
    oratory.”[366]

So Gerbert used the classic poets in teaching rhetoric, and doubtless the
great prose writers too, with whom he was familiar. Following Cicero’s
precept that the orator should be a proficient reasoner, he prepared his
young rhetoricians by a course in logic, and completed their discipline
with exercises in disputation.

Richer also speaks of Gerbert’s epoch-making mathematical knowledge.[367]
In arithmetic he improved the current methods of computation; in geometry
he taught the traditional methods of measurement descended from the Roman
surveyors, and compiled a work from Boëthius and other sources. For
astronomy he made spheres and other instruments, and in music his teaching
was the best obtainable. In none of these provinces was he an original
inventor; nor did he exhaust the knowledge had by men before him. He was,
however, the embodiment of mediaeval progress, in that he drew
intelligently upon the sources within his reach, and then taught with
understanding and enthusiasm. Richer’s praise is unstinted:

    “He began with arithmetic; then taught music, of which there had long
    been ignorance in Gaul.... With what pains he set forth the method of
    astronomy, it may be well to state, so that the reader may perceive
    the sagacity and skill of this great man. This difficult subject he
    explained by means of admirable instruments. First he illustrated the
    world’s sphere by one of solid wood, the greater by the less. He fixed
    it obliquely as to the horizon with two poles, and near the upper pole
    set the northern constellations, and by the lower one those of the
    south. He determined its position by means of the circle called by the
    Greeks _orizon_ and by the Latins _limitans_, because it divides the
    constellations which are seen from those which are not. By his sphere
    thus fixed, he demonstrated the rising and setting of the stars, and
    taught his disciples to recognize them. And at night he followed their
    courses and marked the place of their rising and setting upon the
    different regions of his model.”

The historian passes on to tell how Gerbert with ingenious devices showed
on his sphere the imaginary circles called parallels, and on another the
movements of the planets, and on still another marked the constellations
of the heavens, so that even a beginner, upon having one constellation
pointed out, could find the others.[368]

In the province of philosophy, Gerbert’s labours extended little beyond
formal logic, philosophy’s instrument. He could do no more than understand
and apply as much of Boëthius’s rendering of the Aristotelian _Organon_ as
he was acquainted with. Yet he appears to have used more of the Boëthian
writings than any man before him, or for a hundred and fifty years after
his death. Richer gives the list. Beyond this evidence, curious testimony
is borne to the nature of Gerbert’s dialectic by Richer’s account of a
notable debate. The year was 980, when the fame of the brilliant young
_scholasticus_ of Rheims had spread through Gaul and penetrated Germany. A
certain master of repute at Magdeburg, named Otric, sent one of his pupils
to report on Gerbert’s teaching, and especially as to his method of laying
out the divisions of philosophy as “the science of things divine and
human.” The pupil returned with notes of Gerbert’s classification, in
which, by error or intention, it was made to appear that he subordinated
physics to mathematics, as species to genus, whereas, in truth, he made
them of equal rank. Otric thought to catch him tripping, and so managed
that a disputation was held between them at a time when Adalberon and
Gerbert were in Italy with the Emperor Otto II. It took place in Ravenna.
The emperor, then nineteen years of age, presided, there being present
many masters and dignitaries of the Church. Holding in his hand a tablet
of Gerbert’s alleged division of the sciences, His Majesty opened the
debate:

    “Meditation and discussion, as I think, make for the betterment of
    human knowledge, and questions from the wise rouse our thoughtfulness.
    Thus knowledge of things is drawn forth by the learned, or discovered
    by them and committed to books, which remain to our great good. We
    also may be incited by certain objects which draw the mind to a surer
    understanding. Observe now, that I am turning over this tablet
    inscribed with the divisions of philosophy. Let all consider it
    carefully, and each say what he thinks. If it be complete, let it be
    confirmed by your approbation. If imperfect, let it be rejected or
    corrected.

    “Then Otric, taking it before them all, said that it was arranged by
    Gerbert, and had been taken down from his lectures. He handed it to
    the Lord Augustus, who read it through, and presented it to Gerbert.
    The latter, carefully examining it, approved in part, and in part
    condemned, asserting that the scheme had not been arranged thus by
    him. Asked by Augustus to correct it, he said: ‘Since, O great Caesar
    Augustus, I see thee more potent than all these, I will, as is
    fitting, obey thy behest. Nor shall I be concerned at the spite of the
    malevolent, by whose instigation the very correct division of
    philosophy recently set forth so lucidly by me, has been vitiated by
    the substitution of a species. I say then, that mathematics, physics,
    and theology are to be placed as equals under one genus. The genus
    likewise has equal share in them. Nor is it possible that one and the
    same species, in one and the same respect, should be co-ordinate with
    another species and also be put under it as species under a genus.’”

Then in answer to a demand from Otric for a more explicit statement of his
classification, he said there could be no objection to dividing philosophy
according to Vitruvius (Victorinus) and Boëthius; “for philosophy is the
genus, of which the species are the practical and the theoretical: under
the practical, as species again, come _dispensativa_, _distributiva_ and
_civilis_; under the theoretical fall _phisica naturalis_, _mathematica
intelligibilis_, and _theologia intellectibilis_.”

Otric then wonders that Gerbert put mathematics immediately after physics,
omitting physiology. To which Gerbert replies that physiology stands to
physics as philology to philosophy, of which it is part. Otric changes his
attack to a flank movement, and asks Gerbert what is the _causa_ of
philosophy. Gerbert asks whether he means the cause by which, or the cause
for which, it is devised (_inventa_). Otric replies the latter. “Then,”
says Gerbert, “since you make your question clear, I say that philosophy
was devised that from it we might understand things divine and human.”
“But why use so many words,” says Otric, “to designate the cause of one
thing?” “Because one word may not suffice to designate a cause. Plato uses
three to designate the cause of the creation of the world, to wit, the
_bona Dei voluntas_. He could not have said _voluntas_ simply.” “But,”
says Otric, “he could have said more concisely _Dei voluntas_, for God’s
will is always good, which he would not deny.”

    “Here I do not contradict you,” says Gerbert, “but consider: since God
    alone is good in himself, and every creature is good only by
    participation, the word _bona_ is added to express the quality
    peculiar to His nature alone. However this may be, still one word will
    not always designate a cause. What is the cause of shadow? Can you put
    that in one word? I say, the cause of shadow is a body interposed to
    light. It is not ‘body’ nor even ‘body interposed.’ I don’t deny that
    the causes of many things can be stated in one word, as the genera of
    substance, quantity, or quality, which are the causes of species.
    Others cannot so simply be expressed, as _rationale ad mortale_.”

This enigmatic phrase electrifies Otric, who cries: “You put the mortal
under the rational? Who does not know that the rational is confined to
God, angels, and mankind, while the mortal embraces everything mortal, a
limitless mass?”

    “To which Gerbert: ‘If, following Porphyry and Boëthius, you make a
    careful division of substance, carrying it down to individuals, you
    will have the rational broader than the mortal as may readily be
    shown. Since substance, admittedly the most general genus, may be
    divided into subordinate genera and species down to individuals, it is
    to be seen whether all these subordinates may be expressed by a single
    word. Clearly, some are designated with one word, as _corpus_, others
    with several, as _animatum sensibile_. With like reason, the
    subordinate, which is _animal rationale_, may be predicated of the
    subject that is _animal rationale mortale_. Not that _rationale_ may
    be predicated of what is mortal simply; but _rationale_, I say, joined
    to _animal_ is predicated of _mortale_ joined to _animal rationale_.’

    “At this, Augustus with a nod ended the argument, since it had lasted
    nearly the whole day, and the audience were fatigued with the prolix
    and unbroken disputation. He splendidly rewarded Gerbert, who set out
    for Gaul with Adalberon.”[369]

Evidently Richer’s account gives merely the captions of this disputation.
There was not the slightest originality in any of the propositions stated
by the disputants; everything is taken from Porphyry and Boëthius and the
current Latin translation of Plato’s _Timaeus_. Yet the whole affair, the
selection of the questions, the nature of the answers, the limitation of
the matter to the bare poles of logical palestrics, is most illustrative
of the mentality and intellectual interests of the late tenth century. The
growth of the mediaeval intellect lay unavoidably through such courses of
discipline. And just as early mediaeval Latin had to save itself from
barbarism by cleaving to grammar, so the best intellect of this early
period grasped at logic not only as the most obviously needed discipline
and guide, but also with imperfect consciousness that this discipline and
means did not contain the goal and plenitude of substantial knowledge.
Grammar was then not simply a means but an end in the study of letters,
and so was logic unconsciously. In the one case and the other, the
palpable need of the _disciplina_ and its difficulties kept the student
from realizing that the instrument was but an instrument.

Moreover, upon Gerbert’s time pressed the specific need to consider just
such questions as the disputation affords a sample of. An enormous mass of
theology, philosophy, and science awaited mastering, the heritage from a
greater past, antique and patristic. Perhaps a true instinct guided
Gerbert and his contemporaries to problems of classification and method as
a primary essential task. Had the Middle Ages been a period when
knowledge, however crude, was perforce advancing through experience,
investigation, and discovery, the problems of classification and method
would not have presented themselves as preliminary. But mediaeval
development lay through the study of what former men had won from nature
or received from God. This was preserved in books which had to be studied
and mastered. Hence classifications of knowledge were essential aids or
sorely needed guides. With a true instinct the Middle Ages first of all
looked within this mass of knowledge for guides to its mazes, seeking a
plan or scheme by the aid of which universal knowledge might be
unravelled, and then reconstructed in forms corresponding to even larger
verities.[370]


II

The decades on either side of the year 1000 were cramped and dull. In
Burgundy, to be sure, the energies of Cluny,[371] under its great abbots,
were rousing the monastic world to a sense of religious and disciplinary
decency. This reform, however, took little interest in culture. The monks
of Cluny were commonly instructed in the rudiments of the Seven Arts. They
had a little mathematics; bits of crude physical knowledge had unavoidably
come to them; and just as unavoidably had they made use of extracts from
the pagan poets in studying Latinity.[372] But they did not follow letters
for their own sake, nor knowledge because they loved it and felt that love
a holy one. Monastic principles hardly justified such a love, and Cluny’s
abbots had enough to do in bringing the monastic world to decency, without
dallying with inapplicable knowledge or the charms of pagan poetry.

Religious reforms in the ninth century had helped letters in the cathedral
and monastic schools of Gaul. The latter soon fell back to ignorance; but
among the cathedral schools, Chartres and Rheims continued to flourish. A
moral ordering of life increases thoughtfulness and may stimulate study.
Hence, in the latter part of the tenth century, the Cluniac reforms, like
the earlier reforming movements, affected letters favourably in the
monasteries. Here and there an exceptional man created an exceptional
situation. Such a one was Abbo, Abbot of St. Benedict’s at Fleury on the
Loire, who died the year after Gerbert. He was fortunate in his excellent
pupil and biographer, Aimoin, who ascribes to him as liberal sentiments
toward study as were consistent with a stern monasticism:

    “He admonished his hearers that having cast out the thorns of sin,
    they should sow the little gardens of their hearts with the spices of
    the divine virtues. The battle lay against the vices of the flesh, and
    it was for them to consider what arms they should oppose to its
    delights. To complete their armament, after the vows of prayer, and
    the manly strife of fastings, he deemed that the study of letters
    would advantage them, and especially the exercise of composition.
    Indeed he himself, the studious man, scarcely let pass a moment when
    he was not reading, writing, or dictating.”[373]

It is curious to observe the unavoidable influence of a crude Latin
education upon the most strenuous of these reforming monks. In 994 Odilo
became Abbot of Cluny. After a most notable and effective rule of more
than half a century, he died just as the year 1049 began. The closing
scenes are typically illustrative of the passing of an early mediaeval
saint. The dying abbot preaches and comforts his monks, gives his
blessing, adores the Cross, repels the devil:

    “I warn thee, enemy of the human race, turn from me thy plots and
    hidden wiles, for by me is the Cross of the Lord, which I always
    adore: the Cross my refuge, my way and virtue; the Cross,
    unconquerable banner, the invincible weapon. The Cross repels every
    evil, and puts darkness to flight. Through this divine Cross I
    approach my journey; the Cross is my life--death to thee, Enemy!”

The next day, “in the presence of all, the Creed is read for a shield of
faith against the deceptions of malignant spirits and the attacks of evil
thoughts; Augustine is brought in to expound, intently listened to, and
discussed.”[374]

For Odilo, the Cross is a divine, not to say magic, safeguard. His prayer
and imprecation have something of the nature of an uttered spell. No
antique zephyrs seem to blow in this atmosphere of faith and fear, in
which he passed his life, and performed his miracles before and after
death. Nevertheless the antique might mould his phrases, and perhaps
unconsciously affect his ethical conceptions. He wrote a Life of a former
abbot of Cluny, ascribing to him the four _cardinales disciplinas_, in
which he strove to perfect himself “in order that through _prudentia_ he
might assure the welfare of himself and those in his charge; that through
_temperantia_ (which by another name is called _modestia_), by a proper
measure of a just discretion, he might modestly discharge the spiritual
business entrusted to him; that through _fortitudo_ he might resist and
conquer the devil and his vices; and that through _justitia_, which
permeates all virtues and seasons them, he might live soberly and piously
and justly, fight the good fight and finish his course.”[375]

Thus the antique virtues shape Odilo’s thoughts, as seven hundred years
before him the point of view and reasoning of Ambrose’s _De officiis
ministrorum_ were set by Cicero’s _De officiis_.[376] The same classically
touched phrases, if not conceptions, pass on to Odilo’s pupil and
biographer, the monk Jotsaldus, to whom we owe our description of Odilo’s
last moments. He ascribes the four cardinal virtues to his hero, and then
defines them from the antique standpoint, but with Christian turns of
thought:

    “The philosophers define Prudence as the search for truth and the
    thirst for fuller knowledge. In which virtue Odilo was so
    distinguished that neither by day nor night did he cease from the
    search for truth. The Book of the divine contemplation was always in
    his hands, and ceaselessly he spoke of Scripture for the edification
    of all, and prayer ever followed reading.

    “Justice, as the philosophers say, is that which renders each his
    due, lays no claim to what is another’s, and neglects self-advantage,
    so as to maintain what is equitable for all.” [To illustrate this
    virtue in Odilo, the biographer gives instances of his charity, by
    which one observes the Christian turn taken by the conception.]

    “Fortitude is to hold the mind above the dread of danger, to fear
    nothing save the base, and bravely bear adversity and prosperity.
    Supported by this virtue, it is difficult to say how brave he was in
    repelling the plots of enemies and how patient in enduring them. You
    might observe in him this very privilege of patience; to those who
    injured him, as another David he repaid the grace of benefit, and
    toward those who hated him, he preserved a stronger benevolence.”
    [Again the Christian turn of thought.]

    “Temperance, last in the catalogue of the aforesaid virtues, according
    to its definition maintains moderation and order in whatever is to be
    said or done. Here he was so mighty as to hold to moderation and
    observe propriety (_ordinem_) in all his actions and commands, and
    show a wonderful discretion. Following the blessed Jerome, he tempered
    fasting to the golden mean, according to the weakness or strength of
    the body, thus avoiding fanaticism and preserving continency. Neither
    elegance nor squalor was noticeable in his dress. He tempered gravity
    of conduct with gaiety of countenance. He was severe in the correction
    of vice as the occasion demanded, gracious in pardoning, in both
    balancing an impartial scale.”[377]


III

A friend of Odilo was Gerbert’s pupil Fulbert, Bishop of Chartres from
1006 to 1028. His name is joined forever with that chief cathedral school
of early mediaeval France, which he so firmly and so broadly
re-established as to earn a founder’s fame. It will be interesting to
notice its range of studies. Chartres was an ancient home of letters.
Caesar[378] speaks of the land of the Carnuti as the centre of Druidism in
Gaul; and under the Empire, liberal studies quickly sprang up in the
Gallo-Roman city. They did not quite cease even in Merovingian times, and
revived with the Carolingian revival. Thenceforth they were pursued
continuously at the convent school of St. Peter, if not at the school
attached to the cathedral. For some years before he was made bishop, the
grave and kindly Fulbert had been the head of this cathedral school,
where he did not cease to teach until his death. As bishop, widely
esteemed and influential, he rebuilt the cathedral, aided by the kings of
France and Denmark, the dukes of Aquitaine and Normandy, the counts of
Champagne and Blois. His vast crypt still endures, a shadowy goal for
thousands of pilgrim knees, and an ample support for the great edifice
above it. Admiring tradition has ascribed to him even this glory of a
later time.

From near and far, pious students came to benefit by the instruction of
the school, of which Fulbert was the head and inspiration. Close was their
intercourse with their “Venerable Socrates” in the small school buildings
near the cathedral. From the accounts, we can almost see him moving among
them, stopping to correct one here, or looking over the shoulder of
another engaged upon a geometric figure, and putting some new problem.
Among the pupils there might be rivalry, quarrels, breaches of decorum;
but there was the master, ever grave and steadfast, always ready to
encourage with his sympathy, but prepared also to reprove, either silently
by withdrawing his confidence, or in words, as when he forbade an
instructor to joke when explaining Donatus: “spectaculum factus es
omnibus; cave.”

Some of these scholars became men of sanctity and renown--Berengar of
Tours gained an unhappy fame. A fellow-student wrote to him in later years
addressing him as foster-brother:

    “I have called thee foster-brother because of that sweetest common
    life led by us while youths in the Academy of Chartres under our
    venerable Socrates. Well we proved his saving doctrine and holy
    living, and now that he is with God we should hope to be aided by his
    prayers. Surely he is mindful of us, cherishing us even more than when
    he moved a pilgrim in the body of this death, and drew us to him by
    vows and tacit prayer, entreating us in those evening colloquies
    (_vespertina colloquia_) in the garden by the chapel, that we should
    tread the royal way, and cleave to the footprints of the holy
    fathers.”[379]

The cathedral school included youths receiving their first lessons, as
well as older scholars and instructors. They lived together under rules,
and together celebrated the services of the cathedral, chanting the
matins, the hours, and the mass. The Trivium and Quadrivium made the basis
of their studies. Text-books and courses were already some centuries old.

The first branch of the Trivium was Grammar, which included literature by
way of illustration; and he who held the chair had the title of
_grammaticus_. For the beginners, _Donatus_ was the text-book, and
_Priscianus_ for the more advanced.[380] Nor was Martianus Capella
neglected. The student annotated these works with citations from the
_Etymologies_ of Isidore. Divers mnemotechnic processes assisted him to
commit the contents to memory. The grammatical course included the writing
of compositions in prose and verse, according to rule, and the reading of
classic authors. For their school verses in metre the pupils used Bede’s
_De arte metrica_, an encyclopaedia of metrical forms. They also wrote
accentual and rhymed Latin verse. Of profane authors the Library appears
to have contained Livy, Valerius Maximus, Virgil, Ovid, Horace, Statius,
Servius the commentator on Virgil; and of writers who were Christian
Classics in the Middle Ages, Orosius, Gregory of Tours, Fortunatus,
Sedulius, Arator, Prudentius, and Boëthius, the last named being the most
important single source of early mediaeval education. Rhetoric, the second
branch of the Trivium, bore that vague relationship to grammar which it
bears in modern parlance. The rules of the rhetoricians were learned; the
works of profane or Christian orators were read and imitated. This study
left its mark on mediaeval sermons and _Vitae Sanctorum_.

As for the third branch, Dialectic, Fulbert’s pupils studied the logical
treatises in general use in the earlier Middle Ages: to wit, the
_Categories_ and the _De interpretatione_ of Aristotle, and Porphyry’s
_Introduction_, all in the Latin of Boëthius. For works which might be
regarded as commentaries upon these, the school had at its disposal the
_Categories_ ascribed to Augustine and Apuleius’s _De interpretatione_,
Cicero’s _Topica_, and Boëthius’s discussion of definition, division, and
categorical and hypothetical syllogisms--the logical writings expounded
by Gerbert at Rheims. The school had likewise Gerbert’s own _Libellus de
ratione uti_ and Boëthius’s _De consolatione_, that chief ethical compend
for the early Middle Ages; also the writings of Eriugena, and Dionysius
the Areopagite in Eriugena’s translation. Whether or not it possessed the
current Latin version of Plato’s _Timaeus_, Fulbert and Berengar at all
events refer to Plato in terms of eulogy.

Passing to the Quadrivium, we find that Fulbert had studied its four
branches under Gerbert. In Arithmetic the students used the treatise of
Boëthius, and also the Abacus, a table of vertical columns, with Roman
numerals at the top to indicate the order of units, tens, and hundreds
according to the decimal system. In Geometry the students likewise fell
back upon Boëthius. Astronomy, the third branch of the Quadrivium, had for
its practical object the computation of the Church’s calendar. The pupils
learned the signs of the Zodiac and were instructed in the method of
finding the stars by the _Astrolabius_, a sphere (such as Gerbert had
constructed) representing the constellations, and turning upon a tube as
an axis, which served to fix the polar star. Music, the fourth branch of
the Quadrivium, was zealously cultivated. For its theory, the treatise of
Boëthius was studied; and Fulbert and his scholars did much to advance the
music of the liturgy, composing texts and airs for organ chanting.

In addition to the Quadrivium, medicine was taught. The students learned
receipts and processes handed down by tradition and commonly ascribed to
Hippocrates. For more convenient memorizing, Fulbert cast them into verse.
Such “medicine” was not founded on observation; and a mediaeval
scholar-copyist would as naturally transcribe a medical receipt-book as
any other work coming within the range of his stylus. One may remember
that in the early Middle Ages the relic was the common means of cure.

The seven _Artes_ of the Trivium and Quadrivium were the handmaids of
Theology; and Fulbert gave elaborate instruction in this Christian queen
of the sciences, expounding the Scriptures, explaining the Liturgy, and
taking up the controversies of the time. As a part of this sacred
science, the students apparently were taught something of Canon and Roman
law and of Charlemagne’s Capitularies.[381]


IV

The Chartres Quadrivium represents the extreme compass of mathematical and
physical studies in France in the eleventh century, when slight interest
was taken in physical science--a phrase far too grand to designate the
crass traditional views of nature which prevailed. Indifference to natural
knowledge was the most palpable intellectual defect of Ambrose and
Augustine, and the most portentous. The coming centuries, which were to
look upon their writings as universal guides to living and knowing, found
therein no incentive to observe or study the natural world. Of course the
Carolingian period evolved out of itself no such desire; nor did the
eleventh century. At the best, the general understanding of physical fact
remained that which had been handed down. It was gleaned from the books
commonly read, the _Physiologus_ or the edifying stories of miracles in
the myriad _Vitae Sanctorum_, quite as much as from the scant information
given in Isidore’s _Origines_, Bede’s _Liber de temporibus_, or the _De
universo_ of Rabanus Maurus.

So much for natural science. In historical writing the quality of
composition rarely rose above that of the tenth century.[382] No sign of
critical acumen had appeared, and the writers of the period show but a
narrow local interest. There was no France, but everywhere a parcelling of
the land into small sections of misrule, between which travel was
difficult and dangerous. The chroniclers confine their attention, as
doubtless their knowledge also was confined, to the region where they
lived. To lift history over these narrow barriers, there was needed the
renewal of the royal power, which came with the century’s close, and the
stimulus to curiosity springing from the Crusades.[383]

In fine, the eleventh century was crude and inchoate, preparatory to the
intellectual activity and the unleashed energies of life which mark the
opening of the twelfth. Yet the mediaeval mind was assimilating and
appropriating dynamically its lessons from the Fathers, as well as those
portions of the antique heritage of thought which, so far, it had felt a
need of. Difficult problems were stated, but in ways presenting, as it
were, the apices of alternatives too narrow to hold truth, which lies less
frequently in warring opposites than in an inclusive and discriminating
conciliation. This century, especially when we fix our attention upon
France, appears as the threshold of mediaeval thinking, the immediate
antecedent to mediaeval formulations of philosophic and theological
conviction. The controversies and the different mental tendencies which
thereafter were to move through such large and often diverging courses,
drew their origin from still prior times. With the coming of the eleventh
century they had been sturdily cradled, and seemed safe from the danger of
dying in infancy. Thence on through the twelfth century, through the
thirteenth, the climacteric of mediaeval thought, opinions and convictions
are set in multitudes of propositions, relating to many provinces of human
meditation.

These masses of propositions, convictions, opinions, philosophic and
religious, constitute the religious philosophy of the Middle
Ages--scholasticism as it commonly is called. Hereafter[384] it will be
necessary to consider that large matter in its continuity of development,
with its roots or antecedents stretching back through the eleventh century
to the Carolingian period, and beyond. Mediaeval thinkers will then be
seen to fall into two classes, very roughly speaking, the one tending to
set authority above reason, and the other tending to set reason above
authority. Both classes appear in the ninth century, represented
respectively by Rabanus Maurus and Eriugena. In the eleventh they are also
evident. St. Anselm, who came from Italy, is the most admirable
representative of the first class, being in heart and mind a theologian
whose philosophy revolved entire around his faith. Of him we have spoken;
and here may mention in contrast with him two Frenchmen, Berengar of Tours
and Roscellinus. In place and time they come within the scope of the
present chapter; nor were their mental processes such as to attach them to
a later period. By temperament, and in somewhat confused expression, they
set reason above authority, save that of Scripture as they understood it.

Berengar was born, apparently at Tours, and of wealthy parents, just as
the tenth century closed. After studying under his uncle, the Treasurer of
St. Martin, he came to Chartres, where Fulbert was bishop. Judging from a
general consensus of expression from men who became his opponents, but had
been his fellow-pupils, he quickly aroused attention by his talents, and
anxiety or enmity by his pride and the self-confident assertion of his
opinions. He would neither accept with good grace the admonitions of those
about him, nor follow the authority of the Fathers. He was said to have
despised even the great grammarians and logicians, Priscian, Donatus, and
Boëthius. Why err with everybody if everybody errs, he asked. He appears
as a vain man eager for admiration. The report comes down that he imitated
Fulbert’s manner in lecturing, first covering his visage with a hood so as
to seem in deep meditation, and then speaking in a gentle, plaintive
voice. From Chartres he passed to Angers, where he filled the office of
archdeacon, and thence he returned to Tours, was placed over the Church
schools of St. Martin’s, and in the course of time began to lecture on the
Eucharist. This was between the years 1030 and 1040.

That a man’s fortunes and fame are linked to a certain doctrine or
controversy may be an accident of environment. Berengar chose to adduce
and partly follow the teachings of Eriugena, whose fame was great, but
whose orthodoxy was tainted. The nature of the Eucharist leant itself to
dispute, and from the time of Ratramnus, Radbertus, and Eriugena, it was
common for theologians to try their hand on it, if only in order to
demonstrate their adherence to the extreme doctrines accepted by the
Church. These were not the doctrines of Eriugena, nor were they held by
Berengar, who would not bring himself to admit an absolute substantial
change in the bread and wine. Possibly his convictions were less
irrational than the dominant doctrine. Yet he appears to have asserted
them, not because he had a clearer mind than others, but by reason of his
more self-assertive and combative temperament. He was not an original
thinker, but a controversial and turgid reasoner, who naturally enough was
forced into all kinds of tergiversation in order to escape condemnation as
a heretic. His self-assertiveness settled on the most obvious theological
dispute of the time, and his self-esteem maintained the superiority of his
own reason over the authorities adduced by his adversaries. Of course he
never impugned the authority of Scripture, but relied on it to
substantiate his views, merely asserting that a reasonable interpretation
was better than a foolish one. Throughout the controversy, one may observe
that Berengar’s understanding of fact kept somewhat closer than that of
his opponents’ to the tangible realities of sense. But a difference of
intellectual temperament lay at the bottom of his dissent; and had not the
Eucharist presented itself as the readiest topic of dispute, he would
doubtless have fallen upon some other question. As it was, his arguments
gained adherents, the dominant view being repellent to independent minds.
Still, it won the day, and Berengar was condemned by more than one
council, and forced into all manner of equivocal retractions, by which at
least he saved his life, and died in extreme old age.

It may be that a larger relative import attributed by Berengar and also
Roscellin to the tangibilities of sense-perception, led the latter at the
close of the century to put forth views on the nature of universals which
have given him a shadowy repute as the father of nominalism. The
Eucharistic controversy pertained primarily to Christian dogmatics. That
regarding universals, or general ideas, pertains to philosophy, and, from
the standpoint of formal logic, lies at the foundations of consistent
thinking. So closely does it make part of the development of
scholasticism, that its discussion had best be postponed; merely assuming
for the present that Roscellin’s thinking upon the topic to which his name
is attached was not superior in method and analysis to Berengar’s upon the
Eucharist.

One cannot escape the conclusion that intellectually the eleventh century
in France was crude. The mediaeval intellect was still but imperfectly
developed; its manifestations had not reached the zenith of their energy.
Yet doubtless the mental development of mankind proceeds at a more uniform
rate than would appear from the brilliant phenomena which crowd the eras
of apparent culmination, in contrast with the previous dulness. The
profounder constancy of growth may be discerned by scrutinizing those dumb
courses of gestation, from which spring the marvels of the great epoch.
The opening of the twelfth century was to inaugurate a brilliant
intellectual era in France. The efficient preparation stretched back into
the latter half of the eleventh, whose Catholic progress heralded a period
of awakening. The Church already was striving to accomplish its own
reordering and regeneration, free itself from things that drag and hinder,
from lay investiture and simony, abominations through which feudal
depotentiating principles had intruded into the ecclesiastic body; free
itself likewise from clerical marriage and concubinage, which kept the
clergy from being altogether clergy, and weighted the Church with the
claims of half-spurious priests’ offspring. In France the reform of the
monks comes first, impelled by Cluny; and when Cluny herself becomes less
zealous, because too great and rich, the spirit of soldiery against sin
reincarnates itself in the Grand-Chartreuse, in Citeaux and Clairvaux. The
reform of the secular clergy follows, with Hildebrand the veritable
master; for the Church was passing from prelacy to papacy, and the Pope
was becoming a true monarch, instead of nominal head of an episcopal
aristocracy.

The perfected organization and unceasing purification of the Church made
one part of the general progress of the period. Another consisted in the
disengaging of the greater powers from out the indiscriminate anarchy of
feudalism, and the advance of the French monarchy, under Louis the
Sixth,[385] toward effective sovereignty, all making for a surer law and
order throughout France. Then through the eleventh and twelfth centuries
came the struggle of the people, out of serfdom into some control over
their own persons and fortunes. The serfs were affranchised and became
peasants; the huddled dwellers in the squalid towns tended to become
burghers with actual strength and chartered power to protect themselves
against signorial tyranny. Their rights limited and fixed the exactions of
their lords. Everywhere the population increased; old cities grew apace,
and a multitude of new ones came into existence. Economic evolution
progressed, advancing with the affranchisement of industry, the
organization of guilds, the growth of trade, the opening of new markets,
fairs, and freer avenues of commerce: thus more wealth was diffused among
the many. Architecture with new civic resources was pushing on through
Romanesque toward Gothic, while the affiliated arts of sculpture and
painting were becoming more expressive. Then the Crusades began, and did
their work of spreading knowledge through the Occident, carrying foreign
ideas and institutions across provincial barriers. The Crusades could not
have taken place had it not been for the freeing of social forces during
the half century preceding their inception in the year 1099. They were led
up to and made possible by the advance of the papacy to domination, by the
growth of chivalry, and the habit of making far pilgrimages to holy
places, and by the wealth coming with more active trade and industry.

Thus humanity was universally bestirring itself throughout the land we
know as France. Such a bestirring could not fail to crown itself with a
mightier winging of the spirit through the higher provinces of thought.
This was to show itself among saints and doctors of the Church in their
philosophies and theologies of the mind and heart; with like power it was
to show itself among those hardier rationalists who with difficulty and
misgivings, or under hard compulsion, still kept themselves within the
Church’s pale. It showed itself too with heretics who let themselves be
burned rather than surrender their outlawed convictions. It was also to
show itself through things beautiful, in the strivings of art toward the
perfect symbolical presentation of what the soul cherished or abhorred;
and show itself too in the literature of the common tongues as well as the
literature of the time-honoured Latin. In fine, it was to show itself,
through every heightened faculty and appetition of the universally
striving and desirous soul of man, in a larger, bolder understanding and
appreciation of life.




