CHAPTER XVIII

ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI[507]


Twenty-nine years after the death of St. Bernard, Francis was born in the
Umbrian hill town of Assisi. The year was 1182. On the fourth of October
1226, in the forty-fifth year of his age, this most loving and best
beloved of mediaeval saints breathed his last, in the little church of the
Portiuncula, within the shadows of that same hill town.

Of all mediaeval saints, Bernard and Francis impressed themselves most
strongly upon their times. Neither of them was pre-eminently an
intellectual force--Francis especially would not have been what he was but
for certain childlike qualities of mind which never fell away from him.
The power of these men sprang from their personalities and the _vivida
vis_ (their contemporaries would have said, the grace of God) realizing
itself in every word and act. Bernard’s power was more directly dependent
upon the conditions of his epoch, and his influence was more limited in
duration.

The reason is not far to seek. Both men were of the Middle Ages, even of
those decades in which they lived. But Bernard’s strength was part of the
medium wherein he worked and the evil against which he fought--the
clerical corruptions, the heresies, the schisms and political
controversies, the warfare of Christ with Mahomet,--all matters of vital
import for his time, but which were to change and pass.

Francis, on the other hand, was occupied with none of these. He was no
scourge of clerical corruptions, no scourge of anything; he knew nought of
heresy or schism, nothing of politics or war; into the story of his life
there comes not even a far-off echo of the Albigensian Crusade or the
conflict between pope and emperor. His life appears detached from the
special conditions of his time; it is neither held within them nor
compelled by them, but only by its inner impulse. For it was not occupied
with the exigencies of Italy and Germany, or Southern France, during that
first quarter of the thirteenth century, when De Montfort was hurling the
orthodox and brutal north upon the fair but heretical provinces of
Languedoc, and when Innocent III. was excommunicating Otho IV., and
Frederick II. was disclosing himself as the most dangerous foe the papacy
had yet known. The passing turmoil and danger of the time did not touch
this life; the man knew naught of all these things. He was not considering
thirteenth-century Italians, Frenchmen, and Germans; he was fascinated
with men as men, with the dumb brutes as fellow-creatures, and even with
plants and stones as vessels of God’s loveliness or symbols of His Word;
above all he was absorbed in Christ, who had taken on humanity for him,
had suffered for him, died for him, and who now around, above, within him,
inspired and directed his life.

So Francis’s life was not compassed by its circumstances; nor was its
effect limited to the thirteenth century. His life partook of the eternal
and the universal, and might move men in times to come as simply and
directly as it turned men’s hearts to love in the years when Francis was
treading the rough stones of Assisi.

On the other hand, Francis was mediaeval and in a way to give concrete
form and colour to the elements of universal manhood that were his. He was
mediaeval in complete and finished mode; among mediaeval men he offers
perhaps the most distinct and most perfectly consistent individuality. He
is Francis of Assisi, born in 1182 and dying in 1226, and no one else who
ever lived either there and then or elsewhere at some other time. He is
Francis of Assisi perfectly and always, a man presenting a complete
artistic unity, never exhibiting act or word or motive out of character
with himself.

From a slightly different point of view we may perceive how he was a
perfect individual and at the same time a perfect mediaeval type. There
was no element in his character which was not assimilated and made into
Francis of Assisi. Anterior and external influences contributed to make
this Francis. But in entering him they ceased to be what they had been;
they changed and became Francis. For example, nothing of the antique, no
distinct bit of classical inheritance, appears in him; if, in any way, he
was touched by it--as in his joyous love of life and the world about
him--the influence had ceased to be anything distinct in him; it had
become himself. Likewise, whatever he may have known of the Fathers and of
all the dogmatic possession and ecclesiastical tradition of the Church,
this also was remade in Francis. Evidently such an all-assimilating and
transforming individuality could not have existed in those earlier
centuries when the immature mediaeval world was taking over its great
inheritance from the pagan and Christian antique--those centuries when men
could but turn their heritage of thought and knowledge this way and that,
disturb and distort and rearrange it. Such an individuality as Francis
could exist only at the climax of the Middle Age, at the period of its
fullest strength and greatest distinction, when it had masterfully changed
after its own heart whatever it had received from the past, and had made
its transformed acquisitions into itself.

Francis is of this grand mediaeval climacteric. The Middle Ages were no
longer in a stage of transition from the antique; they had attained; they
were themselves. Sides of this distinctive mediaeval development and
temper express themselves in Francis--are Francis verily. The spirit of
romance is incarnate in him. Roland, Oliver, Charlemagne (he of the
_Chansons de geste_), and the knights of the Round Table, are part of
Francis;--his first disciples are his paladins. Again, instead of emperor
or paladin, he is himself the _jongleour_, the _joculator Dei_ (God’s
minstrel).

And of all that had become Francis the greatest was Christ. He had not
taken the theology of Augustine; he had not taken the Christ handed over
by the transition centuries to the early Middle Ages; he had not adopted
the Christ of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. He took Jesus from the Gospel,
or at least such elements of Jesus’ life and teaching as he felt and
understood. Francis modelled his life on his understanding of Christ and
His teaching. So many another saint had done; in fact, so must all
Christians try to do. Francis accomplished it with completeness and power;
he created a new Christ life; a Christ life partial and reduced from the
breadth and balance of the original, yet veritable and living. Francis
himself felt that his whole life was Christ-directed and inspired, and
that even because of his own special insignificance Christ had chosen him
to show forth the true Gospel life again--but chosen him indeed.[508]

Although the life of Francis appears as if detached from the larger
political and ecclesiastical movements of the time, it yields glimpses of
the ways and doings of the people of Assisi. We see their jealousies and
quarrels, their war with Perugia, also their rustic readiness to jeer at
the unusual and incomprehensible; or we are struck with instances of the
stupid obstinacy and intolerance often characterizing a small community.
Again, we see in some of those citizens an open and quick impulsiveness,
which, at the sight of love, may turn to love. It would seem as if the
harshest, most impossible man of all the town was Peter Bernardone, a
well-to-do merchant whose affairs took him often from Assisi, and not
infrequently to France.

Bernardone had a predilection for things French, and the child born to his
wife while he was absent in France, he called Francis upon his return,
although the mother had given it the name of John. The mother, whose name
was Pica, may have been of Provençal or French blood. Apparently such
education as Francis received in his boyhood was as much French as
Italian. Through all his life he never lost the habit of singing French
songs which he composed himself.[509]

The biographers assert that Francis was nourished in worldly vanity and
insolence. His temperament drew him to the former, but kept him from the
latter. For while he delighted in making merry with his friends, he was
always distinguished by a winning courtesy of manner toward poor and rich.
An innate generosity was also his, and he loved to spend money as he
roamed with his companions about Assisi singing jovial choruses and
himself the leader of the frolic. Bernardone did not object to his son’s
squandering some money in a way which led others to admire him and think
his parents rich; while Pica would keep saying that some day he would be
God’s son through grace. A vein of sprightly fantasy runs through these
gaieties of Francis’s, which we may be sure were unstained by any gross
dissipation. Francis’s life as a saint is peculiarly free from monkish
impudicity, free, that is, from morbid dwelling upon things sensual; which
shows that in him there was no reaction or need of reaction against any
youthful dissoluteness, and bears testimony to the purity of his
unconverted years.[510]

In those days Francis loved to be admired and praised. He was possessed
with a romantic and imaginative vanity. Costly clothes delighted him as he
dreamed of still more royal entertainment, and fancied great things to
come. His mind was filled with the figures of Romance; a knight would he
be at least; why not a paladin, whom all the world should wonder at? So he
dreamed, and so he acted out his whim as best he might on the little stage
of Assisi; for Francis was a poet, and a poet even more in deed than in
words. He was endowed with exquisite fancy, and he did its dictates never
doubting. His life was to prove an almost unexampled inspiration to art,
because it was itself a poem by reason of its unfailing realization of the
conceptions of a fervent and beautiful imagination.

There came war with Perugia, a very hard-hitting town; and the Assisi
cavaliers, Francis among them, found themselves in their neighbours’
dungeons. There some desponded; but not Francis. For in these careless
days he was always gleeful and jocular, even as afterwards his entire
saintly life was glad with an invincible gaiety of spirit. So Francis
laughed and joked in prison till his fellow-prisoners thought him crazy,
which no whit worried him, as he answered with the glad boast that some
day he would be adored by all the world. He showed another side of his
inborn nature when he was kind to a certain one of the captives whom the
rest detested, and tried to reconcile his fellows with him.

It was soon after his release from this twelvemonth captivity that the
sails of Francis’s spirit began to fill with still more topping hopes, and
then to waver strangely. He naturally fell sick after the privations of a
Perugia prison. As he recovered and went about with the aid of a staff,
the loveliness of field and vineyard failed to please him. He wondered at
himself, and suspected that his former pleasures were follies. But it was
not so easy to leave off his previous life, and Francis’s thoughts were
lured back again to this world’s glory; for a certain nobleman of Assisi
was about to set out on an expedition to Apulia to win gain and fame, and
Francis was inflamed to go with him. In the night he dreamed that his
father’s house with its heaps of cloth and other wares was filled instead
with swords and lances, with glittering shields, helmets and breastplates.
He awoke in an ecstasy of joy at the great glory portended by this dream.
Then he fitted himself out sumptuously, with splendid garb, bright
weapons, new armour, and accoutrements, and in due time set forth with his
fellow-adventurers.

Once more he wavered. Before reaching Spoleto he stopped, left the
company, turned back on his steps, this time impelled more strongly to
seek those things which he was to love through life. He was about
twenty-three years old. It was his nature to love everything, fame and
applause, power perhaps, and joy; but he had not yet loved worthily. Now
his Lord was calling him, the voice at first not very certain, and yet
becoming stronger. Francis seems to have seen a vision, in which the
vanity of his attachments was made clear, and he learned that he was
following a servant instead of the Lord. So his heart replied, “Lord, what
wouldst thou have me to do?” and then the vision showed him that he should
return, for he had misunderstood his former dream of arms. When Francis
awoke he thought diligently on these matters.

Such spiritual experiences are incommunicable, even though the man should
try to tell them. But we know that as Francis had set out joyfully
expecting worldly glory, he now returned with exultation, to await the
will of the Lord, as it might be shown him. The facts and also their
sequence are somewhat confused in the biographies.

On his return to Assisi, his comrades seem to have chosen him as lord of
their revels; again he ordained a merry feast; but as they set forth
singing gleefully, Francis walked behind them, holding his marshal’s
staff, in silence. Thoughts of the Lord had come again, and withdrawn his
attention: he was thinking sweetly of the Lord, and vilely of himself.
Soon after he is found providing destitute chapels with the requisites for
a decent service; already--in his father’s absence--he is filling his
table with beggars; and already he has overcome his fastidious temper, has
forced himself to exchange the kiss of peace with lepers, and has kissed
the livid hands in which he presses alms.[511] He appears to have made a
trip to St. Peter’s at Rome, where, standing before the altar, it struck
him that the Prince of the Apostles was being honoured with mean
offerings. So in his own princely way he flung down the contents of his
purse, to the wonder of all. Then going without the church, he put on the
clothes of a beggar and asked alms.

In such conduct Francis showed himself a poet and a saint. Imagination was
required to conceive these extreme, these perfect acts, acts perfect in
their carrying out of a lovely thought to its fulfilment, and suffering
nothing to impede its perfect realization. So Francis flings down all he
has, and not a measure of his goods; he puts on beggars’ clothes, and
begs; he kisses lepers’ hands, eats from the same bowl with them--acts
which were perfect in the singleness of their fulfilment of a saintly
motive, acts which were likewise beautiful. They are instances of
obsession with a saintly idea of great spiritual beauty, obsession so
complete that the ridiculous or hideous concomitants of the realization
serve only to enhance the beauty of the holy thought perfectly fulfilled.

One day at Assisi, passing by the church of St. Damian, Francis was moved
to enter for prayer. As he prayed before the Crucifix, the image seemed to
say, “Francis, dost thou not see my house in ruins? Rebuild it for me.”
And he answered, “Gladly, Lord,” thinking that the little chapel of St.
Damian was intended. Filled with joy, having felt the Crucified in his
soul, he sought the priest and gave him money to buy oil for the lamp
before the Crucifix. This day was ever memorable in Francis’s walk with
God. His way had lost its turnings; he saw his life before him clear,
glad, and full of tears of love. “From that hour his heart was so wounded
and melted at the memory of his Lord’s passion that henceforth while he
lived he carried in his heart the marks of the Lord Jesus. Again he was
seen walking near the Portiuncula, wailing aloud. And in response to the
inquiries of a priest, he answered: ‘I bewail the passion of my Lord Jesus
Christ, which it should not shame me to go weeping through the world!’
Often as he rose from prayer his eyes were full of blood, because he had
wept so bitterly.”[512]

It appears to have been after this vision in St. Damian’s Church that
Francis went on horseback to Foligno, carrying pieces of cloth, which he
sold there, and his horse as well. He travelled back on foot, and seeking
out St. Damian’s astonished little priest, he kissed his hands devoutly
and offered him the money. When, for fear of Bernardone, the priest would
not receive it, Francis threw it into a box. He prevailed on the priest,
however, to let him stay there.

What Bernardone thought of this son of his is better only guessing. The
St. Damian episode brought matters to a crisis between the two. He came
looking for his son, and Francis escaped to a cave, where he spent a month
in tears and prayer to the Lord, that he might be freed from his father’s
pursuit, so that he might fulfil his vows. Gradually courage and joy
returned, and he issued from his cave and took his way to the town. Former
acquaintances of his pursued him with jeers and stones, as one demented,
so wretched was he to look upon after his sojourn in the cave. He made no
reply, save to give thanks to God. The hubbub reached the father, who
rushed out and seized his son, beat him, and locked him up in the house.
From this captivity he was released by his mother, in her husband’s
absence, and again betook himself to St. Damian’s.

Shortly afterward Bernardone returned, and would have haled Francis before
the magistrates of the town for squandering his patrimony; but his son
repudiated their jurisdiction, as being the servant of God. They were glad
enough to turn the matter over to the bishop, who counselled Francis to
give back the money which was his father’s. The scene which followed has
been made famous by the brush of Giotto. The _Three Companions_ narrate it
thus:

    “Then arose the man of God glad and comforted by the bishop’s words,
    and fetching the money said, ‘My lord, not only the money which is his
    I wish to return to him, but my clothes as well, and gladly.’ Then
    entering the bishop’s chamber, he took off his clothes, and placing
    the money upon them, went out again naked before them, and said: ‘Hear
    ye all and know. Until now I have called Pietro Bernardone my father;
    but because I have determined to serve God, I return him the money
    about which he was disturbed, and these clothes which I had from him,
    wishing only to say, “Our Father who art in heaven” and not “Father
    Pietro Bernardone.”’ The man of God was found even then to have worn
    haircloth beneath his gay garments. His father rising, incensed, took
    the money and the clothes. As he carried them away to his house, those
    who had seen the sight were indignant that he had left not a single
    garment for his son, and they shed tears of pity over Francis. The
    bishop was moved to admiration at the constancy of the man of God, and
    embraced him and covered him with his cloak.”[513]

Thus Francis was indeed made naked of the world. With joy he hastened back
to St. Damian’s; and there prepared himself a hermit garb, in which he
again set forth through the streets of the city, praising God and
soliciting stones to rebuild the Church. As he went he cried that whoever
gave one stone should have one reward, and he who gave two, two rewards,
and he who gave more as many rewards as he gave stones. Many laughed at
him, thinking him crazy; but others were moved to tears at the sight of
one who from such frivolity and vanity had so quickly become drunken with
divine love.

Francis became a beggar for the love of Christ, seeking to imitate Him
who, born poor, lived poor, and had no place to lay His head. Not only did
he beg stones to rebuild St. Damian’s, but he began to go from house to
house with a bowl to beg his food. Naked before them all, he had chosen
“holy poverty,” “lady poverty”[514] for his bride. He was filled with the
desire to copy Christ and obey His words to the letter. According to the
_Three Companions_, when the blessed Francis completed the church of St.
Damian, his wont was to wear a hermit garb and carry a staff; he wore
shoes on his feet and a girdle about him. But listening one day to Jesus’
words to His disciples, as He sent them out to preach, not to take with
them gold, or silver, or a wallet, or bread, or a staff, or shoes, nor
have two cloaks, Francis said with joy: “This is what I desire to fulfil
with my whole strength.”[515]

The literal imitation of certain particular Gospel instances, and the
unconditional carrying out of certain of Christ’s specially intended
precepts, mark Francis’s understanding of his Lord. It is exemplified in
the account of the conversion of Francis’s first disciple, as told by the
_Three Companions_:

    “As the truth of the blessed Francis’s simple life and doctrine became
    manifest to many, two years after his own conversion, certain men were
    moved to penitence by his example, and were drawn to give up
    everything and join with him in life and garb. Of these the first was
    Bernard of saintly memory, who reflecting upon the constancy and
    fervour of the blessed Francis in serving God, and with what labour he
    was repairing ruined churches and leading a hard life, although
    delicately nurtured, he determined to distribute his property among
    the poor and cling to Francis. Accordingly one day in secret he
    approached the man of God and disclosed his purpose, at the same time
    requesting that on such an evening he would come to him. Having no
    companion hitherto, the blessed Francis gave thanks to God, and
    rejoiced greatly, especially as Messer (_dominus_) Bernard was a man
    of exemplary life.

    “So with exulting heart the blessed Francis went to his house on the
    appointed evening and stayed all night with him. Messer Bernard said
    among other things: ‘If a person should have much or a little from his
    lord, and have held it many years, how could he do with the same what
    would be the best?’ The blessed Francis replied that he should return
    it to his lord from whom he had received it.

    “And Messer Bernard said: ‘Therefore, brother, I wish to distribute,
    in the way that may seem best to thee, all my worldly goods for love
    of my Lord, who conferred them on me.’

    “To whom the saint said: ‘In the morning we will go to the Church, and
    will learn from the copy (_codex_) of the Gospels there how the Lord
    taught His disciples.’

    “So rising in the morning, with a certain other named Peter, who also
    desired to become a brother, they went to the church of St. Nicholas
    close to the piazza of the city Assisi. And commencing to pray
    (because they were simple men and did not know where to find the
    Gospel text relating to the renouncing of the world) they asked the
    Lord devoutly, that He would deign to show them His will at the first
    opening of the Book.

    “When they had prayed, the blessed Francis taking in his hands the
    closed book, kneeling before the altar opened it, and his eye fell
    first upon this precept of the Lord: ‘If thou wouldst be perfect, go,
    sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have
    treasure in heaven.’ At which the blessed Francis was very glad and
    gave thanks to God. But because this true observer of the Trinity
    wished to be assured with threefold witness, he opened the Book for
    the second and third time. The second time he read, ‘Carry nothing for
    the journey,’ and the third time, ‘Who wishes to come after me, let
    him deny himself.’

    “At each opening of the Book, the blessed Francis gave thanks to God
    for the divine confirmation of his purpose and long-conceived desire,
    and then said to Bernard and Peter: ‘Brothers, this is our life and
    this is our rule, and the life and rule of all who shall wish to join
    our society. Go, then, and as you have heard, so do.’

    “Messer Bernard went away (he was very rich) and, having sold his
    possessions and got together much money, he distributed it to the poor
    of the town. Peter also complied with the divine admonition as best he
    could. They both assumed the habit which Francis had adopted, and from
    that hour lived with him after the model (_formam_) of the holy Gospel
    shown them by the Lord. Therefore the blessed Francis has said in his
    Testament: ‘The Lord himself revealed to me that I should live
    according to the model (_formam_) of the holy Gospel.’”[516]

The words which met the eyes of Francis on first opening this Gospel-book,
had nearly a thousand years before his time driven the holy Anthony to the
desert of the Thebaid. Still one need not think the later tale a fruit of
imitative legend. The accounts of Francis afford other instances of his
literal acceptance of the Gospels.[517]

After the step taken by Bernard and Peter, others quickly joined
themselves to Francis, and in short time the small company took up its
abode in an abandoned cabin at Rivo-torto, near Assisi. In a twelvemonth
or more they removed to the little church of Santa Maria de Portiuncula
(Saint Mary of the little portion).[518] In the meanwhile Francis had been
to Rome and gained papal authorization from the great Innocent III. for
his lowly way of life. It would be hard to describe the joyfulness of
these first Gospel days of the brethren: they come and go, and pray and
labour; all are filled with joy; _gaudium_, _jucunditas_, _laetabantur_,
such words crowd each other in accounts of the early days. Their love was
complete; they would gladly give their bodies to pain or death not only
for the love of Christ, but for the love of each other; they were founded
and rooted in humility and love; Francis’s own life was a song of joy, as
he went singing (always _gallice_) and abounding in love and its joyful
prayers and tears. What joy indeed could be greater than his; he had
given himself to his Lord, and had been accepted. One day he had retired
for contemplation, and as he prayed, “God be merciful to me a sinner,” an
ineffable joy and sweetness was shed in his heart. He began to fall away
from himself; the anxieties and fears which a sense of sin had set in his
heart were dispelled, and a certitude of the remission of his sins took
possession of him. His mind dilated and a joyful vision made him seem
another man when he returned and said in gladness to the brethren: “Be
comforted, my best beloved, and rejoice in the Lord. Do not feel sad
because you are so few. Let neither my simplicity nor yours abash you, for
it has been shown me of the Lord that God will make of you a great
multitude, and multiply you to the confines of the earth. I saw a great
multitude of men coming to us, desiring to assume the habit and rule of
our blessed religion; and the sound of them is in my ears as they come and
go according to the command of holy obedience; and I saw the ways filled
with them from every nation. Frenchmen come, and Spaniards hurry, Germans
and English run, and a multitude speaking other tongues.”[519]

Thus far the life of Francis was a poem, even as it was to be unto the
end; for, although the saint’s plans might be thwarted by the wisdom and
frailty of men, his words and actions did not cease to realize the
exquisite conceptions of his soul. But the volume of his life, from this
time on, becomes too large for us to follow, embracing as it does the far
from simple history of the first decades of his Order. Our object is still
to observe his personality, and his love of God and man and creature-kind.

Francis’s mind was as simple as his heart was single. He had no distinctly
intellectual interests, as nothing appealed to his mentality alone.[520]
In his consciousness, everything related itself to his way of life, its
yearnings and aversions. Whatever was unsuited to enter into this catholic
relationship repelled rather than interested him. Hence he was averse to
studies which had nothing to do with the man’s closer walk with God, and
love of fellow. “My brothers who are led by the curiosity of knowledge
will find their hands empty in the day of tribulation. I would wish them
rather to be strengthened by virtues, that when the time of tribulation
comes they may have the Lord with them in their straits--for such a time
will come when they will throw their good-for-nothing books into holes and
corners.”[521]

The moral temper of Francis was childlike in its simple truth. He could
not endure in the smallest matter to seem other than as he was before God:
“As much as a man is before God so much is he, and no more.”[522] Once in
Lent he ate of cakes cooked in lard, because everything cooked in oil
violently disagreed with him. When Lent was over, he thus began his first
sermon to a concourse of people: “You have come to me with great devotion,
believing me to be a holy man, but I confess to God and to you that in
this Lent I have eaten cakes cooked in lard.”[523] At another time, when
in severe sickness he had somewhat exceeded the pittance of food which he
allowed himself, he rose, still shaking with fever, and went and preached
to the people. When the sermon was over, he retired a moment, and having
first exacted a promise of obedience from the monks accompanying him, he
threw off his cloak, tied a rope around his waist, and commanded them to
drag him naked before the people, and there cast ashes in his face; all
which was done by the weeping monks. And then he confessed his fault to
all.[524]

Francis took joy in obedience and humility. One of his motives in
resigning the headship of the Order was that he might have a superior to
obey.[525] However pained by the shortcomings and corruptions of the
Church, he was always obedient and reverent. He had no thought of
revolution, but the hope of purifying all. One day certain brothers said
to him: “Father, do you not see that the bishops do not let us preach, and
keep us for days standing idle, before we are able to declare the word of
God? Would it not be better to obtain the privilege from the Pope, that
there might be a salvation of souls?”

“You, brothers Minorites,” answered Francis, “know not the will of God,
and do not permit me to convert the whole world, which is God’s will; for
I wish first through holy obedience and reverence to convert the prelates,
who when they see our holy life and humble reverence for them, will beg
you to preach and convert the people, and will call the people to hear you
far better than your privileges, which draw you to pride. For me, I desire
this privilege from the Lord that I may never have any privilege from man
except to do reverence to all, and through obedience to our holy rule of
life convert mankind more by example than by word.”[526]

And again he said to the brothers: “We are sent to aid the clergy in the
salvation of souls, and what is found lacking in them should be supplied
by us. Know, brothers, that the gain of souls is most pleasing to God, and
this we may win better by peace with the clergy, than by discord. If they
hinder the salvation of the people, vengeance is God’s and He will repay
in time. So be ye subject to the prelates and take heed on your part that
no jealousy arise. If ye are sons of peace ye shall gain both clergy and
people, and this will be more acceptable to God than to gain the people
alone by scandalizing the clergy. Cover their slips, and supply their
deficiencies; and when ye shall have done this be ye the more
humble.”[527]

So Francis loved _sancta obedientia_ as he called it. As a wise builder he
set himself upon a rock, to wit, the perfect humility and poverty of the
Son of God; and because of his own humility he called his company the
Minorites (the “lesser” brethren).[528] For himself, he deemed that he
should most rejoice when men should revile him and cast him forth in
shame, and not when they revered and honoured him.[529]

Above all he loved his “lady poverty” and could not say enough to impress
his followers with her high worth and beauty, and with the dignity and
nobility of begging alms for the love of the Lord.[530] As a high-born
lady, poor and beautiful, he had seen her in a vision, in the midst of a
desert, and worthy to be wooed by the King.[531] In the early days when
the brothers were a little band, Francis had gone about and begged for
all. He loved them so that he dreaded to require what might shame them.
But when the labour was too great for one man, so delicate and weak, he
said to them: “Best beloved brothers and my children, do not be ashamed to
go for alms, because the Lord made Himself poor for us in this world after
whose example we have chosen the truest poverty. For this is our heritage,
which our Lord Jesus Christ achieved and left to us and to all who, after
His example, wish to live in holy poverty. I tell you of a truth that many
wise and noble of this world shall join that congregation and hold it for
an honour and a grace to go out for alms. Therefore boldly and with glad
heart seek alms with God’s blessing; and more freely and gladly should you
seek alms than he who offers a hundred pieces of money for one coin, since
to those from whom you ask alms you offer the love of God, saying, ‘Do us
an alms for the love of the Lord God,’ in comparison with which heaven and
earth are nothing.”[532]

With Francis all virtues were holy (_sancta obedientia_, _sancta
paupertas_). Righteousness, goodness, piety, lay in imitating and obeying
his Lord. What joy was there in loving Christ, and being loved by Him! and
what an eternity of bliss awaited the Christian soul! To do right, to
imitate Christ and obey and love Him, is a privilege. Can it be other than
a joy? Indeed, this following of Christ is so blessed, that not to rejoice
continually in it, betokens some failure in obedience and love. Many have
approved this Christian logic; but to realize it in one’s heart and
manifest it in one’s life, was the more singular grace of Francis of
Assisi. His heart sang always unto the Lord; his love flowed out in
gladness to his fellows; his enchanted spirit rejoiced in every creature.
The gospel of this new evangelist awoke the hearts of men to love and joy.
Nothing rejoiced him more than to see his sons rejoice in the Lord; and
nothing was more certain to draw forth his tender reproof than a sad
countenance.

    “Once while the blessed Francis was at the Portiuncula, a certain good
    beggar came along the way, returning from alms-begging in Assisi, and
    he went along praising God with a high voice and great jocundity. As
    he approached, Francis heard him, and ran out and met him in the way,
    and joyfully kissed his shoulder where he bore the wallet containing
    the gifts. Then he lifted the wallet, and set it on his own shoulder,
    and so carried it within, and said to the brothers: ‘Thus I wish to
    have my brothers go and return with alms, joyful and glad and praising
    God.’”[533]

    “Aside from prayer and the divine service, the blessed Francis was
    most zealous in preserving continually an inward and outward spiritual
    gladness. And this he especially cherished in the brothers, and would
    reprove them for sadness and depression. For he said that if the
    servant of God would study to preserve, inwardly and outwardly, the
    spiritual joy which rises from purity of heart, and is acquired
    through the devotion of prayer, the devils could not harm him, for
    they say: So long as the servant of God is joyful in tribulation and
    prosperity, we cannot enter into him or harm him.... To our enemy and
    his members it pertains to be sad, but to us always to rejoice and be
    glad in the Lord.”[534]

Thus the glad temper of his young unconverted days passed into his saintly
life, of which Christ was the primal source of rapture.

    “Drunken with the love and pity of Christ, the blessed Francis would
    sometimes do such acts, when the sweetest melody of spirit within him
    boiling outward gave sound in French, and the strain of the divine
    whisper which his ear had taken secretly, broke forth in a glad French
    song. He would pick up a stick and, holding it over his left arm,
    would with another stick in his right hand make as if drawing a bow
    across a violin (_viellam_), and with fitting gestures would sing in
    French of the Lord Jesus Christ. At last this dancing would end in
    tears, and the jubilee turn to pity for the Passion of Christ. And in
    that he would continue, drawing sighs and groans, as, oblivious to
    what he held in his hands, he was suspended from heaven.”[535]

Francis had been a lover from his youth; naturally and always he had loved
his kind. But from the time when Christ held his heart and mind, his love
of fellow-man was moulded by his thought and love of Christ. Henceforth
the loving acts of Francis moving among his fellows become a loving
following of Christ. He sees in every man the character and person of his
Lord, soliciting his love, commanding what he should do. He never refused,
or permitted his followers to refuse, what was asked in Christ’s name; but
it displeased him when he heard the brothers ask lightly for the love of
God, and he would reprove them, saying: “So high and precious is God’s
love that it never should be invoked save with great reverence and under
pressing need.”[536]

Such a man felt strong personal affection. Pure and wise was his love for
Santa Clara;[537] and a deep affection for one of his earliest and closest
followers touches us in his letter to brother Leo. Not all of the writings
ascribed to Francis breathe his spirit; but we hear his voice in this
letter as it closes: “And if it is needful for thy soul or for thy
consolation, and thou dost wish, my Leo, to come to me, come. Farewell in
Christ.”

Francis’s love was unfailing in compassionate word and deed. Although cold
and sick, he would give his cloak away at the first demand, till his own
appointed minister-general commanded him on his obedience not to do so
without permission; and he saw that the brothers did not injure themselves
with fasting, though he took slight care of himself. On one occasion he
had them all partake of a meal, in order that one delicate brother, who
needed food, might not be put to shame eating while the rest fasted. And
once, early in the morning, he led an old and feeble brother secretly to a
certain vineyard, and there ate grapes before him, that he might not be
ashamed to do likewise, for his health.[538]

The effect of his sweet example melted the hearts of angry men,
reconciling such as had been wronged to those who had wronged them, and
leading ruffians back to ways of gentleness. His conduct on learning of
certain dissensions in Assisi illustrates his method of restoring peace
and amity.

    “After the blessed Francis had composed the Lauds of the creatures,
    which he called the Canticle of Brother Sun, it happened that great
    dissension arose between the bishop and the podestà of the City of
    Assisi, so that the bishop excommunicated the podestà, and the podestà
    made proclamation that no person should sell anything to the bishop or
    buy from him or make any contract with him.

    “When the blessed Francis (who was now so very sick) heard this, he
    was greatly moved with pity, since no one interposed between them to
    make peace. And he said to his companions: ‘It is a great shame for us
    servants of God that the bishop and the podestà hate each other so,
    and none interposes to make peace.’

    “And so for this occasion he at once made a verse in the Lauds above
    mentioned and said:

      ‘Praised be thou, O my Lord, for those who forgive from love of thee,
       And endure sickness and tribulation.
       Blessed are those who shall endure in peace,
       For by thee, Most High, shall they be crowned.’

    “Then he called one of his companions and said to him: ‘Go to the
    podestà, and on my behalf tell him to come to the bishop’s palace with
    the magnates of the city and others that he may bring with him.’

    “And as that brother went, he said to two other of his companions: ‘Go
    before the bishop and podestà and the others who may be with them, and
    sing the Canticle of Brother Sun, and I trust in the Lord that He will
    straightway humble their hearts, and they will return to their former
    affection and friendship.’

    “When all were assembled in the piazza of the episcopate, the two
    brothers arose, and one of them said: ‘The blessed Francis in his
    sickness made a Lauds of the Lord from His creatures in praise of the
    Lord and for the edification of our neighbour. Wherefore he begs that
    you would listen to it with great devoutness.’ And then they began to
    say and sing them.

    “At once the podestà rose, and with folded hands listened intently, as
    if it were the Lord’s gospel; this he did with the greatest devoutness
    and with many tears, for he had great trust and devotion toward the
    blessed Francis.

    “When the Lauds of the Lord were finished, the podestà said before
    them all: ‘Truly I say to you that not only my lord-bishop, whom I
    wish and ought to hold as my lord, but if any one had slain my brother
    or son I would forgive him.’ And so saying, he threw himself at the
    bishop’s feet, and said to him: ‘Look, I am ready in all things to
    make satisfaction to you as shall please you, for the love of our Lord
    Jesus Christ and His servant the blessed Francis.’

    “The bishop accepting him, raised him with his hands and said:
    ‘Because of my office it became me to be humble, and since I am
    naturally quick-tempered you ought to pardon me.’ And so with great
    kindness and love they embraced and kissed each other.

    “The brothers were astounded and made glad when they saw fulfilled to
    the letter the concord predicted by the blessed Francis. And all
    others present ascribed it as a great miracle to the merits of the
    blessed Francis, that the Lord suddenly had visited them, and out of
    such dissension and scandal had brought such concord.”[539]

It would be mistaken to refer to any single pious sentiment, the saint’s
blithe love of animals and birds and flowers, and his regard even for
senseless things. It is right, however, for Thomas of Celano, as a proper
monkish biographer, to say:

    “While hastening through this world of pilgrimage and exile that
    traveller (Francis) rejoiced in those things which are in the world,
    and not a little. As toward the princes of darkness he used the world
    as a field for battle, but as toward the Lord he treated it as the
    brightest mirror of goodness; in the fabric he commended the
    Artificer, and what he found in created things, he referred to the
    Maker; he exulted over all the works of the hands of the Lord, and in
    the pleasing spectacle beheld the life-giving reason and the cause. In
    beautiful things he perceived that which was most beautiful, as all
    good things acclaim, He who made us is best. Through vestiges
    impressed on things he followed his chosen, and made of all a ladder
    by which to reach the throne. He embraced all things in a feeling of
    unheard of devotion, speaking to them concerning the Lord and
    exhorting them in His praise.”[540]

This was true, even if it was not all the truth. Living creatures spoke to
Francis of their Maker, while things insensible aroused his reverence
through their suggestiveness, their scriptural associations, or their
symbolism. But beyond these motives there was in this poet Francis a happy
love of nature. If nature always spoke to him of God, its loveliness
needed no stimulation of devotion in order to be loved by him. His feeling
for it found everywhere sensibility and responsiveness. He was as if
possessed by an imaginative animism, wherein every object had a soul. His
acts and words may appear fantastic; they never lack loveliness and
beauty.[541]

    “Wrapped in the love of God, the blessed Francis perfectly discerned
    the goodness of God not only in his own soul but in every creature.
    Wherefore he was affected with a singular and yearning (_viscerosa_)
    love toward creatures, and especially toward those in which was
    figured something of God or something pertaining to religion.

    “Whence above all birds he loved a little bird called the lark (the
    _lodola capellata_ of the vulgar tongue) and would say of her: ‘Sister
    lark has a hood like a Religious and is a humble bird, because she
    goes willingly along the road to find for herself some grains of corn.
    Even if she find them in dung she picks them out and eats them. In
    flying she praises the Lord very sweetly, as the good Religious look
    down upon earthly things, whose conversation is always in the heavens
    and whose intent is always upon the praise of God. Her garments are
    like earth, that is, her feathers, and set an example to the Religious
    that they should not have delicate and gaudy garments, but such as are
    vile in price and colour, as earth is viler than other
    elements.’”[542]

The unquestionably true story of Francis preaching to the birds is known
to all, especially to readers of the _Fioretti_. Thus Thomas of Celano
tells it: As the blessed Father Francis was journeying through the Spoleto
Valley, he reached a place near Mevanium, where there was a multitude of
birds--doves, crows, and other kinds. When he saw them, for the love and
sweet affection which he bore toward the lower creatures, he quickly ran
to them, leaving his companions. As he came near and saw that they were
waiting for him, he saluted them in his accustomed way. Then wondering
that they did not take flight, he was very glad, and humbly begged them to
listen to the word of God; among other things he said to them: “My
brothers who fly, verily you should praise the Lord your Maker and love
Him always, who gave you feathers to clothe you and wings to fly with and
whatever was necessary to you. God made you noble among creatures,
prepared your mansion in the purity of air; and though you neither sow nor
reap, nevertheless without any solicitude on your part, He protects and
guides you.”

At this, those little birds as he was speaking, marvellously exulting,
began to stretch out their necks and spread their wings and open their
beaks, looking at him. He passed through their midst, sweeping their heads
and bodies with his mantle. At length he blessed them, and with the sign
of the cross gave them leave to fly away. Then returning gladdened to his
companions, he yet blamed himself for his neglect to preach to the birds
before, since they so reverently heard the word of God. And from that day
he ceased not to exhort all flying and creeping things, and even things
insensible, to the praise and love of their Creator.[543]

Thomas also says that above all animals Francis loved the lambs, because
so frequently in Scripture the humility of our Lord is likened unto a
lamb. One day, as Francis was making his way through the March of Ancona
he met a goat-herd pasturing his flock of goats. Among them, humbly and
quietly, a little lamb was feeding. Francis stopped as he saw it, and,
deeply touched, said to the brother accompanying him: “Dost thou see this
sheep walking so gently among the goats? I tell you, thus our Lord Jesus
Christ used to walk mild and humble among Pharisees and chief priests. For
love of Him, then, I beg thee, my son, to buy this little sheep with me
and lead it out from among these goats.”

The brother was also moved with pity. They had nothing with them save
their wretched cloaks, but a merchant chancing to come along the way, the
money was obtained from him. Giving thanks to God and leading the sheep
they had bought, they reached the town of Osimo whither they were going;
and entering the house of the bishop, were honourably received by him. Yet
my lord bishop wondered at the sheep which Francis was leading with such
tender love. But when Francis had set forth the parable of his sermon, the
bishop too was touched and gave thanks to God.

The following day they considered what to do with the sheep, and it was
given over to the nuns of the cloister of St. Severinus, who received it
as a great boon given them from God. Long while they cared for it, and in
the course of time wove a cloak from its wool, which they sent to the
blessed Francis at the Portiuncula at the time of a Chapter meeting. The
saint accepted it with joy, and kissed it, and begged all the brothers to
be glad with him.[544]

Celano also tells how Francis loved the grass and vines and stones and
woods, and all comely things in the fields, also the streams, and earth
and fire and air, and called every creature “brother”;[545] also how he
would not put out the flame of a lamp or candle, how he walked reverently
upon stones, and was careful to injure no living thing.[546]

There are two documents which are both (the one with much reason and the
other with certainty) ascribed to Francis. Utterly different as they are,
each still remains a clear expression of his spirit. The one is the Lauds,
commonly called the Canticle of the Brother Sun, and the other is the
saint’s last Testament. One may think of the Canticle as the closing
stanza of a life which was an enacted poem:

    Most High, omnipotent, good Lord, thine is the praise, the glory, the
    honour and every benediction;

    To thee alone, Most High, these do belong, and no man is worthy to
    name thee.

    Praised be thou, my Lord, with all thy creatures, especially milord
    Brother Sun that dawns and lightens us;

    And he, beautiful and radiant with great splendour, signifies thee,
    Most High.

    Be praised, my Lord, for Sister Moon and the stars that thou hast made
    bright and precious and beautiful.

    Be praised, my Lord, for Brother Wind, and for the air and cloud and
    the clear sky and for all weathers through which thou givest
    sustenance to thy creatures.

    Be praised, my Lord, for Sister Water, that is very useful and humble
    and precious and chaste.

    Be praised, my Lord, for Brother Fire, through whom thou dost illumine
    the night, and comely is he and glad and bold and strong.

    Be praised, my Lord, for Sister, Our Mother Earth, that doth cherish
    and keep us, and produces various fruits with coloured flowers and the
    grass.

    Be praised, my Lord, for those who forgive for love of thee, and
    endure sickness and tribulation; blessed are they who endure in peace;
    for by thee, Most High, shall they be crowned.

    Be praised, my Lord, for our bodily death, from which no living man
    can escape; woe unto those who die in mortal sin.

    Blessed are they that have found thy most holy will, for the second
    death shall do them no hurt.

    Praise and bless my Lord, and render thanks, and serve Him with great
    humility.[547]

The self-expression of the more personal parts of the Testament supplement
these utterances:

    “Thus the Lord gave to me, Brother Francis, to begin to do penance:
    because while I was in sins, it seemed too bitter to me to see lepers;
    and the Lord himself led me among them, and I did mercy with them. And
    departing from them, that which seemed to me bitter, was turned for me
    into sweetness of soul and body. And a little afterwards I went out of
    the world.

    “And the Lord gave me such faith in churches, that thus simply I
    should pray and say: ‘We adore thee, Lord Jesus Christ, and in all thy
    churches which are in the whole world, and we bless thee, because
    through thy holy cross thou hast redeemed the world.’

    “Afterwards the Lord gave and gives me so great faith in priests who
    live after the model of the holy Roman Church according to their
    order, that if they should persecute me I will still turn to them. And
    if I should have as great wisdom as Solomon had, and should have found
    the lowliest secular priests in the parishes where they dwell, I do
    not wish to preach contrary to their wish. And them and all others I
    wish to fear and honour as my lords; and I do not wish to consider sin
    in them, because I see the Son of God in them and they are my lords.

    “And the reason I do this is because corporeally I see nothing in this
    world of that most high Son of God except His most holy body and most
    holy blood, which they receive and which they alone administer. And I
    wish these most holy mysteries to be honoured above all and revered,
    and to be placed together in precious places. Wherever I shall find
    His most holy names and His written words in unfit places, I wish to
    collect them, and I ask that they be collected and placed in a proper
    place; and all theologians and those who administer the most holy
    divine words, we ought to honour and venerate, as those who administer
    to us spirit and life.

    “And after the Lord gave me brothers, no one showed me what I ought to
    do, but the Most High himself revealed to me that I ought to live
    according to the model of the holy Gospel. And I in a few words and
    simply had this written, and the lord Pope confirmed it to me. And
    they who were coming to receive life, all that they were able to have
    they gave to the poor; and they were content with one patched cloak,
    with the cord and breeches; and we did not wish to have more. We who
    were of the clergy said our office as other clergy; the lay members
    said ‘Our Father.’ And willingly we remained in churches; and we were
    simple (_idiotae_) and subject to all. And I laboured with my hands,
    and I wish to labour; and I wish all other brothers to labour. Who do
    not know how, let them learn, not from the cupidity of receiving the
    price of labour, but on account of the example, and to repel
    slothfulness. And when the price of labour is not given to us, we
    resort to the table of the Lord by seeking alms from door to door.

    “The Lord revealed to me a salutation that we should say: The Lord
    give thee peace.”

    Francis’s precepts for the brothers follow here. The last paragraph of
    the Will is: “And whoever shall have observed these principles, in
    heaven may he be filled with the benediction of the most high Father,
    and on earth may he be filled with the benediction of His beloved Son,
    with the most holy spirit Paraclete, and with all the virtues of the
    heavens and with everything holy. And I, Brother Francis, your very
    little servant, so far as I am able, confirm to you within and without
    that most holy benediction.”




