CHAPTER XVII

THE QUALITY OF LOVE IN SAINT BERNARD


Through the prodigious power of his personality, St. Bernard gave new life
to monasticism, promoted the reform of the secular clergy and the
suppression of heresy, ended a papal schism, set on foot the Second
Crusade, and for a quarter of a century swayed Christendom as never holy
man before or after him. An adequate account of his career would embrace
the entire history of the first half of the twelfth century.[472]

The man who was to move men with his love, and quell the proud with fear,
had, as a youth, a graceful figure, a sweet countenance, and manners the
most winning. Later in life he is spoken of as cheerfully bearing
reproaches, but shamefaced at praise, and his gentle manners are again
mentioned.

    “As a helpmeet for his holy spirit, God made his body to conform. In
    his flesh there was visible a certain grace, but spiritual rather than
    of the flesh. A brightness not of earth shone in his look; there was
    an angelic purity in his eyes, and a dove-like simplicity. The beauty
    of the inner man was so great that it would burst forth in visible
    tokens, and the outer man would seem bathed from the store of inward
    purity and copious grace. His frame was of the slightest
    (_tenuissimum_), and most spare of flesh; a blush often tinged the
    delicate skin of his cheeks. And a certain natural heat (_quidquid
    caloris naturalis_) was in him, arising from assiduous meditation and
    penitent zeal. His hair was bright yellow, his beard reddish with
    some white hairs toward the end of his life. Actually of medium
    stature, he looked taller.”[473]

This same biography says:

    “He who had set him apart, from his mother’s womb, for the work of a
    preacher, had given him, with a weak body, a voice sufficiently strong
    and clear. His speech, whatever persons he spoke to for the edifying
    of souls, was adapted to his audience; for he knew the intelligence,
    the habits and occupations of each and all. To country folk he spoke
    as if born and bred in the country; and so to other classes, as it he
    had been always occupied with their business. He was learned with the
    erudite, and simple with the simple, and with spiritual men rich in
    illustrations of perfection and wisdom. He adapted himself to all,
    desiring to gain all for Christ.”[474]

Bernard was born of noble parents at the Chateau of Fontaines, near Dijon,
in the year 1090, and was educated in a church school at Chatillon on the
Seine. It is an ofttold story, how, when little more than twenty years of
age, he drew together a band formed of his own brothers, his uncle, and
his friends, and led them to Citeaux,[475] his ardent soul unsatisfied so
long as one held back. Three years later, in 1115, the Abbot, Stephen
Harding, entrusted him with the headship of the new monastery, to be
founded in the domains of the Count of Troyes. Bernard set forth with
twelve companions, came to Clara Vallis on the river Aube, and placed his
convent in that austere solitude.

Great were the attractions of Clairvaux (Clara Vallis) under Bernard’s
vigorous and loving rule. Its monks increased so rapidly and so constantly
that during its founder’s life sixty-five bands were sent forth to rear
new convents. Meanwhile, Bernard’s activities and influence widened, till
they seemed to compass western Christendom. He had become a power in the
politics of Church and State. In 1130 he was summoned by Louis le Gros
practically to determine the claims of the rival Popes Innocent II. and
Anacletus II. He decided for the former, and was the chief instrument of
his eventual reinstatement at Rome. Before this Bernard’s health had been
broken by his extreme austerities. Yet even the lamentable failure of the
Second Crusade, zealously promoted by him, did not break his power over
Europe, which continued unimpaired until his death in 1153.

This active and masterful man was impelled by those elements of the _vita
contemplativa_ which formed his inner self. First and last and always he
was a monk. Had he not been the very monk he was, he would not have been
the dominator of men and situations that he proved himself to be.
Temperament fashions the objects of contemplation, and shapes the yearning
and aversions, of great monks. The temperamental element of love--the love
of God and man, with its appurtenant detestations--made the heart of
Bernard’s _vita contemplativa_, and impassioned and empowered his active
faculties. It was the keynote of his life: in his letters it speaks in
words of fire, while other writings of the saint analyze this great human
quality with profundity and truth. In these he renders explicit the modes
of affection which man may have for man and above all for God; he sets
them forth as the path as well as goal of life on earth, and then as the
rapt summit of attainment in the life to come. Through all its stages, as
it flows from self to fellow, as it rises from man to God, love still is
love, and forms the unifying principle among men and between them and God.

Let us trace in his letters the nature and the power of Bernard’s love,
and see with what yearning he loved his fellows, seeking to withdraw them
from the world; and how his love strove to be as sword and armour against
the flesh and the devil. By easy transition we shall pass to Bernard’s
warning wrath, flung against those who would turn the struggling soul
aside, or threaten the Church’s peace; then by more arduous, but still
unbroken stages, we may rise to the love of Jesus, and through love of the
God-man to love of God. We shall realize at the close why that last
mediaeval assessor of destinies, whose name was Dante Alighieri, selected
St. Bernard as the exponent of the blessed vision which is salvation’s
crown in the paradise of God.[476]

The way of life at Clara Vallis might discourage monks of feeble zeal.
Among the brethren of these early days was one named Robert, a cousin of
the Abbot, seemingly of weak and petulant disposition. Soon he fled, to
seek a softer cell in Cluny, the great and rich monastery to which his
parents appear to have dedicated him in childhood. For a while Bernard
suppressed his grief; but the day came when he could endure no longer
Robert’s abandonment of his soul’s safety and of the friend who yearned
for him. He stole out of the monastery, accompanied by a monk named
William. There, in the open (_sub dio_), Bernard dictated a long letter to
be sent to the deserter. While the two were busy, the one dictating, the
other writing, a rainstorm broke upon them. William wished to stop. “It is
God’s work; write and fear not,” said Bernard. So William wrote on, in the
midst of the rain; but no drop fell on him or the parchment; for the power
of love which dictated the letter preserved the parchment on which it was
being written.[477]

Whoever has read this letter in its own fervent Latin will not care to
dispute this miracle, for which it stands first in the collection of
Bernard’s correspondence. Bernard does not recriminate or argue in it; his
love shall bring the young monk back to him. Yes, yes, he says to all that
the other has urged regarding fancied slights and persecution:

    “Quite right; I admit it. I am not writing in order to contend, but to
    end contention. To flee persecution is no fault in him who flees, but
    in him who pursues; I do not deny it. I pass over what has happened; I
    do not ask why or how it happened. I do not discuss faults, I do not
    dispute as to the circumstances, I have no memory for injuries. I
    speak only what is in my heart. Wretched me, that I lack thee, that I
    do not see thee, that I am living without thee, for whom to die would
    be to live; without whom to live, is to die. I ask not why thou hast
    gone away; I complain only that thou dost not return. Come, and there
    shall be peace; return, and all shall be made good.

    “It was certainly my fault that thou didst go away. I was too austere
    with thy young years, and treated thee inhumanly. So thou saidst when
    here, and so I hear thou dost still reproach me. But that shall not be
    imputed to thee. I never meant it harshly, I was only indiscreet. Now
    thou wilt find me different, and I thee. Where before thou didst fear
    the master, thou shalt now embrace the companion. Do not think that I
    will not excuse any fault of thine. Dost thou wish to be quite free
    from fault? then return. If thou wilt forget thy fault I will pardon
    it; also pardon thou me, and I too will forget my fault.”

Bernard then argues long and passionately against those who had led the
young man away and received him with such blandishments at Cluny; and
passionately he argues against the insidious softening of monastic
principles.

    “Arise, soldier of Christ, arise, shake off the dust, return to the
    battle whence thou hast fled, and more bravely shalt thou fight and
    more gloriously triumph. Christ has many soldiers who bravely began,
    stood fast and conquered; He has few who have turned from flight and
    renewed the combat. Everything rare is precious; and thou among that
    rare company shalt the more radiantly shine.

    “Thou art fearful? so be it; but why dost thou fear where there is no
    fear, and why dost thou not fear where everything is to be feared?
    Because thou hast fled from the battle-line, dost thou think to have
    escaped the foe? It is easier for the Adversary to pursue a fugitive
    than to bear himself against manful defence. Secure, arms cast aside,
    thou takest thy morning slumbers, the hour when Christ will have
    arisen! The multitude of enemies beset the house, and thou sleepest.
    Is it safer to be caught alone and sleeping, than armed with others in
    the field? Arouse thee, seize thy arms, and escape to thy
    fellow-soldiers. Dost thou recoil at the weight of thy arms, O
    delicate soldier! Before the enemy’s darts the shield is no burden,
    nor the helmet heavy. The bravest soldiers tremble when the trumpet is
    heard before the battle is joined; but then hope of victory and fear
    of defeat make them brave. How canst thou tremble, walled round with
    the zeal of thy armed brethren, angels bearing aid at thy right hand,
    and thy leader Christ? There shalt thou safely fight, secure of
    victory. O battle, safe with Christ and for Christ! In which there is
    no wound or defeat or circumvention so long as thou fleest not. Only
    flight loses the victory, which death does not lose. Blessed art thou,
    and quickly to be crowned, dying in battle. Woe for thee, if
    recoiling, thou losest at once the victory and the crown--which may He
    avert, my beloved son, who in the Judgment will award thee deeper
    damnation because of this letter of mine if He finds thee to have
    taken no amendment from it.”

“It is God’s work,” said Bernard to the hesitating scribe. These words
suggest the character of the love which inspired this letter. He loved
Robert as man yearns for man; but his motive was to do God’s will, and win
the young man back to salvation. In after years this young man returned to
Clara Vallis.

It was Bernard’s lot to write many letters urging procrastinators to
fulfil their vows,[478] or appealing to those who had laid aside the arms
of austerity, perhaps betaking themselves to the more worldly life of the
secular clergy. This seems to have been the case with a young canon Fulco,
whom an ambitious uncle sought to draw back to the world, or at least to a
career of sacerdotal emolument. In fact, Fulco at last became an
archdeacon; from which it may be inferred that in his case Bernard’s
appeal was not successful. He had poured forth his arguments in an ardent
letter.[479] Love compels him to use words to make the recipient grieve;
for love would have him feel grief, that he might no longer have true
cause for grief--good mother love, who can cherish the weak, exercise
those who have entered upon their course, or quell the restless, and so
show herself differently toward her sons, all of whom she loves. This
letter, like the one to Robert, concludes with a burning peroration:

    “What dost thou in the city, dainty soldier? Thy fellows whom thou
    hast deserted, fight and conquer; they storm heaven (_coelum rapiunt_)
    and reign, and thou, sitting on thy palfrey (_ambulatorem_), clothed
    in purple and fine linen, goest ambling about the highways!”

Bernard also wrote letters of consolation to parents whose sons had become
monks, or letters of warning to those who sought to withdraw a monk from
his good fight. In one instance, his influence had made a monk of a youth
of gentle birth named Godfrey, to his parents’ grief. So Bernard writes to
them:

    “If God makes your son His also, what have you lost, or he? He, from
    rich, becomes richer, from being noble, still more illustrious, and
    what is more than all, from a sinner he becomes a saint. It behoved
    him to be made ready for the Kingdom prepared for him from the
    foundation of the world, and for this reason it is well for him to
    spend with us his short span of days, so that clean from the filth of
    living in the world, earth’s dust shaken off, he may become fit for
    the heavenly mansion. If you love him you will rejoice that he goes to
    his Father, and such a Father! He goes to God, but you do not lose
    him; rather through him you gain many sons. For all of us who belong
    to Clara Vallis have taken him to be our brother and you for our
    parents.

    “Perhaps you fear this hard life for his tender body--that were to
    fear where there is nothing to fear. Have faith and be comforted. I
    will be a father to him and he shall be my son until from my hands the
    Father of Mercies and God of all consolation shall receive him. Do not
    grieve; do not weep; your Godfrey is hastening to joy, not to sorrow.
    A father to him will I be, a mother too, a brother and a sister. I
    will make the crooked ways straight, and the steep places plain. I
    will so temper and provide for him that as his spirit profits, his
    body shall not want. So shall he serve the Lord in joy and gladness,
    and shall sing before Him, How great is the glory of the Lord.”[480]

Young Godfrey was a daintily nurtured plant. For all the Abbot’s eloquence
he did not stay in Clara Vallis. The world drew him back. It was now for
the saint to weep:

    “I grieve over thee, my son Godfrey; I grieve over thee. And with
    reason. For who would not lament that the flower of thy youth which,
    to the joy of angels, thou didst offer unsullied to God in the odour
    of sweetness, is now trampled on by demons, defiled with sins, and
    contaminated by the world. How could you, who were called by God,
    follow the devil recalling thee? How could you, whom He had begun to
    draw to Himself, withdraw your foot from the very entry upon glory? In
    thee I see the truth of those words: ‘A man’s foes are they of his own
    household.’ Thy friends and neighbours drew near and stood up against
    thee. They called thee back into the jaws of the lion and the gates of
    death. They have set thee in darkness, like the dead; and thou art
    nigh to go down into the belly of hell, which now is ravening to
    devour thee.

    “Turn back, I say, turn back, before the abyss swallows you and the
    pit closes its mouth, before you are engulfed whence you shall not
    escape, before, bound hand and foot, you are cast into outer darkness
    where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, before you are hurled
    into darkness, shut in with the darkness of death.

    “Perhaps you blush to return, where you have only now fallen away.
    Blush for flight, and not for turning to renew the combat. The
    conflict is not ended; the hostile arrays have not withdrawn from each
    other. We would not conquer without you, nor do we envy you your share
    of the glory. Joyful we will run to thee, and receive thee in our
    arms, crying: ‘It is meet to make merry and be glad; for this our son
    was dead and is alive again, was lost and is found.’”[481]

Who knows whether this letter brought back the little monk? Bernard wrote
so lovingly to him, so gently to his parents. He could write otherwise,
and show himself insensible to this world’s pestering tears. To the
importunate parents of a monk named Elias, who would drag him away from
Clara Vallis, Bernard writes in their son’s name thus:

    “To his dear parents, Ingorranus and Iveta, Elias, monk but sinner,
    sends daily prayers.

    “The only cause for which it is permitted not to obey parents is God;
    for He said: ‘Whoso loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy
    of me.’ If you truly love me as good and faithful parents, why do you
    molest my endeavour to please the Father of all, and attempt to
    withdraw me from the service of Him, to serve whom is to reign? For
    this I ought not to obey you as parents, but regard you as enemies. If
    you loved me, you would rejoice, because I go to my Father and yours.
    But what is there between you and me? What have I from you save sin
    and misery? And indeed the corruptible body which I carry I admit I
    have from you. Is it not enough that you brought miserable me into the
    misery of this hateful world? that you, sinners, in your sin produced
    a sinner? and that him born in sin, in sin you nourished? Envying the
    mercy which I have obtained from Him who desireth not the death of a
    sinner, would you make me a child of hell?

    “O harsh father! savage mother! parents cruel and impious--parents!
    rather destroyers, whose grief is the safety of the child, whose
    consolation is the death of their son! who would drag me back to the
    shipwreck which I, naked, escaped; who would give me again to the
    robbers when through the good Samaritan I am a little recovering from
    my wounds.

    “Cease then, my parents,” concludes the letter after many other
    reproofs, “cease to afflict yourselves with vain weeping and to
    disquiet me. No messengers you send will force me to leave. Clara
    Vallis will I never forsake. This is my rest, and here shall be my
    habitation. Here will I pray without ceasing for my sins and yours;
    here with constant prayer will I implore that He whose love has
    separated us for a little while, will join us in another life happy
    and inseparable,--in whose love we may live forever and ever.
    Amen.”[482]

If Bernard was severe toward those who threatened some loved person’s
weal, his anger burned more fiercely against those whom he deemed enemies
of God. Heavy was his hand upon the evils of the Church: “The insolence of
the clergy--to which the bishop’s neglect is mother--troubles the earth
and molests the Church. The bishops give what is holy to the dogs, and
pearls to swine.”[483]

Likewise, fearlessly but with restraint arising from his respect for all
power ordained of God, Bernard opposes kings. Thus he writes to Louis the
Fat, in regard to the election of a bishop, with many protests, however,
that he would not oppose the royal power--for which we note his reason:
“If the whole world conspired to force me to do aught against kingly
majesty, yet would I fear God, and would not dare to offend the king
ordained by Him. For neither do I forget where I read that whosoever
resisteth power, resisteth the ordinance of God.” But--but--but--continues
the letter, through many qualifyings which are also admonitions. At last
come the words: “It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, even for thee, O king.” Thereupon the saint does not fail to
speak his mind.[484]

Bernard’s fiercest denunciations were reserved for heretics and
schismatics, for Abaelard, for Arnold of Brescia, for the Antipope
Anacletus--were they not enemies of God? Clearly the saint saw and
understood these men from his point of view. Thus in a letter to Innocent
II.[485] he sums up his attitude towards Abaelard: “Peter Abaelard is
trying to make void the merit of Christian faith, when he deems himself
able by human reason to comprehend God altogether. He ascends to the
heavens and descends even to the abyss! Nothing may hide from him in the
depths of hell or in the heights above! The man is great in his own
eyes--this scrutinizer of Majesty and fabricator of heresies.” Here was
the gist of the matter. That a man should be great in his own eyes, apart
from God, and teach others so, stirred Bernard’s bowels.[486]

Of Arnold, the impetuous clerical revolutionist and pupil of Abaelard,
Bernard writes with fury: “Arnold of Brescia, whose speech is honey and
whose teaching poison, whom Brescia vomited forth, Rome abhorred, France
repelled, Germany abominates, Italy will not receive, is said to be with
you.”[487] Again, Bernard rejoices with great joy when he hears that the
anti-pope who divided Christendom was dead.[488]

It is pleasant to turn back to Bernard’s lovingness and mercy. His God
would not condemn those who repented; and the saint can be gentle toward
sinners possibly repentant. He urges certain monks to receive back an
erring brother: “Take him back then, you who are spiritual, in the spirit
of gentleness; let love be confirmed in him, and let good intention excuse
the evil done. Receive back with joy him whom you wept as lost.”[489] In
another letter he urges a countess to be more lenient with her
children;[490] and there is a story of his begging a robber from the hands
of the executioners, and leading him to Clara Vallis, where he became at
length a holy man.[491]

So one sees Bernard’s severity, his gentle mercy, and the love burning
within him for his fellows’ good. Such were the emotions of Bernard the
saint. The man’s human heart could also yearn, and feel bereavement in
spite of faith. As his zeal draws him from land to land, he is home-sick
for Clara Vallis. From Italy, in 1137, fighting to crush the anti-pope, a
