Chapter XVI


What followed showed that Mrs. Strickland was a woman of character.
Whatever anguish she suffered she concealed. She saw shrewdly that the
world is quickly bored by the recital of misfortune, and willingly
avoids the sight of distress. Whenever she went out—and compassion for
her misadventure made her friends eager to entertain her—she bore a
demeanour that was perfect. She was brave, but not too obviously;
cheerful, but not brazenly; and she seemed more anxious to listen to
the troubles of others than to discuss her own. Whenever she spoke of
her husband it was with pity. Her attitude towards him at first
perplexed me. One day she said to me:

“You know, I’m convinced you were mistaken about Charles being alone.
From what I’ve been able to gather from certain sources that I can’t
tell you, I know that he didn’t leave England by himself.”

“In that case he has a positive genius for covering up his tracks.”

She looked away and slightly coloured.

“What I mean is, if anyone talks to you about it, please don’t
contradict it if they say he eloped with somebody.”

“Of course not.”

She changed the conversation as though it were a matter to which she
attached no importance. I discovered presently that a peculiar story
was circulating among her friends. They said that Charles Strickland
had become infatuated with a French dancer, whom he had first seen in
the ballet at the Empire, and had accompanied her to Paris. I could not
find out how this had arisen, but, singularly enough, it created much
sympathy for Mrs. Strickland, and at the same time gave her not a
little prestige. This was not without its use in the calling which she
had decided to follow. Colonel MacAndrew had not exaggerated when he
said she would be penniless, and it was necessary for her to earn her
own living as quickly as she could. She made up her mind to profit by
her acquaintance with so many writers, and without loss of time began
to learn shorthand and typewriting. Her education made it likely that
she would be a typist more efficient than the average, and her story
made her claims appealing. Her friends promised to send her work, and
took care to recommend her to all theirs.

The MacAndrews, who were childless and in easy circumstances, arranged
to undertake the care of the children, and Mrs. Strickland had only
herself to provide for. She let her flat and sold her furniture. She
settled in two tiny rooms in Westminster, and faced the world anew. She
was so efficient that it was certain she would make a success of the
adventure.




Chapter XVII


It was about five years after this that I decided to live in Paris for
a while. I was growing stale in London. I was tired of doing much the
same thing every day. My friends pursued their course with
uneventfulness; they had no longer any surprises for me, and when I met
them I knew pretty well what they would say; even their love-affairs
had a tedious banality. We were like tram-cars running on their lines
from terminus to terminus, and it was possible to calculate within
small limits the number of passengers they would carry. Life was
ordered too pleasantly. I was seized with panic. I gave up my small
apartment, sold my few belongings, and resolved to start afresh.

I called on Mrs. Strickland before I left. I had not seen her for some
time, and I noticed changes in her; it was not only that she was older,
thinner, and more lined; I think her character had altered. She had
made a success of her business, and now had an office in Chancery Lane;
she did little typing herself, but spent her time correcting the work
of the four girls she employed. She had had the idea of giving it a
certain daintiness, and she made much use of blue and red inks; she
bound the copy in coarse paper, that looked vaguely like watered silk,
in various pale colours; and she had acquired a reputation for neatness
and accuracy. She was making money. But she could not get over the idea
that to earn her living was somewhat undignified, and she was inclined
to remind you that she was a lady by birth. She could not help bringing
into her conversation the names of people she knew which would satisfy
you that she had not sunk in the social scale. She was a little ashamed
of her courage and business capacity, but delighted that she was going
to dine the next night with a K.C. who lived in South Kensington. She
was pleased to be able to tell you that her son was at Cambridge, and
it was with a little laugh that she spoke of the rush of dances to
which her daughter, just out, was invited. I suppose I said a very
stupid thing.

“Is she going into your business?” I asked.

“Oh no; I wouldn’t let her do that,” Mrs. Strickland answered. “She’s
so pretty. I’m sure she’ll marry well.”

“I should have thought it would be a help to you.”

“Several people have suggested that she should go on the stage, but of
course I couldn’t consent to that, I know all the chief dramatists, and
I could get her a part to-morrow, but I shouldn’t like her to mix with
all sorts of people.”

I was a little chilled by Mrs. Strickland’s exclusiveness.

“Do you ever hear of your husband?”

“No; I haven’t heard a word. He may be dead for all I know.”

“I may run across him in Paris. Would you like me to let you know about
him?”

She hesitated a minute.

“If he’s in any real want I’m prepared to help him a little. I’d send
you a certain sum of money, and you could give it him gradually, as he
needed it.”

“That’s very good of you,” I said.

But I knew it was not kindness that prompted the offer. It is not true
that suffering ennobles the character; happiness does that sometimes,
but suffering, for the most part, makes men petty and vindictive.




