Chapter LVI


Then two years more went by, or perhaps three, for time passes
imperceptibly in Tahiti, and it is hard to keep count of it; but at
last a message was brought to Dr. Coutras that Strickland was dying.
Ata had waylaid the cart that took the mail into Papeete, and besought
the man who drove it to go at once to the doctor. But the doctor was
out when the summons came, and it was evening when he received it. It
was impossible to start at so late an hour, and so it was not till next
day soon after dawn that he set out. He arrived at Taravao, and for the
last time tramped the seven kilometres that led to Ata’s house. The
path was overgrown, and it was clear that for years now it had remained
all but untrodden. It was not easy to find the way. Sometimes he had to
stumble along the bed of the stream, and sometimes he had to push
through shrubs, dense and thorny; often he was obliged to climb over
rocks in order to avoid the hornet-nests that hung on the trees over
his head. The silence was intense.

It was with a sigh of relief that at last he came upon the little
unpainted house, extraordinarily bedraggled now, and unkempt; but here
too was the same intolerable silence. He walked up, and a little boy,
playing unconcernedly in the sunshine, started at his approach and fled
quickly away: to him the stranger was the enemy. Dr. Coutras had a
sense that the child was stealthily watching him from behind a tree.
The door was wide open. He called out, but no one answered. He stepped
in. He knocked at a door, but again there was no answer. He turned the
handle and entered. The stench that assailed him turned him horribly
sick. He put his handkerchief to his nose and forced himself to go in.
The light was dim, and after the brilliant sunshine for a while he
could see nothing. Then he gave a start. He could not make out where he
was. He seemed on a sudden to have entered a magic world. He had a
vague impression of a great primeval forest and of naked people walking
beneath the trees. Then he saw that there were paintings on the walls.

“_Mon Dieu_, I hope the sun hasn’t affected me,” he muttered.

A slight movement attracted his attention, and he saw that Ata was
lying on the floor, sobbing quietly.

“Ata,” he called. “Ata.”

She took no notice. Again the beastly stench almost made him faint, and
he lit a cheroot. His eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, and now he
was seized by an overwhelming sensation as he stared at the painted
walls. He knew nothing of pictures, but there was something about these
that extraordinarily affected him. From floor to ceiling the walls were
covered with a strange and elaborate composition. It was indescribably
wonderful and mysterious. It took his breath away. It filled him with
an emotion which he could not understand or analyse. He felt the awe
and the delight which a man might feel who watched the beginning of a
world. It was tremendous, sensual, passionate; and yet there was
something horrible there, too, something which made him afraid. It was
the work of a man who had delved into the hidden depths of nature and
had discovered secrets which were beautiful and fearful too. It was the
work of a man who knew things which it is unholy for men to know. There
was something primeval there and terrible. It was not human. It brought
to his mind vague recollections of black magic. It was beautiful and
obscene.

“_Mon Dieu_, this is genius.”

The words were wrung from him, and he did not know he had spoken.

Then his eyes fell on the bed of mats in the corner, and he went up,
and he saw the dreadful, mutilated, ghastly object which had been
Strickland. He was dead. Dr. Coutras made an effort of will and bent
over that battered horror. Then he started violently, and terror blazed
in his heart, for he felt that someone was behind him. It was Ata. He
had not heard her get up. She was standing at his elbow, looking at
what he looked at.

“Good Heavens, my nerves are all distraught,” he said. “You nearly
frightened me out of my wits.”

He looked again at the poor dead thing that had been man, and then he
started back in dismay.

“But he was blind.”

“Yes; he had been blind for nearly a year.”




Chapter LVII


AT that moment we were interrupted by the appearance of Madame Coutras,
who had been paying visits. She came in, like a ship in full sail, an
imposing creature, tall and stout, with an ample bust and an obesity
girthed in alarmingly by straight-fronted corsets. She had a bold
hooked nose and three chins. She held herself upright. She had not
yielded for an instant to the enervating charm of the tropics, but
contrariwise was more active, more worldly, more decided than anyone in
a temperate clime would have thought it possible to be. She was
evidently a copious talker, and now poured forth a breathless stream of
anecdote and comment. She made the conversation we had just had seem
far away and unreal.

Presently Dr. Coutras turned to me.

“I still have in my _bureau_ the picture that Strickland gave me,” he
said. “Would you like to see it?”

“Willingly.”

We got up, and he led me on to the verandah which surrounded his house.
We paused to look at the gay flowers that rioted in his garden.

“For a long time I could not get out of my head the recollection of the
extraordinary decoration with which Strickland had covered the walls of
his house,” he said reflectively.

I had been thinking of it, too. It seemed to me that here Strickland
had finally put the whole expression of himself. Working silently,
knowing that it was his last chance, I fancied that here he must have
said all that he knew of life and all that he divined. And I fancied
that perhaps here he had at last found peace. The demon which possessed
him was exorcised at last, and with the completion of the work, for
which all his life had been a painful preparation, rest descended on
his remote and tortured soul. He was willing to die, for he had
fulfilled his purpose.

“What was the subject?” I asked.

“I scarcely know. It was strange and fantastic. It was a vision of the
beginnings of the world, the Garden of Eden, with Adam and Eve—_que
sais-je?_—it was a hymn to the beauty of the human form, male and
female, and the praise of Nature, sublime, indifferent, lovely, and
cruel. It gave you an awful sense of the infinity of space and of the
endlessness of time. Because he painted the trees I see about me every
day, the cocoa-nuts, the banyans, the flamboyants, the alligator-pears,
I have seen them ever since differently, as though there were in them a
spirit and a mystery which I am ever on the point of seizing and which
forever escapes me. The colours were the colours familiar to me, and
yet they were different. They had a significance which was all their
own. And those nude men and women. They were of the earth, and yet
apart from it. They seemed to possess something of the clay of which
they were created, and at the same time something divine. You saw man
in the nakedness of his primeval instincts, and you were afraid, for
you saw yourself.”

Dr. Coutras shrugged his shoulders and smiled.

“You will laugh at me. I am a materialist, and I am a gross, fat
man—Falstaff, eh?—the lyrical mode does not become me. I make myself
ridiculous. But I have never seen painting which made so deep an
impression upon me. _Tenez_, I had just the same feeling as when I went
to the Sistine Chapel in Rome. There too I was awed by the greatness of
the man who had painted that ceiling. It was genius, and it was
stupendous and overwhelming. I felt small and insignificant. But you
are prepared for the greatness of Michael Angelo. Nothing had prepared
me for the immense surprise of these pictures in a native hut, far away
from civilisation, in a fold of the mountain above Taravao. And Michael
Angelo is sane and healthy. Those great works of his have the calm of
the sublime; but here, notwithstanding beauty, was something troubling.
I do not know what it was. It made me uneasy. It gave me the impression
you get when you are sitting next door to a room that you know is
empty, but in which, you know not why, you have a dreadful
consciousness that notwithstanding there is someone. You scold
yourself; you know it is only your nerves—and yet, and yet... In a
little while it is impossible to resist the terror that seizes you, and
you are helpless in the clutch of an unseen horror. Yes; I confess I
was not altogether sorry when I heard that those strange masterpieces
had been destroyed.”

“Destroyed?” I cried.

“_Mais oui_; did you not know?”

“How should I know? It is true I had never heard of this work; but I
thought perhaps it had fallen into the hands of a private owner. Even
now there is no certain list of Strickland’s paintings.”

“When he grew blind he would sit hour after hour in those two rooms
that he had painted, looking at his works with sightless eyes, and
seeing, perhaps, more than he had ever seen in his life before. Ata
told me that he never complained of his fate, he never lost courage. To
the end his mind remained serene and undisturbed. But he made her
promise that when she had buried him—did I tell you that I dug his
grave with my own hands, for none of the natives would approach the
infected house, and we buried him, she and I, sewn up in three _pareos_
joined together, under the mango-tree—he made her promise that she
would set fire to the house and not leave it till it was burned to the
ground and not a stick remained.”

I did not speak for a while, for I was thinking. Then I said:

“He remained the same to the end, then.”

“Do you understand? I must tell you that I thought it my duty to
dissuade her.”

“Even after what you have just said?”

“Yes; for I knew that here was a work of genius, and I did not think we
had the right to deprive the world of it. But Ata would not listen to
me. She had promised. I would not stay to witness the barbarous deed,
and it was only afterwards that I heard what she had done. She poured
paraffin on the dry floors and on the pandanus-mats, and then she set
fire. In a little while nothing remained but smouldering embers, and a
great masterpiece existed no longer.

“I think Strickland knew it was a masterpiece. He had achieved what he
wanted. His life was complete. He had made a world and saw that it was
good. Then, in pride and contempt, he destroyed it.”

“But I must show you my picture,” said Dr. Coutras, moving on.

“What happened to Ata and the child?”

“They went to the Marquesas. She had relations there. I have heard that
the boy works on one of Cameron’s schooners. They say he is very like
his father in appearance.”

At the door that led from the verandah to the doctor’s consulting-room,
he paused and smiled.

“It is a fruit-piece. You would think it not a very suitable picture
for a doctor’s consulting-room, but my wife will not have it in the
drawing-room. She says it is frankly obscene.”

“A fruit-piece!” I exclaimed in surprise.

We entered the room, and my eyes fell at once on the picture. I looked
at it for a long time.

It was a pile of mangoes, bananas, oranges, and I know not what and at
first sight it was an innocent picture enough. It would have been
passed in an exhibition of the Post-Impressionists by a careless person
as an excellent but not very remarkable example of the school; but
perhaps afterwards it would come back to his recollection, and he would
wonder why. I do not think then he could ever entirely forget it.

The colours were so strange that words can hardly tell what a troubling
emotion they gave. They were sombre blues, opaque like a delicately
carved bowl in lapis lazuli, and yet with a quivering lustre that
suggested the palpitation of mysterious life; there were purples,
horrible like raw and putrid flesh, and yet with a glowing, sensual
passion that called up vague memories of the Roman Empire of
Heliogabalus; there were reds, shrill like the berries of holly—one
thought of Christmas in England, and the snow, the good cheer, and the
pleasure of children—and yet by some magic softened till they had the
swooning tenderness of a dove’s breast; there were deep yellows that
died with an unnatural passion into a green as fragrant as the spring
and as pure as the sparkling water of a mountain brook. Who can tell
what anguished fancy made these fruits? They belonged to a Polynesian
garden of the Hesperides. There was something strangely alive in them,
as though they were created in a stage of the earth’s dark history when
things were not irrevocably fixed to their forms. They were
extravagantly luxurious. They were heavy with tropical odours. They
seemed to possess a sombre passion of their own. It was enchanted
fruit, to taste which might open the gateway to God knows what secrets
of the soul and to mysterious palaces of the imagination. They were
sullen with unawaited dangers, and to eat them might turn a man to
beast or god. All that was healthy and natural, all that clung to happy
relationships and the simple joys of simple men, shrunk from them in
dismay; and yet a fearful attraction was in them, and, like the fruit
on the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil they were terrible with
the possibilities of the Unknown.

At last I turned away. I felt that Strickland had kept his secret to
the grave.

“_Voyons, René, mon ami_,” came the loud, cheerful voice of Madame
Coutras, “what are you doing all this time? Here are the _apéritifs_.
Ask _Monsieur_ if he will not drink a little glass of Quinquina
Dubonnet.”

“_Volontiers_, Madame,” I said, going out on to the verandah.

The spell was broken.




