CHAPTER VII: DR. JOHNSON


Of all the Masters of letters that have adorned and elevated the speech
of our race Dr. Johnson is in many ways the most lovable.  The son of a
poor bookseller in Lichfield {40} with an uncouth figure and an
undistinguished countenance, he rose by the massive force of his
character and the tireless persistence of his industry to an unchallenged
supremacy in the literary world of his age, displaying in his whole life
the truth of his own dictum that "few things are impossible to diligence
and skill."  Disdaining the common habit of the times he would owe
nothing to the patronage of the great.  "Is not a patron," he wrote to
Lord Chesterfield, "one who looks with unconcern on a man struggling for
life in the water, and when he has reached ground encumbers him with
help?"

  [Picture: Dr. Johnson.  From a contemporary etching published February
                               10th, 1780]

He was not very patient with the stupid, or merciful to the absurd, and
vanity never came into his presence without receiving swift and mortal
blows; but the chastisement of his caustic tongue never fell upon modest
worth, and there never lived a man who was a more faithful and
affectionate friend.

The style of his writing is always balanced and sonorous, and everywhere
and always is he "the friend of the wise and teacher of the good."

No man was more ready to give forcible expression to his amusing
prejudices, as when he exclaimed that "the noblest prospect which a
Scotchman ever sees is the high road that leads him to England," but to
be able to assert of any act of man that Dr. Johnson in solemn
seriousness condemned it, is for ever to arraign that act in the court of
human morals; and so the judicious must concede that when his authority
can be cited in fierce and glowing denunciation of vivisectors they are
left in a demersed condition.

I took occasion when giving evidence before the last Royal Commission on
Vivisection to rehearse Dr. Johnson's philippic which I now reproduce
below, and the dejected and deflated aspect of the vivisectors on the
commission when I had finished it caused that moment to be one of those I
shall always recall with exhilaration!  Not a word had one of them to say
while I waited for any comment they might adventure, and after a
diverting and eloquent silence Lord Selby from the chair remarked, "That
leaves no doubt about Dr. Johnson's view in his day."  It most certainly
does not!

    The _Idlers_ that sport only with inanimate nature may claim some
    indulgence; if they are useless, they are still innocent; but there
    are others, whom I know not how to mention without more emotion than
    my love of quiet willingly admits.  Among the inferior professors of
    medical knowledge is a race of wretches whose lives are only varied
    by varieties of cruelty; whose favourite amusement is to nail dogs to
    tables and open them alive; to try how long life may be continued in
    various degrees of mutilation, or with the excision or laceration of
    the vital parts; to examine whether burning irons are felt more
    acutely by the bone or tendon; and whether the more lasting agonies
    are produced by poison forced into the mouth, or injected into the
    veins, it is not without reluctance that I offend the sensibility of
    the tender mind with images like these.  If such cruelties were not
    practised it were to be desired that they should not be conceived;
    but, since they are published every day with ostentation, let me be
    allowed once to mention them, since I mention them with abhorrence.
    _Mead_ has invidiously remarked of _Woodward_ that he gathered shells
    and stones, and would pass for a philosopher.  With pretentions much
    less reasonable the anatomical novice tears out the living bowels of
    an animal and styles himself physician, prepares himself by familiar
    cruelty for that profession which he is to exercise upon the tender
    and the helpless, upon feeble bodies and broken minds, and by which
    he has opportunities to extend his arts and torture, and continue
    those experiments upon infancy and age, which he has hitherto tried
    upon cats and dogs.  What is alleged in defence of these hateful
    practices everyone knows, but the truth is that by knives, fire, and
    poisons, knowledge is not always sought, and is very seldom attained.
    I know not that by living dissections any discovery has been made by
    which a single malady is more easily cured.  And if the knowledge of
    physiology has been somewhat increased, he surely buys knowledge dear
    who learns the use of the lacteals at the expense of his own
    humanity.  It is time that a universal resentment should arise
    against those horrid operations, which tend to harden the heart and
    make the physician more dreadful than the gout or the stone.




CHAPTER VIII: THOMAS CARLYLE
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ANTI-VIVISECTION SOCIETY


The world of letters and of ethics has hardly yet settled whether much of
the teaching of the Sage of Chelsea should be the subject of praise or
blame.

In the advocacy of fine principles of conduct set forth for us in
language of surpassing eloquence and earnest conviction in many a page of
"Sartor Resartus," and scattered through innumerable pamphlets, Carlyle
commands the fervent adhesion of the honest, the brave, and the good;
while in other parts of his writings his infatuated admiration of force,
however clothed with brutality, and of strength, however marred with
mendacity, are calculated as deeply to alienate the urbane man of the
world as the austere Christian.

And this confusion in the estimate of Carlyle and of his teaching suffers
an aggravation from the manifest malice of the biography of him
perpetrated by his friend James Anthony Froude.  A man who is entrusted
with the task of writing the life of a great man who was also his friend
need not adopt the language of continuous panegyric, but to throw a
brilliant illumination upon the man's smaller domestic rugosities which
even the weakest charity would conceal and the feeblest generosity would
forget is a singularly spiteful betrayal.

When something was said to Carlyle about the likelihood of the Dean of
Westminster recognising his fame as justifying his interment in the
Abbey, the rugged old man exclaimed, "Deliver me from that
body-snatcher."  It would have been more to the purpose if he had been
delivered from his intimate friend as his biographer!

That Carlyle detested vivisection, however, must ever remain a great
tribute both to him and to our cause.  Many circumstances of the man and
his teaching might have led the world to anticipate that he would very
likely be found indifferent on the subject.  His earnest adhesion to our
principles leaves those who politely call us old women of both sexes in a
foolish case, for nothing could be more divertingly absurd than so to
classify Carlyle.

I think Froude forgot to mention Carlyle's stern condemnation of
vivisection in his biography, which is more remarkable inasmuch as Froude
himself was a firm and outspoken supporter of our cause.

Whether we can faithfully take to heart and follow all the teaching of
this "old Man eloquent" will long remain a subject of debate, but no one
can rise from his works without recognising a moral grandeur in him that
far out-tops the very human flaws that may even serve to make him more
penetrative to our own imperfect hearts.

There seems to be a law that compels all the truly great men of letters,
from Shakespeare and Johnson down to our own day, to abhor the torture of
animals for our supposed benefit, and to that law Thomas Carlyle starkly
adhered.




