CHAPTER III: CARDINAL MANNING
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ANTI-VIVISECTION SOCIETY


Cardinal Manning was among the early supporters of the Anti-Vivisection
movement, and was a Vice-President of the National Anti-Vivisection
Society till his death.

He occasionally attended meetings of the committee at my request to
assist the deliberations with his good counsel, and I remember one
occasion when Lord Shaftesbury came and took the chair, and both the
Cardinal and my father and the Bishop of Oxford were present to assist in
an important decision.

I frequently went to the Archbishop's house at Westminster to consult
him; the sumptuous cathedral and palace had not then been built, and the
house at the bottom of Carlisle Place had an air of cold austerity; there
were no carpets on the stone staircase, and the large room in which the
Cardinal received his visitors had nothing in it but a bare table and a
few cushionless chairs.  He accepted invitations to dinner from my
father, but although he was gracious and courtly, he ate nothing, and it
was understood that no attention was to be drawn to this abstinence.  He
cannot have eaten much anywhere, for he was extremely emaciated.

He did a great service both to the cause of anti-vivisection and to his
Church in 1882.  It had been spread abroad, by whom, and on what
authority, I know not, that the Church of Rome had declined to support
those who desired to put down cruel experiments upon animals, and had
declared that animals might lawfully be treated like stocks and stones;
to this shocking suggestion the Cardinal gave a decisive and
authoritative denial at a meeting at Lord Shaftesbury's House on the 21st
of June.

His words were as follows:--

    I know that an impression has been made that those whom I represent
    look, if not with approbation, at least with great indulgence, on the
    practice of vivisection.  I grieve to say that abroad there are a
    great many (whom I beg leave to say I do _not_ represent) who do
    favour the practice; but this I do protest, that there is not a
    religious instinct in nature, nor a religion of nature, nor is there
    a word in revelation, either in the Old Testament or the New
    Testament, nor is there to be found in the great theology which I do
    represent, no, nor in any Act of the Church of which I am a member;
    no, nor in the lives and utterances of any one of those great
    servants of that Church who stand as examples, nor is there an
    authoritative utterance anywhere to be found in favour of
    vivisection.

And later in the same speech he said:--

    I do not believe this to be the way that the All-wise and All-good
    Maker of us all has ordained for the discovery of the Healing Art
    which is one of His greatest gifts to man.

Two years later at a Meeting at Prince's Hall on the 26th of June, 1884,
with Lord Shaftesbury in the Chair, the Cardinal in a single pregnant
sentence dissipated the vivisectors' constant careless confusion of the
totally different moral acts of killing animals and torturing them.

"It is clear," he said, "that the words 'kill and eat,' and the dominion
which the beneficent Maker of all things has given to man over the lower
creatures, does not justify the infliction of exquisite torment in the
name of Science."

At that time Lord Shaftesbury was the greatest representative of the
Church of England and the Cardinal the acknowledged head of the Church of
Rome in this country and as they earnestly agreed in condemning the
practice of vivisection as wicked and abominable, it becomes impossible
for those who support it to bring to its defence any authorities on
conduct at all comparable with that of these two great and good men.

    The Cardinal gave the impression of a consciously eminent
    ecclesiastic, who was determined to lift his Church into greatness in
    England by all lawful means in his power; his appearance was ascetic,
    distinguished, and memorable; he was manifestly a man of direct
    nobility of life, and most lofty purpose--a great statesman for his
    Church, leading an austere and detached life as an example in every
    detail for the faithful in his community--a prince of the Roman
    Church fulfilling his august function conspicuously and faultlessly
    in full view of a critical public. {16}

His care for the poor and the noble simplicity of his life found its most
eloquent evidence at his death in the discovery that his entire worldly
possessions amounted to sixty-eight pounds.

He had laid up his treasure where no rust and moth doth corrupt.




CHAPTER IV: ROBERT BROWNING
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ANTI-VIVISECTION SOCIETY
DIED THE 12TH OF DECEMBER, 1889


  [Picture: Robert Browning.  From a painting by Samuel Laurence in the
                         collection of John Lane]

Towards the end of 1874, as I have already remarked, Miss Cobbe prepared
a petition to the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
of which the chief paragraph ran as follows:--

    It is earnestly urged by your memorialists that the great and
    influential Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
    may see fit to undertake the task (which appears strictly to fall
    within its province) of placing suitable restrictions on this rapidly
    increasing evil.  The vast benefit to the cause of humanity which the
    Society has in the past half century effected, would, in our humble
    estimation, remain altogether one-sided and incomplete, if, while
    brutal carters and ignorant costermongers are brought to punishment
    for maltreating the animals under their charge, learned and refined
    gentlemen should be left unquestioned to inflict far more exquisite
    pain upon still more sensitive creatures; as if the mere allegation
    of a scientific purpose removed them above all legal or moral
    responsibility.

Miss Cobbe, confident of what Browning's reply would be, sent him this
petition and asked him to return it with his signature if he approved of
it.

His reply, which I believe has never as yet been published, redounds to
his immortal fame as a man of fortitude and humaneness.

This is what he wrote:

                                                  19, WARWICK CRESCENT, W.
                                                   _December_ 28_th_, '74.

    DEAR MISS COBBE,

    I return the petition, unsigned for the one good reason--that I have
    just signed its fellow forwarded to me by Mr. Leslie Stephen.

    You have heard "I take an equal interest with yourself in the effort
    to suppress vivisection"; I dare not so honour my mere wishes and
    prayers as to put them for a moment beside your noble acts; but, this
    I know, I would rather submit to the worst of the deaths, so far as
    pain goes, than have a single dog or cat tortured on the pretence of
    sparing me a twinge or two.  I return the paper, because I shall be
    probably shut up here for the next week or more, and prevented from
    seeing my friends: whoever would refuse to sign would certainly not
    be of the number.

                                         Ever truly--and gratefully yours,
                                                          ROBERT BROWNING.

Five years later in the volume of Dramatic Idyls issued in 1879, Browning
published his poem entitled "Tray" which extols the noble heroism of the
dog and leaves nothing to be desired in its biting scorn of the
vivisectors:

    "'Up he comes with the child, see tight
    In mouth, alive too, clutched from quite
    A depth of ten feet--twelve I bet!
    Good dog!  What off again?  There's yet
    Another child to save?  All right!

    "'How strange we saw no other fall!
    It's instinct in the animal.
    Good dog!  But he's a long while under:
    If he got drowned I should not wonder--
    Strong current, that against the wall!

    "'Here he comes, holds in mouth this time
    --What may the thing be?  Well, that's prime!
    Now did you ever?  Reason reigns
    In man alone, since all Tray's pains
    Have fished--the child's doll from the slime!'

    "And so, amid the laughter gay,
    Trotted my hero off,--old Tray,--
    Till somebody, prerogatived
    With reason, reasoned:--'Why he dived
    His brain would show us, I should say.

    "'John go and catch--or, if needs be
    Purchase--that animal for me!
    By vivisection, at expense
    Of half an hour and eighteen pence
    How brain secretes dog's soul, we'll see!'"

Here then is enough to show with what earnest conviction this poet of
powerful mind and pure life condemned the practice of vivisection.  He
was a man who breasted the world with a cheerful philosophy which
permitted few external matters to disturb his habitual serenity.  But
vivisection was one of them, and I have often heard him speak with fierce
detestation of what he called "the coward Science."

I do not think he ever addressed a public, or even private, meeting in
his life, and that may have left the unlettered world unaware of his deep
loathing of the cruelties of the laboratories; but he was one of the
earliest Englishmen of unquestioned distinction to join the
anti-vivisection movement and to accept the office of Vice-President of
our Society.

I venture to think that in aftertimes his sanguine advocacy in this great
cause will not be the least of his claims to the gratitude of his fellow
men.




