CHAPTER XI: THREE GREAT CHURCHMEN


I have already recorded in these pages the strenuous opposition to
vivisection displayed by the two greatest representatives of the Church
of Rome that arose in England in the last century; and to all who adhere
to that Church the authority of the two illustrious Cardinals Newman and
Manning must be decisive.

The most famous dignitaries of the English Church in the great Victorian
age were also as firm in their condemnation of vivisection as were the
great Cardinals.

When I was a young man Dean Stanley was the Dean of Westminster, Dean
Vaughan was the Master of the Temple, and Liddon Canon of St. Paul's.
These were all men of world-wide distinction.  They were men who adorned
and made splendid the offices and dignities they occupied, their names
were familiar in every corner of the land, they lent a lustre to the
Church of England, and each of them utterly condemned vivisection.

In these present times only a few people in the metropolis, and hardly
anybody out of it, can tell without consulting some book of reference who
may be the estimable persons who to-day fill the Deanery of Westminster
and the Mastership of the Temple, nor has Canon Liddon any successor that
the world acclaims, and I can vouch for it that none of them has ever
extended to us a helping hand or publicly condemned the torture of
animals for scientific purposes.

It is always the loftiest names in literature and the most illustrious
authorities on ethics that are found ranged against the infliction of
suffering upon helpless animals for the enlargement of human knowledge.

Those who support such inflictions are never in the first rank of
literature, art, or moral teaching.  Dean Stanley left behind him a
reputation incomparably greater than any occupier of his Deanery that has
succeeded him.  The same must be conceded to Dean Vaughan at the Temple;
and the eloquence of Canon Liddon compelled the absorbed attention of
such congregations as are not now collected by the Canons that have
followed him.  As far as I am aware, none of the successors of these
great men have ever helped our cause at all.

No doubt whenever there shall arise in the ministry of the Church of
England men of the commanding power, distinguished character, and potent
speech that these great men of the last generation displayed we shall
find them also espousing the cause of the helpless vivisected animals; in
the meanwhile the occupiers of the most dignified positions in the
Established Church seem to have drifted into the somewhat ignoble
attitude of avoiding the disagreeable subject of vivisection altogether.
When we invite them to help us we receive either no reply at all, or a
reply that is carefully evasive, or we are damned with faint praise while
assured that the writer is too busy to give the subject the attention it
needs before any public utterance is possible upon it.  All of which
methods of dealing with the matter display much wisdom of the world and a
very human desire to avoid controversy and other uncomfortable mental and
epistolary disturbance, but none of the spirit that led Archbishop Temple
when he was Bishop of Exeter to stand unflinching on a temperance
platform while the publicans pelted him with flour.




CHAPTER XII: QUEEN VICTORIA


Queen Victoria has given her name to a period which has no parallel in
magnificence since the days of the great Elizabeth.

The galaxy of great poets, teachers, and philosophers that flourished in
the Victorian age cannot be matched in any similar series of years in all
the history of the modern world.

With her departure exhaustion seems to have come upon the world of
letters for a time, and to the classic glories of the nineteenth century
there has succeeded an usurpation of journalists without the splendour of
genius or even the distinction of scholarship.

And although we may perhaps recognise in Lord Beaconsfield's inclusive
use of the phrase to her of "we authors, Madam" something of the flattery
of the courtier, yet assuredly in all her public addresses to her people
there is displayed a fine and biblical simplicity, and a directness of
appeal indicative of a noble mind and a great heart.

The most penetrating criticism will fail to discover a fault either of
taste or diction or intent in any of these utterances.  They combine the
dignity appropriate to the words of the greatest Sovereign of the World,
with the intimate friendliness that proceeds from the wellsprings of a
sweet woman's heart.

Worthily then did she reign over the most splendid times of our history.

That she should from the day she ascended the throne to the day of her
death forward and abet all the enlargements of the spirit of mercy and
pity towards the suffering, whether among man or animals, was inevitable
in a nature so benevolent.  And it may very well be that in far distant
times the rise of humaneness to man and beast will be regarded as one of
the noblest characteristics of her reign.

Her position above controversies precluded her from participating in
them, and made it difficult if not impossible for her publicly to espouse
the cause of the miserable creatures subjected to nameless sufferings in
the laboratories of the scientific.  But her sympathy with those who
strove and still strive to end those sufferings could not always be
concealed, and on a memorable occasion she expressed her concurrence in
the efforts of those who desired to see the laws sanctioning such
suffering totally abolished and repealed.

Very fitting therefore it is that among those who earnestly condemned
vivisection we should include the august name and fame of Queen Victoria.




