CHAPTER IX: TENNYSON
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ANTI-VIVISECTION SOCIETY


 [Picture: Tennyson.  From an unpublished photograph in the possession of
                 Charles Bruce Locker Tennyson, C. M. G.]

Tennyson, as was inevitable with a man of such nobility of mind and life,
regarded the torture of animals for the sake of knowledge with "the hate
of hate, the scorn of scorn."

If authority be cited in great moral questions here is one that must
compel reverence from all but the poor trifler with his "hollow smile and
frozen sneer."

He looked modern Science in the eye, perceived whither its aggrandisement
of knowledge to a place supreme in human estimate, above conduct, must
inevitably lead mankind, and proclaimed, in accents which can never die,
that it is impossible for man to acquiesce in a godless world.

He taught us that men's hearts can never be satisfied with a world
explained and comprised by the cold "changeless law" of foreordained
evolution and inevitable destiny.  "Knowledge comes," said he, "but
wisdom lingers."

From the first, then, Tennyson lent the weight of his splendid name to
the cause of mercy, and I find his signature to the original great
petition for the restriction of vivisection between those of Leslie
Stephen and Robert Browning on the same sheet of paper--a sheet of paper
now one of the treasured possessions of the National Anti-Vivisection
Society.

All the world knows the allusions in his works to those who "carve the
living hound," and to curare, which he called "the hellish oorali."  And
thus this greatest poet of the Victorian age gave the weight of his
commanding authority for all time to a fierce condemnation of vivisection
as the most awful and monstrous of the offsprings of modern Science.

Tennyson was religious in the widest and most inspiring sense.

"Almost the finest summing up of religion," he wrote, "is 'to do justice,
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God.'"

"To love mercy!"  That is the true sign of magnanimity in man.  All holy
men, all brave men, all great and knightly men have loved mercy.  "It is
an attribute to God Himself."

Time passes, and succeeding races of mankind, like the leaves of autumn,
are blown away and perish, but countless men of heroic mould, reaching
back into the dim mists of legend and down through innumerable years
while the great world spins "for ever down the ringing grooves of
change," have one and all been gloriously crowned with the same shining
diadem of mercy.




CHAPTER X: CARDINAL NEWMAN


  [Picture: Cardinal Newman.  From the portrait by Jane Fortescue, Lady
                                Coleridge]

It is difficult perhaps for students of the younger generation to realise
the immense influence exercised among his contemporaries by Cardinal
Newman, nor will a study of his writings adequately explain it to them.

He has hardly survived as a standard author, though he wrote a pure and
lucid prose.  Those who leave the bulk of their literary work behind them
in the form of sermons are inviting the world to neglect it.

Moreover, though he was a past master of controversy, the arena in which
he fought with such doughty prowess amid the excited plaudits and
dehortations of vast assemblies is now left solitary in echoing
emptiness, and the crowds of to-day have passed away to abet the
combatants, on one side or the other, in very different fields of
tourney.

Here and there his writing ascends to a fine note of eloquence, as in his
great exclamatory passage on music that begins thus:--

    There are seven notes in the scale; make them fourteen: yet what a
    slender outfit for so vast an enterprise!  What science brings so
    much out of so little?  Out of what poor elements does some great
    master in it create his new world!

But all his writings, religious and controversial, will not explain the
immense and dominating effect Newman produced upon his contemporaries.
That effect was due to the irresistible magic of his personality.  He was
manifestly one of the Saints of God, and his presence brought with it
into any company a sense of mighty power gloved in stainless humility.
Though habitually bearing an aspect of wistful gentleness, his entry into
a room crowded with distinguished people made them all seem to be
something less than they were before his arrival.

A man of such a character commands by his visible presence, and those who
have not felt the spell of it do not comprehend the cause of his
authoritative influence among those who have.

The teaching of Newman on the great question of man's relation to the
sentient creatures placed in his power in the world, must come to us with
all the weight that is implicit in the utterance of one of such
unquestioned sanctity.

It would be difficult in all his voluminous works to discover anything
more touching and moving than his reference to the sufferings of animals,
who as he says "have done no harm," which is embedded in the seventh
volume of his Parochial and Plain Sermons:--

    First, as to these sufferings, you will observe that our Lord is
    called a Lamb in the text; that is, He was as defenceless and as
    innocent as a lamb is.  Since then Scripture compares Him to this
    inoffensive and unprotected animal, we may, without presumption or
    irreverence, take the image as a means of conveying to our minds
    those feelings which our Lord's sufferings should excite in us.  I
    mean, consider how very horrible it is to read the accounts which
    sometimes meet us of cruelties exercised on brute animals.  Does it
    not sometimes make us shudder to hear tell of them, or to read them
    in some chance publication which we take up?  At one time it is the
    wanton deed of barbarous and angry owners who ill-treat their cattle,
    or beasts of burden; and at another it is the cold-blooded and
    calculating act of men of science, who make experiments on brute
    animals, perhaps merely from a sort of curiosity.

    I do not like to go into particulars, for many reasons, but one of
    those instances which we read of as happening in this day, and which
    seems more shocking than the rest, is when the poor dumb victim is
    fastened against a wall, pierced, gashed, and so left to linger out
    its life.  Now, do you not see that I have a reason for saying this,
    and am not using these distressing words for nothing?  For what was
    this but the very cruelty inflicted upon our Lord?  He was gashed
    with the scourge, pierced through hands and feet, and so fastened to
    the Cross, and there left, and that as a spectacle.  Now, what is it
    moves our very hearts and sickens us so much as cruelty shown to poor
    brutes?  I suppose this first, that they have done no harm; next,
    that they have no power whatever of resistance; it is the cowardice
    and tyranny of which they are the victims which make their sufferings
    so especially touching.  For instance, if they were dangerous
    animals, take the case of wild beasts at large, able not only to
    defend themselves, but even to attack us; much as we might dislike to
    hear of their wounds and agony, yet our feelings would be of a very
    different kind, but there is something so very dreadful, so satanic
    in tormenting those who never have harmed us, and who cannot defend
    themselves, who are utterly in our power, who have weapons neither of
    offence nor defence, that none but very hardened persons can endure
    the thought of it.

Let us listen with all our hearts to this beautiful appeal.  Let us
reverence the saintly man who made it, and who still speaks to us out of
the past.  Let us remember that Knowledge and the search for it may often
be cruel, but that Wisdom and those who follow it are always merciful.




