CHAPTER III

THE GREAT HISTORICAL FORMS OF CHRISTIANITY

1. _The Evolution of the Christian Principle_

The distinction between the Christian principle and its successive
realisations renders it easy to resolve the question, formerly so much
debated, as to the perfectibility of Christianity.  It is perfect
piety, plenary union with God, consequently the absolute and definitive
Religion.  But, regarded in its historical evolution, not only is it
perfectible, but it must ceaselessly progress, since, for it, to
progress is to realise itself.  The germ could not be perfected in its
essence, as germ and ideal type of the tree that it potentially
contains.  But the tree itself only comes into existence by the
development of the germ.  No reform, no progress, no perfecting, could
raise Christianity above itself--that is to say, above its principle;
for these reforms and this progress only bring it into closer
conformity with that principle--that is, make it more Christian.  On
the other hand, the principle itself must enter into evolution in
history in order to manifest its originality and its force, to realise
in individual and social life, in the realm of thought and in the realm
of action, in a word in the whole of civilisation, all its virtualities
and all its consequences.  Jesus saw this when He spoke the Parable of
the Mustard Seed (Matt. xiii. 31-32).

This distinction has another advantage.  It alone permits the Christian
thinker to be equitable in his judgments in regard to all religious
forms, to place himself at a truly historical point of view, and to
reconcile, without weakness and without violence, what is due to truth
and what to charity.  Every sincere endeavour to express or to realise
Christianity in a system or in a church becomes respectable so soon as
you know how to discover in it, under formulas however strange and
practices however gross, some effects of the Christian principle or
some signs of its presence.  If disdain and contempt are not
permissible with regard to any type of Christianity however different
from our own, neither is illusion to be tolerated with regard to our
own church or to our personal piety.  Perfection is nowhere to be
found.  Each community may repeat, and the larger, older, and more
numerous it becomes the more will it need to repeat, the words of the
Apostle Paul: "Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended," etc.
(Phil. iii. 13, 14).  The habit we have got into of putting all the
truth on our side and all error on the side of others, of thus opposing
light and darkness, not only falsifies the judgment; it sours the heart
and poisons piety, it dries up the feeling of fraternity, and is the
perpetual sign of individual or collective vanity.  Let each examine
himself, let him judge his church without complacence in the light and
spirit of Christ; he will soon attain to more humility and truth.  He
will never identify any particular church or its dogma with
Christianity itself.  However pure its teaching, however generous its
deeds, he will reckon that this is, after all, but a commencement of
Christianity, a mere nothing compared with what the Christian principle
should have accomplished in the world in eighteen centuries.

Such is the feeling with which we should approach the history of
Christianity.  The field is vast; the vegetation in it is infinite; we
must content ourselves with incompleteness.  Being neither able nor
desirous to say everything, I have been obliged to seek a commanding
point of view from which it would be possible to take in that history
in its entirety, and to take a bird's-eye view of the course it has
followed.  Faithful to this idea, namely, that the Christian principle
is like leaven or a seed thrown into a gross, heavy mass of anterior
traditions which it was meant gradually to raise and to transform, it
is this struggle and this progress that I desire especially to
describe.  I shall endeavour to show how Christianity, always borrowing
its forms from the environment in which it realises itself, after
enduring them for a time, subsequently frees itself from and triumphs
over the inferior and temporary elements which fetter it, and manifests
from age to age a greater independence and a purer and higher
spirituality.  This progress is slow, obscure, oft interrupted,
hindered by reactions or by moments of arrest; none the less striking,
however, does it appear when, rising above these secondary
complications, one measures the distance between the points of
departure and arrival.  Not only has Christianity never been better
understood than in our own day, but never were civilisation or the soul
of humanity taken in their entirety more fundamentally Christian.  When
one follows the history of Christianity from this higher point of view,
one sees that it has passed through three very distinct phases and
assumed three essentially different forms: the Jewish or Messianic, the
Graeco-Roman or Catholic, the Protestant or modern, form.  Let us see
how it has passed from the one to the other.


2. _Jewish, or Messianic Christianity_

The first of these periods is usually omitted or suppressed.  Being
unable to admit that Catholicism is not the work of Christ and the
apostles, or that the Church has varied its dogma or its institutions,
Catholic theologians naively imagine that the first Christian
communities of Jerusalem and Antioch resembled those of Rome, Milan,
and Lyons in the fourth century; that Peter was the first of the popes
and exercised for five-and-twenty years the supreme pontificate; that
the apostles appointed bishops everywhere as their successors and the
heirs of their power.  In this way the history of Christianity became,
in the Catholic tradition, a tissue of legends.

The theologians of Protestantism arrived by another road at an
analagous conclusion.  Under the influence of the dogma of the verbal
inspiration of the New Testament, they were led to make of apostolic
Christianity an ideal and abstract type which all the ages ought to
force themselves to imitate and reproduce.  And, as they profess to
have returned to this type both in regard to ideas and to institutions
and morals, they have made of this apostolic period the first chapter
of the history of Protestantism, just as the Catholics have made of it
the first chapter of the history of Catholicism.  In both cases, it
loses all distinct physiognomy and all reality.

By dissipating these prejudices, historical criticism has completely
resuscitated that first form of Christianity.  It is no longer possible
to confound it with any other.  It had its contrasts, its passions, its
storms.  Neither Jesus nor the apostles lived in the ideal or in
paradisiacal peace.  They quarrelled and were divided in the Church of
Jerusalem as in our own.  The subjects of the quarrels were different,
but they did not consider them less grave than those which vex and
trouble us.  Peter, James, and Paul were not less divided in the first
century over the question of circumcision and of the relations between
Jews and Gentiles, than were Luther, Zwingle, and Calvin in the
sixteenth over the doctrine of the Lord's Supper.  From both camps,
then as now, they sent forth pamphlets and anathemas.  There were two
opposite parties.  There were the stubborn holders of tradition and its
authority, and there were the innovators, or the partisans, sometimes
as rash as they, of liberty of faith and individual inspiration; and
between the two there were the men of conciliation and the golden mean
who were preoccupied especially in preventing schisms and arranging
truces and treaties of peace, to be followed in their turn by new
crises and fresh storms.

In this first form of Christianity, as in all that have followed it,
there was a certain dualism, a mixture of heterogeneous and soon
hostile elements.  The struggle was bound to arise between the
Christian principle and Jewish tradition.  The new seed sown in that
ancient soil could not germinate without rising in it and in places
breaking up the thick hard crust.  In the books of the New Testament
that have preserved to us the picture of that first and powerful
germination, side by side with the principle to which belongs the
future we necessarily find old things which are on the way to death.
It will be seen what an error they commit and what a wrong they do
themselves who, misconceiving this historical complexity, sanctify and
deify both these opposite elements, and place on the same level the
eternally fruitful grain, and the chaff to-day dried up and utterly
inert, a mere remnant of the Jewish stalk that bore it.

Conceived in this religious matrix of Judaism, the Christian principle,
if I may so speak, could only take in it a body essentially Jewish in
structure, substance, colour.  I only speak, of course, of the body of
this primitive Christianity, not of its soul, which, as I have shown,
was altogether new.  Now, its body was Jewish on two sides and in two
aspects: by the persistence of the authority of the Law of Moses, and
the practical observance of its precepts, from which the disciples of
Jesus did not dream of detaching themselves; and, secondly, by the
apocalyptic Messianism which dominated Jewish thought from the time of
the Maccabees, and with which the first Christians were perhaps more
imbued and more possessed than all the rest of their people.

Faith in the evangel of Jesus, full and joyful communion with the
Father, habits of Jewish devotion, Messianic hopes,--all this formed,
in the consciousness of the first disciples, a mixture of various
elements and of things of very unequal value.  These elements, in
gradually revealing their disparate nature, could not fail to enter
into contradiction and to engender conflicts in the very heart of
apostolic Christianity.  It was these contradictions and conflicts
which set Christian thought in movement, and produced the life and
progress of that early age, so that one may always rightly consider it
as a creative and classic epoch, and hold it up as a normal example to
the churches of all time; on condition, however, that it be not
considered as an immutable mass of eternal verities, but taken in its
natural movement, in its constant effort of progressive enfranchisement
with regard to the past, in its heroic ascent towards religious forms
and ideas, freer, more human, more conformed to the universal
character, to the spirituality, and to the pure morality of the
religion of Jesus.

"What, then," it will be said, "did not the Christ set His disciples
free at the outset from all the errors and superstitions of the past?
Did He not at once give them perfect dogmas, a completed form of
worship, an immutable and completed system of ethics?"  No; Jesus did
nothing of the kind.  So far from formally and systematically
criticising the traditional religion of His people, so far from making
_ex cathedra_ that selection which the vulgar looked for, Jesus
expressly refused it, as a method essentially false and irreligious.
He did not wish to abolish anything by mere authority; He preferred
rather to confirm the tradition in its totality, of which He was the
heir and not the executioner.  "Think not that I am come to destroy the
Law or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil" (Matt. v.
17).

His method was quite different.  It was the method of the sower to whom
He loved to compare Himself.  In the furrow made by His word in the
ancient soil of Judaism, He quietly and gently deposited new germs.  In
the traditional and theocratic notions of His race He placed contents
altogether different drawn from His own religious experience, and from
the sense of His filial relation to the Father.  He then left time to
do its work, to develop one after another the consequences of the
principles He had planted in human souls.  He sowed, and He and others
reap from age to age the harvest He has sown.

Consider His attitude towards the Law of Moses.  Not a jot or tittle of
it is to fail or be neglected.  He strengthens it rather than relaxes
its claims; He deepens it, carries it inward, makes it infinitely more
spiritual and searching.  He gathers it up into two great commandments,
and constrains the Law itself, if I may so speak, to surpass itself and
transform itself into pure evangelical morality.  That is what He meant
by declaring that His work would be the fulfilment of the Law.  Nothing
was less violent; but nothing, at bottom, was more revolutionary....
It is easy now to see the consequences of this method; history has
revealed them.  But those who heard the words of Jesus could not
perceive these consequences.  They had no idea probably that the day
would come when to be faithful to the Master they would be obliged to
break with Moses.  They did not suddenly break with Judaism.  Indeed,
they had found in their new faith new motives for fervour and
exactitude in their Mosaic piety.  The first Christians in Jerusalem
were honoured of all the people because of their assiduity in the
Temple worship and for their exemplary devotion.  They are therefore
not enfranchised yet; they will have to free themselves from Judaism in
the school of events into which they will be led by the Spirit of Jesus
that is with them and dwells in them.  The Christian principle will
have to reconquer its independence of the Judaism which dominates and
hems them in on every side.  This will be the work of more than a
century of conflict and controversy.  All Christians will not enter
into the movement with the same decision; they will not march abreast
on the path of liberty.  Many will be stupid and turn back.  Progress
would not have been made if the Divine Spirit that had raised up Jesus
had not raised up valiant men like Stephen, Saul of Tarsus, Barnabas,
the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and that of the Fourth
Gospel, to carry on the struggle against the bondage of Judaism and
carry it to complete victory.  When you pass from the one to the other,
from the discourse of Stephen to the Epistle to the Galatians, from the
Epistle to the Romans to the Johannean theology, you clearly see the
march of progress.  At the end of the first century Christianity is so
independent of national and traditional Judaism that the one treats the
other, without any further scruple, as an alien and hostile religion.

More adhesive still to the Christian principle, less easy to strip off,
was the second Jewish wrappage, apocalyptic Messianism.  Jesus had so
thoroughly consecrated it by calling Himself the Messiah and by
inaugurating the kingdom of God, that His Gospel might be named a
"Christian Messianism."  In His discourses He seems to have confirmed
it still more expressly than the Law of Moses.  No doubt He proceeded
in both cases alike.  In all the theocratic notions which constituted
this popular Messianism, He lodged a new content, a religious and moral
element which must, in the long run, make them burst their trammels and
elevate Messianism above itself.  But He did not bring to it any
negative and abstract criticism, any more than He did to the divers
parts of the Mosaic tradition; He never said either that it must be
abandoned or that it must be retained; He deposited in it the new
principle; but He left in it many obscurities, abandoning to time and
to the force of things the care of drawing forth the consequences and
clearing up confusions.

For His own part He wished simply to maintain intact beneath these
apocalyptic forms the principle and the inspiration of His inward
piety.  It was in accordance with these that He interpreted the popular
beliefs, adapting them with a perfect sovereignty to the moral aim and
nature of His work.  As with the Mosaic Law, so with Messianism; He is
its Master, not its slave.  He uses it, but does not abandon Himself to
it.  These hopes never trouble the clearness of His religious vision;
they do not take away His self-possession, or alter the direction,
always exclusively moral, of His acts.  He accepts the title of
Messiah, but only after substituting the idea of the suffering and
humiliated for the national and triumphant Messiah.  If He preaches the
kingdom of God, He takes care to explain the conditions and the true
goods of the kingdom--humility, repentance, childlike confidence,
righteousness, disinterested love, the joy of serving God and man.  He
leaves to men of the flesh the pomp and splendour which dazzle the eyes
of the flesh.  He admires the grandeur of John the Baptist more than
that of Herod.  The kingdom of God will not come with ostentation.  It
will begin like an unseen seed that a man puts into the ground.

At the outset of His work Jesus encountered a mysterious temptation.
This was the conflict of His consciousness with the seductions of the
popular Messianism.  He triumphed over it with difficulty; but
thenceforth He was always on His guard in that direction.  Is it not
remarkable that this very temptation returned to Him through the mouth
of Peter?  Jesus treats as Satan the first of His apostles, and refers
to the devil in person and the prince of darkness suggestions of this
nature which tend to make Him deviate from the road marked out by the
inspiration of His heart.  He avoids the title Messiah until the day
when He is able to join with it the image of the Cross.  He disdains
the title, "Son of David," preferring to all others that of "Son of
Man," a title that was not open to the same mistakes.  On this road of
renunciation He must sacrifice not only His ease, His joys, and His
repose, but also, at each step, some of the beliefs of Israel, and some
of the glories of the Messiah.  He never hesitates.  His people reject
Him, and He turns to His Father and says to Him: "Even so, Father, for
so it seemed good in Thy sight."  He agonises in Gethsemane, the
Messiah agonises in Him, and He prays thus: "Father, not My will, but
Thine be done."

Hence comes His freedom of spirit, the elevation of His view in the
interpretation of events, as also His pious and trustful reserve in
face of the enigmas and obscurities that His glance cannot penetrate.
John the Baptist is beheaded in prison: singular destiny for that
formidable Elijah who was to inaugurate by thunder and lightning the
Messianic era, the dream of all patriots!  Is Jesus offended by it?
Does He hesitate to declare that John at that very moment is "the Elias
which was for to come"?  What a defiance to the oracles of the popular
Messianism!  When the sons of Zebedee desire Him to reserve for them
the foremost places in His future kingdom, He merely speaks to them of
the baptism of martyrdom, and teaches them that they must leave such
things at the disposal of the Father.  No doubt, He never contradicts
apocalyptic predictions; on the contrary He applies to Himself all the
promises of glory and of triumph; but always in subjection to the
Father's will.  Asked as to the date of the Messiah's advent, He
answers that He does not know, that they must observe the blossoms on
the fig-tree and the signs of the times around Himself; that they must
watch and pray, possess their souls in patience, and abandon to the
Father the decisions of which He keeps the impenetrable secret.

I speak of freedom of interpretation and of pious reserve, not of
hypocritical and sceptical accommodation.  We cannot doubt that Jesus
accepted at the outset, and shared, at bottom, the Messianic beliefs in
which He had been trained like all the children of His race.  That His
disciples, in reporting His discourses on this point, exaggerated and
materialised them, need not be denied.  But, on the other hand you can
hardly explain the unanimity of the earliest Christian tradition in
expecting His return upon the clouds if Jesus had professed entirely
opposite ideas.  After all, is there anything more astonishing in His
sharing on this matter the hopes of His time than in the fact of His
having explained certain mysterious maladies as His contemporaries did
by demoniacal possession, or of His attributing Psalm cx., as did
certain of the rabbis, to King David; to the first Isaiah the work of
the second, and to Moses the redaction of the Pentateuch?  These
current and traditional ideas, however, which came to Him, not from
heaven, but from His race and His environment, never succeeded in
corrupting the immutable purity of His inner piety or in falsifying the
divine inspirations of His heart.  Whenever there was contradiction
between the Messianic beliefs or the Law of Moses, on the one hand, and
the consciousness of Jesus, on the other, it was not the latter but the
former that gave way and were transformed.

The disciples were not so free as the Master.  Their faith remained a
long time bound to these hopes of the future.  Why had they left all
and followed Him but because He had appeared to them to be the bearer
and the depository of the divine promises?  His death, which seemed to
belie their beliefs, only served to give them another turn.  They
corrected prophecy.  Instead of one Advent of the Messiah they imagined
two, the first in humiliation, the second in glory.  The one having
been realised, they expected the other with a more ardent confidence.
No one doubted it was near.  The apostle Paul lived in this hope as
well as the author of the _Apocalypse_, the compilers of the synoptic
gospels, and the editors of "The Teaching of the Apostles."  The time
is short: the Master comes: _Maranatha_.  This was the watchword of all
the early Christians.  This faith in the imminent return of Christ and
of the end of the world dominates all the thoughts as well as the
feelings of the apostles: it determines and colours their Christology,
their theory of Redemption, their ethics, their idea of salvation, so
that to expound their writings and estimate the worth of their
reasonings, the historian must always read them and explain them in
this light.  It is for this reason that their Christianity merits the
name of Messianic, and could not be, in this Jewish form, an absolute
_norm_ for all the ages.

The disciples of Jesus, however, found themselves in a school in which
they could not perpetually mistake the lessons.  The Christian
principle had appeared to be at one with Messianism; it was something
altogether different and could not continue for ever to be mixed up
with it.  Under the contradiction of events and the action of the
spirit of Jesus, they soon began to see the dawn of a process of
spiritualisation in their apocalyptic beliefs.  This progress is
manifest in the letters of St. Paul when read in their order and with
attention.  In the first, he hopes before he dies to witness the advent
of the Lord.  But, from the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, the
image of death and martyrdom begins to interpose itself between his
faith and that glorious ideal, which evermore seems to recede into the
future.  It never entirely disappears, but this preoccupation with the
return of Jesus diminishes and occupies a smaller space in his later
epistles.  On the contrary, the work of Jesus, considered in the past
and in its redemptive efficacy, the Christian life conceived as a life
of faith and love, as an imitation of Jesus Christ and an inheriting of
His Spirit, receive ever-increasing developments.  Insensibly, the
centre of gravity of apostolic Christianity changes; from the
hypnotising contemplation of the Messianic future, it passes to the
sanctifying meditation on the passion of Christ, on His teaching, and
redeeming work.  This is best seen in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and
in the Fourth Gospel, in which the Jewish Messiah is transformed into
the eternal _Logos_, the light of all men here below, and the principle
of the universal religion.

The work of emancipation that men alone could not accomplish, God
Himself achieved.  The conquests of the Church in the Empire, and
especially the double and irreparable ruin of Jerusalem and the Jewish
nation under Titus and under Hadrian, opened on the future other
prospects.  The world continued.  It was necessary to settle down and
live in it.  Montanism was merely a last outburst of fever.  By the end
of the second century, Jewish Messianism was so nearly dead that its
obstinate adherents were regarded as heretics by the Church at large.
Organised into a hierarchy, the Church substituted itself resolutely
for the ancient people of Israel, and represented itself as heir to the
ancient promises.  The advent of the kingdom of God becomes the advent
and the victory of the Catholic Church over all the other powers of
earth.  The Messianic Theocracy is transformed into a Church Theocracy.
Messianism gives place to Catholicism.


3. _Catholic Christianity_

Transplanted from the poor and arid soil of Hebraism into the rich and
fruitful loam of Graeco-Roman civilisation, the Christian plant was
sure to grow apace and be transformed.  Catholicism is as much Pagan as
Apostolic Messianism was Jewish--from the same causes, and according to
the same law.  More Greek in the East, more Roman in the West, it bears
always and everywhere the traces of its origin.  Study successively all
the features of the Catholic Church, and you will find on each of them
this indelible mark.

The dogmas of the Councils and the theology of the Fathers, who does
not see at the first glance their true character?  Who does not see
that the material is Greek in form, in colour, in every fibre of its
tissue?  Whence came those terms and notions, of which Hebraism knew
nothing, but which the theologians of all the schools will henceforth
bandy to and fro--those abstract concepts, substance and hypostasis,
nature and person, essence and accident, matter and form?  Whence came
the science of the Fathers of the Church, their exegesis, their
history, their logic, their psychology, and that lofty metaphysic which
has so completely transformed the Prophetic into a Platonic firmament?
All this came from Athens, Ephesus, Samos, and Miletus, _via_
Alexandria and Rome.  The Justins, the Athenagorases, the Clements and
the Basils, Athanasius even more than Arius, Jerome as well as
Augustine, had been nourished from their childhood on Greek and Latin
literature.  They had read Plato, Heraclitus, Zeno, Philo, Cicero,
Posidonius, and Seneca as much and more perhaps than the Old Testament.
What is there astonishing in the fact that their theology should have
followed step by step the theology of neo-Platonism until this latter,
for Augustine, should have become the true introduction to the Gospel,
and that in the Middle Ages the names of Plato and Aristotle should
have been invested with an authority not less than those of Isaiah, St.
Paul, and St. John?

Or shall we pass to the constitution of the Church?  What is that but
the exact counterpart of the constitution of the Roman Empire: the
parish modelling itself on the municipality, the diocese on the
province, the metropolitan regions on the great prefectures, and, at
the top of the pyramid, the bishop of Rome and the papacy, whose ideal
dream is simply, in the religious order, the universal and absolute
monarchy of which the Caesars had first set the pattern?  Or would you
consider the moral life and the type of piety?  It is true that at the
outset, and so long as the persecutions continued, there is a great
contrast between Jewish or Christian morals and manners and those of
Roman or Greek society.  But, with time, the contrast is singularly
attenuated.  If the Church conquered the world, the world had its
revenge within the Church.  What is that monkish asceticism imposing
celibacy on the clergy, exalting virginity, multiplying pious works of
merit, and replacing, by factitious and sterile duties, the duties
dictated by nature and essential to society,--what are all these but
survivals of a dualism and the imitation of an ideal which, come from
the East, seduced the feverish imagination of an expiring world?  The
monks, the anchorites and their theology of impotent celibates, did
they save Egypt, Syria, and Byzantium?

During this time, what did worship, adoration, religion, properly
speaking, become?  Between earth and heaven there reappeared the whole
ancient hierarchy of gods and demi-gods, of heroes, nymphs, and
goddesses, replaced by the Virgin Mother, angels, demons, saints.  Each
town, each parish, every fountain, had its patron or its patroness, its
tutelary guardian, to whom they addressed themselves more familiarly
than to God in order to obtain temporal blessings and the grace for
every day.  The saints have their specialities like the minor deities
of former times.  Some cured fevers, some diseases of the skin.  This
one had charge of travellers, that of harvests, a third of articles
that had been lost, a fourth of needed heirs in families in danger of
decay.  With this mythology, all the superstitions were revived, down
to the grossest fetichism: pilgrimages, chaplets, litanies, the
veneration of images, signs of the cross, rites and sacraments
conceived after the manner of the ancient mysteries.  And all this is
done with a sort of unconsciousness, very gradually, and as the effect
of a zeal that was supposed to be Christian.  The heads of the Church
recommend missionaries not to destroy the temples of the false gods,
but to consecrate them to the true one, and to replace their images by
images of the saints, and the rites of the old cults by similar
ceremonies.  Names and etiquettes were thus changed, but not the things
themselves.  At Rome, beneath the basilica of St. Peter, a superb
statue was erected to the Prince of the Apostles.  This was formerly a
statue of Jupiter.  Its great toe has been worn down by the kisses of
the faithful.  Before Christianity, they kissed the foot of the master
of the gods; now they kiss the foot of Peter.  Is the cult of a
different order and the devotion of a higher quality?

These, however, are but the forms of Catholicism; let us go deeper and
try to reach its generating principle.  This principle should be found
in the central dogma of the Catholic system, that in it which commands
and regulates all the parts, which constitutes its unity and strength.
To designate this central dogma is not difficult.  The catechism
teaches us that it is the dogma of the Church, of its infallibility and
traditional continuity, of its divine origin and supernatural powers.
Protestants affirm that they belong to the Church because they belong
to Christ.  Catholics reverse the terms: no one is in communion with
Christ, no one really belongs to Him, unless he belongs to the Church.
Thus faith in the Church and submission to the Church are put into the
forefront and remain the one thing needful and essential.  One is a
Catholic by the fact of his implicit acceptance of the sovereign
authority of the Church; one ceases to be a Catholic when that
submission ceases.  From which it is easy to conclude that the
principle of Catholicism is the realisation of the Christian
principle--that is to say, of the reign of God and of Christ, in the
form of a visible institution, an organised social body, an external
power, exercising itself by means of that which is the very soul of the
institution--a priesthood endowed with supernatural functions and
attributes.

The immediate consequence of this first principle was the rupture of
the organic union realised in the Gospel of Christ between the
religious element and the moral element.  Nothing is more striking in
the Sermon on the Mount and in all the Parables of Jesus, nothing
better attests the superiority of Christianity to anterior cults,
nothing proves with greater force and clearness that it is the perfect
and definitive Religion, than that mutual penetration, that fusion,
that identification, in a word, of religion and morality, till then
separate and often opposed to each other.  The Christ did not desire in
religion anything that was not in morality, or in morality anything
that was not religious.  Thus did He bring back piety from without, and
made of it the inner inspiration which penetrates and transforms the
whole life, a hidden flame, a ferment acting from the centre to the
surface, the soul in the body, ever invisible and everywhere present.
He thus founded the absolute autonomy of the religious and of the moral
life which no longer are divided, but appear simply as the two sides of
consciousness; the one interior and turned towards God, the other
exterior and turned towards the world.  In creating in us the sense of
our sonship to God, Jesus did not admit the intervention of any
external authority between the Father and the child.  The universal
priesthood, with which, by His spirit, He invests the least of His
disciples, excludes in principle all supernatural priesthood.  "Call no
man master on earth, for one is your Master in heaven; and all ye are
brethren."  The children must have free access to the Father.

But, from the moment the Christian principle, instead of entering as
divine inspiration into the consciousness, sets itself up as a visible
institution in society, it is evident that this organic union is
broken, and the autonomy of the individual consciousness compromised.
The religious element affirms itself on its own account, and imposes
itself from without on the mind of the faithful as a divine authority.
The ancient dualism, which the Gospel surmounted, reappears in a
profounder form; it brings in its train a universal
supernaturalism--that is to say, a mechanical conception of the
relations between God and the world.  Instead of a penetration we have
a superposition of two elements.  The clergy separates itself from the
laity and superposes itself upon it as the necessary intermediary
between earth and heaven.  Religious society, constituted under the
form of a government, superposes itself upon the civil society that it
desires to rule; grace superposes itself upon nature, acting on it from
above in the sacraments; the morality of the Church, in so far as it is
a supernatural morality, superposes itself upon the natural morality of
conscience; revelation upon reason; divine dogmas upon human science;
the spiritual power of the priest upon the temporal power of the family
and of the State.  Everywhere, within and without, the division breaks
out, and you see arise in man and in society an intestine struggle
which will never end; for these two original forces that it brings into
conflict, religion and nature, are equally powerful and eternal.

Catholicism began, then, in the Church of the second century when,
under the unconscious action of tradition and of pagan habits, the need
was felt of objectivising and materialising the Christian principle in
an external fact, of imprisoning the kingdom of God in a visible
institution, the immanent revelation of the Holy Spirit in the
decisions and acts of a priesthood.  This tendency, once born, would be
irresistible.  Ideal and transcendent as it was at first, the Christian
principle would become ever more external and political.  Absorbing all
Christianity, and holding in its hands all the graces of God, the
Church would naturally present itself to the world as the permanent
mediator and the grand magician.  It was its part to effect the
salvation of sinners, and, for this, it would need, like the ancient
priests, to offer daily to God an agreeable oblation, an expiatory
sacrifice of infinite value to atone for the infinite sins of the
world.  Thus the Church transformed the commemoration of the death of
Christ into a _real_ renewal of the sacrifice on Calvary; the Holy
Supper became the mass; the fraternal table was turned into an altar;
the elder or presbyter was changed into a priest and pontiff, and the
bread of the communion into a divine victim.  The dogma of
transubstantiation was bound to follow; to the materialisation of
Christianity in the Church corresponds the materialisation of God in
the host.

By virtue of the same principle, Christian piety becomes devotion,
_i.e._ a ritual and meritorious practice, as in the ancient cults.  But
we must not be unjust and attribute something to Catholicism that it
condemns.  It does not say that external practice is sufficient; the
Church esteems it vain and even culpable unless accompanied by the
affections and the will.

      *      *      *      *      *

The first and principal act of piety is submission to the Church.  Its
dogmas may be irrational, contradictory; its commandments may seem
arbitrary, foreign to the natural conscience, sometimes in
contradiction with it; no matter.

Reason, conscience, all must abdicate, and all submit....  In the
Church, the Christian state must always be a state of minority, for the
tutelage that it accepts will never cease.  And the authority of the
Church, being on this point sovereign and indefectible, could not
remain invisible and indeterminate.  An imperious logic pushed it from
the first to incarnate itself in its organs, more and more apparent and
simplified.  First it was lodged in individual bishops, then in
councils, until the Pope when speaking _ex cathedra_ became the sole
authority.  In 1870 the Council of the Vatican, by promulgating the
dogma of Papal infallibility, drew the irresistible conclusion from the
premises laid down in previous centuries.  The evolution of Catholicism
was completed.  The transformation of Christianity into a sacerdotal
theocracy was achieved.  The first is realised and exhausted in the
second, and the distinction we established, when speaking of the
essence of Christianity, between the Christian principle and its
historical realisations, is not merely effaced; it no longer has any
meaning.

From which follow two consequences which every day become more clear
and patent.  The first is that the Catholic Church, notwithstanding the
desires of Leo XIII., is fatally condemned to be intolerant and
intransigeant towards all others.  The second is that it is
contradictory to expect any reform in that Church, or even to speak of
it; for the Church could not admit the necessity of reform without
renouncing all its pretentions.  A river never turns back to its
source.  Catholicism can only exist by struggling for supremacy.  It
must be all or nothing.

At the same time, things are not so simple as our systems.  The logic
of ideas does not exhaust the reality of life.  Behind abstract
principles there are pious souls....  In Catholicism there has always
been a latent Protestantism, by which I mean a protest, mute or spoken,
direct or indirect, of the Christian principle against the oppressions
of external and tyrannical authority....  Without the continuous
presence of the Christian spirit in the Catholic Church, the
Reformation would have been impossible.  Without the triumph of the
sacerdotal spirit it would have been unnecessary.  Protestantism sprang
out of Catholicism because it was virtually contained in it.


4. _Protestant Christianity_

It is strangely to mistake the nature of the Protestant Reformation of
the sixteenth century to see in it a sort of semi-rationalism, the
inconsistent exercise of free examination, or the revolutionary
introduction of a foreign philosophical principle into the warp and
woof of Christianity.  You have only to read the biography of the
Reformers and to make a slight analysis of their soul to form an
entirely different idea of their work.  The first and almost the only
question which preoccupies and troubles them is an exclusively
religious and practical question: "What must we do in order to be
justified before God?  How may we attain to peace of soul and to the
assurance of pardon and of life eternal?"  To find this peace, this
pardon and salvation, which the Church could not procure for them, they
determined to turn back and quench their thirst at the primitive
sources of the Gospel.  They went back to the original documents
because they were persuaded that Christianity had been corrupted in the
course of centuries; they wished to have it in its purity.  Their whole
reformation was to consist in this restoration of primitive truth.

But history never recommences.  This return to the past and this
re-reading of the Bible were accompanied by a religious experience and
an act of consciousness which made of their enterprise something
essentially new and original, and which rendered it immeasurably
fruitful.  It is unnecessary to seek elsewhere than in psychological
experience the germ of Protestantism.  It was in the humble cell of a
convent at Erfurt and in the soul of a poor monk that the drama was
first enacted from which sprang the revolution that has changed the
face of the world.

Luther entered the convent with a faith in the authority of the Church
and in the efficacy of its rites as serious and entire as that of any
monk.  "If it was possible," he said afterwards, "to reach Heaven by
monkery, I was resolved to reach it by that road."  For years he shrank
from nothing that might render God propitious; he multiplied his acts
of devotion and his works of penance.  There is a striking analogy
between the experiences of Luther under the monachal regime and those
of Saul of Tarsus under the discipline of the Pharisaic Law.  The
_denoument_ was the same.  For the second time, the system of pious
works was found powerless to appease a conscience which roused against
itself the rigour of its own ideal.  This struggle against an external
law could only exasperate the sense of sin to the point of despair.
Paul and Luther, in precisely the same manner, experienced the inward
emptiness and radical worthlessness of the religious system in which
they had been trained.  The more they had tried to realise it in its
perfection, the more had they found it wanting.  Catholicism,
considered as a means of salvation, was rejected by the religious and
moral consciousness of Luther, before it was condemned by exegesis and
by reasoning.  To reach this sentence without appeal the Saxon monk had
but to maintain inflexible the demands of the divine law and to
measure, without illusion, the abyss that separated him from God, and
that no human works could fill.  It was in this way that he found
himself shut up to the essence of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; he found
the peace that fled from him in the pure and simple acceptance of the
glad tidings of the paternal love of God, in the confidence that He
gives gratuitously that which man can never conquer for himself,
namely, the remission of sins and the certitude of eternal life.  What
then is faith?  Is it still intellectual adhesion to dogmas or
submission to an external authority?  No.  It is an act of confidence,
the act of a childlike heart, which finds with joy the Father whom it
knew not, and Whom, without presumption, it is happy henceforth to hold
with both its hands.  That is what Luther found in Paul's great words:
"The just shall live by faith."  In this radical transformation of the
notion of faith restored to its evangelical meaning is to be found the
principle of the greatest religious revolution effected in the world
since the preaching of Jesus.

Let us therefore here set forth the radical opposition between the
Catholic principle and the Protestant principle in order that we may
thoroughly understand the internecine war that was henceforth to be
waged between them.  In vain will eminent men in both camps, with the
most generous and conciliatory intentions, arise and endeavour to find
some middle ground, and effect a pacific reunion of the two halves of
Christendom.  All compromises, all diplomatic negotiations, will fail,
because each of the two principles can only subsist by the negation of
the other.  Having attained to salvation, to full communion with God,
independently of and in collision with the authority and the discipline
of the sacerdotal Church, how could Luther recognise them any longer as
divine and submit to them with sincerity and confidence?  The ancient
edifice had been the more thoroughly ruined, inasmuch as it had become
useless and had been replaced.  The originality of Luther consisted in
this: his religious enfranchisement sprang from his own piety, and he
founded his freedom on his sense of sonship, on the sense he had of his
quality and titles as a child and heir of God.  How could such a
consciousness submit itself to the yoke again without denying itself?
Catholicism, on the other hand, cannot be less intransigeant.  To
recognise in any degree whatever that it is possible to a Christian to
enjoy pardon and the sense of the divine fatherhood apart from its
dogmas and its priesthood, would not this be to abdicate all its
pretensions, and to transform itself to the point of destruction?

No doubt, in actual life, this opposition is attenuated by the fact
that in all Catholicism there is a latent Protestantism, and in all
Protestantism a latent Catholicism.  Between Port-Royal and Geneva,
between Bossuet and Leibniz, between Leo XIII. and the Anglican Church,
the distance seems but little.  It is an illusion.  Like two
electricities of the same name, no sooner do they come into contact
than they repel each other and separate more widely than before.  In
Catholicism Christianity tends to realise itself as a theocratic
institution; it becomes an external law, a supernatural power, which,
from without, imposes itself on individuals and on peoples.  In
Protestantism, on the contrary, Christianity is brought back from the
exterior to the interior; it plants itself in the soul as a principle
of subjective inspiration which, acting organically on individual and
social life, transforms it and elevates it progressively without
denaturalising and doing violence to it.  Protestant subjectivity
becomes spontaneity and liberty, just as necessarily as Catholic
objectivity becomes supernaturalism and clerical tyranny.  The
religious element is no longer separated from the moral element; it no
longer asserts itself as a truth or a morality superior to human truth
and human morality.  The intensity of the religious life is no longer
measured by the number or the fervour of pious works or ritual
practices, but by the sincerity and elevation of the life of the
spirit.  All asceticism is radically suppressed.  Science is set free
along with conscience; the political life of the peoples, as well as
the inner life of the Christian.  Man escapes from tutelage, and in all
departments comes into possession of himself, into the full and free
development of his being, into his majority.

This subjective character of a religion strictly moral stamps itself
with energy on all the specific doctrines of Protestantism.  It would
be superfluous to dwell upon the doctrine of justification by faith;
its subjective character is evident.  No doubt the term justification
has a legal colour and awakens the idea of a tribunal.  But it must not
be forgotten that this tribunal is nothing but the inner court where
man and God meet each other face to face, where man is accused by his
own conscience, and where the sentence which absolves him is the inward
witness of the Holy Spirit, heard by him alone.

The doctrine of the sovereign authority of Scripture in matters of
faith might seem at first sight to set up an external authority.  And
it is very true that certain Protestants have often understood it in
the Catholic sense, and have employed it to exercise some violence on
their own conscience or on the conscience of their brethren.  But they
never succeed for long; they soon fall into a too flagrant
contradiction.  The authority of the Bible is never separated in
Protestantism from the right of the individual to interpret it freely,
and from the personal duty of assimilating the truths he discovers in
it.  What therefore are those Protestants doing who attempt to set up a
confession of faith as absolute and obligatory truth but imposing on
their brethren their own subjective interpretation, and, consequently,
denying to others the right which they exercise themselves?  Nor let it
be forgotten, on the other hand, that the obligation laid on each
Christian to read the Bible and draw from it his faith is a perpetual
and fruitful appeal to the energy of thought and to the autonomy of the
inner life.  The authority of Scripture, so far from being a menace to
Christian liberty, is its invincible rampart.  Not only has the
Protestant Christian in the name of the Bible triumphed over eighteen
centuries of tradition, but it is the Bible, an appeal to the Bible
ever better understood, which has saved Protestant theology from
scholasticism, which has prevented it from congealing in a confession
of faith, and which, leaving the principle of the Gospel in an ideal
transcendence in relation to all its historical expressions or
realisations, has maintained, and still maintains, the spirit of reform
in the Churches of the Reformation.

The doctrines of grace and of predestination, which are at the centre
of Calvinism, have no other meaning.  Souls religiously inert see in
these doctrines nothing but an abuse of blind power, a sort of divine
_fatum_, breaking every spring in the human soul.  Nothing appears to
be more oppressive or more immoral.  But this is only an appearance.
There is really no predestination for irreligious souls.  This doctrine
is but the expression of the inner basis of all true piety, which is
nothing if it is not the sense, the feeling, of the presence and the
sovereign and continuous action of God in each soul and in all the
universe.  No other sentiment gives so much spring and vigour to the
human will, nothing raises it to such a height or makes it so
invincible to all assaults from within and without.  "If God be for us,
who can be against us?" etc. (Rom. viii. 31-39).  How is it that the
Calvinistic Puritans of New England were the founders of modern
liberty, and the Jesuits, those admirable theorisers on freewill, the
precursors of all the servitudes?  It is with predestination as it is
with religion itself.  Conceived as exterior to the life of the soul,
it gives birth, no doubt, to a crushing despotism; conceived as an
inward inspiration, sustaining the initiative and even the liberty of
the individual, it becomes, in the Christian soul, the source of a
force which nothing can break or subdue.

But the point at which the antithesis between Protestantism and
Catholicism becomes most patent is the doctrine of the natural
priesthood of all Christians as opposed to that of the supernatural
priesthood of a privileged clergy.  The free and perpetual communion of
believing souls with the Father is the foundation of the independence
of each and of the fraternal equality of all.  The tap-root of
clericalism is cut.  The individual is a priest before the interior
altar of his conscience; the father is a priest in his household; the
citizen, if so he wills, in the city.

The Catholic notion of dogma vanishes with all the rest.  To speak of
an immutable and infallible dogma, in Protestantism, is nonsense; that
is to say, if we accept the dictionary definition of dogma--the
promulgation by the Church of an absolute formula.  The decision of a
Church cannot have more authority than that Church itself.  Now, no
Protestant Church holds itself, or can hold itself without denying
itself, to be infallible.  How then could it communicate to its
definitions an infallibility that it did not itself possess?
Protestant confessions of faith are always conditioned in time, and can
never be definitive; they are always revisable, consequently they are
always liable to criticism and to reform.  Thus ceases the
solidification of traditional dogma.  The old ice melts beneath the
breath of knowledge and of piety.  The river takes again its natural
course, and evolution, under the control of a perpetual criticism,
becomes the law of religious thought, as of all other human activities.

From these observations and analyses (necessarily abridged) the true
nature of Protestantism will have become sufficiently clear.  It is not
a dogma set up in the face of another dogma, a Church in competition
with a rival Church, a purified Catholicism opposed to a traditional
Catholicism.  It is more and better than a doctrine, it is a method;
more and better than a better Church, it is a new form of piety; it is
a different spirit, creating a new world and inaugurating for religious
souls a new regime.  It is equally evident that Protestantism cannot be
imprisoned in any definitive form.  It leads to variety of formulas,
rites, and associations as necessarily as the Catholic principle leads
to unity.  No limit can be set to its development.  Always interior,
invisible, ideal, the religious principle that it represents
accompanies the life and activity of the spirit into all the paths that
man may pursue and in all the progress he may make.  Nothing human is
alien to it; nor is it alien to anything that is human.  It solves the
problem of liberty and authority as it is solved by free and ordered
governments; it does not suppress either of the terms, but conciliates
them by reducing authority to its pedagogic _role_, and by making the
Christian spirit the soul and inner rule of liberty.

By very reason of its superiority, and of the conditions of general
culture that it presupposes, this form of Christianity could only
appear after all the others.  The spirit can only become self-conscious
by distinguishing itself from the body in which at first it seems as if
diffused, and by opposing to it an energetic moral protest.  "That is
not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterwards
that which is spiritual" (1 Cor. xv. 46.  Cf. Gal. iv. 1-5).  This
divine plan, which the apostle discovered in the ancient history of
humanity, is repeated in the history of Christianity.  The Messianic
form corresponds to infancy, to that brief, happy age in which the
impatient imagination nourishes itself on dreams and illusions which
the experience of life soon dissipates without killing or even
enfeebling the immortal hope at the heart of it.  The Catholic form,
which succeeds it, endures longer and corresponds to the age of
adolescence, in which education is painfully prosecuted, and it demands
a strict external discipline and masters whose authority must not be
questioned or discussed.  It was in this way that Catholic discipline
and authority conducted the slow, laborious education of the pagan and
barbarian world up to the sixteenth century.

But a moment must arrive when the work of education had succeeded, when
the leading strings essential to childhood began to be a bondage and a
hindrance.  The pedagogic mission of the Church, like that of the
family itself, had its limit and its term in the very function it
fulfilled.  That function was to make adult Christians and free men,
not men without rule, but Christians having in themselves, in their
conscience and their inner life, the supreme rule of their thought and
conduct.  This new age of autonomy, of firm possession of self, and of
internal self-government, is that which Protestantism represents, and
it could only commence in modern times--that is to say, with that
general movement which, since the end of the Middle Ages, is leading
humanity to an ever completer enfranchisement, and rendering it more
universally and more individually responsible for its destinies.

It may be remarked that by this evolution, and under its Protestant
form, the Christian principle was only returning to its pure essence
and its primitive expression.  It could only recognise itself, take
cognisance of its true nature, separate itself from that which was not
itself; it could only disencumber itself of every material, temporary,
or local element, of all by which it had become surcharged in the
course of ages, and which was neither religious nor moral, by
remounting to its source, and by renewing its strength, through
reflection and criticism, at its original springs.  That is why
Protestantism has taken the form of this return to the past, for in it
Christianity does not surpass itself; it simply tries to know itself
better and to become more faithful to its principle.  In the
consciousness of Christ, what did we find was the essence of the
perfect and eternal piety?  Nothing more than moral repentance,
confidence in the love of the Father and the filial sense of His
immediate, active presence in the heart: the indestructible foundation
of our liberty, of our moral dignity, of our security, in face of the
enigmas of the universe and the mysteries of death.  Is it not to this
eternal gospel that we must always return?  To finish its course and
complete its work, will humanity ever discover another viaticum that
will better renew its courage and its hope?


5. _Conclusion_

Here I must stop.  At the outset I spoke of a personal confession, and
it seems to me as if it were nearly complete.  In sketching the broad
outlines of the religious history of humanity, I have had but one
object; I have wished to show the men of my generation why I remain
religious, Christian, and Protestant.  I am religious because I am a
man and do not desire to be less than human, and because humanity, in
me and in my race, commences and completes itself in religion and by
religion.  I am Christian because I cannot be religious in any other
way, and because Christianity is the perfect and supreme form of
religion in this world.  Lastly, I am Protestant, not from any
confessional zeal, nor from racial attachment to the family of
Huguenots, although I thank God daily that I was born in that family,
but because in Protestantism alone can I enjoy the heritage of
Christ--that is to say, because in it I can be a Christian without
placing my conscience under any external yoke, and because I can
fortify myself in communion with and in adoration of an immanent Deity
by consecrating to Him the activity of my intellect, the natural
affections of my heart, and find in this moral consecration the free
expansion and development of my whole being.

Under this new form, divested of the swaddling-clothes by which at
first it was bound, Christianity always seems to me to be best as it
is, a spiritual and eternal principle, which brings peace to the soul,
and which alone can give harmony and unity to the world.  Nothing can
contradict it except evil and error; everything serves and strengthens
it.  It is this principle which to my eyes manifests itself with
ever-growing clearness in that heroic love of Science which, in our
time, has created so many marvels and made so many martyrs; this it is
which reveals itself to me in the works of all the great artists, in
that ideal of beauty which enraptures them and brings such generous
tears into our eyes; it is this which I honour and bless in the efforts
of men who interest themselves in the future of humanity, and who in
the political direction of their country or in the work of social
education seek and find some means of raising and ameliorating the
condition of the people: I salute it in the illustrious apostles of all
great causes and in the obscure workers at all humble tasks, from the
mother who teaches her children to join their hands and bend their
knees before the Father in Heaven, to the preacher and the missionary
who faithfully distribute to the hungry soul the bread of the Gospel,
from the sister of charity who devotes her life to the solace of the
sick and suffering, to the thinker who fathoms the mysteries of the
heart and of the universe in order that he may shed on the paths of
erring humanity some rays of light and joy.

Amid the twilight that envelopes us you predict the threatening night;
I see the day that is about to dawn with a new century.  Where you see
nothing but discords, conflicts, and confusion, I see a concourse of
forces which, coming from all points of the horizon, are still ignorant
of each other, and, because ignorant, conflicting, but which, by these
very conflicts and collisions, are labouring together in the common
work of elevation and salvation: the mysterious work whose nature
Christ defined in His Gospel, and whose motive-power he created by
breathing into the human heart His own fraternal love.  Since then
there has been a secret inquietude at the heart of all egoisms, a
sentence of condemnation on the brow of all abuses and all tyrannies.
The modern world can never settle down again into repose, or fall
asleep in evil and in slavery; it has had a vision it cannot forget; it
has been touched with a flame that cannot be quenched.  Many who are
often the best collaborators in this work of redemption know not whence
it comes and whither it tends; they even blaspheme the Christ who
inspires it and the God who maintains it.  They know not what they do,
nor what they say: in their ignorance they calumniate that which is
best both in their life and in themselves.




BOOK THIRD

DOGMA




