CHAPTER IV

THE RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENT OF HUMANITY

  1. The Social Element in Religion
  2. Progress in the Outward Forms of Religion
  3. Progress in the Representation of the Divine
  4. The History of Prayer
  5. Conclusion



BOOK II.--CHRISTIANITY


CHAPTER I

HEBRAISM, OR THE ORIGINS OF THE GOSPEL

  1. Prophetism
  2. The Dawn of the Gospel


CHAPTER II

THE ESSENCE OF CHRISTIANITY

  1. The Problem
  2. The Christian Principle
  3. The Gospel of Jesus
  4. A Necessary Distinction
  5. The Corruptions of the Christian Principle


CHAPTER III

THE GREAT HISTORICAL FORMS OF CHRISTIANITY

  1. The Evolution of the Christian Principle
  2. Jewish or Messianic Christianity
  3. Catholic Christianity
  4. Protestant Christianity
  5. Conclusion



BOOK III.--DOGMA

CHAPTER I

WHAT IS A DOGMA?

  1. Definition
  2. Genesis of Dogma
  3. The Role and the Religious Value of Dogma


CHAPTER II

THE LIFE OF DOGMAS AND THEIR HISTORICAL EVOLUTION

  1. Three Prejudices
  2. The Two Elements in Dogma
  3. The Crisis of Dogma


CHAPTER III

THE SCIENCE OF DOGMAS

  1. Mixed Character of the Science of Dogmas
  2. The Science of Dogmas and the Church
  3. The Science of Dogmas and Philosophy


CHAPTER IV

CRITICAL THEORY OF RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE

  1. Antiquated Theories
  2. The Kantian Theory of Knowledge
  3. The Two Orders of Knowledge
  4. Subjectivity of Religious Knowledge
  5. Teleology
  6. Symbolism
  7. Conclusion


APPENDIX

Reply to Criticisms




PREFACE

This volume contains three parts which are related to each other as the
three stories of one and the same edifice.  The first treats of
religion and its origin; the second of Christianity and its essence;
the third of Dogma and its nature.

Proceeding thus from the general to the particular, from the elementary
forms of religion to its highest form, passing afterwards from
religious phenomena to religious doctrines, I have endeavoured to
develop a series of connected and progressive views which I do not wish
to be regarded as a system, but as the rigid application and the first
results of the method of strictly psychological and historical
observation that for years I have applied to this species of studies.
In no domain is there a greater incoherence of ideas, a sharper
conflict of feeling, or data more contradictory or, at all events, more
difficult to reconcile.  In no other is it more urgent to introduce a
little sequence, clearness, harmony.  Our century, from the beginning,
has had two great passions which still inflame and agitate its closing
years.  It has driven abreast the twofold worship of the scientific
method and of the moral ideal; but, so far from being able to unite
them, it has pushed them to a point where they seem to contradict and
exclude each other.  Every serious soul feels itself to be inwardly
divided; it would fain conciliate its most generous aspirations, the
two last motives for living and acting that still remain to it.  Where
but in a renovated conception of religion will this needed
reconciliation be found?

No one nowadays underestimates the social importance of the religious
question.  Philosophers, moralists, politicians, show themselves to be
alive to it; they see it dominating all others, whose solution, in the
end, it may prevent or decide.  But, singular contradiction! the more
zeal and the more decision these men manifest in handling the religious
question in the social order, the more indifference or impotence they
show in solving it for themselves both in their inner and their family
life...  No one has the right to impose a doctrine or the presumption,
surely, to dictate to others how they must direct their thought; but a
sincere and persuaded mind may tell how it has directed its own, and
may set forth as an experience and a "document" the views at which it
has arrived....

The solidarity of minds has now become so great, the currents of ideas,
like the currents in the atmosphere, move so quickly and create, in
circumstances so different and so far apart, states of soul so similar
that many who read these studies, and who are struggling with the same
difficulties as those which have so long engaged the author's thoughts,
may find both interest and profit in seeing how he has succeeded in
satisfying himself.  Those even who have never reflected on these
questions, or have lightly turned from them because they deemed them
insoluble, will not perhaps object to be directed to them by one who
wishes, not to check their freedom of thought, but to stimulate them to
exercise it.  Who, at the close of his secret meditations, on the
confines of his knowledge, at the end of his affections, of the joys he
has tasted, of the trials he has endured, has not seen rising before
him the religious question--I mean the mysterious problem of his
destiny?  Of all questions it is the most vital.  Men may be turned
from it for a time by manifold distractions and by a sense of
powerlessness to solve the question, but it is impossible that they
should not return to it.  Has life a meaning?  Is it worth living?  Our
efforts, have they an end?  Our works and our thoughts, have they any
permanent value to the universe?  This problem, which one generation
may evade, returns with the next.  Each new recruit to the human race
brings the problem along with him, because he wishes to live, and to
live is to act, and all action requires a faith.  It is of the young
that I have thought while preparing these pages, and it is to them that
I dedicate them.

To a generation that believed it could repose in Positivism in
philosophy, utilitarianism in morals, and naturalism in art and poetry,
has succeeded a generation that torments itself more than ever with the
mystery of things, that is attracted by the ideal, that dreams of
social fraternity, of self-renunciation, of devotion to the little, to
the miserable, to the oppressed--devotion like the heroism of Christian
love.  Hence what has been called the renaissance of Idealism, the
return, _i.e._, to general ideas, to faith in the invisible, to the
taste for symbols, and to those longings, as confused as they are
ardent, to discover a religion or to return to the religion their
fathers have disdained.  Our young people, it seems to me, are pushing
bravely forward, marching between two high walls: on the one side
modern science with its rigorous methods which it is no longer possible
to ignore or to avoid; on the other, the dogmas and the customs of the
religious institutions in which they were reared, and to which they
would, but cannot, sincerely return.  The sages who have led them
hitherto point to the impasse they have reached, and bid them take a
part,--either for science against religion, or for religion against
science.  They hesitate, with reason, in face of this alarming
alternative.  Must we then choose between pious ignorance and bare
knowledge?  Must we either continue to live a moral life belied by
science, or set up a theory of things which our consciences condemn?
Is there no issue to the dark and narrow valley which our anxious youth
traverse?  I think there is.  I think I have caught glimpses of a steep
and narrow path that leads to wide and shining table-lands above.
Indeed I have ascended in the footsteps of some others, and I signal in
my turn to younger, braver pioneers who, in course of time, will make a
broader, safer road, along which all the caravan may pass.




BOOK FIRST

RELIGION




