CHAPTER I

WHAT IS A DOGMA?

1. _Definition_

Dogma, in the strictest sense, is one or more doctrinal propositions
which, in a religious society, and as the result of the decisions of
the competent authority, have become the object of faith, and the rule
of belief and practice.

It would not be enough to say that a religious society has dogmas as a
political society has laws.  For the first, it is a much greater
necessity.  Moral societies not only need to be governed; they need to
define themselves and to explain their _raison d'etre_.  Now, they can
only do this in their dogma.

Dogma therefore is a phenomenon of social life.  One cannot conceive
either dogma without a Church, or a Church without dogma.  The two
notions are correlative and inseparable.

There are three elements in dogma: a religious element, which springs
from piety; an intellectual or philosophic element, which supposes
reflection and discussion; and an element of authority, which comes
from the Church.  Dogma is a doctrine of which the Church has made a
law.

All the peoples of antiquity believed that their legislation came from
heaven.  In like manner all the Churches have believed, and many of
them still believe, that their dogmas, in their official form, have
been directly given to them by God Himself.  The history of evolution,
political and religious, has dissipated these illusions.  Every law of
righteousness and truth should, doubtless, be referred to the
mysterious action of the Divine Spirit which works incessantly in the
spirits of men; but, in its historical form, it bears, nevertheless,
the stamp of the contingent conditions in which it is born.  The genius
of a people is nowhere more manifest than in its constitution and its
laws, nor the soul and the original inspiration of a Church than in its
dogmatic creations.  The work always bears the moral impress of the
workman.

It follows that a Church cannot claim for its dogma more authority than
it possesses itself.  Only a Church which is infallible can issue
immutable dogmas.  When Protestantism sets up such a pretension, it
falls into a radical contradiction with its own principle, and that
contradiction ruins all attempts of this kind.

In Catholicism the theory of the immutability of dogmas is opposed to
history; in Protestantism it is opposed to logic.  In both cases the
affirmation is shown to be illusory.  It is with dogmas, so long as
they are alive, as it is with all living things; they are in a
perpetual state of transformation.  They only become immutable when
they are dead, and they begin to die when they cease to be studied for
their own sakes--that is, to be discussed.

Dogma, therefore, which serves as a law and visible bond to the Church,
is neither the principle nor the foundation of religion.  It is not
primitive; it never appears until late in the history of religious
evolution.  "There were poets and orators," says Voltaire, "before
there was a grammar and a rhetoric."  Man chanted before he reasoned.
Everywhere the prophet preceded the rabbi, and religion theology.  It
may be said, no doubt, that dogma is in religion, since it comes out of
it; but it is in it as the fruits of Autumn are in the blossoms of
Spring.  Dogmas and fruits, in order to form and ripen, need long
summers and much sunshine.  The best way to describe their nature will
be to trace their genesis.


2. _The Genesis of Dogma_

Dogma has its tap-root in religion.  In every positive Religion there
is an internal and an external element, a soul and a body.  The soul is
inward piety, the movement of adoration and of prayer, the divine
sensibility of the heart; the body consists of external forms, of rites
and dogmas, institutions and codes.  Life consists in the organic union
of these two elements.  Without the soul, religion is but an empty
form, a mere corpse.  Without the body, which is the expression and the
instrument of the soul, religion is indiscernible, unconscious, and
unrealised.

Which of these two elements is primitive and generative?  The answer is
not doubtful.  Modern psychology has learnt it in a manner never to be
forgotten from Schleiermacher, Benjamin Constant, and Alexander Vinet.
The principle of all religion is in piety, just as the principle of
language is in thought, although it is not possible now to conceive of
them as being separate.  Consider a moment.  That religion which time
and custom have transformed, perhaps, into a mechanical round of
ceremonies, or into a system of abstractions and metaphysical theories,
what was it at first?  Trace it to its source, and you will find that
these cold blocks of lava once came burning hot from an interior fire.

But this is the parting of the ways.  This is the point at which
religious minds separate into widely different groups.

Regarding religion as a saving institution in the form of a visible
organised Church maintained by God and provided with all the means of
grace, Catholicism was bound to end in a sort of mechanical psychology,
and to explain the sentiment of piety as the inward effect of the
outward and supernatural institution.  This is done by Bellarmine and
de Bonald, the most consistent of the Catholic theologians.
Protestantism, on the contrary, which makes of the faith of the heart,
of the immediate and personal relation of the soul to God, the very
principle of justification, and of all religious life, was bound none
the less logically to end, by analysis, in a more profound psychology,
and to refer to an inward principle all the forms and manifestations of
religion.  Religious history thus becomes homogeneous, and runs
parallel with that of all the other activities of the human mind.

None the less, this subjectivity of the religious principle frightens
many good men.  Persons devoted to practice, and unconsciously
dominated by the habits and necessities of ecclesiastical government
and religious teaching, hesitate to enter upon a road so naturally
opened.  As, from generation to generation, religion has been taught
and propagated externally by the Church, the family, or special agents,
it is impossible for them to imagine that it was not always so, and not
to trace back to God Himself that chain or tradition of external
instruction.  In which they are certainly right.  Their only error, but
it is a grave one, is to represent God as an ordinary teacher, the
first of a series, who once acted, like the rest of them, upon His
pupils from without; whereas God works in all souls, acts and teaches
without ceasing through all human masters, and is present throughout
the whole religious education of humanity.

Who does not see that to represent things otherwise is to remain in the
crudest and least religious of anthropomorphisms?  At bottom, these men
are afraid of losing revelation, which they rightly judge to be
inseparable from the very idea of religion.  They object that piety and
the awakening of the religious sentiment must have an objective cause,
and that that cause can only be a revelation of God Himself.  Nothing
is more true; but this revelation which is effected without, in the
events of Nature or of History, is only known within, in and by the
human consciousness.  This inward inspiration alone enables religious
men to interpret Nature and History religiously.  Now, this
interpretation is made by their intellect and according to the laws and
conditions which regulate it.  The religious phenomenon therefore has
not two moments only, the objective revelation as a cause and the
subjective piety as an effect; it has three, which always follow each
other in the same order: the inner revelation of God, which produces
the subjective piety of man, which, in its turn, engenders the
historical religious forms, rites, formularies of faith, sacred books,
social creations, which we can know and describe as external facts.  It
will be seen what an error they commit, what a mistake they make, who
identify the third term with the first, suppressing the second, which
is the necessary link and forms the transition between the other two.
Whoever will fathom this little problem in psychology, and reflect upon
it with a little attention, will see that all religious revelation of
God must necessarily pass through human subjectivity before arriving at
historical objectivity.

      *      *      *      *      *

Passing now from the intellectual interpretation to the intellectual
expression of religion, and noting the successive stages through which
it must necessarily advance towards dogma, I remark once more that
man's first language is that of the imagination.  The imagination of
the child or of the savage animates, dramatises, and transfigures
everything.  It spontaneously engenders vivid and poetic images.  At
the beginning, religion, consisting chiefly of emotions, presentiments,
movements of the heart, clothed itself in mythologic forms....  But the
age of individual reflection comes.  The image tends to change into the
idea.  Men interpret, define, translate it.  The religious myth is
replaced by the religious doctrine.  These are at first entirely
personal interpretations.  Nevertheless, these opinions desire to
propagate themselves, to become general, and, as they are imperfect and
diverse, they engender conflicts which threaten to become schisms.
Myths, appealing to the imagination merely, and only professing to
translate the common emotion, draw souls together and fuse them into a
real unity; individual reason, private exegesis, inevitably separates
them.  But the consciousness of the community, thus menaced, naturally
reacts by the instincts of conservation.  There is therefore a struggle
between the two, and out of this conflict dogma is born.

A new element must intervene.  There must be a Church.  Now, all
religions do not form churches.  The phenomenon is only produced in the
universalist and moral religions.  Strictly speaking, there is no
Church except in Christianity; and no dogmas save Christian dogmas.  In
ancient societies, where religion was confounded either with the State,
or with the nationality, the religious unity was maintained and
guaranteed by the same means as the political unity.  There were no
dogmas, because dogmas were of no use.  As much may be said of Hebraism
and of Islam: in them there were rites, external signs and seals, which
sufficed to weld and to maintain the religious bond.

Dogma only arises when the religious society, distinguishing itself
from the civil, becomes a moral society, recruiting itself by voluntary
adherents.  This society, like every other, gives to itself what it
needs in order to live, to defend itself, and propagate itself.
Doctrine necessarily becomes for it an essential thing; for in its
doctrine it expresses its soul, its mission, its faith.  It is
necessary also that it should carry its doctrine to a degree at once of
generality and precision high enough to embrace and to translate all
the moments of its religious experience and to eliminate all alien and
hostile elements.  Controversy springs up and threatens to rend it.
The Church then chooses and formulates a definition of the point
contested: it enacts it as the adequate expression of its faith, and
sanctions it with all its objective authority: dogma is born.  From
that moment also the two correlative notions of _orthodoxy_ and
_heresy_ are formed.  Orthodoxy is official and collective doctrine;
heresy is individual doctrine or interpretation....  By and by symbols
or confessions of faith are formed, and these become the standards of
faith and practice in the various churches that adopt them.

This long evolution is fully justified in the eyes of reason.  It is a
movement of the mind as legitimate as it is necessary.  The germ must
become a tree, the child grow to manhood, the image be transformed into
the idea, and poetry give place to prose.  It is possible to be
mistaken as to the nature, origin, and value of dogma, but not as to
its necessity.  The Church may make a different use of it in the
future, but it will not be able to dispense with it, for the doctrinal
form of religion answers to an imperative need of the epoch of
intellectual growth at which we have arrived.  No one can either
reverse or arrest its development....

The word dogma is anterior to Catholicism.  It had two senses in Greek
antiquity: a political and authoritarian sense, designating the decrees
of popular assemblies and of kings; this is the meaning which dominates
and characterises the Catholic notion of dogma.  But the word had also
in the schools of Greece an essentially philosophical and doctrinal
meaning; it designated the characteristic doctrine of each school.  The
Protestant Churches have inherited this latter sense of the word: it is
in perfect harmony with the spirit and the principle of Protestantism.
Dogma, in the Protestant sense, means the doctrinal type generally
received in a Church, and publicly expressed in its liturgy, its
catechisms, its official teaching, and especially in its Confession of
Faith.[1]


[1] Originally the word dogma signified a command, a precept, and not a
truth (Luke ii. 1, and the Septuagint of Dan. ii. 13; vi. 8; Esther
iii. 9; 2 Maccab. x. 8, etc.).  Ignatius of Antioch still uses the word
in this sense.  It is not until towards the time of Athanasius or of
Augustine that it begins to be used of the doctrinal decisions of the
Fathers, the Councils, and the Pope.  (Cf. also Acts xv. 28, 29.  This
is afterwards called a dogma, the only time it is used in the N.T. with
reference to a decision of the Church.)



3.  The Religious Value of Dogma

The intolerance of Catholic dogmatism has had consequences so
revolting, and, in Protestantism, wherever this dogmatism has revived,
it has given rise to conflicts so sterile and so lamentable, that
certain minds have gone so far as to deny the utility of dogma in the
largest sense of the word, and have wished to suppress all doctrinal
definition of the Christian Faith.  To call dogma either divine in
itself or evil in itself is to go to an unwarrantable extreme.  In
religious development, whether individual or social, it has an organic
place that cannot be taken away from it, and a practical importance
that cannot be contested.

Religious faith is a phenomenon of consciousness.  God Himself is its
author and its cause; but it has for psychological factors all the
elements of consciousness--feeling, volition, idea.  It must never be
forgotten that these verbal distinctions are pure abstractions; that
these elements co-exist, and are enveloped and implicated with each
other in the unity of the ego.  In the living reality there has never
existed feeling which did not carry within it some embryo of an idea
and translate itself into some voluntary movement....  As it is
impossible for thought not to manifest itself organically by gesture or
language, so it is impossible for religion not to express itself in
rites and doctrines.

No doubt, in the first period of physical life, sensation dominates,
and at the _debut_ of religious life, feeling and imagination.  But as
science springs from sensation, so religious doctrine springs from
piety.  To say that "Christianity is a life, therefore it is not a
doctrine" is to reason very badly.  We should rather say, "Christianity
is a life and therefore it engenders doctrine;" for man cannot live his
life without thinking it.  The two things are not hostile; they go
together.  In apostolic times the greatest of missionaries was the
greatest of theologians.  St. Augustine at the end of the old world,
Calvin, Luther, Zwingle, at the beginning of the modern world, followed
the example of St. Paul.  When the sap of piety fails, theology
withers.  Protestant scholasticism corresponds to a decline of
religious life.  Spencer, by re-opening the springs of piety, renewed
the streams of theology.  Without Pietism Germany would have had no
Schleiermacher; without the religious revival at the beginning of this
century we should have had neither Samuel Vincent nor Alexander Vinet.

If the life of a Church be compared to that of a plant, doctrine holds
in it the place of the seed.  Like the seed, doctrine is the last to be
formed; it crowns and closes the annual cycle of vegetation; but it is
necessary that it should form and ripen; for it carries within it the
power of life and the germ of a new development.  A Church without
dogmas would be a sterile plant.  But let not the partisans of dogmatic
immutability triumph: let them pursue the comparison to the end:
"Except a grain of wheat fall into the ground and _die_," said Jesus,
"it bears no fruit."  To be fruitful, dogma must be decomposed--that is
to say, it must mix itself unceasingly with the evolution of human
thought and die in it; it is the condition of perpetual resurrection.

Without being either absolute, or perfect in itself, then, dogma is
absolutely necessary to the propagation and edification of the
religious life.  The Church has a pedagogic mission that could not be
fulfilled without it.  It bears souls, nourishes them and brings them
up.  Its role is that of a mother.  In that educative mission, we may
add, the mother finds the principle and aim of her authority, the
reason and the limit of her tutelage.  In this sense, dogma is never
without authority.  But this same pedagogic authority is neither
absolute nor eternal; it has a double limit, in the nature of the
pupil's soul, which it ought to respect, and in the end it would
attain, the making of free men, adult Christians, sons of God in the
image of Christ and in immediate relationship to the Father.  If dogma
is the heritage of the past transmitted by the Church, it is the
children's duty first to receive it, and then to add to its value by
continually reforming it, since that is the only way to keep it alive
and to render it truly useful and fruitful in the moral development of
humanity.  It is therefore to this idea of necessary dogma, but of
dogma necessarily historical and changing, that we must henceforth
accustom ourselves; and we shall most easily habituate ourselves to it
by tracing its evolution in the past.




