CHAPTER III

THE SCIENCE OF DOGMAS

1. _The Mixed Character of Dogmatics_

We have shown the necessity of a free criticism of dogmas.  This
criticism, if it is religious, will at the same time be positive; it
will tend not to destroy, but to distinguish, in each dogma, that which
is truly religious and permanent from that which is philosophical and
fleeting.  Such is the object of the discipline that, in the schools,
is called _Dogmatics_, or the Science of Dogmas.  It remains to define
its task and to point out the resources which it has at its disposal.
Both points are connected with its relation to the Church and to
Philosophy.  The science of dogmas has always necessarily followed the
life of the one and the vicissitudes of the other.

In the religious experiences of the Church it finds the material that
it elaborates; from philosophy it borrows the methods according to
which it treats this material and the form in which it organises it.
This science is, therefore, a mixed science: positive and practical in
its object, speculative and theoretical in its procedure, it seeks to
connect the religious and moral experience with the rest of the
experience of humanity, and to effect the synthesis claimed, in order
to their full vigour, by the scientific order of thought and by the
moral order of practical life.

This intermediate position of our science, between the Church and
philosophy, constitutes its independence and its originality.  If, as
in Catholicism, it were absolutely subjected to the authority of the
Church, and were limited to receiving, without critical examination,
its successive decisions and traditions, it would be confounded with
the history of dogmas, and would be merely a survival of scholasticism.
On the other hand, if it did not start from the data furnished by
history and by the personal and collective experience of piety,--if it
did not study the Christian life in its objectivity and in its historic
continuity, but abandoned itself to purely subjective and general
speculations--it would be fatally confounded with philosophy.  It
escapes this double peril, first, by taking as its object the study of
the doctrinal tradition of the Church, tracing it back to its
generative principle, following it in its successive forms and
necessary evolution; and, secondly, by freely applying to this
objective material the principles and rules of a truly rational method,
a method that may be avowed as such by philosophers.  It thus
constitutes the philosophy of religion in general and of Christianity
in particular, setting itself to connect the consciousness of the
Church with the general consciousness of humanity, and establishing or
maintaining between them communications equally profitable to both.

It follows that our discipline, in studying the tradition of the
Church, is independent of philosophy.  On the other hand, the fact that
it borrows its methods and processes from philosophy, renders it
independent with regard to the Church.  Its freedom springs from its
twofold subjection.  Such a little principality, placed between two
great rival Powers without whose help it could not live, maintains its
independence of them both by virtue of their very rivalry, and may
become an arbiter, an element of pacification and good understanding,
between forces which are only hostile because they either do not know
or do not understand each other.  Thus the science of dogmas will be
free, pacific, fruitful, on condition that it does not break its
connection on either hand, but remains in close communication with the
two sources of its life, without which it would be liable either to die
of inanition for want of food, or of impotence for lack of liberty.


2. _The Science of Dogmas and the Church_

A religious society cannot dispense either with doctrines or doctrinal
teaching.  The more moral it is in its character, the more it needs a
dogmatic symbol which defines it and explains its _raison d'etre_.  It
will have its teachers as well as its pastors and missionaries.  The
apostle Paul compares the Church to an organism in which each member
has its necessary function, according to the special gift it has
received.  "God," says he, "gave some, apostles; some, prophets; some,
teachers" (1 Cor. xii. 28; Rom. xii. 6-8.  "Teaching of the Apostles,"
13 and 15).  In passing through different lips the Gospel takes
different forms.  It creates divers types of doctrine, divers schools
or parties (1 Cor. i. 10-14).  It is necessary to instruct the
ignorant, to refute heretics, to heal schisms, to administer reproofs,
to correct the interpretation of texts.  This could only be done by
means of discussion, reasoning, exegesis, speculation.  It was not an
effort of pure science, but of practical science, in the interest of
the Church itself, with a view to its inner edification and to the
continuous reform of its worship and its faith.  The labour of
dogmatics thus sprang up spontaneously in the bosom of the Church
itself, and it has continued its work, not from without, but from
within, through an office which is an essential ministry, an organ of
the Church.  It could not be done well in any other way....

A religious society, by the very fact that it endures, creates a
doctrinal tradition, and this tradition soon assumes a divine character
and tends to become an absolute authority.  This is the effect of a
psychological illusion characteristic of the religious consciousness so
long as reflection does not put it on its guard against itself.  The
object of our faith being divine, we ingenuously transport this quality
into the formula by which it has been transmitted to us, and we hold
this formula to be divine before we have learnt to distinguish between
the essence of faith and its historical manifestations, between the
religious substance of the doctrine and its traditional expression.
Add to the prestige of the past the necessity of educating the new
generations.  Every Christian begins as a catechumen, and, in certain
respects, he is and ought to be a learner all his life, for he cannot
fail to see that the collective consciousness is always richer and more
stable than his own.  But, if the aim of Christian education is to
produce adult Christians--that is, Christians who, having received the
Holy Spirit, have entered into a direct and permanent relation to the
common Father, and into personal and living piety, they possess an
inward rule of conduct, and along with this a principle of free
judgment.  As St. Paul says, our tutelage ends when we have attained to
our majority.  The spiritual man judges all, but is judged of none.  He
becomes independent of the authority under which he has grown up, as
the full-grown man becomes free from the mother who has borne and
nourished him.  He will, doubtless, always gratefully welcome the
tradition of the past; but he feels within himself a higher principle
which gives him the right to amend and the power to increase, in some
degree, the inheritance he has received from his fathers.  No one is
either a man or a Christian on any other condition.

The solution of the problem named above is to be found in these
considerations.  A tradition which desires to be absolute, which
misunderstands and stifles individual inspiration, is not only an
usurper--it also fails in its mission, which is to make adult
Christians, Christians who are inwardly inspired and autonomous.  It is
like those tyrannical mothers who, if they could, would keep their sons
in a perpetual minority.  On the other hand, the children, even when
they have attained their majority, should not despise their parents and
disdain the counsels of experience and of age.  Individual inspiration
is apt to lead to self-sufficiency and sectarianism; it loses sight of
the link of solidarity which unites the generations, and the social
continuity in which alone progress is made in the religious life, as in
the life of civilisation.  The first defect, the tyrannical usurpation
of tradition, predominates in the Catholic Church; the opposite defect,
that of the intransigeance of individual convictions and of Illuminism,
is the plague of Protestant communities.  The truth would be found in a
middle course, and in the organisation of a traditional Church stable
enough to receive and keep the heritage of the past, large and flexible
enough to permit in it the legitimate expansion of the Christian
consciousness and the acquisition of new treasure.

To this ideal, Catholicism cannot resign itself without succumbing to
death.  Protestantism aspires to it without reaching it; and yet
nothing is more really in the logic of its principle.  No Protestant
Church professes to be infallible.  Its most solemn Confessions of
Faith have only a provisional value.  The spirit of reform breathes in
it without truce, continually.  The principal task of the community, as
of the individual, is to amend itself, to advance in knowledge and in
virtue.  A Church which should exclude this spirit of reform would
cease to be a Protestant Church.  And, of course, the duty of reform
implies the legitimacy of criticism, of an appeal to the Gospel better
understood, of a constant effort to bring the real up to the ideal.
The only matter of importance is to decide aright on the principle or
criterion according to which this criticism shall be made.

Shall it be another dogma?  No; not even if it be called a fundamental
one such as the authority of Scripture.  For this very dogma,
formulated by tradition, is therefore human and contingent, and is open
to criticism like all the rest.  With what then, or in the name of
what, shall dogma be criticised?  Shall we, with Rationalism, take a
moral or philosophical axiom as the criterion?  We should then violate
the autonomy of the religious consciousness; we should denaturalise
religion itself, by subjecting it to an external rule; and Dogmatics,
basing its fabric on an alien principle, would produce a hybrid
structure that would be rejected by believers and philosophers with
equal disdain.

The principle of criticism of Christian dogmas can only be the
principle of Christianity itself, which is anterior to all dogmas, and
which it is the aim of dogmas to manifest and to apply.  Now the
principle of Christianity is not a theoretical doctrine: it is a
religious experience--the experience of Christ and His disciples
through the centuries.  It is the Gospel of salvation by the faith of
the heart, the revelation of a moral relation, of a new relation, of a
filial relation, created and realised between the man who is sinful and
lost, and the Father who calls and pardons him.  Such is the initial
germ from which the whole Christian development has sprung, and by
which consequently that development should and can be judged.

This generative principle of the life and of all the dogmas of the
Church being laid down, and the distinction established between the
ideal principle and its successive realisations, all of them
necessarily incomplete, the criticism of dogmas will be effected
automatically, without violence, and with fruit.  It will be enough to
tell the story of the genesis and evolution of each of them.  It will
then be seen what contingent and perishing elements have entered into
it in the course of history.  Christianity is an organism whose soul is
immortal, but whose body is renewed unceasingly by the fact that its
materials are in constant movement, and that they are gathered from the
various environments through which it has to pass.  The philosophical
notions which have served it as a temporary expression, and which are
doubly dead to-day, either because civilisation has advanced, or
because they were without vital connection with the initial Christian
experience, fall from the tree like withered leaves or lifeless
branches.  As to the others, in which the sap still rises from the
mother root, they will be seen to be transformed, to grow and flower
from year to year under the same salubrious breath of criticism.  Our
discipline, religiously faithful to the principle of Christian piety,
may often find itself in conflict with the administrative powers of the
Church, but never really with the Church itself.


3. _The Science of Dogmas and Philosophy_

If less burning, the problem of the relations of dogmatics to
philosophy is perhaps more difficult to solve than the problem just
discussed.  It has given rise to quite as many controversies.  The
danger is twofold.  On the one hand, there is the pretension of
scholasticism, the attempt to absorb philosophy in theology and make it
subservient.  It is still the pretension of a certain simple Protestant
orthodoxy, for which there is no philosophy outside the Christian
faith.  At the other extreme is the attempt of rationalism to include
the Christian religion in general ethics and philosophy.  In the first
case it is dogmatics which absorbs philosophy; in the second it is
philosophy which absorbs dogmatics.  But, in both cases, the
specifically religious phenomena are lost sight of, the original
character of Christian piety is misconceived, and theology, no longer
having any special domain, succumbs and vanishes.  It is the merit of
the Reformation of Luther, in the sixteenth, and of the thought of
Schleiermacher and Vinet in the nineteenth century, to have brought out
and rendered manifest, among all other psychological phenomena, the
character _sui generis_ of Christian faith and life, and thus to have
assigned to theology an object of study, eminent no doubt, but very
special and very circumscribed.  A task was thus marked out for
theology widely different from that of philosophy--a task which
consists, not in explaining everything in heaven and earth, but, more
modestly and usefully, in giving an account of the religious experience
of the Christian Church.  Saved at once from scholasticism and
rationalism, dogmatic theology may therefore build itself up in its own
domain by the side of the other sciences without menacing or fearing
any of them.

Its relations to philosophy will become clear if we call to mind a very
simple distinction.  Philosophy to-day comprises two parts very
different in nature: a study of the thinking subject, or, as it is
sometimes called, a critique of reason, or a theory of knowledge; in
the second place, a doctrine on the essence and the necessary relations
of beings, a metaphysic, or a theory of the universe.

It is easy to see that all the positive sciences are differently
related to these two parts of philosophy.  None of them, for instance,
can dispense with the first, with the criticism of our faculty of
knowing and of our means of reasoning, under penalty of mistaking the
worth of its own hypotheses, and even the regularity of its processes.
It is clear that a physicist cannot dispense with correct syllogisms or
with vigilance against illusions of the senses and other errors of
method.  But, on the other hand, no savant would accept the yoke of any
metaphysic whatever which should come to him _a priori_ to dictate to
him its conclusions.  Upon indications of this nature he desires to
form hypotheses and make new experiments; but, as a savant, he will
never pronounce before that supreme and decisive consultation of facts.

It is exactly the same with the relations of dogmatics to philosophy.
It will have recourse to it for all that regards the theory of
knowledge in general and the theory of religious knowledge in
particular.  Like every other science it needs to ascertain the scope
of its instrument in order that it may be under no illusion as to the
worth of the work it accomplishes.  But also, like every other science,
it has the right and the duty to challenge and neglect all general
metaphysic which, flowing from another principle than that of the
Christian religion, would dictate to it articles of faith or rules of
morality.

Let it not be said that every theory of knowledge soon begets a
metaphysic in its own image.  We know theories which deny the very
possibility of metaphysics, and it is a question whether a truly
Christian dogmatic accommodates itself to it better than any other
theory.  It may be maintained in fact that the act of faith which is
the expression of the conservating energy of the ego and the principle
of all religion is accomplished all the more freely when there is no
knowledge, properly speaking, there to hinder it.  A common prejudice
requires that we should have metaphysics as a support to religion.  It
is on religion, on the contrary, that metaphysics and ethics rest.  Man
did not become religious when he heard that there were gods; he only
had the idea of God and believed in Him because he was religious.
Mystery was the natural cradle of piety.  Faith is much less an
acquisition of knowledge than a means of salvation and a source of
strength and life.  It is one thing to speculate on the universal
problem; it is another to place one's self by the heart in a living
relation of trust, of fear, or of love to the mysterious Being on whom
all other beings depend.  Religion may possibly be under the necessity
of ending in a metaphysic, but a metaphysic does not necessarily end in
religion, for there are some kinds of metaphysic which either exclude
religion or render it impossible.

A theory of religion, dogmatics can have no other starting point than
religious phenomena themselves.  From this concrete and experimental
principle, from this state of soul produced by the immediate feeling of
a necessary relation to God, the entire system should spring and
develop.  What is not in religious experience should find no place in
religious science, and should be banished from it.

It would only be to its detriment, then, that the science of dogmas
should throw away its liberty by espousing beforehand metaphysical
theses or the final conclusions of any philosophy whatsoever.  These
theses, springing from another source than religion, have no right, in
that religion, to become articles of faith.  Rational truths not born
of religious feeling would be in dogmatics so many dead weights and
heterogeneous elements, which would lead to the greatest incoherence.
To build up a professedly revealed theology on a professedly natural
one is to construct a system without either unity or profound
connection.  Such a dualism of principles is as intolerable to science
as to piety.  Instead of dogmatics subordinating itself to metaphysics,
metaphysics ought to include dogmatics as well as the results of all
the other sciences.

It is altogether different with the criticism of our means of knowing.
In every order of science it is mere levity of mind to commence or to
conclude researches a little general without having first determined
the precise conditions of real knowledge.  The absence of a
philosophical critique of this nature explains why savants, so rigorous
in their special studies, show a philosophical _naivety_ so great in
the conclusions that they draw from them, and so readily crown their
discoveries by a pseudo-metaphysic that they impose upon the multitude
with all the authority and prestige of science.  More than any others,
theologians are guilty of this abuse when they wish to make their
science the sum of universal knowledge.  They would be more soundly
religious were they more modest and more reserved.  An excellent means
of putting ourselves on our guard against this illusion and its
deplorable consequences will be to institute, without further delay, a
rigorous criticism of religious knowledge.  This task, I believe, has
never been seriously attempted in France.  It is, however, as
indispensable to the right conduct of the mind as it is fitted
radically to cure us of our dogmatic pride and to inspire us with
tolerance and humility.  This will be the object of the following
chapter.




