letter in which he says that he had intended to rebuild this temple?
Would not his testimony have been triumphantly adduced? Is it not
infinitely more probable that he changed his mind? Does not this letter
contain these words:

_"Quid de templo sua dicent, quod, quum tertio sit eversum, nondum
hodiernam usque diem instauratur? Hæc ego, non ut illis exprobarem, in
medium adduxi, utpote qui templum illud tanto intervallo a ruinis
excitare voluerim; sed ideo commemoravi, ut ostenderem delirasse
prophetas istos, quibus cum stolidis aniculis negotium erat"._

"What will they (the Jews) say of their temple which has been destroyed
for the third time and is not yet restored? I speak of this, not for the
purpose of reproaching them, for I myself had intended to raise it once
more from its ruins, but to show the extravagance of their prophets who
had none but old women to deal with."

Is it not evident that the emperor having paid attention to the Jewish
prophecies, that the temple should be rebuilt more beautiful than ever
and that all the nations of the earth should come and worship in it,
thought fit to revoke the permission to raise the edifice? The
historical probability, then, from the emperor's own words, is, that
unfortunately holding the Jewish books, as well as our own, in
abhorrence, he at length resolved to make the Jewish prophets lie.

The Abbé de la Blétrie, the historian of the Emperor Julian, does not
understand how the temple of Jerusalem was destroyed three times. He
says that apparently Julian reckoned as a third destruction the
catastrophe which happened during his reign. A curious destruction this!
the non-removal of the stones of an old foundation. What could prevent
this writer from seeing that the temple, having been built by Solomon,
reconstructed by Zorobabel, entirely destroyed by Herod, rebuilt by
Herod himself with so much magnificence, and at last laid in ruins by
Titus, manifestly made three destructions of the temple? The reckoning
is correct. Julian should surely have escaped calumny on this point.

The Abbé de la Blétrie calumniates him sufficiently by saying that all
his virtues were only seeming, while all his vices were real. But Julian
was not hypocritical, nor avaricious, nor fraudulent, nor lying, nor
ungrateful, nor cowardly, nor drunken, nor debauched, nor idle, nor
vindictive. What then were his vices?

4. Let us now examine the redoubtable argument made use of to persuade
us that globes of fire issued from stones. Ammianus Marcellinus a pagan
writer, free from all suspicion, has said it. Be it so: but this
Ammianus has also said that when the emperor was about to sacrifice ten
oxen to his gods for his first victory over the Persians, nine of them
fell to the earth before they were presented to the altar. He relates a
hundred predictions--a hundred prodigies. Are we to believe in them? Are
we to believe in all the ridiculous miracles related by Livy?

Besides, who can say that the text of Ammianus Marcellinus has not been
falsified? Would it be the only instance in which this artifice has been
employed?

I wonder that no mention is made of the little fiery crosses which all
the workmen found on their bodies when they went to bed. They would have
made an admirable figure along with the globes.

The fact is that the temple of the Jews was not rebuilt, and it may be
presumed never will be so. Here let us hold, and not seek useless
prodigies. _Globi Hammarum_--globes of fire, issue neither from stones
nor from earth. Ammianus, and those who have quoted him, were not
natural philosophers. Let the abbé de la Blétrie only look at the fire
on St. John's day, and he will see that flame always ascends with a
point, or in a cloud, and never in a globe. This alone is sufficient to
overturn the nonsense which he comes forward to defend with injudicious
criticism and revolting pride.

After all, the thing is of very little importance. There is nothing in
it that affects either faith or morals; and historical truth is all that
is here sought for.




APOSTLES.


_Their Lives, their Wives, their Children._

After the article "Apostle" in the Encyclopædia, which is as learned as
it is orthodox, very little remains to be said. But we often hear it
asked--Were the apostles married? Had they any children? if they had,
what became of those children? Where did the apostles live? Where did
they write? Where did they die? Had they any appropriated districts? Did
they exercise any civil ministry? Had they any jurisdiction over the
faithful? Were they bishops? Had they a hierarchy, rites, or ceremonies?


I.

_Were the Apostles Married?_

There is extant a letter attributed to St. Ignatius the Martyr, in which
are these decisive words: "I call to mind your sanctity as I do that of
Elias, Jeremiah, John the Baptist, and the chosen disciples Timothy,
Titus, Evadius, and Clement; yet I do not blame such other of the
blessed as were bound in the bonds of marriage, but hope to be found
worthy of God in following their footsteps in his kingdom, after the
example of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Isaiah, and the other
prophets--of Peter and Paul, and the apostles who were married."

Some of the learned assert that the name of St. Paul has been
interpolated in this famous letter: however, Turrian and all who have
seen the letters of Ignatius in the library of the Vatican acknowledge
that St. Paul's name appears there. And Baronius does not deny that this
passage is to be found in some Greek manuscripts: _Non negamus in
quibusdam græcis codicibus._ But he asserts that these words have been
added by modern Greeks.

In the old Oxford library there was a manuscript of St. Ignatius's
letters in Greek, which contained the above words; but it was, I
believe, burned with many other books at the taking of Oxford by
Cromwell. There is still one in Latin in the same library, in which the
words _Pauli et apostolorum_ have been effaced, but in such a manner
that the old characters may be easily distinguished.

It is however certain that this passage exists in several editions of
these letters. This dispute about St. Paul's marriage is, after all, a
very frivolous one. What matters it whether he was married or not, if
the other apostles were married? His first Epistle to the Corinthians is
quite sufficient to prove that he might be married, as well as the rest:

"Have we not power to eat and to drink? Have we not power to lead about
a sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the
Lord, and Cephas? Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear
working? Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges?"

It is clear from this passage that all the apostles were married, as
well as St. Peter. And St. Clement of Alexandria positively declares
that St. Paul had a wife. The Roman discipline has changed, which is no
proof that the usage of the primitive ages was not different.


II.

_Children of the Apostles._

Very little is known of their families. St. Clement of Alexandria says
that Peter had children, that Philip had daughters, and that he gave
them in marriage. The Acts of the Apostles specify St. Philip, whose
four daughters prophesied, of whom it is believed that one was married,
and that this one was St. Hermione.

Eusebius relates that Nicholas, chosen by the apostles to co-operate in
the sacred ministry with St. Stephen, had a very handsome wife, of whom
he was jealous. The apostles having reproached him with his jealousy, he
corrected himself of it, brought his wife to them and said, "I am ready
to yield her up; let him marry her who will." The apostles, however, did
not accept his proposal. He had by his wife a son and several daughters.

Cleophas, according to Eusebius and St. Epiphanius, was brother to St.
Joseph, and father of St. James the Less, and of St. Jude, whom he had
by Mary, sister to the Blessed Virgin. So that St. Jude the apostle was
first cousin to Jesus Christ.

Hegesippus, quoted by Eusebius, tells us that two grandsons of St. Jude
were informed against to the emperor Domitian as being descendants of
David and having an incontestable right to the throne of Jerusalem.
Domitian, fearing that they might avail themselves of this right, put
questions to them himself, and they acquainted him with their genealogy.
The emperor asked them what fortune they had. They answered that they
had thirty-nine acres of land, which paid tribute, and that they worked
for their livelihood. He then asked them when Jesus Christ's kingdom was
to come, and they told him "At the end of the world." After which
Domitian permitted them to depart in peace; which goes far to prove that
he was not a persecutor. This, if I mistake not, is all that is known
about the children of the apostles.


III.

_Where did the Apostles Live? Where did They Die?_

According to Eusebius, James, sur named the Just, brother to Jesus
Christ, was in the beginning placed first _on the episcopal throne_ of
the city of Jerusalem; these are his own words. So that, according to
him, the first bishopric was that of Jerusalem--supposing that the Jews
knew even the name of _bishop_. It does, indeed, appear very likely that
the brother of Jesus Christ should have been the first after him, and
that the very city in which the miracle of our salvation was worked
should have become the metropolis of the Christian world. As for the
_episcopal throne_, that is a term which Eusebius uses by anticipation.
We all know that there was then neither throne nor see.

Eusebius adds, after St. Clement, that the other apostles did not
contend with St. James for this dignity. They elected him immediately
after the Ascension. "Our Lord," says he, "after His resurrection, had
given to James, surnamed the Just, to John and to Peter the gift of
knowledge"--very remarkable words. Eusebius mentions James first, then
John, and Peter comes last. It seems but just that the brother and the
beloved disciple of Jesus should come before the man who had denied Him.
Nearly the whole Greek Church and all the reformers ask, Where is
Peter's primacy? The Catholics answer--If he is not placed first by the
fathers of the church, he is in the Acts of the Apostles. The Greeks and
the rest reply that he was not the first bishop; and the dispute will
endure as long as the churches.

St. James, this first bishop of Jerusalem, always continued to observe
the Mosaic law. He was a Rechabite; he walked barefoot, and never
shaved; went and prostrated himself in the Jewish temple twice a day,
and was surnamed by the Jews _Oblia_, signifying the just. They at
length applied to him to know who Jesus Christ was, and having answered
that Jesus was the son of man, who sat on the right hand of God, and
that He should come in the clouds, he was beaten to death. This was St.
James the Less.

St. James the Greater was his uncle, brother to St. John the Evangelist,
and son of Zebedee and Salome. It is asserted that Agrippa, king of the
Jews, had him beheaded at Jerusalem. St. John remained in Asia and
governed the church of Ephesus, where, it is said, he was buried. St.
Andrew, brother to St Peter, quitted the school of St. John for that of
Jesus Christ. It is not agreed whether he preached among the Tartars or
in Argos; but, to get rid of the difficulty, we are told that it was in
Epirus. No one knows where he suffered martyrdom, nor even whether he
suffered it at all. The _Acts_ of his martyrdom are more than suspected
by the learned. Painters have always represented him on a saltier-cross,
to which his name has been given. This custom has prevailed without its
origin being known.

St. Peter preached to the Jews dispersed in Pontus, Bithynia,
Cappadocia, at Antioch, and at Babylon. The Acts of the Apostles do not
speak of his journey to Rome, nor does St. Paul himself make any mention
of it in the letters which he wrote from that capital. St. Justin is the
first accredited author who speaks of this journey, about which the
learned are not agreed. St. Irenæus, after St. Justin, expressly says
that St. Peter and St. Paul came to Rome, and that they entrusted its
government to St. Linus. But here is another difficulty: if they made
St. Linus inspector of the rising Christian society at Rome, it must be
inferred that they themselves did not superintend it nor remain in that
city.

Criticism has cast upon this matter a thousand uncertainties. The
opinion that St. Peter came to Rome in Nero's reign and filled the
pontifical chair there for twenty-five years, is untenable, for Nero
reigned only thirteen years. The wooden chair, so splendidly inlaid in
the church at Rome, can hardly have belonged to St. Peter: wood does not
last so long; nor is it likely that St. Peter delivered his lessons from
this chair as in a school thoroughly formed, since it is averred that
the Jews of Rome were violent enemies to the disciples of Jesus Christ.

The greatest difficulty perhaps is that St. Paul, in his epistle written
to the Colossians from Rome, positively says that he was assisted only
by Aristarchus, Marcus, and another bearing the name of Jesus. This
objection has, to men of the greatest learning, appeared to be
insurmountable.

In his letter to the Galatians he says that he obliged James, Cephas,
and John, who seemed to be pillars, to acknowledge himself and Barnabas
as pillars also. If he placed James before Cephas, then Cephas was not
the chief. Happily, these disputes affect not the foundation of our holy
religion. Whether St. Peter ever was at Rome or not, Jesus Christ is no
less the Son of God and the Virgin Mary; He did not the less rise again;
nor did He the less recommend humility and poverty; which are neglected,
it is true, but about which there is no dispute.

Callistus Nicephorus, a writer of the fourteenth century, says that
"Peter was tall, straight and slender, his face long and pale, his beard
and hair short, curly, and neglected--his eyes black, his nose long,
and rather flat than pointed." So Calmet translates the passage.

St. Bartholomew is a word corrupted from Bar. Ptolomaios, son of
Ptolemy. The Acts of the Apostles inform us that he was a Galilean.
Eusebius asserts that he went to preach in India, Arabia Felix, Persia,
and Abyssinia. He is believed to have been the same as Nathanael. There
is a gospel attributed to him; but all that has been said of his life
and of his death is very uncertain. It has been asserted that Astyages,
brother to Polemon, king of Armenia, had him flayed alive; but all good
writers regard this story as fabulous.

St. Philip.--According to the apocryphal legends he lived eighty-seven
years, and died in peace in the reign of Trajan.

St. Thomas Didymus.--Origen, quoted by Eusebius, says that he went and
preached to the Medes, the Persians, the Caramanians, the Baskerians,
and the magi--as if the magi had been a people. It is added that he
baptized one of the magi, who had come to Bethlehem. The Manichæans
assert that a man who had stricken Thomas was devoured by a lion. Some
Portuguese writers assure us that he suffered martyrdom at Meliapour, in
the peninsula of India. The Greek Church believes that he preached in
India, and that from thence his body was carried to Edessa. Some monks
are further induced to believe that he went to India, by the
circumstance that, about the end of the fifteenth century, there were
found, near the coast of Ormuz, some families of Nestorians, who had
been established there by a merchant of Moussoul, named Thomas. The
legend sets forth that he built a magnificent palace for an Indian king
named Gondaser: but all these stories are rejected by the learned.

St. Matthias.--No particulars are known of him. His life was not found
until the twelfth century by a monk of the abbey of St. Matthias of
Treves. He said he had it from a Jew, who translated it for him from
Hebrew into Latin.

St. Matthew.--According to Rufinus, Socrates, and Abdias, he preached
and died in Ethiopia. Heracleon makes him live a long time and die a
natural death. But Abdias says that Hyrtacus, king of Ethiopia, brother
to Eglypus, wishing to marry his niece Iphigenia, and finding that he
could not obtain St. Matthew's permission, had his head struck off and
set fire to Iphigenia's house. He to whom we owe the most circumstantial
gospel that we possess deserved a better historian than Abdias.

St. Simon the Canaanite, whose feast is commonly joined with that of St.
Jude.--Of his life nothing is known. The modern Greeks say that he went
to preach in Libya, and thence into England. Others make him suffer
martyrdom in Persia.

St. Thaddæus or Lebbæus.--The same as St. Jude, whom the Jews in St.
Matthew call brother to Jesus Christ, and who, according to Eusebius,
was his first cousin. All these relations, for the most part vague and
uncertain, throw no light on the lives of the apostles. But if there is
little to gratify our curiosity, there is much from which we may derive
instruction. Two of the four gospels, chosen from among the fifty-four
composed by the first Christians, were not written by apostles.

St. Paul was not one of the twelve apostles, yet he contributed more
than any other to the establishment of Christianity. He was the only man
of letters among them. He had studied under Gamaliel. Festus himself,
the governor of Judæa, reproaches him with being too learned; and,
unable to comprehend the sublimities of his doctrine, he says to him,
_"Insanis, Paule, multæ te litteræ ad insaniam convertunt"_. "Paul, thou
art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad."

In his first epistle to the Corinthians he calls himself _sent_. "Am I
not an apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?
Are ye not my work in the Lord? If I am not an apostle unto others, yet,
doubtless, I am unto you," etc.

He might, indeed, have seen Jesus while he was studying at Jerusalem
under Gamaliel. Yet it may be said that this was not a reason which
could authorize his apostleship. He had not been one of the disciples of
Jesus; on the contrary, he had persecuted them, and had been an
accomplice in the death of St. Stephen. It is astonishing that he does
not rather justify his voluntary apostleship by the miracle which Jesus
Christ afterwards worked in his favor--by the light from heaven which
appeared to him at midday and threw him from his horse, and by his being
carried up to the third heaven.

St. Epiphanius quotes Acts of the Apostles, believed to have been
composed by those Christians called Ebionites, or poor, and which were
rejected by the Church--acts very ancient, it is true, but full of abuse
of St. Paul. In them it is said that St. Paul was born at Tarsus of
idolatrous parents--_utroque parente gentili procreatus_--that, having
come to Jerusalem, where he remained some time, he wished to marry the
daughter of Gamaliel; that, with this design, he became a Jewish
proselyte and got himself circumcised; but that, not obtaining this
virgin (or not finding her a virgin), his vexation made him write
against circumcision, against the Sabbath, and against the whole law.

_"Quumque Hierosolymam accessisset, et ibidem aliquandiu mansisset,
pontificis filiam ducere in animum induxisse, et eam ab rem proselytum
factum, atque circumcisum esse; postea quod virginem eam non accepisset,
succensuisse, et adversus circumcisionem, ac sabbathum totamque legem
scripsisse."_

These injurious words show that these primitive Christians, under the
name of the poor, were still attached to the Sabbath and to
circumcision, resting this attachment on the circumcision of Jesus
Christ and his observance of the Sabbath; and that they were enemies to
St. Paul, regarding him as an intruder who sought to overturn
everything. In short, they were heretics; consequently they strove to
defame their enemies, an excess of which party spirit and superstition
are too often guilty. St. Paul, too, calls them "false apostles,
deceitful workers," and loads them with abuse. In his letter to the
Philippians he calls them dogs.

St. Jerome asserts that he was born at Gisceala, a town of Galilee, and
not at Tarsus. Others dispute his having been a Roman citizen, because
at that time there were no Roman citizens at Tarsus, nor at Galgala, and
Tarsus was not a Roman colony until about a hundred years after. But we
must believe the Acts of the Apostles, which were inspired by the Holy
Ghost, and therefore outweigh the testimony of St. Jerome, learned as he
might be.

Every particular relative to St. Peter and St. Paul is interesting. If
Nicephorus has given us a portrait of the one, the Acts of St. Thecla,
which, though not canonical, are of the first century, have furnished us
with a portrait of the other. He was, say these acts, short in stature,
his head was bald, his thighs were crooked, his legs thick, his nose
aquiline, his eyebrows joined, and he was full of the grace of
God.--_Statura brevi, etc._

These Acts of St. Paul and St. Thecla were, according to Tertullian,
composed by an Asiatic, one of Paul's own disciples, who at first put
them forth under the apostle's name; for which he was called to account
and displaced--that is, excluded from the assembly; for the hierarchy,
not being then established, no one could, properly speaking, be
displaced.


IV.

_Under What Discipline Did the Apostles and Primitive Disciples Live?_

It appears that they were all equal. Equality was the great principle of
the Essenians, the Rechabites, the Theraputæ, the disciples of John, and
especially those of Jesus Christ, who inculcated it more than once.

St. Barnabas, who was not one of the twelve apostles, gave his voice
along with theirs. St. Paul, who was still less a chosen apostle during
the life of Jesus, not only was equal to them, but had a sort of
ascendancy; he rudely rebukes St. Peter.

When they are together we find among them no superior. There was no
presiding, not even in turn. They did not at first call themselves
bishops. St. Peter gives the name of _bishop_, or the equivalent
epithet, only to Jesus Christ, whom he calls _the inspector of souls_.
This name of _inspector_ or _bishop_ was afterwards given to the
ancients, whom we call _priests_; but with no ceremony, no dignity, no
distinctive mark of pre-eminence. It was the office of the ancients or
elders to distribute the alms. The younger of them were chosen by a
plurality of voices to serve the tables, and were seven in number; all
which clearly verifies the reports in common. Of jurisdiction, of power,
of command, not the least trace is to be found.

It is true that Ananias and Sapphira were struck dead for not giving all
their money to St. Peter, but retaining a small part for their own
immediate wants without confessing it--for corrupting, by a trifling
falsehood, the sanctity of their gifts; but it is not St. Peter who
condemns them. It is true that he divines Ananias' fault; he reproaches
him with it and tells him that he has lied to the Holy Ghost; after
which Ananias falls down dead. Then comes Sapphira; and Peter, instead
of warning, interrogates her, which seems to be the action of a judge.
He makes her fall into the snare by saying, "Tell me whether ye sold the
land for so much." The wife made the same answer as her husband. It is
astonishing that she did not, on reaching the place, learn of her
husband's death--that no one had informed her of it--that she did not
observe the terror and tumult which such a death must have occasioned,
and above all, the mortal fear lest the officers of justice should take
cognizance of it as of a murder. It is strange that this woman should
not have filled the house with her cries, but have been quietly
interrogated, as in a court of justice, where silence is rigidly
enforced. It is still more extraordinary that Peter should have said to
her, "Behold the feet of them which have carried thy husband out at the
door, and shall carry thee out"--on which the sentence was instantly
executed. Nothing can more resemble a criminal hearing before a despotic
judge.

But it must be considered that St. Peter is here only the organ of
Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost; that it is to them that Ananias and his
wife have lied, and it is they who punish them with sudden death; that,
indeed, this miracle was worked for the purpose of terrifying all such
as, while giving their goods to the Church, and saying that they have
given all, keep something back for profane uses. The judicious Calmet
shows us how the fathers and the commentators differ about the salvation
of these two primitive Christians, whose sin consisted in simple though
culpable reticence.

Be this as it may, it is certain that the apostles had no jurisdiction,
no power, no authority, but that of persuasion, which is the first of
all, and upon which every other is founded. Besides, it appears from
this very story that the Christians lived in common. When two or three
of them were gathered together, Jesus Christ was in the midst of them.
They could all alike receive the Spirit. Jesus was their true, their
only superior; He had said to them:

"Be not ye called rabbi; for one is your master, even Christ; and all ye
are brethren. And call no man your father upon earth; for one is your
father, which is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters; for one is
your master, even Christ."

In the time of the apostles there was no ritual, no liturgy; there were
no fixed hours for assembling, no ceremonies. The disciples baptized the
catechumens, and breathed the Holy Ghost into their mouths, as Jesus
Christ had breathed on the apostles; and as, in many churches, it is
still the custom to breathe into the mouth of a child when administering
baptism. Such were the beginnings of Christianity. All was done by
inspiration--by enthusiasm, as among the Therapeutæ and the Judaïtes, if
we may for a moment be permitted to compare Jewish societies, now become
reprobate, with societies conducted by Jesus Christ Himself from the
highest heaven, where He sat at the right hand of His Father. Time
brought necessary changes; the Church being extended, strengthened, and
enriched, had occasion for new laws.




APPARITION.


It is not at all uncommon for a person under strong emotion to see that
which is not. In 1726 a woman in London, accused of being an accomplice
in her husband's murder, denied the fact; the dead man's coat was held
up and shaken before her, her terrified imagination presented the
husband himself to her view; she fell at his feet and would have
embraced him. She told the jury that she had seen her husband. It is not
wonderful that Theodoric saw in the head of a fish, which was served up
to him, that of Symmachus, whom he had assassinated--or unjustly
executed; for it is precisely the same thing.

Charles IX., after the massacre of St. Bartholomew, saw dead bodies and
blood; not in his dreams, but in the convulsions of a troubled mind
seeking for sleep in vain. His physician and his nurse bore witness to
it. Fantastic visions are very frequent in hot fevers. This is not
seeing in imagination; it is seeing in reality. The phantom exists to
him who has the perception of it. If the gift of reason vouchsafed to
the human machine were not at hand to correct these illusions, all
heated imaginations would be in an almost continual transport, and it
would be impossible to cure them.

It is especially in that middle state between sleeping and waking that
an inflamed brain sees imaginary objects and hears sounds which nobody
utters. Fear, love, grief, remorse are the painters who trace the
pictures before unsettled imaginations. The eye which sees sparks in the
night, when accidentally pressed in a certain direction, is but a faint
image of the disorders of the brain.

No theologian doubts that with these natural causes the Master of nature
has sometimes united His divine influence. To this the Old and the New
Testament bear ample testimony. Providence has deigned to employ these
apparitions--these visions--in favor of the Jews, who were then its
cherished people.

It may be that, in the course of time, some really pious souls, deceived
by their enthusiasm, have believed that they had received from an
intimate communication with God that which they owed only to their
inflamed imaginations. In such cases there is need of the advice of an
honest man, and especially of a good physician.

The stories of apparitions are innumerable. It is said to have been in
consequence of an apparition that St. Theodore, in the beginning of the
fourth century, went and set fire to the temple of Amasia and reduced it
to ashes. It is very likely that God did not command this action, in
itself so criminal, by which several citizens perished, and which
exposed all the Christians to a just revenge.

God might permit St. Potamienne to appear to St. Basilides; for there
resulted no disturbance to the state. We will not deny that Jesus Christ
might appear to St. Victor. But that St. Benedict saw the soul of St.
Germanus of Capua carried up to heaven by angels; and that two monks
afterwards saw the soul of St. Benedict walking on a carpet extended
from heaven to Mount Cassino--this is not quite so easy to believe.

It may likewise, without any offence to our august religion, be doubted
whether St. Eucherius was conducted by an angel into hell, where he saw
Charles Mattel's soul; and whether a holy hermit of Italy saw the soul
of Dagobert chained in a boat by devils, who were flogging it without
mercy; for, after all, it is rather difficult to explain satisfactorily
how a soul can walk upon a carpet, how it can be chained in a boat, or
how it can be flogged.

But, it may very well be that heated brains have had such visions; from
age to age we have a thousand instances of them. One must be very
enlightened to distinguish, in this prodigious number of visions, those
which came from God Himself from those which were purely the offspring
of imagination.

The illustrious Bossuet relates, in his funeral oration over the
Princess Palatine, two visions which acted powerfully on that princess,
and determined the whole conduct of her latter years. These heavenly
visions must be believed since they are regarded as such by the discreet
and learned bishop of Meaux, who penetrated into all the depths of
theology and even undertook to lift the veil which covers the
Apocalypse.

He says, then, that the Princess Palatine, having lent a hundred
thousand francs to her sister, the queen of Poland, sold the duchy of
Rételois for a million, and married her daughters advantageously. Happy
according to the world, but unfortunately doubting the truths of the
Christian religion, she was brought back to her conviction, and to the
love of these ineffable truths by two visions. The first was a dream in
which a man born blind told her that he had no idea of light, and that
we must believe the word of others in things of which we cannot
ourselves conceive. The second arose from a violent shock of the
membranes and fibres of the brain in an attack of fever. She saw a hen
running after one of her chickens, which a dog held in his mouth. The
Princess Palatine snatched the chick from the dog, on which a voice
cried out: "Give him back his chicken; if you deprive him of his food he
will not watch as he ought." But the princess exclaimed, "No, I will
never give it back."

The chicken was the soul of Anne of Gonzaga, Princess Palatine; the hen
was the Church, and the dog was the devil. Anne of Gonzaga, who was
never to give back the chicken to the dog, was _efficacious grace_.

Bossuet preached this funeral oration to the Carmelite nuns of the
Faubourg St. Jacques, at Paris, before the whole house of Condé; he used
these remarkable words: "Hearken, and be especially careful not to hear
with contempt the order of the Divine warnings, and the conduct of
Divine grace."

The reader, then, must peruse this story with the same reverence with
which its hearers listened to it. These extraordinary workings of
Providence are like the miracles of canonized saints, which must be
attested by irreproachable witnesses. And what more lawful deponent can
we have to the apparitions and visions of the Princess Palatine than the
man who employed his life in distinguishing truth from appearance? who
combated vigorously against the nuns of Port Royal on the formulary;
against Paul Ferri on the catechism; against the minister Claude on the
variations of the Church; against Doctor Dupin on China; against Father
Simon on the understanding of the sacred text; against Cardinal
Sfondrati on predestination; against the pope on the rights of the
Gallican Church; against the archbishop of Cambray on pure and
disinterested love. He was not to be seduced by the names, nor the
titles, nor the reputation, nor the dialectics of his adversaries. He
related this fact; therefore he believed it. Let us join him in his
belief, in spite of the raillery which it has occasioned. Let us adore
the secrets of Providence, but let us distrust the wanderings of the
imagination, which Malebranche called _la folle du logis_. For these two
visions accorded to the Princess Palatine are not vouchsafed to every
one.

Jesus Christ appeared to St. Catharine of Sienna; he espoused her and
gave her a ring. This mystical apparition is to be venerated, for it is
attested by Raymond of Capua, general of the Dominicans, who confessed
her, as also by Pope Urban VI. But it is rejected by the learned Fleury,
author of the "Ecclesiastical History." And a young woman who should now
boast of having contracted such a marriage might receive as a nuptial
present a place in a lunatic asylum.

The appearance of Mother Angelica, abbess of Port Royal, to Sister
Dorothy is related by a man of very great weight among the Jansenists,
the Sieur Dufossé, author of the _"Mémoirs de Pontis"_. Mother Angelica,
long after her death, came and seated herself in the church of Port
Royal, in her old place, with her crosier in her hand. She commanded
that Sister Dorothy should be sent for and to her she told terrible
secrets. But the testimony of this Dufossé is of less weight than that
of Raymond of Capua, and Pope Urban VI., which, however, have not been
formally received.

The writer of the above paragraphs has since read the Abbé Langlet's
four volumes on "Apparitions," and thinks he ought not to take anything
from them. He is convinced of all the apparitions verified by the
Church, but he has some doubts about the others, until they are
authentically recognized. The Cordeliers and the Jacobins, the
Jansenists and the Molinists have all had their apparitions and their
miracles. _"Iliacos inter muros peccatur et extra."_

