CHAPTER VI

SOME RECENTLY OBSERVED PSYCHICAL PHENOMENA

  _An account of some recently observed Psychical Phenomena produced
    in the presence of Doctor Maxwell and Professor Charles
    Richet. Arranged by the Translator from notes furnished by Dr.
    Maxwell._[17]

      [17] It is scarcely necessary for me to certify to the accuracy
      of the phenomena mentioned in this chapter, especially when I
      am spoken of as having been present.—MAXWELL.


During the last two years exceptional opportunities have been offered
Professor Richet and Dr. Maxwell of observing a medium—whom we will
call _Meurice_—who has furnished Dr. Maxwell with many of his most
important examples of psychical phenomena. I refer to phenomena spoken
of on pp. 74, 81-2, 101-3, 136-7, 152-5, 160-2, 195-9, 201-2, 250.

Dr. X.—a friend of Professor Richet—who does not wish his name to be
mentioned, having been present with Professor Richet and Dr. Maxwell at
some of their experiments, has sent Dr. Maxwell a few notes concerning
those seances at which he was present. Dr. Maxwell has authorised me
to put these notes in order, and to add to them a few extracts from
letters written by Dr. Maxwell to Professor Richet and myself.

These notes and letters were written either during or immediately
after the seances, if I may so call the impromptu occasions on which
the phenomena to be spoken of were obtained.

There is, in these notes, a miscellaneous stream of evidence, the
complexity and importance of which may be presumed, when it is pointed
out that a useful combination of two orders of research has been
at work therein. Dr. Maxwell was chiefly interested in the study
of the facts concomitant with the phenomena, whatever they might
be, whilst Professor Richet devoted himself to the analysis of the
personifications, and to the study of the manifestations from a purely
psychological point of view.

Evidence is the touchstone of truth, and though the reading of parts
of this chapter may sound more like pages out of a fantastic story
than the words of savants, yet the publication of these facts has been
judged necessary by Professor Richet and Dr. Maxwell, in their belief
that no one is justified in setting aside facts which have been well
attested. These facts have been observed—let it not be forgotten—in a
spirit of pure scientific curiosity.

It is, therefore, hoped that this chapter will receive the thoughtful
consideration of many; and that careful analysis will be especially
given to those very parts, the unreal-like romantic nature of which
seems to render them, at a random glance, unworthy of serious thought.


THE MEDIUM AND HIS PHENOMENA

An acute analysis of a medium is of primary importance in the
examination and appreciation of his phenomena, therefore we will first
of all dwell a little on the personality of M. Meurice, the medium in
question.

He is a friend of Dr. Maxwell’s—a friend of some years’ standing.

He is a slightly built man, the reverse of robust, but endowed with
remarkable vitality and recuperative powers. He is thirty-two years
of age; he is unmarried. He is highly sensitive and reserved in
disposition, and forms quick but lasting sympathies and antipathies. He
gives one the impression of being always in a state of hypertension;
his nervous system is most finely strung, and he appears to experience
an irresistible need of constant physical movement. He passes easily
from the extremes of joy to the extremes of sadness. Highly nervous
though he be, Dr. Maxwell has never observed any signs of hysteria,
or any symptoms of a lack of equilibrium in the medium’s mentality.
He is not amenable to the hypnotic sleep, but Dr. Maxwell says he has
sometimes thought that he might eventually succeed in inducing that
state. The few attempts so far made in this direction have given no
results; moreover, M. Meurice does not care to submit himself to this
kind of experimentation. His cutaneous and other sensibilities are
normal; his reflexes also are normal.

He suffers occasionally from violent headaches and neuralgia; and has
frequent gastric attacks, notably after the production of telekinetic
phenomena. Otherwise his health is good. During the production of
phenomena, M. Meurice often acknowledges to a sinking sensation in the
epigastric region, and says it is as though something material were
being drawn out of him at such moments.

He is well read in every branch of literature, and has a most retentive
memory. One has the notion that this medium, to a great extent,
has under his conscious control a large range of what is generally
submerged faculty.

Subliminal operation is, no doubt, constantly going on with us all,
but it is most apparent in M. Meurice. One feels with him that his
unconscious memory is always on the alert.

Amnesia appears to follow rapidly in the footsteps of his visions, but
several things seem to indicate that this amnesia is only apparent.[18]

      [18] The amnesia, which appears to follow medianic phenomena,
      bears a certain relation to the amnesia which follows dreams.
      It is probably due to the weakness of the links between the
      conscious personality and the forgotten images. The links
      exist, but are not strong enough to bind those images to the
      usual stream of personal consciousness. They serve as clues,
      however, and the reappearance of the images at a given moment
      is due to the working of the usual laws of association.—MAXWELL.

Dr. Maxwell says he always thought he had a psychic in his friend.
However, notwithstanding his medical studies, and wide range
of knowledge of things in general, M. Meurice was ignorant of
metapsychical phenomena, and averse to becoming acquainted with the
practices of spiritism or anything of that nature. Little by little Dr.
Maxwell induced his friend to take some interest in these phenomena,
and one day he persuaded him to put his hands on a table with a view
to seeing whether the two of them together could obtain any phenomena.
Raps were immediately forthcoming; they resounded on the floor. The
medium was startled by the unusual noise and quickly rose from the
table. Nothing more was received on that occasion or for some time
afterwards. Then, for two years, M. Meurice reluctantly and irregularly
yielded to Dr. Maxwell’s persuasions to develop his medianity.

For some time he could not be made to see the importance of his
phenomena, and Dr. Maxwell refused to give weight to his words by
appealing to technical literature. He was desirous of keeping his
friend in ignorance of current notions on these phenomena, thinking the
results would be of greater value if the soil they sprang from were
virgin.

M. Meurice has done all in his power to throw light upon his own
phenomena. His co-operation has been precious, for often his fine
intelligence and well-trained powers of observation have enabled him
to bring into the research valuable analyses of his sensations and
impressions. For this medium not only does not lose consciousness
during the production of his phenomena, he is often at such moments
more thoroughly ‘all there’—to use a Scotch expression—than in his
unproductive moments of abstraction. True, there have been a few
exceptions, but, _as a rule_, he is keenly alive to all that is going
on when phenomena is forthcoming.

The passages I have indicated in Dr. Maxwell’s work will acquaint
the reader with the order and degree of phenomena presented by M.
Meurice, when Professor Richet made his acquaintance. Dr. Maxwell
had studied, almost exclusively, the physical aspect of the facts he
received, and did not encourage phenomena of an intellectual order.
This scientific attitude, however, had not prevented the manifestation
of the phenomenon of personification; and the ‘raps’ speedily put forth
the claims common to spiritualistic beliefs—in spite of the medium’s
ignorance of them. When Professor Richet began to experiment with M.
Meurice, the ‘raps’ had already claimed to emanate from ‘John King,’
‘Chappe d’Auteroche,’ a group of four entities calling themselves the
‘good fairies,’ and, lastly, from two of Dr. Maxwell’s deceased friends.

As the capital interest of this chapter lies in the intelligent aspect
of the phenomena, there is a fact of paramount importance to be pointed
out with emphasis.

Our medium is very amenable to influence, and his phenomena constantly
show the effects of suggestion and influence. I do not, by any
means, wish to infer that M. Meurice is like wax in the hands of his
friends; on the contrary, if it were only a question of personal
consciousness, we might say he is almost impervious to the action
of extraneous influences. His ways of thinking and acting bear the
stamp of independence, and if he yields occasionally to the wishes
of his friends, it is out of pure friendship and with deliberation.
When, however, we are endeavouring to make a psychological study of
a medium, we strive to reach the lower strata at once; the surface
is of little interest when we know that the secret lies below.
Therefore, when I say that M. Meurice is most amenable to influence,
I am bearing in mind that profound region, his general consciousness.
The personal consciousness may be rebellious to influence, but the
subliminal is reached by subtler means than is its grosser envelope,
and is remarkably amenable to the charm of suggestion and the voice of
sympathy. In all probability the reader will find sufficient evidence
of the accuracy of my assertion in the phenomena to be spoken of in the
course of this chapter; therefore, I will not dwell any further upon
this point, although it be an important one.

When experimenting with Eusapia Paladino, Professor Richet had remarked
and called attention to the synchronism which existed between her
phenomena and her movements or muscular contractions. Dr. Maxwell, in
his turn, also remarked it, and forthwith bent his studies in that
direction. The conclusion appears to be evident that a profound and
far-reaching importance lies in the synchronism between the movements
of the experimenters and the phenomena. It was observed that Dr.
Maxwell was indeed able to produce phenomena of raps and telekinesis
[of very feeble intensity, it is true] by tapping the medium on his
hands or shoulder, by firmly squeezing the hands, joined in a circle
above the table, or by the simple contraction of his own muscles.

_En passant_, it may be useful to note that Dr. X. was opposed to
the idea that synchronism _always_ existed between the phenomena and
the movements of the experimenters, that is to say, that muscular
contraction was _alone_ responsible for the phenomena. Dr. X. was
so opposed to this notion, that his presence at seances where this
synchronism was being demonstrated, has often been observed to cause
all manifestations to cease—to nullify the results. If Dr. X. was able
to exercise this power over one centre, it is highly probable that his
presence would exercise a like inhibitory influence over other centres
of energy, where like experiments were being conducted.

Though Dr. Maxwell had obtained not a few phenomena showing
intelligence (_e.g._ raps claiming to emanate from various
personifications), yet, as he says in his book, pages 26, 28, and 83,
he did not feel drawn towards that order of research, and did his best
to keep the phenomena on physical lines. But since Professor Richet
has experimented with M. Meurice, the phenomena have developed rapidly
along the lines of intellectuality: a result which may, it is true, be
due to our medium’s good-nature in allowing his power to be used as was
desired, or which may be the effect of influence and suggestion. We
are inclined to think the latter is nearer the truth, an opinion which
is supported by the fact that when Dr. X. and Professor Richet were
present—that is to say, within a few days after Dr. X.’s appearance in
the circle—synchronous phenomena could rarely be obtained.[19]

      [19] ‘Vous voyez, cher ami, que depuis que nous avons
      expérimenté ensemble, votre influence persiste et nos
      phénomènes physiques s’orientent vers les messages
      intellectuels.’—Extract from a letter written by Dr. Maxwell
      to Professor Richet six weeks after the first series of
      experiments with Professor Richet were held.

Now, all unknown to Dr. Maxwell, Professor Richet had passed the
previous three years in the study of these same phenomena from a
psychological standpoint, and at the moment of his first visit to
Bordeaux, he was particularly absorbed in the research and analysis
of intelligent messages received by means of a physical phenomenon.
His desire, for the time being, was to receive messages—of identity or
otherwise—by means of _raps without contact_.

Already familiar with the fact of synchronism—which a little experience
suffices to show is not due to self-suggestion or endosomatic
activity—Professor Richet wished to get on to fresh ground; as before
said, he wanted intellectuality in a physical phenomenon, and it was
not long before he got what he wanted with the medium in question.

And, _à propos_, perhaps I may be allowed to briefly relate at
once the first phenomenon containing intelligence, which Professor
Richet obtained with M. Meurice. A short time after having made his
acquaintance, the professor and Dr. X. thought they would try to
obtain a ‘test.’ Supposing, for a moment, that an entity, who has
several times claimed to be communicating with Professor Richet, really
existed, they ‘evoked’ him, and asked him to give them a sign through
M. Meurice, which would denote that he had been listening to a certain
conversation held two hours previously. The medium and Dr. Maxwell were
unaware that this entity had a speciality of communicating in Latin
or Greek. A few hours afterwards, during dinner, raps were heard on
the table and other furniture in the vicinity of M. Meurice; when the
question was asked as to who was rapping, the Christian name of the
entity was given, followed by the word _Confide_. No word, it appears,
could have borne more directly upon the conversation in question. There
was difficulty in obtaining these two words, the raps—in such abundance
when not requested to ‘work’—came laboriously, as though some one were
picking his steps among brambles, so to speak. The medium himself spelt
out the alphabet on this occasion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Maxwell has given an analysis of the raps obtained with M. Meurice,
and we especially refer the reader to pages 79-82 and 250.

When raps without contact delay in coming, M. Meurice takes a
lead-pencil, holds it in his hands, and presses one end against the
table or on an experimenter according to desire; the raps then resound
at the end touching the experimenter or the table.

Anæsthesia is observed only in the hand and arm holding the pencil.
“Once or twice,” says Dr. X., “I have observed something like cramp
seize the hand and arm, and extend along the shoulder blade, to the
nape of the neck. On these occasions, I saw the whole arm vibrate after
each rap, like the rebounding of an elastic band, and I have sometimes
thought it looked as though the ‘fluid’ passed down the nerves of the
arm into the pencil, as though it were flowing through a clear open
channel, until it reached the point of the pencil, when a jerk of some
kind appeared to force it out on to the wood; not that the pencil or
arm _moves_ when the rap resounds, but one has the impression of an
_interior_ jerk of some kind when, in moments of cramp, the rap is
heard; this rebounding movement appears to be almost simultaneous with
the rap. Though the medium keeps his personality alive, _as a rule_, it
seems to me,” continues Dr. X. (whose opinion is shared by Professor
Richet), “to undergo a diminution of some kind, on these occasions;
ideation appears to be slower and more difficult. But, because his arm
hurt him when this cramp came on, we have always begged him to cease;
therefore we cannot say whether, the experiment courageously continued,
complete anæsthesia would eventually set in, accompanied by psychical
phenomena.”

It is of importance to point out that both Professor Richet and Dr. X.
(though Dr. Maxwell does not altogether share their opinion on this
point) are inclined to believe that M. Meurice can tell _when_ raps
are going to be given, when phenomena will be forthcoming and when
they will not be forthcoming; a conclusion which is drawn from many
observations.

Some of the messages given in this chapter were obtained, when out
walking with the medium. On such occasions, M. Meurice would put his
hand on a walking-stick or on an umbrella; he preferred the latter.
“The raps on the open umbrella are extremely curious,” writes Dr. X.
“We have heard raps on the woodwork and on the silk at one and the same
time; it is easy to perceive that the shock actually occurs in the
wood—that the molecules of the latter are set in motion. The same thing
occurs with the silk; and here observation is even more interesting
still; each rap _looks_ like a drop of some invisible liquid falling on
the silk from a respectable height. The stretched silk of the umbrella
is quickly and slightly but surely dented in; sometimes the force with
which the raps are given is such as to shake the umbrella. Nothing is
more absorbing than the observation of an apparent conversation—by
means of the umbrella—between the medium’s personifications. Raps,
imitating a burst of laughter in response to the observer’s remarks,
resound on the silk like the rapid play of strong but tiny fingers.
When raps on the umbrella are forthcoming, M. Meurice either holds the
handle of the umbrella, or some one else does, whilst he simply touches
the handle very lightly with his open palm. He never touches the silk.

“Raps without contact appear to require more force, and are not so
frequently forthcoming, as raps with contact—which seem to be always
at the medium’s command; consequently—and particularly as the tenor
of the messages received constituted the chief interest for the time
being—the use of the pencil or umbrella has been encouraged.”

All the messages given in this chapter, except where the contrary
is expressly stated, have been received by contact with a pencil
or umbrella—with what Chappe, the chief personification, calls his
telephone.

A marked trait in the phenomena is their spontaneity. Months will
pass away without the production of a single phenomenon worth
mentioning—raps through the pencil can generally be obtained, however.
After the attraction of the fan (pages 357-8), nine months elapsed
before another telekinetic phenomenon occurred. At other times, the
energy is so abundant that while it lasts, that is to say for two
or three weeks, the medium may truly be said to live in a world of
phenomena in more senses than one; for, at such periods, phenomena are
constantly forthcoming. Regular seances are not of much avail with M.
Meurice; it is better not to seek, but to know how to receive, which
means to know how to wait patiently and attentively.

       *       *       *       *       *

A brief analysis of the personifications is necessary before laying
bare their work. The first to manifest was ‘John King.’ Subliminal
labour is very transparent herein. M. Meurice had heard not a little
of Eusapia Paladino’s secondary personality, which calls itself ‘John
King.’

Then the raps announced the presence of a group of four entities
calling themselves the ‘fairies’—_les bonnes fées_. In fact, the
latter were the first to make their presence felt by M. Meurice, though
John King was the first to manipulate the raps. The fairies gave the
names of Miriam, Yolande, Liliane, and Brigitte; the latter remained
but a short time; she said she had to go away somewhere; she was
replaced by ‘Wicki,’ who claims to be an ancestor of Dr. Maxwell’s,
and to have lived in Ireland during the fifteenth century. The medium
associates the odour of jasmine with the fairies. Perhaps the following
may suggest a clue to the origin of these entities:—

Some years ago, before Dr. Maxwell had commenced experimenting with
his friend, he was in the habit of bidding him good-bye with the
words, ‘_Que les très bonnes vous protègent_.’ When the fairies—_les
bonnes fées_—appeared, they at once claimed to have been the means
of bringing about the meeting of Dr. Maxwell with M. Meurice, and of
having fostered their friendship. As for the odour of jasmine: on
one occasion, soon after experimentation had begun, the medium was
talking to the doctor about good influences; and he remarked that he
sometimes perceived the odour of jasmine without being able to explain
it normally. The next time the doctor saw his friend, the raps dictated
that the odour of jasmine was the signal of the presence of the good
fairies.

The next personification to manifest was said to be S., a very dear
friend of Dr. Maxwell’s (see pages 160-1). The genesis of this
personification is easy to follow. S. was one of the leading men
in Bordeaux, where he occupied a very prominent position; he was
extremely well known—though M. Meurice did not know him, and says he
never saw him. M. Meurice witnessed Dr. Maxwell’s grief when S. died,
and heard the former say that he had been very fond of S. I again
refer the reader to pages 160-1 for further consideration of the S.
personification.

For a few months, the phenomena claimed to emanate chiefly from the
fairies—John King gradually fading away. Then ‘Chappe d’Auteroche’
came on the scene, and has ever since kept the field pretty much to
himself,—though he permits of the presence of the personalities already
mentioned and a few others if _introduced_ by him. His first appearance
took the form of a vision in the crystal. The medium saw him in a
foreign land, amidst large red flowers, savage tribes and queer-looking
boats on canals; he gave his name, the exact day, month and year of
his death, and the cause of his death; he described what his work on
earth had been—all things which M. Meurice did not _consciously_ know.
Everything, which was verifiable, was found to be correct.

Some time after this, Chappe gave a long and coherent message by means
of tilts of a table without contact—in daylight; on this occasion, he
gave his Christian name as ‘Adhémar,’ which is, probably, an error, as
biographies do not mention it.

Chappe is, doubtless, a subliminal entity; but his evolution is more
difficult to explain than any of the medium’s other personifications.
Perhaps M. Meurice—an _avide_ reader—has come across some articles in
periodicals, concerning the measurements of the solar parallax, by
means of the crossing of the sun’s surface by the disc of the planet
Venus. Chappe was one of the best-known observers; he went to Siberia
in 1761, and to California in 1769, to observe those passages. His
name must certainly have been mentioned in the newspapers, when the
last crossings took place—that is in 1874 and 1882. But on these
occasions, M. Meurice was only three and eleven years old! Has he seen
the biographical notice of Chappe in Larousse’s dictionary? He has no
conscious recollection of having read this, nor does he remember ever
having heard of Chappe the astronomer. And there, for the present, the
matter must stand.

Another personification—H. B.—made its irruption towards the end
of 1903. M. Meurice was certainly aware of Dr. Maxwell’s profound
esteem and affection for H. B.; but for further consideration of this
personification, we refer the reader to Dr. Maxwell’s notes thereon,
pages 287 and following.

       *       *       *       *       *

I perceive I am about to end these remarks on the medium and his
phenomena without having said a word upon a vital point, one which
many specialists would require to be satisfactorily settled before
consenting to listen to an account of the phenomena. I mean the
medium’s honesty. Professor Richet, Dr. Maxwell, and Dr. X. say that,
for diverse reasons, they cannot doubt this particular medium’s
honourability. As for raps and telekinetic phenomena, there can be no
shadow of doubt about their genuineness; the excellent conditions of
light, sight and touch which always prevail when his phenomena are
forthcoming, joined to the intelligent co-operation of M. Meurice, who
is as much interested in and capable of examining his own phenomena as
are the observers, put mystification out of the question.

Is there any evidence of identity, of survival, of intelligent forces
other than human, in this chapter? Each one will answer this question
after his own manner of thinking. Some will say ‘No.’ If we could
forget the extraordinary romance at the end of this chapter—Series
C—we too might answer categorically ‘No.’ Though we have given all
the leading details of the case, family reasons have necessitated
the omission of much valuable material in this ‘romance,’ and
perhaps readers will not see so much in it as those who watched
its development. But even as it stands, it presents some baffling
difficulties. It really seems to indicate that there is activity in
the metethereal environment, and that the spirit can act in that
environment. What matter, therefore, if it be the spirit of the living
or of the dead? If one can demonstrate its independence of the body,
why not the other?


_SERIES A_

VISIONS

It may be useful to give one or two of our medium’s visions. If these
simple phenomena—where so much of the personal consciousness seems
at play—be studied, some idea may be gained of how far, if at all,
the subliminal is responsible for the production of this particular
medium’s more intricate phenomena, such as intelligent messages given
by means of raps without contact.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. Meurice was once visiting Paris. He dined at my house on the evening
of his arrival. This was the first time I met him. During dinner, an
hour or so after his arrival, the medium said he saw a vision near me,
and described a personage ‘dressed in white and gold-embroidered robes,
who looks like a priest of ancient times.’ The only interest in this is
that it corroborates what two other sensitives, unknown to our medium
and to each other, have on two different occasions told me.

M. Meurice also claimed to recognise in me and this bedecked personage,
two persons who figured in a dream-vision he had had, three years
previous to meeting me. We give this dream chiefly for the sake of its
rich symbolism.

The medium wrote an account of the dream at the time, at Dr. Maxwell’s
request, the latter being struck by its oddity. Here is the vision:—

“I dreamt I was sleeping in a bed, the framework of which nearly
touched the ground; the bed was raised on a kind of platform. I was in
a large hall, which looked like a church. Suddenly a tall, fair woman,
dressed in black, entered. A man wearing long, white, ancient-looking
garments, embroidered all over in gold, followed her. Then Dr. Maxwell
entered. The man in white read aloud out of the book, which the fair
woman held open before him. I was suddenly overcome with emotion. I
wept, and wept, and wept. My tears caused the flowers embroidered on
the counterpane to spring into life; they grew and multiplied with
amazing rapidity, completely covering the bed and, finally, burying
me beneath their abundance and weight. The fair woman then said: ‘We
must seek for him,’ and set to work to remove the flowers. During this
operation, Dr. Maxwell stepped on my body; I screamed with pain and
awoke.”

When M. Meurice awoke, he was suffering from colic; this fact may
explain parts of the vision.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day in December 1903, at the close of a seance when some fine raps
at a distance had been obtained, M. Meurice wrote a few German words.
He does not know German. At the same time he saw, in the crystal, the
words: ‘Kolbe, chimiste, mort à Leipzig 1730.’ A few hours after this
seance, the medium had a vision of the personification Chappe, who
said, ‘Vous ne savez donc lire? C’est “mort à Leipzig le 25 Novembre
1884,” et pas “1730.”’

Kolbe the chemist died at Leipzig on the 25th of November 1884. This
information is to be found in Larousse’s dictionary.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following is an experiment in the transmission of thought which Dr.
Maxwell tried with the medium:—

“I gave my hand to M. Meurice, to hold, and said to him—we had been
talking, in a vague, general manner of the plurality of existences—‘Try
and see how I died in my previous existence.’

“Unknown to the medium, I wrote down on paper the words:—_Fall from a
horse!_

“M. Meurice answered: ‘I see your life, then you fade away into
nothingness; you die from an accident; a carriage—no, a horse accident.
I see you wearing a shield. You fall from your horse, he crushes you to
death.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

The medium very often sees the same vision repeat itself in the
crystal. This is the vision of a procession of individuals clothed in
flowing robes; they follow a long narrow path, which loses itself in a
tunnel, into which the procession passes. The vision never varies, save
that at times after the procession has disappeared into the tunnel, the
path seems to be strewn with the bones of skeletons.

This vision has also been seen, in the same crystal, by our medium’s
youngest sister, a girl of twenty, who is absolutely ignorant of
spiritistic phenomena. She attributed her vision to an optical illusion.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been observed with M. Meurice that the last vision sometimes
precedes veridical hallucinations.

This and other facts would lead one to think that very probably, for
a medium, there is no test which can discriminate between falsidical
and veridical hallucinations. The psychological process appears to be
the same, viz. dramatisation and concrete images, instead of abstract
concepts or ideas.

Mediums, as a rule, possess parasitic personalities which act in the
same way as the normal personality; this feature of hallucinatory
phenomena is difficult to analyse, and introduces into the problem a
number of unknown factors.

In the case of the medium in question, the secondary personalities are
weak. They are always felt and objectived by the normal personality,
which is never expelled from the scene—a circumstance which is precious
for the observer as the visions are sometimes vivid to a degree. With
M. Meurice the unknown factors, though existing, are reduced to a sort
of minimum, and the psychological analysis is perhaps less difficult
than in the generality of cases. In this fact lies the value of his
intellectual phenomena, though it is a drawback indeed from another
point of view, the persistency of the normal consciousness, of the
normal will, and even of the normal powers of attention, being probably
the cause of the impurities which so frequently stain his intellectual
phenomena.


