CHAPTER III

PARAKINESIS AND TELEKINESIS


I. PARAKINESIS

I apply the term parakinesis to the production of those movements where
the contact observed is insufficient to account for them. I thus more
especially designate the complete levitation of a table upon which the
sitters are leaning their hands; also the displacement of heavy pieces
of furniture which are but lightly touched by the medium alone, or
with other experimenters. Levitation is the raising of an object from
the ground without that object resting on, or being in any contact
whatsoever with, any normal support.

I have frequently observed this phenomenon with Eusapia Paladino
under satisfactory conditions of light and other tests. She has given
me several unimpeachable examples of parakinetic levitation, and, I
repeat, in full light. A detailed report will be found in the accounts
of seances at l’Agnélas, published in 1896 in the _Annales des Sciences
Psychiques_.

These accounts, however, give only the physiognomy of the regular
seances. We sometimes improvised experiments in the afternoon
with striking results; and I remember having observed under these
conditions a very interesting levitation. It was, I think, at about
five o’clock in the afternoon; at all events it was broad daylight
in the drawing-room at l’Agnélas. We were standing around the table;
Eusapia took my hand and held it in her left, resting her hand on the
right-hand corner of the table. The table was raised to the level of
our foreheads; that is to say, the top of the table was raised to a
height of about five feet from the floor.

Experiences like this are very convincing. It was utterly impossible
for Eusapia, given the conditions of the experiment, to have lifted the
table by normal means. One has but to consider, that she touched only
the corner of the table to realise what a heavy weight she would have
had to raise had she done so by muscular effort. Moreover, she had no
hold whatsoever of the table. And, given the conditions under which
the phenomenon occurred, she could not have had recourse to any of the
means suggested by her critics, such as straps or hooks of some kind.

In ordinary seances, the table used to be raised to a lesser height;
perhaps because we were seated, and could not therefore accompany it
very far. As a rule, the levitation was preceded by oscillations; the
table raised itself first on one side, then on the other, and finally
left the ground. Very often Eusapia, holding her neighbours’ hands,
would abandon all contact with the table, and make several passes above
it, when the table would rise, apparently of its own accord.

I have only obtained parakinetic levitation under really good
conditions with Eusapia. I have observed more decided movements without
contact with other mediums, but they have not given me levitations
properly so-called. I have once or twice obtained defective levitations
with a non-professional medium. The table drew near to her of its
own accord, and raised itself while touching her dress. This fact
occurred in the light, but the conditions under which I observed
it were imperfect. I may say the same thing of some levitations I
obtained at Bordeaux with rather an interesting professional medium;
these levitations took place in total obscurity, which rendered good
conditions of control impossible; besides no one held the medium’s
hands and feet, as had been done with Eusapia.

In a series of experiments which gave me some results worthy of careful
examination, I obtained the levitation of the table under slightly
better conditions. But some of the sitters cheated so barefacedly,
that I do not consider I ought to take any serious notice of the
parakinetic movements I witnessed there; although I have the impression
that everything was not simulated which happened in this group. The
unsatisfactory conditions under which I made this series of experiments
led me to discontinue them.

I consider that the levitation of the table, even with the contact of
the hands, is a difficult phenomenon to obtain under good conditions
of observation. Up to the present, Eusapia Paladino is, I repeat, the
only medium with whom I have been able to verify the phenomenon in a
satisfactory manner.

Her method is similar to the one I indicated and recommended to my
readers. Phenomena are often forthcoming when she raises her hand above
the table. Although I do not consider myself authorised to affirm
the reality of the effect this method appears to exercise upon the
phenomenon of levitation, I indicate it because the positive results,
which similar practices have given me in telekinetic experiments, lead
me to think it may also answer for parakinetic experiments. Let me
briefly explain this method. When the experimenters have their hands on
the table, and the latter begins to sway about from side to side as if
it were trying to raise itself, one of the sitters puts his hand above
the table, palm downwards, and approaches it to within two or three
centimetres of the top. Then he raises it very gently; while doing
this, the levitation sometimes takes place as though the hand drew the
table after it.

I recommend experimenting with as much light as possible. We must
not forget that nothing is easier to simulate than a parakinetic
levitation. Force of habit will soon teach us how to recognise
fraudulent phenomena of this kind, but it is nevertheless important to
know beforehand the principal systems of cheating. With the reader’s
permission I will indicate them.

The position, which the experimenters are obliged to assume around the
table when they are seated, has the consequence of almost completely
hiding their feet. As soon as the lights are lowered, it is nearly
impossible to exercise that mutual control which it is indispensable
should be exercised. Now, when the hands rest a little forcibly on
the table, it is very easy, especially with a light table, to glide
the point of a shoe under one of the legs of the table and to raise
it above the ground. This manœuvre is all the easier, as the swaying
of the table from side to side permits one to effect the movement,
without much fear of detection. Needless to say that hooks attached to
the wrist, or specially contrived bracelets, also permit of raising
and holding the table in the air. But it is easy to protect oneself
against fraud of this nature. Let every one stand up and join hands
in the centre of the table; the kind of fraud I indicate will then be
impossible. I myself have often obtained fine levitations in this way,
but unfortunately in obscurity.

I will point out still another fraudulent process practised at times
by professional mediums. It consists in the following manœuvre. The
medium places himself at the narrow end of a table,—in preference a
rectangular one—he promotes various oscillations, and when he has
succeeded in raising the end opposite to him, he spreads out his legs
in such a way as to exercise a strong hold over the feet of the table,
between which he is sitting. Once this pressure is exercised, there is
nothing more for the medium to do, in order to obtain a levitation,
than to lean his hands heavily on the table. It is easy to understand
how the table, maintained in position by the trickster’s knees,
executes a rotatory movement around an axis the points of which are
fixed by the pressure of the knees; consequently the table, becoming
parallel with the ground, appears to be abnormally levitated. This
simulation can be successfully realised, even when some one is seated
on a chair on top of the table; under the pretence of offering a better
condition of control, the medium takes the hands of the person on
the table, and finds in him the point of support required to promote
the rotation of the table around its axis. We should keep this kind
of fraud before the mind’s eye when seeking to obtain levitations,
especially if operating in obscurity, for then this trick is most easy
of execution.

Once again, I cannot too strongly warn experimenters against dark
seances: they are absolutely worthless when paranormal phenomena
are required. These ought to be obtained in full light; under such
conditions the levitation of the table is a verifiable phenomenon.


II. TELEKINESIS

I will now relate my observations upon telekinesis, that is to
say, movements without contact. Telekinesis corresponds with
_l’extériorisation de la motricité_, discovered by Colonel de Rochas.
It is a phenomenon which I have taken particular pains to verify. I
have had exceptionally good experiences in this phase of manifestation.

I verified telekinetic phenomena with Eusapia Paladino first of all.
When operating with this medium, the seance-table was often elevated
without contact. As a rule, Eusapia formed the chain of hands around
the table without touching it; at the end of a few seconds, she would
make some passes over the table with her right hand, retaining her
hold of her right-hand neighbour’s hand at the same time: the table
would then leave the floor, and remain suspended in the air for several
seconds. It fell to the ground heavily as a rule. This experiment was
made several times in my presence under satisfactory conditions of
light.

It was not only the table which moved with Eusapia: the curtains of
the cabinet were often thrown over the table, as if a strong wind
had blown them out. This phenomenon was particularly noticeable at
l’Agnélas, where we experimented in front of the curtains of one of
the drawing-room windows. These curtains were made of heavy silk
material, and nothing was more curious than to see them swell out and
suddenly stretch over us. The manner in which they were thrown over our
heads was peculiar; it was as though they had been blown out. Without
an adapted instrument of some kind, I do not think it was possible for
the medium to produce this phenomenon fraudulently with her hand. I
obtained the same characteristic movements of curtains with another
medium.

With Eusapia, the sitters’ chairs were frequently displaced, shaken,
raised, and even carried on to the table. I cannot conceive how Eusapia
could have obtained such results normally, considering the strict test
conditions exacted at l’Agnélas. We had been courteously acquainted
with the results of the Cambridge seances, and our attention had been
very specially drawn to the fraudulent practices of this medium. One of
us held her feet and her waist, while the mission of two others, seated
on either side of her, was to observe her hands. It is relatively easy
to know if we hold a right or left hand: it suffices to carefully note
the position of the thumb, which ought always to be turned towards the
observer if the hand be directed palm upwards, and which ought to be
turned towards the medium if the hand be directed palm downwards. It
is unnecessary to hold the medium’s hand tightly in order to be aware
of its position: an ordinary contact, intelligently superintended,
is quite enough; it is of course necessary to make sure of the
simultaneous contact of thumb and fingers. Now, in a certain number
of cases, the check upon the medium was good, when the chair of one
of the sitters was carried on to the table. It is also to be noted,
that Eusapia would have been forced to lean forward in a very marked
manner, in order to seize her neighbour’s chair and carry it on to the
table; the inclination of her body would have been easily perceived,
especially as the chair was first of all drawn away from under the
experimenter and then raised on to the table, manœuvres which occupied
some time.

Other phenomena of the same kind were, however, produced in a more
conclusive manner. I remember having seen the lid of a trunk, which was
placed behind the experimenters and to the left of Eusapia, open and
shut of its own accord.

Lastly, I obtained with this medium a very convincing phenomenon, which
M. de Gramont had already verified at l’Agnélas after my departure.
This is the movement at a distance of the scale of a letter-balance. I
made the experiment at Bordeaux in the presence of a few intelligent
and educated persons. We operated in a light which was strong enough
to enable us to read the faintly marked divisions on the scale.
This object had just been purchased by me, and I had drawn it from
its wrappings just prior to the experiment. Before our eyes Eusapia
repeatedly made the scale go down by raising and lowering her hands,
palms downwards. Eusapia’s hands were from three to five inches away
from the letter-balance; she performed the movements described without
abandoning her neighbour’s hands. We obtained the lowering of the plate
of the balance several times, each time varying the position of the
medium’s hands, placing them in front of the apparatus in such a manner
as to form a triangle of which the plate was the apex, and bringing
the medium’s hands together so that the angle at the apex became very
acute. This was done in order to obviate the possibility of the medium
producing the effect by means of a hair or thread between her fingers.
I must point out, however, that a hair or thread would have been
visible.

By turning her hands round, that is to say by directing them palms
upwards, Eusapia raised the plate of the letter-balance to its full
extent when it was weighed down by a pocket-book. By measuring the
oscillations of the index-needle, we were able to ascertain that the
force employed was at least one ounce superior in weight to that of the
pocket-book.

The facts I verified with Eusapia, I was able to prove again through
other mediums, non-professional. On two occasions, I obtained fine
telekinetic phenomena in a public restaurant. I was in the company of
a good sensitive, a highly intelligent man, but one who knew little
or nothing of spiritism. The first time I was breakfasting with him;
we were seated at a fairly large table, near which was a small round
one; the cloth which was covering our table touched the small one. We
first heard several fine raps, and then the small table drew gradually
nearer till it touched the big one. There had been a displacement of
eleven inches. It was broad daylight, and the conditions under which
I observed this fact completely exclude—at least in my opinion—the
hypothesis of fraud. Another time we were lunching together. I was
seated at the left-hand side of the medium, and we were alone at our
table. Two chairs were facing us, while a third one was on the medium’s
right, facing another table. The chair to the right of the medium
approached the table, and then retreated at our request. The chair
_facing me_ reproduced the same movements. The light was so bright
that I was able to observe the hands and feet of the medium with the
greatest ease.

[Illustration]

These plain, decided, easily observable, and well-observed facts are
among the most convincing I have received. The medium’s position, the
bright light, the full liberty of verification which was permitted me,
rendered these observations extremely convincing to me. The measuring
of the distances between the table and the object in movement excludes
the hypothesis of hallucination on my part. I therefore consider that
all possibility of fraud or hallucination was out of the question.

Previous to the movements, I had established contact with the chair
in front of me, by means of one of those wooden holders to which
newspapers are attached in restaurants and buffets. The chair in
approaching us pushed the newspapers towards us, and we were thus
enabled to watch the horizontal progression of the chair. The distance
travelled by the chair was from seven to eight inches. The objects
moved in a jerky, irregular manner.

I have been able to observe telekinetic table movements on many
occasions, and always in broad daylight. Perhaps the most curious
movement I have seen is the following: A lady and gentleman once did
me the honour of inviting me to witness certain phenomena which they
were often able to obtain when experimenting together; these phenomena
consisted in slight displacements of a table. They reproduced these
movements without contact in my presence. I then begged them to form a
chain with me around the table, always without touching it of course.
This table, a light tripod, the top of which measured eleven inches
by twenty-one inches, was in contact with the dress of my hostess.
After having executed several diverse gliding movements—approaching or
retreating at request—the table began to raise itself and to strike the
floor with one of its feet. We spelt out the alphabet, and received a
typtological communication. During this performance, the table was in
contact with the dress only. The dress did not hide the feet of the
table, the contact was simply lateral, and the table could be seen in
entirety. It was daylight, and it would have been easy to detect the
slightest movement of the dress. Moreover, the table raised one of its
feet which was not in contact with the dress. I did not try—because
I did not wish—to remove the contact of the dress, for I had often
observed this bulging out of women mediums’ dresses: as soon as the
garment comes near the table and contact is established, the movement
is produced. I have often checked the position of the medium’s feet,
while the phenomenon was happening, and I have been able to verify that
the slight contact was with the dress only, and not with the feet.
This curious fact has already been observed by Richet and others, in
connection with Eusapia Paladino. I will add that I have often obtained
movements without any contact whatsoever, even that of garments.

Another medium has enabled me to verify telekinetic movements of
curtains. They were less violent than with Eusapia, but more decided,
and enabled me to make some observations which are not altogether
lacking in interest. I was once experimenting with the medium in
question, in subdued light, contrary to my usual custom. It was in the
daytime, but we had closed the shutters of the window and drawn the
curtains together, in order to form a kind of cabinet. We were trying
to obtain luminous phenomena, which, however, were not forthcoming. The
medium had his back turned towards the curtains. I noticed that the
curtains stirred now and then. I drew the attention of an experimenter
to this, and at first we attributed the movement to a slight draught.
We drew the curtains together completely, and then observed that only
the curtain close to the medium stirred. It was light enough to see the
hands and feet of our medium, and we were able to convince ourselves,
that the movements were not normally produced by him. We then noticed
that the movements of the curtain corresponded with our movements.
The experiment was repeated with success twenty times. We varied the
movements and were able to observe, that the maximum disturbance of
the curtain occurred, when the medium rubbed the head of one of the
experimenters.

The curtain was not blown out over the table as with Eusapia. The
movements simply consisted of a species of undulatory trepidation,
whose amplitude did not surpass five or six inches: it was like the
sinuous undulations of a rope, when shaken at one of its extremities.

Such are the principal facts which I have been able to observe. I
will not have much to say concerning the method of operation, for I
have already sufficiently indicated how I proceed habitually. I have,
nevertheless, two important remarks to make.

The first is, that the presentation of the palm of the hand towards the
object, which we wish to displace, often brings about the movement. I
proceed in the manner I have indicated for a parakinetic levitation,
but instead of presenting the palm of the hand to the top of the table
and then drawing it slowly away, I direct it towards the side of the
table, and I act as though I wished to attract or repulse the table. I
have noticed that this practice gives good results.

The second remark I wish to make is, that when desirous of obtaining
movements without contact, it is helpful to form the chain around
the table by holding each other’s hands. Still, I do not think this
precaution is indispensable, for I have obtained telekinetic movements
without its aid. It seems to me, however, that it is a method to be
recommended, especially in the beginning of the seance.

I have just said that the chain of hands is not indispensable. And, as
an example, I remember having once verified some telekinetic movements
which interested me very much. I was conversing with a private medium:
by the way, all the telekinetic phenomena of which I have been
speaking, save those obtained with Eusapia Paladino, have been obtained
with private mediums. In the course of our conversation we pronounced
the name of a personification, whose irruption in our midst had been as
sudden as unexpected. This personification behaves like a cautious and
well-advised experimenter, and conducts himself as, I think, I would,
if I co-operated on the other side in the experiments I am speaking
about. Hardly had I pronounced this personification’s name than the
table began to glide gently across the floor. We questioned it, and
according to our request, it approached or retreated from the medium.
The movements of the table alternated with raps. I content myself with
merely stating this curious fact, without allowing myself to draw any
conclusions therefrom; it appears to me to offer a striking example of
that apparent spontaneity, which psychical phenomena sometimes present.

From the account I have just given of some of my experiments in
parakinesis and telekinesis, we may deduct the following propositions:
they resume, fairly exactly, the points of fact I have been able to
ascertain:—

I. There is a certain correlation between the movements of the medium
or assistants and the movements of the objects used in experimentation.

II. Certain peculiar sensations accompany the emission of the force
employed.

III. That force has a probable connection with the organism of the
assistants.

I. Nothing is easier to verify than the correlation existing between
the movements of the medium or sitters, and those of the object with
which we are experimenting. I may say, that almost without exception,
the movements of the operators are, in a way, reflected by the table.
I have already pointed out, that movements of attraction or repulsion
attracted or repulsed the table. I have remarked this peculiarity
on several occasions. When, in a seance, the presence of a certain
force manifesting itself in raps and oscillations without contact is
established, it often suffices for one of the sitters to direct his
hand towards the table to bring about its immediate displacement. By
proceeding in the manner indicated further back, I have noticed that
complete levitations could be obtained; but it is then necessary for
the sitters to put their hands on the table, while one of their number
puts one of his hands in the centre of the table, and palm downwards
slowly raises his hand. Levitations without contact can certainly be
obtained by the same method, by simply forming a chain of hands around
the table without touching it; but the results are less difficult to
obtain when the hands are laid on the table.

Levitation seems to me more difficult to realise than gliding
movements. I have frequently obtained the latter without contact, by
directing the palm of my hand towards the table, and trying to draw it
after me as though an elastic thread united the table to my hand. Under
these conditions the table seems to obey a kind of attraction.

I think I have some observations to make on this subject, but I cannot
formulate them with much certitude, and I only point them out in order
to provoke—if that be possible—the examination of these facts by
persons more competent than I am. First of all, it is not always the
medium who obtains the best results in the manœuvre I indicate. I have
seen some experimenters obtain more marked movements than the sensitive
himself. This is not generally the case, but the fact does not appear
to me to be rare. It is rather disconcerting, because those persons,
who in a seance manifest a force relatively greater than the medium’s,
cannot obtain any supernormal fact when alone; the presence of a medium
is necessary for the energy of their action to be manifested. I wonder
if this be not due to the medium’s inexperience. I never observed this
peculiarity in seances with Eusapia, although the sitters could, in her
presence, produce certain phenomena themselves. I have only noticed it
with the non-professional mediums, who kindly consented to allow me
to experiment with them. Nearly all of them had no notion whatever of
psychical experimentation; most of them were altogether ignorant of
the practices of spiritism; and many were frightened by their first
phenomena. These mediums have not the tranquillity and presence of
mind of myself and friends, whom a long experience has freed from all
kinds of bias. Perhaps, therefore, they do not operate under such good
conditions as we do, or as more experienced mediums would. Whatever may
be the reason, I note the fact observed.

A second interesting observation I have to make is the unequalness of
the radiations or emanations which appear to issue from the back or
palm of the hand. The action of the palm is decidedly more energetic
than that of the back; as an example, I will recall to mind the
experiment with the letter-balance. To lower it, Eusapia lightly moved
her hand from top to bottom, palm downwards; to obtain the contrary
movement, she turned her hand in the opposite direction. There are
certain obscure peculiarities to elucidate in this curious unequalness.
It is desirable to study it, for it is one of the rare points where
experimentation is really possible, in the studies of the kind I am
setting forth. It is to be noted, and this is I think a very important
consideration, that the innervation of the palm of the hand is much
more abundant than that of the back.

In what concerns movements without contact, I have not noticed any
unequalness of action between the two hands: the left hand appears to
act quite as well as the right.

In the third place I have verified a correlation, between the
intensity of the muscular effort and the abnormal movement. This is an
interesting observation, for I have not observed it when studying the
phenomenon of raps. As an example, I will cite an experiment which I
have often made. When the liberated energy is insufficient to provoke
movements, and the existence of a certain quantity of force has,
nevertheless, been ascertained, if the manœuvre of attraction does not
succeed, we can sometimes provoke the movement by shaking the hand
about at a certain distance above the table. This rapid movement of the
hand and arm appears to me to develop a maximum of telenergy.

Again, rubbing the feet on the floor, rubbing the hands, the back,
the arms, in fact any quick or slightly violent movement appears to
liberate this force. These manœuvres often bring about the realisation
of the desired phenomenon. It is evident that such manœuvres must
be employed with discernment; some of them might hamper observation:
_e.g._ rubbing the feet on the floor if telekinetic movements of
the table be desired, for this would render it difficult, if not
impossible, to check the position of the medium’s feet.

The breath appears to exercise a great influence; things happen as
though in blowing on the object, the sitters emitted a quantity of
energy, comparable to that which they emit, in quickly moving their
limbs. This is a strange peculiarity, one which is apparently very
difficult to explain.

A more thorough analysis of the facts permits us to think, that the
liberation of the energy employed depends upon the contraction of the
muscles and not upon the executed movement. The fact which reveals
this peculiarity is easily observed. When the chain round the table is
formed, a movement without contact can be procured by tightly squeezing
one another’s hands, or by resting the feet very firmly on the floor:
the former is by far the better process. The limbs have executed an
insignificant movement, and we may say that the muscular contraction
is about the only physiological phenomenon visible to observers; it is
nevertheless sufficient.

These ascertainments all tend to show that the agent, which is the
determining cause of movements without contact, has some connection
with our organism and probably with our nervous system.

Other reasons also tend to prove this. Thus it is that the number
of experimenters influence the phenomena to a certain degree. The
levitation of a table is easier to obtain with five or six persons
than with one or two. It is very difficult to arrive at any precise
conclusion on this point, for the observations I have read are
contradictory. In so far as my personal experience is concerned, I
have the impression that, within certain limits, the quantity of force
liberated varies in direct proportion with the number of experimenters.
Nevertheless, a certain number should not be surpassed if we wish to
experiment under good conditions. But I think that the diminution
of results may have other causes than the diminution or increase of
the number of sitters. I believe that if we could assemble a number
of homogeneous elements, we would obtain excellent results. This
would explain the so-called miracles, which are said to have occurred
in certain primitive congregations, where beliefs were strong and
convictions profound. This unity of belief and ideas, and the material
and moral regimen, to which every member of the community submitted,
determined that harmony which is a fundamental condition for the
production of good phenomena. It is in this way that historical and
contemporary ‘miracles’ may be explained. But in the present state
of society it is very difficult to unite six or eight persons having
identical ideas and submitting themselves to an identical discipline;
and I have always thought that the harmony of a circle was more
important than the number of its members.

I have just pointed out in detail certain purely physical processes
for provoking the production of paranormal phenomena. They give good
results when the force is feeble; but as soon as the force is abundant,
the simple manifestation of the will is sometimes sufficient to
decide the character of the movement; _e.g._ the table will move in
the direction asked for by the sitters. Things then happen as though
the force was handled by an intelligence distinct from that of the
experimenters. I hasten to say, that this seems only an appearance
to me, and that I have observed certain similarities between these
personifications and secondary personalities of somnambulism. But I
would not be giving an exact physiognomy of the facts observed, did I
not lay stress upon this curious trait of their character.

In this apparent union between the _indirect_ will of the sitters and
the phenomena there is a problem, the solution of which escapes me so
far completely. I feel that there is nothing of a supernatural order
in this union; I also feel, that the spirit hypothesis is altogether
inadequate to explain it; but I am unable to formulate any explanation.
This is one of those points of fact which I confine myself to pointing
out.

The attentive observation of the relation, existing between the
phenomena and the will of the sitters, permits of the demonstration
of other facts. Firstly, the bad effect of discord between the
sitters. It often happens that one of them expresses a desire to
obtain a certain given phenomenon; if the requested phenomenon be not
immediately forthcoming, the same experimenter will demand a different
one. Sometimes, several of the sitters ask for several contradictory
things at the same time. The confusion which reigns in collectivity is
generally manifested in the phenomena, which, in their turn, become
vague and confused.

Still, things do not altogether happen as though the phenomena
were directed by a will, which was only an echo of the will of the
experimenters. The phenomena often manifest great independence, and
refuse decidedly to yield to the desires of the experimenters. By
admitting even Janet’s hypothesis on the secondary personalities
of mediums, stretching it from cases of somnambulism to cases of
telekinesis, a fact which is very curious from a purely psychological
point of view is to be met with occasionally: the secondary personality
sometimes manifests itself at the same time as the normal personality,
and a conflict between them is the result. I have seen this with
Eusapia, when, for example, she wanted to drink, and the table
violently opposed itself to her wishes.

To sum up my observations upon the first of my conclusions: There is
a close and positive connection between the movements effectuated
by the medium or the sitters, and the displacement of articles of
experimentation; there is a relation between these displacements and
the muscular contractions of the experimenters; a probable relation,
whose precise nature I am unable to state, exists between the will of
the experimenters and paranormal movements.


II. Certain peculiar sensations accompany the emission of the force
employed. I hesitated before deciding to formulate this conclusion,
because, notwithstanding the great number of observations I have
made, I am only able to present this proposition with much reserve.
The sensations I am going to describe are purely subjective, and may
consequently give rise to all sorts of error and illusion. Some of
these sensations may be explained by fatigue or prolonged immobility.
In spite of these causes for error, which are, I acknowledge, very
numerous and very real, it seems to me, that the impartial analysis
of the facts observed tends towards showing that illusion, error,
fatigue, and immobility do not explain them all.

I will put aside visual, auditory, olfactory, tactile, gustatory
sensations; these are, moreover, very rarely observed. I will limit
myself to examining certain ill-defined sensations, which appear to
depend upon the general sensitiveness, and not upon the sensory organs
properly speaking. From the observations I have made, I am inclined to
discern five principal sensations:—

  (_a_) The sensation of cool breezes, generally over the hands.

  (_b_) The sensation of a slight tingling in the palm of the hand,
        and at the tips of the fingers, near the mounts.

  (_c_) The sensation of a sort of current through the body.

  (_d_) The sensation of a spider’s web in contact with the hands and
        face, and other parts of the body—notably the back and loins.

  (_e_) The sensation of fatigue after strong phenomena.

(_a_) The first is very frequently mentioned by experimenters. It is
an impression of coolness, or even of cold, which they generally feel
over the hands. I have not been able to settle with certitude, if this
sensation be purely subjective, or if an element of real objectivity be
blended with it. It is at times so marked, that I have some difficulty
in believing that it is altogether imaginary. Though it often precedes
the production of a motor phenomenon, it more frequently happens, that
the sitters feel it without any paranormal fact being forthcoming.

This peculiar sensation is similar to what is felt in seances with
Eusapia Paladino, when approaching one’s hand to the scar on her head.
What she calls the _soffio freddo_ is very decidedly felt: it is as
though a current of air were escaping through the scar. The reality of
this sensation with the Neapolitan medium makes me think, that the cool
breeze mentioned in other seances may have some objectivity. It is to
be noted, that I have observed this phenomenon with mediums, who had no
familiarity whatever with spiritistic seances.

Sometimes, the sensation of coolness or of cold extends to the whole
body. Mediums are more likely to feel this than other experimenters.
This sensation can bring on veritable shivering, in which case it often
coincides with a phenomenon.

(_b_) A tingling sensation may seem to be solely due to immobility, or
to other ordinary causes, such as prolonged contact of the fingers with
the table. I recognise that this explanation is true nine times out of
ten; but in certain cases it has appeared insufficient to me: either it
was felt too soon after the debut of the sitting to be due to fatigue,
immobility, or to prolonged contact, or its coincidence with certain
well-observed phenomena was too frequent to be fortuitous. Therefore
it appears to me probable, that there is some connection between this
tingling sensation and the emission of the force utilised.

What is the precise nature of this tingling sensation? I have carefully
questioned those who felt it—and nearly all experimenters feel it
sooner or later—and compared their impressions with mine. All the
descriptions tally: it is the sensation of a slight pricking, having
its seat in the palm of the hand and its maximum intensity on the
mounts at the finger-tips. Some persons compare it to the sensation one
feels, when lightly touching a mass of pin-points or a stiff brush:
others say it seems to them, as though their hands were pierced by
small holes, through which something was escaping. The latter sensation
is rarer than the former. This tingling sensation has no resemblance
whatever with the tingling of a benumbed limb.

The experimenters feel these impressions at the beginning of the
sitting; they do not always indicate a good seance, but I have noticed
that if phenomena are going to be received at all, these sensations are
generally perceived beforehand, although, as I say, they can also be
felt when phenomena are not forthcoming.

(_c_) The sensation of a current passing through the body is less easy
to describe. It is of a less precise nature than the preceding one.
The majority of persons I have questioned, compare it to the sensation
which is produced on them by the passage of an electric current. To
me this assimilation has generally appeared approximative. I have
sometimes felt this sensation, and can only compare it to a very slight
shiver, a kind of feeble vibration, running through the back and arms,
especially perceptible to me in my right arm. This sensation, as I feel
it, is not continuous; it takes the form of waves rapidly succeeding
each other. It is feeble, and, as a rule, I can only perceive it by
paying great attention to it; in a few rare cases I have felt it very
distinctly.

I think that in a great number of cases this sensation is purely
subjective, but—as with cool breezes—it does not always seem to be so.
It generally accompanies the production of phenomena relatively feeble
and continuous, such as raps and gliding movements. I have not always
felt it when strong phenomena were forthcoming; but then I was not
always in contact with the medium, and often, though I did not feel
anything, the medium mentioned having other curious sensations, which I
shall speak of presently. Besides, the chain must be formed in order to
perceive this sensation of a current with all the accompanying features
I have just described; but it is not necessary for the medium to be in
the circle. This sensation can also be felt by simply leaning the hands
on the table without joining them. This case bears an analogy to the
preceding one, if we suppose that the table, serving as a condenser for
the emitted energy, suffices in itself to establish a sort of indirect
contact with the experimenters. And things seem to happen as though
this were really the case.

If that be so, we can at once understand the relation, which appears
to exist between the mediate or immediate contact of the observers’
hands and the sensation of a ‘current.’ There is something here which
is very obscure and very delicate to analyse, but which, if the fact be
real, appears to me to indicate the circulation of some thing or other.
It is probable that what circulates is precisely the energy used for
the production of the abnormal facts I am relating. True, this is only
a hypothesis, and I again beg my readers’ pardon for having allowed
myself to be drawn into the field of conjecture. I hasten to return to
facts.

If the sensation of the ‘passage of the current’ be feeble, it is not
so with its abrupt interruption. When, for some cause or other—a slight
discussion between the operators, the medium’s emotion, a sudden
breaking of the chain—the sensation of the passage of the current is
interrupted, the interruption is easily felt. It may even cause a
sensation of sudden indisposition, if the interruption coincide with
the phenomenon in course of production. This is a curious fact, and
one easily observable. The sensation of the breaking of the current is
distinctly felt; and it is this which makes me think, that the feeble
impression of the passage of the current is not altogether imaginary.

The sensitiveness of different experimenters varies very much. Some are
most susceptible to these influences, others are not at all so, or only
very slightly. I remember having recently assisted at a seance with
one of my friends, a man well known in the fencing world. My friend,
although he is still young, had an attack of apoplexy some years ago.
He recovered, and has only retained a very slight hemiparesis of the
right side. Medically, he comes under the category of hemiplegics. He
appears to be extremely sensitive to the impression I call ‘the passage
of the current.’ He compares it to the sensation, which the passage of
an electric current produces upon him. He assured me that his right
arm was affected by it and benumbed. He told me that he experienced a
similar effect when passing near powerful dynamos; he could not, for
example, stay long in the gallery of machines at the French Exhibition
in 1900, because of the generators of electricity which were installed
therein. He had a disagreeable sensation in the right arm; the
uneasiness extended from the arm to the neck, and he was obliged to
leave the neighbourhood of these electrical machines. In the course
of the seance—a very uninteresting one, by the way—he declared that
he felt an identical sensation, and he was even compelled to leave
the circle. I relate this observation, for the person who made it is
an intelligent man, and quite capable of correctly analysing his own
sensations. It is needless to add that he was cool and self-possessed,
and observed everything free from bias, one way or another.

The medium’s sensations are generally much more accentuated than those
of the sitters. Sensitives say, they distinctly feel the passage and
the interruption of the current; I think it is a question of degree:
their sensations differ from the sensations of other experimenters only
in degree. There is, nevertheless, a category of sensations, which is
almost exclusively felt by the medium when a fairly strong movement is
forthcoming: this is the sensation of a sudden emission of force. One
of the most intelligent mediums I have come across describes it, as a
sensation of cramp in the epigastric region; it seems to him at times
as though he were on the verge of fainting. I have indicated a similar
sensation, which I myself once felt during a levitation obtained with
Eusapia Paladino. I felt the same thing on other occasions, but not
with the same intensity. I remember, for example, an experiment made
under the following conditions: We were holding a seance on a winter’s
evening; the light on this occasion, though feeble, was sufficient. We
had covered the table with a woollen cloth which fell over our knees,
and protected us slightly from the cold. Upon the seance table we had
placed a smaller one upside down. We touched the edge of the smaller
table. Having noticed that the small table appeared to be trying to
raise itself on one side, I endeavoured to increase the amplitude
of the movement by violently contracting the muscles of my arms and
legs. While I made this intense effort, we saw the little table slowly
lean forward, and turn itself over without coming into any contact
whatever with ourselves. When the phenomenon was accomplished, I felt
suddenly very tired. It is possible, that the cause of this fatigue was
simply the violent effort I had made to contract my muscles; still, I
point out this observation—which others of the same order appear to
confirm—because the correlation between the effort, and the sudden
sensation of fatigue is less regular than the connection between
that sensation and the phenomenon. Whatever may be the intensity of
the effort, the fatigue is felt with less abruptness and in a lesser
degree, when the phenomenon is not realised. I may add, that this
sensation only appears to me to accompany telekinetic and certain
luminous phenomena. It does not, as a rule, accompany raps or automatic
manifestations; the fatigue determined by these phenomena makes itself
felt progressively and more tardily. I will return to this however.

(_d_) The experimenters, and particularly the medium, sometimes speak
of a sensation, which they compare to that which is felt, by coming
into contact with a spider’s web. This appears to be rarer than the
above-mentioned sensations, and, so far, I have not noticed that it was
manifested with certain phenomena rather than with others.

This sensation of spider’s web is felt about the hands, the face, and
at times the back and loins.

I cannot give any other indication upon this curious sensation.

(_e_) I have already said a few words about the sudden sensation of
fatigue, which is felt when an important phenomenon occurs. I have
carefully examined the state of the assistants before and after the
seances, and I have invariably noticed that most of the experimenters
were tired after a successful seance. This fatigue appears to be in
fairly exact proportion to the results obtained. I speak of parakinetic
and telekinetic results; for it must be noted that the fatigue
determined by these abnormal movements is not identical—at least in the
case of the medium—with the fatigue which other phenomena appear to
occasion.

Movements without contact entail a lassitude, comparable to that
ensuing after a long walk or prolonged physical exercise.


III. The last observation leads me to the examination of my third
proposition. This is, that the force employed in the production of
para or telekinetic phenomena has, probably, a connection with the
organism of the experimenters. The analysis I have just made allows one
to surmise the very serious reasons, which lead me to formulate this
conclusion so precisely. The first of these reasons is the correlation,
existing between the movements and muscular contractions of the sitters
and the paranormal movements. I have pointed out that this connection
appears, in reality, to reside in the muscular contraction rather than
in the free movements of the limbs: this is a first ascertainment.
There is yet another, that provoked paranormal phenomena are,
apparently, approximatively proportional to the movement executed by
the experimenter and the effort he makes.

These two first points appear to me to be acquired, and the correlation
observed between the muscular effort and the paranormal movement,
indicates reciprocal dependence between these two phenomena. We may go
further, and try to discover whether the relation indicated resides in
the fact, itself, of muscular contraction, or in the physiological fact
which provokes it—that is to say, the nervous discharge. Observation
tends to show, that it is with the nervous influx that the relation
pointed out appears to be made manifest. In support of this opinion I
will indicate:—

  (_a_) The attraction and repulsion which the palm of the hand
        exercises to the almost total exclusion of the back of the
        hand;

  (_b_) The diverse sensations which I have analysed;

  (_c_) The influence of the mental condition and dispositions of the
        experimenters;

  (_d_) Finally, the characteristic fatigue which follows successful
        seances, fatigue similar to that which is felt after
        prolonged or violent exercise, that is to say, exercise
        necessitating a considerable expenditure of nervous force.
        In a book, in which I am striving to exclude all manner of
        theory, treating, moreover, of a subject where theoretical
        hypotheses are premature, I cannot enlarge any further
        upon these considerations. I must content myself with
        pointing them out to the attention of those, who may wish to
        experiment in their turn.

Telekinetic movements are more difficult to simulate than levitations
of the table with contact. By operating in daylight, as I have done,
and with non-professional mediums, there is every kind of guarantee.
Besides, it is very difficult for even a professional medium to
trick telekinetic phenomena in full light; he must be a terribly bad
observer, who lets himself be taken in under test conditions of light.
The slightest link between the medium and the object in movement is
easily perceptible, and it is very easy to make sure, that no such
link exists. I recommend experimenters to force themselves to direct
the phenomena towards movements without contact. I do not advise them
even to begin with levitations with contact, for it is a manifestation
which is easily simulated; and I advise persons who are not accustomed
to seances, and who are not familiar with fraudulent processes, to
seek for telekinetic phenomena only. They are longer in coming, and
more difficult to obtain; but their demonstration will make it well
worth while taking pains to realise them, and spending time to wait
for them. When we work in good light, when we can pass our hands in
every direction round the article of experimentation, when we operate
with articles not belonging to the medium, which have not been in his
possession or handled by him, the hypothesis of fraud is inadmissible.
I do not speak of the honourability and good faith of the medium: these
are important elements of appreciation. But my principle is not to let
these considerations have any weight, when judging of a paranormal
fact. For, if the observation is to have any serious value, every one
ought to be able to verify the conditions, under which that observation
is made.

To sum up, the observations, I have so often made with diverse
mediums, have thoroughly convinced me of the reality of movements
without contact. I believe I have verified a connection between them
and the organism of the experimenters. There is a _synergy_ between
their movements and their muscular contractions and the forthcoming
paranormal movements. I have already spoken of this coincidence in the
chapter on ‘Raps.’

There is this difference, however, to be borne in mind, I have noticed
that, within a certain radius, the intensity of the raps is independent
of the proximity of the medium. The raps heard at a distance of ten
feet appeared to me to be as loud as those which resounded near him
or under his hands. I think it is not quite the same with movements
without contact. I believe I have noticed, that distance exercises
a certain influence over the latter. I have not seen any movements
without contact at a greater distance than that of three feet from the
medium, save, perhaps, the movements of the curtains of the cabinet.
I have observed that the action appeared to reach its maximum at
irregular distances. For example, I have obtained glidings of the table
by slowly drawing the hand backwards: the movements occurred, when my
fingers were about ten or twelve inches away from the table, and not
when they were closer to it. Many circumstances may intervene to modify
the action of distance, _e.g._ the possible accumulation of force at
the end of a given time.

I have often observed, that the intentional direction of a movement
executed by an observer influenced the movement of the table. I have
not been able to ascertain whether the determination of the direction
of the paranormal movement was due to the direction of the movement of
the experimenter’s hand, or to the manifestation of his will. I have
been prevented from solving this problem by the fact, that when the
energy is sufficient, the movements will occur in the direction desired
by the assistants. The movements seem to be produced by an intelligent
being.

I have already pointed out this curious aspect of things, when
analysing the phenomenon of raps. Telekinetic movements present
themselves to observation in the same manner. They claim, as the
raps do, to be the manifestations of personifications. I related
an observation I was once able to make under some interesting
circumstances; out of seance hours, in broad daylight, in the course of
a conversation relative to a certain personification, the table near
which we were seated glided of its own accord across the floor, when
I pronounced the name taken by the personification. A conversation
ensued with the latter, by means of the movements of the table without
contact. I also related the typtological conversation without contact
which I had with the same personification.

These personages who call themselves the authors of telekinetic
phenomena present the same characteristics, as those who claim to be
responsible for the phenomenon of raps. I have nothing in particular to
say on this point at present.

The observation of the facts resumed in this chapter reveals another
circumstance which deserves pointing out. This is the apparent
conductibility of certain bodies for the force employed. I gave some
examples: table-linen, wood, dresses, etc. I related having often seen
women-mediums’ dresses bulge out and approach the table, when the
phenomenon was being produced; the sensitive’s feet remained visible,
and, in view of the conditions under which I have been able to test
this phenomenon, I consider as absurd the idea that an artificial hand
or foot was introduced, as imagined by Dr. Hodgson to explain away this
fact with Eusapia. I have frequently obtained movements without the
contact of the medium’s dress, but I have certainly noticed that this
contact facilitates the realisation of the movement.

Darkness favours it also; there is no doubt about this. Of course
I am putting aside the greater facilities obscurity offers for the
execution of fraudulent phenomena; and though, in this book, I have
only taken into account phenomena observed in full light, I have often
experimented in obscurity; and it appears to me certain, that total
darkness is one of the conditions for the maximum development of the
liberated energy.

The action of light is interesting to note. I have already stated
that the dynamic agency of psychical phenomena appeared to me to be
analogous with the nervous influx, and that the table seemed to play
the rôle of condenser. In that hypothesis, light would act like certain
rays of cathodic origin, which discharge the electricised condensers
placed in their vicinity. The study of the influence of light upon
telekinetic phenomena will certainly enable us to learn their cause.
The little we already know permits us to suspect that the telenergic
force ought to have some _rapport_ with light and electricity, at least
in that which concerns the amplitude of vibrations.

The study of this _rapport_ can only be taken up by an experienced
physicist. It will require delicate methods and special instruments,
and I earnestly hope it will soon be seriously undertaken.

As for those who confine themselves, as I do, to simply seeking whether
the facts be real or not, they should avoid working in obscurity. Light
may hamper the production of telekinetic movements, but it will not
prevent it. Experimenters should accustom themselves to holding their
seances in the daytime, or in a light which is sufficient to permit of
reading small print. Above all things, it is necessary to be personally
convinced of the reality of the facts; and this conviction is not so
easily acquired, when the experiment is made in obscurity.

It is difficult to imagine to what a pitch audacity of certain
tricksters will carry them. I once attended a series of experiments,
which interested me greatly from that point of view. The group included
three young men, one of whom is a most remarkable medium. The other
two, intelligent and well-educated young fellows, appeared to me to
have some medianic faculties, but I withhold my judgment, because they
tried so hard to cheat, that it would not be prudent to seriously
notice those facts, where fraud did not strike me as coming into play;
for it was always possible. These young men had nothing to gain by
cheating; in any case, I have not yet understood what aim they wished
to attain. The levitations of the table were splendid—in obscurity—and
all the furniture in the seance-room was more or less jostled about
and displaced. This was all very fine; it was all very well done; and
novices were easily taken in. The ‘spirits’ caressed or struck the
sitters, and I have seen sincere but inexperienced persons convinced
of the reality of facts, for which the legerdemain of one of the young
men present was alone responsible.

One of these youths, a medical student, presents symptoms of nervous
troubles, and will become a hysteric if he is not one already.
Notwithstanding my reproaches and exhortations, he could not stop
himself from cheating; and I have the impression that fraud is, in his
case, almost impulsive. I did not think I was authorised to examine
him from a medical point of view, but I observed him carefully. He has
manufactured spirit photographs very cleverly; they were wonderfully
well done, and only a professional eye would detect the trick. He
proceeded by double exposure.

With this group, as soon as the room was lighted up, the phenomena,
which were so violent in obscurity, ceased almost entirely. This
circumstance alone was suspicious; for the action of light is not
such as to constitute an insurmountable obstacle to the production of
telekinetic movements. Whenever phenomena are intense in obscurity, we
ought to be able to obtain weaker ones of the same kind in light. This
is a rule without an exception, as far as my experience goes.

Needless to add that the table, under the normal impetus which the
young men gave it, insisted upon total darkness. Now, in truly good
seances, on the contrary, I have always seen the table ask for light,
if purely motor phenomena were desired. Naturally, it is otherwise with
luminous phenomena, of which I am now going to speak.




