CHAPTER V

PSYCHO-SENSORY AND INTELLECTUAL PHENOMENA


Under this somewhat vague title I am bringing certain facts together,
which differ greatly from those I have been examining. In reality, the
facts so far related by me refer to material manifestations, and it was
merely as an accessory, that I pointed out the intelligent character
some of these manifestations presented. I will now describe the means
best adapted for obtaining not _physical_ but _intellectual_ phenomena,
properly so-called; that is to say, phenomena which are interesting
solely because of the ideas expressed, or because of the signification
of the images produced, and not at all because of the conditions under
which they are obtained.

I have studied this category of phenomena with less interest than
sonorous, motor or luminous phenomena, where observation is relatively
simple. Intellectual phenomena can only be studied indirectly, and
in order to verify them, we are generally obliged to trust to the
statement of a third person. I think these are bad conditions of
observation. This reserve made, I will divide these phenomena into two
wide categories:—

1. Sensory automatism.

2. Motor automatism.


I. SENSORY AUTOMATISM

I thus designate phenomena produced by the spontaneous activity of
our senses, and which do not appear to be due to exterior excitation.
They border on hallucination. They are observed in the different
sensory spheres. I will only examine olfactory, auditory, and visual
sensations; tactile impressions were studied in the last chapter. As
for gustatory sensations, they are very rare and without interest.

(_a_) _Olfactory sensations._—These consist of a special odour. I have
never observed any in the seances at which I have been present. In one
series, however, the medium associated the odour of Jasmine with the
manifestation of certain personifications. To me this sensation seemed
to be purely subjective; it was constant.

An odour of ozone is often perceived after luminous phenomena have been
obtained, a fact which ought to be borne in mind. It may be compared
with the odour of ozone, perceived in the vicinity of powerful static
machines, which give off electricity at _very high potentiality_. Here
is an analogy which is, perhaps, not altogether fortuitous; these
facts, however, are unintelligible.

(_b_) _Auditory sensations._—I do not speak of sonorous phenomena.
I now enter directly into the study of intellectual phenomena, that
is to say, phenomena having a signification more or less precise and
intelligible.

Auditory phenomena may be divided into two categories: provoked
automatisms, and spontaneous automatisms or _clairaudience_. The first
may be considered as hallucinations induced by diverse methods. The
simplest method consists in the use of certain shells, horns, trumpets,
or, in a word, any object capable of augmenting and allowing the
perception of those external or internal sounds, which are not usually
perceptible to the hearing. This is what is observed particularly with
some sea-shells. When we apply them to the ear, we hear a murmur or
a slight rumbling sound. This sensation is common to every one, and
children are accustomed to play at ‘listening to the sound of the sea
in the sea-shells.’

Some people do not hear this sound, or rather, when they listen,
it quickly disappears and makes way for words and phrases. I
know a subject with whom this faculty exists, but circumstances,
unfortunately, have prevented me from studying him carefully. I point
out, to the attention of observers, the interest which this automatism
presents; the rapidity of communication is very great; in this way
there is a greater output than with automatic writing, and it is
less tiring for the sensitive. The only precaution to observe is to
take down all he says in shorthand. We must accustom him to repeat,
instantly, everything he hears, because words heard in this way are
speedily forgotten—as in dream—but amnesia is not the sole point of
resemblance between this automatism and dream. It has much analogy with
visual automatism, but it has an interesting advantage over the latter.
Visual images are those which offer the highest degree of symbolism;
they are vague, wanting in precision, and require interpretation.
Auditory hallucinations, on the contrary, have greater precision.
Perhaps this is due to language, the usual manner in which auditory
images are revealed. On the other hand, they are not so rich, and
contain less detail than visual images do.

The meaning of auditory messages is seldom very clear; but there are
cases where it is wonderfully so. Such are the chief features of
provoked auditory phenomena. I have given too little attention to
this phase of manifestation, to be able to enter into a more complete
analysis of it.

_Clairaudience_ is more frequent; perhaps this is due to the negligence
of experimenters, who do not think of using the methods of induction I
have just described.

I have rarely observed the existence of isolated auditory
hallucinations; I have always observed them associated with visual
hallucinations; therefore I will study them after these last, when
examining mixed phenomena.

(_c_) _Visual sensations._—Observable, visual phenomena are very
numerous, and have already been the object of exhaustive studies. I
will again divide these into provoked and spontaneous phenomena. Of
course, I am speaking of hallucinations experienced by sensitives out
of seance hours. In this part of my analysis, I am replacing the word
_medium_ by the word _sensitive_, which seems to me to define more
correctly the distinguishing features, of those persons who have the
faculties I am going to describe. This word conveys the correct idea,
that the facts observed belong to the sphere of sensibility.

One of the oldest known methods of inducing visual hallucination is the
use of a crystal ball. I have no need to recall to mind the practices
of former fortune-tellers, nor the history of John Dee, nor the
numerous recitals handed down to us by ancient chroniclers, novelists,
etc. The crystal ball and the black mirror are the best methods; but
the ordinary mirror, a glass of water, a decanter, a shoemaker’s wooden
ball, the finger-nail, the watch-glass, any polished surface, in fact,
may serve to induce hallucination; but I only recommend the first
methods—they are certainly the best; a glass of water, a decanter, a
syphon of seltzer-water, the thumb-nail, polished surfaces, etc., may
serve to induce hallucination, but these last methods only succeed with
very highly sensitive subjects.

I have carefully studied crystal-gazing, and though I have remarked
individual differences in each sensitive, I think I may say that, as
far as working methods are concerned, I have come to the following
conclusions:—

The material of which the object is composed is not a matter of
indifference. Balls of rock-crystal have given me the best results. I
have seen people, incapable of receiving visions with ordinary glass,
obtain them in a tiny ball of natural crystal. Objects in rock-crystal
have the inconvenience of being very expensive.

Ordinary glass gives good results, but care should be taken that
the ball contains no air bubbles or other defects. They must be as
homogeneous as possible.

The ball may be spherical or egg-shaped. I think the elliptical form
is, perhaps, the best; reflections are more easily avoided with this
shape.

The size is a matter of indifference; personally, I prefer rather
large balls. I have, nevertheless, obtained just as good results with
balls of only one centimetre in diameter as with balls of six or seven
centimetres in diameter.

The crystal may be white, blue, violet, yellow, green; it may be
opalescent or transparent; but, I think, the best results are obtained
with white transparent balls; blue or amethyst coloured crystals are
also very good, and tire the eyes less than others.[8]

      [8] As crystal-gazing seems to me one of the most curious
      phenomena to study, I will take the liberty of mentioning
      that well-made crystal balls may be found at Leymarie, 42 Rue
      Saint-Jacques, Paris; at the Society for Psychical Research,
      20 Hanover Square, London, W.; or Mrs. Venman, Sugden Road,
      Lavender Hill, London, S.W. The price of the globes varies from
      6s. to 9s.; those of ovoids, from 8s. to 10s. The best thing to
      do would be to look for a ball in rock-crystal, the price of
      which would vary from 4s. to £8. They must be cut to order, for
      it is extremely difficult to find any ready made. M. Servan,
      jeweller at Bordeaux, furnishes good ones.

When looking into the ball, it should be sheltered from reflection, as
it should offer a uniform tint, without any brilliant points. To obtain
this result, it may be enveloped in a piece of dark foulard or velvet,
or held in the hollow of the hand, or even at the fingertips, provided
the conditions mentioned above have been observed. The object ought to
be placed within the range of normal vision; the gaze should not be
directed on to the surface of the crystal, but _in the crystal itself_.
The knack of gazing inside the crystal is speedily acquired.

Mirrors also give very good results. They can be made like ordinary
mirrors, or black like the famous mirrors of Bhatta, which are made
of a special composition. Sensitives say that the mirror should not
reflect anything: it should present a uniform tint, _e.g._ that of the
sky, blue or grey, but without the mixture of these colours as would be
the case with a cloudy sky; in a room the ceiling may be reflected, if
it be monochrome.

Under these conditions of operation I have sometimes observed results
so extraordinary, as to confound the imagination. They appeared to
me to tend towards demonstrating Kant’s idea of the relativity and
contingency of time and space. It is very difficult to admit, that
these two ordinates of our perceptions are exactly what they seem to
be, unless we push the theory of coincidence to the absurd. But this
would be shutting the door on all discussion, and on all intelligent
examination of a fact apparently abnormal.

My observations have been made with different persons, and a great many
have been pointed out to me. Sensitives, possessing the faculty of
seeing in the crystal, are not rare. The analysis of the facts I have
observed, or of which I hold first-hand reports, allows me to class
these ‘hallucinations’(?) under six categories of increasing interest:—

_A._ Imagination—images, ordinary hallucination.

_B._ Forgotten souvenirs, recalled to memory in the form of visions.

_C._ Passed events, of which the sensitive affirms to have always been
ignorant.

_D._ Present events, certainly unknown to the sensitive.

_E._ Future events.

_F._ Facts of doubtful interpretation.

This grouping shows the curious gradation observed in these visions.
First of all, disorderly and illogical activity as in dreams; then,
more orderly activity: knowledge of forgotten facts, knowledge of past
events unknown to the sensitive, knowledge of present events unknown to
the sensitive, apparent prescience. I will give some examples.

_A._ Imagination—images are by far the most frequent. This phenomenon
is analogous to ordinary visual hallucination, and seems to me to
present the characteristic features of dream. This is hardly the place
to discuss the state of consciousness during dream; for the form I am
giving my recital would not bear any long psychological analyses. I
will simply confine myself to resuming the conclusions of the detailed
analysis, which I made in a work dealing with this subject.

The consciousness which works habitually in us, that which is
manifested in our everyday life, is the _personal consciousness_.
It is around this that are grouped the souvenirs accessible to our
normal personality, to that part of ourselves which we call ‘I.’
This _personal consciousness_ asserts itself in the highest acts of
the psychic life, in the comparison of images one with another, in
abstraction, judgment, and the voluntary selection of acts, which
appear to us equally possible. This selection is the expression of
our voluntary activity, personally conscious; it is determined by
the comparison of acts between themselves, by the examination of
their probable advantageous or disadvantageous consequences, by the
appreciation of their morality or immorality, according to the social
laws of the day, etc. Personal consciousness is the foundation of all
our intelligent life; practically, it alone appears to exist, and its
disappearance seems to us to annihilate our own personality.

In reality, such is not the case. With certain invalids, complete or
partial modifications of the personal consciousness may be observed.
Sometimes the notion of personality disappears. There are patients
who suddenly forget everything, even to their own name. All their
antecedent life is effaced, and they appear to return to the state they
were in at birth. They have to learn again how to speak, to eat, and
to dress themselves. Sometimes the amnesia is not so complete. I have
been able to observe a patient, who had forgotten everything which had
any connection whatever with his own personality. He was absolutely
ignorant of all he had ever done, did not remember where he was born,
who his parents were, or what his name was. He was thirty years of age.

Organic memory and memories organised apart from the personality
subsisted. He could read, write, draw, and displayed a certain amount
of musical talent. Amnesia, with him, was limited to all facts
connected with his antecedent personality; it presented the type of
systematised losses of memory. This is what is called in medical
phraseology _amnésie de dépersonnalisation_.

In a lesser degree, amnesia only affects limited periods of life.
Epileptics and hysterics often present the phenomenon of _ecmnesia_,
a term chosen by the eminent professor of clinical medicine at the
university of Bordeaux, M. Pitres, who was the first to point out
this phenomenon with hysterical subjects. The patient forgets a part
of his life, believes he is ten, fifteen, thirty years younger than
he really is, and behaves as though he were at the age he thinks he
is. The souvenirs of his ulterior life cease to be accessible to his
conscious personality, which finds itself brought back exclusively to
the elements which constituted it, at the time the ecmnesia carries
him to. Every idea, foreign to that diminished personality, remains
unintelligible to him. In order to make him understand, we must speak
to him only of what he knew at the epoch to which he has been brought
back.

Besides these disappearances or _amoindrissements de la personnalité_
of the personal consciousness, which may be permanent or transitory, we
also observe _qualitative_ without _quantitative_ alterations of the
personal consciousness. These are changes or variations of personality,
which have been well studied in hysterical subjects, but which also
exist in other invalids, notably epileptics and victims of certain
poisons.[9]

      [9] Interested readers will find a complete analysis of
      these facts in Azam’s celebrated work, _Hypnotisme et double
      conscience_, Alcan; in Pitres’ book, _Leçons sur l’hystérie_,
      Alcan; and in Janet’s _L’automatisme psychologique_, Alcan. It
      is essential to know at least these three books, if we wish to
      observe, profitably, the delicate phenomena I am discussing in
      this chapter.

To sum up, the personal consciousness is susceptible of total or
partial disappearance, or of being replaced by another consciousness
which can be absolutely foreign to the normal personal consciousness,
or preserve more or less close relationship with it, _e.g._ the patient
who undergoes a change of personality may retain all the souvenirs of
the normal personality A and those of the new personality B. But in
an almost absolute manner the normal personality A is ignorant of all
which concerns B. This is the type of periodical amnesia.

The clinical study of diseases of personality permits observation
of the above facts. I ought to say that, in practice, they do not
present the simplicity of the _schéma_ which I have just given. Curious
problems arise from the nature itself of amnesia, its degree, its
mechanism, problems impossible to treat here.

But the facts I have summarily exposed already reveal an important
truth, which curable, transitory amnesia clearly demonstrates:
this is, that souvenirs can exist in a latent state in the general
consciousness, and be inaccessible to the personal consciousness. Let
us suppose that A forgets the ten previous years of his life—the result
of a fall or nervous crisis. This amnesia will perhaps last for six
months, during which period he will believe himself to have returned to
the age of fifteen, when he is really twenty-five. All the events of
his life between the ages of fifteen and twenty-five will have entirely
disappeared from his memory for six months; then they will, more or
less abruptly, reappear. Their temporary disappearance clearly shows
that these souvenirs have been preserved somewhere, and that they were
not really lost. We cannot affirm that they were accessible to the
general and impersonal consciousness in every case; but nevertheless we
can affirm it for hysteria, according to the observations of Pitres,
Janet, and others; and, according to Régis, for certain poisons. The
facts studied by these savants show, that souvenirs inaccessible to
the normal personality were known to the general consciousness. For
example, an amnesic patient can recover all his souvenirs when he is
put to sleep; this is what Régis has demonstrated even in certain cases
of amnesia from blood-poisoning. Janet, on his side, has established
that these souvenirs, forgotten by the personal consciousness, can be
evoked by certain automatisms (notably automatic writing), and are
therefore at the disposition of the impersonal consciousness, that is
to say, of that general consciousness of which personal consciousness
seems to be only a part.

This fact, which the study of nervous pathology has demonstrated,
is certainly general. The troubles of hysteria and other nervous
diseases only exaggerate a normal phenomenon. Our personality does not
burden itself with all the souvenirs, which our general consciousness
appears to possess: the greater part of the things we have seen,
learned, heard, etc., are forgotten; but this forgetfulness is probably
relative, and only extends to the personal consciousness. It is also
variable, and, according to circumstances, the souvenirs accumulated
in the general consciousness are at one time more accessible to the
personal consciousness, and less so at another time. If the personal
memory be over-excited, _exalté_, we have hypermnesia. The facts
which spring up in the personal consciousness have been so completely
forgotten by it that they sometimes appear to be new; souvenirs present
themselves to the consciousness without being identified by it, and
we commit errors on the localisation of the mnesic image in time and
space; this is what we call _paramnesia_.

The variations of the personal consciousness relative to memory,
whose rôle in the constitution of the personality of the _self_
is preponderant, are therefore translated clinically by amnesiæ,
hypermnesiæ, paramnesiæ; but the variations pointed out are not limited
to memory, they extend to other operations of the mind. I indicated
just now, that the personal consciousness was only a facet of that
more general consciousness existing in us, a consciousness where all
antecedent experiences are piled up, where all our sensations are
registered, be our personal consciousness aware or unaware of them.
This general consciousness is in itself impersonal, at least in
relation to our normal personality. This latter is only one of the
currents which circulate in that consciousness, its preponderance,
as Myers has indicated, is probably only a consequence of its greater
practical utility in daily life, and not an indication of its absolute
superiority; but there is one thing to point out, this is that we
are accustomed to connect with that personal consciousness all the
operations of our usual intelligence. Our reasonings, volitions,
judgments, whatever they may be, are grouped around our conscious
personality, or rather are founded upon its apparent activity. The
consequence is, that every time the sentiment of personality in the
consciousness varies, our reasonings, volitions, and judgments will
vary in the same proportion. Thoughts which come to us will cease to
be chosen by us, and will apparently come of their own accord; their
associations will escape all logic, their succession will be rapid and
incoherent for our personality, which will look on at their evolution
powerless to direct it. The weakening of the sentiment of personal
participation, in the acts of the psychical life, is then translated
by the diminution of our faculty to choose the images evoked in the
consciousness, by the diminution of our power of control over their
evolution, by the helplessness in which we are, not only to judge them
according to the rules of reason, but also to reject the most illogical
interpretations, which offer themselves to us or impose themselves
upon us. In a word, the weakening of the will, of the judgment, is
associated with that of the personal consciousness.

We also observe a corresponding attenuation in the faculty of
abstraction. Ideas are accompanied by their pictured or motor
representations. Sometimes they are only expressed by pictures, and
are presented in a symbolical form, or are dramatised; _e.g._ the idea
of the death of a relative will not be expressed with precision, as
is sometimes the case in verbal or written hallucinations, but by a
picture representing the relation in a coffin, or depicting his burial.

Such are the psychological expressions of the weakening of the personal
element in the consciousness.

We must not conclude, therefrom, that the impersonal consciousness
is incapable of intelligent operation. No such thing; and events
prove that the impersonal or subliminal consciousness is capable of
accomplishing, with great perfection, the most complicated intellectual
acts, without the personal consciousness being aware of it. In these
cases, when the result of the operation is transmitted to the personal
consciousness, this latter perceives it under the symbolical or
dramatical form I pointed out.

Observation shows, that all the features I have just described as being
met with in cases where participation of the personal consciousness
with our mental or physical activity is diminished, are to be found in
hallucination and in dreams.[10]

      [10] Readers, interested to know my ideas on this point, will
      find them more extensively developed in my book, _L’Amnésie et
      les troubles de la conscience dans l‘épilepsie_.

I beg to be excused for this digression; it was indispensable in
order to develop, in a comprehensive manner, the analogies which are
presented between dreams and hallucinations provoked by crystal-gazing,
and the transcendental character which these visions can present,
without being, however, supernatural. These considerations set forth, I
arrive at the recital of some facts I have observed.

The way in which imagination-images or hallucinations are induced,
with most of the sensitives I have examined, is nearly always the same.
I will describe it, pointing out at the same time that the formation of
the hallucinatory image is the same in nearly every case, be the visual
impression imaginary, or be it the expression of a true fact, past,
present, or future.

I have shown how to hold the crystal, and how to look at it. The
sensitive, having fixed his eyes on the crystal for a few seconds or
minutes—the time varies according to individuals—sees an opalescent,
milky tint come over the crystal. I know a sensitive,—an intelligent
and well-educated lady—who compares this impression, to that produced
on the eye by rising mists and fleeting clouds. For her, the milky
tint in the crystal is in movement. It breaks away like a cloud or
mist, to disclose the hallucinatory image completely formed. To another
sensitive, the cloud appears first of all immobile, and then becomes
condensed into grey forms, which gradually become coloured and mobile.
This sensitive enters so completely into the hallucination, that, as
a rule, he thinks he is transported to the landscape he is gazing at;
he has not only a hallucination of sight, but a hallucination of all
the senses. Most people see the image in the crystal, but believe they
see it life-size. The dimension of the crystal has no influence on the
apparent dimension of the image;—at least, this is what I have nearly
always remarked.

What I say of the mode of induction of the image in the crystal can
be applied to any other mode of induction—mirror, glass of water,
decanter, etc.

The cause of the vision is sometimes an association of ideas or
images, which is easy to trace. Here is an example: I was once in a
spiritistic group, and among those present were several sensitives
presenting subconscious or paraconscious automatisms, with the features
of ordinary somnambulism. I begged one young girl, of about fifteen
or sixteen years old, to look into a white crystal ball of four
centimetres in diameter. Almost without transition she saw goldfish
in the ball. Every one knows the spherical bowls in which goldfish
are put; as it happened, there was a bowl of this kind in the room.
The idea of a transparent bowl was naturally associated with that of
goldfish; this subconscious association provoked the visual image of
the fish. Facts of this kind are the simplest; their psychological
mechanism is easy to penetrate; the associations of images are almost
logical, and their dreamlike character is scarcely marked. In the
above case, the impossibility of placing the fish in a crystal ball is
not perceived by the consciousness, which suffers the succession of
images empirically associated; the globe of water containing the fish
resembled in its form and aspect the transparent glass ball; therefore,
the latter evoked the image of the former, and the fish which it
contained. This association is very intelligible.

Here is another example borrowed from experiments I made with a
remarkable sensitive—the one with whom the hallucination becomes
generalised. This person, looking in the crystal, perceived a
railway-station, and saw portmanteaux in the luggage-room. He then
plunged right into the dream, and imagined he was going to take away
his own portmanteau; he entered the luggage-room, took his trunk and
opened it. It contained a particularly horrible dead body, which
leaped out of the portmanteau, and bitterly complained of being
disturbed. It threw itself upon the sensitive, who immediately fled,
pursued by the dead body. After a desperate chase, the sensitive darted
into a road which crossed a park. This park, in reality, is situated at
more than six hundred miles from the railway-station, where he believed
he saw the portmanteaux: this distance had disappeared in the vision.
The dead body took a corresponding road; the two roads met on a hill,
where the persecutor made a dead set at the sensitive; the latter fell,
and the dead body stopped and bent down to strike him. The visionary
gave him a kick in the stomach, and stretched him full length on the
ground. The hallucination then ceased abruptly, and the sensitive found
himself back in his room, in front of the crystal. The vision was so
intense, that he was still upset with fright, and breathless from
running.

This hallucination is of a dreamlike character, and reminds one of
certain kinds of delirium. I have often questioned the sensitive
carefully, in order to try to reconstitute the psychological elements
of his hallucinations, and for this particular hallucination, as I have
related it, I will indicate the result of my inquiry:—

1. The sensitive has often seen dead bodies. He is not afraid of them;
he feels no repugnance even when touching them.

2. He has travelled a great deal, but has no souvenir of any
connection whatever between his portmanteau and dead bodies, except
the associations which stories of the nature of the Gouffé affair may
evoke.[11]

      [11] A lawyer who was murdered, and whose dead body, much
      hacked about, was found in a trunk in the luggage-room of a
      railway-station in France.

3. The chase occurred at a spot known to the sensitive, who had, as
it happened, gone, one day, to that very spot on a walking expedition
with one of his friends, under some conditions recalling those of the
hallucination, notably the choice of different roads; the two roads
corresponded and met as in the vision.

4. He did not fall, and has no conscious souvenir, which can explain
his struggle with the dead body.

This curious hallucination shows us an admixture of true images and
fantastic images, these latter, however, composed of real elements.
The duration of this hallucination, so full of events, was very short.
This is another feature observed in dreams. We see here the trace of
queer associations, some explicable, others not so. The idea of a
railway-station awakens that of portmanteaux; that of the dead body is
already abnormal, but comprehensible, the sensitive being sufficiently
acquainted with contemporary criminal literature to know of the Gouffé
affair. The leap of the dead body out of the valise, the flight of the
sensitive, and the pursuit of the dead body after him, are abnormal
associations. The first is difficult to explain; the flight and pursuit
are more easily explained. The first of these ideas naturally suggests
the second. The idea of pursuit awakens the idea of running; this, in
its turn, awakens the idea of the place where the sensitive has really
run a race; and, notwithstanding its illogism, that association is
accepted, though the railway-station, where the scene begins, be more
than six hundred miles from the park where the chase takes place.

All these associations bear the characteristic stamp of dreams.

_B._ Visions of past and forgotten facts present a different
appearance. The following is an example:—The sensitive, in the course
of conversation, was asked to sing one of Delmet’s songs. He could not
remember two lines of one of the verses, and was obliged to pass them
over. I had the curiosity to improvise an experiment, and I begged the
sensitive to look into a crystal. The forgotten lines were read by him
in the crystal. Facts of this nature—and they are very numerous in
technical literature—can be explained by the action of the impersonal
or subliminal consciousness. The souvenir forgotten by the personal
consciousness exists in the general consciousness, which has need
of scenic effects in order to transmit its message to the personal
consciousness; hence we have sensorial, automatic, visual activity,
and the reading of the forgotten words, which appear printed in the
crystal. I will not dwell upon facts of this kind; they are so well
known.

_C._ The third category of visions comprises the perception of past
events, which the medium affirms never to have known. It is evident
that these facts can, in the greater number of cases, come under the
preceding category, and be but forgotten souvenirs. But I have reason
to think it is not always so, and that a certain number of cases
exists, in which knowledge of the past appears to be acquired in a
supernormal manner. This is only an impression, which I draw from the
reality of certain premonitory facts observed by me.

As an example of the facts I am describing at present, I will cite the
following:—

A sensitive one day looked into the crystal; he suddenly saw the words
‘Salon de 1885,’ and a series of pictures, announced by their titles,
passed before his eyes. The pictures, thus seen by him, had really been
exhibited in the salon of 1885. In 1885 the sensitive was too young, to
have had any personal knowledge of the salon of that year; but nothing
is easier than to read descriptions of past salons, or to procure
reproductions of the pictures exhibited there. The sensitive, whose
good faith is above suspicion, affirms having no conscious souvenir
of a like reading. He believes he has never seen or read anything
concerning the salon of 1885, but he confines himself to affirming the
non-existence of a conscious souvenir. It is, nevertheless, possible,
as he acknowledges, that he may have glanced over a former catalogue or
criticism without remembering it.

Facts of this kind are never convincing, for it is very difficult to
know exactly, if the sensitive has ever had knowledge of the fact,
which emerges in the vision. I cite the above case, as an example only,
without pronouncing an opinion on its signification.

_D._ I have had no occasion of observing induced hallucinations
representing a scene actually happening; at least, I have never been
able to verify any in a satisfactory manner.

_E._ The cases of premonition I have obtained are, on the contrary,
relatively numerous. I have, personally, observed some of them,
and have obtained first-hand accounts of others. Here are my most
interesting cases:—

I had given a crystal to Monsieur X., a friend of mine, who is much
interested in psychical researches. Madame X. has the faculty of seeing
in the crystal, but I have never had the opportunity of interrogating
her upon her visions. The fact, which her husband related to me,
concerns a woman who is cashier in a large restaurant at Bordeaux.
Monsieur X., who sometimes lunches at this restaurant, one day showed
the crystal to the cashier; the latter looked into it and saw therein
a small dog. She did not recognise the dog, and the vision appeared to
have no interest.

Shortly afterwards, Monsieur X. was again lunching in the same
restaurant. The cashier called him up to her, and told him she was much
astonished, because she had just received the present of a small dog,
exactly like the one she had seen in the crystal.

Another lady sometimes sees visions in a mirror; these visions are
formed on the glass of a wardrobe, which is placed facing a window,
thus partly satisfying the conditions indicated further back. The
recital, which was given me of these visions by her friends, was
confirmed by the lady herself.

She saw a man seated on the footpath of a certain street, the man was
wounded, in a particular manner, on the forehead; a piece of skin was
torn away and lay over the eye. Among other details about his costume
was a sack, which the man had rolled round his neck; on the sack the
letters V. L. were printed. The lady, in her vision, saw herself speak
to the wounded man, take him to the hospital and have his wound dressed.

She went out on the morning of the next day, met the wounded man at the
spot she had seen him the day before, and her vision came true to the
letter, even to the detail of the sack around the neck, and the letters
which were printed upon it.

Another time this lady perceived, always under the same conditions,
that is in the glass of the wardrobe, one of her friends, who is
married to a government officer abroad, where he is consul of a
sister-power. This lady, in the vision, appeared to be walking up the
street Tourny at Bordeaux, just where it opens out into the square
Gambetta. The details of the costume were noted by the observer:—a
light cloak, and a blouse made of Scotch plaid with gold trimming about
the neck. Two or three days afterwards, the percipient happened to be
in a tram. As the tram arrived at the junction of the street Tourny and
the square Gambetta, she perceived her friend, exactly as the vision
had represented her.

Here is another and last example, still more significative than the
preceding, for the vision was related to me eight days before the event
took place, and I myself had related it to several persons before its
realisation. A sensitive perceived in a crystal the following scene:—A
large steamer, flying a flag of three horizontal bands, black, white,
and red, and bearing the name _Leutschland_, navigating in mid-ocean;
the boat was surrounded by smoke; a great number of sailors, passengers
and men in uniform rushed to the upper-deck, and the sensitive saw the
vessel founder.

Eight days afterwards, the newspapers announced the accident to the
_Deutschland_, whose boiler had burst, obliging the boat to stand to.
This vision is very curious, and as the details were given me before
the accident, I will analyse it with care.

In the first place, one thing strikes us:—The premonition was not
exactly fulfilled. The _Deutschland_ met with an accident, it is true;
from the nature of that accident, it must have been surrounded with
vapour; the crew and passengers would probably have rushed to the
upper-deck; but happily, this magnificent vessel did not founder. On
the other hand, the sensitive read L instead of D; but this detail is
of no importance, the foreign word being probably badly deciphered.
Lastly, one thing worthy of noting is the complete absence of personal
interest in this vision, for the sensitive has no connection whatever
with Germany, and was ignorant, at least consciously, of the existence
of this boat, though he might certainly have seen illustrations of it.
Evidently, we must not attach too much importance to this premonition,
but the same sensitive has given me many other curious examples of
the same kind; and these cases, compared with others I myself have
observed, or with those of which I have received first-hand accounts,
render the hypothesis of coincidence very improbable, but do not
exclude it in an absolute manner. Such as they are, I think these facts
are sufficiently interesting, for systematic observation of the visual
phenomena I point out to be undertaken by competent persons, with true
sensitives, and _not with hysterical subjects_, who seldom, if ever,
give good observations.

The facts of premonition which I have observed or controlled, and
of which I have just given a few examples, cannot, I think, be
reasonably regarded as coincidences. I have already said that this
hypothesis, without being inadmissible, is insufficient. Think of the
immense proportion of probabilities, which accumulate in favour of
the reality of a fact, as soon as the details themselves accumulate.
The visions relative to the foreign friend, and to the wounded man,
are instructive from this point of view, given the great number of
circumstances seen beforehand:—exact locality, exact details of the
wound, the costume, etc. It is a pity these facts were not observed
under good conditions. That of the _Deutschland_ is much less
demonstrative, because of the inaccuracy in the foreseen issue.

If we compare these facts with those which have been already registered
by the Society for Psychical Research, we will come to a conclusion,
which confirms the simple impression that my own observations have
given birth to in my mind. What is the cause of these premonitions?
What signification have they with respect to the reality of time? Why
do these visions come to people, who often have no interest whatever
in knowing of them? These are all so many questions I am putting,
without being able to indicate their solution. We must observe, with
the greatest care, the facts which are presented, accumulate them in as
great a number as possible, and, before considering their causes, be,
first of all, doubly sure of their reality.

I have indicated, further back, the analogy of the greater part of
these visions with dreams. I will point out finally another resemblance
which is, perhaps, not the least interesting. This is, that these
visions are often quickly forgotten. We must make the sensitives we
observe write down their visions immediately; for, in the greater
number of cases, a rapid amnesia mixes up the details and causes them
to disappear. These visions, therefore, react upon the memory in the
manner of dreams.

_F._ Certain visions are of a doubtful character. Here are some
examples:—Several times a sensitive sees, in the crystal, a long
procession of personages clothed in white enter a sort of crypt,
which looks like the entrance to a tunnel. The vision presents no
incoherence, but appears to have no signification, either as a souvenir
evoked unconsciously or as a subconscious symbolical image admitting of
interpretation.

And now, I am going to relate a vision, which, doubtless, will
particularly interest occultists. I was operating with a sensitive,
who was ignorant, I think, of their theories and those of spiritists;
who had no notion whatever about larvæ, and the forms given to such in
the literature of occult sciences. Now the sensitive, of whom I speak,
twice saw the vision of a tree standing out detached from the others
in a forest. The earth appeared white, the tree itself was white, and
appeared to be covered with white pears hanging from its branches.
In his vision the sensitive drew near, and perceived that the pears
were in reality white beasts of hideous appearance; they were like
heads without bodies, terminating in long tails. These beings were
suspended to the branches by their tails. This vision seems to me to
be purely imaginary, but I have related it because the curious forms
described concord, I believe, with the aspect given to larvæ by occult
writers. I cannot positively affirm the sensitive’s absolute ignorance
of mystic literature, but I have serious reasons to admit it. Must we
simply see herein a morphological association between the different
forms of larvæ, of tears embroidered on funereal garb and pears! This
explanation would be possible, if the sensitive knew the signification
of the word larvæ, and the form lent to these fabulous beings.

I must now cut short the recital of these observations, and confine
myself to resuming the conclusion to which I have come:—This is, that
sensorial automatisms and especially visual hallucinations have the
same characteristic features we note in dreams, the same weakening
of the power of control of the will and judgment over the selection
of images, over their coherence, their likelihood, and the same
rapid amnesia. These are characteristic features, which we observe
in every case, where the sentiment of personality is impaired. This
is just as noticeable in purely imaginary hallucinations, as in
hallucinations which appear to have a real foundation. This fact seems
to me of great importance, for it permits us to think, that one of the
conditions of the transcendental perception of facts past, present
or even future is the disappearance of the voluntary and personal
activity of the consciousness. Less fit to act actively, it would be
more inclined to be passively impressed by influences, which are at
present indeterminable; the transmission to the normal consciousness
of the impressions perceived by the impersonal consciousness appears
to take place in the same way as in a dream, that is to say by
dramatisation,—by a scene which expresses the idea in a concrete and
symbolical manner.

There is therefore a _rapprochement_ between these sensory automatisms
and dreams and telepathy. Several premonitory dreams have been related
to me by people of absolute good faith; I will give two, which were
told me by magistrates. The first concerns a man holding a high rank
in the magistracy. He had sold, at an advantageous price, the wood on
a property he possessed in the neighbouring country, but the bargain
was not definitely settled, and was to be concluded in an interview
arranged for between the owner and the purchaser. On the eve of the
day when the magistrate should have gone to the country, his wife
dreamt that she was present at the woodman’s visit. In her dream, the
latter offered a price, which was inferior to the price originally
agreed upon, and covered his treachery with all sorts of periphrases,
trying to prove that the bargain remained excellent for the owner.
Finally he turned towards Madame X., who was present at the interview,
and said to her, ‘This is fair speaking, is it not, Madame?’ Madame X.
related the dream to her husband, telling him also that she thought the
bargain would not come off. Her dream was fulfilled literally, and the
phrase heard in her dream was uttered by the woodman. I received this
account from the magistrate himself, an eminent man and one of the most
brilliant intellects I have known.

The second dream is, perhaps, still more curious; it was told me by one
of my colleagues, a calm, positive man with not the slightest tendency
whatever to mysticism, employing his leisure hours in hunting rather
than with metaphysics. He is, moreover, an experienced magistrate,
and occupies a distinguished position at a court in the centre of
France. At the time he had the dream I am going to relate, he was
_juge d’instruction_ in a small town, where there are some important
factories. He was closely connected with a large manufacturer, and was
accustomed to go and see him nearly every day. He knew the staff of the
factory, and notably an overseer, a native of Flanders; this man, after
many years of faithful service, wished to return to his birthplace and
left his employer, remaining, however, on the best of terms with him.

Some months afterwards my colleague dreamt, he had taken his usual
promenade and paid his visit to his friend. In his dream, he saw the
overseer and manifested his surprise at seeing him; the overseer
replied, ‘Yes, sir, it is I. I could not find any work in my own
country, and i’ faith, I came back here.’ My colleague attached no
importance to this dream; on the morrow he went, as usual, to see his
friend, and in the factory found the overseer whom he had seen in his
dream. He exchanged the same conversation he had held with him in his
dream.

Facts of this kind are very numerous. Perhaps they are only simple
coincidences, but, as with sensory automatisms already described, I
cannot help thinking, that coincidence does not explain everything. The
concording details are often so numerous, that the probabilities in an
extremely large proportion are against pure hazard. Richet, however,
has carefully studied the Calculus of Probabilities, and I will not go
into the question. I simply give my impression, persuaded as I am that
those who study these facts impartially will come to the conclusion,
that hazard does not explain everything.

The two dreams which I have taken as examples offer us cases of
telepathy, that is to say, the impression perceived in a way which the
ordinary senses do not explain. Telepathy has been carefully studied
by Myers, Gurney, Podmore, Sidgwick, Ermacora, and discussion on this
question can only be pursued, if the work of these savants has been
studied. Telepathy appears to me to be established in a definitive
manner, but I have no personal example to cite. However, a very great
number of cases have been related to me, by persons who have received
telepathic impressions. I know of many people who have had veridical
hallucinations, either during sleep or when awake. The following are
some examples borrowed from my circle of friends or relations:—

One of my great-uncles had married a coloured woman at Martinique.
This lady, though highly respectable, was the victim of tenacious
prejudice on the part of the white creole families on the island, and
my uncle’s marriage aroused the displeasure of his family. He left
Saint-Pierre, and came to Bordeaux. His wife’s mind suddenly gave way;
she had dangerous attacks of fury, but the union between my great-uncle
and his wife was so close, and their reciprocal affection so profound,
that my relation would not consent to a separation and have her cared
for in an asylum. He fell a victim to his devotion; his wife killed
him in an attack of high fever. One of my great-aunts, the dead man’s
sister, living at Paris, was awakened in the middle of the night by
her brother’s voice calling her. This hallucination coincided with the
death of my great-uncle.

An intimate friend of my mother’s, a creole living at Bordeaux, had
been present at the embarkation of a family belonging to Martinique,
that was returning to Saint-Pierre. Some time afterwards she had a
dream in which she saw a steamer founder; the stern of the vessel rose
above the waves, and she was able to read the name of the boat; it was
the one on which her friends had embarked. The vessel was lost and not
a life saved.

Here is another interesting fact, in which (1) a sentiment of anxiety,
the cause unknown to the conscious personality, corresponds with the
serious illness of a near relation; (2) the telepathic, premonitory
hallucination of a telephonic call preceded the real call by two hours.
This fact was communicated to me by one of my friends.

‘Here is the exact account of the fact I mentioned to you.

‘On the evening of the 17th October 1901 I went to bed feeling greatly
disturbed; I could not define the cause of my mental anguish, for I was
in perfect health. This trouble persisted, and my sleep was haunted by
painful nightmare.

‘At half-past four I suddenly awoke, having distinctly heard the
sound of my telephone bell. I ran to the apparatus, and answered the
ring. The night operator replied that he had not rung me up, and that
nothing unusual was happening. I had therefore been labouring under a
hallucination, provoked by a particular haunting impression.

‘At seven o’clock in the morning, the telephone again sounded, and I
was put into communication with my brother-in-law residing at Biarritz.
He told me that my sister, Madame V., had, in the night, been struck
with congestion of the brain, and was in a critical state.’

All these facts may be considered as coincidences; their attentive
study, their thorough analysis, and their careful, thoughtful
comparison can alone make us suspect, that hazard has nothing whatever
to do with their production.

I may compare these cases of telepathy to facts of exteriorisation of
sensibility, and of vision at a distance. I have given very little
study to these facts, for they do not enter into the habitual plan of
my researches; I have sometimes observed them, but under conditions
which do not satisfy me. My observations, however incomplete they
may be, tend, nevertheless, to make me think, that the phenomenon
described by de Rochas, under the name of _extériorisation de la
sensibilité_, is real. I have met with two sensitives, who presented
the phenomenon in a fairly clear manner in a waking state. I was led
to make the following experiment with one of these sensitives. As soon
as she entered the seance-room and had taken off her cloak, I took
hold of the garment and pinched the lining. The sensitive mentioned
feeling a certain sensation, rather feeble however, in the part of her
body which had been covered by the garment in the place I had pinched
it. The first time I tried this experiment, the sensitive had not been
warned, and was surprised at the sensation she felt. Needless to say, I
took precautions to make sure, this lady did not see what I was doing.
I have observed, that this particular sensibility disappears very
rapidly; at the end of forty or fifty seconds it has ceased to exist.

I have asked a lady friend of this sensitive’s to try the same
experiment with her more private garments, especially with the corsets.
Sensibility should then be greater.

I think that the observation of this fact, which I point out with much
reserve, not having submitted it to serious study, is easier than
is supposed, by employing the method I indicate, that is to say, by
pinching or pricking garments which the sensitive has just thrown off.

I have had occasion also of verifying this phenomenon, under the
technical conditions indicated by Colonel de Rochas. Very few
sensitives present it in a marked manner, and it has seemed to me
necessary to push the artificial sleep rather deeply. This expression
may seem somewhat antiquated, to those who have frequented our learned
neurological cliniques; but I cannot help thinking, that a real
difference exists between the different phases of somnambulism, if they
be observed. I speak of a difference of degree. It seems to me that,
once the subject is put to sleep, the repeated action of the passes
determines a particular state, pointed out by ancient magnetisers
and exposed in detail by de Rochas, in which the subject appears to
lose the notion of his personality, and be in close dependence upon
his ‘magnetiser.’ I have experimented very little in this order of
research, and I can permit myself only to give indications; I am
unable to affirm a personal conviction. The few experiments I have
made, however, tend to make me think that de Rochas is quite right in
speaking of superficial and profound states. I am not convinced that
the passage from the one to the other takes place with the regularity
that my eminent friend has observed, but the fact pointed out by him
is, I think, true in a general way. I am going to support my opinion
with an example.

I have already spoken of Madame Agullana. Those who have only been
present at her ordinary seances can have no idea of the curious
faculties, she sometimes presents. An experienced manipulator can
obtain with her—on condition of operating quietly and in the presence
of very few people—phenomena which are very interesting, in the sphere
of what is called animal magnetism. I was at her home one evening with
Monsieur B. We were expecting a tutor, a medium of whom I had heard
marvellous things. This tutor did not turn up; but, while waiting for
him, I put Madame Agullana to sleep; I wished to show Monsieur B.,
who had no experience of this kind, the effects of profound sleep.
I prolonged my passes, made longitudinally from the forehead to the
epigastrium, for more than twenty-five minutes. From time to time,
every seven or eight minutes, I asked Madame Agullana what was her
name. She told me her name. At last the moment came when she could
not remember her name, and appeared to have lost consciousness of her
personality. I made a few more passes, and remarked to Monsieur B.
that, when Madame A. appeared to have cutaneous anæsthesia, she seemed
to perceive pricks at a distance of two or three centimetres from the
skin. The passes were continued for about another quarter of an hour;
at that moment Madame A. appeared to present two peculiarities:—

1. Her sensitiveness appeared to be localised behind her, at about
three feet from, and twenty-one inches above the level of her head. She
winced, when—care being taken that she did not see—the air was pinched
at the spot indicated.

2. Only the persons _en rapport_ with her—in the sense given to this
word by de Rochas—could make an impression upon her; contacts and
pinching by other people were not perceived by her. I did not observe
these two peculiarities under conditions sufficiently precise to
warrant me affirming, that my observation was good; but I indicate
them, for to me they appeared probable.

Then, phenomena were forthcoming. Madame Agullana said she was in the
street, outside of the house. I asked her to go and see what one of
my friends, Monsieur Béchade, was doing—a man whom she knew well. It
was twenty minutes past ten o’clock. To our great surprise, she told
us that she saw ‘Monsieur Béchade half-undressed, walking bare-footed
on stones.’ This did not seem to us to have any sense. I saw my friend
the next day, and, although he is well acquainted with spiritistic
phenomena, he seemed to be astonished at my recital, and said to me,
word for word: ‘I was not feeling very well yesterday evening; one of
my friends who lives with me advised me to try Kneipp’s method, and
urged me so strongly, that, in order to satisfy him, I tried last night
for the first time to walk barefooted on cold stone. I was, in reality,
half-undressed when I made the first attempt; it was then twenty
minutes past ten o’clock; I walked about for some time on the first
steps of the staircase, which is built of stone.’

Perhaps this also is a coincidence, but this fact, which was witnessed
by several people, presents very strange coincidences all the same.
The hour, the costume, the unusual operation, are circumstances of too
special a nature for mere hazard to suffice to explain them, it seems
to me. I cite this case because it came under my personal observation,
and because it shows a variety of telepathic phenomena; it is what the
ancient magnetisers called lucidity, clairvoyance or, more exactly,
vision at a distance. It appears to me to be a development of the facts
pointed out by de Rochas; it looks as though the entire sensibility was
exteriorised to variable distances. This is telæsthesia, a phenomenon
in the sensitivo-sensorial domain, analogous to motor telekinesis.

Experimenters, who might be desirous of verifying these facts, should
not forget, (1) it is necessary to have a sensitive who has often been
_magnetised_—I do not say _hypnotised_; (2) sleep must be pushed
very deeply—passes must be continued for more than half an hour after
somnambulism sets in. The time is reduced with sensitives who are well
developed.

It would be easy to multiply examples of this kind, particularly
those of well-observed telepathic cases. The publications of the
London Society for Psychical Research, Flammarion’s book, _L’Inconnu
et les problèmes psychiques_, the _Annales des Sciences psychiques_,
contain a great number of them. This symbolism will always be met
with,—this dramatic element, which I have indicated as the ordinary way
by which the general consciousness transmits its information to the
personal consciousness. The assimilation which I make between sensory
automatisms and dreams, crystal vision and telepathy, appears to me
to find support in these facts. These phenomena are of the same order
and, in all probability, have their seat in the same strata of the
consciousness.

I will not try to fathom the cause; once again I must repeat what I
have so often said already,—the question is still so little known, that
we are not able to enter profitably upon the study of the apparent
cause of the psychical facts examined in this present chapter. We must
multiply observations and verify the undeniable existence of the facts,
before attempting to interpret them.

I give here, both as an example of careful observation and as an
illustration of the chief features of the phenomena of which I have
just been speaking, the following account which Professor Charles
Richet has kindly sent me.


A COMPLEX CASE OF PSYCHICAL PHENOMENA.

BY PROFESSOR CHARLES RICHET.


  _April, 1903._

‘DEAR DR. MAXWELL,—The following is a brief account of the strange,
bewildering facts, of which I promised you the narration.

‘I. In the beginning of October 1900 I was at Carqueiranne, when I
received a letter from Madame X. Madame X. had left Paris on the 1st of
October for Fontainebleau, with the intention of spending a month near
the forest. In her letter to me she related, that on the arrival of the
train at the station of Melun, she had a notion that some one entered
her carriage and sat down opposite to her. This “vision” spoke to her,
saying he had known me very well, that he used to call me “Carlos,” and
that I called him “Tony”; he told her, that he knew Fontainebleau very
well and would accompany her in her walks in the forest.

‘After that letter I received others from Madame X., giving me
numerous details concerning this vision which called itself “Tony,” a
vision which was repeated several times during Madame X.’s visit at
Fontainebleau. These details were particularly remarkable and abundant
between the 20th and the 28th October. I will briefly enumerate them,
after which I will enter upon a discussion and appreciation of the
chief details.

‘“Tony” showed me a tree to-day on which were engraved the letters
A. B. and a date 1880, or 1883—the last figure was indistinct;
underneath the letters A. B. was the name “Lucie.” ... “Tony” seems to
have had to do with machinery of some kind. He had hoped to construct
a machine, which would have been of great use to mankind. He seems to
say it was he who discovered the telephone,—or, at least, that he was
on the right track.... I hear him say, “I know Madeleine well.” He says
he adored his father. He speaks about Léon, Sarah, and Marguerite, but
especially about Lucie. His wife’s name was Lucie.... There were Jews
in his family; he also talks about Louise.... He worked with telegraphy
and electric wires.... He knew you remarkably well; he called you
“Carlos,” and you called him “Tony”; of this I am sure, for he speaks
of it so often. He says he collaborated with you in some work. He says
that when he was dead, you went into his death-chamber and kissed
him on the forehead.... He had not been previously ill,—a feeling of
suffocation in the chest and that was all. [_Quelque chose l’a étouffé
à la poitrine, et ce fut tout._] He was only 30 or 32 years old when he
died.... I do not think he was married, that is to say, in the legal
sense of the word; but he was very much attached to Lucie, by whom
he had a daughter, who was about three years old when he died. This
child seems to be still alive, but very few people know about it. He
adored Lucie, who seems to have been very charming, for Antoine shows
me her portrait,—a medallion or locket which he used to wear—in which
she seems to have beautiful dark eyes and hair. He lived for about
four or five years with Lucie; but Lucie had previously been married
to a Jew [_un gros juif_], whom she did not care for. I think Antoine
lived a long time with Lucie at Fontainebleau; they were sadly happy
there [_tristement heureux_]. The house they stayed at is no longer
inhabited. It was a red and white cottage, quite close to the forest,
which was just behind it.... The house stood alone; a tramway passes
by there to-day.... “Tony” also speaks about his father. His father
loved his own fireside; he once lost a lot of money when Antoine was
grown up; but Antoine did not take much notice of this, for he did
not trouble himself about money matters. The house in which “Tony”
and his father lived together, is one which they seem to have always
inhabited. “Tony” seems to have always known this house. The furniture
is old; the rooms look as though they had been occupied for a very long
time. He speaks of the Faubourg Montmartre; does that mean he used to
live there?... Antoine also had to do with engines of war. I think he
was wounded during the war [the Commune], because I hear the noise of
cannon—and your father dressed his wound....

‘Antoine was a free-mason. He admired Claude Bernard. His political
opinions were of a socialistic tendency. He did not care for the
society of women. He was temperate, and did not drink wine; he was no
epicure.... He has been to Geneva.... He has hunted with you.... He
used to like reading _Titus Livy_.... He cared naught for the world’s
opinion, taking his conscience for his sole guide.... He often saw
Philippe. He also mentions Yvonne, Josephine, Georges, James, Clotilde,
and André.... He speaks about a pseudonym; he has written some things
under a _nom-de-plume_.... Antoine had beautiful dark eyes, large and
most expressive, full of resolution, but, at the same time, soft,
dreamy-looking eyes. He had a frank, hearty laugh, and this merry
sound was often heard [_Il riait souvent de ce bon rire_]. He had a
habit of putting his hands behind his head, and stretching himself
out on a sofa, laughing merrily.... He has very long, thin fingers,
which seem to be clever at mechanical work; indeed he seems to have
been clever at everything, and to do all things well.... A short time
before he died—a Wednesday,—you and he were at a banquet together, and
drank each other’s health. “Tony” then told you, that he had not been
feeling well, and that he was in great need of a holiday.... Antoine
told me again to-day, that he loved Lucie dearly; “and,” he said, “I
still watch over her, even now; tell her no evil will ever befall her.”
[_Rien de mauvais ne lui arrivera._]

‘II. The preceding are the most important of the data concerning my
friend Antoine B., given me in Madame X.’s letters during the month
of October 1900. I repeat Madame X. was at Fontainebleau, and I at
Carqueiranne. Therefore, I could not have given her any hints by my
words, and I am particularly anxious to point out a fact, of which I am
absolutely certain, which is, that I had never pronounced the name of
my friend Antoine B. in the presence of Madame X.; I am positive that
no word of mine could have afforded the smallest clue to Madame X. of
my acquaintance with Antoine B.

‘I may also add that, though to-day four years after these visions
occurred, Madame X. has become one of my friends, at that moment,
October 1900, our acquaintanceship dated from a few months only; and,
at Madame X.’s own request, in order to avoid hints and suggestions,
I abstained from ever speaking with her on anything save vague,
general topics. Madame X., at this time, lived a secluded, retired
life in a convent, seldom going out and receiving no visitors. She
was, moreover, almost an entire stranger to Paris, having arrived
there only a short time before I made her acquaintance. If Madame X.
spoke of any one of my deceased friends to-day, it would be impossible
for me to affirm positively that I had never pronounced that name in
her presence; but, thanks to the great care I took at that moment to
avoid all manner of confidences whatsoever, continually seconded in my
efforts by Madame X. herself, I can certify that the name of Antoine B.
had not been pronounced up to the month of October 1900.

‘Therefore my stupefaction was indeed great, when I discovered in
Madame X.’s letters so many precise and correct data, though mixed up
with occasional errors. And when I speak of precise and correct data, I
do not mean data, traces of which may have been left in printed matter.
I speak of private, unpublished facts, facts known only to me or to his
wife. Notwithstanding this, however, I was blind to the truth. And I
sought to explain away these phenomena of lucidity, by an apparently
rational explanation.

‘Here is the fable I invented, for I think it may be useful to acquaint
the reader with my hesitations, and the manner in which I tried to
explain these facts. First of all, I supposed that Fontainebleau
was a mistake, since, as far as I knew, Antoine B. did not go to
Fontainebleau in 1883. At the same time, I thought I remembered he had
been a pupil at the School of Artillery at Fontainebleau in 1874. But,
I asked myself, why should Madame X. speak about Antoine B., whose name
I was and am certain never to have pronounced in her presence? I found,
or rather I thought I had found, the explanation. In the month of
September 1900, Antoine B.’s daughter Madeleine, the wife of Jacques
S., died, and one or two newspapers mentioned this sad and premature
death. Now, I supposed that Madame X. had unconsciously glanced
over one of these newspapers, that Antoine B.’s name had appeared
therein with his biography more or less fully traced, our relations
mentioned [he had been director with me of the _Revue Scientifique_,]
and reference made to his term at the School of Application at
Fontainebleau. That was my fable.

‘It is true there were several other facts awaiting explanation; but
I did not let them hinder me,—so dazed are we by the fear of meeting
with the truth just where it really is, when we find ourselves in the
presence of facts, with which force of habit has not yet rendered us
familiar.

‘I will not dwell upon the absurdity of this manner of thinking; I will
simply repeat, that my first thought was that this vision of Antoine
was simply the souvenir of some sub-conscious reading, with here and
there a few gleams of lucidity, already very important in themselves,
but not exceeding in precision or in importance other proofs of
lucidity, of which Madame X. had already given me numerous and decisive
examples.

‘Well! I was altogether wrong! It was a conversation which I had with
Antoine B.’s widow, [she was now Madame L., having married a second
time] which showed me my mistake.

‘During the summer vacation in 1901, she was staying at my house at
Carqueiranne, and one day I happened to speak about Madame X.’s visions
concerning Antoine. As soon as I began, Madame B. became agitated;
the recital wrought upon her feelings considerably. When I had
finished, she furnished me with the two following fundamental facts,
facts which entirely destroyed the point of view I had first of all
adopted: 1. “Antoine was never a pupil at the School of Application at
Fontainebleau”; 2. “In 1883 he and I were at Fontainebleau together.”

‘Consequently the scaffolding I had erected in order to explain Madame
X.’s visions entirely collapsed. The connection between Antoine and
Fontainebleau—connection discovered by Madame X.—could not have been
provoked by the souvenir of the reading of any newspaper, and the
hypothesis—a very improbable one moreover—of a sub-conscious souvenir,
of the unconscious reading of a hypothetical newspaper, had therefore
no _raison d’être_. So that the knowledge of a connection between
Antoine and Fontainebleau could not have been due to any printed
matter—since, naturally, no newspaper had mentioned this private
detail in Antoine’s life—or to any suggestion I might have given
inadvertently—since I was ignorant of the fact.

‘Three other hypotheses remain:—that of chance, and this is so absurd,
that it is useless even to mention it; that of collusion between Madame
X. and Madame B., a hypothesis which is as absurd as the preceding
one, even if it were possible, for neither of these two ladies had
or have ever seen one another; lastly, there is the hypothesis of an
extraordinary lucidity, on the nature of which I will not dwell, in
order to avoid theorising, but which I must, perforce, be content with
simply pointing out.

‘There is not the slightest trace left of Antoine B.’s visit to
Fontainebleau in 1883. At Barbizon, where he stayed with his wife from
the 15th May to 20th June 1883, he lived in a rustic inn, which has
been demolished to make way for a tram-line. No writing, no letter,
no souvenir of any kind whatever could have furnished a clue to this
private detail in Antoine B.’s life.

‘III. I will now confront the reality, such as it was in June 1883,
with what Madame X. wrote me in October 1900.

‘1. In order to go to Fontainebleau, or rather to Barbizon, M. and Mme.
B. left the train at _Melun_. It is impossible to say, whether the
initials of A. B. and the name of Lucie are engraved on a tree in the
forest.

‘2. “There is much resemblance between Antoine, as he was, and the
physical portrait drawn of him by Madame X., especially the soft,
caressing expression of the eyes. In politics he held advanced opinions
for his time, and, had he lived, he would, in all probability, have
been a socialist to-day; at least his opinions would have been very
favourable to socialistic doctrines. The sentence, _Nous étions
tristement heureux_, is characteristically true; for at Barbizon, in
spite of our long walks and our reveries in the forest, he was already
very weak and in the grip of the illness which, soon afterwards,
carried him off so rapidly.” [The above was written and handed to me by
Madame B. in October 1901.]

‘3. Lucie is not Madame B.’s name. Her name is Marie. But Antoine
often said to her, “What a pity you are not called Lucie!” It was his
favourite name.

‘4. It is quite true that, alone among all my friends, Antoine called
me “Carlos,” and that I, on my side, called him “Tony.” This is a fact
known only to me. It is also perfectly correct—and I am not aware of
having related this fact to any person whomsoever—that, when Antoine
died, stricken to death in a few hours by a disease of the heart, I
went into his death-chamber and kissed him on the brow.

‘5. All the details relative to the construction of machines, electric
wires, invention of the telephone, [before Gr. Bell’s invention had
been made known], collaboration with me in a scientific work, all these
details are correct.

‘6. The house in which he stayed at Fontainebleau stood by itself, with
its back to the forest; a tramway passes there to-day, the house having
been pulled down to make room for it.

‘7. His daughter (who died in September 1900, at about the time when
Madame X. says she first heard a voice call me “Carlos”) was called
Madeleine. His sister’s name was Louise. Louise married M. H. of Jewish
origin. [_There are Jews in his family._]

‘8. He was thirty-two years old when he died, and his death was almost
instantaneous. It would be impossible to describe his death more
correctly than Madame X. does in the words: _Quelque chose l’a étouffé
à la poitrine, et ce fut tout._ In fact, towards eleven o’clock in the
night he was seized by a thoracic oppression, which made such rapid
progress, that he expired at four o’clock in the early morning.

‘9. He was not wounded during the Commune; but once when, as a reserve
artillery officer, he was assisting at gun-firing at Grenoble he lost
the hearing of the left ear, an affliction which saddened him very
much. Probably I knew this, but, if so, I had completely forgotten it.
It was Madame B., who related this detail to me in October 1901, a
detail absolutely unknown to every one, for Antoine never spoke of it.

‘10. When Antoine was already grown up, shortly before his marriage,
his father, Louis, suffered heavy losses of money through a defaulting
cashier. Antoine did not take this to heart; moreover, no one ever knew
of the incident, which was carefully kept from the knowledge of every
one outside of the family.

‘11. He wrote under a pseudonym. He wrote a few insignificant plays in
1876 or 1877; but it would be almost impossible to recover traces of
them to-day.

‘12. The house where he was born, and where he lived up to the time
of his marriage, is very old (situated on the Quai de H., and not in
the Faubourg Montmartre); the furniture is ancient; the house is quite
unlike a modern one.

‘13. The description of Lucie, his wife, is exact—“a very charming
woman with beautiful dark hair and eyes.” Antoine had a portrait of her
in a locket, which he used to wear on his person.

‘14. In a conversation I had with him a short time before his death, he
spoke to me about the extreme fatigue which he felt, a kind of general
lassitude, and of his great need of change and rest.

‘In all the above facts there is an admirable and most unlikely
concordance between the reality and the indications given by Madame X.

‘To be quite complete, I ought to mention the facts which I have not
been able to verify, and those which seem inexact to me.

‘Among the facts I have been unable to verify, are the names of Yvonne,
Josephine, Sarah, Marguerite, Georges, Clotilde.

‘The chief inexact details are the story of Lucie’s true husband—a
Jew (_un gros juif_)—and of the child Lucie and Antoine had, of whose
existence hardly any one knew; also the detail of having been wounded
during the Commune and his wound having been dressed by my father.
I ought also to add that Antoine and Marie B. were at Fontainebleau
with their three children. However, for reasons which I will develop
further on, these errors have a great interest and merit an attentive
examination.

‘When considering these phenomena we must, first of all, rid ourselves
of commonplace prejudices. The question is, not whether such or such a
phenomenon does or does not concord with recognised ideas, but whether
the phenomenon exists or does not exist—always supposing, of course,
that it be not in flagrant contradiction with established and verified
truths.

‘Therefore every effort of demonstration must be concentrated on this
one point: Can we explain the above facts by any known process? For
the sake of simplicity let us only take one of the facts, that of the
presence—“or of the _thought_”—of Antoine B. at the Melun railway
station. We have seen that I fell into error by endeavouring to explain
this presence—or this _thought_—by a term at the School of Artillery
at Fontainebleau; and I do not see what other explanation can be
attempted, since not the slightest trace is left of Antoine’s visit to
Fontainebleau with his wife twenty years ago.

‘Even if an expensive detective inquiry had been set on foot, it is
highly doubtful if anything concerning Monsieur and Madame B.’s visit
to Fontainebleau could have been found out.

‘Therefore, at the very outset, and without taking into account any
of the other exact details in Madame X.’s visions, we encounter
the material impossibility of establishing any relations between
Fontainebleau and Antoine.

‘But, just for one moment, let us make the concession that the names
of Monsieur and Madame B. had been somewhere met with at Barbizon
after an interval of twenty years; this would immediately entail the
knowledge of many other details ever so much easier to gather than were
those very details given by Madame X., and not only easier but also
more exact. Had this visit become known to Madame X. by any normal
means, there would not have been the story of an illegal union, and of
a residence of five years at Fontainebleau.[12] So even the mistakes
are a confirmation of the truth, one of the most interesting of
confirmations; for, honestly, we cannot suppose that, knowing the real
facts, Madame X. would have taken it into her head to add facts, which
she knew to be incorrect.

      [12] Let us, however, point out that Antoine had been
      five years married when he died, and that he had been
      at Fontainebleau with his wife, consequently the error,
      which consists in saying five years of life together at
      Fontainebleau, constitutes only a relative error.

‘To put it in another way, even if we admit this absurdity of an
extremely cleverly conducted detective inquiry making known to Madame
X. the story of Antoine’s life, she would not have distorted the
results of such an inquiry by introducing errors therein. To take an
example, when Antoine was at Fontainebleau with his wife and three
children, she would have mentioned the other two children. She would
also have said—and this was extremely easy to find out—that the B.
establishment was situated on the Quai de H., and not in the Faubourg
Montmartre.

‘Therefore, every point carefully considered, I think it is absolutely
certain that normal means of knowledge could not establish any
connection between Antoine and Fontainebleau.

‘In the second place, unpublished details were furnished. I will pass
over all the details—though they too be correct—which might be found
in biographical or necrological articles; I will simply draw attention
to the following five extremely private details:—

  ‘1. The name of Lucie; and a locket containing her portrait which
        Antoine always wore on his person.

  ‘2. The names of “Carlos” and “Tony.”

  ‘3. A pseudonym.

  ‘4. Money lost by his father.

  ‘5. The circumstances of his death.

‘Now, not one of these details could have been found out by any
inquiry, however clever, however well-planned and well carried out such
an inquiry might have been.

‘1. Madame B. was the _only_ living person who knew of Antoine’s
preference for the name of Lucie. She had never spoken of this to any
one; and it is a minute detail of which I was in complete ignorance,
until Madame B. told me of it in 1901, after hearing about the visions
Madame X. had related to me in her letters, a year before.

‘2. I was the _only_ person living who knew that Antoine called me
“Carlos”; and this is not a very commonplace statement, since no one,
save Antoine, has ever called me “Carlos.”

‘3. No one ever suspected Antoine of having written under a _nom de
plume_; the few insignificant things he wrote for the stage are so
entirely forgotten, that Madame B. herself remembered nothing about
them in 1901; and it is even highly probable that what he wrote could
not be found again, the Bobino theatre, where he presented his plays,
having disappeared years ago.

‘4. The monetary losses which his father, Louis B., sustained a short
while before Antoine’s marriage, had been carefully kept from the
knowledge of every one. These losses were occasioned by a dishonest
cashier. The man was not prosecuted. Notwithstanding the importance of
the sum involved, Antoine was relatively indifferent to the loss, as
was distinctly indicated by Madame X.

‘5. The circumstances of his death are described with striking reality.
I kissed Antoine on the forehead when he was dead. Some little time
before the end, he spoke to me about his health, saying he felt in
great need of rest. He did not look ill, however, and he died, after a
few hours’ illness only, from a cardiac affection: _quelque chose l’a
étouffé à la poitrine_.

‘There is still another item of interest, which I wish to touch upon:
this is, the “message” from Antoine to his wife: _rien de mauvais ne
lui arrivera_. These words were written by Madame X. in one of her
letters to me, with the indication that Antoine had pronounced them
on a certain day. Now, on that very day, Madame B. was delivered of a
still-born child. She was, therefore, in a perilous condition at the
very time Antoine said: “I watch over her, even now; tell her, no evil
will ever befall her.”

‘We have, now, to draw our conclusion. The hypothesis of chance is
absurd; the hypothesis of fraud is absurd; there remains but a third
hypothesis, that of a phenomenon inexplicable by any of the existing
data of our knowledge. It is for this inexplicable phenomenon, that we
are going to try and find an explanation.

‘Two explanations at once present themselves: α, either this
knowledge is entirely due to the intellectual faculties of Madame X.;
or β, some other intelligence intervenes, which manifests itself to
Madame X.

‘α. This hypothesis is rather complicated, for it is not in the
form of abstract knowledge that Madame X. learnt of all these real
facts concerning Antoine, but in the form of Antoine himself. So that,
if it really be only a question of abstract notions, these abstract
notions have taken a concrete form in order to manifest themselves.
They would thus have constituted a sort of error in themselves. It
has been supposed that Antoine himself came into the railway carriage
at Melun, that he accompanied Madame X. in her walks in the forest at
Fontainebleau during the whole month of October 1900, that he related
the story of his life to her; and there is something which shocks us
in the thought that, though the story told to Madame X. be true, there
was no Antoine. At the same time, this objection is not paramount; for
we know so little of the ways in which supernormal knowledge flows into
the mind, that we are unable to make any negation concerning them.

‘Moreover, it is, relatively, more rational, not to suppose the
intervention of another force, since, _à la rigueur_, a human
intelligence, under extraordinary conditions of clairvoyance, may
suffice to explain everything.

‘β. If other personalities intervene, they may be either β´,
the personality of Antoine B. himself, or, β´´, other forces
non-identical with human personalities.

‘β´. Assuredly, the hypothesis that it is the consciousness of
Antoine B. himself who came to Madame X. is the simplest, and at a
first glance, it satisfies us. But then! what a number of objections
such a hypothesis raises! How is it possible for the consciousness
to survive after death? How can intelligences which suffer birth
escape death? A beginning implies an end: Birth implies death, the one
involves the other!

‘β´´. Other forces such as genii, demons, angels, etc., may exist,
as strict logic commands us to admit. There is a certain impertinence
in supposing that, in the Infinite Immensity of Worlds and Forces, man
is the only force capable of thinking. It seems to me necessary to
admit, that there exist intelligent forces in nature, other than man;
forces, which are constituted differently to him, and are consequently
imperceptible to his normal senses; these forces may be called angels,
genii, demons, spirits, no matter the name we give them. It is evident,
however, that this hypothesis of intelligent forces ought not to be
confounded with the hypothesis of human personalities surviving after
death. These are two absolutely distinct hypotheses. Now, I think that
it is not the hypothesis of intelligent forces which is doubtful; what
is extremely doubtful is that these forces can enter into communication
with man. Moreover, as in the case under notice, why should they take
the material appearance of a deceased human being, and declare their
identity with such?

‘We see that all the explanations so far put forth are imperfect, and,
for my part, I find them so imperfect, that I am inclined to believe in
some other hypothesis which I do not know, which I cannot even guess,
but which, nevertheless, I am convinced exists, since here we have real
facts, which not any of the hypotheses heretofore presented can explain
in a satisfactory manner. It is to this hypothesis _X_ that I attach
myself, for the present, recognising, while doing so, that there is a
certain amount of irony in proposing a hypothesis, of which I am unable
to give the formula.

‘In conclusion, we see that this case of Antoine B. involves the whole
problem of spiritism. It appeared to interest you, my friend, and I
have, therefore, related it to you, because the simple and complete
narration of facts ought to precede theories.’


  _November 1903._

‘MY DEAR MAXWELL,—The series of phenomena concerning Antoine B. do not
cease with the recital I recently sent you. That recital comports an
epilogue not less extraordinary than itself. I say an “epilogue,” for
most assuredly it has some connection—of a psychological order—with
the preceding recital. I will set it forth as concisely as possible:

‘One evening in May 1903 I was dining with Madame X. and her family.
After dinner we tried for phenomena, but received nothing. Towards the
close of the evening, shortly before I left, Madame X. pronounced the
following words—words which I wrote down among my notes as soon as
I reached home—“I see a woman standing near me; she has grey hair,
she is about fifty years of age, but looks older than she really is.
Her hair is quite grey. I believe it is Madame B.” (Antoine’s widow),
“though I am not quite sure yet. I see the figure 7 with her, which
probably means that she will die in seven months, or on the 7th of some
near month.” Such is the copy of the very brief note I took of Madame
X.’s words. I ought to add that this note is a much abridged account of
Madame X.’s actual words, and that she also said:—“Madame B. is very
ill; she has some sort of chest complaint—perhaps tuberculosis—and she
will die very soon indeed.”

‘What renders this premonition extremely interesting is that Madame
B., at that moment, was only very slightly ill. She was so slightly
indisposed, that not for a moment did the thought ever cross my mind,
that her indisposition might turn into anything serious. Neither I
nor any one in the world suspected any danger whatsoever. But fifteen
days after this prognostication had been made, the apparently slight
bronchial affection from which Madame B. was suffering, and of which I
had, naturally, never said a word to Madame X., remained stationary,
but still the idea that the result might prove fatal never entered into
any one’s head.

‘Nevertheless, the result did prove fatal. Madame B. died, within
seven weeks after Madame X.’s prediction, on Tuesday, 30th June 1903,
after a very sudden and irresistible aggravation of her previously
slight indisposition, which carried her off in four or five days. The
illness turned out to be a sort of pulmonary affection, the nature of
which is still unknown to the doctors who attended her: (tuberculosis?
infectious _grippe_?).

‘An interesting detail: Madame B. had black hair; I, who knew her well,
had never noticed any grey in her hair; I did not know she was grey.
Now a few days before her illness took a serious turn, one of the
members of my family who had just been paying Madame B. a visit, said
to me: “Madame B. does not dye her hair any longer, so that one can now
see how very grey she is!”

‘Here is a veritable premonition. The authenticity of this remarkable
fact cannot be doubted, for it would have been impossible for me, or
for any one else, by means of telepathy, or in any other way, to convey
to Madame X. the idea of a death, in which I did not believe, and which
did not, even for a moment, cross my mind, or any one else’s mind.

‘Such, dear Dr. Maxwell, is the epilogue of the recital I sent you.
Although we cannot state precisely the link uniting the diverse
psychical phenomena exposed in my two letters, I do not think we
can consider them as independent of each other. There are certain
mysterious relations here, which the future, aided by our patience,
will certainly elucidate.—Yours sincerely,

  ‘CHARLES RICHET.’


  _January 1905._

‘DEAR FRIEND,—During the revision of the above pages, whilst I was
showing them to Madame X., the latter told me that “the family B. were
not yet done with” [_tout n’est pas fini encore pour la famille B.!_];
her words conveyed to me the impression of a presentiment of some
misfortune about to fall upon that family. These words were uttered
between 3 and 4 o’clock on the 23rd December 1904.

‘Now, during the night of the 23rd-24th December, towards 11 o’clock,
Louis B. (the son of Antoine B.) narrowly escaped being killed in
a serious railway accident. That he was saved was little short of
a miracle. When, on the morning of the 24th December, I saw by the
newspapers that Louis had escaped, I was struck by the thought that
Madame X.’s prediction [_tout n’est pas fini encore pour la famille
B._] had been on the point of becoming realised.

‘Alas! the presentiment was but too true; for Oliver L., the son of
Madame B.’s second husband, was in the same train as Louis B., and,
though the morning papers did not mention the fact, he was killed
instantaneously.

       *       *       *       *       *

‘I have another interesting point to mention in connection with this
presentiment. On the 8th July 1903 Madame X. wrote to me saying,
that Madame B.’s death (she had just died) would be soon followed by
another. She added: ‘Some one tells me that one of the sons will soon
die,—before the end of two years. I think it is Jacques B., but they do
not say so.’ [_Quelqu’un me dit qu’un des fils mourra bientôt, avant
deux ans. Je pense que c’est Jacques B., mais on ne le dit pas._]

‘Thus this premonition—somewhat vague it is true—pronounced eighteen
months before, was realised. It will be remarked that Madame X., by
adding her own impression to her auditory perception, committed an
error; whilst the perception itself, though not very explicit, was
correct.—Yours very sincerely,

  ‘CHARLES RICHET.’


II. MOTOR AUTOMATISM

The observations which I have just laid before my readers, relate to
facts occurring in the domain of sensibility; the motor centres do not
escape automatism, and there is a whole series of motor automatisms,
simple or mixed, to be noticed. For the sake of clearness, I will
divide them into four classes:—

1. Simple muscular automatism:—Typtology; Planchette; and diverse
alphabetic systems, ouija, etc.

2. Graphic muscular automatism:—Automatic script and drawing;
Planchettes, baskets, tables.

3. Phonetic automatism:—Automatic discourses.

4. Mixed automatisms:—Incarnations.

I will remark, first of all, that the word automatism, borrowed from
Myer’s terminology, is not strictly correct. In reality, we can only
speak of automatism when we are in presence of mechanical acts,
excluding intervention of the will. Now this is not the case with the
acts in question; these acts, which appear to be automatic if they are
looked at solely from the point of view of the personal consciousness,
are in reality due to some sort of consciousness, parasitic or
non-parasitic, and offer the characteristic features of voluntary acts.
These reserves made, I will continue, for want of better, to use the
word consecrated by custom.

1. Simple muscular automatism.—I designate thus those acts which
require no association of complicated movements, such as the movements
of writing and language exact. The simplest way of provoking this
automatism is in the ordinary spiritistic process of typtology.

The experimenters sit down round a table, and lay their hands lightly
on it. Sooner or later the table trembles, sways about from side to
side, sometimes turns round, but more often raises one of its feet and
strikes the ground with it. A code of signals is arranged to express
‘yes,’ ‘no,’ ‘doubtful’—_e.g._ three, two, and four:—the manner in
which the alphabet is to be pointed out is also agreed upon, either the
table will strike the number of the letter’s rank, for example, one for
A, three for C, 15 for O, 20 for T, etc., or it will strike the floor
when the letter desired is pronounced.

I rank this phenomenon with automatisms because, nearly always,
it has appeared to me to be due to involuntary, or unconscious
movements. I do not like this kind of experiment; it does not carry
conviction. Gasparian, and after him, Chevreul have given the correct
interpretation of it.

It is interesting only when the communications obtained reveal facts,
apparently unknown to the experimenters. Then the phenomenon is no
longer explicable by simple automatic action: the muscular movement
is determined by the impersonal consciousness of the sitters or the
medium, and becomes the manner of transmitting the message addressed by
the impersonal consciousness to the personal consciousness. In fact,
we conceive that, if what I said concerning parakinesis be correct,
the movements of the table may be sometimes parakinetic. I have been
present at many seances for typtology, but I have never verified
interesting facts, except the one I related concerning _Touton la
Pipe_. When the experiments are conducted under the conditions which
I consider indispensable, I am careful not to encourage typtological
manifestations.

There exists other means of inducing simple muscular automatism. The
best are instruments after the style of the psychograph. The alphabet,
numbers, and the words ‘yes,’ ‘no,’ ‘I do not know,’ are written on a
dial in the centre of which a needle is placed. The displacements of
this index hand indicate the letters, numbers, etc., like the needle
of the dial of a Bréguet telegraph. These dials are made of different
sizes, and of different materials. It is best, however, to construct
them in the following manner:—take a square piece of white wood,
non-resinous, from seventeen to twenty inches broad. Trace thereon a
circumference of seven to nine inches in diameter, and write around it
the letters of the alphabet, numbers, the words, ‘yes,’ ‘no,’ ‘I do
not know,’ and any other desired indications. Place in the centre of
the circle a bone or ivory pivot, the axis round which the needle will
turn. Make the needle of wood, giving it enough thickness and solidity
for the hands to be able to rest on it. It is not necessary to give
much mobility to the needle if the hands are to rest on it; in this
case, it will suffice to pierce a hole in it, through which the pivot
may pass.[13]

      [13] Articles of this nature may be found at Leymarie’s, 42 Rue
      Saint-Jacques, Paris; and at the office of _Light_, 110 St.
      Martin’s Lane, London.

I have been told of cases where the needle moved of its own accord; but
I have not personally verified this fact. If movements of the needle
without contact be desired, it would be well to give a more perfect
suspension to the needle: this may be accomplished by supporting it on
small movable rollers, like those on the planchettes used for automatic
writing.

I have rarely experimented with psychographs, for the same reasons
which made me shun typtology.

I will say the same thing of another kind of apparatus: the ouija, made
in England. It is a board on which the alphabet and other signs are
written. A small movable planchette supported on three or four feet
is placed on the board; the sitters put their hands on the planchette
which points out the letters, etc., with one of its feet, a process
which is irksome, to say the least of it.

There are yet other means for inducing muscular automatism. I will
point out, as an example, the very ancient method of divination by the
ring. A metal, or better still an ivory ring, is suspended to a hair or
silken thread. The end of the hair or thread is held in the fingers;
the ring is held, thus suspended, in the centre of a small circle of
three or four inches in diameter on which the alphabet is written.

At the end of a certain time, the ring sways about, then strikes the
letters, sometimes spelling out words. By placing the ring in a glass,
it will strike against it, giving indications in this way. I have only
used this method once or twice, for it seemed to me to present very
little interest. This is in reality Chevreul’s exploring pendulum.

2. Automatic script.—Automatic writing is, I think, one of the most
interesting of all phenomena; I have no need to bring to mind the
important studies which Myers, Hodgson, Hyslop, Sidgwick, and others
have made on this phenomena. I have been able to make some observations
of great interest, but the limits of this book do not permit me to
give a detailed report of them. The thorough examination I made of one
particular case of automatic writing—a rather rudimentary case, it is
true—clearly revealed to me the play of the unconscious souvenirs of
the medium.

The methods for obtaining automatic writing are numerous. We can even
make a table write by fixing a pencil to one of its feet; the same
with a hat or basket, etc. More perfect methods exist, of which the
following are the best:—

First of all the planchette; an instrument in the shape of an oval
piece of wood, resting on three movable tiny ivory rollers, with a
small copper setting at one end, in which a lead-pencil may be screwed.
With the planchette two or three persons may write at the same time.

Another equally good method is the following: Fix two, three or four
handles on to a large wooden ball, of about seven inches in diameter.
Fix the pencil in a hole bored through the ball, each handle of which
is held by an experimenter. Place a sheet of paper underneath the
pencil, the latter will then often move and write words and phrases.

Finally, the best method of all is to write naturally, without any
instrument at all. The sensitive sits down with a pencil, as though to
write, and waits.

Whatever the method adopted may be, it is seldom that automatic writing
is manifested at the outset. Generally one or several seances are
passed in illegible scribblings, in making strokes, zigzags, in endless
repetitions of the same letter. But we must not be discouraged; on the
contrary, we must continue experimenting for a certain time, before
concluding to the impossibility of success. Whether we be trying to
obtain collective or ordinary automatic writing, it is a good plan
to consecrate ten or fifteen minutes every day, always at the same
hour, to these trials. The phenomenon takes a long time to evolve, and
people, who have obtained most curious results with automatic writing,
have passed months in developing their faculty.

As I said before, I have chiefly directed my experiments towards the
observation of movements without contact; therefore, I have not sought
very assiduously to obtain automatic writing with my mediums. The
greater number of cases I have observed offer little interest, if we
compare them to the curious visual hallucinations which I related a
little while ago. I will make an exception though for one which I am
in the act of studying, and which makes me conceive some hopes, the
sensitive having written in English, a language which I am positive
he does not know. This medium, like many I have met with, submits
grudgingly to these experiments, and has not yet consented to sit
regularly for automatic writing. I hope I may succeed in persuading him
to do so.

Though my observations present very little relative interest, I will
give some examples of the results I have obtained personally. I will
give them simply as indications, for, none of the facts I have observed
present, so far, any real interest, except the one I was able to
analyse, and even this contains nothing of a transcendental nature.

I myself have often tried to write with the planchette. I obtained
words and incoherent phrases, all extremely commonplace. I wrote
alone or with others; alone, I obtained it with the left as well as
with the right hand. The left hand sometimes gives mirror-writing,
_Spiegelschrift_; with the planchette, the left hand generally writes
in the usual manner from left to right. One point to be noted with
planchette-writing, is the dissociation of the graphic elements. The
letters are as a rule fairly large, varying from an eighth of an
inch to nearly an inch. It is chiefly in capital letters we find the
dissociation curious. The characteristics of my hand-writing are not
altered. I will add that this manifestation does not present much
interest, for I am perfectly conscious of what I write when alone,
and when I write with another person, the movements of the planchette
indicate to me what letters are being formed.

With the ball and handles, of which I gave a description, I once
observed a curious fact. I was experimenting with a lady and her
husband; the former is a medium whose faculties are above the average.
The writing announced the reception of a letter from Hendaye on the
morrow. The letter came; but to demonstrate the premonitory feature
of this fact, I have only the affirmation of my co-experimenters, and
although they are people of unimpeachable probity, their affirmation
alone would be insufficient to establish the reality of the premonition
in a positive manner. Therefore, I only give it as a specimen of the
facts which may be obtained with automatic writing.

I have often observed ordinary writing, but I have never obtained a
veridic paranormal fact in this way. I have, as I said, studied a case
of semi-automatic writing, and was able to analyse its psychological
features thoroughly. The writer was what spiritualists call an
_intuitive_ medium, that is to say, he was conscious of what he wrote.
He was thirty-five years of age, and had never indulged in spiritistic
practices before, though he knew the literature, especially Allan
Kardac’s works. At the time the phenomenon manifested itself with him,
he was mentally overdone through excess of brain work. He occupied an
important official position. Apparently he has no nervous defect, and,
except for frequent headaches, his health is good. I have not been able
to study his reflex movements, nor examine him from a somatic point of
view.

He commenced writing with the planchette; he had a sensation of being
guided, but knew what he wrote and what he was going to write. There
was, therefore, a beginning of dissociation between the mental images,
properly so called, and their motor action. This fact should be noted,
because it seems to me to have an interesting signification, in so far
as it demonstrates that the ideomotor image is not simple, but has
complex elements, and, notably, that elements which are purely ideal
and motor elements can become dissociated. In the example cited, the
sensitive was fully conscious of the _ideas_ which were formed in, or
which presented themselves to, his consciousness. On the contrary,
he was not fully conscious of the movements his hand made. The
stereognostic perception and the muscular sense were intact; only the
consciousness of the origin of the accomplished movement was obscure;
therefore, it was only the sphere of voluntary motor power in the
personal consciousness which was touched.

The first manifestations of pseudo-automatic writing claimed to
emanate from a deceased relation. This relation was quite disposed to
communicate facts known to the sensitive, but manifested very little
eagerness to answer questions which the sensitive’s consciousness
could not answer. Invited to justify his identity, the personality
showed itself incapable of giving the slightest proof.

Meanwhile, the sensitive tried ordinary writing, and obtained
it. It presented the same features as planchette-writing. A new
personification came and assisted the deceased relation—he was nothing
less than a Mahatma from India! At this time the sensitive was
reading the works of Madame Blavatsky and Mr. Sinnett, especially the
latter’s _Occult World_. The communications were signed _Hymaladar_.
This Mahatma presented nothing of transcendental interest, and was
lavish with his promises. He declared he was ready to undertake the
exoteric education of the sensitive, who, in his _naïveté_, yielded to
the Mahatma’s advice. The Mahatma promised to transport him actually
over to India, to precipitate letters, etc. The promises were never
fulfilled.

Other personifications manifested; the sensitive tried to obtain
some proofs of identity, but without success. On the other hand the
personifications were verbose on general topics, and gave proof of a
lively imagination. Here are some specimens of their style and ideas.

A guide, signing himself _Memnon_, expressed the following opinion upon
a certain mystic book:—

‘... Do not allow yourself to be led away by its descriptions: they
apply to all those who, in no matter what religion, devote themselves
to a contemplative life, which is, assuredly, a blessing, but one which
must be won by patience and effort. When the duties common to every man
born of the flesh have been fulfilled, abstention from the imperious
duty of procreation can, and really does, favour the faculty for
projection of the soul, and renders _ecstasy_ easier; but not only is
such a development artificial, it is also reprehensible to arrive at
that contemplative life, without having founded a family in compliance
with the imprescriptible law of nature. Herein lies the original
vice of all religious communities which offend creation’s views; it
would suffice to generalise the doctrine to discover its falseness
immediately. Man has physical as well as moral duties to accomplish: he
is composed of a body and a soul; he is culpable when he subordinates
one of his composing parts to the other. The senses have no more the
right to command the body than the soul has of making the body suffer
in its physical functions. The suppression of any natural function
is criminal, and every religious order does this. This is their
capital error. He who has raised children and satisfied the physical
evolution, he alone has the right to withdraw from the world, to lead
a contemplative life, when the body, worn out by old age, has finished
its active rôle here below. It is only then that preparation is useful.’

The pencil was verbose every time general subjects were broached.
Whenever the sensitive pressed the personification on some given point,
the latter was silent—he disappeared. The questions were written as
well as the replies. There are some amusing conversations, where the
‘spirit’ plays a rôle other than that of simple interlocutor. By way of
specimen, I note the following dialogue:—

Q. Do you see me?

A. Yes, but badly; we do not see matter clearly; a long apprenticeship
is necessary, and we have not been working long with matter.

Q. Is it long since you left your sphere?

A. Eight years.

Q. Who are you?

A. Monsieur A.

Q. And?

A. And Mamie Beaupuyat.

Q. You have known me?

A. Yes, I was one of your college friends.

Q. Where?

A. At N.

Q. What college?

A. Z. College.

Q. Will you write your name again?

A. Maurice B. (here the name of a street).

Q. I do not remember having known you my friend. Remark this, you have
given me two different names, Beaupuyat and B.

A. Many details are forgotten in Paradise (_sic_).

Q. Ah! strange ambassador! You come to see me without letters of credit!

A. Good-bye.

Q. Good-night.

       *       *       *       *       *

The subconscious excuse for the contradiction pointed out is not
wanting in humour.

Here is another example:—

Q. Are my guides here?

A. We are always at hand to help you, always.

Q. Will you show yourselves to me?

A. Ought you to ask us for anything before giving us tokens?

       *       *       *       *       *

Q. Is it X. who is influencing me?

A. Yes.

Q. But he is dead?

A. Yes.

Q. But you forbid me to evoke the dead?

A. We are the spirits of dead people.

Q. But you told me you were Mahatmas?

A. We are _Mahatmas_, but _Mahatmas_ are not living.

Q. Is it again a trick of my subliminal?

A. Yes, your subliminal is the will.

Q. Yes, it is true, but the will is chiefly superliminal.

A. You are right.

Q. Why do you always make fun of me?

A. We do so to please the Lord.

Q. This is cruel. I am in earnest, and your lord, if he be just, will
punish you severely for your farces.

A. Yes, he will give us the whip.

Q. I do not like this joking, leave me.

A. Always ... (illegible).

Q. What?

A. Magician.

Q. Am I a magician?

A. Yes.

Q. I did not know it.

A. Always do good, and you will be happy.

Q. Happiness is not so easy to obtain.

A. Good-bye.

Q. Who are you?

A. A friend.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is simply nonsense. I have quoted these three examples in order
to show the growing analogy found therein with the delirium of dream.
It is scarcely visible in the first quotation, which is coherent,
logical and of fairly elegant form. But the ideas which are expressed
have their sources in subconscious souvenirs: they will be found in
_Spirit Teachings_, _Higher Aspects of Spiritualism_, _Occult World_,
and _Esoteric Buddhism_.

The second quotation reveals decided oneiroscopic associations. The
name Beaupuyat awakens no souvenir; the name of a street having nearly
the same assonance is then substituted for it; this is an illogical
association, formed by phonetic elements. The explanation of the
contradiction between the names given successively is very illogical,
but it is what might be called ‘a good hit.’ This is one of our ways of
reasoning with ourselves in dreams.

The third quotation shows a still more marked degree of incoherence.
The first replies are attempts at conciliation of contradictions
impossible to do away with: they are affirmations which are but echoes
of the questions asked. I do not quite understand the association
between subliminal and will; but the emergence of the idea of will
gives place to a curious phenomenon: the evolution of a parasitical
association of ideas bringing to mind the psychological phenomenon
which A. Pick describes under the name of _Vorbeidenken_. We have
non-expressed stages, from will to ‘God’s will,’ words which are often
associated together in religious language: ‘to do the will of God, to
be agreeable to God.’ The incoherent reply, which consists in saying
that the Mahatmas make fun of the subject in order to be agreeable to
God, is then the last link of a chain of latent associations; this
last link is the only one shown. Also, the incongruous idea of beings
who call themselves spirits and wise men, and declare they must be
whipped, is the result of an evident association between the idea
of being severe consciously expressed, and the idea of severity,
chastisement, whip, average latent terms. The psychological analysis,
therefore, reveals to us mental processes which are known and classed.
It shows us, that the dream character of subconscious messages
does not differ from that observed in the mental operations of the
consciousness, as soon as the latter’s personal and voluntary activity
becomes weakened or gradually gives place to spontaneous ideation.
I think the three examples I have chosen show this progressive
debilitation very well, and also the corresponding accentuation of the
characteristics of dream in the messages obtained. The case I examined
is at the limit of paranormal facts, but the inquisitive reader has at
his disposal the weighty analysis of the transcendental cases published
in the _Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research_, epitomised
by M. Sage in his book _Mrs. Piper et la Société Anglo-Américaine des
Recherches Psychiques_, to verify the accuracy of my conclusion, viz.
that the mental processes in simple cases, as well as in the more
complex cases, are identical.

I return to the case observed by me. The obstinacy of even the best and
most moral of these personalities in refusing to expose themselves to
any control whatsoever, the falsehoods they were imprudent enough to
overlook, and the critical attitude of mind of the sensitive himself,
awakened a spirit of distrust in the latter. He began to observe
himself, and the first result of his observation of the conditions
under which the writing was produced, was the gradual disappearance
of the sensation of impulse which he had felt: his pencil, he told
me, had seemed to follow a magnet. As this sensation weakened and
disappeared, so the personifications affected to be either grievously
pained, or cold and dignified, or frankly insolent; they all deplored
the sensitive’s incredulity. The relation bade him adieu and appeared
no more; Hymaladar himself ceased to be interested in his _chela_. The
sensitive soon saw the futility of his efforts, and the writing ceased
completely to present the peculiarity it had offered during several
weeks.

This case is instructive, because it is on the borderline between
conscious and unconscious phenomena. Thanks to the clear and complete
indications on the part of the sensitive, I was able to reconstitute
the genesis of every personality. That of the relation is easily
explained, but Hymaladar was more rebellious to analysis. Upon
investigation it appeared to me to be the synthesis of the words
Hymalaya and Damodar. The one, which quite naturally evokes the thought
of India, is the dwelling-place of the sages who, it appears, preside
in a very secret manner at the evolution of the theosophical movement;
the disciple or _chela_ of one of them was the guru, the master of
Madame Blavatsky. His name was Damodar. The associated ideas—Blavatsky,
India, Hymalaya, Damodar—lead up to the word _Hymala_ (ya Damo) _dar_;
the genesis of the word is thus quite comprehensible.

At present I am observing a more complex case, in which paranormal
phenomena accompany automatic writing. The sensitive, who is in the act
of developing his medianity, unfortunately gives himself up rather
unwillingly to observation. He does not know English, yet he has
automatically written certain phrases in English. However, we must not
conclude therefrom, that these messages are of transcendental origin.
This sensitive is a well-educated person, and most probably English
words and phrases have fallen under his eyes from time to time; thus
the irruption of English in messages he obtains may be explained by
the emergence of subconscious souvenirs. The tenor of the messages
is still vague; the writing is often difficult to read; no precise
fact capable of being analysed and verified has so far been given. It
appears to me useless, in these circumstances, to give examples of
these messages, but I will point out an interesting peculiarity which
I have observed only with this sensitive. This is the concomitancy of
raps and automatic writing. I have most carefully studied these raps;
they appear to me to occur on a level with the point of the pencil.
The phenomenon is forthcoming in broad daylight, and under excellent
conditions of observation. An attentive examination shows that the
point of the pencil does not leave the paper. The raps are forthcoming
even when I put my finger on the upper end of the pencil, and when
I press the point on the paper. The pencil vibrates, but it is not
displaced. As these raps are very sonorous, I have calculated that it
would be necessary to give rather a strong knock in order to reproduce
them artificially: the necessary movement would require raising the
pencil from the twentieth to the eighth of an inch, according to the
intensity of the raps. Now, the pencil does not appear to be displaced.
Further, when the writing runs quickly the raps succeed one another
with great rapidity, and the close examination of the writing reveals
no stops; the text is unbroken, no trace of pencil dots is perceptible,
there is no thickening of the characters. The conditions of observation
appear to me to exclude the possibility of a trick. I will add that
during this automatic writing the arm and hand of the sensitive are in
a state of anæsthesia.

3. Phonetic and mixed automatisms. I combine these two categories of
automatisms because the automatism is seldom purely phonetic. The
sensitive makes gestures appropriate to the personage he represents,
and the automatism is complicated; the muscles which regulate the
emission of the voice are not the only ones in activity.

This kind of automatism is very easy to observe. It is the basis of
ordinary spiritistic seances; it is called ‘incarnation’ or ‘control,’
and the sensitive, who produces this kind of phenomena, is called a
‘trance medium.’

Its necessary condition is the trance or somnambulistic state. The
sensitive falls asleep spontaneously, or is put to sleep artificially
by passes. After a certain time, more or less long, and after diverse
movements, the most usual of which seem to be muscular contractions of
the face and pharynx, the sensitive enters into somnambulism and passes
into the secondary state. Some subjects fall asleep very quickly. It
is not a rare thing in spiritistic seances, for two or three persons
to enter into a state of somnambulism at the same time. The perfection
of the sensitive’s acting, when personifying diverse individualities,
is most striking when they have known the persons they are imitating.
Observation is extremely interesting. In spiritistic seances these
personalities, naturally, always represent spirits.

I have seen nothing in this order of phenomenon which appeared to me
worth noting. Everything is easily explained by the play of impersonal
memory and by imitation. Many transcendental facts have been related
to me: personally I have observed none. But I have very rarely tried
to provoke trance phenomena. They do not present the same interest to
me as physical phenomena do. The most interesting I have seen, were
given me by Madame Agullana, in private seances. This sensitive’s
most curious personality is that of a doctor, who died about eighty
or a hundred years ago: he has always refused to give any information
concerning his identity; the reason he advances for maintaining his
incognito—the existence of his family, members of whom are living in
the south of France—does not satisfy me; I imagine he is withholding
the best. His medical language is archaic. He calls plants by their
ancient medical names; his diagnosis, accompanied with extra-ordinary
explanations, is generally correct, but the description of the internal
symptoms which he perceives is such as would astound a doctor of
the twentieth century. Matters, fluids, molecules, dance a strange
saraband. Nevertheless, my colleague from beyond the tomb—not at all
loquacious, by the way—retains a serenity, which is proof against
everything, and humbly recognises that there are many things he does
not know. During the ten years I have been observing him, he has not
changed, and presents a logical continuity which is most striking.
Persons, who are not _au courant_ with the features of secondary
personalities, might easily be deceived and believe in his objective
reality. Be he what he says he is, or be he what I suspect him to be,
that is to say, one of the sensitive’s secondary personalities, my
_confrère_ Hippolytus is an interesting interlocutor, and, with his
conversation, one could write a work on clinical medicine which would
be rather out of the common. This is not the place to study him, for
his examination only raises problems of psychological interest. In
these phenomena of mixed automatism, of ‘incarnation,’ we observe the
complete development of _personifications_. These personifications
are the feature common to all psychical phenomena. Raps claim to
emanate from a given personality, paranormal movements have the same
pretension, automatic script assures us of a like origin: ‘incarnation’
or ‘control’ puts forth the claim of being the personality himself, in
full possession of the sensitive’s body, directing and using it as he
pleases.

The problem which these personifications set before us is, perhaps, the
most interesting of all those which are to be met with, in the kind
of study to which this book is consecrated. I have pointed out, that
the general feature of these personifications is to present themselves
as living—or more usually deceased human beings. My observations
do not tend to make me think that this claim is well founded. It
does not come within the scheme of my work to analyse the different
hypotheses, which have been emitted by the different mystic schools.
Occultists profess to see astral shells, in these personifications,
debris—still organised—of the body’s astral double, which the superior
principles have abandoned. Theosophists have about the same theory,
designating these debris by the name of elementals. Spiritists
attribute their phenomena to the spirits of the dead. Roman Catholics
see the intervention of the devil therein, while the greater number of
savants only see fraud or chimera. All these opinions are too absolute.
There is, certainly, something; but I think this something is neither
spirit, shell, elemental nor demon. It is not my province to formulate
in detail my theory: properly speaking, I have not any. I observe
without bias of any kind, and the only indication I can give is the
following:—in almost every case I have studied, I believe I recognised
the mentality of the medium and the sitters in the personification. It
is true, there are certain cases which I cannot explain in this way;
but the spirit hypothesis explains them still less satisfactorily. We
must continue seeking.

The examples I have given of intellectual phenomena show that in every
case of which I have been able to make a thorough analysis, we discover
the action of the impersonal consciousness. This explains itself
naturally, since the personal and voluntary consciousness excludes by
definition the co-existence of a second personality. Nevertheless, this
is not absolutely true. The medium, of whom I have already spoken, he
who produces raps when writing, writes automatically while he speaks,
in quite a natural way, of other things. In fact, he only writes well
when his attention is drawn away from his hand. As soon as he is
conscious of the movement, the writing ceases. Things happen with him,
as though the normal consciousness lost all contact with the motor
centres of the arm and hand. A special consciousness appears to be
developed in these centres.


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF AUTOMATISM

The difficulty, which is raised by the interpretation of facts of
the kind exposed above, is considerable. It is to be remembered,
that the sensitive of whom I have just spoken, does not appear to
suffer any diminution of his normal personality; he converses with
facility, his normal personal souvenirs and his intelligence remain
intact. His arm and hand alone, especially the latter, are withdrawn
from consciousness, and this in the sensitive as well as in the motor
spheres. Janet sees in these facts psychological disaggregation, and
in many cases his explication is the correct one. But it cannot be
applied to the case I am speaking of, for no diminution in the memory,
intelligence or mental activity is perceptible. However, Janet seems
to have only seen one of the phases of these curious phenomena. I
attach so much importance to the establishing of the _point de fait_
that, before all analysis thereof, I desire to state it precisely,
successively with the discussion.

The first circumstance of fact which observation of the case I am
examining reveals, is the one I have just pointed out: an apparent
dissociation of the normal personality, from the cenesthesic
consciousness of which a portion of the body is withdrawn. The second
circumstance is the relative knowledge of English—with correct
orthography excepting one mistake only—which is shown by the apparently
self-governed limb. Note also that I feel sure that this knowledge of
English is probably subconscious, and that I have supposed, although
this has not been proved, that the writer has now and then come across
a few English sentences, containing the phrases written by him. These
two circumstances are, for me, observed facts.

From these facts there results a third fact, the consequence of the
first two: the consciousness, which directs the limb withdrawn from
the personality, appears to have more considerable resources—at least
from a memory point of view—than the normal consciousness. If it be
correct to speak of apparent disaggregation in that which concerns
the conscious normal personality, it seems to me that this expression
ceases to represent the facts, as soon as it can be demonstrated, that
the consciousness manifested by the automatism is more extensive than
the normal consciousness. If we are to attach a precise meaning to
language—and Janet’s language is so clear and simple that we may not
accuse this elegant and remarkable writer of want of precision—the idea
of disaggregation implies the division of the personal consciousness
into elementary parts, according to definition, lesser than the whole.
This phenomenon is frequently observed, _e.g._ when automatic writing
shows itself to be incapable of logical co-ordination, of which I have
given examples; sometimes there is no trace of thought, properly so
called, _e.g._ when the sensitive confines himself to repeating _sine
die_ the same letter, or traces nothing but lines, and strokes, etc.
But can we consider the case as one of veritable disaggregation where
the hand, withdrawn from normal consciousness, appears to dispose of a
greater mass of souvenirs than the normal consciousness does?

Janet himself has verified the fact, and gives some examples of it
in his work, _Névroses et idées fixes_, vol i. After that, is it
not contradictory to say (_Automatisme psychologique_, p. 452): ‘The
result of our studies has been to bring back the diverse phenomena of
automatism to their essential conditions—most of these phenomena depend
upon a state of anæsthesia or abstraction. This state is connected with
the narrowing of the field of consciousness, and this narrowing itself
is due to the feebleness of synthesis and the disaggregation of the
mental compound into diverse groups smaller than they should normally
be. These diverse points are easy to verify; the state of abstraction,
incoherence, of disaggregation, in a word, of suggestible individuals
has often been pointed out.’ How can a group, smaller than the mental
compound of which it forms one of the parts, be more considerable
than that compound? How can a part be greater than its whole? This
is, nevertheless, a fact easily verifiable in the domain of memory
and sometimes in that of intelligence. Janet’s theory explains only
some of the observable facts; it is only partially true. It suffices
to compare the quotation I have just given with what he says in his
work, _Névroses et idées fixes_, vol. i. p. 137: ‘The souvenir even in
somnambulism only exists if the patient be oblivious to everything and
replies automatically to questions, by the mechanical association of
ideas without reflection, without the personal perception of what he is
doing.

‘... The souvenir, in a word, is only manifested unknown to the person:
it disappears when the person has to speak or write in his own name,
conscious of what he is doing.’ For Janet this is the sign of mental
disaggregation.

The quotations I have just given define sharply Janet’s opinion,
and show up his mistake and his contradiction. That which becomes
disaggregated is the _personality_, the _personal consciousness_.
But it does not become resolved into groups smaller than they ought
normally to be, since these groups often show themselves to be more
comprehensive than the mental compound. It is, therefore, illogical to
consider them as a part which has become dissociated from the whole.

I have already had occasion to express my manner of thinking in other
writings: nevertheless, perhaps I may be permitted to indicate the
direction which psychological interpretation should take in order to
avoid an encounter with facts.

The personal consciousness is only one of the modalities of the general
consciousness. Clinical observation reveals that, in a great many
cases, it has been proved, that the souvenirs stored up in the general
consciousness are infinitely more numerous, than those which the
personal consciousness has at its free disposition. Myers has expressed
these ideas most happily in the following words (‘The Subliminal
Consciousness,’ _Proceedings, S. P. R._, vii. p. 301):—

‘I suggest, then, that the stream of consciousness in which we
habitually live is not the only consciousness which exists in
connection with our organism. Our habitual or empirical consciousness
may consist of a mere selection from a multitude of thoughts and
sensations, of which some at least are equally conscious with those
that we empirically know. I accord no primacy to my ordinary waking
self, except that among my potential selves this one has shown itself
the fittest to meet the needs of common life. I hold that it has
established no further claim, and that it is perfectly possible
that other thoughts, feelings, and memories, either isolated or in
continuous connection, may now be actively conscious, as we say,
‘within me’—in some kind of co-ordination with my organism, and forming
some part of my total individuality. I conceive it possible that at
some future time, and under changed conditions, I may recollect all; I
may assume these various personalities under one single consciousness,
in which ultimate and complete consciousness the empirical
consciousness which at this moment directs my hand may be only one
element out of many.’

He appears to me to be nearer the truth than Janet is: I do not know if
we shall ever arrive at that complete consciousness which Myers hopes
for, but it seems to me probable, that our personal consciousness is
only one element of our general consciousness. This latter becomes
concrete and definite, but also grows less by becoming personal.
The apparent supremacy of the personal consciousness may be only an
effect of the circumstances in which we are evolving; if Darwin’s
ideas are true, we can understand that the necessities of life may
have favoured the development of the active, voluntary, personal
consciousness; we can imagine other conditions—which the monastic life
sometimes realises—where the active and voluntary phases of the general
consciousness may be less evolved than its receptive and passive
phases. Therefore, the psychologist finds the study of hagiography
teeming with information.

Janet’s disaggregation is but the weakening of the sentiment of the
conscious and voluntary personal activity, of what I called the
sentiment of the personal participation in intercurrent psychological
phenomena. It is no veritable disaggregation; it is a disappearance of
one modality of the consciousness, of one of its _limited expressions_,
so to speak. However, I recognise, with Janet, that this mode of
expression of the consciousness is the necessary basis of our activity
in _ordinary life_, and that it is legitimate to consider as invalids,
those persons in whom it is normally wanting. But the fact itself
of its disappearance has more the features of an _integration_ than
of a _disintegration_, since upon an attentive examination, the
personal consciousness is revealed as a limitation and a special
determination of the general consciousness of which it is, in a way,
a dismemberment. If I dared to use metaphysical language, I would say
that rational and voluntary activity is in reality a disaggregation;
personality is only a contingent and limited manifestation of the
being, or rather of individuality. This latter, to use the expression
of an eminent philosopher, would be superior to reason itself, and of
irrational essence, an idea which contains the first principles of a
new philosophy. I make this incursion into metaphysics merely to show
how narrow Janet’s theories are, and what different consequences result
from such a professional manner of thinking as his is, and from a
more general conception of that, of which his manner of thinking only
concerns one particular case.

The facts, moreover, condemn Janet’s theory. I have too high an opinion
of the distinguished man whose ideas I criticise, but whose works
I admire sincerely, not to be convinced that he has only observed
undeveloped subjects. What demonstrates this in my eyes is his timid
affirmation, that ‘nearly always (I do not say always in order not to
prejudice an important question) these mediums are neurotics, when
they are not downright hysterics.’ It is difficult to discuss an
opinion expressed with so much reserve, and I can only commend him for
his circumspection, for my personal observations contradict his. I
have seen many mediums: the best were not _neurotics_ in the medical
sense of the word. The finest experiments I have made have been with
persons appearing to present none of the stigmæ of hysteria. Up to
the present Janet seems to have operated with invalids only, and I
am not surprised, therefore, that he should assimilate the automatic
phenomena of sensitives with those of his hysterical patients. It would
be surprising were it otherwise. I am not going to defend spiritistic
mediums; they appear to me to present very poor interest—at least in
ordinary seances—but my duty is to protest against the generality of
the judgment which Janet brings to bear upon automatic phenomena. Those
facts, which are worthy of careful observation, differ essentially
from those which ordinary hysterics present. They indicate no _misère
psychologique_—quite the contrary, and I will state the reasons why.

The discussion, in order to be clear, must be divided:

1. The phenomena observable with good mediums are not those we observe
in hysterical patients. I said I had obtained raps and movements
without contact under conditions of control, which appeared to me to
be convincing. I added that I had obtained by raps, or by the rappings
of a table without contact, words and phrases which were extremely
coherent. This is not quite the kind of phenomena to which hospital
patients have accustomed us. What does Janet say on this point?

‘The essential point of spiritism is indeed, we believe, the
disaggregation of psychological phenomena, and the formation beyond
the personal perception of a second series of thoughts detached from
the first. As for the means which the second personality employs to
manifest itself unknown to the first—movements of tables, automatic
writing or speaking, etc....—this is a secondary question (_sic_).
Where do those sounds come from which are heard on tables and walls
in answer to questions? Is it from a movement of the toes, of that
contraction of the tendon supposed by Jobert de Lamballe...? Is it from
a contraction of the stomach and from a veritable ventriloquism as
Gros. Jean supposes, or from some other physical action yet unknown?
Are they produced by the automatic movements of the medium himself, or,
indeed, as appears to me most likely in some cases, _in the obscurity
demanded by the spirits_(!) by the subconscious actions of one of the
assistants, who deceives others and himself at the same time, and who
becomes an accomplice without knowing it? It does not matter very much.’

That is not my opinion. I think, on the contrary, it matters a great
deal. I am positive that every sincere and patient experimenter will
observe, as I have done, in broad daylight, and not in obscurity,
sounds and movements which will not appear to be explicable by any
known cause. Those who, like myself, have verified these facts, will
not dream of attributing them to unconscious or involuntary movements,
to the cracking of a tendon, to ventriloquism. The cases observed by me
will not admit of this explanation. Things happen as though some force
or other were produced by the medium and the assistants, and could act
beyond the limits of the body. If this fact be correct, can we consider
it as secondary and without importance? On the contrary, does it not
open to the psychology of the future the road of direct observation
and experimentation, if, as I have tried to show, this force preserves
certain relations with our general consciousness? Does this not make
one think of those words of Proclus when speaking of souls:—

Τρίτη δὲ αὐταῖς πάρεστιν ἡ κατὰ τὴν ἰδίαν ὕπαρξιν ἐνέργεια, κινητικὴ
μὲν ὕπάρχουσα τῶν φύσει ἑτεροκινήτων. Souls have a third force
inherent to their essence, that of moving things which by their very
nature are put into movement by an energy foreign to themselves.

Has not Janet a singular way of reasoning? He makes a reserve on
the existence of another ‘physical action yet unknown,’ but quickly
forgets it, and reasons as though that action were perfectly well
known. ‘That action, whatever it may be, is _always_ an involuntary and
unconscious action of some one or other: the involuntary word from the
intestines(!) is not more miraculous than is the involuntary word from
the mouth; it is the psychological side of the problem which is the
most interesting, and which ought to be the most studied.’

I am sure that those of my readers, whose patience has not been
too severely tested by my long analysis of facts observed, will not
consider my distinguished colleague’s conclusion as acceptable. The
most interesting side of the phenomenon is, I think, the one which
reveals to us an apparently new mode of action of the nervous influx
upon matter.

2. These phenomena, again, are not the indication of a _misère
psychologique_, as Janet thinks.

Let us discuss the cases observed by me. To follow my reasoning, it
will be necessary to be familiar with the works of Gurney, Podmore,
Sidgwick, Myers, Barrett, Hodgson, Lodge, Hyslop, du Prel, Perty,
Hellenbach, Aksakow, Richet, de Rochas. To-day, it is no longer
possible to shun the work of such savants, (when dealing with a
question of such a nature as that which engrossed Janet) by simply
saying as he did ‘that he had not had occasion to read the _Philosophie
der Mystik_ of a man like du Prel.’ He should have read that book ...
and many more.

It seems to me to be now quite an established fact, that the
impersonal consciousness is capable of perceiving accurate impressions
independently of the senses. It translates these impressions in diverse
ways in order to transmit them to the personal consciousness, but these
translations are concrete and symbolical. It is a hallucination visual,
auditory, or tactile. The form of _subliminal_ messages, to use one of
Myers’ expressions, is always the same, be the fact thus transmitted
true or false, be it a reminiscence or a premonition. This is already a
psychological ascertainment of great importance, for it puts us on the
road we must follow, in order to discover the mental process of this
psychological phenomenon. But there is something else. The hysteric
who automatically simulates a drunkard, a general, a child, offers us
a very different spectacle to the one offered us by the sensitive who
telepathically sees an event happening afar off, or who predicts the
future, or reveals facts unknown to himself and the assistants. There
are thousands of examples of these facts; I have given a few which were
observed by myself or related to me first-hand.

Is it possible to consider this extraordinary faculty as a
‘disaggregation’? Is it possible to class phenomena of this kind with
the commonplace phenomena of somnambulism and ‘incarnation,’ the only
ones Janet has observed? It suffices to put the question to receive
the answer immediately. The psychological mechanism of these facts, so
unlike one to the other, is probably the same, but the cause of the
apparent automatism, motor or sensory, is certainly not the same. The
sensitive, of whom I spoke, who sees in the mirror twenty-four hours
beforehand, the very scenes she actually sees the next day, presents
to us a phenomenon of considerable importance. It intimates that time
and space are forms of the personal thought and consciousness, but
that probably they have not the same signification for the impersonal
consciousness. It is a phenomenon which, if it be true, demonstrates
experimentally that Kant’s theory upon the contingency of these
‘categories’ necessary to all conscious and personal perception is
exact.

I am quite aware of the nature of the reply I shall meet with: my
observations have been defective; and all those who before me affirmed
the existence of the same facts were also deceived. This simplifies
the discussion. The history of science offers us many an example of
the manner in which facts are received, when they contradict current
ideas. Kant said more than a hundred years ago, in his _Traüme eines
Geistersehers_, 1, i.: ‘Das methodische Geschwätz der hohen Schulen ist
oftmals nur ein Einverständniss durch veränderliche Wortbedeutungen
eine schwer zu lösenden Frage auszuweichen, weil das bequeme und
mehrentheils vernünftige, “Ich weiss nicht,” auf Akademien nicht
leichtlich gehört wird.’[14]

      [14] The methodical idle prattle of the high schools is
      often only an understanding to elude, by words of variable
      acceptation, a question difficult of solution, for we do
      not often hear in academies such convenient and ordinarily
      intelligent words as ‘I do not know.’

The discussion on Janet recalled to my mind these words of Kant’s. His
expression, _misère psychologique_ is one of those words of double
meaning, true, if we consider only a part of the facts and one aspect
only of the phenomenon, that which concerns the personal consciousness;
inexact, if we study the facts in their totality and the phenomenon
they reveal in its generality. The being who would be capable of
perceiving at a distance, by looking into space and into time, would
have faculties superior to the normal; he would not be the inferior
being imagined by Janet.

An attentive and patient observation will show him, I am sure,
the reality of the facts which I point out; may he not deny this
possibility without putting himself under the requisite conditions for
observing these facts.

It belongs to the future to decide the question, and I have no doubt
whatever upon the nature of the verdict.[15]

      [15] See Appendix A.

To sum up, an attentive observation of the facts shows, that in
psychical phenomena we observe the emergence of personifications
which may be secondary personalities, but which in really clear cases
present particular features, and seem to possess information which
is inaccessible to the normal personality. They may co-exist with
the latter, without any disorder manifesting itself in the sensitive
or motor spheres; in other cases, they encroach upon the normal
personality, which may either lose the use and sensation of one member,
or be deprived of several members. Finally, the personification can
invade the whole of the organism and end in incarnation or ‘control,’
a phenomenon of apparent possession. When it reaches this maximum
development, the personification manifests a remarkable autonomy, and
appears to be much less suggestible than in the intermediate stages of
its evolution.

What are these personifications? I do not know. The problem they raise
in some cases is extremely difficult to solve. I can only say that
they do not appear to me to be what they claim to be. Is it collective
consciousness? Is it self-deception? Is it a spirit? Everything is
possible, to me nothing is certain save one thing, namely, that we must
not put our trust in them.

I say this for the benefit of spiritists, who have a tendency to
believe blindly everything their good spirits tell them. These
‘spirits’ may make mistakes, though they may not wish to deceive
you. Never abandon yourself or submit the conduct of your life and
affairs to their guidance: submit only to the rule of reason and sound
judgment. Be not over-credulous.[16]

      [16] See Appendix C.




