CHAPTER VII

FRAUD AND ERROR


This work would be incomplete, if I did not carefully examine fraud
and errors of observation. The first should always be considered as
possible. Errors of observation are even more numerous than fraud, and
their sources are manifold. We should study them, learn their causes,
and suspect them until the contrary has been proved.


I. FRAUD

Fraud can be conscious, unconscious, or mixed. I have no need to say
how frequent the first is, especially with paid mediums. Spiritistic
reviews, notably the Revue Spirite, Revue Morale et Scientifique du
Spiritisme, Light, Psychische Studien, give many examples of fraud
discovered by spiritists themselves. Unconscious fraud is no less
common than conscious fraud; as for the third, mixed fraud, this is
also very often observed.

_Conscious fraud._—(_a_) _Raps._ Nothing is easier to imitate. I have
indicated the diverse ways of reproducing them artificially: gliding
the finger or nail along the top of the table, with or without the help
of resin; rapping with the feet; gliding the foot or dress—especially
silk dresses—against the legs of table, etc. These diverse movements
imitate feeble raps to perfection, if they be slowly made. For that
reason I have always refused to consider raps as convincing when
produced with any contact whatever. Consequently I exclude raps
produced on the floor from those phenomena which have determined my
conviction. Certain persons seem to be able to move their tendons at
will, even making a considerable noise in that way. I observed this
with a medical student who, by resting his elbow on the table, produced
very sonorous raps; but the movement of his arm was easily seen. I know
another person who could crack his joints at will.

The play of the knee-joint has been especially incriminated by Mrs.
Sidgwick in her article ‘The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism’
(_Proceedings of the S.P.R._ xiii. 45). She recalls to mind the
interpretations given by Drs. Lee, Flint, and Coventry, who observed
Mrs. Kane and Mrs. Underhill, two of the famous Fox sisters. Mrs.
Sidgwick experimented with the third sister, Mrs. Jencken, and accepted
the explanation of the American doctors. For them, the double raps
were produced by a rapid movement of dislocation and readjustment of
the knee. By placing in such a position as to render that voluntary
dislocation impossible, _e.g._ by making the medium sit down with
outstretched legs and heels resting on a soft cushion, no raps were
forthcoming. It is possible that the explanation of the American
doctors may be true concerning the case examined by them. In those
which I have studied, it is certainly not acceptable. I have obtained
raps on a table without any kind of contact whatsoever. I have obtained
them on the floor, by placing the medium in positions which excluded
the play of articulation. The kind of fraud in question was not
therefore in operation. I have even made some mediums sit on my knees
when raps were forthcoming; I then made sure the raps were produced on
the table, and that the latter was not touched. My conclusion as to the
reality of the phenomenon of raps is the result of nearly two hundred
observations.

In obscurity, the means of cheating are unimaginable. I saw a young
medium, who had succeeded in concealing a stick, simulate raps on
the ceiling with it. I have known two others hit the table with
their fists, kick it with their feet, etc. Everything is possible in
darkness, and with certain confiding observers.

(_b_) _Parakinesis_, or abnormal movements of objects with contact.
I have often said that all movements with contact—except certain
levitations which are, however, difficult to observe with precision—are
worthless. I have indicated the chief ways of simulating levitations,
either by the hands, the feet or the knees. I will not revert to this.

These methods are difficult in full light, but when the experimenters
are placed in such a position as to be unable to keep a reciprocal
watch over the feet, the second method is still easily brought into
play.

(_c_) _Telekinesis._—Fraud is more difficult to perpetrate here. A
connecting link of some kind or other would be required to move objects
possessing a certain weight and bulk. I look upon this phenomenon as
most convincing, when it is obtained in full light; in obscurity, it is
to a certain extent unverifiable.

(_d_) _Luminous phenomena_ are easily simulated; phosphorescent oil
and certain sulphides give excellent imitations of hands and forms.
I have seen a photograph taken by magnesian light in a seance for
materialisation. The medium, by way of imitating a materialised garment
of some kind, had wound a white cloth around his neck, and moreover
wore a false beard. Those present at this seance will not admit they
were cheated. One of the sitters, a friend of mine, one familiar with
psychical matters, but too honest himself to suspect fraud in others,
did not think my judgment in this case was correct. It was necessary to
have it confirmed by the celebrated Papus!

As for the phenomenon of _attouchements_, this is of all phenomena the
most easily simulated in obscurity.

Every one knows the rôle played by dolls, disguises and confederates
in seances for materialisation. The trickster’s imagination is of
inconceivable fertility. The recent Rothe trial gives us a fresh
example of this.

(_e_) _Motor and sensory automatisms_ can be imitated with extreme
facility, and their efficacious control is impossible. A careful
analysis of the messages is necessary in order to appreciate their
value. On the other hand, well-observed premonitions are of immense
importance.

From the preceding, we see that all psychical phenomena can be
simulated; this does not mean that every psychical phenomenon is
simulated. Those who wish to explain away everything by fraud make as
great a mistake, as those who trustingly accept everything without
control.

There is an important general observation to be made concerning the
phenomena I am treating in this book. It is of historical order, but
nevertheless it gives a much wider signification to these facts than
is usually accorded them. Many writers, Janet among them, imagine that
_spiritistic_ phenomena, as they call them, date from the celebrated
events of Rochester, about the year 1847, where the Fox sisters were
the objects of diverse manifestations. But in reality these facts date
much further back. One of the best observed cases is the one spoken
of by Dr. Kerner in his book _Die Seherin von Prevorst_, which has
been translated by Dr. Dusart into French, probably from Mrs. Crowe’s
English translation. Kerner observed raps and movements without contact
from the year 1827, when he had Madame Hauff staying in his house.

Phenomena of the same kind are to be met with in accounts of haunted
houses. There are stories of this kind dating from remote epochs, and
diverse decrees of parliament exist cancelling leases for this cause.
These phenomena were criticised at the end of the eighteenth century.

It is only the metaphysical system founded upon these facts which is
new. It is in that, and in that only, that spiritism or spiritualism
consists. It is undeniable that the doctrine embodying the essence of
these teachings has attained a considerable extension. I pointed out
the radical differences existing between the beliefs of Anglo-Saxon
spiritists and those of spiritists of other nationalities, particularly
in that which concerns reincarnation. I will not go back to this;
but in order to specify the point in question, I will recall to mind
that the only new phenomena which spiritistic forms of contemporary
mysticism offer, are their constitution into a body of religious
doctrines and their rapid extension. These phenomena are of
sociological, not biological order. The facts upon which they are based
belong, on the contrary, to biology.

Further, it is not absolutely true to say, that the metaphysical
theories established upon the revelations of spirits are new. The
life of some of the ‘saints’ in the Roman Church offers us several
examples, one of the most celebrated being the devotion to the _Sacrè
Cœur de Jésus_,’ a special kind of worship based upon revelations
claimed to have been accorded to a nun named Marie Alacoque, who
lived in the eighteenth century. Monastic life has not the monopoly
of such experiences. Commerce with spirits appears to be likewise one
of the elements of the religious ceremonies of the Shakers; even the
Mormons seem to indulge in practices similar to those of spiritism;
Jérôme Cardan, John Dee, Martinez de Pasqually pass for having held
intercourse with immaterial beings; members of the order of the Red
Cross have also been looked upon as holding frequent intercourse with
diverse genii. If we study the history of human thought, we see that
nothing is really new, nothing save perhaps the contemporary extension
of spiritism. From many points of view, spiritism appears to play a
rôle in the civilised, sceptical, material society of to-day, analogous
to the simple rôle which Christianity played in the second and third
centuries of our era.

But this is a sociological problem; its examination, however
interesting it may be, would lead me beyond the limits I have traced
for myself. I will confine myself, therefore, to drawing from the
brief historical account I have just given, the conclusion it admits
of. The facts studied by Janet and others are anterior to spiritism,
and cannot be legitimately designated by this name. I have already
indicated that this word expresses an _ensemble_ of metaphysical and
religious doctrines explaining psychical phenomena by the intervention
of spirits, and drawing their teachings from the revelations attributed
to these same spirits. It is terminologically incorrect to designate
these facts by a word which has a wider signification, since it
expresses an explanatory hypothesis of these same facts.

Custom has consecrated the word ‘psychical’ facts or phenomena: this
term is also imperfect, and it seems to me preferable to adopt the new
term _Metapsychical_ which Richet recommends.

Therefore, in the actual state of research, the scientific problem, it
seems to me, is not whether spiritism be true or false, but whether
metapsychical phenomena be real or imaginary.

As Richet and Ochorowicz have said, every medium may defraud, and the
analysis of fraud is one of the most complicated problems which the
study of psychical phenomena presents. It is also one of the most
interesting. The Cambridge[37] experiments with Eusapia Paladino put
clearly before us the question of fraud and its signification.

      [37] See Appendix B.

Before entering upon the psychological examination of fraud, it appears
to me necessary to explain the signification of the terms I am going to
use, and after that to classify medianic phenomena.

It is of primary importance to determine the correct signification
of the expression _consciousness_.[38] There are few words in
philosophical language which have such diverse acceptations. As my
conception of consciousness is somewhat special without at the same
time being peculiar to me, I owe it to my readers to say what I mean to
designate by this term.

      [38] The French have but one word to express what is meant in
      English by the word _Conscience_ (_i.e._ the principle which
      decides on the lawfulness or unlawfulness of our actions or
      desires), and the word _Consciousness_ (_i.e._ the being aware,
      the knowing of one’s own thoughts). Nevertheless we consider
      this chapter could ill spare this masterly synthesis.—_Note of
      Translator._

I conceive consciousness, _lato sensu_, as a function of living matter.
It is the particular state which determines in organised and living
matter another state of the centre where this matter lives. It is,
if you like, a kind of reaction of the living matter in harmony with
external phenomena. This mode of reaction, like every other mode of
reaction, allows of two conditions: some sort of sensibility to the
action of the ambient, permitting variations thereof to be felt; some
sort of activity which permits of realising an adaptation to the
ambient, and of producing internal modifications corresponding, in
some measure, to the perceived external modifications. In order that
the internal modifications may realise this equilibrium, they must not
go beyond a certain amplitude, whence the theoretic necessity for the
_sensibility_ to be always apprised of the internal modifications of
the living substance, as it perceives the external modifications of the
ambient.

Experience proves that in reality things do happen in this way.
In fact, we are able in the animal kingdom to prove the existence
of special organs, some of them destined to the perception of the
successive states of the ambient and of the individual, the others to
the active realisation of the latter to the former. The different
modifications provoked in the _receptive_ system by the variations of
the ambient, determine in their turn the intervention of the _active_
system which realises the internal variations. This is the principle of
the nervous and muscular systems, the latter being only put into play
by the former; natural history shows us the progressive specialisation
of these nervous and muscular elements. At first non-differentiated
in appearance, the animal cell presents in more complicated animals a
sensitive pole and an active pole, the one nervous, the other muscular.
The myo-epithelial or neuro-muscular cells offer us a classical example
in the hydra.

The examination of the development of the nervous system and of
the muscular system in the vertebrata shows us their growing
specialisation. The nervous cells are associated in systems more
or less dependent the one upon the other; the muscular cells are
accumulated into masses. This is the application of that law of the
division of labour, the constant operation of which we observe in all
the phenomena of life. The nervous cells are grouped together in a
heap, in a nucleus, and send their prolongations to the periphery or
to the organs. These prolongations are of two kinds: some transmit
impressions towards the cell (dendrites prolongations), others transmit
excitations proceeding from the cell (cylindraxes prolongations).[39]
The centres themselves are hierarchised, so to speak, and are divided
into two wide categories: the first destined to the functions of
organic life, circulation, secretions, digestion, etc.; the second
to those of the life of relation. These two categories include the
sensitive cells and the motor cells; the one transmits to the other
the stimulus born of excitations provoked by the internal or external
centres.

      [39] _Dendrites_, nerves conducting the influx towards the
      centre of the cell.

      _Cylindraxes_, nerves conducting from the cell towards the
      periphery or towards another cell.

In superior animals, at any rate in man, we observe that the activity
of certain nervous centres is accompanied by a particular phenomenon,
which is designated under the name of _personal_ consciousness. It is
the notion we have that the phenomenon is perceived by us, that the
movement executed is executed by us.

Personal consciousness does not accompany all perceived phenomena, nor
all executed movements. Certain given conditions of diverse orders
appear necessary, for the consciousness to become aware of these
phenomena. This conscious consciousness is translated by the connection
of the impression or of the movement with a personality.

This personality looks to us as though it were continuous. It is around
it that our past impressions are grouped in the form of souvenirs. It
is that which continues the ‘self.’

The consciousness I have just described is what I call the _personal
consciousness_. The notion of personality which characterises it is not
invariable, and is not necessary.

It is not invariable, because the study of morbid psychology reveals
to us that different personalities can succeed one another in the same
individual, or even appear to be concomitant. This is notably the case
with secondary personalities in hysteria or in epilepsy.

It is not necessary, for diverse phenomena can be perceived and stored
up in the memory without the personal consciousness being conscious
thereof; in the same way, movements adapted to a certain purpose may
be executed without the personal consciousness being warned thereof:
such are notably the reflex and complicated movements, which custom has
rendered automatic.

The result of these facts is that the personal consciousness is
manifested as a limitation of the general consciousness, of what I
will simply call _the consciousness_. The study of the alterations of
memory notably—diverse amnesiæ, hypermnesiæ, paramnesiæ—shows us that
those souvenirs of which the general and impersonal consciousness has
the free disposition are incomparably more numerous than those at the
disposal of the personal consciousness. This is incontestable as far
as memory is concerned; is it so with intelligence? It is hard to say;
there are, however, numerous examples of problems solved and of work
accomplished without the knowledge of the personal consciousness.

Anatomy and physiology inform us, that personal consciousness is
manifested in phenomena, which appear to have their seat in certain
regions on the surface of the cerebral hemispheres. The cortical
region seems to be appropriated, at least in part, by psychological
phenomena, of which personality is the centre, active memory,
attention, judgment, abstraction, will. It is for this reason that
this region is called ‘the superior centres.’ Underneath this region
the cerebral sub-cortical ganglions, the bulbous and medullary nuclei,
the sympathetic ganglions, and the plexus constitute the inferior
centres which preside over certain functions foreign to the personal
consciousness.

However, it must not be thought that the activity of the cortical
centres is always perceived by the personal consciousness. That of
the motor centres, for example, may exist unknown to the personal
consciousness. I have already given the indication of certain
complicated movements which can be voluntary and personally conscious
in the beginning, and become, in the end, unconscious and yet
voluntary; _e.g._ the playing of a musical instrument. Likewise,
certain involuntary movements can sometimes be perceived by the
personal consciousness; _e.g._ the rapid movement we make in chasing
away a fly which is worrying us. If the centre motors of the arm which
drives away the fly be sub-cortical or medullary, it is none the less
true that the movements executed, even when they appear to be pure
reflex movements, can sometimes be perceived.

Movements executed without the participation of the personal
consciousness and will are called _automatic_. This expression
signifies for me, that the voluntary activity of the personality
remains foreign to the movement executed.

Therefore, in the motor sphere, that is to say in movements, we
may have different relations between the movement executed and the
personal consciousness. We have, first of all, conscious and voluntary
movements; then involuntary or impulsive movements, perceived or
unperceived by the personal consciousness.

These diverse movements are normal: that is to say, they are executed
according to the recognised rules of muscular activity; they do not go
beyond the peripheral limit of the body; the nervous influx is diffused
along the nerves in the ordinary manner.

If the nervous influx, or more correctly speaking, the mode of
energy which constitutes it, goes beyond the material limits of
the body, we have phenomena designated by de Rochas under the name
of _extériorisation de la motricité_. These are again automatic
phenomena for me, since the personal consciousness and the will do not
participate in them. But they present a feature which distinguishes
them from normal automatisms: they are _exosomatic_, if I may use that
expression, while the others are _endosomatic_. These two expressions
signify for me, the one exosomatic, that the movements are produced
beyond the limits of the body; the other endosomatic, that they are
produced within the limits of the body, that is to say by muscular
activity acting physiologically. The first, which are apparently
contrary to the ordinary data of experience, are paranormal phenomena,
that is to say, outside the usual rule; the second, on the contrary,
are normal. Parakinesis is a paranormal movement with contact;
telekinesis is a paranormal movement without contact.

Sensibility presents the same categories of facts. Properly speaking
there is no veritable automatism in phenomena of sensitivity; but
we can nevertheless distinguish therein, first, normal sensitive
phenomena—that is to say, phenomena produced under physiological
conditions, more or less well-known, but frequent, such as
hallucinations, hypermnesiæ; and second, paranormal phenomena, that is
to say, phenomena which imply the existence of modes of perception to
which the normal personality is foreign—clairvoyance, clairaudience,
tele-æsthesia, telepathy (Myers, Gurney, Podmore), exteriorisation of
motor power (de Rochas).

I have already indicated that these perceptions appear to depend upon
the _impersonal_ consciousness, and that the impressions thus perceived
are transmitted to the personal consciousness in a given form analogous
to that of dream perceptions—that is to say, in a dramatic form,
with a concrete and symbolical setting. The impersonal consciousness
seems, therefore, to be affected in a vague, general manner: the
perceptions only assume an appearance of precision in those strata of
the consciousness, where the notion of personality is determined. Hence
the following conclusions, which I only give as probabilities: (1) that
the notion of personality is susceptible of diverse degrees; (2) that
the impressions perceived by the general consciousness are agreeable or
disagreeable—that is to say, only impart to the personal consciousness
a very vague message, moral comfort or indefinable discomfort; that,
in rarer cases, the transmitted message is more precise, and takes the
form of a detailed hallucination; (3) that, if telepathy exists, the
general consciousness is capable of being affected by channels other
than those of the ordinary senses, which have only a value in ratio to
the personal consciousness of which they are, perhaps, the condition.

This last consideration brings us back to the definition which I gave
a little while ago of consciousness, which is, for me, the common
property of all living matter: its sensuality is limited and specified
by the _senses_, is limited and specified by the personality and the
will.

I beg the reader to excuse me for having entered into these
explanations. I wished, as I said before, to state as clearly as
possible the meanings I attach to the terms I use; I have still another
task to accomplish somewhat similar to the last: which is to classify
medianic phenomena before studying their relations with fraud. In the
first place I divide them into two wide categories, each capable of
penetrating into the other, for, with the exception of luminosities,
physical phenomena are rarely devoid of all meaning, and intellectual
phenomena have always some fact of a physical nature as substratum.
Therefore, these two categories are two _different aspects_ of the same
phenomena rather than two distinct categories.

If we consider the purely physical side, we have the following
approximate series:—


PHYSICAL PHENOMENA

_Sonorous._—Raps; diverse noises.

_Motor._—Normal; paranormal; parakinesis; telekinesis.

_Luminous._—Amorphous; definite forms; psychic (?) photography.

If we consider the form of communications, in appearance intelligent,
by adhering to the mode of expression of the _intellectual_ sense of
the phenomena, we have the following classification:—


INTELLECTUAL PHENOMENA: ENDOSOMATIC AUTOMATISM

_Muscular._—Typtology; grammatology; automatic script; automatic
speaking.

_Sensorial._—Visual, auditory, tactile, gustatory, olfactory phenomena.

_Vaso-Motor._—Secretory phenomena; vascular phenomena; perspirations,
etc.


EXOSOMATIC AUTOMATISM

(_Exteriorisations_): _Motor._—Telekinesis; psychography (direct
writing); psychophony (direct voice).

—— _Sensitive-Sensorial._—Telepathy; telæsthesia.

—— _Plastic._—Materialisations; apports, etc.


On the other hand, if we examine fraud in a general manner, we
will notice the following correspondences: the words conscious and
unconscious are taken in the sense of the personal consciousness:—

  _Motricity: normal._    1. Conscious and         Conscious voluntary
                               voluntary             fraud. Simulation;
                               movements.            responsibility.

     ——         ——        2. Conscious but         Conscious impulsive
                               involuntary           fraud. Simulation;
                               movements.            irresponsibility.

     ——         ——        3. Unconscious and       Impulsive and
                               involuntary           unconscious fraud;
                               movements.            irresponsibility.

     ——    _paranormal._  4. Exteriorisation of    No fraud.
                               motricity and
                               plasticity;
                               telekinesis;
                               materialisations.

  _Sensibility: normal._  5. Voluntary             Voluntary and
                               falsehood.            conscious fraud.
                                                     Simulation;
                                                     responsibility.

  _Sensibility: normal._  6. Illusions;            No fraud; no real
                               hallucinations;       phenomenon.
                               hypermnesiæ;
                               paramnesiæ.

     ——    _paranormal._  7. Exteriorisation of    No fraud; real
                               the sensibility;      phenomena.
                               clairaudience;
                               telepathy;
                               clairvoyance.

As for true exosomatic automatism, there can be no question of fraud
as far as it is concerned. This classification, which I only give as
an experiment, appears to me more complete than that of Ochorowicz’s
(_Annales de Sciences Psychiques_, vi. 97). The latter distinguishes—

  (_a_) Conscious fraud.
  (_b_) Unconscious fraud:
        in the waking state      }  Medianity of an
        in the trance state      }   inferior order.
  (_c_) Partial, automatic fraud }  Medianity of a
  (_d_) The pure phenomenon      }   superior order.

If we compare Ochorowicz’s table with mine we will notice that his
conscious fraud corresponds to Nos. 1 and 5 of my classification.

His unconscious fraud to No. 3.

I divide his partial, automatic fraud into the classes 2, 3, and 6.

The pure phenomenon into the classes 4 and 7.

His superior medianity includes all exosomatic automatisms (Nos. 4 and
7); his inferior medianity, the classes 3 and 6.

These general indications given, it is easy to see that I divide
fraud into three categories, which are, moreover, susceptible of
co-existing and of forming mixed types: this is the ordinary case. We
have, first of all, the guilty, voluntary and conscious fraud; then
the impulsive, but conscious, frequent fraud; then the unconscious and
involuntary fraud, veritable normal automatism: the author cannot be
held responsible for this last order of fraud, which is, moreover, very
frequent with many excellent mediums.

If we study the psychological mechanism of fraud, we will find variable
and diverse causes.


1. CONSCIOUS AND VOLUNTARY FRAUD

The most usual cause is self-interest. This is the case with
charlatans, who speculate upon the credulity of the public. We must
not think this is the only motive; each impostor obeys motives which
are peculiar to himself. The medical student, who gave me such curious
examples of fraud, was not actuated by motives of self-interest. I
think it was simply for the pleasure of cheating, of taking me in, for
I had often spoken to him about my suspicions. He often cheated simply
as a prank; this is what happened in a seance given by a spiritistic
group to convince some new converts, when my student, it appears, gave
them manifestations somewhat out of the common!

However, conscious and voluntary fraud raise no real psychological
problem.


2. CONSCIOUS AND INVOLUNTARY OR MIXED FRAUD

On the contrary, the problem originates in this order of fraud. It
often happens in circles, though composed of honourable persons, that
some of the sitters, who would be incapable of voluntarily committing a
fraud, do not dare to accuse themselves of an involuntary movement made
by them, and of which they are conscious. This can only be applied to
fairly rapid movements, such as those which imitate raps or parakinetic
movements. In serious seances, the sitters should give themselves the
habit of openly acknowledging every involuntary movement; it will be
noticed that certain persons are very prone to these movements. They
often end by being ashamed of accusing themselves so often, and thus
fraud from timidity: I have met with this, especially among women. It
is one of the reasons which make me condemn all experiments for the
production of movements with contact.

Timidity is the usual cause of this kind of fraud: the psychological
problem raised is simple.


3. UNCONSCIOUS AND INVOLUNTARY FRAUD

Here the problem becomes complicated. I will not distinguish, as
Ochorowicz does, fraud committed in the waking state from fraud
committed in the trance or second state. The psychological mechanism
is the same in both cases, and appears to me to depend upon
self-suggestion, or what has been called _monoïdeism_, that is to say,
the mind is invaded by one idea, which ends by stifling all others, and
by realising itself: it is, in reality, a phenomenon analogous to that
determined by suggestion.

It is in unconscious or involuntary frauds, that the psychological
disaggregation of the medium which Janet has studied, is best observed.
These frauds present phenomena which are without interest from a
medianic point of view.

What is the mechanism of unconscious and involuntary frauds? It appears
to me to be the following: the subjects—they may have been good
mediums in their day—who commit this kind of fraud sit down to the
table, or give a seance in view of obtaining supernormal phenomena.
But the production of these phenomena is often difficult, sometimes
impossible. Immobility, expectation, and obscurity act powerfully upon
the nervous system of these mediums, and particularly so when they are
hysterical. They determine the trance; the desire for the phenomenon
becomes a fixed idea, and then a self-suggestion. If the supernormal
phenomenon delays, the inferior strata of the consciousness—_whose
morality often differs greatly from that of the active personal
consciousness_—realises it normally.

In the same way, even if the sensitive does not fall into the trance
state, there is, nevertheless, a particular state manifested which is
not sleep, neither is it the full, genuine waking-state. The active
and voluntary personal element of the consciousness, as well as the
judgment, becomes weakened. The sphere of the personality is reduced,
and personal activity gives place to automatism. Every degree between
conscious and involuntary fraud and pure automatism is to be met with.

Therefore, it is prudent to take measures to guard against fraud with
all subjects who become entranced, or with those who become somnolent
in obscurity, silence, immobility, and expectation; but we should be
frank with our sensitives: let us not offer, in ourselves, an example
of dissimulation to the medium; neither must we let him have the
impression of not being controlled: this would be to expose him to a
temptation, all the greater in that his personal power of volition is
weakened.

Add to this, that we do not in the least know what influence the mental
state of the experimenters has upon the medium, although some kind
of influence appears to me to exist. We do not know to what extent
an ill-founded certitude of fraud can be responsible for its birth.
Ochorowicz says on this subject:—

‘After having recognised that the medium is only a mirror, who reflects
and directs the ideas and nervous forces of the assistants towards an
ideoplastic end, we will not be surprised to see that _suggestion_
plays an important rôle therein. There is no doubt but that the
assistants can suggest the desired act to the medium; neither is it
doubtful that the manifestations bear the stamp of surrounding beliefs.
In a society of materialists I have seen “John” (with Eusapia Paladino)
become dissolved into an impersonal force, which the medium simply
called “questa forza,” while in intimate spiritistic circles it took
the form of deceased persons, more or less clumsily. In the same way,
with controllers imbued with the idea of fraud as Messrs. Hodgson and
Maskelyne were, the medium will remain under the empire of a suggestion
of fraud.’

Without completely sharing Ochorowicz’s conviction, I have reasons for
thinking that his theory comes very close to the truth. I have myself
indicated how _suggestible_ the personification is.

There is something else. In cases where force is lacking, or is feeble,
it is easier for the medium to obtain the phenomenon normally—that
is to say, by fraud—rather than by veritable exteriorisation. I have
remarked, that often the paranormal movement has to be normally
simulated before it is supernormally realised. This is frequently the
case with Eusapia. We can conceive how the movement of simulation can
end in fraud, when the medium is in a hemisomnambulistic state.

In short, the energy which sets an object in movement appears to me
to be of nervous origin, and I believe it to be of the same nature
as that which provokes muscular contractions. Therefore, this is what
follows: the force only becomes exteriorised if accumulated and wrought
up to a sufficient tension. In proportion as its tension increases,
so it tends to expend itself in the form of impulsive movements;
the medium must resist this tendency to be able to obtain the pure
phenomenon. Therefore experimenters ought to keep the medium in this
resistance, and not allow him facility for expending the energy which
tends to realise itself in muscular movements.

Such are the conclusions to which the observations I have made with
several mediums have led me. Unconscious and involuntary fraud is
frequent, and in order to avoid it, the conditions likely to favour it
should be carefully put aside, especially in the beginning of a series
of experiments, and when experimenting with an undeveloped medium.
Medianity is powerfully influenced by acquired habits.

There exists, finally, another kind of unconscious and involuntary
fraud: that which is due to illusion. It is constantly found in
spiritistic seances, where ninety-nine times out of a hundred mediums
produce no real phenomena. They are, nevertheless, in earnest, but they
do not take into consideration the rôle of memory and imagination. This
is particularly the case with _intuitive_ writing mediums and ‘control’
mediums. With this order of phenomenon we rarely obtain verifiable
indications; the ‘spirits’ utter plenty of commonplace generalities,
but give no precise information.

_Fraud_ is a misnomer in this case: being unconscious and involuntary,
it cannot, correctly speaking, be called fraud; therefore it is better
to reserve the word ‘illusion’ for it.

I cannot think of analysing the question of fraud in detail. If
examined closely it is extremely complicated. But, like Richet, I deem
‘it possible that in states bordering on trance, and in trance itself,
the psychology of a medium may be very different from ours.’ I confine
myself simply to indicating the result of my reflections, which are the
fruit of a long series of observations. Let me renew my oft-repeated
recommendation for avoiding fraud: Experiment with light, the greatest
possible amount of light, and seek for simple phenomena, difficult,
perhaps, to obtain, but easy to observe, such as raps and movements
without contact.


II. ERROR

If I insist so much upon the necessity, especially in the beginning,
of seeking only for phenomena observation of which is easy, it is
because error of observation is facile. We need to be much accustomed
to seances to be able to distinguish rapidly between probable phenomena
and those which are certainly tricked. It is with this, as with
everything else, a question of time and reflection.

One of the causes of error, which it is highly important to avoid,
is obscurity. For many simple phenomena darkness is unnecessary;
therefore, from the very outset, we should exhort the personification
to accept light. I have already frequently said that personifications
are very suggestible. I know well it is not always so, and that at
times the personification displays much obstinacy. Personifications of
this class are especially observed with mediums who have long-acquired
habits. It was so with Eusapia, who was only accustomed to giving
dark seances. But even when the personification appears to have very
decided ideas, it is possible, with a little ingenuity, to induce him
to change. It is with them as with secondary personalities, or subjects
to whom we have given a suggestion. We must enter right into the circle
of suggested ideas in order to break it; it is a question of tact only.

With Eusapia we succeeded in operating in a good light by appealing to
‘John’s’ vanity. We explained to him that obscurity stood in the way
of the observation of the phenomena, that he was just as capable of
working in the light as the ‘guides’ of other mediums were. In this
way, we lead him to change his habits with us; the _meno luce_ to which
those who have experimented with this medium are accustomed, was still
demanded, but only when the seance was well advanced. At Bordeaux,
where there was a large bay-window in the seance-room, the reflection
thereon from the lights burning in the kitchen and winter-garden
enabled us to see a little. In that case, Eusapia or John did not
desire total obscurity, and we always had this feeble light, allowing a
visual control which was sometimes satisfactory.

When we are lucky enough to meet with an undeveloped medium, it is easy
to give him the habit of operating in full light. This has occasionally
happened to me.

I need not enlarge upon the influence of obscurity upon error. With
some very rare exceptions we can never be certain of the authenticity
of a phenomenon obtained in a dark seance.

Obscurity is, however, necessary for luminous phenomena. When once we
have observed decided luminous forms, or really characteristic lights,
it is easy to distinguish between them and illusion. A cool, calm
observer does not make a mistake; it is not quite the same with excited
experimenters. These latter give veritable suggestions to one another,
and they end by having curious collective hallucinations. This is one
of the most interesting facts of observation in spiritistic seances,
so rich in purely psychological curiosities. I have frequently heard
a sitter say that he saw a light in a given direction; the others
looked in their turn and also saw it. Then one declared he perceived a
form; soon others also saw a form. And from exclamation to exclamation
the description of the form is completed. This is the genesis of a
collective hallucination.

I need hardly say, that experimenters who are so suggestible are not
good elements: in purely scientific researches they should be reduced
to a minimum.

Personal experience has shown me, that of all the senses, that of sight
is the most liable to imaginary impressions; after sight, the sense
of touch is the most prompt to receive illusion. There are constant
examples of this in spiritistic seances; the _cool breeze_, which is
often really felt, is more often only imaginary. One person says he
feels it; others at once imagine they feel it also. Sometimes it is not
an error of imagination, but an error of attribution, the sensation of
a cool breeze being caused by the breath.

The sense of hearing has seemed to me to be refractory to suggestion
in seances, though it does not altogether escape. I know of very few
examples of imagined raps or noises.

On the contrary, the muscular sense is one of the most unfaithful.
Unless one has experimented oneself, it is impossible to imagine how
frequent unconscious and involuntary movements are. These movements are
of very feeble amplitude; they are slight, but they end by acquiring a
certain amount of force. It will then be noticed that the assistants
accuse each other reciprocally of pushing the table, and it is not rare
to see angry discussions arise on these occasions. This is a frequent
fact of observation. I have also very frequently noticed tactile
hallucinations with impressionable experimenters, who easily imagine
diverse contacts.

The sense of smell sometimes perceives imaginary odours, but it is
somewhat rare. I have not observed any hallucinations of taste.

Another cause of error which requires pointing out is fatigue on the
part of the experimenters. Every phenomenon which is produced after a
long period of waiting stands many chances of being badly observed. The
attention kept for a long time on the _qui vive_ becomes weary, gives
place to abstraction, and often the phenomena takes the experimenters
by surprise; hence they are unable to examine the conditions with
certitude. It is also bad to hold very long seances, fatigue quickly
setting in.

Such are the principal causes of positive errors; that is to say, of
errors tending to persuade one of the existence of an imaginary fact;
negative errors, that is to say, those which tend to make one look upon
a real fact as an imaginary one, are not less dangerous than positive
errors.

In the first place, _parti pris_ is to be pointed out. If we wish to
experiment with success, we must experiment without credulity, without
faith, even without confidence; but we must not be determined only to
meet with fraud.

We must not experiment naïvely. If, at the beginning of a seance, it
be useful to allow freedom in order to put the force _en train_, as
Ochorowicz wisely recommends, once the phenomena are established,
we must control them with the greatest care. But we should make our
intentions known to the medium and to the personification. This,
I think, is an indispensable precaution. The personification will
always consent to it; but this does not mean we will always obtain the
wished-for result. We must not allow the medium or the personification
to think we are their dupes if they fraud; we must tell them, gently
but clearly, that they are not giving anything good. Equivocation is to
be carefully avoided, all misunderstanding is to be shunned.

We must not, however, place the medium under such conditions that the
experiment cannot be realised. We do not understand these conditions,
and, perhaps, apparently simple phenomena may not be realisable. I
remember that at Choisy in 1896, a lady, a member of my family—she
has an insurmountable bias against psychical experiments, which she
declares _a priori_ are fraudulent—declared to Eusapia that she would
believe in her phenomena, if she could make a doll’s table move before
her eyes. Eusapia placed this small table on top of the seance-table,
but did not succeed in making it move. Why could not such an
apparently simple phenomenon be obtained?

We must, therefore, observe, but we must not wish to impose beforehand
the conditions which the phenomenon should fulfil in order to be
accepted.

Many experimenters tie up the medium, put him into a sack, and seal
him therein. If he consents to this, well and good; if he refuses,
other means of control must be found. We must not indeed suppose that
the medium’s refusal is always due to a desire to fraud. The slightest
fetters may sometimes be very painful, especially when there be
cutaneous hyperæsthesia.

Before bringing a negative judgment to bear upon the phenomena, the
experimenters should always hold a certain number of seances, and
should not found their judgment upon one bad seance alone; by so doing
they would expose themselves to a wrong course of action.

It is especially in psychical experimentation that inexhaustible
patience is necessary.




CONCLUSION


And now my task is accomplished. I perceive that in the latter part
of my work, I have broached complex and difficult problems, and have
allowed myself to be drawn into—not theorising—but combating certain
theories which appear to me to be incorrect or insufficient; for which
I beg my reader’s pardon. In conclusion, I wish to repeat that I am
convinced of having, in a sure, positive manner, observed raps and
movements without contact. I have seen many other phenomena; but I will
not venture to be so affirmative concerning them, at present.

I make no pretension of demonstrating the reality of the facts I have
observed. In publishing my conclusions, I have had but one object in
view, that of bringing my testimony to those, who, long before me,
attested to the facts which I in my turn affirm. Does that mean that
I have not been mistaken? most assuredly, no! And it is very possible
that my observations may have been imperfect. I am, nevertheless,
so convinced of their exactness, that I can only advise those who
may impugn the accuracy of my statements, to experiment as I have
done, with the same method, and the same patience. I have had many
occasions to pronounce these words in the course of my work, and now in
terminating it, I pronounce them once again with stronger emphasis than
ever.

I doubt, though, whether my voice will be heeded, where others, more
influential than mine, have remained unheard. However, I do not
regret having expressed my opinion about these facts. I am persuaded,
that some day, _perhaps very soon_, they will come under scientific
discipline, and this, in spite of all the obstacles which obstinacy and
fear of ridicule accumulate in the way.

One of these obstacles, and it is not the least, is due to the fashion
in which many savants estimate mediums. Their judgment is summed up in
such expressions as hysteric, cheat, physically or morally tainted,
degenerates. Such a judgment is iniquitous, absurd and false in its
generality, and baneful in its consequences. It is founded upon a
deplorable error, for I know mediums who possess faculties superior
to the average, and who present absolutely no stigma of degeneracy. I
have said, and I cannot repeat it too often, my finest phenomena were
obtained with subjects who were sound and healthy in mind and body. It
is with hysterical subjects that we observe fraud, side by side with
gleams of true phenomena; but with a medium who has no nervous taint,
whose well-balanced intelligence knows how to offer resistance to
self-suggestion, and _l’idée fixe_, we have real phenomena or none at
all.

The opinion of savants, who, ill acquainted with the facts, inform
us that mediums are hysterics and victims of nervous disorders, is
therefore erroneous; unfortunately the consequences of such an opinion
are lamentable. I know many remarkable subjects who absolutely refuse
to experiment outside a tested and restricted group, because they fear
to be regarded as neurotics; they are afraid of being stigmatised
as insane, they are afraid of compromising their commercial position
or their professional interests. I will never succeed in convincing
them that they are above the average; doubtless I will succeed still
less in inducing others to believe it: though in many respects it be
true. If the relative perfection of their nervous system renders these
persons more sensitive than the average, it would be wrong to conclude
thereupon, that they were degenerate specimens of humanity. This
argument is lacking in common-sense; we might just as reasonably insist
that Europeans are in degeneration, because they are more emotional
and more sensitive to pain than certain savage tribes. How ignorant,
tactless, and incautious we are! The attitude of certain learned
centres—it is with intention that I do not say the most cultured—is,
to me, similar to that of ecclesiastical authorities in the middle
ages. The novelty of a thing frightens them. They treat independent
scientific thought as the inquisitors treated free thought in days
gone by. Like their prototypes of other times, they have the same
intolerance, the same hate for schism and heresy. Their accumulated
errors ought to make them cautious: but, no! If they no longer make a
pariah of the arch-heretic or schismatic, if they no longer deliver
him up to the executioner, they treat him with the same relative
vigour. They excommunicate him, in their fashion, and cast him out
of sane healthy humanity as a degenerate, a mystic, an _exalté_. The
future will have the same opinion of them as we have, to-day, of their
predecessors. Their attitude prevents the most cultured, the most
capable mediums from allowing their psychic faculties to become known.
If these mediums spoke of visions, a douche would be recommended! If
they caused a table to move without contact, the words hysteria and
fraud would be heard. Is it surprising they should hide their gifts?

We ought to consider mediums as precious beings, as forerunners of the
future type of our race. Why should we only see degeneracy around us?
Why should we not see superior beings ahead of us, beacons, as it were,
on the route we have to follow? Does not simple common-sense suggest
that humanity has not yet arrived at perfection—that it is evolving
to-day just as it has always been doing? All men have not attained the
same degree of evolution. As there are types representing the average
state of former days, so there are advanced types representing to-day
the average state of the future. The progress of the race seems to
make for perfection along the lines of the nervous system, in the
acquisition of more delicate senses, of greater nervous sensibility,
and of vaster means of information. If the discovery of implements, new
instruments of investigation, such as the telescope and microscope,
for example, aid in the progress of the race, they are of no use for
the evolution of the individual himself. Now, veritable progress is
individual; it is the improvement of the individual which assures
the evolution of the race, and this progress should be determined by
heredity. Do what we will, we shall never be born with a microscope
at the eyes, and a telephone at the ears. Progress of this kind is
not transmissible; only physiological acquisitions are transmissible.
The sensibility of the nervous system of mediums is a progress on
our relative obtuseness; it is not the same thing with the bad sight
of him who makes an improper use of the microscope. If Virchow were
still alive, there would be many disagreeable things to be said to him,
concerning the inaptitude of the ordinary type of savant to personify
the desirable progress of the race towards health, force, sensibility,
and the perfect form.

The intolerance of certain savants is equalled by that of certain
dogmas. To take an example, Catholicism considers psychical phenomena
as the work of the devil! Is it worth while at this hour to discuss
so obsolete a theory? I think not. However, superior ecclesiastical
authorities, with the tact and sentiment of opportunism which they
often show, permit many Catholics to undertake the experimental study
of psychical facts. I cannot blame them for recommending prudent
abstention to the mass of the faithful; spiritism appears to me to
be an adversary with which they will have to reckon very seriously
some day. The simplicity of its doctrines ensures it the _clientèle_
of simple souls enamoured of justice, that is to say, of the immense
majority of mankind.

But this question is foreign to psychical facts themselves. As far as
my experience permits me to judge of them, these phenomena contain
nothing but what is natural. The devil does not show his hoof here,
timorous souls may feel reassured; if the tables claim to be Satan
himself, they need not be believed; summoned to prove his power, this
grandiloquent Satan will be a sorry thaumaturgist. Religious prejudice,
which proscribes these experiments as being supernatural, is just as
little justified as scientific prejudice, which sees therein nothing
but fraud and imposture. Here, again, the old adage of Aristotle finds
its application: Justice lies midway.

May my book determine a few experimenters of goodwill to try to
observe in their turn. May it help to dispel from the mind of gifted
mediums their fears of being ranked with insane and disordered
intelligences, or looked upon as being in partnership with the devil.
May it especially contribute to make metapsychic phenomena come to
be considered as natural facts, worthy of being usefully observed,
and capable of enabling us to penetrate more deeply than any other
phenomena into a real knowledge of the laws which govern Nature.




APPENDIX A

_An Appreciation on Certain Documents published on the subject of
Fraud._


The question of fraud is so important that I feel I should not only
give the results of my own observations, but also my appreciation of
some of the principal documents published on the subject.

With the exception of Richet and a few others, representatives of
science in France are very ill informed on this question, as I have
endeavoured to show. They overlook the immense work which has been done
in the United States and in England; consequently it is very difficult
to discuss the question with these savants, they are either ignorant or
feign to be ignorant of what others have done. I have shown that their
experiments are defective and their methods open to criticism.

If all serious discussion be impossible with certain savants, it
is not so with those who have taken the trouble to verify psychic
phenomena for themselves. This is the case with the principal members
of the Society for Psychical Research, Crookes, Lodge, Barrett, Myers,
Sidgwick, Gurney, Podmore, Hodgson, Hyslop, and others. The first three
are persuaded of the reality of the facts observed by them. The others
have a tendency to attribute to fraud all _physical_ phenomena; they
admit, on the other hand, _intellectual_ phenomena, and explain them
either by telepathy as Mr. Podmore does, or by the intervention of
spirits as spiritists themselves do, though they were at one time the
latter’s adversaries; this is notably the case with Myers, Hodgson,
and Hyslop. The great respect I have for the remarkable men who direct
the Society for Psychical Research, obliges me to examine their
experiments very carefully, for their judgment has a great value in
my eyes; at the same time, I have too much regard for the research of
truth to conceal from them the errors of experimentation, which they
appear to me to have committed.

In the fourth volume of the _Proceedings_ will be found a series
of papers by Mrs. Sidgwick, Messrs. Lewis, Hodgson, and Davey upon
fraud. The last-named deal particularly with the production of direct
slate-writing. This phenomenon is very easy to simulate; it suffices to
read the papers mentioned, especially Davey’s document, to understand
under what suspicious conditions the phenomenon was produced.

A long time ago I myself artificially produced this kind of
manifestation by fixing a pencil into a hole in the table, and
thereupon moving the slate about. With practice a certain amount
of facility can be acquired; you can write fairly well and give
regularity to apparently spasmodic and involuntary movements; but only
inexperienced or credulous people are taken in by this trick; and
though they may be more complicated, Mr. Davey’s methods are not by any
means more difficult to expose.

I wonder how a man of Dr. Hodgson’s intelligence could have based
his judgment upon such superficial observations as those of the
experimenters he cites. Here are men, without doubt honourable and
well educated, who hold seances with the object of obtaining direct
slate-writing through Mr. Davey. Instead of taking the elementary
precaution of never abandoning their slates, they allow the medium to
manipulate them, permit him to leave the seance-room for a moment,
consent to allow other slates than their own to remain on the table
at the same time as those which are used for the experiment, and
lastly when they examine, only examine it on one side. This is not
mal-observation, it is absence of observation. (See R. Hodgson, ‘Mr.
Davey’s Imitations by Conjuring of Phenomena sometimes attributed to
Spirit Agency,’ _Proceedings_, vi. 253.)

Mr. Davey has also produced raps and materialisations fraudulently.
It is necessary to read, in Dr. Hodgson’s paper, the conditions
under which he operated to see what ill-placed confidence his
co-experimenters had in him (Davey). They do not verify, although
they are invited to do so, the contents of a trunk precisely where
the material essential to fraud was concealed; they allow Mr. Davey
to close the door of the room: he gives two turns of the key, the one
locking, the other unlocking the door, which is carelessly sealed with
gummed paper; no one thinks of verifying if the door is well closed.
The most elementary precautions are neglected by the assistants who,
one would really think, had been chosen by Mr. Davey for their very
credulity. Frauds as easy to prevent as those from which Dr. Hodgson
draws his argument, cannot be considered as being able to take in a
prudent, shrewd observer, accustomed to experimentation, and knowing
how to preserve a little _sang-froid_. Was it not enough that the
medium should have asked one of the observers: ‘What do you want the
spirit to write on the slate? In what colour do you want the writing
to appear?’ for these very questions alone to suggest imposture? Dr.
Hodgson’s argumentation is inoperative, and the faults, accumulated
by the deceived observers whose impressions he cites, are excessive.
One would think he had had to do with very convinced spiritists,
inclined to admit _a priori_ the reality of the forthcoming phenomena
without troubling themselves about the precise conditions of their
observations; this is what the perusal of the reports of these seances
makes one think, for I read textually (p. 296): ‘It may be interesting
to compare the reports given by spiritualists of a sitting with Mr.
Davey with his account of what really occurred.’ Can one draw an
argument from these accounts of spiritists? Some spiritists, convinced
of the reality of the facts, appear to care very little indeed about
any sort of control. To reason from their methods of observation, to
generalise this reasoning and to extend it to all observers, is rather
too easy a form of discussion.

There are certain phenomena which lend themselves badly to observation:
this is particularly the case with those which require obscurity and
arrangements of a nature likely to hinder or interfere with the best
control which can be exercised, that of the eyesight. In my opinion
the phenomenon has no demonstrative value whenever it occurs out of
sight, as is the case with slate-writing, when the slate is held under
the table. Neither has it any great signification when it requires
sustained observation in order to control it. Errors are easy, for
abstraction almost inevitably follows, if it does not accompany,
sustained attention. Hodgson, in ‘The Possibilities of Mal-Observation
and Lapse of Memory from a Practical Point of View’ (_Proceedings_,
iv. 381) gives examples of this, but his paper only points out facts
well known to those who are familiar with human testimony. In order
to observe with a minimum chance of error, the phenomenon we intend
to study should be simple, and repeated often enough to prevent the
attention from becoming weary from waiting. From this point of view,
the production of raps and telekinetic movements with the aid of
the experimental manœuvres I have described, permit, by specifying
the moment when the phenomenon is going to occur, of bringing the
whole attention to bear upon the examination of the conditions under
which the phenomenon is obtained. Raps and movements without contact
appear to me to lend themselves admirably to observation; with these
phenomena, by operating as I have indicated, experimentation is almost
possible; but a veritable medium must be sought for in the first
instance.

Now this is what my colleagues of the Society for Psychical Research
did, but they did so under conditions which were far from satisfactory.
Mrs. Sidgwick, a woman of brilliant intellect, has given an account
of the attempts made by herself, her husband, and friends to obtain
psychical phenomena. They went to Eglinton and Slade for slate-writing,
to the Misses Wood and Fairlamb and a Mr. Haxby for materialisations.
The first two gave phenomena which were suspicious, not to say worse;
as for Haxby, he frauded shamefacedly. Mrs. Sidgwick’s account is
demonstrative on this point, and it is enough to read it to be
convinced that no shrewd observer could be taken in.

The first mistake, committed by the distinguished members of the
Sidgwick group, was to suppose that psychical phenomena can be obtained
at will. Whenever a paid medium gives regular seances, there are a
hundred chances to one of downright fraud. If there be a positive
feature in these supernormal facts, that feature in my opinion is their
apparent irregularity. I have been able to experiment with intelligent,
well-educated mediums anxious for a thorough investigation of their
powers: I have made very many experiments with them, and I have
observed that often whole weeks passed away without a good seance; at
other times, the force was so abundant that phenomena were forthcoming
without seance. I have related some curious facts in this respect,
_e.g._ the table moving spontaneously in the course of a conversation
bearing upon psychical phenomena (p. 106).

What are the conditions which impede or favour the production of this
unknown mode of energy? I cannot specify them; but I think I have
noticed concordances, which confirm in a measure the conclusions of
Ochorowicz (_Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, vi. 115):—

1. Action of temperature. Dry cold weather is the most favourable. Damp
or close weather is most unfavourable.

2. Health of the medium and sitters. If the medium does not feel well,
things happen as though he exteriorised no force whatever. It is the
same thing with the sitters, but in a lesser degree; in the latter case
it suffices to eliminate the experimenter who feels ill.

3. Mental condition of the medium and sitters.[40] Ill-humour, anxiety,
sadness—especially a sadness without any specific cause, a kind of
mental discomfort—are prejudicial. Joy, gaiety are often favourable.

      [40] There are _apparent_ exceptions to this rule.

4. Nervous exhaustion. This condition is too often overlooked. I have
not unfrequently had occasion to conduct several series of experiments
at one and the same time. I generally noticed that the results were not
good. I have not been able to understand the cause of this want of
success; it is probably other than that of simple nervous exhaustion,
although this may have an action in prolonged series of seances.

Neither do seances held too frequently with the same medium give good
results; in this case, nervous exhaustion is certainly in play.

The English experimenters do not appear to have taken these diverse
elements into consideration; I am persuaded the results of their
investigations would have been different had they shunned ‘paid
mediums,’ and sought for fresh or undeveloped mediums, persons
uninfluenced by private considerations, intelligent and capable of
bringing a correct analysis of their subjective impressions into the
research. These mediums are rare, but they are to be found.

None of these conditions were fulfilled by the Sidgwick group. These
experimenters, acting with the best of intentions, took a wrong
course. Eglinton, Slade, Haxby, have perhaps been genuine mediums in
their time, but as soon as they made it a business to give regular
seances, they were at once prepared to give fraudulent phenomena with
regularity. At Newcastle, the group operated at one and the same time
with Miss Fairlamb and with Miss Wood. These two parallel series of
experiments could not help being prejudicial one to the other, even if
these two mediums had been honest, which does not appear to have been
the case, judging from Mrs. Sidgwick’s account.

I cannot think of discussing in detail all the experiments of the
Sidgwick group; but I will study their experiments with Eusapia
Paladino at Cambridge more carefully, for their judgment on this medium
appears to me unjustified. Every one knows under what conditions
Messrs. Myers, Hodgson, Sidgwick, etc., invited Eusapia to England, in
order to resume experiments previously made with her at Ribaud. These
experiments had obtained a favourable report from Dr. Lodge; Mr. Myers
and Mr. Sidgwick associated themselves with Dr. Lodge’s conclusions.
Dr. Hodgson—who is a doctor of law and not a doctor of medicine, as
some people suppose—criticised the experiments summarised by Dr.
Lodge. He was met with the reply that his criticisms contained nothing
new; that what he said had been already pointed out by Richet and
others, and that the experimenters were acquainted with every possible
system of fraud; that the substitution of one hand for another,
the substitution of an artificial foot for the medium’s foot, were
well-known systems of imposture, against which every precaution had
been taken. Nevertheless, and notwithstanding the fact that the report
had been drawn up by such competent men as Richet, Ochorowicz, Lodge,
and Myers, it was criticised with an undeniable appearance of logic
and justice by Hodgson: the latter reproached them for insufficiently
describing the manner in which the diverse controls were ensured, for
omitting to dwell upon the precautions which were taken, and for the
lack of a minute description of all the movements of the medium. In his
article (_Journal_, vii. 49) he expressly says:—

‘Professor Lodge makes the following declaration concerning the raising
of the table:—

‘“It appears to me impossible for any person to lift a table of this
size and weight while standing up to it, with hands only on top,
without plenty of leg action, and considerable strength and pressure of
hands. It was quite beyond the possibility of Eusapia.”

‘Now let us suppose,’ continues Hodgson, ‘that Eusapia used a form of
support which, with some variation or other, I fancy is not altogether
unknown in the Italian race. Let us suppose that she had, next to her
body, a light strong band round her shoulders and across her chest,
with a pendant attached of a black band or cord, with a hook or other
catch at the end which could be tucked out of sight in her dress front
when not in use. (By the way, in a photograph which I have seen of
Eusapia at a sitting, when the table is supposed to be completely off
the floor, one of the buttons of the bosom of her dress seems to be
unfastened.)

‘She fixed this catch—either stooping or bending her legs slightly
outward—to one of the sideboards of the table, or to some point in
the neighbourhood of the junctures of, for example, sideboards and top
of table. She straightened herself out, stiffened her shoulders and
her body back, and pushed forward with her foot against the leg of the
table, close to which she was standing. The light touch of one of her
hands may have helped to steady the table, the edge of which may also
have been in contact with her body. Was this hypothesis or any kindred
hypothesis tested by Professor Lodge?’ etc.

This long quotation shows how Hodgson reasons. Conscientious savants
omitted to indicate, explicitly, in their report, that every hypothesis
of fraud had been studied and put to one side; they omitted to analyse
each hypothesis, because their implicit affirmation of the reality
of the fact appeared sufficient to them, and a detailed examination
of each hypothesis would have given exaggerated dimensions to their
report. No matter. Analysts like Dr. Hodgson will not spare them,
and will not hesitate to indicate hypotheses, even those the least
compatible with the conditions of observation.

However, the Cambridge experiments were decided upon, and although
Hodgson had taken a decided stand in the matter, he was invited to
assist. These experiments gave bad results, and Sidgwick was able to
say, in spite of the contrary observations of other experimenters, who
were his colleagues in the Society for Psychical Research (_Journal
S. P. R._, vii. 230): ‘It will be seen that at our last meeting a
question was asked with regard to “phenomena” obtained by Eusapia
Paladino subsequent to the exposure of her frauds at Cambridge. It may
be well that I should briefly state why I do not intend to give any
account of these phenomena.

‘It has not been the practice of the Society for Psychical Research
to direct attention to the performances of any so-called “medium” who
has been proved guilty of systematic fraud. Now, the investigation at
Cambridge, of which the results are given in the _Journal_ for November
1895, taken in connection with an article by Professor Richet in the
_Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, for January-February 1893, placed
beyond reasonable doubt the facts that the frauds discovered (_sic_) by
Dr. Hodgson at Cambridge, had been systematically practised by Eusapia
Paladino for years. In accordance, therefore, with our established
custom, I propose to ignore her performances for the future, as I
ignore those of other persons engaged in the same mischievous trade.’

Such a judgment made a considerable and lamentable stir: if it were
exact, it was just to pronounce it; if it were not thoroughly exact,
Sidgwick should have suspended his verdict. This is what Myers
advised—this is what Lodge and Richet advised. But the experimenters
who followed Hodgson’s impulse did not do this. They made a mistake,
and subsequent events have proved they were wrong.

I have said that their judgment was not quite accurate. Professor
Sidgwick said, addressing a general meeting of the Society for
Psychical Research on the 11th October 1895 (_Journal S. P. R._, vii.
131):—

‘I consider it to be proved beyond a doubt that the medium used
systematic trickery throughout this series of sittings. Her _modus
operandi_ I will leave to Dr. Hodgson to describe, who—though only
present during a part of the sittings—has had better opportunities
for personally observing the actual process of fraud. When this
trickery was discovered, the greater part of the phenomena offered as
supernormal at these sittings were at once explained; and, this being
so, I think it, in the circumstances, unreasonable to attribute—even
hypothetically—to supernormal agency the residuum that was not so
easily explicable. And considering the great general resemblance
between the performances of the medium at these sittings and those
I witnessed last year, I am now disposed to think that my earlier
experiences are to be similarly explained; I therefore wish to withdraw
altogether the limited and guarded support which I gave last year to
the supernormal pretensions of Eusapia Paladino.’

So Sidgwick declares that his former experiments were null and void, as
everything could be explained by trickery!

Hodgson, at that same general meeting, explained the means used by
Eusapia, the surreptitious freeing of foot and hand, and some simple
apparatus such as a handkerchief and a small object, such as a coin
or a piece of paper, covered with some phosphorescent preparation.
Hodgson—and Myers reminded him of this—forgot to say that he had
invented nothing, and that these trick devices had been discovered and
previously pointed out by others, notably by Richet, who has often
experimented with Eusapia Paladino. Sidgwick remarks that a portion of
the phenomena are not easily explicable by fraud. It would have been
interesting to know which. I suspect that certain levitations were
among the number of these phenomena. But the notes published in the
_Journal S. P. R._, vii. 148, only mention _attouchements_, and it is
advisable to limit the discussion to this fact, though it appears to me
the least demonstrative.

Let us take the seance of the 1st September. We read p. 153:
‘7.25.—R. H. says, phenomenon preparing. _Enormous hand shaking
Mrs. M.’s head, hand clearly felt._ H. S., hand well held, but not
completely. R. H. has hand completely held, gap and then grasp again.
Hand holds H. S. well. Right hand, thumb and finger clutch R. H.
(On nearly all occasions after the first few hand-touch phenomena,
I informed the sitters of a coming phenomenon in some such words
as that a phenomenon was preparing, before the phenomenon actually
occurred, and usually immediately prior to its occurrence. I made this
announcement as a rule when I felt the right hand leaving mine, but
sometimes when I felt it preparing to leave. After the phenomenon was
over, and the hand returned, I described usually what I felt at the
moment of my description, so that E. might not become aware, through
some partial appreciation of my English, that I knew that her hand was
away from mine during the production of the phenomenon. In some cases,
when it was necessary, I added a few words about the state of holding
during the phenomenon.)’

I confess that I do not understand. Hodgson has shown himself so severe
for others, that he will not be annoyed with me for exacting the same
precision from him that he requires of others. Now, in the passage
quoted, we read: first, that Mrs. Myers is touched by an enormous hand,
a hand which is ‘clearly felt.’ Either it is Eusapia’s hand, released
by Hodgson, in which case it ought to be _small_, for Eusapia’s hand
is small, or Mrs. Myers did not ‘clearly feel’ the hand which shook
her. If Mrs. Myers has correctly described her impression, then Hodgson
makes a mistake in seeming to indicate that it is Eusapia’s hand which
touched Mrs. M.; if not, then Mrs. M. has made a mistake. At any rate,
there is a contradiction here between the two observers.

Sidgwick acknowledges that Eusapia’s tricks do not explain everything,
yet he allows Hodgson to expatiate complacently upon fraudulent
_attouchements_. The learned lawyer even mimicked Eusapia’s tricks
for freeing her hands and feet before members of the Society for
Psychical Research. But all this was already known by Continental
specialists. Hodgson had invented nothing; why did he confine himself
to partial criticisms? why did he not discuss each fact, and especially
those which appeared inexplicable? He is very severe with Eusapia;
why not treat her as he treats Mrs. Piper? He carefully discusses
the Neapolitan’s errors and attempts; but does he think that there
is no conscious or unconscious fraud with the American medium, and
that defunct Phinuit is alone responsible for the inaccuracies and
falsehoods observed in Mrs. Piper’s mediumship, whilst Eusapia’s fraud
is conscious and voluntary?

As far as his experiments with Eusapia Paladino are concerned, I
will reply to him that, in a great measure, he and his friends
were responsible for her frauds, and almost wholly responsible for
the failure of the experiments. They appear to have neglected the
psychological side of a medium’s rôle, and forgot that a medium is not
a mechanical instrument.

Eusapia was not at her ease, and, if my memory serves me right, she
found the Cambridge centre rather disdainful and haughty, save Mr. and
Mrs. Myers. She was dull and lonely. I think she was not admitted to
the same table. But I will not affirm this detail; it seems to me she
told me, she was usually served apart from the members of the household.

The seances were too numerous (there were twenty seances held in
less than seven weeks—a seance every other day) if we take into
consideration her not being very well, and consequently unfit for
anything for a few days. This was making sure of bad results,
especially as the seances sometimes lasted two and a half to three
hours. It was impossible for the medium to recruit her strength
physically or morally, especially in a country where the manners, life,
language, and even the cooking were so different from those at Naples.
She was not well when in England. Was she long ill? I cannot say; but I
can affirm that she did not go home satisfied.

It appears, however, that the first seances were pretty good; there
were some suspicious things, as is often the case with Eusapia.
Hodgson’s arrival changed everything: it was then that fraud was
discovered, but a long time after Richet and Toselli had pointed it out.

How did Hodgson go to work? He appears to have conceived the
singular idea not to control Eusapia at all, and to leave at her
free disposal the hand he was supposed to hold. Every time he ceased
to feel the contact of her hand, he announced a phenomenon; the
phenomenon produced, he related his impressions in _English_ to his
co-experimenters. These were two capital mistakes. The first passed
even unconscious fraud: for though severe control sometimes stops the
phenomena, at least it effectually prevents trickery. The second,
by arousing Eusapia’s jealous susceptibility, was bound to worry
and irritate her. These considerations may appear to be secondary
to persons, who are not acquainted with the difficulties which the
observation of psychical phenomena present; those who are familiar
with them will not gainsay me. However, if the Cambridge experimenters
had not gone any further than this, we might excuse them, and simply
consider they had blundered touching the necessary conditions; but they
went further. They invited to the seances Messrs. Maskelyne, father
and son. These men, the well-known directors of the Egyptian Hall
in London, have made it a speciality of producing by conjuring the
phenomena called ‘spiritistic.’

Mr. Maskelyne, senior, did not conceal his bias, to judge by his
letters in the _Daily Chronicle_ (29th Oct. 1895, and following days).
This conjurer explained certain levitations in a singular fashion.
A small table had been carried on to the seance-table. According to
Maskelyne, Eusapia had seized it with her teeth by bending backwards,
and by this feat of dental strength had herself carried and placed
the smaller table on the larger one! Mr. Maskelyne felt the movement,
just as Dr. Hodgson felt he had lost the contact of the hand, when a
phenomenon was going to be produced. From this negative observation,
Mr. Maskelyne, like Hodgson, deducts the positive conclusion, that
the phenomenon was normally and fraudulently produced. I retain Mr.
Maskelyne’s affirmation, that the backward movement Eusapia made when
the small table was carried on to the larger one, revealed her method
to him. Hodgson has the same impression as the conjurer. In concluding
as they do, they both forget this circumstance, often observed with the
Italian medium, that synchronous movements of her limbs accompany the
phenomenon. If Mr. Maskelyne is excusable in not having studied and
examined this circumstance, Dr. Hodgson, well acquainted with psychical
matters, is unpardonable in having neglected it. This omission is a
fundamental gap in his reasoning; and I think it robs it of all serious
value.

Let us take another example in the rare indications given by the
Cambridge experimenters (Extracts from report of seance of 1st Sept.
1895, _Journal_, vii. 151-153):—[‘The Report consists of notes taken
by Mr. Myers at the time from the dictation of the sitters, with
supplementary statements added by some of the sitters afterwards; these
are placed in square brackets, and all except those to which Mrs.
Sidgwick’s initials are appended were written by Dr. Hodgson on Sept.
2nd and 3rd. The italics refer to the descriptions of phenomena, the
ordinary type to the conditions of holding, etc.]. [Sitters arranged
as follows:—

[Illustration]

‘Mrs. Myers goes under the table, has the medium’s feet on palms of
hands far apart.]

‘=7.= 6. _Three knocks_ [which sounded as if made on the top of the
table]. Right hand lies across R. H. and holds H. S.’s three fingers
with at least two. Left hand holds F. D. and Mrs. S. Three movements
made with left hand beforehand. Knees not moved and feet held tight.
[Medium was asked to repeat this phenomenon.]

‘=7.= 7. _Three knocks, rather loud and dull_ [resembling the
preceding]. Right hand moving, holding H. S.’s and R. H.’s. Left hand
well off the table; holding satisfactory, held by F. D. and Mrs. S.
Feet well held, knees not moved.

‘[Both series of three knocks were doubtless produced by Eusapia’s
head. On the second occasion, I succeeded in getting her head between
me and a slight light from the curtains behind, and observed the motion
of her head part of the way forward and back. She moved her right hand,
with H. S.’s hand and mine, forward, outward, and upward somewhat,
and possibly made a similar movement with her left hand, thus giving
herself a free space to bend her head forward and down, and at the same
time having the hands which were holding hers, in a position from which
it would be more difficult to grab.] [And had practically six hands out
of the way of an accidental contact with her head. E. M. S.].’

Such is the _procès-verbal_. Dr. Hodgson, I repeat, has been so severe
with others, that he will forgive me for being exigent with him.

Is it admissible to reason in this way? to consider that she has,
_perhaps_, made a movement with the left hand similar to the one
effected with the right hand, and afterwards to hold that supposition
as a demonstrated fact? Should he not have remembered that such a
movement, in a big woman like Eusapia, cannot be easily made without
her arms betraying the movement of the spinal column, and the muscles
of the neck, without the knees revealing the movement of the body?

Now, the knee did not move; and Hodgson points out no movement of the
arm.

The movement of the head might have been one of those synchronous
movements of which I have spoken. Dr. Hodgson has omitted to consider
this hypothesis.

To sum up, limiting ourselves simply to published documents, we see
that the English experimenters paid no attention to the conditions
under which it is expedient to operate, that they tired out the medium,
surrounded her with elements of suspicion, encouraged her to fraud—Dr.
Hodgson especially—and finally concealed from her the severe judgment
they had formed about her. As Richet says, the Cambridge experiments
prove only one thing, which is, that in that particular series of
seances Eusapia frauded with her well-known methods, but it is rash to
conclude thereupon that she has always frauded.[41]

      [41] ‘_A Cambridge Eusapia pendant une série de séances a
      fraudé avec ses procédés connus._ Voilà la première conclusion.
      Et voici la seconde. _En mettant Eusapia dans l’impossibilité
      de frauder, pendant cette même série d’expériences de
      Cambridge, Eusapia n’a pas pu produire un seul phénomène
      vrai...._

      ‘Il me paraît qu’il est téméraire de conclure que tous les
      phénomènes produits ou présumés produits par Eusapia sont
      faux.... Sous des influences morales et psychologiques
      dont la nature nous échappe, pendant un très long temps
      Eusapia est incapable de pouvoir exercer une action vraie
      quelconque, et peut-être, à Cambridge elle s’est trouvée dans
      ces conditions.... J’en conclus qu’il n’y a encore rien de
      démontré, ni dans un sens, ni dans l’autre, et qu’il faut
      courageusement poursuivre la recherche; et expérimenter
      encore.’—CHARLES RICHET. (_Journal S. P. R._, vii. 179.)

The analysis of the documents published permits me to ascertain:—

  1. Demonstration of fraud in certain hypothetical cases.

  2. Omission to indicate if the medium was conscious or in trance.

  3. Omission to discuss phenomena non-explicable by fraud.

  4. Apparent contradiction between Dr. Hodgson’s statements and
      those of other experimenters.

  5. Omission to analyse if Eusapia’s suspicious movements were
      not muscular movements synchronous with the phenomena. This
      omission is capital, and demonstrates the relative inexperience
      of the Cambridge group.

  6. Evident bias of Dr. Hodgson, who had taken up a decided stand,
      and treated Eusapia’s phenomena as fraudulent before having
      seen them.

In a word, the Cambridge experimenters operated under bad conditions:
they could not obtain any good results by acting as they did. But,
even under these wretched conditions, they ought to have received
some veridical phenomena, and the reading of their publications leads
us to presume they did receive some. In any case, their report does
not demonstrate that everything was explicable by fraud, and is not
sufficient to justify the sweeping judgment they brought to bear upon
Eusapia Paladino.

Now, if we compare the Cambridge results with those obtained by other
experimenters, the conclusion we draw from these documents becomes more
precise. I refer my readers to the reports of the experiments at Milan
(_Ann. des Sc. Psych._, 1893), and at l’Agnélas (_Ibid._ 1896). I will
only dwell upon my personal experience with Eusapia. I experimented
with this medium in 1895, 1896, and 1897, and I obtained undeniable
phenomena with her.

Like other Continental experimenters, I tried to put Eusapia at her
ease, to win her confidence and sympathy; and the results of my seances
were convincing.

At l’Agnélas, out of seance hours, and in full light, I saw the table
raised to the height of my forehead. Every one was standing up,
Eusapia’s hands were held and seen; her left hand, held by me, rested
on the right angle of the table.

At Choisy, in 1897, we received doubtful phenomena, notably the
_apport_ of a carnation which appeared most suspicious to us; but we
spoke openly of our doubts to Eusapia. At other times the phenomena
were of extraordinary intensity. One afternoon, Sunday, 11th October,
all the sitters, even those furthest away from the medium, were touched.

But it was at Bordeaux, perhaps, in 1897 that the phenomena were most
intense. I find in my notes—which are not, and make no claim to be,
reports—the following recital:—

‘P. is vigorously touched. Eusapia gives him the control of her hands
and feet. P. receives slaps in the back every time Eusapia presses his
foot. The noise is distinctly heard. P.’s chair is shaken and drawn
from under him. Eusapia rubs her feet on the floor, to give fluid, she
says. Finally P.’s chair is slowly carried on to the seance-table.
The persons (Dr. Denucé, Madame A., and I) for whom P. is between
the table and the window (a light from outside streams through the
Persian shutters) see the chair very clearly outlined on the window
(a large bay, six feet wide). After having been placed on the table,
the chair is taken back to the floor, and, a second time, carried on
to the table. The movements were slowly produced; while they were
being produced, the hands, feet, and head of the medium were under
control. If any part of the medium’s body had touched the chair, the
contact would have been seen on the silhouette of the chair, the latter
standing out well against the lighted-up window. While the chair is in
movement P. is crouching down on his heels; he is touched on the back,
his garments are pulled, he is tickled; at the same time the table is
levitated. _These three manifestations were produced simultaneously._’

This phenomenon is, perhaps, the most convincing Eusapia has given
me in demi-obscurity; it was impossible to produce these three
manifestations simultaneously with a free hand and foot (admitting
there had been substitution): knowing the possible frauds, I had
indicated to my co-experimenters Eusapia’s ordinary tricks. Moreover,
Dr. Denucé and P., a barrister at Bordeaux, were both _au courant_ with
the usual frauds, and were experienced experimenters. I draw special
attention to the visibility of the chair suspended in the air. We only
saw the outline of the chair, but we saw it plainly.

Here is another levitation obtained under conditions which exclude
every device pointed out by Messrs. Hodgson and Maskelyne: teeth,
strap, hook, foot, hand holding the table, pressure of the knees,
etc.:—

‘Afterwards Eusapia makes us get up. She pulls the table into the
centre of the room (telling us she is doing this herself). She
invites M. to hold her feet; M. goes under the table. Eusapia becomes
impatient, and says to him “_dietro_” because the table would hurt her;
M. stoops down behind Eusapia, and seizes her by the feet. Eusapia then
says she is going to raise the table without touching it. A circle is
made around the table, which, after several oscillations, rises up
vertically. The top of the table reaches as high as our foreheads.

‘A second time the table is levitated under the same conditions, and
to the same height. The experimenters are all standing up around the
table, and no hand at all touches it.’

The table stood out plainly against the window. It would have been easy
to see the limb or instrument which was in contact with it, had there
been any such contact.

Professor Sidgwick ‘often asked Eusapia—or rather John—to favour him
with a hand-grasp when he was holding the two hands of the medium in
his two hands, since he regarded this as the only mode of holding the
hands which could ever be perfectly satisfactory to him.’ He solicited
in vain. Now we obtained this phenomenon frequently:—

‘Eusapia takes Dr. D.’s two hands, and gives him her two hands to
control. Under these conditions Dr. D. is touched. Eusapia does the
same thing with P., who is several times touched.’

Here are some phenomena obtained with a bright green light. ‘One side
of the table rises up, followed by two good levitations: the table is
levitated to a height of about one foot six inches, and remains from
two to three seconds in the air. Eusapia’s hands are well controlled
and visible; her feet do not move. The feet of the table (visible to
me) are not in contact with Eusapia’s dress during the levitation. I
see the dress distinctly; it is motionless. When the levitation took
place no hand was touching the table.’

Finally, here is a crucial experiment, an account of which M. de Rochas
has published in the _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_ in 1898. At that
moment I still suspended my judgment, not that my opinion with regard
to the phenomena produced by Eusapia and verified by me was uncertain,
but because I wished to study other mediums before pronouncing my
judgment. My studies are now sufficiently complete, from the point of
view of the observation of these facts, to permit me to declare my
opinion. The reasons of prudence, which led me to beg M. de Rochas to
withhold my name from his report, no longer exist. Here is the extract
from my notes made at the time of the experiment:—

‘I had bought, during the day, a letter-balance, which I brought to the
seance. Eusapia makes us sit for two or three minutes with our hands
on the table. Then she approaches her hands to the letter-balance,
placing her left hand on top of Dr. D.’s right hand. Dr. D. mentions
the sensation of a cold breeze, which ceases and recommences. Eusapia’s
hands are at about fifteen centimetres away from the letter-balance.
She makes two or three ascending and descending movements with
her hands, palm directed downwards. At the second movement the
letter-balance is pushed to the limit of its course, requiring for this
a force of more than one hundred and seventy grammes. Eusapia takes
P.’s left hand, and tries the experiment with him. She asks if he feels
the cool breeze. In a few seconds P. feels it over the third and fourth
fingers. (P.’s left hand is under the medium’s right hand.) The tray is
lowered, and the hand stops at the division 20.

‘Eusapia takes Dr. D.’s hand again. She forms a triangle with her
hands. Dr. D. has always his right hand in Eusapia’s left. The latter’s
hands are about fifteen centimetres away from one another, and about
ten centimetres away from the edge of the apparatus. The tray of the
latter is lowered; the hand marks 90 grammes, and _slowly_ returns to
0; in the two preceding experiments it had returned abruptly.

‘Eusapia tries to raise the scale. She directs her hands palms upwards.
The scale raises itself.

‘P. puts a black pocket-book weighing seventy grammes on the tray.
Eusapia begins the last experiment over again. After two or three
movements of her hands, palms upwards, the tray is raised to its
uttermost limit.’

These experiments were made in a good green light.

In conclusion, we never hesitated to act openly with Eusapia, telling
her what we thought. For example, at one time, in obscurity, Eusapia
drew the table to her without announcing it was she who did it. P.
immediately said: ‘It is the medium who’s drawing the table.’ Eusapia
was not annoyed, and said that P. was right to speak of what he noticed.

These experiments at Choisy and Bordeaux, in the course of which there
were both good and bad seances, convinced me that I had not been the
victim of illusion at l’Agnélas in M. de Rochas’ house.

My judgment will convince no one. In such matters we must see for
ourselves in order to be convinced. Mr. Hodgson himself knows
this to-day. My testimony contradicts formally and explicitly the
conclusions of the Cambridge investigators. Eusapia does not always
defraud; with us, she rarely defrauded.

Let me terminate this discussion with Richet’s words: ‘Malgré les
apparences qui sont en effet souvent contre Eusapia, je ne suis fixé
en aucune manière sur ce que j’ai appelé jusqu’ici fraude.... Il est
possible, que dans l‘état de trance, ou dans les états voisins, la
psychologie d’un médium soit très différente de la nôtre.’




APPENDIX B


I have criticised somewhat lengthily M. Janet’s opinions: will the
reader kindly allow me to make yet another incursion into scientific
ground. For it is perhaps necessary to reply to some objections which
are advanced—doubtless in all sincerity—by certain savants who are
either ill informed, or lacking in adequate knowledge of the subject.
Professor Grasset of the university of Montpellier, for whose talent
and earnestness I have the greatest respect, has just published a long
article entitled _Le Spiritisme et la Science_ in the last volume of
his _Leçons de clinique médicale_ (t. iv., 1903, p. 374). He begins
by stating that he is going to take Janet as his guide, because the
latter’s ‘luminous ideas are and remain for him the sole scientific
basis now existing of these questions.’ Though we see it in print,
this assertion is so extraordinary, that we wonder if we be not
dreaming when reading it. Professor Grasset, then, is going to take
Janet as a guide, Janet who has never seen anything! It makes one
think of the fable, only, this time, it is the blind man who climbs on
the paralytic’s back. Grasset is going to deal with matters of such
importance, so prolific probably in new and unexpected consequences,
without consulting the writers who have described the phenomena he is
going to study! The authors from whose works he quotes—Jules Bois,
Papus, Péladan, Mme. de Thébes, Léo Taxil!—have more to do with the
charms of fancy than with the gravity of science. The task of refuting
their assertions is far too easy a one, and the learned professor ought
to have chosen other and better representatives of psychical research.
His argumentation falls short of the mark.

Professor Grasset’s case is, however, instructive. I consider
him as one of our best-informed scientists, and he seems to look
upon psychical research without prejudice. Nobody can doubt his
earnestness, his learning, his talent; but, in spite of these
qualities, he shows himself to be unfamiliar with the serious work
which has been done, and which is being done in psychical matters. When
he quotes Myers, he misquotes him. When he discusses the Piper case, he
sums up the account given of the case by M. Mangin in the _Annales des
Sciences Psychiques_, and does not say a word of the careful reports
drawn up by Hodgson and Hyslop. It is not to be wondered at, therefore,
if the professor’s statements do not agree with the facts. He does
not appear to have studied either the original reports or M. Sage’s
remarkable summary of these reports.

Professor Grasset simply says: ‘Four months after the death of Mr.
Robinson (George Pelham), Mrs. Piper gave a seance in the house of one
of Mr. Robinson’s friends and fell into a trance.’ [A slight mistake,
the seance took place at Mrs. Piper’s.] ‘P., the secondary personality,
said that George Robinson was ready to communicate; and henceforth this
spirit took part in Mrs. Piper’s seances as another familiar spirit.
Such an example shows how _polygonal_ incarnations are formed during
the medium’s trance.’

And no more! Professor Grasset does not see the real problem: did the
medium show any knowledge of facts known only to the deceased? This is
the problem. The mode of formation of the secondary personality is but
an accessory question.

This kind of reasoning is common to savants. They keep aloof from
the real psychological problem, and only discuss its side issues.
I am sorry to see a man of Professor Grasset’s worth fall into the
usual errors, and pronounce a judgment upon facts before thoroughly
acquainting himself with those facts.

Professor Grasset speaks of _spiritisme scientifique_ as belonging
to the realm of biology, and demanding the serious attention of
scientists. But why speak of spiritism? Spiritism is a religion, it is
not a science; it is the _systematic explanation_ of the _ensemble_ of
certain facts, so far very ill understood, but it is not the assertion
of those facts. Are the alleged facts true? That is the question which
biology has to examine. Spiritism, on the contrary, that is to say, the
_ensemble_ of metaphysical doctrines founded upon the revelations of
spirits, cannot be considered, at least for the present, as belonging
to biology. I beg Professor Grasset not to confound the impartial,
unbiased research for scientific truth with spiritism.

The little influence which the criticism of savants—of even the
most renowned among them—has had upon contemporary thought (_e.g._
it has not been able to prevent or put a stop to the quest in the
domain of psychical sciences), is due precisely to their lack of
correct information. They have always reasoned beside the question,
analysing the facts imperfectly, admitting only those which they can
easily explain, and rejecting all others as fraudulent or doubtful.
To those who have studied these ‘fraudulent and doubtful’ facts,
they are neither doubtful nor fraudulent, and the only effect, which
the obstinate negation of certain savants has, is to rob their words
of all serious influence and value. And this is a pity, for the
savants themselves first of all, and afterwards for the public who,
ill enlightened, become the prey of charlatans or the victims of
_illuminés_.




APPENDIX C


It is to the kindness of M. Braunschweig that I owe the following
story, which is instructive from several points of view. M.
Braunschweig, a retired business man, intelligent and highly educated,
is well known in his town. The phenomena, of which he guarantees
the authenticity, have not been observed by me; but the disastrous
consequences of his and M. Vergniat’s too great confidence in a
‘spirit’ taught him such a useful and serious lesson, that I thought I
would do well to make it known. I only give it with that object, for I
cannot personally vouch for the extraordinary facts in this interesting
recital. I give this recital _in extenso_ without changing anything, in
order not to alter its physiognomy.


_A Mystery_

  Canius Junius when walking to the scaffold said to his friends:
    ‘You ask me if the soul is immortal; I am going to find out, and
    if I can, I will return to tell you.’

These notes, written in haste, and, as it were, off-hand, have no other
claim than to bring a few strange facts together, leaving every one
free to appreciate them as they think best.

For a while I was swayed by a preoccupation; I hesitated in the face
of incredulity, which thrusts aside all which is neither matter nor
number, to unveil phenomena of the nature of those which have been
verified by so many persons already; but the duty imposed upon me of
preserving my children from trials similar to mine, has triumphed over
my hesitation, and I will proclaim the truth without any fear of their
ever doubting their father’s veracity.

In writing these lines, I yield to a feeling that the witness of
mysterious facts ought to give, in the interests of humanity or
science, a scrupulously exact narration of what he has seen. And
particularly so when his revelations are likely to preserve the
inexperienced from the pitfalls of an occult power which it would be as
senseless to deny the existence of as to doubt of its power for good or
evil, according as it desires good or evil. I therefore accomplish what
I believe to be a duty. This conviction suffices to brave the spirit
always more or less strong, which is ever inclined to deny what it
cannot explain.

The fear of being accused of seeking for sympathy, by relating these
facts of which I have been the victim, might also have stopped me from
speaking; but for the loss of a few worldly goods, my mind, my soul,
finds ample compensation in that certitude of a future life, which
results from the facts the Master permitted me to witness.

It was in 1867. Attracted by the noise of a trumpet, I crossed _La
Place Saint-André_, and went down the dark, narrow street which, at
that time, skirted the Cathedral, and where _bric-à-brac_ dealers used
to spread out their wares. At the corner of the street Palangues, I
came across a crowd gathered around an auctioneer who was holding a
sale of statuary.

I was passing on indifferently when the auctioneer held up a statuette,
the outlines and graceful pose of which immediately struck my fancy.

Was it a Virgin? A _mater dolorosa_? I do not know. But I still see
that beautiful face, stamped with sadness, the eyes upraised, two
great tears tremblingly seeming to implore me to put a stop to this
profanation. The general appearance of the statue—its head bent
slightly forward—and the graceful drapery denoted a work of art.

I bought it, yielding simply to the desire of possessing an artistic
work, and not to satisfy any religious sentiment, which, I must own,
did not exist.

I also bought a bracket to support the statuette, and a few minutes
afterwards, everything was arranged in my room, Rue du Palais Tallien,
No. 147.

My wife, Madame Vergniat, was at Périgord. When she returned home,
she was surprised to see, in the most conspicuous spot in my room, a
religious object which I myself had bought.

Her surprise was legitimate, for strong prejudices against religion
left little room in my mind for religious practices.

Nothing strange happened in that house, although we lived in it for
a long time after the purchase of the statuette. But I always felt
such great pleasure in admiring my Virgin, that I have often wondered
whether this ill-defined attraction were not the prelude, and, in some
measure, a first influence of the mysterious facts which were going to
happen.

We left our residence in the Rue du Palais Tallien to go to a house I
had bought in the Rue Malbec, No. 116.

It was a detached house surrounded by a garden; it contained two
bedrooms, a sitting-room, and a vestibule which served as a dining-room.

In order to make my recital intelligible, I am obliged to give a few
details about the furniture and its arrangement.

A night-table separated my bed from the fireplace. Above the table was
a holy-water fount; above the latter an oil painting representing the
Virgin; finally, near the ceiling, the statuette on its bracket.

To the left of the night-table, in the recess beside the chimney, there
was a panoply composed of swords and sabres.

When we were settled, Madame Vergniat again visited Périgord. It was
during her absence that the first manifestation took place, but I
attached no great importance to it.

Here are the circumstances under which the phenomenon occurred.

I was awakened in the night by the sound of a violent blow as of some
one hammering at the front door. I promptly lit the candle, and looked
at the time; it was one o’clock.

This visit was not of a reassuring nature, for, to be able to knock at
the front door at this hour of the night, it was necessary to leap over
the gate, which, securely closed, barred access to the house.

Before proceeding to open the door, I waited for a second knock, but
in vain. I was awakened, at the same hour on the following night, by a
similar rap.

The nurse, sleeping with the children in the next room, hearing the
knock, got frightened. I tried to reassure her by saying: ‘_To-morrow
a loaded gun will receive the individual who takes such a pleasure in
arousing us._’

I underline these words, because further on we will have occasion of
seeing them repeated in a surprising manner.

A few months later, and without any new incidents occurring in the
meantime, our nurse was discharged, and replaced by a strong healthy
girl from the Pyrenees.

The nocturnal visit had been quite forgotten, when on the 23rd January
1868, Madame Vergniat and the nurse, who were busy in my room, heard
something like a rustling on the window-panes, and saw the statuette
bow twice, as though saluting them. At first they thought an earthquake
had happened, and when I entered they related the incident to me in
scared tones.

The statuette was indeed displaced; but was that sufficient to convince
me? No.

I laughed at the story, convinced that my wife and the nurse were
victims of an illusion.

However, on the morrow and following days, the same phenomena occurring
at the same hour, that is to say towards eleven o’clock in the morning,
I determined to stay at home and verify _de visu_ this marvellous fact.

I got what I wanted; for on that day, the statuette turned about now
to the right, now to the left, twelve or fourteen times. Sometimes it
advanced and balanced itself on the edge of the pedestal.

The evolution was so prompt and so unexpected, that the eye could
scarcely follow the movement.

I was not long in ascertaining that, before executing these movements,
the mysterious power awaited the moment when the attention, tired of
remaining on the _qui vive_, was off its guard. Then a sharp sounding
rap, similar to the discharge of an electric spark, denoted that the
evolution had taken place.

The picture hanging under the statuette lost its equilibrium, the
_bénitier_ fell over, and the swords swayed about like so many clock
pendulums.

I noticed that the presence of my wife and the nurse aided these
manifestations considerably; I even noticed that the appearance of
either of them on the threshold of the room sufficed to provoke the
phenomena.

I tried to dissimulate the preoccupation these manifestations caused
me, and I pretended to attach no importance to them, in order to react
against the exaltation and fear which were taking hold of Madame
Vergniat and the nurse, and of the two work-women, who were also
constant witnesses of this disorder.

But instead of aiding me in my efforts, the Virgin no longer contented
herself with simple evolutions on her pedestal. She began to let
herself fall down on the eiderdown of my bed, and would remain buried
there until a sharp sounding rap announced that she had returned to her
pedestal.

In a short time, the raps became more frequent, and did not always
indicate displacements. We heard them on the doors, on the cupboards,
etc., and even in the middle of the garden.

Thus on returning home one day, such a formidable rap resounded, that
the neighbours ran to their windows, and called out to me: ‘Well, M.
Vergniat, one would think you were being saluted.’

These facts, already so extraordinary, were to be succeeded by others
more extraordinary still.

The watchmaker, M. Ouvrard, who wound up our clocks every fortnight,
having at one time taken up the study of somnambulism, thought he
recognised in our nurse a subject who would be susceptible to magnetic
influences, and proposed putting her to sleep.

A few minutes sufficed to obtain the state of prostration and
insensibility which characterises magnetic sleep. For the first few
seances, Marie’s replies were unintelligible, but she very soon began
to express herself clearly and even with volubility.

Considering the state of mind the manifestations of the statuette kept
us in, it will be readily understood that the first question put to the
somnambulist was, ‘Do you see who it is who moves the Virgin about?’

‘I see him,’ she replied, ‘he is close to me on his knees, praying. It
is a man dressed in a brown coat, holding a dark-covered book in his
hand. I do not see his face. I only see a part of his moustache, for he
is turning his back to me.’

For several days her answers were always the same. But having insisted
upon knowing the name of the man in prayer, the somnambulist at last
replied, ‘I am Madame’s father.’

However, this assertion was soon contradicted by a more explicit
declaration.

It was so easy to produce the magnetic sleep with Marie, that, once
when she asked me to put her to sleep, I succeeded in doing so without
having any other notions about such things than those I had gathered
from our few seances; but I found it impossible to awaken her, and was
obliged to send for the watchmaker, hoping he would help me out of my
dilemma. He arrived, but his efforts were in vain.

The somnambulist made fun of us, and teased the watchmaker about his
_embonpoint_.

This fact is to be noted, for it contradicts the current belief that
the subject obeys the will of the magnetiser: but what follows reveals
a phenomenon of vastly different interest.

Marie ceased to speak in her own name. A spirit having taken possession
of her will, declared that all our efforts to awaken the somnambulist
would be useless.

‘I am quite comfortable here,’ said the spirit, ‘and it pleases me to
stay. But at four o’clock, I am wanted elsewhere; the somnambulist will
then awaken of her own accord. Have the patience to wait.’

At the hour mentioned, at the exact moment, the somnambulist returned
to her normal state.

From that day forth the somnambulist remained constantly under the
influence of the spirits who took possession of her during her sleep.
Thus, as soon as she was asleep, the spirit sometimes said, ‘I have
only a few minutes to stay’; and when the time was up, Marie would
awaken without any intervention.

During these more or less lengthy conversations, the spirit took a
fancy to calling me his son. His advice testified to a disposition of
great benevolence, and was chiefly of a profoundly religious character.
It is incontestable that, by an inexplicable phenomenon, Marie’s
faculties were replaced, during these communications, by a spirit whose
superiority it was impossible not to recognise, a superiority revealed
by the tone of the discussion and the choice of expressions.

Pressing him one day for an explanation, I resolutely asked him, ‘But
who are you, then?’

‘I am he, you wanted to receive with a loaded gun, when I knocked at
your door at one o’clock in the morning.’

Remember the somnambulist was absolutely ignorant of this fact, as she
was not in our service when the strange nocturnal visit occurred.

As for the Virgin, she was not at a standstill all this time; she
continued to turn five or six times every day.

The good advice of the spirit, the purity of his principles, most
certainly interested me; but I confess the statuette interested me
more. Had I not a tangible, undeniable fact before me, just as stubborn
as my reason tried to be? Stamping my feet I repeated, ‘And still she
turns.’

Ever on my guard, even in face of evidence, I gave myself the
satisfaction of imprisoning the Virgin, but in such a way as to be able
to verify her evolutions.

I had a niche of wire made, covered with transparent gauze, and,
sealing it to the wall, I securely shut up the statuette therein.

My work done, I left my room. At once a formidable rap resounded: I ran
to the room, everything had disappeared, the pedestal alone was still
in its place. The Virgin, thrown on to the bed, was found buried in the
eiderdown, whilst the casing was at the side of the bed.

My precautions having incurred displeasure, I took care not to renew
them. When consulted on this, the next day, the somnambulist, or rather
the spirit acting through her, said, ‘Never touch the Virgin, leave her
there; otherwise she will be transferred,’ adding, ‘he who takes her
away from her pedestal will know very well how to put her back again.’

This recommendation was followed; but one day the statuette
disappeared. Madame Vergniat having quite got over her first fears,
searched for it actively everywhere, and after having turned the house
upside down in her quest, found it in a cupboard behind the children’s
bed. This cupboard, being dissimulated by tapestry, had never been
used, and we did not even know of its existence.

How had the Virgin got into it?

The displacements became more and more frequent. For instance, the
statuette took it into its head to change rooms, and the sitting-room
became its favourite resort, but it never let a whole day pass without
reappearing upon its pedestal.

The doors opened and shut before it with the same sharp sound which
followed each evolution. All this went on so rapidly that we were more
surprised than inconvenienced.

Under the influence of these phenomena, the ordinary sleep of the
somnambulist became heavier. At night she was often heard speaking
aloud. She awakened with difficulty, and having shaken off her torpor,
she could not open her eyes. ‘They feel as though they were glued
down,’ she used to say. But placing her fingers on Marie’s eyelids,
Madame Vergniat used to pray, and the difficulty would disappear.

In her ordinary sleep, the conversation was not serious; it was more
often commonplace, full of jesting, sometimes even of bad taste;
whereas in provoked sleep, we constantly found a serious spirit,
professing the purest maxims, and giving advice full of sincere charity.

I asked this mysterious spirit if it were true that he was Madame’s
father, as he had once declared himself to be.

Here is his reply, I give it word for word: ‘My son, I read in your
mind (for you cannot hide your thoughts from me) that not having enough
faith to attribute to God the happiness of the visit you receive in
your house, you seek its explanation in absurd suppositions. _Do not
believe in spiritism, my son._

‘God, who is essentially good, could not permit your spirit-friends,
after having gone through all the trials of earth, to be condemned to
look on at the turpitudes and the sufferings of those who are dear to
them. This is a torture which God did not wish to reserve for you.

‘Yes, a Spirit exists; but He is alone, unique, and that Spirit is
mine. It is He who breathes into all things, who animates all things;
He who makes you act, walk, stop when you believe that your own will is
all-powerful.

‘That Spirit, I repeat, is unique. It is the Master’s.’

Let us remark, _en passant_, that this is the opinion of Mallbranche,
who claims God to be the immediate Author of the union we admire
between soul and body.

‘I see that you doubt my words,’ added the spirit, ‘(for I have already
told you that you cannot hide your thoughts or actions from me), and
you are saying, “What presumption! to suppose that I have deserved such
a visit, and that the Divine Spirit has knocked at my door!”

‘You prefer, therefore, my son, to doubt my words and to stand aloof
from the truth. So be it! but do not forget, whatever your appreciation
may be about me and the object of my visit, be assured that I am only
able to visit your home in pursuance of a supreme will, and that all
your efforts to drive me away, and even my desire to leave you before
the accomplishment of my mission, would be equally useless.

‘Welcome me, therefore, as a kind father who comes to help his son to
tread the painful path of life. I have never left you since you came
into the world. We have gone through many worries together, we have
borne many sorrows; but better times are at hand, and I am able to
reveal to you, my child, that from the moment I am able to make my
voice heard, the blessing of the Master will assure you the repose of
body, soul, and spirit.

‘No more worry for you, your father is here to shield you. But in
exchange for the good which my mission is to bring you, I ask you to
turn your thoughts to the Creator, and thank Him for the immense favour
He has accorded you. For, learn that no man has ever before received
such a Visitor in his home.

‘I desire you to attend divine service regularly, and to go to
communion.

‘I also desire you to help those people whose addresses and needs I
will make known to you; but as I am a protector, if I impose charges
upon you, I will also procure you the means of providing for them.’

Imagine what an influence these mysterious facts already exercised
over me, when I say that I promised everything, and, like a submissive
child, took the communion with fervour.

From that day forth the benevolence of the unknown was extended over
every one and every thing, from the household to the house needs. His
solicitude, for the somnambulist especially, drove him sometimes to
charge me with delicate missions, of which I will give an example.

I had once just put Marie to sleep, when the spirit manifested itself,
saying:—

‘I am going to speak to you about some of the private affairs of the
somnambulist, and I beg you to follow my instructions.

‘This girl thinks of marrying a carpenter, named Toussaint, who has
been following her about for a long time. But Marie’s parents, who are
honest folk, will never consent to this marriage. First of all, because
Toussaint is a worthless fellow, and in the second place, because
Toussaint’s brother was condemned _yesterday_ to pay an ignominious
penalty for a foul crime he has committed.

‘Therefore, Marie must cease to know this young man; moreover, his
jealous and violent character might soon endanger her life.

‘Marie is ignorant of these details. Therefore, when she awakens, take
care not to repeat our conversation; but to-morrow, when returning from
Bordeaux, tell her about this as though it were some news you had heard
of in town.

‘Marie will deny everything, first of all; she will pretend not to know
the individual; but insist upon it, and she will confess everything.’

And this, in fact, is what happened.

The spirit went on to say:—

‘This workman has recently wounded his hand, and is consequently
debarred from working; he is always prowling about the house, and I
advise you to be on your guard against him.’

Marie often used to ask me to put her to sleep in the evening. Then,
strange to say, she would tell us when and how many times this man
Toussaint would pass the door, the next day.

This information was always correct. However, one day, our man did not
turn up at the given time—he was two minutes late. Marie was asleep
in the sitting-room, and I went backwards and forwards from her to
the terrace. I was nearly losing patience, when she cried out, ‘He is
coming—you will barely have time to get to the terrace.’ And so it was;
as soon as I reached my post of observation, the carpenter came into
the Rue Malbec out of the Rue Bègles.

A few days afterwards, the spirit, whom the somnambulist called ‘Grand
Father,’ warned us that Marie ran a great risk. Toussaint having had
the door shown to him everywhere because of the disgrace which had
fallen upon his family, had made up his mind to avenge himself.

Animated with the worst designs, he had shaved off his beard in order
to make himself unrecognisable; and hiding a large knife under his
coat, he was bending his way to the house, with the fixed purpose, said
the spirit, of striking Marie.

When giving us this information through the somnambulist, our
mysterious friend added: ‘Do not allow this girl to go out to-day. I
will deliver you from this dangerous man very soon, by making him wish
to go on a long voyage, from which he will never return.’

Two or three days afterwards, Marie heard that this individual had left
for Algeria.

First of all we have seen, by the substitution of the spirit to the
faculties of the somnambulist, how our free-will is subordinated to
occult influences. And if the objection be made that in that case,
magnetic influences facilitated this substitution, there still remains
the case of the carpenter, whose free-will was absolutely subjugated
after premeditation, as is shown by the spirit’s declaration that he
would ‘make him wish to take a long voyage from which the individual
would never return.’

In proportion as these strange facts succeeded each other, we yielded
further and further to an influence from which it was impossible to
escape—I may even say we were happy to obey.

How could we thrust aside advice which was always thoroughly honest,
and with which the name of God was constantly associated?

After the somnambulist, Madame Vergniat was the one who felt the
effects of this mysterious atmosphere the most strongly.

For my part, I had, at first, confined myself simply to observing the
phenomena, to accepting them only as a study; but under the influence
of surprise upon surprise, filled with admiration, I ended in blind
submission. And yet, we were only at the beginning of our marvellous
manifestations.

Often, during a meal, if we had need of something or other, Marie would
bring it to us before we asked for it. A voice, which she thought was
at times mine, at times Madame Vergniat’s, transmitted our desire
to her before it was expressed. It was a splendid case of thought
transference.

If the maid’s work was not quite properly done, he who watched over
the house so assiduously, punished her immediately, by removing with
remarkable dexterity the foulard she wore on her head. And if she ever
happened to be wanting in politeness towards us, she was instantly
called to order in the same way, without any consideration for the
place or circumstances she might be in at the moment. I have often seen
her foulard thrown on the ground, to remind her that she should allow
us to pass before her into a carriage, omnibus, etc.

I have also had occasion to witness a very surprising manifestation,
surprising because of the facility shown for displacing a piece of
furniture the weight of which was relatively considerable.

Often, after retiring to rest, the somnambulist would feel her bed
gently rolled into the centre of the floor, and then back again to its
place. This to-and-fro movement used to be repeated as often as three
or four times in the same evening; the movement was slow, we could see
distinctly that great mass moving about under the impulsion of some
invisible force.

The somnambulist, as I said in the beginning, was a big, stout girl
from the Pyrenees. She could neither read nor write, and the sight
of all these supernatural things astounded and alarmed her. I have
remarked that, in her normal state, she often forgot what she had seen
the previous day. But what she really did understand was that ‘Grand
Father’ was not satisfied with her when a crust of bread or some cheese
was thrown at her head; this was a sure sign that there was a hitch
somewhere.

In the vestibule, which we used as a dining-room, a small Louis xv.
lustre was suspended; it often swayed about when we sat down to meals,
and the movement, which was always preceded by a rustling on the metal
chains, was slow or accelerated according to my wife’s expressed or
unexpressed wish.

If we had visitors, everything was so quiet that no one would ever have
suspected what strange things happened to us habitually. It looked as
though these manifestations were reserved for the inmates of the house
and for a few privileged guests, whose attention was, perforce, aroused
by the noise.

Two young girls, one Anna ——, from Périgord, the other Mathilde ——,
from Bordeaux, who worked almost constantly in our house, were present
at most of these occurrences, and ‘Grand Father’ even testified much
affection for these girls.

In the beginning, I said that when the statuette turned on its
pedestal, the swords had moved about in the contrary direction. One of
them was unhooked and deposited in a corner of the wall, but in the
presence of Madame Vergniat an invisible force almost immediately put
it slowly back again in its place.

The oscillations of the lustre, the movements of the swords, the
displacements of the bed were the only phenomena which the eye was able
to follow; all the others were so rapid that they escaped even the most
vigilant attention.

Our presence in the house was not necessary to produce noises and
other phenomena. The fact which I am going to relate contradicts the
opinion emitted by some spiritists, that spirits borrow the force which
is indispensable to produce these displacements from the mediums or
assistants.

We once went to spend a day in the country, taking the nurse with us,
and leaving the house empty for the day. Returning in the evening, the
neighbours came out to meet us saying that they feared all our crockery
was broken, because ever since our departure a dreadful noise had
reigned in the house. We searched all the rooms, but no damage had been
done, and everything was in its place.

Where, therefore, in that empty house had the spirit taken the
auxiliary force which we are told is necessary for its manifestations?

I was very reserved respecting these facts. I did not care to noise
them abroad, for had I done so controversy would certainly have arisen.

Another reason for remaining silent was, that once after having spoken
of these events to the member of a reputedly religious family, the
Virgin refused to make any evolution before this visitor. But scarcely
was the incredulous person out of the house when the statuette was
displaced.

The same evening I put Marie to sleep, and reproached the spirit
severely.

‘What happens here is for you alone,’ he replied, ‘and ought not to be
exhibited as a spectacle.’

However, this apparently severe admonition was soon infringed upon by
himself under the following circumstances:—

M. Bossuet, a hairdresser in the Rue Bouffard, at Bordeaux, was
dressing Madame Vergniat’s hair in the sitting-room: my wife heard
the sharp rap which usually announced a displacement of the Virgin.
She got up, and without saying anything went into the room, followed
instinctively by M. Bossuet. The Virgin was balancing herself on
the edge of the bracket. M. Bossuet, quickly understanding what was
happening, cried out in admiration, ‘_Mon Dieu!_ how glad I am to have
seen such a thing!’

M. Bossuet is dead now; who can say whether he has found the solution
of the problem which engages us?

I took advantage of this incident to ask why the Virgin had moved
during M. Bossuet’s visit, since it was told me that these favours were
exclusively reserved for the household.

‘I choose my company,’ replied the spirit, ‘and I had to reward M.
Bossuet for having patiently reproduced the features of Christ in some
hair.’

I do not know if it be true—though many have since assured me it is
true—that M. Bossuet was the author of such a work. I confine myself,
as a faithful reporter, to recording the reply which was given me.

Our house had one inconvenience—a very disagreeable one in winter—that
of obliging the maid to cross the garden in order to open the gate for
the milkman, who rang every morning at daybreak.

We were looking for a combination which might enable us to avoid this
inconvenience, when our kind protector came to our aid.

This fact is one of the most curious of our long series of surprising
adventures.

Henceforth, when the milkman’s cart stopped at the gate and before he
rang, a mysterious power shot back the bolt in the lock. Then the gate
opened, and the milkman placed on the window-sill the jug of milk,
which the domestic took in later on.

Perhaps the milkman thought a special mechanism allowed us to open the
door. However that may be, his imagination was evidently at work, for
he was heard to say aloud, when getting into his cart, ‘All the same,
this is a very queer house.’

Sometimes, after having attended vespers either at Sainte-Croix or at
the Vieillards, we used to take a long walk, and often we returned home
tired and impatient to sit down and rest a while.

So that we might not have to wait, an invisible hand used to knock at
the door before we arrived there.

This fact could not be hidden, and our neighbour, Madame Pardeau, in a
good position for observation, laughed at the attentions shown us.

At about this time there was a strange substitution, one which would,
henceforth, render the intervention of the somnambulist unnecessary.
Madame Vergniat and I were returning home after visiting Talence. On
the way, my wife turned round quickly, saying: ‘Some one has just
called me: twice I heard a voice say, “Héloïse! Héloïse!”’

From that day forth, Madame Vergniat asked questions mentally and a
foreign voice answered them.

Very soon the voice took the initiative of conversations, and absorbing
Madame Vergniat’s faculties, spoke through her.

There was no being deceived; it was easy to recognise the same
benevolent spirit, which had only changed his dwelling-place, as it
were.

The first recommendation given through Madame Vergniat was to cease
putting Marie to sleep. ‘Henceforth you will not be able to do so,
without incurring much unpleasantness.’

But my keen desire to see and to observe everything was so great, that
it got the better of this last advice, and I put the somnambulist
to sleep as usual. Ill came of it. To the charitable and benevolent
discourses succeeded a dishevelled language, which I thought I could
put an end to by awakening the somnambulist; but it was impossible to
do so.

She walked about the room with her eyes closed, crying out: ‘I will
wake up when it suits me to do so. I am here, and I want to stay just
because my staying annoys you.’ Then she tried to go out to walk about
in the garden, and I was obliged to lock the door.

This scene, which lasted for several hours, took away my wish for
further experimentation with Marie.

From that time, Marie was subjected to several ill-defined influences
during her ordinary sleep; she spoke aloud, sometimes she used serious
language; sometimes she seemed to be filled with mad joy. The former
depth and goodness in advice given through her had disappeared.

Moreover, I was amply compensated by the new situation which rendered
the somnambulist’s intervention unnecessary, and I thought no further
of risking the disagreeable scene of which I have spoken. I may even
say that all magnetic attempts and experiments with Marie ended here.
There was no further question of them.

Sometimes the spirit when consulted did not answer. Madame Vergniat
would then say, ‘I speak to him, but he does not reply.’ But he never
kept us waiting very long.

The spirit often announced his departure. ‘If you have something to ask
me, or to tell me,’ he would say, ‘be quick, because I am obliged to
go away, and will only be able to return to-morrow at such and such a
time.’

And, until the time indicated had arrived, all questioning was useless.
There were no replies.

Hundreds of times I had had occasion of verifying the exactness of
information furnished by means of Marie; but it remained to me to find
out if the information given by the new channel had the same value.

I had not long to wait before attaining certitude in that respect.

It was on a winter’s evening, the night was pitch dark, it was pouring
in torrents. Returning home from business, the maid came to tell me
that a small Havanese dog, which a neighbour had kindly given us, had
gone astray. As I said, the weather was fearful, and we could not
think of going out to search for the tiny animal. But, as I appeared
to be troubled about the matter, Madame Vergniat, who so far had
said nothing, raised her head, and addressing me in the peculiar way
which announced an official communication, said, ‘So you were really
attached to that little animal! Very well! do not be sad, you will
find it again. I see it; a workman is holding it under his jacket in a
hairdresser’s establishment in the Rue Bègles (the little hunchback).’

The information was precise; given by the somnambulist, I would not
have hesitated believing it; but I now needed further proof; therefore,
in spite of the weather, I went out in search of the dog. My quest
having led me to the hairdresser’s, I looked timidly in at the
window, when the hunchback perceived me, and called out: ‘Do you want
something, M. Vergniat?’ I replied, ‘If you should happen to hear that
a small Havanese dog has been found, be kind enough to let me know.’

A workman, who was in the shop, said: ‘Five minutes ago I held it in my
jacket trying to warm it. I had picked it up sopping wet, in a corner
of the street, where I dropped it again.’

Some few steps further off, I observed a white spot in the darkness. It
was Fleurette crouching down in the shelter of a doorway.

I returned home triumphantly, carrying the children’s happiness with
me, as well as the confirmation of the infallibility of our protector.
The influence of this power, which revealed itself as unlimited, will
be easily understood. Always gaining fresh ground by new supernatural
phenomena, its will entirely superseded ours. What in the beginning it
formulated as a desire, soon became an order. It paid attention to the
smallest details; designated the necessary provisions for the day and
fixed the prices thereof. If a more important purchase than usual had
to be made, he indicated the shop and price beforehand.

These facts gave rise to some curious incidents. Thus, for example,
when a shopkeeper charged too high a price. ‘Grand Father,’ always
at hand, used to whisper to Madame Vergniat, ‘Tell that woman her
goods only cost her such and such a price. Offer her so much. That is
sufficient profit....’

The shopkeeper, dumfounded, could not deny, and the bargain would be
concluded.

I reveal all these facts without hesitation, persuaded that the study
of such persistent and varied manifestations may help to lift the
mysterious veil surrounding us. Moreover, why should I hesitate or keep
silent? Have I not seen? The more incomprehensible the facts may be,
the greater the duty to reveal them.

I will, perhaps, be accused of weakness by showing so much submission
to this occult power, which, however, only put forth the claim of
coming from God, and expressed none but honourable sentiments. To
my accusers, I will reply, ‘Go through the same trial, then I will
recognise your right to criticise.’

As for weakness, this was never one of my failings, unless I should
make an exception for the sentiment, which makes me bow before the
Master—a sentiment I mean to preserve.

I said my wife and I went regularly to vespers, sometimes at Talence,
sometimes at Sainte-Croix; but more often at the Vieillards.

I remember that once when gazing upon these latter poor creatures, ever
at the mercy of public charity, our mysterious guest confided to us:
‘Without my visit, my children, that fate might have been yours.’

In the beginning, I said I had promised to take the communion; I did
so with fervour, so profoundly had these mysterious facts impressed
me; I carried submission to the extent of giving up theatres, and all
amusements, obeying the express desire of the unknown.

To make up for this, I was permitted to join every pilgrimage.

One morning, as I was starting for my office, Madame Vergniat, with
an inspired air, dictated the following order to me: ‘You must send a
telegram to Paris this morning, bidding the agents to sell out 6000
francs worth of French stock at 3 per cent., and buy in 10,000 francs
of Italian stock.’ He added: ‘Did I not tell you, that when it would
please me to impose an obligation upon you, it would never be at your
own expense? Now, I have need of a few thousand francs, the use of
which I will point out to you when the time comes.’

In spite of the strange things I had already seen, I was bewildered.
Madame Vergniat, although the wife of a stockbroker, had never
interested herself in business affairs, and was absolutely ignorant of
financial combinations.

The terms used to dictate the transaction, indicated that the operation
was planned by a mind accustomed to this kind of business.

As the advice was not dangerous, and, in case of failure, would not
carry me very far, I telegraphed to Paris without hesitating. Before
I returned home in the evening, I had the reply, and wished to
communicate it to my mysterious client. ‘Useless,’ he said to me, ‘I
know it.’

I took advantage of this circumstance of talking business with him,
with the object of finding out just how far the spirit’s knowledge, in
matters of speculation, went.

‘Do you know,’ I said to him, ‘that your transaction is founded on two
liquidations. The Italian stock is in liquidation for the 15th inst.,
and the 3 per cent. for the end of the month.’

‘I did it purposely. The Italian will be liquidated first, for the
profits thereof are urgently required. Whoever procures the French
stock for the end of the month is destined to offer a present to his
daughter. I will give you a few instructions on this subject.’

I risked the question: ‘You then believe in the rise of the Italian and
fall of the French stock?’

‘Your Father is not one who doubts, who believes, or who only hopes; He
is always sure, because He is the Master.’

From the day the exchange transaction was made, the two contrary
movements, favourable to the arbitration, were not belied; and (an
important fact to take note of) every morning, with mathematical
precision, the unknown predicted the stock-list which the telegraph
only brought at four o’clock in the afternoon.

I wish to insist upon this fact, because some people seem to question
the spirits’ possibility of foretelling the future.

Always preoccupied in studying these facts, I sometimes asked, the
evening before, what the rate would be the following day. ‘I cannot
tell you before to-morrow morning. I have need of the night to gather
my information.’

One day, there was a difference of a farthing between the rate
predicted in the morning, and the official rate received at four
o’clock. When I made the remark, the unknown said to me: ‘It was a bad
head who rang down the changes at the stroke of the bell.’ The spirit
evidently even possessed the slang of the stockbrokers’ ring.

Seeing so much penetration, I meekly asked if he could be useful to me
in my own business. He replied: ‘I did not come for that; my visit has
another object in view; nevertheless I think I can be useful to you,
and when the opportunity occurs, I will not forget.’

This declaration seemed to contradict the first one. At the outset of
these manifestations, the ‘Master’s‘ blessing assured the repose of
body, soul, and spirit: ‘No more worries for you: your Father is here
to turn them all aside.’ There was now a slight deviation which we
cannot help observing.

Let us, however, return to this power of penetration; it was such,
that, consulted upon the state of my cash-box, he at once told me how
much it contained. For him, it was mere child’s play to tell any one
the contents of their purse.

During the arbitration process, I sometimes asked him, ‘What profit
does your stock operation give you this evening?’ He mentioned it at
once, and, without omitting a farthing, he even counted brokerage and
the price of telegrams.

‘Your business affairs,’ said he, ‘should no longer trouble you, for
they are mine. I will look after them: you have only to obey, and to
satisfy me in order to be rewarded.

‘You may be sure that nothing would be easier for me than to load you
with riches any day; and, if I make you wait, it is because you made me
wait a long time before I was able to bring you to me.’

This is another remark which is not any clearer than the one I quoted a
little while ago.

Whilst the arbitration was proceeding favourably, the Virgin continued
her evolutions; however, they were soon to cease.

One afternoon she made some evolutions noisier than usual, and going
out of the house, went and placed herself upon some grape-vines in the
garden.

At that moment, one of our former servants, a girl named Caroline T...,
the same who was in our service when the nocturnal visit occurred,
happened to come up to the house; seeing the statue in the garden, she
and another servant decided to put it back again on its pedestal.

It was scarcely replaced when a violent rap resounded, and the Virgin
fell on the ground broken to pieces.

Great was Madame Vergniat’s grief when she heard of the accident.
I must own that I, too, was vexed. The debris were gathered up and
preserved with veneration for a long time.

But the pedestal remained vacant. Then the thought came to me of asking
our protector if it would be possible to find a similar statuette.

‘I will see about it to-night,’ he replied. The spirit often begged
me to leave him the night for reflection. He said it was then that he
found the necessary information.

The next day, faithful to his promise, he gave me the following
information: ‘There is, in Bordeaux, a Virgin like the one which is
broken. You will find it at a sculptor’s in the Rue Bouquière (a small
shop situated in a corner of the street). There is only that one
specimen, and the tradesman has no cast.’

I quickly took one of the fragments, and went to the Rue Bouquière.
I found the shop, and the tradesman told me he had a Virgin similar
to the one I desired, but that he had no cast of it. ‘I will look for
it, and you may come and fetch it this evening.’ The same evening I
returned to Malbec with the statuette which was going to stifle all
regrets.

My arrival with the statuette was the occasion for another official
communication: ‘My son, that Virgin will be displaced. I will not tell
you where I shall carry it to; she herself will reveal it to you. Now,
as she will go very far away, you must put your name and address inside
the statuette.’ This was done.

Placed upon the pedestal, the new Virgin turned round three times the
day after her arrival; since that day she never stirred.

I do not know if she will ever go on this journey; in any case, she is
a long time making her preparations.

All the incidents touching the statuette end here: the circumstances of
the _année terrible_ caused it to pass into other hands.

We said that the stock transaction was going on better and better. And
with his facility to foretell the future, the unknown sold out the
Italian stock at the highest rate, whilst he waited for several days to
buy back his 3 per cent. favourably.

All this was done with astounding precision; with a power equal to his,
fortune was simply without bounds.

The profits of these two transactions amounted to about three thousand
francs. With the funds resulting from the liquidation of the 15th I
was given the mission to reserve one thousand francs for the father of
a large family. And the souvenir of this good action, for which, in a
way, I was but an agent, rejoices me still.

Other less important distributions were ordered to be made.

Finally, to crown everything, we were told to illuminate our garden in
honour of the Virgin.

The profits of the second liquidation followed afterwards, and gave
rise to a curious incident.

On pay-day, when the profits were at the disposition of the mysterious
spirit, he begged me to return to Bordeaux to buy a piano, which he
offered to my daughter. (This was the ‘present’ which had been spoken
of in the beginning of these bourse transactions.)

‘Go,’ he said, ‘to M. Caudéré’s, Allées de Tourny, No. 50, where you
will buy a second-hand piano; you will be asked six hundred and fifty
francs for it.’

Upon making the remark that I needed precise indications in order to
avoid all confusion, he replied: ‘It is not necessary. I will be there
to see that they offer you the piano I want. You will not be obliged to
bargain, for the price is less than the value of the instrument.’

How could I resist the commands of such a kind-hearted friend, whose
power seemed to have no other limit than that of his will?

Moreover, was it my province to discuss the manner of employing money
which did not belong to me?

Therefore I arrived at Allées de Tourny. Madame Caudéré was alone in
the shop. I followed my instructions, and was offered a second-hand
piano for six hundred francs. It was fifty francs below the stated
price. I hesitated taking it, but, remembering his own words, ‘_I will
be there_,’ I concluded the bargain on the express condition that
the instrument might be delivered the same evening, according to our
benefactor’s will.

I arrived home quickly, impatient to have an explanation concerning the
fifty francs.

It was the first time I had observed an irregularity, and as my
submission was only the result of an infallibility which, until then,
had never been belied, the absolute and regular continuation of these
facts was required in order to keep up that blind confidence which
already impaired so seriously my free will.

It was with almost a triumphant air I announced that the piano had only
cost six hundred francs.

‘I know it,’ said the unknown; ‘but Madame made a mistake.’

On the morrow, when settling the account, the shopkeeper said to me:
‘You got a bargain yesterday; my wife made a mistake in selling you for
six hundred francs a piano I had fixed at six hundred and fifty.’

Absorbed in these supernatural incidents, I did not think of replying.
I walked slowly home wrapped in thought. I related to the mysterious
being what had happened to me at the piano-shop.

If my mystical preoccupations had made me forget my duty for an
instant, he was not long in recalling it to me.

‘I apprised you of it,’ he answered. I understood, and brought back the
fifty francs to the tradesman, not caring to benefit by a mistake.

At that time my daughter’s musical knowledge was limited to the ‘_Bon
Roi Dagobert_,’ and yet, when she sat down to the piano, her fingers,
yielding to some mysterious influence, moved involuntarily over the
piano, and played unknown airs whose accompaniments were in accordance
with all the rules of harmony.

Convinced that the child was playing from memory, the pianoforte-tuner
complimented her upon her musical dispositions.

This phenomenon was only produced three or four times; it is true, I
always took care to take the child away from the piano as soon as I
suspected the approach of the influence.

The stock transaction accomplished, other business, patronised and
advised by the protector, succeeded as well as the first. The object
was always charity. These operations were not important; but for all
that, their results increased the importance of the help every day.

The spirit had reserved to himself the right of designating the persons
he wished to help. Sometimes he indicated the name, but more often he
confined himself to mentioning the street, the number, and flat.

I remember one Sunday, while breakfasting, I was suddenly told to go
_immediately_ and visit a family living in a tiny house behind the
Rue François-de-Sourdis. It was a long way off, and notwithstanding
the indications given me, I went up and down several streets in that
quarter of the town in vain, and I returned without having been able to
fulfil my mission.

‘You must go back again,’ said the unknown, ‘and before breakfasting;
for you yourself can wait; but it is not the same there, where the
children are hungry...!’

Every morning, when leaving home to go to my office, I was commissioned
to do a good work. ‘In such and such a street, at such and such a
number and flat, at the door to the right, etc., lives a widow; you
will give her five francs, or ten francs, and so forth....’

In the beginning, fearing to be led astray, these missions made me feel
rather uncomfortable, especially when he sent me to places where there
was no apparent misery; but he never made a mistake.

To provide for these distributions, and carry out certain religious
projects, which he acknowledged to me—such, for example, as the
erection of a chapel on the ground of ‘Malbec,’ in order to perpetuate
the memory of his visit—to provide, I say, for so much expense, he
considerably increased the figure of his operations.

It is true that an affair undertaken by his order always the same
evening gave good results. And it was necessary it should be rigorously
so, if he wished to maintain the blind confidence he seemed so desirous
of preserving.

It was then that he changed his tactics. Instead of taking his profits
at each liquidation, he now opposed himself to any realisation
whatsoever.

In the face of such a dangerous system, I timidly risked some remarks:—

‘No one could guide me better than you do, and I would be already
_too rich_ if, as before, you took advantage of every fluctuation of
the market, instead of opposing yourself to the realisation of the
profits. It is true there is a large margin on your purchases, but our
prosperity is only artificial, since it is but the result of recharges
and not of liquidated operations. That is to say, by this system we are
constantly laying ourselves open to emergencies.’

It was also under this mysterious inspiration that I then took an
engagement to buy out the interest of my sleeping partners.

Always under the same guidance, our business affairs rapidly created an
opulent position for me. The upward movement of stocks continued, and
if at times a slight reaction arose, it could only touch a small part
of the profits already acquired, and constantly carried over.

The dangerous system of non-realisation, we see, had not been abandoned.

I often complained.

It was thus that on the 1st January 1870 (a Sunday, I think), the
_Coulisse_ having quoted on the boulevards 75·05 francs, and this
rate assuring us a profit of 30,000 francs on one affair alone, I
implored him to consent to realising. He refused energetically, saying,
‘Money-jobbing does not suit me, I have put you in a position which
will be your last affair.’ Moreover, he affected a great dislike to
my profession, saying he desired to see me leave it as speedily as
possible.

Sometimes the spirit dropped certain exclamations, aside, as it were,
the most frequent of which was, ‘_What a struggle!_’

I paid no attention to this, and it was only after the tragic
_dénouement_ of this affair that the souvenir of these exclamations,
although so frequently repeated, came back to my memory.

The circumstances which follow sadly demonstrate that during two and
a half years the aim, so patiently followed, was simply to bribe my
confidence with strange revelations, and to keep me under his thumb.

This result obtained, he had only to use influence in order to keep me
in a position whose importance could not help being fatal, in view of
coming events, and which the unknown’s power of penetration permitted
him to foresee.

It was in the midst of all this, in a way, borrowed prosperity, since
it only resulted from non-realised operations, that I took possession
of my new residence, Rue d’Enghien, No. 11.

For several months, although it was impossible for stock to rise above
seventy-five francs, faithful to his system, the unknown refused to
sell out.

It was therefore necessary to continue. But could I complain if funds
remained stationary? The profits entered into cash as a consequence of
the rise of stocks, which seemed a sufficient guarantee against any
event whatsoever.

Moreover, it seemed to me mean to reproach him with not giving me more,
when I owed him already such unhoped-for prosperity.

My tranquillity was, therefore, absolute when complications with
Germany broke out. Then, from the first day, I wished to liquidate.

‘There, are your fears beginning again as at the time of the Luxembourg
incident? Believe him who is the Master, and who for nearly three years
has never deceived you.’

Notwithstanding his affirmations, two days afterwards war was decided,
and in taking possession of the telegraph lines, the light-hearted
minister put the finishing-stroke to my ruin, for it placed me in the
impossibility of communicating, and therefore of limiting my loss.

Whatever may be the danger of a struggle, we succumb with less regret
when we have fought on equal terms; but here, without speaking of the
strange circumstances, the suppression of telegraphic communication
placed me in the position of a man bound hand and foot, who is thrown
into the sea and reproached for not swimming.

In this critical moment, the unknown was absolutely dumb. He answered
none of the questions I asked him. And yet the situation was most
critical; for twenty years of labour disappeared into the gulf, and,
moreover, to this material loss was added the grief of being forced to
remain separated from my daughter, who was dangerously ill.

A last explanation took place: ‘There, then,’ I said to him, ‘here is
what you have brought me to, and I do not know who you are; I only know
that you have appealed to honourable sentiments, in order to make me
your dupe, and that you have not hesitated using the name of God when
laying your snares.’

I was too irritated to heed his reply; and I have only a vague souvenir
of the word ‘_trials_’ faltered out in answer to my upbraidings.

Thus ends this long and sad ‘story.’

       *       *       *       *       *

I have given this curious self-observation _in extenso_. The
personification is liable to errors which may be dangerous if we
abandon ourselves to its direction, as too many people are tempted to
do.

The extraordinary facts with which Madame Vergniat’s life was filled
are not confined to those just related; she appears to have possessed
supernormal faculties right up to the last. It might be of considerable
interest if her family would give a detailed account of her life.


  Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty
  at the Edinburgh University Press




Transcriber’s note


Words in italics have been surrounded with _underscores_, some bold
letters with =signs=, and small capitals were changed to all capitals.

A few missing page numbers were added to the table of Contents, but
other omissions and inconsistencies were preserved.

Some missing punctuation has been corrected, also the following
changes were made, on page

   24 under point 6 “a” changed to “d” ((_d_) Lastly, the most
      complete)

   64 “IV.” added (IV. THE PERSONIFICATION)

   95 “is” changed to “are” (Phenomena are often forthcoming)

  368 “Phenomenon” changed to “Phenomena” (Phenomena of the same
      kind).

Otherwise the original was preserved, including inconsistent spelling
and hyphenation and possible errors in languages other than English.
Additional: Mallbranche, on page 429, should probably be Malebranche.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Metapsychical Phenomena, by J. Maxwell

