letter is sure to be delivered. One of my friends writes a hand so hard to
decipher that I can generally achieve most success in unravelling its
mysteries by turning his missives upside down and studying his
hieroglyphics in an inverted position. He wrote to me at Dublin, and
addressed me at a street unknown to the Dublin directory. In New York this
would have been the last of the letter. The Dublin post‐officials referred
the letter from one postal district to the other until the person to whose
care it was addressed was found, and it was forwarded to Paris, where I
happened to be at the time.

Dublin occupies both sides of the Liffey. The river runs through the city
from east to west. The streets along its banks are subdivided into
“quays.” The banks are faced with granite, of which the parapets are also
constructed. The river is spanned by nine handsome bridges, seven of stone
and two of iron. The river streets extend about three miles on either
side. Each block, as we would say in New York, has a different name. Thus
there is Usher’s Quay, Merchants’ Quay, Wellington Quay, etc., on the
north side, extending from the Phœnix Park gate to the North Wall
Lighthouse. On the south side are Arran Quay, King’s Inn Quay, where the
Four Courts are situated, Upper Ormond Quay and Lower, Eden Quay, Custom‐
House Quay, etc. The entire street reaches from King’s Bridge to the end
of the South Wall at Dublin Bar Lighthouse. The Liffey may be considered
as the diameter of a circle in which Dublin is contained; the circular
roads which run around it describe the circumference. West of Carlisle
Bridge, which is the head of navigation, the Liffey is a dull and
uninviting stream, especially at low water. It is not more than eighty
yards wide. The mouths of the sewers which empty into it are some feet
above low‐water mark. Their contributions to its by no means pellucid
flood are not agreeable to contemplate either from an æsthetic or from a
sanitary point of view. I should suppose the quays to be unhealthy places
for residence. One must have the suicidal mania very strong indeed who
would throw himself into the Liffey between King’s and Carlisle Bridges.
Beyond King’s Bridge you get into the country, where the stream is not
defiled by the filth of the city.

Sackville Street is the principal street of Dublin. It is about twice as
wide as Broadway, but is not longer than from Canal Street to Houston
Street. Its shortness takes away from its impressiveness. At the foot of
Sackville Street stands Nelson’s Pillar, a Doric column about a hundred
and twenty feet high, with a figure of the great admiral leaning against a
capstan on the summit. A fine view can be had on a _clear_ day (which is
not always to be had) from the top of the monument, to which you may
ascend by a spiral staircase in the interior on payment of a small fee.
The steps at the base of the column are generally occupied by squatting
idlers of all ages. On a fine day—_i.e._, when it does not rain—every inch
of sitting space is occupied. Belated “squatters” may be seen waiting for
hours until place is made by the retirement of some of the sitting
members. Then a general rush is made for the vacant place. Here the
politics of the nation and of the universe are discussed by the unwashed
politicians of the Irish capital. I endeavored to ascertain how these
squatters manage to live; but I was told that it is one of those mysteries
which no one can penetrate.

The General Post‐Office and the Rotunda are near the monument. The Post‐
Office is a fine structure of stone with a portico of Ionic pillars five
feet in diameter. Its pediment is surmounted by three statues: Ireland at
the apex, Fidelity on the left, and Mercury on the right. In certain post‐
offices that we wot of Mercury would indeed be the right statue in the
right place, and might be considered to have a double significance—as a
celestial messenger and a patron of thieving post‐office clerks.

Certain tourists have claimed for Sackville Street the proud pre‐eminence
of being “the finest thoroughfare in Europe.” I do not think the claim
well founded. I do not consider it equal to some of the new boulevards in
Paris, or even to some of those in Brussels. It is certainly grand and
imposing as far as it goes, but it does not go far enough. Sackville
Street, however, presents a lively scene on a fine afternoon. Beautiful
women, well‐dressed gentlemen, rich toilets, and magnificent equipages may
then be seen; the toilets superior to anything to be seen out of Paris,
the equipages not to be equalled out of London. Nothing that I have seen
on the Continent of Europe can compare with the “turn‐outs” and “cattle”
driven in Dublin. The most beautiful equipage I have noticed, and at the
same time the chastest in its elegant simplicity, was that of Earl
Spencer, the present viceroy; four dark bays—blood‐horses—with postillions
and outriders in a dark livery almost black, with white buckskin breeches
and top‐boots. Not a brass button or strip of tawdry gold lace to be seen.
Compared with this equipage, the state carriages at Buckingham Palace and
those at Versailles looked like circus wagons.

Carlisle Bridge, the _embouchure_ of Sackville Street, being considerably
narrower than the street, is generally the scene of something like a
“Broadway jam.” On a busy day it reminds one of the Fulton Street
crossing—even to the policeman.

The _élite_ of Dublin, however, will be found in Grafton Street about four
P.M. This street, though narrow—narrower even than Broadway—is the
brightest, cheeriest street in Dublin. It is laid with asphaltum, and is
delightfully free from mud or noise. It is the fashionable shopping‐
street. Equipages in the very perfection of good taste may be seen in long
lines at both sides of the street in front of the principal shops, while
ranks of magnificent “Yellowplushes,” in rich liveries and powdered heads,
wait, with the grand imperturbability of flunky dignity, to open the
carriage‐door for madame or “my lady.”

I have already said that the Irish in Ireland are becoming a serious
people. I did not meet a single specimen of the Irish joker, indispensable
to the tourist in Ireland a quarter of a century ago. If he ever existed
as they represented him, the railways have killed him. Now there is no
time for display of wit, so called. I think the extinction of the genus
“joker” is something to be grateful for. I did not see any evidence of
suffering among the laboring classes or any more raggedness than in
England, France, or Germany. Artisans are becoming scarce, and can command
good wages. It is hard to get agricultural laborers; they can almost set
their own terms. Those who may be obtained cannot be kept very long; they
work merely to save enough to join their relatives and friends in the Land
of the Free.

The traditional costume of the stage Irishman is as rarely seen in Ireland
as the short‐waisted, long‐tailed coat, and striped trousers of the stage
Yankee in the United States. I saw but one pair of “knee‐breeches” between
Cork and Kingstown.

I did not encounter a single shillelah.




Grapes And Thorns. Chapter XIV—Uprooting Thorns.


By The Author Of “The House Of Yorke.”

“You are happy, then!” F. Chevreuse said to Mr. Schöninger the next
evening when they were talking together.

His companion repeated the word with a doubting inflection. “I have always
associated the idea of happiness with excitement,” he said; “and I am too
calm for that. I should say that I am deeply satisfied.”

Mr. Schöninger had been rehearsing in the church the music for the next
day, and F. Chevreuse had sat in the sanctuary listening, marking with
what will and effect the leader accomplished his work. He showed small
regard, indeed, for the vanity or the personal dignity of the singers he
was training, but the success was admirable. If the men and women around
him had been organ‐pipes or keys, he could scarcely have treated them with
less ceremony. When the rehearsal was over, he dismissed them without a
word, except the command to be promptly in their places the next morning.
Knowing the touchiness of singers in general, and the peculiar touchiness
of some of his own choir, the priest fully expected to see some
manifestation of resentment among them; but they seemed merely surprised
and a little awe‐struck, and, after a momentary hesitation, withdrew in
silence, leaving the organist alone in the loft, with the soft gloaming
painting the air about him, as he closed the instrument with tender care,
and drew the curtain about it.

While waiting for him to come down, the priest perceived for the first
time a lady dressed in deep mourning, who knelt near the door, and who
quietly followed the singers from the church. Miss Pembroke had the habit
of visiting the Blessed Sacrament at this hour; and she was, moreover,
making a Novena, which she had begun the night before, with a special
intention. In that Novena her dear Sisters at the convent had joined, only
Sister Cecilia knowing what the intention was.

Mr. Schöninger went into the house with F. Chevreuse, and stood with him
at an open window looking out in that exquisite hour when day and night
meet in mid‐air, the sunset not yet relinquishing all its rose and gold,
the night drawing only her tenderest film of purple across the sky, and
crushing back her trembling stars like glimmering tears crushed between
dark‐fringed eyelids.

The two men looked out, both unconsciously pleased because the evening was
beautiful and spring in its freshness, and consciously thinking of other
things.

“They are all taking their places again,” Mr. Schöninger said, after
looking upward a moment in silence. “My patriarchs and prophets! I hated
to see them discrowned, and growing dim, and fading away into myths. Now
they burn out again with a greater splendor than ever. The church of the
fulfilment has never shown such men as my prophetic church. The glory of
the later ritual is theirs. When the church which sees would express her
emotion, she borrows the song of the men who foresaw. They were a grand
race. I would like to build a church, and dedicate it to King David, and
have a stone statue of him playing on his harp over against the altar.”

F. Chevreuse smiled, but said nothing. He was watching with intense
interest the development of this new Christian, who took his religion as
he might have taken a crown. Mr. Schöninger had an odd way of performing
what in any one else would have been acts of humility with a proud
unconsciousness, or an unconscious pride that was a little puzzling. Of
what is commonly called piety he showed not a sign; yet he did without
hesitation or apparent effort what ordinary piety shrinks from. One might
say that he possessed a sublime common sense, which, perceiving the
relative importance of God and man, worshipped God as a matter of course,
taking no thought whether man were pleased or not. Certainly, had any
religious persecution threatened him, he would have taken it as a piece of
astonishing impertinence.

F. Chevreuse had only just checked in himself an intention to compliment
the convert on what he took to be the bravery of his profession of faith
the evening before, finding that Mr. Schöninger had been as disregardful
of the crowd who had listened to him as if they had been wooden posts; and
he refrained also from referring to the cool “Oh! come to think of it, I
do not eat meat to‐day,” with which he had that day, at the hotel table,
sent his plate away in the face of a score of staring people, who,
however, did not venture to smile.

If any one had exhorted him not to be ashamed of God, he would probably
have asked simply, Do you think I am a fool?

Their conversation approached this topic after a while.

“One thing that has always astonished me is the mean spirit so many
Christians have,” Mr. Schöninger said. “Their religion seems to degrade
rather than ennoble their character. They make such grand, heroic talk
because they overcome some contemptible temptation which a pagan should be
ashamed to yield to, and seem to regard themselves as constant proofs of
special divine interposition because they are not habitual liars, thieves,
and robbers. They delight, apparently, in calling themselves miserable and
worthless, which is a shame to them and a contradiction of God. If they
had been so worthless, the Almighty would not have taken so great pains to
be reconciled to them.”

“You are regarding the dignity of man, not that of God,” remarked the
priest quietly. Then, seeing that his companion did not understand his
meaning, added: “These expressions of humility and abasement come with
sincerity only from those souls which, gazing heavenward, have seen so
much of the glory of God that they shrink to nothingness in comparison. It
is by looking at him that they grow small in their own eyes, and their
little faults, if you would call them so, become so mountainous in
appearance. There is, indeed, an immense dignity in man, but he loses in
contemplating it; for there is sure to grow up in his soul as immense a
pride and egotism. We are quite safe when we leave our honors to the
guardianship of the God who gave them, and occupy our minds in caring for
his honor, which was once so fatally lost sight of that all mankind were
smitten with a curse. We are a fallen race. Adam and Eve could once walk
with heads erect in the face of heaven, but no human being since.”

Seeing his pupil frown, F. Chevreuse added more lightly: “But I do not
think it worth while to make the devil of too much consequence. Our Lord
said, ‘Get thee behind me, Satan.’ Now, most people would be afraid to
have the devil behind them. They would be continually peeping over their
shoulder to see what he was about. His great strength is in our
misconception of him. I don’t suppose any man ever yielded to him and
consented to offend God but he was astonished afterward to see how easily
he might have conquered, and how small was the bribe for which he had
sacrificed so much.”

“The devil, too,” said Mr. Schöninger with an odd little smile. “Must I
accept him?”

“No; you must reject him,” retorted the priest.

And then came question after question. How did the church explain this?
What was the meaning of that? F. Chevreuse found his philosophy and
theology somewhat tested by this searching questioner, who, without
doubting, wished that all things should be made plain to him.

“I always had a tender feeling for Christ,” he said, “and sometimes a
slight questioning if he might not be the Messias; but only last night
were the needed links supplied which made my fragmentary acquiescences a
single conviction. But though satisfied with Christ, I am not satisfied
with religion as I see it. There are too many trumpery glozes and comments
and complications. I like common sense in religion, and without it
religion has no dignity in my eyes. Nothing, not even his humility and
love, was more conspicuous in the character of Jesus Christ than his
common sense and consistency. How honest he was! I say it with all
reverence and adoration. How free he was from evasion and policy, and that
prudence which is founded on an infinite number of small lies! He always
detected a fallacy, and exposed it; and he was constantly appealing to the
reason and good sense of his followers. When he propounded a mystery, it
was not a mystery because it was involved and obscure, but because it was
so great that we could not see all the parts of it. His mysteries hang
like suns in space. How little there is in common between his transparent
nobleness and the petty tricks of, I must say, the majority of Christians,
their weights and measures for the offences they may dare against him, and
those which are over the permitted guilt, their excuses, their
compromises! Why, sir, there never was a time when I did not think, there
never will be a time when I shall not believe, that the greatest foes to
the Christian church are Christians themselves.”

“You are quite right,” F. Chevreuse answered with an air of sorrow and
mortification. “There is a vast difference between Christ and Christians.
He is God, and we are men. And it is the thought of this difference which
makes us walk with that downcast face which so offended you a few minutes
ago. Do not come to too many decisions at once. Wait, and learn by
experience. Here in your reach now is all the splendor of faith, a free
gift for you to work out your life by. Your privileges are peculiar. You
have had no sacrament to misuse; and when you are baptized, you will stand
as new and sinless a man as Adam was at his creation. In that instant, if
your intention is pure, you will possess heaven in your soul. It does not
often fall to the lot of a man to be sure of such happiness. Let us see
how you will use the privilege. Show us, if you will, the ideal Christian,
and we will be glad to see and imitate him. But beware of pride!”

“My dear friend!” exclaimed Mr. Schöninger, “I did not mean to be
presuming nor to wound you. I am sure you do not wish me to say it, but to
me you, at least, are perfect.”

F. Chevreuse laughed slightly. “Only wait and see,” he said. “And now a
score or two of penitents are waiting to confess, and F. O’Donovan is
wondering if I am going to let him stay in the confessional till midnight.
I must leave you. Why do you not go up and see Mrs. Ferrier? She has been
anxiously inquiring for you to‐day, and complaining a little. Go and make
the good soul happy. Miss Pembroke will be glad to see you too, I am sure.
She has gone to live with Mrs. Ferrier. They do not receive company; but
send your name in, and you will be welcome.”

“I had forgotten them both!” Mr. Schöninger said with some compunction. “I
will go at once.”

F. Chevreuse soon found that he had been mistaken in two of his
assertions; F. O’Donovan was not in the confessional, and Miss Pembroke
was not at that moment in Mrs. Ferrier’s house. Both had gone to the
convent, one called there, the other hastening to follow when she knew his
errand.

Little Anita was dying, killed by her first vision of the wickedness and
agony of the world. She had heard of sin as one living far inland hears of
the ocean, which he has never seen; and now the bitter waves of that wide,
salt sea she believed so far away and alien had rolled in about her. It
touched her feet and her garments, and left its poisonous rime there; it
caught and strangled before her eyes those she had trusted and been near
to; it tossed its sacrilegious foam on to the very altar of God. Her soul
trembled within her, and she turned her face away from life, and hid it in
the bosom of her Lord.

“O my God! my God!” she prayed. “Forgive me! but I cannot live.”

There was no physical malady; but the heart, which, like a busy shuttle,
tosses to and fro its rosy threads, weaving soul and body together,
faltered, and let slip link after link. The invisible folded wings
detached themselves, trembling; the spiritual hands left the bodily hands
cold, and stretched out into eternity, trembling, always trembling; the
whole soul, still full of the fear and agony of the world, shrank outward.

The Sisters knelt about her, cruelly grieved. Was this delicate saint to
be torn away from them thus, leaving them no consolation but the memory of
her blameless life? Was she to go down to the grave without a sign of
victory? Were they to keep for ever this last vision of her, prostrate in
the shadow of that low portal?

And even while they prayed, just giving up hope, as the slight form grew
cold and rigid, all at once it shone out like a marble statue on which a
sudden sunbeam falls. The eyes flashed wide open, the shining soul stood
tiptoe in them an instant, then parted softly.

It is not for us to follow, even in fancy, the flight of that innocent
soul, nor to witness the tears of mingled sorrow and joy which the Sisters
shed over their young companion, nor to listen to the prayers they said,
nor the sacred communings they held together.

Our business is with earth, with Honora Pembroke, driving homeward soberly
through the still evening.

“Drive slowly,” she said to the footman—not John now. “There is no haste.”
And she added to herself: “I want a chance to think.”

There was, indeed, little chance to think in her new home; for good Mrs.
Ferrier, who did her thinking with her tongue, could not conceive any need
for solitude, and was constantly breaking in upon the few moments of
retirement her young friend allowed herself to ask if she had “got
through,” if she were ill, if she would please to come down, or if she
objected to company. And then would come the recapitulation of her trials,
her fears for her daughter, and lamentations without end. That Miss
Pembroke herself might be sad and troubled, and stand in need of cheering
and sympathy, did not seem to enter her mind.

So thus early in their intercourse the young woman was fain to seize every
excuse for a moment of solitude. Whether she would have taken advantage of
this had she known that a visitor awaited her return is doubtful.

The drive was not interminable, however, and it was still early in the
evening when she reached the house and entered. She stopped at sound of a
voice in the drawing‐room. It was Mrs. Ferrier who spoke, but her words
were quite sufficient to tell whom she spoke to.

“I shall never, never get over your having been treated so—never!”

“Madam,” said Mr. Schöninger with a decision which scarcely covered his
displeasure, “I request as a favor that you will never again mention this
subject to me. I am sorry for your trouble in the matter, and grateful for
the kindness you have shown me; but you must see that it is something of
which I do not wish to be reminded.”

Miss Pembroke’s impulse was to go immediately up‐stairs. A kind of terror
seized her at the thought of meeting him. What if he should know that she
was making a Novena, and what it was for!

She stopped one moment, irresolute, then went into the bright drawing‐room
where the two sat. Mrs. Ferrier uttered a little exclamation, not having
heard her come; but Mr. Schöninger had heard the carriage, the door, even
the step that paused at sound of their voices, and half divined that he
had come near not seeing Miss Pembroke that night.

She gave him her hand with dignified and earnest friendliness. “I cannot
tell you how happy you made us all last night,” she said. “You are
welcome.”

He found something haughty in her mode of address, like that of a queen
speaking to a subject, and looked at her intently to discern its meaning,
if possible.

Alarmed at his searching expression, she turned abruptly away from him
with unmistakable haughtiness this time. But no sooner had she done so
than, smitten by a swift recollection of the folly and injustice of the
act, she returned with a glance and gesture so full of mute, impulsive
penitence that it more than atoned; it explained.

The proud surprise in his face melted to a quiet smile. He resumed his
seat by Mrs. Ferrier, and began to talk with her, taking no further notice
of Honora for a few minutes. But when he saw her sitting silent and pale,
her momentary trouble forgotten in the recollection of the solemn scenes
which she had witnessed in the last few days, he spoke to her.

“I hope you will take some interest in my choir,” he said; “for I wish to
improve it very much. The material is bad, the greater part of it. Those
persons seem to have been selected who had loud, blatant voices and a firm
belief that they were excellent singers. They make noise enough, and are
not afraid; but they are vulgar singers. I want a choir of boys in
addition to them. You must know some good voices among the children.”

She brightened. It was a pleasant surprise to hear something in common
life spoken of, and to have one who knew all assume that all was not lost.

“I know a good many such voices,” she said; “and I should be glad to help
you. Could not I make the selection, and teach them the first lessons? It
would be small work for you.”

“If you would be so good,” he replied, quite as if he had expected the
offer.

And so, without more words, Miss Pembroke was installed as Mr.
Schöninger’s musical assistant. It was a timely employment and interest in
her changed life, and exerted a softening influence on his. He gradually
relinquished the designs he had meditated, and looked on his sufferings in
a more impartial light. Whatever prejudice had existed, he could not
doubt, when he examined the subject calmly, that he had been condemned on
a reasonable array of circumstantial evidence, and that, without
prejudice, any other man would have been condemned on the same evidence.
Besides, even had there been a chance of success in the attempt, he could
not have received as much in legal reparation as was voluntarily given him
by the public. The city was, in a manner, at his feet. The highest
officials, both in private and in their public capacity, tendered to him
their respect, their regrets, and offers of any assistance he might need.
People felt that they could not do too much for him. It was quite true, as
Mrs. Ferrier said to him: “Now is the time for you to break the law, if
you want to. You could do anything, and no one would find fault with you
for it.”

For the real criminal, who shall say how it happened that he was not
brought to justice? There was certainly an immense activity in searching
where he was not. The law put on its most piercing spectacles, then shut
its eyes and looked in every direction. The spectacles saw nothing. If
they were on the point of having a glimpse, they were instantly turned in
another direction. We have all seen such justice when wealth and influence
are on the side of the culprit. Letters came from Annette to her mother
with only the smallest circumlocution, and answers were sent to them with
the most transparent diplomacy in the world.

“When my poor Gerald heard of his mother’s death,” Annette wrote, “I
thought for a while that he would die. He lay for hours almost insensible,
and only revived from one swoon to fall into another. But he soon
recovered from the first shock, and is, I think, glad to know that her
sufferings were so short. But he says nothing, and I do not talk to him. I
wait to see what God will do with his soul. He is like a frail building
that has been overthrown so thoroughly that not one stone remains upon
another, and is being built up again in a different shape. I can perceive
a strength in the new foundations of his life which I had not believed him
capable of. Indeed, he is not humanly capable of them. But this is the
city of miracles, and ours is a miraculous faith. As I have told you, he
says nothing. His life is almost an absolute silence, and, I might say,
blindness to earthly things. I never see him looking at any beautiful or
sublime object except the crucifix. Even I seem to be only a voice to him.
He begins lately to show a disposition to be active, which is to me a sign
that his mind is becoming settled.”

Annette did not think it best to describe the nature of the activity that
her husband was showing, well knowing that it would have made Mrs. Ferrier
believe herself to be, in addition to her other afflictions, the mother‐
in‐law of a maniac. For the work he did, here and there, wherever it could
be quietly done without attracting attention, was menial. She had seen him
help the poor man unload his cart of stones, or take the spade from his
hands to labor in his stead, and he was constantly performing menial
labors in the house. All this was done, not with any appearance of being
an eccentric gentleman, but as one of the poor. For day by day his dress
had been growing rude and his whole aspect changed. The sun had burnt his
fair skin and faded his unshorn beard, and, by means best known to
himself, his delicate hands had become dark and rough. Looking at the
firm, silent lips and downcast eyes, Annette could scarcely doubt that the
man she had called her husband was gradually and purposely effacing all
the beauty and daintiness of which he had been so proud. He never went out
with her, and if by chance they were likely to encounter in the street, he
avoided the meeting. No one, except the people of the house where they
lived, suspected that there was any acquaintance or connection between
this dainty _signora_ and this man, who grew every day less and less to be
distinguished from the common laborer.

But in humbling himself Lawrence Gerald had not been unmindful of the one
earthly duty remaining to him. “Are you willing to give me up entirely,
Annette?” he asked her one day.

She answered with a brief affirmative. “Follow wherever God leads you,”
she said; “and do not stop an instant to think of me.”

He was used to depending on her, and to being sure that she meant what she
said, and could perform her promises. Yet he wished to make certain. “You
have to go out alone, and have no protection but that of servants,” he
said.

“I do not need any other protection; I am quite safe here,” she replied.

“You cannot marry again,” he went on.

“I have no wish to!”

Perhaps there could not have been a stronger proof of the purification
which Annette Gerald’s character had undergone than the fact that this
reply was made without a tinge of bitterness or regret. She spoke with
gentle sincerity—that was all. As an absorbing affection had made her
consent to be taken without love, so now a pity and charity yet more
engrossing enabled her to find herself discarded without anger.

“Follow God, and think no more of me,” she said. “I remain here. Go when
and where you will.”

It was the first time they had spoken together for several days, and was
more by accident, apparently, than of their seeking. Passing through the
room where Annette was, Lawrence had seen her trying to open a window that
resisted her slight hands, and had opened it for her. Then the sweet
clangor of the Ave Maria breaking out from all the towers at once, they
had paused side by side a moment.

Perhaps he had wished to speak, and seized this opportunity.

At her answer he looked at her earnestly, for the first time in months, it
seemed to her, and with a look she could not endure without emotion, so
far‐away and mournful, yet so searching, was it. It was a gaze like that
of one dying, who sees the impassable gulf widening between his eyes and
what they rest upon. How many, many glances she had encountered of
his!—laughing, critical, impatient, in the old days that now seemed
centuries past; superficially kind, penitent, disregardful, careless, but
never from the depths of his soul till now. Now she knew at last that his
soul had depths, and that, as she stood before him, he was aware of her,
and saw her as she was.

“Annette,” he said, almost in a whisper, “words cannot tell my sense of
the wrong and insult which I have heaped upon you—on you more than all the
rest put together.”

“Do not speak of that,” she said, trying still to be calm.

“Of all the women I have hurt or destroyed, you are the noblest,” he went
on, seeming not to have heard her.

She drew her breath in quickly, and stood mute, looking down, and some
strong band that had been holding her down—how long she knew not, perhaps
for years, perhaps for her whole life—loosened, and she felt herself
growing upright. She was like the graceful silver birch that has been
bowed over by the snow, flake after flake, till its head touches the
ground, when the warm sun begins to melt its burden, and it lifts a
little, and feels itself elastic.

In days when Honora Pembroke was his ideal, “noble” was the word he
applied to her, and Annette Ferrier always felt herself grow small when
she heard him utter it.

“Of all women I have ever known, you are the noblest and most lovely,” he
said slowly. “I was blind. Too late I have learned that. And if I had a
wish left, it would be that God would reunite us in heaven.”

The snows had melted, and she stood upright at last.

There was a confused whispering in her brain. Since she was loved and
honored, why need they part? She could comfort him, be at his side always,
and help him to win back peace, if not happiness. They would perform works
of charity together, and in humbling herself she would raise him.

She lifted her eyes, and opened her lips to speak some such word, but
checked herself on seeing him turn away. His face was no longer calm and
sad, but full of anguish. All the enticements of human life had assailed
his soul, and were fighting against its one stern tenant, remorse.
Silently, and with a feeling of unacknowledged disappointment, she awaited
the result, scarcely doubting that he would yield. When had he not
yielded? was the bitter question that rose in spite of her, only to be
thrust down again under many excuses, as she called to mind his sufferings
and his isolation.

He stood near the window, with his face turned to the light, and she
watched the struggle without daring to move or to speak. What silent clash
of warring passion held him thus rigid she could only guess; what voices
sweet and pitiful were pleading, and what voices stern and terrible
replying, who can say? It did not need that angels of darkness should be
there; the human heart was enough. In that swift review when the soul,
anticipating a privilege of eternity, can compress a lifetime into a
moment, what visions of all that life might give could have presented
themselves!—dusky eves and sunlighted mornings, when the singing of birds,
mingled with the prattle of children, and quiet and elegant leisure, and
smiling friends, made earthly existence seem like an Elysian dream; ever‐
present affection, with its excuses for every fault, its recognition,
prompt and inspiring, of every virtue, its cheering word for the hour of
sadness, its loving check, its sympathy, its silent tenderness; the
freedom of earth which wealth can give, every portal opening as if by
magic, existence a perpetual feast. They crowded upon him mercilessly, and
tossed to and fro his grief and remorse as the sea tosses its dead, that
are now but faint white outlines, half lost in froth, now cold faces
starting clearly out of the thin, green wave.

How many times that soul was lost and won in those few minutes none but
the invisible witnesses of the scene could tell.

He moved at length, and Annette stepped nearer with sudden alarm, as she
saw him put his hand into his bosom slowly, as if with dread to draw forth
what was there. The hand closed on what it sought, and with bitter
shrinking, as if it were his heart he was thus uprooting, brought it to
light. It was no knife, nor pistol, nor vial of poison, as she had feared,
but a folded paper. She had seen it in his hands before, and wondered what
he kept with such care.

He opened it and read; and she, leaning nearer, read also, without
stopping to consider her right.

This was the breviary Lawrence Gerald carried in his bosom, written
largely and clearly, and signed with his name in full:

“I am a gambler, a housebreaker, a thief, a sacrilegious liar, a murderer,
and a matricide.”

“O my love! stand firm! stand firm!” the wife tried to say; but the words
died in a whisper on her lips, as her heart fainted with pain and delight.

He did stand firm without having heard her admonition. She saw the
unsteady lips close again, the gazing eyes droop, the whole face and form
compose itself. That brief reminder, written to be a visible witness when
the voice of conscience should fail, was more potent than poison or blade
or bullet.

“I wish to take a room by myself in another part of the city,” he said.
“Are you willing?”

“Certainly!” she replied. “But I would like to know where it is. Not,” she
added quickly, “that I would intrude or trouble you in any way. But you
cannot expect me to lose all interest in you, and I shall feel better to
know where you are, and to go once to see your room and the people you are
with.”

“I will let you know as soon as I find a place,” he said. “Of course I
wish to support myself, to be removed from all society, except those
persons whom I must see, and to wait my time in penance. You understand it
all, Annette. I no longer exist in the ordinary life of men. I am either
in purgatory or in hell—I do not yet feel sure which.”

He was going away, but turned at a little distance, and looked at her once
again. “My dear,” he said faintly, “good‐by!”

She could not utter a word, could only clasp her hands over her face, and
so lose his last glance. For as he spoke that farewell, and as she heard
his retreating step, the door of her sealed and frozen heart burst open,
and her dead love, stirring uneasily in its grave during these last days,
rose up stronger than ever before, and resumed the throne it was never
again to abdicate. There, at last, was a man worth loving!

The next evening she received his new address; and he added: “I shall be
out to‐morrow, and the _padrona_ will admit you, if you wish to come.”

Of course she went; but, what had not been to her a matter of course, the
place pleased her. The house was in an old and crowded part of the city,
where the streets swarmed with poor people; but the room was at the very
top, in an odd corner quite removed from noise and communication with any
other apartment, and had an eastern and a northern window that looked off
over palace roofs and through towers and domes to the beautiful mountains.
Close to its southern wall pressed a church tower, and on a level with its
windows rose the sculptured façade, wreathed with angels. Once there, one
might easily forget the steep, dark stair, the squalid street below, and
even the bare walls and floor of the room itself.

Annette had not allowed herself to bring any article of comfort, still
less of adornment, though her heart had ached with longing to do so. But
she placed a beautiful crucifix on the one poor table, and left a volume
of lives of saints beside it. A bunch of roses hung at her belt, and her
fingers lingered on them in doubt for a moment. But she checked that
impulse also. How much might roses breathe of woman’s presence there and
all the graces and sweetnesses of life! But before leaving, she hung over
an arm of the crucifix a single small bud, where the petals showed like a
drop of blood oozing through the green.

As she was placing this last souvenir, her tears dropping over flowers and
cross, there was a sound as though a hurricane should draw in its breath
before blowing, the floor of the room trembled, then there came a
tremendous and reverberating stroke. The great bell in the tower was
striking the hour of noon, and the chamber shook as a bird’s nest shakes
when a storm sweeps over the tree in which it is built. For the moment
everything in the universe was obliterated but sound. She breathed its
tremulous waves, she was enveloped and borne up by its strong tide; the
very sunshine and the blue of the sky were like bright, resounding tones.
Then the stroke ceased; and, circling round and round in fainting rings,
the music of the bells went out to join the music of the spheres, perhaps
to creep with a golden ripple up the shores of heaven.

The woman who had opened the door wondered much to see the pale _signora_
come down with a face flushed with weeping; but a liberal gift disposed
her to think the best of everything.

“You must be very good to him, and not allow any one to intrude,” Annette
said to her. “I shall come to the church here below every morning at seven
o’clock; and if he should be ill, or any accident should happen to him, I
wish you to come there and tell me. But you must not talk to him. Speak to
him only when he asks you to.”

That evening she wrote to her mother: “Lawrence has left me, and is in the
arms of God. That is all I can say, except that I trust he has won a
perfect forgiveness.

“I am sorry, dear mamma, if you are lonely, but I cannot return to
America. I do not wish for society anywhere. Here in Rome is my place,
with my religion and the poor to occupy my time. Try to be happy, and to
think of me as peaceful and contented. And, mamma, if there should be any
good, honest man whom you would like to marry, I shall be glad of it.
Goodness is the chief thing.”

Mrs. Ferrier wept profusely over this letter, not doubting that Lawrence
was dead.

“The poor fellow!” she said. “After all, he wasn’t so bad as he might have
been.”

And then, bethinking herself, she wiped away her tears, and calmed her
grief as much as possible; for it would not do to render herself
unpresentable. It was necessary to go at once with the news to F.
Chevreuse.

The way that Mrs. Ferrier took to the priest’s house was a roundabout one;
it led in an opposite direction, and stopped before a new dry‐goods store
of the most glittering sort. There was, in fact, no shop in Crichton so
fine or so much frequented as this. People went there at first from
curiosity, and were disposed to make themselves very merry regarding it;
but there seemed to be nothing to laugh at, unless it might be certain
erroneous notions in their own minds. Everything was well ordered and
business‐like, the clerks attentive and respectful, and the proprietor
perfectly dignified and watchful. Indeed, a slight excess of dignity and
watchfulness had at first marked his conduct, and made his customers wary
of giving offence.

We have already intimated that Mrs. Ferrier had a new footman.

This functionary, a slim and sentimental young man, let down the step for
his mistress; but before she had made her majestic descent, the proprietor
of the shop stood in the door, bowing to his wealthy customer. She
beckoned him out, and motioned the footman away out of hearing.

“Poor Lawrence is dead, John!” she said plaintively, a smile tempering her
grief. “And it’s best so, of course. I’ve just got a letter from Annette.
And, John—”

The lady paused, and looked down, and laughed a little.

“Well, what is it?” asked the new merchant with an appearance of
curiosity.

“She’s willing.”

John’s face expressed two contrary emotions at this announcement—one of
pleasure, the other a dogged sort of resentment that Annette’s willingness
should have been considered of consequence.

“It is pleasanter to have everybody pleased,” the lady said soothingly.
“Of course, though, it doesn’t make one bit of difference with me so far
as what I shall do; for you know, John, I’d stand by you through thick and
thin. Now I must go to F. Chevreuse.”

“There isn’t a more respectable‐looking merchant in the city of Crichton,”
said Mrs. Ferrier emphatically to herself, as she drove away.

“Beg y’r pardon, mum?” said the slim footman, leaning over.

“I wasn’t talking to you!” exclaimed his mistress indignantly.

It was, indeed, observed by everybody that Mrs. Ferrier was very high with
this unfortunate man, who was humility personified, and only too assiduous
in his obedience. She had assumed a trifle more of state with all her
servants; but the footman was scarcely allowed to breathe freely.

“I shouldn’t wonder, now, if he might think he could marry Annette,” she
muttered to herself, as they drove on.

Poor fellow! his ambition did not soar beyond Betty, and she was treating
him with cruelty. However, with a story‐teller’s prescience, we are fully
aware that his trials are only the little waves which are sending him
nearer and nearer to his haven, and that before the year is over the day
will be named. Already in our mind’s eye we see the fair Betty in her
bridal robes, with her magnificent and patronizing mistress fastening on
the veil, and giving her a kind and resounding kiss at the same time. We
even hear the small whisper with which she silences her bridegroom’s last
jealous misgiving when he comments on the salute given her by the master
of the house:

“What! you think that I could ever have had a fancy for him—a man who
drops his h’s?”

The withering contempt of this remark was decisive.

But we are anticipating.

Mrs. Ferrier found the priest at home, and gave him the letter to read. He
read it attentively, but came to a different conclusion from hers. He did
not tell her so, though, for it was evident that Annette wished them to
think that her husband was dead. Her former letters had prepared him to
suspect a state of things very near the truth.

After a long conversation, in which F. Chevreuse perceived that his
visitor was lingering and hesitating in an unusual manner, Mrs. Ferrier at
last called his attention to the concluding sentences of the letter.

He read it a second time, glanced up through his spectacles at his
visitor, read it again, and gave the letter back, quite uncomprehending.
He was, doubtless, the only person in Crichton who could have been
unconscious of her meaning.

“You may think me foolish, father, at my time of life, to be thinking of
marrying again,” she said deprecatingly. “But you have no idea how lonely
I am. Honora will soon have a house of her own, anybody can see that;
Annette won’t come back, and Louis won’t live here, after what has
happened. I have nothing to do but wander from room to room of my great
house, and think how awfully lonesome I am, and almost wish that I had a
little cabin that I could fill. I don’t feel as if I were in a house, but
as if I were out somewhere. Many a time I’ve gone and sat in my chamber‐
closet, just to feel my elbows hit something.”

She paused, and F. Chevreuse said, “Yes!” as sympathizingly as he could,
wondering greatly what was to come.

“John is a decent man, and my equal in everything but money,” she went on.

“Oh! it’s John!” F. Chevreuse exclaimed, light breaking in.

Mrs. Ferrier dropped her eyes and smiled.

“I don’t see any harm in it, if you have got your mind made up,” the
priest said, recovering from his first astonishment. “I suppose it would
be of no use for me to try to break off the arrangement, even if I wanted
to.”

“Well, John is pretty set,” the lady admitted modestly.

“I dare say,” was the smiling rejoinder. “When is it to be?”

“In a month, if you please. He is started in business now, and is doing
well, and there’s no reason why he shouldn’t be a great merchant as well
as any other man. He’s capable of it, if anybody is,” she said, becoming a
little defiant.

“Certainly!” replied F. Chevreuse with perfect gravity. “There is not a
law in the commonwealth which will prevent his being as great a merchant
as he pleases. The world of trade is open to John, and I wish him all
success in it. Do you put your property into his hands?”

Instantly the beautiful modesty of the bride‐elect gave place to the
business‐like acuteness of the woman who knew perfectly well the value of
money.

“No, father, we keep our accounts separate,” she said. “He had half enough
to start in business with, and I lent him the other half. The income of
the whole is to go toward our housekeeping, but he will have nothing to do
with the rest of my property.”

F. Chevreuse nodded. “I see that you haven’t lost your head. You have
managed your own affairs so well thus far, you may as well continue to do
the same, for your children’s sake.”

A month later there was a quiet marriage at the priest’s house; and the
only notice the Crichtonians had of it was when John appeared again in
Mrs. Ferrier’s carriage, this time by her side, instead of in the dicky.

Everybody smiled except Honora Pembroke. She alone, perfectly polite, and
refraining from all interference, felt haughtily indignant at the
marriage. It was in vain that F. Chevreuse tried to reason away her
prejudices.

“I do not object because he was poor,” she said. “Riches are less a
distinction than a difference. But he has been a servant, and that is
irreparable.”

The priest began to hum a tune:


    “Ah! ça ira, ça ira, ça ira!
    Les aristocrats à la lanterne.”


Somewhat to his surprise, she blushed slightly, but did not smile.

“You may think me foolish, or even guilty of sinful pride,” she said with
a certain stiffness; “but this is a feeling of which I cannot rid myself.
I do not like to sit at table with a person who has once brought me my
soup, nor on the same seat in the carriage with one who used to let down
the step for me. Of course I recognize and submit to the situation; but I
shall go to my own house again immediately.”

“Well!” said the priest, “it takes a good while to get acquainted with
people. Here have I known you these ten years and more, have seen you
simple, unpretending, humble, apparently, good to the poor, and going
freely among them. I thought I knew you thoroughly; yet all at once I come
upon the rock in that smooth stream. Have I ever caught a little gray
shadow of it before, I wonder? Well, well! I won’t undertake to blast it
out of the way at once. I am sorry, though, that you do not like John.”

“I like him in liveries,” said Miss Pembroke with dignity.

“I tell you,” persisted the priest, “they are going to be a very happy
couple.”

“I haven’t a doubt of it,” she replied. “But that is no excuse.”

He laughed, and let her go. The haughty recoil of pride in the fibre was
not to be reasoned away.

It was a clear afternoon in mid‐autumn; and when Miss Pembroke stepped
from the priest’s door, she paused a minute on the sidewalk, and hesitated
which way to go. She did not wish to return home, and she did not think of
any other place where she would rather go.

And then, without looking, she was aware of a tall gentleman, who came
down the street, and, still without looking, knew that he had crossed to
her side of the street, and was approaching her. And then, with a
perverseness which was scarcely natural to her, she turned quite coolly in
the opposite direction, and walked from him, perhaps lest he might think
that she wished for his company. Not but she and Mr. Schöninger were on
the most friendly, and even cordial, terms—it was, indeed, taken for
granted in Crichton that they were the best of friends—but—in short, she
walked away from him. Perhaps she found his full and prosperous life a
little discordant with her saddened one. She almost fancied sometimes that
he had an air of triumphant pride, and that he was being spoiled by the
adulation paid him on all sides.

She had been wishing lately that she could go to Annette; and, now that
Gerald was dead, if the ambiguous letter they had received really meant
that, perhaps Annette would like to have her. Miss Pembroke felt strangely
lonely in her native town, where she knew everybody, and where she had
not, certainly, to complain of any lack of attention. But she would be
lonely for ever rather than Mr. Schöninger should think that she waited on
F. Chevreuse’s step for him. He must have been at the end of the street
when she came out, and—surely he would never dare to think that she saw
him, and had been giving him time to overtake her!

Mr. Schöninger was meantime walking leisurely behind her quickening steps,
intending to overtake her presently, but wishing first to watch her a
little, and to think of some things. One was that he did not approve of
her wearing black any longer. She was beautiful in anything, but too sad
in this; and, besides, it interfered with certain plans of his. He made a
slight reckoning, as nearly correct as the masculine mind could make it on
such a subject. She might put on gray, or black and white, immediately.
That would enable her to wear a rich purple in the winter. He liked to see
her in purple. Some day, when she should be older, she must have a
trailing robe of purple velvet with diamonds. Well, in the spring, then,
she could change her deeper color for one of those delicate lavenders or
lilacs that women know how to look pretty in; and then the way would be
quite open for white, and rose, and blue, and all the fresh, gay colors a
bride might wish to wear.

“We should be married by the first of May, at latest,” thought the
gentleman very decidedly.

Miss Pembroke was quite right in fancying that there was something
triumphant in Mr. Schöninger’s air; but she did not believe, and it was
not true, her pettish charge that he was being spoiled by adulation. All
was going well with him. Hosts of friends surrounded him—friends as
sincere as any one can claim; he did not believe they would stand any
great test, but, also, he did not believe that they were hypocrites. In
his profession he was winning gold and reputation; and, what no one but
himself knew as yet, the fortune for which he had vainly struggled so long
was approaching him of itself. Two of those who had stood between it and
him had died, and there remained now but a feeble old man. With his death
all other claims would die. And not least in his cause of congratulation
was his conviction that this fair woman, who walked before him with the
black drapery fluttering back from her light foot, the braid of hair just
showing its glossy bronze beneath the mourning veil, and, as she turned
the corner of a street, the curve of her smooth cheek glowing like a
peach, was his own.

What made her cheek so red now?

“Honora!” he said, quickening his pace.

She stopped with a start.

“Mr. Schöninger!”

“I beg your pardon!” he exclaimed, recollecting that he had never called
her by her Christian name before. “I was thinking, and I forgot.”

She walked soberly by his side without asking what the subject of his
thoughts had been. His exclamation may have revealed to her something of
their nature; but she was far from suspecting that she was engaged, still
less that her marriage‐day was fixed. She had, indeed, no reason to
suppose that Mr. Schöninger had any intention of renewing the suit that
she had once rejected.

“You are willing to take a walk?” he asked, and, when she nodded assent,
added:

“Let us go up the Cocheco. Last night’s frost has added the finishing
touch to the trees, and everybody is admiring them.”

A beautiful road, almost as wild as a country lane, led between the river‐
bank and the flowery cliffs beside it, and here at evening all the youths
and maidens, and many of their elders in whom age had not chilled the love
of nature, used to walk soberly in the soundless path, or climb the
cliffs, or sit on the mossy rocks, or venture out on the rocks that
studded the stream. Not a pleasant evening but found people strolling
through this romantic avenue.

“Nowhere but in New England does nature dazzle, I think,” Mr. Schöninger
said. “See this maple‐leaf! It is a fine scarlet, and as glossy as a gem,
even when examined closely. And the elm‐leaf is as fine a gold. Everywhere
else the autumn foliage is dingy when looked at so closely. The sky, too.
Look at those long lines of fire that are beginning to stretch overhead,
and at the gathering crimsons! In half an hour the heavens will be as
brilliant as the earth. In Italy the colors are soft, like the colors in
an old painting; they have great depth and richness, but they lack the
fresh brilliancy of the skies in the New World. You must go to Italy soon,
Honora.”

This time the name was used without an apology.

“I have been thinking of it,” she replied quietly, and began to feel as a
stranded seaweed may when, after having lain awhile painfully on the dry
sand, it finds the bright sea slipping under it, and lifting it from its
hard resting‐place. Without a word of explanation she found herself
claimed and cared for.

“I wish to go there again as a Catholic,” he continued, “and see with the
eyes of faith what I saw before with the eyes of an artist. I shall always
admire most the Catholicism of America, or what the Catholicism of America
is going to be. It is more intelligent, noble, and reverent. It isn’t a
sort of devotion that expresses itself in tawdry paper flowers. Indeed, I
believe that America is destined to show the world a Catholicism morally
more grand than any it has yet seen—a worship of the heart and the
intellect, where children shall be delighted, and yet common sense find
nothing to regret. Still, Rome is the sacred city of the martyrs, the
popes, and the temples. I think we should go there in two years at
latest.”

He had spoken earnestly, and had absolutely forgotten how much remained
unsaid, so sure was he of her.

Honora’s glance of astonishment and incredulity reminded him. He bent a
little nearer, smiling, and said softly: “But we shall be married long
before that time, dear, shall we not?”

“It is the first I have heard of it,” Miss Pembroke managed to say with a
certain degree of composure, after a moment.

“You surely are not vexed!” he said quickly, beginning to fear that he had
assumed too much. “I asked you once in the proper, lover‐like fashion, and
you refused me, not because you were indifferent to me—you never said
that—but because you would not marry and would not love one who denied
your Saviour. That obstacle no longer exists. You did not imagine that I
had become indifferent to you? That is out of the question. Have I made a
mistake?”

“No; it is I who have made a mistake,” she answered frankly. “I was afraid
that you had given me up.” She hesitated a little, then, since he still
listened, added: “I am very glad that you have not.”

“Thank you!” he said.

They walked slowly up the road between the foaming river and the glowing
cliffs, praising the skies and the trees as they went, finding everything
beautiful, finding each the other more beautiful than all else. And when
the evening began to fade a little, they turned their steps, and went down
again with the river, filled with that deep and quiet happiness which
leaves nothing to wish for and nothing to tell.

The very next morning a little note was sped from Miss Pembroke to Sister
Cecilia with the following mysterious announcement:

“My _Novena_ has succeeded perfectly! I will come very soon and tell you
all about it.”

Since the matter is settled, we may as well own at once that when Mr.
Schöninger first announced himself a Catholic, Honora had said to her
friend and confidant at the convent, “If I do not marry him, I shall never
marry any one”; and that the result of this confession was a _Novena_, in
which the young woman had asked that she might find favor in his sight.

“I told him about the _Novena_,” Miss Pembroke said when she made her
explanatory visit to the convent. “And I told him that you and all the
Sisters joined with me; and he bade me thank you for his part, and say
that he hoped you would never be sorry for having done so.”

But Honora did not tell how astonished and touched her lover had been at
this confession of what seemed to her the most simple thing in the world.

“I never thought of asking God for you,” he said; “and yet there is
nothing in the world so well worth praying for. I am a very ignorant
Catholic, Honora, in all except doctrine. You will have much to teach me.
But, then,” he added, smiling, “we have all our lives for that.”

“The only blot on my happiness,” Honora said to her friends, “is the
thought of Annette. A letter came from her last night which seems to shut
us all out from giving her either society or comfort. She evidently does
not wish to see any one she has ever known. She says that her time and
thoughts are entirely occupied.”

Annette Gerald was fully occupied. She was like one who stands at the head
of a long flight of winding stairs, watching another descend, and,
beginning to lose sight of the object of her attention, begins to follow
slowly, intent, at the same time, not to be too near or too far away.

It was necessary that she should keep Lawrence Gerald in sight without
attracting attention either to him or to herself. As a rich lady, driving
in her own carriage, she could not do this. She therefore gave up her
carriage, and moved to an humbler apartment, where she lived with one
servant. Still, the dainty elegance of the widow’s attire she had assumed,
fastidious in her choice, not consciously, but from habit, pointed her out
as of a different class from the people she went most among. To remedy
this, it was necessary only to be passive; and in a few months Roman dust
and mud and brambles had reduced her to a dinginess almost Roman, and she
could go unremarked, could see Lawrence about his work, digging in the
excavations, carrying stone and mortar for the masons, doing any rough
labor that offered. She could see him in the church, where he spent an
hour every morning; she knew that every Sunday he entered the same
confessional, and, as she could well guess, told the same tale to the
priest, who, when his penitent left him, leaned forward and looked after
him with a sad and earnest gaze. More than once, late in the evening, she
had looked up from the street where her close carriage stood waiting, and
seen, out on the corner of the open roof, to which no one but he had
access, his form drawn clearly against the transparent purple of the sky,
and, after waiting as long as prudence would allow, had gone away to her
lonely apartment, leaving him there in company of the marble angels that
clustered about the church front, and the blessed bells, and whatever
invisible spirits God should will and his own soul invoke. Never did she
see a light in that lofty window; and, after a while, it occurred to her
to ask the reason of the _padrona_, who often came to the church in the
hope of receiving money from the lady.

“He never will have a candle,” the woman said. “I think he is very poor.
And he never drinks wine or eats meat. And, _signora_, he is growing very
pale.”

That night Annette Gerald extinguished the candles in her own apartment,
and never lighted them again. She could weep and pray without light. The
next day she dismissed her one servant, and thenceforward waited on
herself. No ease or elegance must her life know while his was passed in
such poverty. He ate the dry, sour bread of the poor; she ate it too. He
discarded every luxury of the table; she also became an ascetic. If she
put wine or fruit to her lips, tears choked her, and she set them aside.
As he went down, so she followed him, unseen, weeping pitifully, watching
constantly, loving utterly.

Without suspecting it, both became after a while objects of interest to
those about them. No dinginess or apparent poverty could hide their
refinement; and the extraordinary piety of both invested them with a
certain sacredness in the eyes of these people, who had walked and talked
with saints. The rude workmen ceased, not only to jest with, but to jest
in the presence of this man who never smiled, or spoke without necessity,
whose pale face was for ever downcast, and who, in the midst of Italian
indelicacy, carried himself with the refinement of an angel. In the long
noon rest of the hot summer days they withdrew from the place where he
threw himself down, faint with fatigue and the heat, and left him to that
solitude he unmistakably desired. Only little children ventured near the
“penitent,” as he began to be called, and smiled wistfully in his face,
and kissed the hand that now and then gave them a _soldo_.

Once, as he lay asleep on the grass, in the shadow of a ruined arch, an
artist, who was just returning home from a morning’s sketching in the
Campagna, paused to look at him. The other workmen lounged about at a
distance, some asleep, some eating their noon luncheon of dry bread,
others smoking and talking. This one seemed laid there apart for a
picture. Thrown carelessly on his back, with his hand under the cheek
turned a little aside, and the hat dropped off, his form and face were
fully seen. It was not the form and face of a plebeian. The elegant shape
was not disguised by its faded garments; the beauty of the face,
delicately flushed with heat, and beaded with perspiration, was even
enhanced by the unshorn and untended beard and the confused mass of
clustering hair; and the expression of calm melancholy, which was not
obliterated even by the unconsciousness of sleep, did not belong to a
common nature.

The artist drew softly nearer, and opened his portfolio, too much engaged
to give more than a passing glance to a woman who stood by the arch. With
a rapid pencil he sketched his subject, trying to catch that hovering
sadness and the weary bend of the head.

Drawing back presently to see if he could add anything to his sketch, he
perceived that the woman who had been standing by the arch was at his
side, watching his progress.

“Don’t let the shadow run off so,” she said, looking at the sketch, not at
him. “Show how the sunshine comes, close to his feet, so that he has only
a step to take to reach it. And do you see how those yellow flowers lean
against his hair in the form of a crown? Put them in too; and the group of
workmen yonder, and a corner of the excavation, with that beautiful
pedestal half uncovered. As you have it, it is only a pretty poem without
meaning; give the whole, and it will be a tragical story.”

The artist looked intently at the lady while she spoke. Surely she must be
the sister of the sleeper! Their two faces would do to stamp on a coin,
the man’s profile showing beyond the woman’s.

“Finish the sketch quickly before he wakes,” she said. “I will pay you
whatever you want for it. Some day I will have you paint it. Don’t forget
the red poppies at his feet. And can you see, can you show, that there is
a blister on his hand?”

Wondering much at this strange sort of poor people whom he found himself
among, the artist obeyed.

“But I want to keep the sketch,” he said. “I will make a copy for you, if
you will come to my studio for it.”

“Certainly not!” she exclaimed, and for the first time looked at him with
a clear and haughty gaze. “You have no right to keep it, for you took it
without permission. It would be dishonorable and intrusive of you to show
that to any person. We are not _contadini_!”

The artist rose and bowed.

“Madam, allow me to present my sketch to you,” he said with equal pride.

“Some day you will know, and then you will no longer be offended,” she
said calmly, and took the sketch from his hand just as the sleeper stirred
and began to awake. “And now, I beg you never to notice him again, or
mention him to any one till I come to you for the picture.”

And so three years passed away, and there came an Easter morning such as
Easters used to be in the days when the pope was King of Rome, and there
was one city in the world where the business was religion.

Who can forget the scene, having once beheld it—the sky built up of
sapphires, glitter on glitter of such blue as the queen of heaven might
make her mantle of; the full, warm gold of the sunshine looking the sad
ruins in the face till they smile, and revealing its hidden rainbows now
and then, as the foamy columns of fountains sway in the light breeze, and
catch it unawares; the birds, with long, pointed wings, that cut the air,
and seem inebriated with the delight of flying. Then the crowd in the
piazza of S. Peter’s, the millennial mingling of rich and poor, royal and
plebeian, making in all a scene to be witnessed nowhere else.

“How familiar, yet how new!” said a lady who stepped from her carriage at
the barrier. “It is all I could wish! I am glad, Max, that we did not come
sooner to Rome. I would rather my first sight of it should be a festal
one.”

This lady was richly dressed, and the black lace of her large Spanish veil
was drawn back from a face like a fresh lily.

She was instantly addressed as _principessa_ by all the beggars about.

“I am sorry I cannot give you the title, Honora,” her husband said, and
smilingly dropped a coin into each outstretched hand. “So nothing
disappoints you? I thought it would be so. Now, we must not linger
outside.”

“Let us go slowly up; and please do not speak to me,” Mrs. Schöninger
said. “No, I do not want your arm now. I must enter S. Peter’s the first
time praying.”

They went slowly up the ascent, Honora with her hands clasped, and her
eyes dilating as they entered the grand vestibule. Then Mr. Schöninger
lifted the heavy curtain, and she crossed the threshold.

At that first step into S. Peter’s a Catholic feels as though he had
touched the beating heart of mother church.

The crowd pressed in; but still another crowd remained outside, keeping
their places for the papal benediction, and listening for the silvery
burst of trumpets inside which should tell that the risen God stood on the
central altar of Christendom.

Among this crowd was a group, for which they made way, as it crossed the
piazza and approached the steps. Yet it was only two poor laborers who
supported a sick man between them.

The thin and transparent face of this invalid, bathed now in the
perspiration of weakness, showed that he was worn by consumption or by a
long and exhausting fever. He was so weak, indeed, that his two assistants
supported him in their arms; and when they reached the stone posts at the
foot of the steps, he knelt there, and leaned against one of them, almost
insensible.

A lady, following closely behind, wet her handkerchief in cologne‐water,
and handed it over his shoulder to one of the men, but did not herself
speak to them. He revived a little at that, and, still leaning against the
central post, remained fixed in prayer.

A whisper began to creep among the poor people about. Some of them had
seen this man, and knew what they conceived to be his story, and they told
it in intervals of listening to the strains of heavenly music faintly
heard now and then from the church.

“He is a penitent,” one whispered, “and has been doing penance here as a
laborer, though he is so rich—so rich! Some say that he killed his own
mother; but who knows? The beautiful _signore_! Look at his face! She must
have provoked him; and perhaps she was a very wicked woman. Ah! I could
tell stories of mothers. They are not all like the blessed Madonna.—There
are the trumpets! Alleluia! alleluia! Blessed is he who cometh in the name
of the Lord!—And so this poor _signore_ has been living a hard life, and
is about to die; and he has come at last to get the Holy Father’s
blessing. He would not ask for it before. But, indeed, he might, for he is
as holy as the blessed Labré, though he sleeps in a bed and works for his
living, instead of begging it. The pale _signora_ who stands behind him is
his sister. She has been in Rome all these years, watching over him,
without his knowing it. See! she stands out of his sight now. He worked up
to a week ago, and then he fell one day in a faint. She was near by, and
called a carriage to take him home. And since then she has had a room in
the same house, but told the _padrona_ not to let him know. She is rich,
for all her poor clothes. She puts something into every hand that is held
out to her. See the way she looks at him!—Ah! there they come.”

Mass was over, and the crowd in the church came pouring out. It was with
difficulty that Lawrence Gerald’s protectors could keep his place in that
pressure. But that he had revived, they could not have done so. With the
first intimation that the moment for which he had so long waited was at
hand, he had roused himself, and exerted his whole strength. Upright on
his knees, with his arms clinging to the post against which he leaned, he
fixed his eager eyes upon the balcony where the Pope would in a short time
appear. He saw nothing else, not even two familiar forms and faces
directly in front of him, which he could scarcely have seen even then with
indifference.

“My God!” exclaimed Honora Schöninger, and clung to her husband’s arm.
“Look, Max! It is Lawrence, and he is dying!”

Mr. Schöninger drew his wife aside. “It is no time to recognize him now,”
he said. “And there is Annette behind him. Poor fellow! poor fellow!”

Annette pressed close to her husband, ready to catch him if he should
fall. She knew that he had had an exhausting day. He had risen at early
dawn to hear Mass and receive communion, though not really able to leave
his bed, and had afterwards spent his remaining strength in the first
careful toilet he had made for years. After having so long heaped every
indignity on his own body, to‐day he had seemed desirous of treating it
with respect as the temple of God. He still wore the dress of the laborer,
but his face was shorn of its ill‐tended beard, his hair brushed once more
into silken waves, and his linen snowy white. And more exhausting than
these efforts had been the excitement of mind under which he labored, and
his fear lest in some way he should miss the benediction he so longed for.

“I want to be placed directly in front of the balcony,” he had said,
“where I can see the Pope’s face. I shall recognize his face at once. Who
knows but he may look at me? If he should, then I shall think that at last
God looks at me.”

The crowd hushed itself, as the golden cross came in sight, and after it
the crowned and mitred heads, all in white save one. And that one, under
its glittering tiara, wore a crown of snowy hair dearer to Catholic hearts
than gold or jewels. On this central face the eyes of the sick man fixed
themselves with a wide and imploring gaze, and his hands stretched
themselves out, as if to beg that he might not be forgotten.

“Do not fear!” Annette whispered in his ear. “The Holy Father knows all
your story, and pities you; and there is one standing beside him who will
remind him that you are here. He will know just where you are.”

To the waiting and trembling penitent this was like a whisper from his
good angel. He associated no other thought with the voice.

The silence deepened till nothing could be heard but the swift wings of a
bird flying over the piazza, and the soft “zitti! zitti!” of the
fountains, and the heart that each one in that vast crowd felt beat in his
bosom.

Surely that mild and blessed face was turned his way! the penitent
thought. Surely, surely, the Holy Father had looked at him, searching the
crowd one instant with his eyes, and finding him!

Then a single voice was heard—the only voice in the universe, it seemed.

“May the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, in whose power and authority we
confide, intercede for us with the Lord.”

“Amen!” chanted the choir, as though the world had found voice.

Again the single voice:

“Through the prayers and merits of blessed Mary ever Virgin, of blessed
Michael the archangel, of blessed John the Baptist, of the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, and all the saints, may the omnipotent God have mercy upon
you, may all your sins be remitted, and Jesus Christ lead you to eternal
life.”

“Amen!”

“Indulgence, absolution, and remission of all your sins, space for true
and faithful repentance, hearts ever contrite, and amendment of life, may
the omnipotent and merciful God afford you.”

“Amen!”

“And may the blessing of the omnipotent God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
descend upon you, and remain with you for ever.”

“Amen!”

Every stain was washed away! Full and strong the blessing flowed, a divine
river from the throne of God himself! On its tide were borne away, not
only guilt, but the memory of guilt; not only fear, but the remembrance
that fear had been. Supported in the arms of his wife and attendants, and
of the old friends of whose presence he was unconscious, Lawrence Gerald
lay back with his eyes half closed, and a smile of such peace and ecstasy
on his face as could only come from God. His soul was gliding sweetly away
on the echoes of that last amen.

The military bands began to play, the guns boomed from Sant’ Angelo, the
bells of S. Peter’s rang out with a joyful clash on the air, and all Rome
broke into music over the resurrection.

And there was joy before the angels of God over one sinful soul redeemed.

The End.




Madame Du Deffand.


“Men have died, and worms have eaten them, but not of love,” the poet
tells us. And women too have died, and worms have eaten them, but not of
_ennui_, although Mme. du Deffand for nearly fourscore years woke the
echoes of Versailles and Paris with the pitiful lament: “I am bored! I am
bored! I am dying of _ennui_!” If she eventually did die of it—which we
stoutly deny—a malady that took eighty years to kill its victim can hardly
be called a very cruel one. The vivacious, gossipping, wearied old lady
contrived to extract a very reasonable amount of amusement, even of
excitement, out of the existence whose wearisomeness she was for ever
denouncing; and it is only fair to add that she contributed a very goodly
share of amusement to other people. This renowned heroine and victim of
_ennui_, Marie de Vichy‐Chamroud, was born into this wearisome world in
the year of grace 1697, of a noble family of the province of Burgundy. The
De Vichy‐Chamrouds were richer in parchments than in lands; so it fell out
that Marie, young, lovely, accomplished, and teeming with wit, was
condemned to marry an old man, and, what was still more terrible, a
wearisome old man, who had not a single taste in common with her.
Immediately on leaving the convent where she received what in those days
was considered a liberal education, the beautiful young lady was presented
to her future lord. If she bored herself as a young girl, free and happy,
and with life before her, what must she have done as the wife of a
querulous, stingy old man? All the revenge that was in her power Marie
took. She bored her husband as much as he bored her, until at last, in
sheer desperation, he agreed to give her an annuity, and let her go her
way without him. As Marquise du Deffand, free and comparatively wealthy,
the young wife began a new era. She opened a _salon_ which soon became the
centre of the wit and fashion of Paris. All that was eminent in war, arts,
sciences, literature, and folly came there, and tried to chase away her
eternal _ennui_. Amongst her many admirers, the President Hénault occupies
the most conspicuous place, both from the dignity of his own character and
the enduring nature of their mutual attachment. Hénault was one of the
most remarkable men of his time. He was educated by the Oratorians, and
had early the inestimable advantage of enjoying the advice, and almost the
intimacy, of Massillon. He counted the scarcely lesser privilege of early
personal acquaintance with the great poet Racine. As soon as he had
completed his studies, young Hénault was introduced at court, where he at
once made a favorable impression. “This is not to be wondered at,” says a
chronicler of the times; “for, in truth, he was a youth of gracious parts,
gay, witty, amiable, a good musician, and gifted with the art of making
light and graceful verses.” While the Duchesse de Maine held her brilliant
court, Hénault was a constant presence there, and one of its principal
ornaments. He was so universally beloved that it was popularly said of
him: “There is a man who has more friends than he can count, and not a
single enemy.” And this lucky man was the devoted admirer of Mme. du
Deffand for over fifty years.

He attained considerable fame as an author, and not the least remarkable
feature in his works is that their authorship was vehemently contested,
not only during Hénault’s life, but for many years after his death. Most
of his books were first published anonymously—a circumstance which, in
their early career, may have explained the doubts concerning their origin.
But the _Abrégé Chronologique_, which Hénault regarded as his best,
appeared with the author’s name at the outset, and this, strange to say,
was the one which the world refused longest to believe was his, and
persevered in long attributing to the Abbé Boudot. A copy of the book was
found, in the _abbé’s_ own writing, amongst his papers when he died, and
this is the only piece of evidence on which Hénault’s detractors built
their obstinate denial that he was the author of the _Abrégé_. Admitting
that this fact looked suspicious, the book itself from first to last bears
the stamp of Hénault’s composition in the most unmistakable manner; the
choice of the subject, its style and treatment, all point emphatically to
him as the author, while there is abundant explanation of the accidental
presence of the compromising copy amongst Boudot’s papers. Hénault was in
the habit of employing him to copy out his compositions. Voltaire, in one
of his letters to the president, recommends the _abbé_ as a very clever
copyist, and also as a useful person to make researches for him at the
Royal Library; and Grimm also recommends him for the same purpose,
informing Hénault that Boudot had employment at the library, and was in
charge of the literary and historical department. A man who held this
subaltern post, and was treated as a mere scribe by such authorities, and
who never pleaded guilty to writing even a pamphlet in his life, is, to
say the least, a very unlikely person to be the author of such a work as
Hénault’s _Abrégé_. Mme. du Deffand and Grimm, who both liked to sharpen
their wits pretty freely at the president’s expense, never for an instant
doubted the reality of his authorship, or suspected that any one had had a
share in his books.

Unlike so many of his distinguished literary contemporaries, Hénault was a
practical Christian. “His piety,” says the Marquis de Agesson, “was as
free from fanaticism or bitterness as his books were from pedantry.”

Mme. du Deffand, who spared her friend on no other points, spared him on
this. She never laughed at his religion. On that score alone he was safe
from her irony and sarcasm. She even openly commended him for challenging
Voltaire’s impious vituperation of the faith; and in her own
correspondence with the infidel philosopher she speaks almost with
enthusiasm of the clear intellect, the pointed wit, and irresistible
goodness of his antagonist. When he was past eighty, Hénault wrote
privately to Voltaire, imploring him, in the most touching terms, to
retract some of his diabolical satires on religion; and this letter,
which, unhappily, we know remained without effect, was found amongst
Voltaire’s papers after his death. He, on his side, strove to win over
Hénault to the “enlightened school,” and with artful flattery and subtlest
sophistry urged him to change certain historical passages in the _Abrégé
Chronologique_ which strongly vindicated the influence of Christianity.
But the Christian writer withstood these blandishments. In a literary
point Voltaire contributed in no small degree to the reputation of
Hénault, whose style he praised with creditable candor. It is strange to
see the lively and bored old _marquise_ holding steadily the friendship of
these widely dissimilar men. Diderot, D’Alembert, and Montesquieu were
also _habitués_ of her brilliant _salon_. But none of them could do more
than give her momentary deliverance from her life‐long enemy—_ennui_. She
went on boring herself, in spite of the perpetual cross‐fire of _esprit_
that the brightest wits of the age kept up around her, and she bored her
friends almost to exasperation by the unceasing repetition of the
complaint: _Que je m’ennuie! Que je m’ennuie!_

At the age of fifty‐four a terrible misfortune befell the _marquise_. She
grew blind. It was soon after this that she became acquainted with Mlle.
de l’Espinasse. The sprightliness and the energy of this young girl were
an immense consolation to Mme. du Deffand, and cheered her for a time in
that “eternal night,” as she pathetically described it, in which she now
dwelt. But they did not agree for long. After living happily together for
some few years, they quarrelled and separated. It is impossible to say
whose fault it was. Each had violent partisans, who accused the other, but
proved nothing. Mme. du Deffand was undoubtedly difficult to live with, as
all people are who draw exclusively on those around them for amusement;
but she was old and she was blind, and it is beyond doubt she was a kind
benefactress to her young companion, and that, at the moment of
separation, she wrote a most touching letter to her, asking forgiveness
for all she had done inadvertently to pain her, and urging the young girl
to remember how cruelly she was afflicted both by blindness and by
_ennui_. To this Mlle. de l’Espinasse returned a curt and ungracious
answer. Nor did she imitate the kindliness of speech of her quondam
employer, who always spoke of her ever after their quarrel with the utmost
good‐nature and forbearance.

Just as her home was resounding to these domestic discords, Mme. du
Deffand made the acquaintance of Horace Walpole. They were spontaneously
pleased with each other. Mme. du Deffand would have probably been still
more so, if she could have foreseen how triumphantly this new friendship
was destined to rescue her memory from oblivion. We know more of her and
her _salon_ through the voluminous correspondence that passed between her
and that prince of gossips and most brilliant of scribblers than through
any other source; although she comes in, it is true, for more ridicule at
his hands than eulogy. He constantly reproaches her for making him the
laughing‐stock of Paris and London by her absurd affection, and coarsely
tells her he does not want to be the hero of a novel where the heroine is
a blind octogenarian.

This correspondence was published at the beginning of the century, and was
hailed as a valuable addition to the French literature of that period. On
reading it, one feels transported into the society of the fascinating
women and accomplished men whom it so cleverly depicts. Mme. du Deffand
passes in review the authors and actors of her time with a graphic power
of delineation rarely equalled. Unsparing in her criticism, she is in some
instances no doubt too severe, and occasionally even unjust; it is
nevertheless acknowledged that in her literary judgments she is rarely at
fault; they are marked throughout by discrimination, taste, and delicacy.

Horace Walpole made Mme. du Deffand’s acquaintance when she had become
quite blind; on his being presented to her, she drew her hand over his
face, in order to ascertain whether he was plain or handsome, and what his
age was. Her touch had acquired such sensitive delicacy in course of time
that it enabled her to calculate people’s ages and looks with the greatest
accuracy. In quite the latter years of her life Mme. du Deffand, who had
never been avowedly an unbeliever, although practically so, turned her
thoughts to religion, and sought in the teaching of the faith those
consolations to her _ennui_ that wit and philosophy had failed to secure
her. She announces this change of sentiment, with her usual frankness, in
one of her letters to Walpole. Her biographers throw but little light on
the subject. La Harpe alludes to her having had many interviews with the
celebrated Jesuit, F. Lenfant—an episode which is dismissed by Mme. du
Deffand herself with the remark that “the Père Lenfant was very clever,
and that she was much pleased with him.”

The Père Lenfant who is thus incidentally introduced to us in the memoirs
of the lively French woman was one of the countless noble and touching
victims of the Revolution—that raging torrent that drowned so many gentle
voices in its roar. He was gifted with an eloquence that drew around him
all the lovers of rhetoric and the most able men of his day. The poet
Young heard him, and was so struck by his power and pathos that he
entreated a Protestant clergyman of his acquaintance to go and hear him;
the latter did so, and embraced the faith. Once, on coming out from a
sermon of the Père Lenfant’s, preached at S. Sulpice during Lent, Diderot
exclaimed to D’Alembert, who had been drinking in every word from
beginning to end, with his eyes riveted on the preacher: “It would be hard
to hear that man often without becoming a Christian.”

When the order of the Jesuits was disbanded in France, the Père Lenfant
was thrown upon the world. He was then forty‐seven years of age. The
decree which despoiled him of his religious garb could not rob him of its
spirit. He continued his good works and his apostolate with fervor and
wisdom. Several crowned heads tried to win him to their courts, but in
vain. The son of S. Ignatius held steadily aloof from the tempting snare.
He preached indefatigably at all times and places, at Lunéville, Vienne,
Versailles, wherever he was called; and everywhere the great and the
learned flocked round his pulpit. His contemporaries describe the effects
of his eloquence as electrical. He captivated his hearers, not so much by
the magnificence of his language, as by the pathos of his voice and the
force of his own faith. Père Lenfant preached the Lent of 1791 before the
court; but on refusing to take the oath of the clergy to the civil
constitution, he was obliged to withdraw. Shortly afterwards he was taken
prisoner and condemned to death. On being brought before his judges, the
people cried out that his life might be spared, and, yielding to the
cries, his jailers let him go; before, however, he had got free from the
crowd, a woman called out: “There goes the king’s confessor!” At these
words the thirst for blood, that had seemed for a moment satiated or
suspended, rose up anew. The mob set upon him like tigers. The Père
Lenfant uttered only words of love and forgiveness, and, raising his hands
to heaven, exclaimed: “My God, I thank thee for allowing me to offer my
life for thee, as thou hast offered thine for me!” And with this gracious
sentence on his lips the Jesuit father fell and expired under the blows of
the murderers.

This little sketch of the Marquise du Deffand would be incomplete without
a passing mention of the author of the _Esprit des Lois_, who was one of
the most distinguished of her numerous friends.

Her letters to Montesquieu have been preserved; they are, however, much
less interesting than those to Walpole, and consequently much less known.
Mme. du Deffand could be a staunch friend, though she was often a trying
one; she proved herself such to Montesquieu. Amongst other good offices,
she cleared him from the charge of avarice which was laid at his door so
generally. History revoked the verdict, it is true, but only when the
subject of it was gone beyond the reach of earthly rehabilitation.
Montesquieu’s exceeding modesty and desire to have his benefits known only
to the recipients was the real, and perhaps the only, cause of his reputed
avarice. One example of his delicate generosity we cannot refrain from
giving.

He was in the habit of visiting Marseilles to see his sister, Mme.
d’Héricourt, who resided there. During one of these visits he happened one
evening to be lounging on the quay; the weather was sultry, and it
occurred to Montesquieu that he would take a boat, and have a row on the
sea. His attention was drawn to a young man who was looking out for a
customer. He hailed him, and got in. As soon as they were out a little at
sea, Montesquieu perceived that his boatman was a novice at the work, and
rowed with difficulty. He questioned him, and learned that he was, in
truth, a jeweller by trade, and a boatman only on Sundays and holidays, in
order to gain a trifle towards helping his mother and sisters, who were
working to procure 4,000 crowns to ransom his father, who was a prisoner
at Tetuan. Montesquieu was deeply touched by the story. He made a
resolution on the spot, but said nothing. Before landing, however, he got
from the boatman his father’s name and the name of his master. On parting,
he handed him his purse, and walked away rapidly; great was the delight of
the young man, on opening it, to find that it contained sixteen golden
_louis_.

Six weeks after this the captive suddenly appeared in the midst of his
wife and children. He saw, by the astonishment mingled with their joy,
that it was not to them he owed his liberation; but the surprise and
gratitude of all were increased on his telling them that not only was his
ransom paid, but likewise his voyage home and his clothing; and, over and
above this, a sum of fifty _louis d’or_ had been handed to him on
starting. The young boatman no sooner heard this fairy tale than he
bethought him of the generous stranger who had presented him the purse and
expressed such sympathy on hearing of his sorrow. He determined to seek
him. For two years he did so, but in vain. The name of the benefactor to
whom he and his owed such a sweet and magnificent debt of gratitude
remained an impenetrable mystery. At last one day, while walking in the
streets of Paris, he suddenly encountered Montesquieu face to face; the
young man fell upon his knees, kissed the hand of his benefactor, and
entreated him to come with him to the home he had blessed, and witness the
joy that he had brought back to a desolate family. But Montesquieu feigned
ignorance and surprise, declared he knew nothing of what the young man was
talking about, and at last, wrenching his hand away abruptly, he
disappeared in the crowd, nor did his pursuer succeed in finding him
again.

This action would never have been discovered had not Montesquieu’s
executor found among his papers a memorandum in his own handwriting,
stating that he had sent 7,500 francs to Mr. Main, an English banker at
Cadiz; on the latter being applied to for information, he replied that he
had given that sum, by the order of M. de Montesquieu, for the ransom of a
man named Robert, a Marseillais, detained as a slave at Tetuan. Inquiries
were set on foot, and the Robert family told the rest.

This touching incident was made the foundation of many dramatic pieces. If
it did no more than clear a noble character from the unworthy charge of
heartlessness and avarice, the world would have been the better for its
discovery.




Cain, What Hast Thou Done With Thy Brother?


By Ernest Hello.

From The Revue Du Monde Catholique.

By way of preface, I will relate a true story given by F. Agathon, a
priest of the Monastery of Ruba, and preserved in the _Lives of the
Fathers of the Desert_.

F. Agathon says: “One day I descended into the valley of Ruba to find the
holy solitary, F. Pémeu, as I wished to consult him on a subject that
weighed heavily upon my mind. We conversed until late in the evening, and
then he sent me into a cavern to pass the rest of the night. Now, as it
was winter, and the cold extreme, I was nearly frozen. The next morning,
when the old man came in to see me, he asked: ‘How have you passed the
night, my son?’

“ ‘Father,’ I answered, ‘I must say, in truth, I passed a terrible night,
on account of the extraordinary severity of the cold.’

“ ‘And I did not feel it at all,’ he replied.

“These words filled me with astonishment, as he was nearly naked, and I
said: ‘I beg of you, father, to tell me how that could have happened.’

“ ‘For the reason,’ he answered, ‘that a lion came and lay down beside me,
and kept me warm. But nevertheless, my dear son, I can assure you that I
shall be devoured by wild beasts.’

“ ‘Why do you say so?’ I asked.

“ ‘Because,’ he replied, ‘when I was a shepherd in our country (we were
both from Galatia), I would have saved the life of a traveller, if I had
accompanied him; but I did not show him that charity, and he was devoured
by the dogs. Therefore I shall most certainly meet with a similar death.’

“And it really happened as he said. For three years afterwards he was torn
to pieces by wild beasts.”



I.


Dear Marie, cease to think of me; all is ended; I am lost. I do not tell
you what will become of me; I know nothing myself. I only know that
yesterday I received the fatal blow, from which I cannot recover.

I had just finished the last picture, of which I have so often spoke to
you—The First Glance. It is the portrait of a young man, who awakens and
looks around him, as though he saw everything for the first time.

Some of my friends thought the picture splendid, but added that it would
not sell well, as my name was unknown to the public.

After innumerable attempts, all equally unfortunate, I showed it yesterday
to a very rich amateur—Baron de Brienne. He examined the picture, thought
it remarkable, and then asked if I had often exhibited my pictures.

On my replying in the negative, his expression changed.

“I thought,” said he, “I did not know your name. You must make yourself
known. This picture has great merit, and this sketch also,” he added,
throwing a rapid glance at my other picture just commenced—you know it,
Marie—Cain after his Crime—“but, in fact, you are not known,” he
concluded.

“But, sir,” I replied, “I am endeavoring to make myself known.”

“Well,” continued the baron, “you have talent, that I acknowledge; but I
doubt if it is the kind of talent that will be appreciated by the public.
If I bought your picture, I would be asked where I found it. As it stands
there, it has a certain value; but if you were dead, it would be worth a
hundred times as much, and perhaps would soon find purchasers, possibly
myself among the first. You see I can’t change the world. So it is with
men; they will pay the most ridiculous price for objects of art whose
worth is guaranteed by a signature, but will not bother themselves to talk
up unknown talent. I,” he added with a happy smile, “recently gave a
hundred thousand francs for a picture which I do not place above yours;
but it was a Murillo! I am a modest man, and always side with the
majority. The majority is always right, and, for my part, I am not vain
enough to think I know more than the entire human race. Make yourself
known; everything is in that. Make yourself known; put your pictures in
the exhibition; receive medals and decorations. But, above all, die; your
pictures then will be worth so much gold. You see you are talking to a
practical man, who don’t believe in neglected genius. _Au revoir_,
monsieur. You really have talent; more even than that, I do not hesitate
to say you have genius. _Au revoir_.”

This, Marie, was my last adventure. All the others were similar. I will
spare you any further details. I have told you in a few words what in
reality was a long agony. But despair is brief; it has not the courage to
dwell on separate facts; it sums up the causes, and only shows the
effects.

Now, my dear Marie, you know what happened yesterday. The day before there
came another gentleman, who had not the time to examine my picture as it
deserved. This he explained to me for two hours without looking at the
picture. He really had no time; for example, every morning he visits his
stables from ten to twelve, and in the afternoon rows on the lake from
four to six.

As for Baron de Brienne, when he left, he assured me he held my talent in
the highest estimation; that he would like to have a gallery of pictures
all painted by me, as it would probably one day be very valuable; later,
my pictures would sell splendidly, and he could make money by the
operation.

If there is ever to be a later day for me, I shall find him, when I will
no longer need him, and he will be the first to show me honor.

Adieu, Marie. I was so sanguine, so buoyed up with hope, it needed all
this time—all this precious time, of which these gentlemen had so little
to waste—to bring me where I am now.

I think the baron saw despair in my face, for he used a singular
expression on leaving which I had not provoked by any remark.

“My dear sir, do not look so dismal and wretched. I am not the Don Quixote
of budding genius. Make yourself known, make yourself known, and you will
find me! But if your courage fails, you will commit blunders and spoil
your talent, for which I will not be responsible; like Pilate, I wash my
hands of you!”

I listened to them going down the stairs.

“No, no,” said he to his wife; “you see for my portrait I must have a
master, a signature.”

“Perhaps,” replied the baroness—“perhaps we have done wrong to discourage
the young man.”

“Discourage? What are you talking about? I told him he had great talent.
Do you wish to know what I think?” he added, as he stood for an instant
before her. “What ruins art in the present day is that it is gorged with
gold, and that too few men of genius die in the hospital—that is the
reason!”

Adieu, Marie.



Something else was said, which Paul did not hear.

The baroness paused, as she was about to enter the carriage.

“Well, what is the matter with you?” said her husband.

“I am not very well,” she replied.

“So much more reason for getting in the carriage. What ails you?”

“The face of that young man haunts me. Who knows what despair may drive
him to? Who knows how terrible may be his hidden suffering? Let us go
back. I feel as though we had just committed a crime. Let us go back.
Thirty years ago I read a story which I had long forgotten, but that now
returns vaguely to my memory as a warning. I no longer remember the whole,
but the impression comes back vague and terrible after thirty years. Ah!
let us go back.”

The baron stopped, and laughed immensely.

“Ha! ha! Are you crazy? Haven’t I the _right_ to choose the pictures I
wish to buy? Is there a law which compels me to buy pictures from this
gentleman? I speak to you very seriously, my dear; such fancies as these
will make you crazy. There is a great deal of insanity in our present day.
Let us take care, let us take care!”



II.


Marie, after reading her brother’s letter, was half frantic with terror,
as she knew him thoroughly, and understood his bitter despair. She lost no
time, but left in the first train. Arrived in Paris, she ran to the little
house in the Quartier Latin where Paul lived. She was too excited to take
a carriage. The rapid walk seemed to soothe her. In the cars she longed
for quicker movement; in the street she wished for wings; at the door she
would rather have been at the other end of the world. She dared not go up.
She stopped, suffocated with the beating of her heart. If it was already
too late—the thought nearly paralyzed her with horror. If she were a
minute too late!

Finally, when on the stairs, she wept. Then she dared ring.

“I have wept,” she thought; “he is saved.” Taught by a long and singular
experience, the young girl knew that tears were for her the mysterious and
certain sign that her prayer was granted. She rang. A servant‐girl,
without speaking, led her to a bed, and uttered a single word—“Dead”—and
then added: “The funeral will take place in two hours. He threw himself
into the Seine from the bridge of Austerlitz.”

“He is not dead,” said Marie.

“The registration of the death has been made,” said the woman.

Without replying, Marie looked fixedly at him, and said to herself:

“He is not dead. I have wept; he is not dead. Paul!” she called. Silence.
“Paul!” Silence.

She seized a mirror, and held it to her brother’s lips. At the moment she
took it in her hand she burst into tears. “You will see that he is saved!”
she said.

The woman thought her crazy. Marie still held the mirror before Paul’s
lips. Dead silence; her own poor heart nearly stopped—the mirror was
tarnished!



III.


Seven years afterwards M. le Baron de Brienne was conversing in a numerous
and choice circle. It was at a grand dinner. The women were crowned with
flowers and sparkling with jewels. The conversation turned upon a great
crime which had recently been committed, the details of which filled two
columns of every paper. Suddenly the Baron de Brienne became singularly
agitated, and then, in a voice which he endeavored to keep calm, but whose
trembling was still further shown by the effort to subdue it, said:

“It appears that the police have not yet discovered any trace of the
assassin.”

“I don’t know,” replied a guest.

“I believe not,” said another.

“Excuse me,” replied a third person; “according to the latest accounts,
the police, if not positively sure, had at least great hopes.”

The Baron de Brienne was as white as his napkin. He tried to overcome and
conceal his excitement, and attempted to eat; but the effort was too
great. He swooned, and fell heavily to the ground.

Every one rose and crowded around him. Water was thrown in his face, salts
were held for him to inhale. The hostess neglected none of the ceremonies
usual in such cases. Fortunately, there was a physician among the guests.
Every attention was lavished upon M. le Baron. His carriage was called,
and he was taken home.

The next day he was better; at the end of three days he was well. He made
them bring any quantity of papers, and read them to him. Mme. la Baronne,
who was the reader, suddenly paused, and said:

“Here is more of the horrid crime of which we were all talking when you
were taken ill.”

“Well?” said the baron in a singular tone.

“Well,” continued the baroness, “the murderer has been arrested. But what
a strange interest you take in the affair!”

“I?” replied the baron. “Oh! not at all; I can very truly say that. Why do
you think otherwise?”

“Because you are so strangely excited whenever the subject is mentioned.”

“What do you mean, talking about my excitement?” he replied. “Can you
possibly imagine, like those stupid people at dinner the other evening,
that this affair interests me in the slightest degree? They were all there
looking at me, looking at me ... with eyes ... with eyes.... Are you, too,
going to stare at me now with those eyes ... with those eyes....”

Mme. la Baronne rose, and wrote two lines: “_Dear doctor, come
instantly._”

“Carry that to the telegraph office,” she said to the servant.

“She did not count the words,” muttered the man in astonishment, as he
withdrew. “It must be something very serious.”



IV.


Three months had elapsed, and the baron had resumed his ordinary life,
when one evening, in a _salon_ in the faubourg Saint‐Honoré, a gentleman
remarked, in the course of conversation, that it was astonishing the
number of crimes one daily heard of. And he related the last murder that
the daily paper had brought under his eyes.

Said the baron: “Why do you make such an assertion? Never were crimes so
rare as to‐day; manners and customs are so much softened, we can almost
say there are no longer any criminals. None can be found in the higher
class of society; and when we speak of the aristocracy, it means the
entire nation. Indeed, to speak the truth, I believe very little in the
wonderful crimes with which the daily journals fill their columns when
there is a dearth of political news.”

“You are very incredulous, M. le Baron,” replied the Comte de Sartigny.
“Probably it is from kindness to the editors that the police seek the
criminals, and the courts judge them.”

“You say,” answered the baron, “that the police seek the criminals. It is
false, M. le Comte. In the first place, only one is guilty, and the police
are not hunting him up; he is already found, and he has no accomplice. He
has been found, I tell you, he has been found; and the man has no
accomplice. Perhaps I don’t know it. Ha! ha!”

While the baron, pale as death, spoke these words, with terror imprinted
on his face, the count looked steadily at him, and said:

“You say that I have spoken falsely, M. le Baron? Will you repeat that
remark? I think those were your words, but perhaps I was mistaken.”

“I only say one thing,” replied the baron, “which is, that the criminal
has been found and arrested.”

“But a moment ago you denied the reality of the crime.”

“I only say one thing, M. le Comte: that there is no doubt about the name
of the assassin.”

The master of the house took the count by the arm, and led him to the
recess of a window....

“Ah! very well, very well; I did not know it,” said the count, as he left
the room.

While they were conversing together, the baron made several vain efforts
to rise. He experienced the supreme anguish of a man who, while still in
the possession of his faculties, feels they are leaving him—of a man who
has not fainted, but who is about to faint, and who feels on his brow the
first drops of cold sweat.

The baroness made her excuses for leaving so early, and, when alone with
her husband, asked anxiously:

“What can be the matter with you?”

“And you too, you too,” he replied, pushing her from him, as he raised his
blood‐shot eyes.



V.


“We must,” said the doctor, “enter into his mania, so as to endeavor to
discover the cause. We must make him talk without questioning him. Do you
know, madame, in the life of M. le Baron, of any fact that may have left a
disagreeable remembrance?”

“Doctor, do you mean a guilty remembrance?”

“No, madame; something terrifying.”

The baroness thought a long while.

“No,” said she, “not one. Our life has always passed most tranquilly. You
know how people of the world live; well, so we live, and have always
lived. My husband is a quiet man, who has never had a quarrel in his life
with any one, and has never done an injury that I know of.”

“You have never seen in the baron any anxiety of conscience?”

“Any anxiety of conscience? He? Why should he have any? He has never in
his life done anything to reproach himself with.”

“The baron,” replied the doctor, “has the reputation of being benevolent
and kind‐hearted. I don’t think he is naturally very imaginative; do you,
madame?”

“Not at all, doctor. I think he is just the contrary. I can even say he
has very little faith.”

“But when and where did you first perceive the commencement of this
mania?”

“It was one day when nothing strange had happened. Some one had been
speaking of a young sculptor, who now is very famous. A friend told us
that he owed his success to a rich banker, who had discovered his talents
by some happy accident, and had aided him with his fortune and influence.
When our guests had left, and we were alone, I thought he would kill
himself; as now, without the slightest reason.”

“In his daily life does he show any eccentricity of which I am yet
ignorant?”

“Not precisely eccentricity,” said Mme. de Brienne. “His tastes have
changed very much, but that cannot be called eccentricity. He formerly
spent quite a fortune in purchasing pictures, of which he has a very fine
collection, that he admired extravagantly; now he never looks at them. But
he has always been rather fickle.”

“Does he talk in his sleep?”

“No; but one morning (now that you make me think of it) he awoke terribly
frightened at a dream. ‘Ah! what a dream I have had,’ he said to me. His
face looked worn and haggard, and, as I begged him to relate it, he turned
away his eyes, and refused peremptorily. I insisted, but he kept silent,
and I have never been able to make him relate it.”

The doctor reflected.

“Perhaps that is the whole secret,” said he. “But if we were to ask him
about it now, probably to‐morrow we would be obliged to confine him.”

“Confine him?” cried the baroness. “Do you think him so seriously
affected?”

“Very seriously, madame, and more so as he is perfectly sane in relation
to other affairs. His mania is confined to one point, and is what we call
hallucination. My duty compels me to tell you, madame, that it is a case
where science up to the present time has been very unsuccessful.”

“But, doctor, never was there a man less crazy. As for the pictures, which
was the only passion I ever knew him to have, he prided himself on never
having done a foolish thing; he only bought pictures of known value, with
the signatures of the artists fully guaranteed. I, for instance, who am
speaking to you, would have sometimes acted more unwisely than he. I
remember once he even refused....”

“Nevertheless,” interrupted the doctor, “the case is very serious.”

The baron was alone in his room. His wife listened attentively at the
door, and watched him through the key‐hole. He raised the curtains, shook
the cushions on the sofa, searched around, and, when convinced that he was
alone, spoke in a low voice; but his wife caught his words.

“No one suspects me. No one, not even she; and yet everything should warn
them, everything.... The circumstances that accompanied the act are
reproduced every instant. For example, the clouds in the sky have nearly
always the same form as at that moment.... The clouds do it purposely;
they have assumed since that day certain positions always the same. What
do they resemble? What I do not wish to say, but I know well since my
dream. Oh! that dream.... I am cold, frozen. Why is it no one ever speaks
to me of that dream; that no one in this house remembers it? And yet they
were all there ... in the dream.... My wife was there, and the other one
also,” he added, lowering his voice.

And after a silence, occasionally broken by unintelligible words, and
joined to a strange pantomime, he continued:

“It was frightful. How that man struggled for his life!”

And speaking always lower and lower, the baron gasped out:

“He clung to me, and, when I pushed him into the water, an expression
passed over his face such as was never seen but then in this world. It was
near the bridge of Austerlitz. How he glared at me as he disappeared the
last time! How is it that in the street the passers‐by do not say on
seeing me, ‘There is the man, there he is—the man who had the dream’? But
was it a dream or reality? Men often pass me quickly in the street. Who
knows but that they know or see something?”

The baron walked around the room, greatly excited, and then, pausing, he
sighed, and said in a mournful tone:

“How do other men act—those who are not followed? They can take a step
without hearing behind them another step that goes quicker or slower,
according as they walk. Then there are men who do not hear steps behind
them as they walk. Yet I always seek the noisiest places; but no noise
ever deadens the sound of that step, so faint but so invincible. The noise
of carriages, the roar of cannon—I have tried everything.... If possible I
would live amidst thunder; but the lightning might fall near me, and cover
me with ruins; still should I hear that faint, almost imperceptible noise,
a foot that just touches the ground. I am cold! How cold it is! Fire no
longer warms me! How lightly that foot touches the ground. It does not
press heavily like ours. No, decidedly not; it was no dream—it was
reality. That foot never is tired; but when I stop, it stops. It has a
certain manner of stopping that makes me always feel that it is there, and
that it will resume its walk when I do mine. Sometimes I would rather hear
it, and I walk to make it walk; when it is silent, its menace is to me
more terrible than the sound of the step.... If it would only change
place!... But, no; always at an equal distance from me. Ah! how cruel. If
I could but see some one, I think the most horrible spectacle would be
less terrifying than this dreary void. To hear and not see!”

Here the baron rapidly jumped backwards, and put out his hand as though to
grasp something in the air, then exclaimed:

“Gone! He has escaped—escaped, as ever!”



VI.


The course of the baron’s ordinary life flowed on as smoothly as ever.
Nothing was changed, and those who were not much with him perceived no
difference; to them he was the same as heretofore.

The following summer he wished to go to the sea‐shore.

They left for Brittany. They spoke of the pleasant walks and drives, and
the baron, in an absent manner, asked on which part of the coast was the
most sand. He would not hear of the cliffs; he wanted sand—only sand.
Gâvre was recommended by a gentleman who was seated near them at the
_table d’hôte_.

The baron instantly decided upon going to Gâvre.

“At what hour shall we leave?” asked the baroness.

The _we_ evidently displeased the baron. He wished to go alone. He gave a
thousand pretexts to prevent his wife accompanying him. As she would not
admit them, he said, contrary to his usual custom, “I will” ... “I wish to
go alone,” said he. “Am I in prison? Do you take me for a criminal?”

The baron left Port Louis in the steamboat. His wife followed him, without
being seen, on another boat, and watched his movements through a spy‐
glass, as he paced up and down the shore at Gâvre.

First, according to his usual custom, he assured himself that he was
alone. Then he would take several steps, and return quickly, seeing
nothing; he searched in the sand, and, finding his own footsteps, he
sought a little further on the trace of the _other_ one. All in vain.
Disappointed, he went to another spot, and recommenced his weary walk,
always seeing his own footprints, never the _other_. He had hoped in the
sand; the sand had proved false, as everything else.



VII.


Meanwhile, the doctor was in Paris, and one evening in a _salon_ in the
faubourg Saint Germain. The conversation was on madness; and the doctor,
who was a celebrated _alieniste_, was asked many questions as to the
causes of insanity.

“The causes of insanity,” said he, “are so profound and mysterious that to
know them one must make the tour of the invisible world.”

“I have known,” said one gentleman, “insane persons who thought themselves
guilty of crimes which they had never committed—innocent men, intelligent
and good, incapable of harming a bird, and who thought themselves
assassins.”

Among the guests that evening was a famous artist, M. Paul Bayard, whose
most admired works, The First Glance, and Cain after his Crime, ranked
with the _chefs‐d’œuvre_ of the greatest masters of the day.

Said M. Bayard: “I have not studied, like you, doctor, from life. I don’t
know any insane persons, and what I am going to tell you is not founded on
fact. But this is what I think about this strange remorse felt by innocent
people: who knows if they may not have committed _spiritually_ the crime
of which they think themselves guilty _materially_? In this hypothesis
they have completely forgotten the real and spiritual crime, which they
committed really and spiritually; they did not even know or feel it at the
instant they committed it. But this crime real, spiritual, and forgotten
is transformed, by virtue of madness, into a material crime, of which they
are innocent, but of which they believe themselves guilty. Perhaps a man
has betrayed his friend; instead of accusing himself of this treason, he
accuses himself of another fault which resembles that one, as the body
resembles the soul. I repeat, I cannot cite an example. It is purely
hypothetical; but something which I cannot define makes me think it
possible, nay, even probable. The guilty person deceived his conscience;
conscience in turn deceives him. To make a child understand, we give
examples of sensible things. Perhaps justice thus acts with these men,
and, finding them insensible in the sphere of the mind, transports their
crime into the sphere of the body.

“Perhaps it is a real crime, but too subtle to be understood by them, that
descends to their level, and pursues them under the appearance of an
external and sensible crime, the only one which they can understand. There
are whimsical scruples which resemble madness, as exaggeration resembles
falsehood. Who knows if these scruples are not the wanderings, or, if you
prefer it, the transpositions of remorse? I say _remorse_. I do not say
repentance, for repentance enlightens, and remorse blinds. Between
repentance and remorse there is an abyss: the first gives peace, the
second destroys it. Perhaps conscience, not being able to make itself felt
by the guilty person on its own ground, speaks to him, by way of revenge,
in language as coarse as himself, on his own domain. Through a terrible
justice, it makes him reproach himself with what appears unjust on the
surface, but which is a thousand times just at the bottom. Conscience,
which spoke in vain at the moment of the crime, now arms itself against
the criminal as a phantom. We are men here to‐night, as we appear to each
other; but who knows if we are not for some one somewhere, at this moment,
phantoms?”

The doctor rose, and, taking the artist’s hand, said: “I do not know how
much truth there may be in your theory. I only know one thing: that you
are a man of genius, and, if I had doubted it before, I am now convinced
of it. I will reflect on your words; they open to me a new horizon.”

“I have always been pursued by the thought,” said the artist, “that there
is a moment when a man understands for the first time what he has seen
since his infancy. It is the day when the eyes of the mind open. It is
this I have attempted to show in my picture—The First Glance. But as the
horizon is constantly enlarging, I endeavor to throw upon everything, each
time, a look which I may call The First Glance. In the other composition,
Cain after his Crime, I wished to show in Cain, not the melodramatic
assassin, but a vulgar, common man. The _stigmata_ of anger, of which he
received the visible mark, opens to him the eyes of the soul. He throws
upon his crime a first glance. There are spiritual Cains whose arms are
innocent. Perhaps there may be some among the insane, of whom we have
spoken; and in that case there is more truth in their madness than in
their previous security. Their insanity only deceives them about the
nature of the crime; their security deceived them about the crime itself.”

The doctor was thoughtful. He took the artist aside, and in a low tone
said: “Shall we leave together?” And they left.

After their departure the conversation turned on what had just been said.

“Were you always a materialist?” asked one person of his neighbor.

“It is scarcely fair or generous to choose this moment for such a
question,” was the reply.

“As for me,” said a young lady, “I don’t like to hear M. Bayard talk. He
is a great artist—that I admit; but when he commences in that style, he
worries me!”

“Would it be indiscreet, madame, to ask you why?” timidly inquired a young
man with a badly‐tied cravat.

“Because I am afraid he is right in his opinions. I wish to pass gaily
through life; and if we believe what he says, life would be such a serious
affair, we should have to think. Really, to hear him, we can imagine
ourselves surrounded with mysteries.”



VIII.


“I wish to see and study your picture of Cain. I was going to say your
portrait of Cain,” said the doctor to the painter; “for it seems to me
that you must have known him personally, from the manner in which you have
spoken to me of him.”

“Perhaps I have known him,” said Paul. “At any rate, come!” And they
entered the studio.

Arrived before the picture, the doctor started back in surprise.

The portrait of Cain was that of the baron, horrible in the resemblance.

There was on that face the coldness of the criminal and the horror of the
cursed. The coldness did not impair the horror, nor the horror the
coldness; and from the mouth of Cain the spectator might expect to hear
the words that S. Bridget heard from the mouth of Satan when he said to
God:

“O Judge! I am coldness itself.”

Indifference and despair were in those eyes, on those lips, and on that
brow. But the despair was not heartrending, for repentance was wanting,
and this despair even appeared expiatory, like justice eating its bread.

The doctor remained a long while motionless. The horizon opened before his
eyes. His science sought new depths. He did not precisely reflect, but he
remembered, and, perhaps for the first time in his life, passed an hour in
profound contemplation.

“So you know him?” said he at last to Paul.

“Whom do you mean?”

“Why, my patient!”

“I don’t know any of your patients.”

Professional discretion arrested the name before it passed the doctor’s
lips.

“But, really,” said he, “this head is a portrait. You could not have drawn
it by chance.”

“Neither one nor the other,” replied Paul. “No one sat for me, and I did
not draw it by chance. It appears to me, when I work, certain faces are
offered to me without forcing themselves upon me. I perceive them
interiorly; for my eyes are closed and I see nothing. Perceive is not the
proper word, for the sense of sight is not needed. If I perceive them, it
is with an unknown sense which is not that of sight, and in a peculiar
condition, in comparison with which wakefulness is profound sleep. I think
these perceptions correspond with some reality, either distant or future,
whose photographic likeness at that moment passes before the eyes of the
mind.

“This faculty, which may be called natural inspiration, has never
abandoned me. The aptitude to surmise what I do not know is the highest
form of the activity of my mind, and not only do I surmise what I do not
know, but very often I do it, I realize it, without intention and without
knowledge. It is as though I were an actor in a drama of which I was
ignorant. I recite a part in a play that I do not know, and whose title
and plot are equally unknown.

“Yet I feel myself free, and the profound sentiment of my liberty bursts
forth, above all, in the remembrance of my faults. I wished to die, but
death did not want me. I have sometimes asked myself if, having wished to
lose my life, I might not lose inspiration, which would be for me a subtle
and cruel manner of death. It has seemed to me that the question has been
agitated somewhere, and that inspiration, which has compassion on the
weak, came back to me gratuitously. If I had been criminal from malice, it
would have abandoned me, perhaps, or have become in me the auxiliary of a
future crime. It might have refused to help me, or have assisted me in
doing wrong.”



IX.


Shortly after this interview the baron returned to Paris, apparently
calmer than usual.

“He is much better,” said Mme. la Baronne. “The doctor alarmed me
terribly; but I knew very well in reality there was no danger. My husband
is a cold man, and I have nothing to fear for his reason.”

The following night the baron waited until the house was quiet, and then
went on tiptoe, as though afraid of being surprised or disturbed. Once
safely in his picture gallery, he cut each of the pictures with a
penknife, and then one by one burst them open by placing his knee against
the canvas; and, that accomplished, left the house toward morning. The
porter saw him pass, but did not recognize him.

“Who is that old man,” said he to his wife, “who passed the night in the
house?”

The baron’s hair, black the night before, was white as snow.

They waited for him at breakfast, they waited for him at dinner; he did
not return. In searching his papers his wife found a note containing these
words:

“This time I will not escape; the police are on my track.”

Said madame: “I always feared some misfortune would happen to me.”

The next day the baron’s body was found in the Seine under the bridge of
Austerlitz.

“I am much distressed, but not astonished,” said the doctor to madame. “I
always thought his madness absolutely incurable.”

“Ah! doctor, he destroyed all the pictures. I have not even his portrait.”

“You shall have it, madame,” said the doctor.

Eight days afterwards the doctor kept his promise. He brought the baroness
a photograph.

Madame de Brienne was profoundly agitated, and nearly fainted.

“Oh! what a resemblance,” she gasped, “what a resemblance! Doctor, how was
it done? This is not natural. It is not his portrait, it is himself. He is
going to speak. I am afraid!”

There was horror in the astonishment of the poor woman. She threw upon her
husband and herself a first glance.

“But tell me, doctor, where did you find it?”

“Allow me to keep the secret, madame.”

In reality, the thing was very simple: they had only photographed the
picture of the great artist—Cain after his Crime.




The Legend Of Vallambrosa.


An ancient myth like ivied vesture clings
About fair Vallambrosa’s cloistered walls,
Telling that ’neath the roof sweet charity
Has spread her soft, warm draperies within
What time eight circling centuries have traced,
In memories gray and green, her blessedness.

Of the fair, nestling valley here to sing,
With sweet‐strung choice of cadenced synonymes,
Could better music hold the ear, to note
Its silver‐dropping streams and shadowy dells
Than that wherewith Italia christened it,
Calling it _Aqua‐Bella_, or the _Val‐Ambrosa_, liquid‐toned and clear? No
            ripple,
Methinks, of happier tones or tenderer hues
Could voice its lapsing falls and verdant vales
Than lives within such naming!
          Hither came
Long years agone—long years before the years
That gave the legend birth—a prayerful priest,
Bearing the cross where untamed beast and bird,
Alone frequenting, poured in wildest notes
The praise for life which lowest life uplifts!
And here, as ever, man’s triumphant voice
Leaped up above the brute’s, beseeching heaven
To consecrate with holy dews, and bless,
The heights which, cycles later, cradling held
The hermitage of one so famed; and grew,
As seed luxuriant in rich soil _will_ grow,
Because all teeming life must needs expand,
These walls of generous hospice that outstretch
Their sheltering arms to weary travellers.

If it be true, as we have often heard,
That lukewarm sinners make but lukewarm saints,
Perhaps the converse proof we hold in hand;
For, mark! once lived in Florence, of the proud
Gualberto house, one heir to all its pride,
Giovanni named—_he_ this same sinner‐saint.

Quickened by summers of some eighteen years,
And flushed by southern suns to fervid warmth
Of life impetuous, his youthful form
Bore stamp already of the venturous will
Of a gay, dashing cavalier outgiven
To heedless coursings in the round of sense.
And yet there dwelt adeep within his breast
A living well of tenderness that flowed
In gentle care for Hubert, his beloved
And only brother.
          Hubert (a twelvemonth
Scarce younger) stood between his tempted soul
And much that might have swayed it past recall
Over the margin of sin’s dread abyss.
’Twas not that Hubert was a chastened saint,
But love within the brother’s ardent soul
Invested him with raiment pure and white—
Love holding from assoil the fabric fine
Itself had wove, and still will choose to weave
So long as life is life, or love is love.
Thus, when unto Giovanni came a dawn
That kindled to a conscious glow of health
His own quick pulse, yet, warming, failed to melt
The frozen current in pale Hubert’s veins,
Because those veins had felt the frigid touch
Of steel in duelling combat, there arose
Within his anguished heart a stern demand
Against the murderer of life for life—
An unrelenting thirst of blood, to quell
The ghostly phantoms of his fevered brain,
And satisfy with feast of sweet revenge
His brother’s manes.
          On one Good‐Friday morn,
Followed by armed retainers, and slow bent
Unto San Miniato to attend
High Mass, in faithfulness to Hubert’s soul,
He met unwittingly within a pass
That leads to the Basilica this man,
Of all men hated most. Close, face to face,
Spell‐bound they stood a moment’s span; then flashed
From out Giovanni’s sheath his gleaming sword,
And by its glittering sign with one will rose
From every trusty scabbard near at hand
Sharp kindred swords that gleamed defiant fire
Into the bright’ning day, and in _his_ face
Who stood unarmed, alone.
          The unsheathed sword
Of pitiless Giovanni had well‐nigh
Its rueful deed of deadly wrath made sure
When he, the helpless foe confronted thus
By certain death, saw in death’s pallid light
The spectre of his sin as it must seem
To disembodied spirits, and he fell
Prone, horror‐stricken, at the avenger’s feet.
There, graving on the ground with level arms
The crucial sign, he prayed for pardoning grace,
And grace of lengthened days for penitence,
And all in name of Him whose agony
Upon the cross he thus in dust recalled!

The sword is stayed, and in the tremulous pause
Great waves of varying passions meet
And battle in Giovanni’s breast. Through all
A voice, as of faint music o’er the din
Of tumult, whispers: “_Who loveth brother more_
_Than me, or any loved one more than me,_
_Is all unworthy of me._” Quick, with ever
Conquering motions of the Spirit’s power,
As winds of peace the passionate waters calm,
His sword is dropped, and, offering helpful hands,
He cries: “Thou who hast slain my brother be
As Christ doth will—a brother unto me.”

O’erwhelmed with gratitude, and filled with deep
Contrition for his sin, the uplifted foe
Lets fall his head upon Giovanni’s neck,
And there with loosened torrent of remorse
He pours the unguent of his tears, as once
Another penitent poured costly balm
Upon the Holiest One, growing therefrom
Through mercy’s twofold grace to peace and joy.

While yet the day was young, the legend tells
How both these humbled, contrite cavaliers
Offered their thanks for comfort at the shrine
Whither their steps together now were led;
And how, while kneeling at the crucifix,
Broke from the Saviour’s parted lips a smile
Upon Giovanni, while the sacred head
In gracious token bowed.
          O crowning joy!
Too much to halo one poor human brow,
And not the radiance divine extend
To others all unconscious, even as once
Himself had been of its illumining might!
Henceforth no other smile was aught to him
If for a passing moment it could hide
The memory of that glory from his eyes.

Henceforth the impulse of his life was one
Deep, passionate desire to shadow forth,
In the best shadowy way a mortal can,
The glowing flame of beatific fire
_That_ hallowed smile had kindled in his soul.
And thence so perfect was his Godward walk
That scarce five summers of devoted life
Were added to his eighteen worldly years
Before San Miniato’s brotherhood
Decreed him to its abbacy. But, no!
Nor stole nor triple crown had charm for one
Too wholly Christ’s to care for stole or crown,
Save for that lustrous crown of ransomed souls
His earnest life might win to shine as stars.
For _this_ to Vallambrosa’s lonely height
In rapt and silent vigil he withdrew;
But even as sweetness bursts the seedling’s cell,
So holiness from him exhaled in light
That drew, to seek his counsel, devotees
Led faithfully by his unswerving faith
To live with him a life of prayer and praise.
Or, if they came not cowled as lowly monks,
Still hither fared the noble of the land,
Even kings whose purple paled beside his gray,
And royal ladies and most knightly knights,
To pour their wealth of treasure at the feet
Of one all saintly.
          Thus the order grew
Of world‐famed Vallambrosa, where to‐day
The weary find repose and welcoming cheer,
And benison of heavenly graciousness.
And thus of one soul’s overflow of light
The Saviour’s smile is seen in saving love
To stream adown the ever‐widening years
That close and closer bring us to the day
Of promised joy, when all our utmost need
Shall in that glorious smile be satisfied.




Odd Stories. VIII. Snifkin.


There certainly was a time when dogs were more respected than now. Such a
period in particular must have been the reign of Gigag, when the Odomites,
who had once kicked, maimed, and starved their poor curs in a manner
inhuman, now fed and fondled them with an affection that was almost
canine. This revolution in sentiment was entirely due to what may be
called a genius of instinct possessed by one extraordinary dog. His owner,
who was none other than the goblin Gigag, had, in one of those journeys
which he sometimes took through his underground thoroughfare, named his
four‐footed companion, with a fond conceit, Snifkin; and when they emerged
into the atmosphere of the king’s grounds, the latter was allowed the
chief place at supper among the royal dogs. Some of this many‐colored pack
were wont to bark, as others were to bite. Some were renowned for scent
and vigilance, and others for speed and courage; still others for motley
skins, lapping lips, great ears, and yelling, yelping, and howling. But
the dog Snifkin united their best qualities with a sagacity that was
almost diplomatic. He never barked till he was prepared to bite, and he
sometimes bit without barking. He had a scent and sight which are only
acquired by dogs who have seen a great deal of human nature. So various
and cabalistic seemed the marks and colors upon him, that the vulgar
ascribed them to the science of Gigag rather than to natural revelation.
To crown all, the dog Snifkin showed his ivory teeth at times, sneezing,
snorting, and laughing in a way next to human for its friendliness.

From a number of the faculties described arose two incidents which
increased the fame and worth of all dogs, and which no man can
sufficiently admire. A miser, in whom the sagacious Snifkin recognized a
former oppressor of his kind, came to plead his cause at court, alleging
his ownership of four hundred and ninety‐five thriving estates, and
prosecuting his poor nephew for about as many cents. At a contrast so
preposterous the knowing dog could not contain himself, and sniffed,
snorted, and showed his teeth to such a degree that even his royal master,
at whose side he sat during the hearing of the plea, was forced to join in
the general guffaw which greeted the miser.

Another incident related chiefly to one of four malcontent noblemen, who,
with bows and smiles, came to the royal presence. With no more ado the dog
Snifkin jumped at his throat, bringing him to the foot of the king, when a
concealed bodkin fell out of his bosom, and a number of poisons, which
Gigag recognized as badly prepared, were strewn upon the floor. Without a
word the king understood why it was that his dumb counsellor had not taken
soup that day. While irons were being placed on the limbs of the
malcontents, a collar made of the finest cloth of gold, adorned with
precious stones, was put upon the neck of the loyal dog. By sovereign
order it was decreed that, taking with him all the dogs in the kennels of
the palace, the crown crier should go out and cry to all the people the
patriotism of Snifkin, and the fidelity of dogs generally.

But it would require a million miracles to convince those whose unreason
has placed them nearest to the brutes, that dogs and other animals, human
and inhuman, exist for the trying and proving of the souls of men. As
Snifkin was one day seated in the high easy‐chair of the barber who
clipped and shaved for the king’s dogs, a commotion in the street provoked
him to bark loudly, hazarding thereby the loss of his nose at the hands of
the barber. Arrived in the street, what was his surprise to see fifty of
the royal hounds yelping in the most distressful manner over the loss of
his tail by the chief hound, who had provoked by impudent barking a
slashing cut from the sword of a cavalier, who, it came to be known, was a
conspirator against the life of King Gigag. Not being able to contend with
swordsmen, Snifkin quickly seized upon the largest and finest specimen of
the breed of curs who barked against the king’s hounds, and made short
work of him.

This act, loyal though it was, became the signal for that factious state
of feeling among the Odomites which eventuated in the famous war of tails.
Most of the best dogs belonging to the houses which barked against the
king having had their tails cut off, it grew to be a fashion with the
malcontents of the realm to reject everything with a tail to it, even were
it a shirt, or an entailed estate not already owned and occupied by one of
their number, or a story which was not to be continued. In fact, it became
a question whether they would give ear to any tale whatever, and hence it
was truly said of the malcontent faction that their ears were longer than
their tails. Of course the scientific king lost no time in improving the
situation; indeed, of putting an end to it. He trained a pack of dogs,
under the teaching of Snifkin, to scent out treason, and, when that was
done, he managed to give the hydrophobia to a large number of rebellious
curs, who afterwards bit their masters. The dog Snifkin barked against
this measure in vain.

A war now broke out, assisted by the prince of a neighboring country, who
had conceived a great hatred of the goblin Gigag. It was the habit of the
royal dogs to discover supplies to their masters, and guard their camp at
night, and, besides, to indicate in what direction were the princely
headquarters and trains of the enemy, which they knew by the smell of many
viands.

The same, perhaps, would have been the practice of those dogs without
tails who barked for the malcontents and their ally, were it not that the
poor fare they received compelled their flight to the better provisions of
the enemy. Nevertheless, it would have gone hard with King Gigag if his
rival’s device of drawing off the dogs by a concentration of savory meats
in an ambushed ravine had succeeded; for the king, had it not been for the
sagacity of Snifkin, would certainly have gone to the dogs. Despairing now
of being able to foil their antagonists, the allies heard with growing
dismay the general bark and howl in the king’s camp at night ere his
warriors slept upon their arms. Only a low growl here and there, or
perhaps the voice of some lonely hound who had strayed out of camp to bay
the moon, broke the silence of the sleep of war.

While thus the silent avalanche was prepared that was to overwhelm the
allies in the carnage of civil strife, a most unforeseen accident
occurred. King Gigag was on his rounds through the camp when a dog taken
with hydrophobia bit him in the leg. Returning mad to his headquarters, he
saw the dog Snifkin laughing and wagging his tail, and, frenzied by the
sight, he drew his sword, and at once cut off the whole of that pleasant
appendage. Immediately the dog Snifkin became the most beautiful young
prince you ever saw. Seizing an enchanted blade that hung up in the tent
of the goblin, he defended himself with fury, and by an artful stroke put
the unlucky Gigag out of his pains. When it became known throughout both
camps that King Gigag had cut off the tail of the dog Snifkin, a
reconciliation grew apace between those dogs who had tails and those dogs
who had none; and, indeed, the royal hounds especially were anxious to
have their tails cut off, so that they might turn at once into princes;
but, unfortunately, this result never happened, two of these dogs at least
having been curtailed, to their great shame and mortification, without so
much as becoming scullions, or anything but unlucky dogs. It was then seen
by the Odomites that the dog Snifkin was none other than their long‐lost
Prince Gudood, who would have been devoured by the giant Googloom, had not
the goblins got hold of him and changed him into a dog; in which character
he served the excellent goblin Gigag, who, however, was not made aware of
his identity by the evil goblins from whom he had escaped. By means of a
birthmark on his right arm the allied lords were speedily brought to
understand that this, indeed, was the long‐lost prince who had been
affianced to the daughter of the neighboring king. And now with one heart
and soul they hastened the marriage of the prince and princess, who ever
afterwards lived happily in the joy and glory and union of both kingdoms.
In the magnificent bridal procession nothing was more astonishing than the
thousand trained dogs of all kinds, large and small, who marched in order,
clad sometimes in variegated suits, and wearing rich collars. First came
the royal hounds and mastiffs; second, a fine breed of mountaineer dogs as
large as wolves; third, two or three hundred pointers, spotted all colors;
fourth, as many setters, their backs streaked with colors like gold and
snow; fifth, a battalion of mixed red, white, and blue dogs; sixth, a body
of sky‐terriers, followed by the finest array of black‐and‐tan dogs that
was ever known; sixth, a large number of dogs who looked like nothing so
much as walking hearth‐rugs; seventh, a noble lot of shaggy water‐dogs as
large as men; then a great many shepherd‐dogs, spaniels, poodles, pups;
after these a battalion of dogs shaved to look like lions; and finally a
rear‐guard of bull‐dogs with their tails cut off, walking as steadily as
firemen on parade. A loud and harmonious barking at intervals interrupted
the sound of the wedding bells, and five hundred terrier dogs at least
stood up on their hind legs when the marriage ceremony was performed.

Thus the reign of humanity and utility succeeded to the reign of science
and pelf. Only dogs were allowed to do the fighting, and they were treated
so well that they did nothing worse than bark. The following conversation
was one time overhead among them in a street near the king’s palace:

_Royal Mastiff._—Bowoghowow! Bowgh!

_Hound without tail._—Boowoogh! Boohoo! Wowoo!

_Terrier dog._—Gr‐r‐r‐r‐row, r‐row!

_Bull‐dog._—Hr‐r‐r‐um‐g‐r‐r‐u‐m. Bowowgh!

From these syllables it was conjectured by the knowing that the new King
Gudood had no enemies, and that peace abode in the land.




New Publications.


    DE L’AUTORITE; OU, LA PHILOSOPHIE DU PERSONNALISME. LETTRE AU REV.
    PERE J. F. HECKER, SUIVIE D’UN APPENDICE SUR LA SOUVERAINETE DU
    PEUPLE. PAR DWIGHT H. OLMSTEAD. Traduction approuvée par l’auteur.
    Genève: Japonnier et Steuder. 1874.


This pamphlet, the English original of which we have not seen, has been
sent to us from Geneva, by the author, we presume. The Rev. F. I. T. (not
J. F.) Hecker has been abroad, travelling for the restoration of his
impaired health, for more than a year, and cannot, therefore, give his
personal attention to Mr. Olmstead’s very courteous _Letter_, at least for
the present, and in the columns of THE CATHOLIC WORLD. Moreover, the
author is mistaken in attributing a certain article in THE CATHOLIC WORLD,
with which he chiefly employs his pen in the _Letter_, to F. Hecker. The
article in question is one of the numerous contributions with which Dr.
Brownson enriched and adorned our pages during the interval of the
suspension of his own _Review_. In our opinion, Mr. Olmstead has not dealt
a very heavy blow upon the head‐piece of his veteran antagonist. In fact,
we do not see that he has attempted any serious answer to arguments which
he would find it no easy task to refute. Mr. Olmstead deals more in
objections and assertions than in arguments, and his assertions are so
general and vague that one would need to write a treatise on general and
special metaphysics to refute them. They merely amount to this: that Mr.
Olmstead agrees with Kant and J. Stuart Mill. F. Hecker’s works were
written for persons who either believe in some sense in Christianity, or
at least in God and in human reason and intelligence. It is not necessary
to prove the premises admitted by the persons with whom you argue. If they
are Protestants, you assume the truth of Christianity. Your only effort is
then to prove that Catholicity is the genuine Christianity. If they are
rationalistic theists, you prove that the truth of Christianity, and
specifically the authority of the church as one of its essential doctrines
and laws, is demonstrable from principles of reason and natural theology.
When it is a question of arguing with an atheist or sceptic, these topics
must be postponed, and the discussion turned upon the first principles of
metaphysics. Even here something in common must be admitted as a starting‐
point for argument. If a man denies everything or doubts everything, the
only thing which can possibly be done is to watch him closely until he
asserts something, and then you can do no more than show to a bystander
his absurdity. If we understand Mr. Olmstead correctly, he admits the
reality of all that is contained within self‐consciousness, and considers
all else, by the mere fact of its being exterior to consciousness, as an
unknown quantity in respect to its reality. He merely holds this, however,
as an opinion, and admits that the contrary is very probable. If he is in
earnest—and it is fair to presume that he is—in searching for
philosophical truth, the only way in which a Catholic philosopher could
argue with him to any purpose would be by presenting a theory of the
origin of ideas and knowledge, which would give him something objective as
a primitive element in his very first act of intellectual self‐
consciousness. This is rather too serious a task to be performed in a
hurry. Whatever we have to say on these great fundamental topics of
philosophy has been already partly said in the elaborate articles which
have appeared in our columns, and will be said hereafter in articles of a
similar nature. We refer the author of the _Letter_ and others in a
similar position to THE CATHOLIC WORLD, _passim_, to get what modicum of
light we are able to furnish them. If they wish for more light, they must
go to the great works of great authors, and study them carefully. As for
the great number of very excellent persons who do not trouble their heads
with philosophy, and who complain that our philosophical articles are too
dry and abstruse, we must beg them to content themselves with the lighter
portions of the magazine, and allow us to give a reasonable amount of
space to the few readers who have some taste and capacity for real
science.


    HOLY PLACES: THEIR SANCTITY AND AUTHENTICITY. By F. Philpin de
    Rivières, of the London Oratory. London: Washbourne. 1874. (New
    York: Sold by The Catholic Publication Society.)


F. De Rivières gives play both to reason and imagination in an instructive
and agreeable manner in treating of the attractive topic of holy places.
The book contains some interesting information about the recent
explorations in Jerusalem.


    THE MONTH OF MARY OF OUR LADY OF LOURDES. By Henri Lasserre.
    Translated from the French (23d edition) by Mrs. Crosier. London:
    Burns and Oates. 1874. (New York: Sold by The Catholic Publication
    Society.)


Henri Lasserre’s beautiful work—of which a translation, which the best
judges have pronounced to be of the very highest literary merit as well as
the most literal accuracy, appeared in this magazine—is abridged and
divided into thirty‐one chapters for each day of the month of May, in this
neat and pretty volume.

The Blessed Virgin pressed very hard on the head of the old serpent when
she appeared at the rocks of Massabielle. The sympathizers with this
“revolutionnaire malheureux,” as Renan calls him, in his warfare on the
Queen of Heaven, frequently show their perplexity and vexation at the
overwhelming proof of the miracles she has wrought, by an attempt at
scornful ridicule, which is always unaccompanied by any argument, or any
attempt at meeting the challenge so often addressed to them to rebut the
evidence M. Lasserre has furnished. Louis Veuillot, probably the wittiest
man now on the earth, once said of a certain Frenchman that he was a
clever writer, but _fort piqué contre le Saint Esprit_. Dr. Coxe, who has
formerly shown himself to be a clever poet, to say the least, in his
recent pamphlet against Bishop Ryan, which is not at all clever, but only
cunning, has exhibited a great pique against Our Lady of Lourdes. In this
we see a fulfilment of the ancient prophecy, “I will place enmity between
thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed.” The vulgar and
unmeaning jibes of the infidel and the heretic, as well as the pious
writings and devout pilgrimages of the faithful, alike serve to make the
wonderful event of Lourdes more and more widely known all over the world,
to the greater glory of God, and his Blessed Mother.


    A FULL CATECHISM OF THE CATHOLIC RELIGION (preceded by a short
    history of religion), from the creation of the world to the
    present time. With Questions for Examination. Translated from the
    German of the Rev. Joseph Deharbe, S.J., by the Rev. John Fander.
    Fourth Edition. London: Burns & Oates. 1874. (New York: Sold by
    The Catholic Publication Society.)


This is the most celebrated catechism of the century, has been most
extensively approved and brought into use, and will be of great service to
those who are employed in teaching young people the Christian doctrine, as
well as for the instruction of converts.


    THE COMMONITORY OF S. VINCENT OF LERINS. London: Washbourne. 1874.
    (New York: Sold by The Catholic Publication Society.)


There is no treatise of such small size as the _Commonitory_ among
Christian writings, so far as we know, which has been so universal in fame
and influence, and has made its author so illustrious, as this one.

The neat little _libretto_, containing the translation, with some
accompanying testimonies of eminent Protestant divines to the excellence
of the work, is edited by the Rev. John Lynch, of Ballymena, Diocese of
Down and Connor, Ireland. In the preface he mentions the fact that S.
Vincent and S. Patrick were fellow‐students. The treatise can be easily
read and understood by any intelligent person, and yet contains an amount
of instruction and information on Catholic doctrine equal to that which is
ordinarily spread through volumes.


    MONASTICON HIBERNICUM. With Engravings in Gold and Colors, Maps
    and Views. By Mervyn Archdall, A.M. Edited by the Right Rev. Dr.
    Moran. Vol. I., 4to. Dublin: W. B. Kelly. 1873.


This well‐known historical work is now republished in the most splendid
style. It is a history of religious houses and orders in Ireland,
extensive, learned, and full of romantic and religious interest. The first
volume contains two fine views of the exterior and interior of S.
Patrick’s Cathedral, Dublin, one of the ancient episcopal palace, and
several engravings, in gold, of different religious orders. The work is,
of course, a costly one, and is only published by subscription. Every
wealthy Irishman in the United States ought to subscribe for a work which
is an honor to his country and the Catholic religion. The first edition
is, however, limited to one thousand copies, and we presume that persons
desiring to procure a copy will find it necessary to send on their names
immediately.


    CHERUBINI: MEMORIALS ILLUSTRATIVE OF HIS LIFE. By Edward Bellasis,
    Barrister‐at‐Law. London: Burns & Oates. (With a portrait.)


This is an elaborate biography of the great musical composer, edited and
published with the greatest care in an attractive style of typography. It
cannot fail to interest very much those who have a taste for musical
literature.


    LA SAINTE ECRITURE ET LA REGLE DE FOI. Par l’Abbé Bégin, de
    l’Université Laval. Québec: Coté et Cie. 1874.


With admirable precision and clearness the Abbé Bégin develops and defends
in this volume the Catholic doctrine of the rule of faith in accordance
with the soundest and most orthodox theology. We cannot sufficiently
recommend his treatise to clergymen and other students of sacred science.
There are some mistakes in the spelling of English names, as is very usual
in French books. For example, we have Richard Buxter instead of Baxter.
Whoever wishes to preach, lecture, or write for the press on the topics
treated in this volume will find it even more available for use than the
treatises contained in our dogmatic text‐books.


    SKETCHES OF ILLUSTRIOUS SOLDIERS. By James Grant Wilson. New York.
    George P. Putnam’s Sons. 1874.


This work has a promising look, the author’s name reminding us that the
military profession was for some time his own, and that he is a diligent
student of the literature of his subject.

Military biography has a strange charm for most readers; indeed, it is
doubtful whether fiction has an equal fascination at certain periods of
our lives. Few of us have attained middle age without having had our
cheeks frequently glow and our patriotism grow warm at the narration of
deeds of prowess performed by our favorite heroes. Unfortunately, however,
the production of this species of literature has fallen to a great extent
into the hands of literary adventurers‐writers who looked only to making
the most of a profitable enterprise. Hence the periodical eruption of
lives of great captains, distinguished, indeed, as men count greatness,
but whose most valid claim to eminence consisted in their ability to
destroy whatever opposed the realization of the objects of their ambition,
and the permanent maintenance of unjustly‐won crowns. To this cause we may
partly attribute the fact that people have well‐nigh lost sight of the
loftiest form of heroism—that which prompts a man to stake everything on
the defence of a principle; to brave all dangers and sustain all
privations, so that conscience be kept pure and the Christian character
preserved unsullied.

The work under notice belongs to a different category. It is written, for
the most part, in a calm, judicial spirit, the author evidently intending
to avoid partisanship, and exhibiting a painstaking fidelity to the data
before him. Occasionally, however, he betrays the hero‐worshipper in the
case of individuals who appear anything but admirable to us. On such
common ground as the sketch of Washington we are glad to express our
agreement with the author. We also like his estimate of anecdotes as
illustrations of character.


    UNIVERSAL PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY OF BIOGRAPHY AND MYTHOLOGY. By J.
    Thomas, A.M., M.D. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co. 1874.

    A COMPLETE PRONOUNCING GAZETTEER. Edited by J. Thomas and T.
    Baldwin, assisted by several other gentlemen. Philadelphia: J. B.
    Lippincott & Co. (Sold at 25 Bond St., New York)


Next to a dictionary of the language we rank dictionaries of persons and
places, as works of reference for those engaged in writing, and, indeed,
for all intelligent readers as well. We hear of so many men of eminence,
or of localities so nearly alike in orthography, that we never feel
entirely at ease without reference to a good authority; so that, for the
mere purpose of identification, books like these are worth all they cost.
The period and country at and in which a given subject lived, his
occupation, his contemporaries, and for what he was distinguished; the
county, state, or kingdom in which a certain city or town lies, serve all
ordinary uses. Should we desire more, we can at our leisure resort to the
encyclopædias or individual biographies for fuller information. Of course
these works would be more acceptable if written from our point of view;
but that we cannot expect for a long time to come. Meanwhile, being
reasonably impartial, as we have found them to be so far as we have
examined, we accept them as the best attainable. Lest the fact that they
are each in one volume should convey an inadequate idea of their extent,
we may state that the _Biographical Dictionary_ has 2,345 closely‐printed
royal octavo pages, and the _Gazetteer_ xviii.‐2,182 pages of the same
size and compactness. We know of no works of the kind so convenient and
full in all matters for which they are ordinarily consulted.


    A DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. By Joseph E. Worcester,
    LL.D. Boston: Brewer & Tileston. 1874.


As it would be quite superfluous to advise any one to get a dictionary at
the present time, we content ourselves with asking our readers to get _the
best_—Worcester’s Unabridged. We have warmed towards this author, among
other reasons, because he is less of an iconoclast than some of his
fellow‐lexicographers. It has grieved us not a little to see our favorite
words maltreated as if they had no personality about which to be
sensitive, or pedigree whereof to be proud. We can scarcely recognize them
in the new dress, or rather mask, in which they are often presented. Were
we a boy again, not a hair of our head would rise at a spect_er_, and we
should have an additional reason for refusing allegiance to a sovereign
who held only a scept_er_—though the sun should still refuse to set on her
dominions.

In saying this we would by no means disparage a standard in spelling. When
some new Ursa Major shall arise who will not only give us an uniform,
harmonious system of orthography, but such substantial reasons in favor of
it as will satisfy the learned and confound all opponents, we may yield to
the general verdict. But we are not at all on the lookout for such a
contingency while our language is in the process of formation, and expect
to possess our Worcester Unabridged in peace for many long years to come.
The work has lxviii.‐1,786 pages quarto, and is quite as full, we believe,
as any other extant in the various tables, grammatical and other
information having a bearing on the main purpose of the volume.

The same publishers also issue Worcester’s _Comprehensive Dictionary_,
Worcester’s _Primary Dictionary_, and _A Pocket Dictionary_, compiled from
the quarto and school dictionaries of J. E. Worcester, by Loomis J.
Campbell; for those who desire inexpensive and portable manuals.





THE CATHOLIC WORLD. VOL. XIX., NO. 114.—SEPTEMBER, 1874.




Matter.



II.


The activity displayed by matter in the production of natural phenomena is
twofold, viz., attractive and repulsive; and the question has been raised
whether these two kinds of activity can reside in one and the same
subject, or, owing to their opposite nature, require separate subjects.
With regard to molecules, it is quite certain, though some have thought
otherwise, that in all ponderable bodies each molecule is in possession of
both powers; but with regard to the primitive elements which enter into
the constitution of a molecule, the question needs a special treatment, as
no direct evidence is supplied by experimental science for an affirmative
more than for a negative solution, and different views have been advanced
which it is important to examine in the light of philosophical principles,
that we may ascertain which of them has the best claim to adoption both in
philosophy and in molecular mechanics.


Attractive and repulsive powers.


Since it is well known that all the phenomena of the material order,
whether physical or chemical, ultimately depend on attractions and
repulsions, we are compelled to admit the existence in nature of
attractive and repulsive powers. Neither attractive powers alone nor
repulsive powers alone would afford us a rational explanation of natural
facts. If the primitive elements of matter were all repulsive, and nothing
but repulsive, then neither the cohesion of material particles nor the
gravitation of bodies would be possible; no solid and no liquid would
exist; and all matter from the very beginning of its existence would have
vanished in a state of extreme attenuation through the immensity of space.
If, on the contrary, the primitive elements of matter were all attractive,
and nothing but attractive, no expansive power would be found in nature;
for the expansion of bodies evidently depends on a repulsion prevailing
between their molecules. All solid and liquid bodies likewise proclaim the
existence of repulsive powers by the resistance they oppose to
compression. This resistance shows that their molecules are endowed with
powers whose exertion impedes their mutual approach as soon as they have
reached a certain limit of distance. It is plain that the power which
impedes the approach under pressure must be a repulsive one. Thus both
attractive and repulsive powers exist in nature.

But do they exist together in the same primitive element of matter?
Boscovich answers in the affirmative; but his answer is not supported by
any cogent reason. Having found no other means of accounting for the
impenetrability of bodies, he assumed that every element of matter is so
constituted as to be attractive at all great distances, according to the
law of universal attraction, but that each element, at molecular
distances, becomes repulsive in order to resist pressure, and again
attractive in order to exercise chemical affinity, and then repulsive
again, these alternations going on a certain number of times, till at last
repulsivity alone prevails, which indefinitely increases when the distance
of two elements indefinitely diminishes.

Yet this theory is by no means needed to account either for the
impenetrability of bodies or for any other phenomenon; as what Boscovich
ascribes to elements may be, and is in fact, a property of molecules—that
is, of a compound system of elements. On the other hand, the theory is
unnaturally complex, and the alternation of the attractive and repulsive
exertions looks as unscientific as the epicycles of the old astronomers
and other hypotheses once admitted as plausible, and now superseded by a
fuller knowledge of natural laws. To a mind which examines the question of
attractive and repulsive powers in the light of philosophy, it must be
evident that each primitive element of matter cannot possess them both.
_If an element is attractive at any distance, it must be attractive at all
distances, whether enormously great or indefinitely small; likewise, if an
element is repulsive at any distance, it must be repulsive at all
distances._

This proposition can be proved as follows: Opposite actions cannot
originate from one and the same simple principle when such a principle has
no control over itself, but acts by inherent necessity. But in each
primitive element of matter there is but one simple principle of activity,
which has no control over itself, as it acts by inherent necessity. And
therefore no primitive element can be both attractive and repulsive, but
is either attractive at all distances or at all distances repulsive.

In this syllogism the major is evident. An active principle which, like
the human soul, can, by immanent operations, assume at pleasure different
attitudes towards the term of its action, and which masters the conditions
and controls the intensity of its exertions, may perhaps be considered
competent to originate actions of opposite kinds.(159) But a being which
is destitute of immanent operations, and acts by an inherent necessity of
its nature, has no power to modify itself or to alter its intrinsic
determination; and its action is so ruled by its intrinsic determination
that there is no chance of its being either transmuted into its opposite,
or even partially suspended. Now, in a primitive being the principle of
activity is nothing else than the simple act which formally determines its
nature; and it is plain that wherever there is one simple formal act,
there can be only one formal determination to act. And consequently a
simple principle of activity which has no immanent operations cannot be
the source of two opposite kinds of actions. Bodies and their molecules,
on account of their physical composition, contain as many distinct
principles of activity as they contain physical components or elements;
hence we can easily account for their capability of originating opposite
actions by admitting that among those elements some are attractive and
others repulsive. But in a primitive element it is impossible to admit of
two opposite active principles; for a primitive element is a being
entitatively one, having only one essential act, and consequently only one
active principle and one intrinsic determination to act. It would
therefore be absurd to expect from such an element actions of such an
opposite nature as are attraction and repulsion. For evidently, to enable
the element to display two opposite powers, two opposite determinations
would be necessary. Hence, if the intrinsic determination enables the
primitive element to attract, such an element will always attract, and
never repel; and if, on the contrary, the intrinsic determination enables
the primitive element to repel, such an element will always repel, and
never attract. In other terms, the attractive and the repulsive power
cannot coexist in the same primitive element.

This conclusion, which affords the only possible basis for the
speculations of molecular mechanics, is one of those which mere scientists
cannot reach through their empirical and inductive method; but its truth
is not less certain for that; it is rather all the more certain, as it is
not founded on accidental facts, but on the unchangeable nature of things
and the transcendental relation of the principles involved in the
constitution of real beings.

Our proposition may be confirmed by reflecting that the change of
attraction into repulsion, according to Boscovich, would depend on the
diminution of the distance between the agent and the patient. Now, this
view is inadmissible. For a change of distance, though necessarily
accompanied by a change in the intensity of the action, cannot exercise
any influence on the specific nature of the action. The _intensity_ of the
action is an accidental thing, and can change without in the least
interfering with the nature of the agent; and for this reason it can, and
must, depend on distance as a condition implied in the exercise of the
active power. But the _nature_ of the action always follows the nature of
the substance from which it proceeds. Now, a change of distance does not
change the nature of the substance. And accordingly the nature of the
action must remain the same, even though the distance be indefinitely
diminished.

Moreover, if there were any distance at which the action of a primitive
element could change from attractive to repulsive, evidently the element,
at such a distance, would be unable to exercise either attraction or
repulsion, as Boscovich concedes; and therefore, at such a distance, the
material element would have no activity. We may, then, ask: Whence does
the attractive power emanate which is to have uncontrolled sway at all
greater distances? Does it emanate from any point of space outside the
element? Then it would not be the active power of the element, as it would
have nothing to do with it. On the other hand, it is obvious that if it
emanates from the element, it does not end at a distance from it. For,
since the active power is really identical with the formal principle from
which the primitive element receives its nature, it is as necessary for
the elementary power to reach the very centre of the element as it is for
the form to be intrinsically terminated to its matter. Whence it follows
that the elementary power of attraction, which prevails at all great
distances, must emanate from the very centre of the element. But if so,
why shall it not prevail up to that very centre? Is it, forsooth, because
in the neighborhood of the centre an opposite principle prevails? Were
this the case, the same primitive being would have two formal acts, and it
would be _two beings_ and _two natures_; which is an evident
contradiction. As long, therefore, as we adhere to the fundamental
doctrine that a primitive being cannot have more than one simple principle
of activity, we must admit that a primitive element, if attractive at any
distance, is attractive at all molecular distances, and, if repulsive at
molecular distances, is repulsive at all distances.

Against the existence of attractive and repulsive powers in distinct
primitive elements some objections now and then have been made. It has
been said, first, that what we call repulsion is only a result of certain
vortical movements of the ether all around the molecules of ponderable
bodies. This objection is based on a false supposition. We have already
shown that the arbitrary theory of the vortices fails altogether to
explain the great phenomenon of universal attraction; and we may easily
show that it fails as completely in regard to molecular repulsion. In
fact, the centrifugal forces which are developed by vortical movements,
and which in this theory are assumed as the cause of the phenomena of
molecular resistances, are not active powers. They are components of the
vortical movements, and nothing more; that is to say, they do not
_efficiently_ produce movements, but are the _formal_ principles of
movements already produced. To ascribe to them the molecular resistances
and the impenetrability of bodies is, therefore, to admit the effect
without the cause.

Secondly, some authors object that the resistance called into play by
pressure is not a real action, and requires no efficient repulsive powers.
They consider it, according to the vulgar prejudice, as a merely _passive_
resistance; for they imagine that a body, when pressed or impinged on,
resists the progress of the obtruding body _by its own inert matter_,
which with its materiality obstructs the way onward. This old explanation
is still popular with the great mass of the uninstructed, but is
scientifically and philosophically worthless. For whatever causes a real
change really acts; now, a body resisting the advance of another body
causes a real change in the rate of its movement; therefore a body
resisting the advance of another body really acts. Its resistance is
therefore _active_, and not passive; that is, it consists in an exertion
of repulsive power, and not in a material obstruction of the path.

Hence what physicists call “force of inertia” is not a passive resistance
proceeding from the inertia of matter, but an active exertion of the
molecular powers, and has been so called only because, all other things
being equal, its intensity is proportional to the mass of the inert
body.(160) Evidently, inertia itself cannot resist or check the advance of
an impinging body. Nothing but a positive action can do it; for nothing
but a positive action can communicate to the advancing body that impetus
in the opposite direction which alone is competent to neutralize the
impetus of the advance. Physicists know this very well, though many of
them, owing to the difficulty of analyzing and expressing certain things
with philosophical accuracy, do not always use, in this particular, a very
correct language—a thing which, after all, must not surprise us, as one
can be well read in physics without necessarily being a profound
philosopher.

The third objection is aimed at our argument against Boscovich’s theory,
in which we have said that attraction and repulsion are actions of
opposite kinds. Boscovich, on the contrary, maintains that attraction and
repulsion differ only as the greater from the less, and therefore cannot
be considered as actions of a different kind. He says: “Both actions are
of the same kind; for the one, as compared with the other, is negative;
and negative things do not differ in kind from positive ones. That the
one, as compared with the other, is negative, is evident from this: that
they differ only in direction. That the negative and the positive belong
to the same kind is evident from the principle, _More and less do not
differ in kind_. In fact, from the positive, by a continued subtraction or
diminution, we obtain first some smaller positive quantities, then zero,
and lastly, if we still go on in our subtraction, negative
quantities.”(161)

This argument, notwithstanding its speciousness, is not difficult to
upset. It is not true, in the first place, that attraction and repulsion
differ only in direction; on the contrary, they differ in everything
except in direction. Two points _A_ and _B_ being given, there is only one
direction from _A_ to *B*, whether _A_ be attractive or repulsive. If _A_
is attractive, its attraction is directed from _A_ to _B_; and if _A_ is
repulsive, its repulsion is no less directed from _A_ to _B_. This is
quite evident, as the action must in all cases proceed from the agent to
the patient. It is evident, therefore, that the two actions must have the
same direction. The movements of _B_ will indeed have opposite directions,
according as _B_ is attracted or repelled; but this does not show that the
actions themselves have opposite directions; it shows, on the contrary,
that those actions, though directed in the same manner from _A_ to _B_,
are of a different nature, and proceed from opposite principles. And this
conclusion may be confirmed by remarking that the direction is always from
a point to a point, or from matter to matter; and consequently it is not
the active power or the action, but only the position of the material
centres, that can determine any direction. Accordingly, so long as such a
position is not inverted, it is impossible to conceive two opposite
directions from _A_ to _B_. It is therefore evidently false that
attraction and repulsion differ in direction.

It is not true, in the second place, that attraction and repulsion differ
only as the positive differs from the negative, or the greater from the
less. In the mathematical expression of mechanical relations, if we
consider a movement as positive, the movement which points to an opposite
direction must, of course, be affected by the negative sign. The same we
must do with regard to forces and actions; for we estimate the actions by
the movements which they produce, and we express them only in terms of
movement—that is, by their effects. But this does not mean that there is
either any movement or any action _absolutely_ negative; for a negative
movement would be no movement, and a negative action no action. It is in a
relative and conventional sense only that movements are considered as
positive or negative; and, moreover, either of the two opposite movements
can be assumed as positive or as negative, at will; which shows very
clearly that the negative and the positive do not differ in this case as
the greater differs from the less, as Boscovich assumes; for either of the
two can, at pleasure, be taken as positive, whereas it would be absurd to
pretend that either of the two can, at pleasure, be pronounced to be the
greater. Thus, when a stone is thrown up vertically, and abandoned to
itself, if its ascent is taken as positive, its descent will be considered
as negative. Now, according to Boscovich’s reasoning, we should infer that
_the ascent is greater than the descent_, though they are evidently equal.
And in the same manner, if the ascent is taken as negative (which nothing
forbids), the descent must be taken as positive; whence, according to
Boscovich, we ought to infer also that _the descent is greater than the
ascent_. Any argument which leads to such glaring contradictions must be
radically false. And therefore it is false that attraction and repulsion
differ from one another as the greater from the less.

It might be urged, as a fourth objection, that if an attractive and a
repulsive power differ in kind, then a repulsive element and an attractive
element will be two kinds of material substance; which is inadmissible.
For we cannot admit two kinds of primitive material beings essentially
different, as the essence of matter must be the same in all the elements.

To this we answer that although there are two kinds of elements, there are
not two kinds of matter. In other terms, an attractive element differs
from a repulsive one as to the principle of action, but not as to the
matter itself. In fact, the essence of a material being _as such_ requires
nothing more than a form giving existence to matter; hence, wherever there
is a form giving existence to matter, there also is the essence of matter.
Now, matter is as much and as completely actuated by a form or act which
is a principle of attraction as by a form or act which is a principle of
repulsion. For the actuation of the matter by its form is not _efficient_,
but _formal_; and its result is not _to approach_ by attraction or _to
recede_ by repulsion, but _to be_ simply and absolutely; so that neither
attractivity nor repulsivity has any bearing on the essential constitution
of a material element as such—that is, inasmuch as it is material.
Accordingly, two elements of opposite natures differ in kind as agents,
but not as _material_ beings; and thus the essence of matter _as such_
remains one and the same in all the elements. Matter, as we have already
shown, is the centre of a sphere of activity; and it is evident that, by
this activity of an attractive or of a repulsive nature, the centre
remains a centre, and the sphere a sphere, without the least alteration.
Gold and ivory differ in kind; but a sphere of ivory and a sphere of gold
do not differ in kind _as spheres_, and their centres do not differ in
kind _as centres_. In a like manner the sphere of activity of an
attractive element does not differ from the sphere of activity of a
repulsive element, nor the centre of the one from the centre of the other.
And therefore two elements, however different in their nature as agents,
do not cease to be of the same kind as material. Their form is different,
but informs equally, and their matter is exactly the same.

We have stated that Boscovich was led to admit two opposite powers in the
same element, because he thought this to be the only means of accounting
for the impenetrability of bodies. We observe that, although the
impenetrability of bodies peremptorily proves the existence of repulsive
powers, it by no means proves that the repulsive power coexists with the
attractive _in the same primitive element_. Hence Boscovich’s inference is
not legitimate. Molecules, as we have already remarked, may possess both
powers, as their composition involves a great number of elements, which
can be of different natures. And this suffices to explain the
impenetrability of bodies, and all other properties dependent on molecular
actions, without need of arbitrary hypotheses.

A last objection against the doctrine we have established might be drawn
from the difficulty of reconciling the existence of repulsive elements
with universal attraction; for if we admit that repulsion can be exercised
at astronomical distances, it will be difficult to see how the celestial
bodies can attract one another in the direct ratio of their masses, as the
law of attraction requires.

The answer is obvious. If all matter were repulsive, universal repulsion
would be the consequence. But if bodies are made up partly of attractive
and partly of repulsive elements, then will either universal repulsion or
universal attraction prevail, according as the number and power of the
repulsive elements is greater or smaller than that of the attractive ones.
Hence, from the fact that in the solar system and elsewhere attraction
prevails, it follows, indeed, that the attractive powers are the stronger,
but it does not follow that they are the whole stuff of which bodies are
compounded.

As to the law of attraction _in the direct ratio of the masses_, a
distinction is to be made. The law is certainly true if by masses we mean
the masses _acted on_; not so, however, if for the masses acted on we
substitute the masses of the attracting bodies. The fact of universal
attraction shows that two planets, all other things being equal, must be
attracted by the sun in the direct ratio of their masses. This is an
established truth. But to say that, all other things being equal, the sun
and the earth would attract the moon in the direct ratio of their
_absolute_ masses, is to assume what no fact whatever gives us the right
to assert. Physicists very commonly admit this second assumption, and
consider it a part of the law of attraction; but they would be not a
little embarrassed were they required to undertake its demonstration. They
take for granted that all the particles of matter are equally and
uniformly attractive. Now, this assumption has never been established by
facts; it simply arises from an unlawful generalization—that is, from the
extension of the law of kinetic forces to dynamical actions. The momenta
of two bodies animated by equal velocities are proportional to the masses
of the same bodies; but nothing justifies the inference that therefore the
attractive powers must be proportional to the masses. Indeed, it is
scarcely possible to believe that equal masses of lead, iron, and zinc
possess equal powers. Their properties are, in fact, so different that we
cannot assume their constitution to be the result of an assemblage of
equal powers. Hence we maintain that, unless two bodies have the same
molecular constitution, their attractions cannot be proportional to their
masses.(162)

Universal attraction being also proportional to the inverse squares of the
distances, as we are going to show, we may add that the existence of
repulsive elements in the sun and in the planets by no means interferes
with this law. In fact, the total action of one celestial body on another,
on account of the great distance at which the law of universal attraction
is applied, equals the algebraic sum of all the actions by which one body
makes an impression upon the other. Hence, if all the elements of which
the body consists, whether they be attractive or repulsive, act
proportionally to the inverse square of the distance, it is evident that
the resultant of all such actions will also be proportional to the inverse
square of the distance, whenever the form of the body is spherical, or
nearly so, as is the case with the celestial bodies. And thus it is plain
that no valid objection can be drawn from universal attraction against the
existence of repulsive elements.


Law of elementary actions.


We have now to establish the general law of elementary attraction and
repulsion. We hold that _the actions of every primitive element are always
inversely proportional to the squares of the distances, no matter whether
such distances be great or small, astronomical or molecular_.

This proposition can be briefly proved in the following manner: Astronomy
teaches us that the Newtonian law, according to which the actions are
inversely proportional to the squares of the distances, is true for all
the celestial bodies. Now, the total action of one celestial body upon
another is a resultant of elementary actions, and arises from the
algebraic sum of them all. Hence it follows that every element of matter,
when acting from certain distances, obeys the Newtonian law; for it is
evident, from the theory of the composition of forces, that the sum of the
elementary actions cannot follow the Newtonian law unless these actions
themselves follow it. But if the law is true in the case of astronomical
distances, it must be true also in the case of microscopical and molecular
distances. For as a primitive element cannot have two laws of action, so
neither can it follow at molecular distances any other law than that which
it follows at all other distances.

That a primitive element cannot have two different laws of action will be
manifest by considering that the law which an element obeys in its actions
results from the intrinsic determination of its nature—that is, from its
formal constitution—inasmuch as the principle of action is, in every
primitive substance, the formal principle of its very being: _Principium
essendi est principium operandi_. Now, a primitive element has but one
formal principle of being; for it is entitatively one, and therefore it
has but one formal determination to act, which, as resulting from its
essential constitution, is unchangeable and inviolable. But it is evident
that from _one_ formal determination to act only _one_ law of action can
possibly result. Two laws would be two formal results, and would require
two formal principles giving two different determinations. Accordingly,
since each primitive element has but one formal principle, it cannot have
two laws of action. And therefore the Newtonian law, which primitive
elements follow at astronomical distances, must prevail also at all other
distances.

Let the reader observe that this conclusion regards the action of
primitive _elements_, not the action of _molecules_. That molecular
actions at molecular distances are not inversely proportional to the
square of the distance is a known fact. Molecular cohesion, for instance,
is immensely greater than it could possibly be by the Newtonian law; so
also molecular repulsion. This is what prevented physicists from
recognizing the applicability of the Newtonian law at molecular distances.
As long as the primitive elements were confounded, under the name of
atoms, with the molecules of the so‐called primitive bodies, hydrogen,
oxygen, carbon, etc., it was impossible to recognize in the molecular
actions any trace of the Newtonian law; hence came the division of
attraction into _universal_ and _molecular_, the first following a known
law, the second following some other law or laws which physicists could
never discover. Their embarrassment was a necessary consequence of an
incomplete analysis of the material compound. The molecule of a given
substance, though often called an atom, is a system of primitive elements;
and elements acting according to the Newtonian law can give rise to
molecular systems which, at very small distances, will act according to
any other law that may be indicated by molecular phenomena. This other law
depends entirely on the number, kind, strength, and geometrical
arrangement of the primitive elements which enter into the constitution of
the molecule; and since molecules of different primitive substances are
very differently constituted, every kind of molecule must have its own
peculiar law of acting at molecular distances—a fact on which the
scientific explanation of the different physical and chemical properties
of different substances entirely depends. Hence it is clear that all the
attempts at finding a general law of molecular attraction were, from the
very nature of the case, destined to fail. The only general law of action
which all matter obeys is the Newtonian law; and what was once considered
to form an exception to it is now acknowledged to be the result of its
application to a complex system of attractive and repulsive elements.

From the fact that the actions of all elements are proportional to the
inverse squares of the distances, it follows that the sphere of activity
of material elements extends beyond any assignable limit. The intensity of
the action cannot, in fact, become = 0 unless the distance becomes
infinite. The objections to which this corollary of the Newtonian law may
give rise will be answered in our next article, where all the difficulties
concerning the _actio in distans_ will be solved.


Mode of action.


A last question remains here to be examined respecting the action of
primitive material elements—viz., whether such an action needs a medium
through which it may be transmitted and communicated to distant bodies, or
whether, on the contrary, it is exerted upon them directly without
dependence on any material medium.

In answering this question we must be careful not to confound action with
movement. Movement, though not properly transmitted, is propagated, as we
shall explain; and this cannot take place where there is no movable
matter. Those who are wont to identify movement with force, and force with
action, as is unfortunately the fashion even in scientific treatises, will
no doubt imagine that actions must be transmitted or propagated through a
material medium, just as sound through air, or as light through
luminiferous ether. But action is not movement; and therefore the question
how elementary actions—that is, how attractions or repulsions—reach
distant bodies has to be resolved on its own merit, as one altogether
distinct from the question about the propagation of movement. This
premised, we are going to show that _the elementary actions are
independent of all material medium of communication_.

In the first place, there is no reason why we should assume that the
elementary action (attraction or repulsion) depends on a medium of
communication, except inasmuch as we may apprehend that the action itself,
or the active power whence it proceeds, is in need of being transmitted to
some matter located at a certain distance. But neither the elementary
power nor the elementary action can be transmitted to the distant matter.
And therefore neither the power nor the action can be dependent on a
medium of communication.

In this syllogism the major is evident; and the minor can be proved in two
manners: First, because the power and the action are, of their own nature,
intransmissible. Secondly, because, prescinding from their
intransmissibility, no medium can be assigned which would be capable of
transmitting them. And as to the first, we know that nothing can be
transmitted to a distant place except by local movement; but neither the
active power nor the elementary action is capable of receiving local
movement; for there is no other subject capable of local movement than
matter alone, on account of its passive potentiality. Hence neither power
nor action can be transmitted. And in the second place, even were they
transmissible, what medium could be found for their transmission? If any
such medium could be found, it would consist of some matter like ether or
air, this being the view of those who admit the necessity of such a
medium. On the other hand, a material substance is not a suitable medium
for transmitting action or power. For whenever an active power is exerted
upon matter, the result of the exertion is nothing but a determination to
a change of place; as it is well known that matter cannot receive any
other determination. And therefore it is not the power that is received in
the matter acted on, but only the act produced by its exertion, which act
is otherwise called a momentum either statical or dynamical. Strictly
speaking, not even the action itself is received in the matter, although
we are wont to tolerate such an expression; for the action properly so
called is the production of an act, and the matter receives, indeed, the
act produced, but not its production. And thus the action, properly
speaking, is _terminated_ to the matter, and not _received_ in it. Hence
we see that neither the power of the agent nor its exertion is received in
the matter acted on; it is merely the produced accidental act, or, in
other terms, the momentum, that is received. But evidently matter cannot
transmit what it does not receive. And therefore matter cannot be a medium
for transmitting either power or action. Whether it can transmit movement
we shall examine at the end of the present question.

This argument would suffice to show that elementary actions are quite
independent of a material medium. Yet as the prejudice against which we
are fighting is ancient, popular, and deeply rooted, we think it will not
be superfluous to confirm our proof by a few other considerations.

Those who maintain the transmission of forces admit a material medium, in
which, by successive contact of particles with particles, the transmission
of the force to a distant body is supposed to be carried on. By the word
“force” they understand action as well as movement. Now, let us ask them
whether the particles of their material medium come into mathematical
contact or not. If they do not come into mathematical contact, then the
action is not transmitted by the medium from one particle to another, for
there will be a vacuum between them; and vacuum is not a material medium.
If, on the contrary, the particles come into mathematical contact with
their own matter, then, as we have already shown in our past article, they
cannot by such a contact communicate any movement to each other; and since
the transmission in question should be carried on by successive
communications of movement, it is plain that no such transmission will be
possible. And accordingly the theory of the transmission of actions
through a medium must be rejected.

Moreover, elementary actions are either attractive or repulsive, and
neither of them can be conceived without intensity and direction. Now, no
direction is possible unless there be two points distinctly ubicated in
space. And therefore the action, no matter whether attractive or
repulsive, cannot reach any material point which is not distant from the
matter of the agent. But if so, the action is independent of a medium of
communication; for the material medium, if it were needed, should lie
between the agent and the patient in such a manner as to link them
together, and fill by its material continuity the gap by which they are
separated; and if this were the case, the medium could not be set in
motion, as its contact with the agent would exclude distance, and
consequently the possibility of any direction from the agent to the medium
itself.

Some will say that this argument proves nothing, as the direction of the
action can be sufficiently accounted for by the direction of the impulse.
But this conclusion is evidently wrong. For what impulse can they imagine
to proceed from the sun to the moon? Uncultivated minds are easily deluded
by unlawful generalizations. They apply to all actions what they imagine
to agree with some special phenomenon; and because they see that in the
case of impact there is an impulse in a certain direction, they hastily
conclude that the direction of every action depends on the direction of
some impulse. We may remark that, even in the case of impact, it is not
safe to conclude that the direction of the movement will follow the
direction of the impulse, unless the impulse be central, and the body
impinged upon homogeneous. But leaving aside the theory of impact, which
has nothing to do with the present question, what impulse can explain the
continuous resistance of a body to statical forces? What impulse can
account for the expansive tendency of gases, and for their continuous
pressure against the recipients in which they are contained? What impulse,
above all, can account for universal attraction?

We have mentioned this objection, not because it needed any scientific or
philosophical discussion, but simply because it is one of those notions to
which the prejudices of our infancy give easy admittance into our minds
when we allow ourselves to be guided, as is often the case, by our senses
and imagination, in matters pertaining in great part to the intellectual
order. Our mistakes in the appreciation of the character and conditions of
natural facts most ordinarily originate in the unwarranted assumption
that, since the facts are sensible, our knowledge of them must wholly
depend on our senses; whilst the truth is that our senses perceive the
movements, but not the actions which cause them, and therefore do not see
the entirety of the natural facts, but that portion only which is most
superficial. “A fundamental fact, like an elementary principle, never
fails us,” says M. Faraday, speaking of natural philosophy; “its evidence
is always true; but, on the other hand, we frequently have to ask, What is
the fact? often fail in distinguishing it—often fail in the very statement
of it—and mostly overpass or come short of its true recognition. If we are
subject to mistake in the interpretation of our mere sense impressions, we
are much more liable to error when we proceed to deduce from these
impressions (as supplied to us by our ordinary experience) the relation of
cause and effect; and the accuracy of our judgment, consequently, is more
endangered.”(163)

And now, let no one imagine that we have any intention of denying the
existence of a material medium between the celestial bodies. We only deny
that there is a medium _for transmitting actions_. Again, we do not deny
that when the earth, for instance, acts upon the moon, the elements of
matter lying between the earth and the moon exert their activity on one
another. But we maintain that their actions are _their own_, and proceed
from their own intrinsic and permanent power, and not from any extrinsic
agent, and that such actions are not travelling from element to element
till they reach the moon. Neither do we deny that the elements located
between the earth and the moon are also acted on, for it is clear that
gravity must tend to alter their position in space; but we hold that the
whole possible effect of gravity on all such elements is movement, and
that movement is a mere change of place, and not a transmission of the
action by which it is produced. How the movements themselves are
communicated from element to element we shall explain presently.

Meanwhile, from the fact that the elementary actions are independent of
all material medium of communication, we infer that bodies, in attracting
and in repelling, act with equal promptitude, and without loss of time,
whether the distance of the body acted on be great or small. Time, in
fact, follows movement; for without movement there is no succession. Now,
the action of a body does not reach the distant body through movement—that
is, through successive transmission; on the contrary, each element is, of
its own nature, determined to act _directly_ and _immediately_ on every
other element existing in the indefinite sphere of its activity. Hence a
body will indeed act with a greater intensity at a less distance, but will
not act sooner than at a greater distance. There have been scientists who
surmised that the solar attraction may perhaps need time for reaching the
earth and the planets, and therefore that the attraction may reach Mercury
in a shorter time than Jupiter or Neptune. From what precedes it is
manifest that the surmise is wholly without foundation. Light needs time
for its propagation, because it consists in a kind of movement; but
attraction, as we have just remarked, is not movement, and therefore is
not dependent on time.


Propagation of movements.


We have shown that there is no material medium for the transmission of
forces, if the word “forces” is taken to mean “actions”; but if the word
is intended to express “movements,” then the material medium is quite
indispensable. We read very frequently in scientific books that actions
are transmitted; but as this is not true of the actions themselves, we
must suppose that the phrase is intended to express only the fact of a
progressive development of the effects resulting from those actions. In
the same way, when we read that actions are conveyed through a material
medium, we interpret this expression as meaning that a material medium is
strictly required for the progressive development of the series of effects
due to such actions. We will explain the fact by an example.

If, a mass of air being at rest, a string is stretched in order to elicit
sound, the vibrations of the string will be communicated to the
neighboring molecules of air by the action (not by the movement) of the
string itself; these first molecules, being thrust out of their position
of equilibrium, will, by their action (that is, by the exertion of a power
residing in each of their component elements, not of a power coming from
the string, nor by their movement, nor by transmitted action), put in
movement a following set of molecules, and so on indefinitely; so that, in
the whole series of molecular vibrations, each preceding molecule causes
the motion of the following one, and causes it by the exertion of its own
powers, not of any power transmitted. It is evident that the string cannot
give activity to the molecules of air. These molecules, whether the string
vibrates or not, have already their own activity and their own mutual
action; only their actions balance each other as long as the mass of air
is at rest. But when the string begins to vibrate, the equilibrium being
broken near it, those molecules of air which first cease to be in
equilibrium begin to act on the following molecules with a different
intensity, according to the change of the molecular distance. Thus the
movement by which the distance is altered is not the cause, but the
condition, of the phenomenon.

What we say of air and sound applies to any other medium, as ether with
its vibrations, whether luminous or calorific. The molecules of ether have
their own powers, and exert them continually, whether there exists a flame
determining a series of vibrations or not; but with the flame the first
molecules of ether which are displaced from their position of equilibrium
will acquire a new local relation with regard to the following, and their
actions will be of a new intensity, sufficient to cause the displacement
of the next set of molecules, and so on. The flame, then, causes the
displacement of the first set of molecules; the first set displaced causes
the displacement of the second; the second displaced causes the
displacement of the third, etc.; each set producing its own effect by its
own inherent powers, not by the exertion of any power communicated to them
by the flame, and their displacement being not a cause, but only a
condition, on which the intensity of the exertion depends.

Hence it appears that in phenomena of this description it is not the
action, and much less the power, that is transmitted, but only the
movement, or the formal perturbation of the equilibrium; and even the
movement is not properly _transmitted_, but only _propagated_; because the
movement of each following molecule is not the identical movement of each
preceding one, but is a movement really produced in the very impact of the
one on the other, as our reader must have easily gathered from our
preceding discussion. And therefore one movement succeeds another
indefinitely, the one being a condition for the existence of the other;
which constitutes propagation, not properly transmission.

To Be Continued.




Antar And Zara; Or, “The Only True Lovers.” V.


An Eastern Romance Narrated In Songs.

By Aubrey De Vere.



