Part IV.


She Sang.

I.

It came: it reached me from afar:
  I kissed the seal, the cords unwove;
Came wafted from the fields of war
  On all the odorous airs of love.

Close hid I sang; close hid I sighed
  In places where no echoes were,
Where dashed the streams through gorges wide,
  And sprays leaned back on moistened air.

I sang a song, half sighs, yet proud,
  And smothered by those downward rills,
A music proud, and yet not loud,
  As when her babe a mother stills.

II.

Behold! for thee, and for thy love
  I fain would make my spirit fair:
For this I strive; for this I strove:
  My toil, though late, shall blossom bear.

Before thy face the plant shall rise,
  In thy fair presence bloom and flower:
O love me! Thou art great and wise:—
  Heart‐greatness is the woman’s dower.

Thou mad’st me as a warrior young
  That yearns to flesh a maiden sword,
That burns for battle with the strong,
  That pants to crush some rebel horde.

Rebels I count all things in me
  That bear no impress of my King!
“Fair is a great king’s jealousy;
  His worth he knoweth”; thus I sing.

III.

I stood upon a rock what time
  The moon rushed up above the plain:
The crags were white like frosty rime;
  Her beams upon me fell like rain.

It was her harvest month of might:
  The vales and villages were glad;
I cried—my palms against the light—
  Like one with sudden pinions clad,

“Whom seek’st thou, O thou rising moon
  That broad’nest like a warrior’s shield?
Whom seest thou? Thou shalt see him soon,
  My Warrior ’mid the tented field!

“He reaches now some gorge’s mouth;
  Upon his helmet thou shalt shine;—
Seest thou, O moon, from north to south,
  Another loved one like to mine?”

IV.

No merchant from the isles of spice
  Who stands in hushed hareem or hall
Who parts his goods, and names the price,
  Was I, O friend! I gave thee all.

When from me I had all things cast
  Except thy gifts, that hour I found
A gift I, too, might give at last—
  The being thou had’st made and crowned!

I am not nothing since thy vow
  Enriched my heart. _That_ wealth is mine:
“Nothing” I call myself, that thou
  May’st hear, O love! and call me thine.

V.

High on the hills I sat at dawn
  Where cedar caverns, branching, breathe
Their darkness o’er the dewy lawn,
  While slowly bloomed in heaven a wreath

Of eastern lilies. Soon the sun
  Ascended o’er the far sea‐tide
Smiting to glory billows dun
  And clouds and trees; and loud I cried,

“Thou too shalt rise, _my_ sun—thou too—
  O’er darkling hearts in power shalt rise,
And flame on souls, and flash on dew
  Of tears that dim expectant eyes.”

And every wind from vale and glen
  Sang loud, “He, too, shall rise and shine!
A warrior he, a chief of men,
  A prince with might; and he is thine.”

VI.

Men praised my words. Thy spirit dwells
  Within me, strangely linked with mine:
At times my mind’s remotest cells
  Brighten with thoughts less mine than thine.

A gleam of thee on me they cast:
  They wear thy look; they catch thy tone:
A kingdom in my breast thou hast:—
  The words they praised were not mine own.

VII.

A chance was that—our meeting first?
  At morn I read a quaint old book
That told of maiden palace‐nursed
  Who met a prince beside a brook.

“Beside _our_ brook the lilies blow,”
  I mused, “green‐girt, and silver‐tipped”;
And, dreaming of their bells of snow,
  At eve adown the rocks I tripped.

Sudden I saw thee!—saw thee take
  Toward me thy path! I turned, and fled:
So swiftly pushed I through the brake
  My girdle dropped:—still on I sped.

Had I but guessed that past the dates
  That hour the stranger youth made way,
I ne’er had left my maiden mates
  Beside that brook, alone, to stray.

VIII.

Surely my thoughts, ere yet we met,
  Even then were loyal to their lord;
The tides of all my being set
  Towards thee with blind yet just accord.

When first I kenned, through showers aslant
  The snowy Lebanonian line,
When first I heard the night‐bird’s chant,
  Even then my beating heart was thine.

When minstrels sang the sacred strife,
  And thus I wept, “The land made free
By warrior’s sword is as a wife
  Whose head is on her husband’s knee,”

Then, too, I nursed this hope sublime:
  My breast unconscious turned to thee:
Let no one say there lived a time
  When thou wert nothing unto me!

IX.

How often, dimmed by grateful tears,
  I see that convent near the snow
Wherein I lived those seven sweet years,
  And seven times saw the lilies blow;

There sent to couch on pavements cold,
  Fearless to suffer and to dare,
And reverence learn from nuns dark‐stoled
  Who live in penance and in prayer.

There, too, of love they sang—there, too—
  Ah! not this love of maid and youth!
To that first love oh! keep me true,
  Thou Who art Love at once and Truth!

Have I not heard of hearts that nursed
  This human love, yet wronged their troth?
That first, great love they outraged first:—
  Falsehood to that was death to both!

X.

Now glorious grows my Warrior’s name:
  The very babes his praises spread:
But late released, this morn they came
  Around me, clamouring, “Give us bread!”

His light was on them! Freed by him,
  A land redeemed I saw them tread!
I gazed on them with eyes tear‐dim:
  I blessed them, and I gave them bread.

“What man is this?” our ancients sought:
  “This chief we know not can we trust?”
Thou gav’st them back, unbribed, unbought,
  Their towers far off, their state august.

Thou gav’st to warriors proved of yore
  Victory, by carnage undisgraced;
To matrons hearts unpierced by war;
  To maids their nuptials high and chaste.

To others, these:—but what to me?
  I speak it not: I know it well:
The fawn whose head is on my knee
  As well as I that gift might tell!




The Veil Withdrawn.


Translated, By Permission, From The French Of Madame Craven, Author Of “A
Sister’s Story,” “Fleurange,” Etc.



X.


Livia was the first to return to herself and put an end to my singular and
ill‐timed reverie.

“I hope, however, you do not imagine my resolution is to be attributed to
the _jettatura_,” she said.

These words immediately recalled me to a sense of all that had taken place
the previous hour. I reflected an instant, and then replied:

“No; I know too well what you yourself would think of a vocation that had
such an origin.”

“And yet I cannot deny,” she said, “that it has had a certain influence on
my destiny; for, thanks to the _jettatura_, I have had a heavy, mysterious
cross to bear. It is not to get rid of this cross I wish to leave the
world, but to embrace it more closely and experience more fully the
blessings it has revealed to me.”

“That is above my comprehension, Livia. I no longer understand you.”

“You know very well, however, do you not, that love is the chief element
of happiness?” said she slowly.

“Yes, I believe that. Happiness consists chiefly in loving and being
loved, I imagine. Everything else is merely accessory.”

“And you know what is accessory loses all importance when the whole heart
and soul are absorbed in some adored and adorable being?”

“Yes; ... but the difficulty is to love thus though I say this
hesitatingly, lest it seem ungrateful to Lorenzo.”

“You are right, Ginevra. It is very difficult, and even impossible, in
this world, as you will some day realize more fully than you do now.”

We were both silent for a few moments.

“And my father,” I at last resumed—“what will my poor father say to this
separation?”

“What would he say, I beg to know, if a noble, wealthy man—in fact, a
great lord like Lorenzo—should ask my hand on condition of carrying me
away, like you, beyond the mountains and the sea? Do you think he would
refuse? Well, neither will he refuse Him who demands my heart and life.
For, after all, is not he alone great—the only Lord?... But of course my
father will decide the matter. It will be when and as he wishes.”

This conversation gave me a glimpse of a world into which the hour had not
yet come for me to penetrate, and I was diverted from the thoughts it
awakened in my soul by the excitement and agitation that followed. But
every word of this last conversation remained fixed in my memory; whereas
the incidents and impressions of the following day only seem like a
dream—yes, like a dream when I recall the confusion of that last day, the
preparations both for my wedding and my journey (for I was to leave my
father’s house and my native land nearly at the same time), Ottavia’s
feverish excitement, and the quiet activity of Livia, who thought of
everything, and arranged everything calmly and in order. Then there was a
succession of calls from our young friends and relatives, who, according
to the custom in our country, could not be present at the wedding, and
therefore came to take leave of me on the eve, and admire at their leisure
the rich presents of the bridegroom, especially the jewels, which were
unusually splendid. Among these young girls I particularly remember my two
cousins, Mariuccia and Teresina, who, as well as their mother, Donna
Clelia, experienced many conflicting emotions on the occasion of their
young cousin’s brilliant marriage. But interest and curiosity finally
overcame the grain of ill‐humor which my aunt especially could not help
feeling at seeing me attain a rank and position which her most ambitious
flights could not hope for her daughters to obtain. Donna Clelia was my
father’s sister, but she did not resemble him in the least. She was
married to a wealthy man of an obscure family, and, as she was remarkable
for nothing but her ability as a manager and her kind heart, she had
passed her life in a different sphere from that my father had attained by
his talents and celebrity. This sometimes caused a temporary feeling of
spite, but she was in the main an excellent woman and a good mother.

At length the great day came and nearly passed away; for it was not till
night came on—that is, about nine o’clock in the evening—that the ceremony
took place. The large _salon_ was illuminated with all the lights in the
crystal chandelier, and at the farther end of the room an altar had been
placed, adorned with lights and flowers. Before it stood good old Don
Placido, awaiting those he was to unite. His long, white beard and
Capuchin habit formed a singular contrast to the elegant toilets around
him and the total lack of any religious aspect—as was proper at a wedding
in the midst of a brilliant assembly like this, and in a place better
fitted for worldly gayety than the celebration of a holy rite.

Don Fabrizio soon appeared, leading the pale, trembling bride clothed in
white, and wearing on her forehead a coronet of diamonds whose _fleurons_
indicated her new rank. Every eye was fastened on her, as she knelt beside
the bride‐groom at the feet of the venerable old priest who had baptized
her, and was now waiting to bless her marriage. I only remember that the
very moment when Don Placido was joining our hands Livia’s words occurred
to my mind: “You are going to pronounce the most fearful vow there is in
the world,” and my voice failed me. Lorenzo, on the contrary, spoke
unhesitatingly and with perfect distinctness. Don Placido then addressed
us a few words that affected me to tears, for he spoke of her who was not
here to accompany her child to the altar; and this sorrowful recollection,
alluded to in language so touching, made me forget everything else, and
for a few moments entirely absorbed me. I cannot recollect anything more
till, leaning on Lorenzo’s arm, I descended the grand staircase, in order
to go to the palace he owned at a short distance, and where he had lately
resided. The night was glorious, the air soft and balmy, and I took a seat
in the open carriage with nothing around me but my lace veil. My bridal
dress was becoming, notwithstanding my paleness, and the diamonds I was
covered with sparkled in the light of the torches borne by the attendants.
A murmur of admiration ran through the crowd at my appearance; and when
Lorenzo took a seat at my side, the air resounded with cheers and
enthusiastic exclamations. We at last set off amid cries of “_Evviva i
sposi!_” “_Evviva il duca!_” “_Evviva la duchessa!_”(137) ... We set off,
but not alone. According to our custom, we were preceded, accompanied, and
followed by a crowd of relatives and friends who thronged the house which
I now entered for the first time. I was obliged to receive them all,
listen to them, reply, and, above all, do the honors of a place more
familiar to every one there than to myself!

This old palace had been very magnificent once, but it was now in the
dilapidated condition into which all buildings for a long time uninhabited
generally fall. On this occasion the walls were covered with rich
hangings, and on every side there was a profusion of lights and flowers.
It was brilliantly illuminated without, and through the open windows of
the _salon_ came the sound of ravishing music in the garden. For this
evening, at least, they had succeeded in giving to this ancient habitation
not only a sumptuous and cheerful aspect, but one really fairy‐like.

It will not seem surprising that, agitated and excited as I had been, the
brilliancy of such a _soirée_ was repugnant to my feelings. It may not
even seem astonishing that, in spite of all that was apparently combined
to intoxicate me with joy and pride, a scene so brilliant, so little in
accordance with the solemn emotions of the day, should have produced an
entirely opposite effect on me. The transition had been too sudden and
abrupt. This was the first time but once I had ever been in the gay world,
and the recollections associated with that occasion were the most terrible
of my life, as well as the most deeply graven on my memory. It is not
strange, therefore, that I felt a painful depression of spirits, as well
as a fearful embarrassment and an irresistible desire to escape from them
all—even from Lorenzo himself, whose radiant look seemed so unable to
comprehend my feelings that I could not turn to him for the sympathy that
had heretofore inspired me with so much confidence in him. I looked around
in vain for a glimpse of my compassionate sister; but she had been made no
exception to the custom forbidding young girls to be present at nuptial
festivals. My father, after escorting me to the door of my new home, had
returned, not being able to overcome his repugnance to mingle in the
world. Mario that evening was cold and sarcastic. I felt, therefore, alone
and frightened, and quite overcome by emotion and fatigue. In addition to
this, I had a severe headache from the weight of the coronet I wore, and,
feeling nearly ready to faint, I went to one of the balconies, when,
perceiving some steps leading to a vast _loggia_, I hastily descended, and
almost ran to seat myself on a stone bench at the end of the terrace which
overlooked a part of the garden more retired and obscure than the rest.
There I felt I could breathe freely. Away from the crowd and the dazzling
lights, the sound of the music faintly heard at a distance, and looking up
with delight through the foliage at the tranquil heavens brilliant with
stars, I took off the rich diadem that burdened my head, and felt relieved
as the evening wind blew back my hair and cooled my brow. I leaned my head
against my clasped hands, and did what had hitherto seemed impossible—I
collected my thoughts a moment: I reflected and prayed.

I was married. My past life was at an end. A new and untried life had
begun. What had it in reserve for me? What lay in the future, seemingly so
brilliant, but in reality so dark? I could not tell, and at this moment I
felt a vague terror rather than joyful anticipations. For the second time
that evening Livia’s voice seemed to resound in my ears, and this time to
echo the words my mother had written. I seemed to make them some promise I
hardly comprehended myself, and I murmured the words: “Rather die!...”

Lorenzo’s voice recalled me to myself. His eyes, which had never lost
sight of me, immediately perceived my absence, and he was now at my side.
He was alarmed at first at the sight of my tears, my disordered hair, and
the coronet lying on the stone bench beside me, but was reassured when I
looked up with an appealing expression, and understood me without giving
me the trouble to speak.

“Poor Ginevra!” he softly said in a caressing tone of protection which he
so well knew how to assume. “Yes, you are right. This display is foolish,
this crowd is odious, and has been too much for your strength. And how
absurd,” he continued, “to hide this golden hair, and burden so young and
fair a brow with heavy jewels! You did not need them, my Ginevra. You were
certainly charming with the coronet on, but much more so as you are....
Ah! do not shake your head. You must allow me to say what I please now.
You no longer have the right to impose silence on me, and I am no longer
bound to obey you....”

So saying, he led me slowly back to the house, but, instead of returning
to the rooms still crowded with company, he took me another way leading to
a _boudoir_ of a circular form, which was ornamented with particular care.
The gilding, the mirrors, and the paintings did not seem to have suffered
from the effects of time like the rest of the house. Nothing was wanting
that could give this little room a comfortable and sumptuous aspect. The
soft light of a lamp suspended from the ceiling was diffused throughout
the room, and perfect silence reigned.

“This is your room, Ginevra,” said Lorenzo, carelessly throwing on one of
the tables the circlet of diamonds he held in his hands. “Here you can
quietly repose undisturbed by the crowd. There is absolutely nothing to
disturb you here; the music itself can scarcely be heard. I will leave
you, my Ginevra, to explain your absence and endure till the end of the
evening the fearful task it pleases them to impose on us, but from which,
at least, they must allow me to deliver you.”



XI.


The following day, as the breeze declined, I was standing beside Lorenzo
on the deck of the ship that was bearing us away. I had left behind me all
I had hitherto known and loved, and my eyes were yet tearful from my last
farewells. I stood looking at the receding shores of Sicily, and the
magnificent amphitheatre of Messina rising up before us, which presents so
imposing an appearance when seen from the sea. We soon passed between the
two famous whirlpools which often afford a comparison for those among us
_voyageurs_ over the sea of life who escape one only to fall into the
other—a comparison figuratively very apt, though in reality it is quite
doubtful if in our day any navigator ever falls either into Scylla or
Charybdis.

When nothing more was to be seen, and night came on with its serene and
starry heavens, revealing only the outline like a silvery vapor which
marked the coast of Italy, I consented at last to leave the place where I
had been standing motionless, and took a seat under an awning Lorenzo had
had put up for me on deck. During the hour of calm repose I enjoyed
there—my first and almost only hour of perfect happiness!—I was inspired
with renewed hope and confidence while listening to the penetrating
accents of the husband whose idol I was, as he depicted the future in
language whose magic charm seemed to open a whole life of pleasure before
me. After a few days’ rest at Naples, we were to take a delightful journey
through Italy and France. We should behold all the places and objects I
had so often seen in imagination, and whose names were so familiar to my
memory. The interest I was capable of feeling in every subject, the
curiosity so natural to the young, and the undeveloped sense of the
beautiful which Lorenzo knew so well how to draw out and gratify, the
taste for art with which he was gifted—all these chords, as yet nearly
untried, seemed to vibrate within me as I listened to him. I was like a
docile instrument from which a skilful hand knows how to draw forth sounds
hitherto unsuspected. As in certain compositions of the great masters, the
same musical idea is persistently reproduced in the most varied
modulations, so on all subjects and on all occasions he found means to
lead my heart back to the certain conviction of being loved—loved as much
as in my most ambitious dreams I had ever imagined it would be sweet to be
loved. At that moment the vow so “fearful” seemed easy to keep; and if
Livia’s words had occurred to me then, they would doubtless have excited a
smile!...

One false note, however, or at least a doubtful one, disturbed for an
instant the harmony that seemed to reign between us.

Every one who has crossed, on a beautiful summer night, the sea that
washes those enchanted shores, has doubtless experienced the undefinable
impression of mingled delight and peace, enthusiasm and dreaminess, that
sometimes comes over one while watching the stars becoming more intense in
their brilliancy, and the luminous sea like a widespread mirror reflecting
the immensity of the heavens. We grew silent, and after a time I rose and
went to the side of the ship to contemplate more fully the beauty of the
night, and there, with uplifted face and clasped hands, one of those
inarticulate prayers rose from my heart in which the happiness of the
present moment is confounded with admiration for the wonders of the divine
creation, and the soul truly feels itself greater than the entire
universe, because it alone has the power to render thanks to Him who not
only created it but the whole world.

Lorenzo had followed me, and taken a seat on the bench that ran along the
side of the ship, where, with his head leaning on one hand, and his back
to the sea, he sat intently gazing at me. Filled with devout thoughts, I
took his hand, and, pressing it in mine, I said: “O my dear husband! let
us offer up one short prayer together—a prayer of thanksgiving to God....”
His only reply was to seize both of my hands, and kiss them one after the
other, and then to laugh gently, as one would at the prattling of a
child!... A sudden sensation of pain darted through my heart like an
arrow; and if it had not been so dark, he might have seen how pale I at
once turned. But he did not notice or suspect my emotion, though his eyes
were fastened on my face. “_Beatrice in suso, ed io in lei
guardava_,”(138) he said in his most caressing tone. Then he continued:
“Your eyes are my heaven, Ginevra. I need not raise them any higher.”

The sentiment to which I had appealed was one so utterly unknown to him
that he unconsciously destroyed the emotion I felt.

“Ah! Lorenzo,” I exclaimed in my anguish, “Dante had a different meaning,
or Beatrice would not have allowed him to use such language.” Then I
stopped, obeying for the first time the instinctive feeling, so painful
but right, that checks every word on a woman’s lips which, as has been so
well expressed, would be profaned if not understood.

But this was rather instinctive than the result of thought with me. And
though the ray of truth that time was to reveal more fully was vivid, it
was only transient, ... and my momentary disappointment left no permanent
impression at the time, though I did not forget it, and the recollection
came back at a later day.

Coming from Sicily, the sight of the Bay of Naples does not, of course,
inspire the same degree of wonder and admiration felt by those who come
from the north; but it was with a feeling of delight my eyes wandered
around, after passing Capri, and beheld at the right the wonderful chain
of mountains at whose foot lies the charming shore of Sorrento; at the
left Posilippo and all the pleasant villas that crown its height; in front
the marked outline of Vesuvius standing out against the majestic Apennines
in the distance; and, finally, Naples, smiling and lovely, seated on the
inner shore of its beautiful bay! Whatever may be said as to the
possibility of finding anywhere else in the world a prospect as
magnificent as this, and even if it is true that there is one, it would be
impossible to remember it when the view I have just described is presented
to the eye for the first time.

While we were thus rapidly crossing the bay, and I was gazing on every
side with delight, Lorenzo pointed out the Villa Reale, beyond which stood
the house we were to live in, surrounded by a large garden—a charming
habitation which combined all the attractions of the country and all the
advantages of the city, and which, when I entered it for the first time,
seemed like a beautiful frame to the sunny picture of my future life.

On this occasion we only remained a fortnight at Naples; but this was
sufficient to make me appreciate my new home, and the prospect of
returning to it an additional pleasure in the journey before us. It is, in
fact, only pleasant to travel around the world when we can see in
imagination a place awaiting us where some day we are to find rest and
deposit the treasures we have accumulated.... Happily for me, I was then
far from foreseeing those I should have to bring back when I returned to
this spot!...

The day after our arrival Lorenzo took me for the first time into his
studio, where I was filled with astonishment at the exquisite perfection
of the productions I found there. I had often heard him called a great
artist, and I now realized it was no idle flattery. But I involuntarily
turned my eyes away from many of them, and stood gazing with admiration at
a statue which was incontestably the finest in the gallery. It represented
a young girl whose flowing drapery was marvellous in execution and grace.
Her face, though perfectly beautiful, had an expression of grief and
terror. A lamp stood at her feet, but the light had gone out.

Lorenzo’s pride as an artist had never been gratified with a more lively
or more _naïve_ admiration than mine.

“O Ginevra _mia_!” he exclaimed, “if I have hitherto been considered an
artist, what shall I be when I have you for my model and my judge?”

He then told me that this beautiful statue represented a vestal, but it
lacked a pendant which he had never been able to execute.

“But now,” he added, “I am sure of succeeding. I have long sought a model
for my second vestal, and at last I have found one.”

He put my hair back with one hand, and, examining me attentively with a
thoughtful air, continued, as if talking to himself: “Yes, ... these
faultless features, the noble, dignified air of the head, the profound
expression of the eyes, and the gravity of the mouth, constitute the very
type I want. I could not find a better combination of all I need for my
noble, mysterious vestal—the vigilant, faithful guardian of the sacred
fire. I will begin it to‐morrow.”

“Not here, will you?” said I, glancing uneasily at a Bacchante as unlike
as possible to the statue I had been admiring, and which I could hardly
believe came from the same hand. Lorenzo looked at me with astonishment,
and hardly seemed to comprehend me. He only regarded such things from an
artistic point of view—perhaps a valid excuse, but it was the second time
within two days his uncommon penetration had been at fault. He was really
skilful at reading a passing thought that had not been expressed, and in
penetrating somewhat below the surface, but he was incapable of looking
deeply into a soul, or of following it when it rose to certain heights.
When I clearly made known my wishes, however, he immediately assented to
them, and took me into an adjoining room that was smaller.

“Just as you please,” he said. “You shall come here to sit to me, and I
promise you, Ginevra, that there shall be nothing in this studio except
what you are willing to look at.”



XII.


During my first stay at Naples we made no visits, and our doors were
closed against every one. It was our honeymoon. Lorenzo chose to pass it
entirely alone with me, and I was far from wishing it otherwise. Every one
respected our solitude. Nevertheless, as soon as my arrival was known,
Lorenzo’s friends and acquaintances, with the proverbial courtesy of
Neapolitan society, sent me their cards as a sign of welcome. We looked
them over together in the evening, and I thus learned the names of the
acquaintances I should soon have to make. Lorenzo sometimes laughingly
made comments on them which were more or less flattering and diffuse. One
evening, however, he excited a feeling of surprise and uneasiness. I had,
as usual, taken up the cards that had been left that day, when I saw him
change color at the sight of one, which he snatched hastily from my hand,
and tore into a thousand pieces. The extreme suddenness of the act checked
the question I was on the point of asking. I remained silent, but the name
I had read on the card was graven ineffaceably on my memory in consequence
of the occurrence. I shall never forget it. Lorenzo quickly recovered
himself at seeing my surprise, and told me it was the card of a foreign
lady who had left Naples, and whose call I never need trouble myself to
return. Then taking up the next card, he read aloud:

“Stella d’Oria, Contessa di San Giulio.” “Ah! as for her,” he exclaimed,
“you will like her, I know, and I am willing you should become friends. I
used to consider her a little too perfect to suit me, but I am of a
different opinion when it is a question of my wife....”

The new statue was begun without any delay. I sat to him two or three
hours every day, and in the evening we took long walks on the heights of
Camaldoli, where we were most sure of not meeting any one. He enjoyed my
admiration for the wonderful aspect of nature around us, and took pleasure
in giving me a fresh surprise every day. And he was not yet tired of
entertaining me with the varied events of his past life, and of witnessing
the interest his conversation invariably excited in one who possessed an
intelligent but unstored mind. Complete harmony seemed to reign between
us, and yet more than once during the brief duration of these happy days
it was suddenly disturbed by some discordant note which caused the vague
uneasiness I have already spoken of that seemed like one of those
momentary shooting pains that are the premonitions of some fixed,
incurable disease. In both cases they are experienced a long time before
the cause is understood, and the disease is often far advanced before the
tendency of these symptoms is clear and unmistakable.

The terrible chastisement that followed the gratification of my vanity on
that one occasion had inspired me, as I have said, with a kind of
repugnance, if not terror, to have my face praised. This repugnance on the
part of a young girl who had reason to be proud of her beauty was an
originality which had perhaps given me additional attraction in Lorenzo’s
eyes. Now I was his wife, I could not, of course, expect him to obey me
and keep up the same reserve in our intercourse. And yet how many times,
especially during those long sittings in the studio, I longed to impose
silence on him!... How many times I felt a blush mount to my forehead
when, after arranging my drapery and attitude, unbraiding and putting my
long hair to suit his own fancy, and making me change my position a dozen
times, he would fall into an ecstasy against which my whole soul revolted!
Was this the passion full of mingled tenderness and respect that I should
have been as proud to inspire as to experience? Was this really being
loved as I had longed to be? I sometimes asked myself if his admiration
for the hands, arms, face, and whole form of a statue was of a different
nature. I did not yet go so far as to wonder if some other woman, merely
endowed with greater beauty than I, could not easily rob me of a love that
had so frail a foundation....

Fortunately, we left Naples when the fortnight was at an end, though the
statue was not half finished. Our long _tête‐à‐tête_ had not proved to be
all I had anticipated. I hoped more from the journey, and this hope was
not disappointed. Lorenzo was capable of being the best and most
intelligent of guides everywhere, and such he was during our rapid journey
through Italy, where we only remained long enough in each city to admire
the monuments and museums, though we did not follow the beaten track of
ordinary tourists. Lorenzo thought himself versed in everything relating
to art and history, and yet he did not seem to realize that the church had
also had its _rôle_ in the history of his country. Therefore one side of
Italian history escaped him entirely, and I do not know if, even at Rome,
it had ever occurred to him there had been any change whatever of religion
between the building of the Temple of Vesta and the time when the dome of
Michael Angelo was raised in the air. Both are worthy of admiration in a
different degree, and he regarded them with the same eye. But I did not
then perceive all he left unexpressed. My thoughts and attention were
absorbed by all there was around me to see. I was astonished to find
myself in a world so fruitful in sources of interest that perhaps there is
no one man on earth able to investigate them all equally. One alone,
independent of the rest, might really suffice for the study of a whole
life‐time.

At length we arrived at Paris. Lorenzo, of course, had frequently made
long visits there, and had a host of friends and acquaintances there as
well as everywhere else. A few days after our arrival, I attended a large
ball for the first time since my marriage, and the second in my life. I
heard my name murmured on every side. I was surrounded with homage and
overwhelmed with compliments. I was afterwards informed I had been the
object of universal admiration; that nothing was talked of but the beauty
of the Duchessa di Valenzano and her diamonds; and that a journal
accustomed to give an account of the gayeties of the season had devoted a
long paragraph to the description of my dress and person.

All this was reported to us by a young cousin of Lorenzo’s whose name, in
reality, was Landolfo Landini, though his friends usually called him Lando
Landi. He had lived in Paris several years, and considered himself almost
a Frenchman. He had acquired the stamp of those people who have no aim in
life—as easily imitated as they are unworthy of being so—and had wasted
the natural cleverness and good‐nature which redeemed some of his faults.
He prided himself particularly on using the language of polite society,
and was under the illusion that he completely disguised his nationality.
When he fell in with a fellow‐countryman, however, he allowed his natural
disposition to reassert itself, and indulged in a flow of language that
might have been amusing to some, but to me was frivolous and tiresome,
and, after listening to the account of my grand success the previous
evening with a coolness that seemed to astonish him, I fell into a reverie
that had more than one cause. Why had Lorenzo watched me so attentively
all the evening before? It was the first time we had appeared in society
together, and he was anxious I should create a sensation. He himself had
carefully selected the dress I was to wear, and I was pleased with the
admiration with which he regarded me. On this point I had no hesitation: I
was anxious to please _him_, but not to _please_; and as to the gay world
into which he now introduced me, I entered it with the pleasure and
curiosity of a child, and the lively interest inspired by everything that
is new; but I had become strangely insensible to the pleasure of being
admired, or even the gratification that springs from vanity.

In alluding once more to this fact, I will add that it was the effect of
an exceptional grace; for at no remote period of my youth had my mother
detected the germ of this poisonous plant which was to shed so baleful an
influence over the simplicity and uprightness of my nature.

This plant had been swept away in a single tempestuous night, and a divine
hand had plucked out almost its last root. Was this peculiar grace (the
forerunner of a much greater one I was to receive at a later day) granted
me in answer to the prayer of my dying mother? Or was it to the sincere
repentance that had so overwhelmed my soul? These things are among the
mysteries of divine mercy beyond one’s power to fathom. But it is certain
I was thus preserved from one of the greatest dangers that await most
ladies in the fashionable world. I was very far from being invulnerable on
all points, as the future showed only too plainly; but I was on this.

Nevertheless, I had not been put to so decided a proof before. Never had I
seen or imagined so brilliant a scene. I was delighted and charmed, and
unhesitatingly gave myself up to the enjoyment of the evening; but the
incense lavished on me added nothing to my pleasure. It only produced a
certain timidity that lessened my ease and greatly diminished my
enjoyment. I sincerely think if I had been less beautiful or more simply
dressed—in a word, less admired—I should have been happier and much more
at my ease.

In my embarrassment I was glad to find Lorenzo always near me, and the
more so because I had no idea it was not absolutely the custom. But I
noticed with some surprise that he observed every movement I made with a
strange attention, and listened to every word I uttered when addressed.
Perhaps others did not perceive this, but I understood his quick,
observant glance and the expressive features he knew so well how to
control, and I knew also the art with which he could seem occupied with
what was going on at one end of a room, while his whole attention was
absorbed in what was said at the other. In short, I felt he had not lost
sight of me a single instant the whole evening, and that not one of my
words had escaped him. I wondered if his affection for me was the sole
cause of this constantly‐marked solicitude. This was the primary cause of
my uneasiness. Another arose from the conversation that was actually going
on in my presence, which I listened to with pain, and as a passive
witness; for I could take no part in it.

How could Lorenzo take any pleasure in the trivial details, the unmeaning
gossip, and the doubtful jests of Landolfo Landini?... How could he
question him, reply to what he said, and encourage him to continue? And
yet Lorenzo was a very different person from his cousin. He was very far
from leading an aimless life. He had undertaken long, dangerous journeys
that had entailed great exertion and incredible fatigue, in order to
increase his extensive and varied knowledge. He was capable of continued
application. Talents like his could only be acquired by profound study of
a hundred different subjects, as well as by long, serious, persevering
practice in the art in which he had become such a proficient. One can
hardly conceive of frivolity in an artist, and yet this anomaly exists. I
have since remarked it in others, as I observed it now in Lorenzo—a proof,
doubtless, that to soar above the every‐day world, and keep at such
heights, talent and genius, no more than the soul, should be separated
from God!

The morning at length passed away, and about four o’clock we ordered the
_calèche_ for a long drive. The first hour was devoted to making numerous
purchases. Lando Landi escorted us. Perfect familiarity with the shops of
Paris was one of his specialties. Above all, he knew where to find those
curiosities that are almost objects of art, and which have the gift, so
precious to those who sell them, of inducing people who make the first
purchase to continue indefinitely; for each new object of that class
acquires additional value in the eyes of a connoisseur, and in such
matters, more than any other, _l’appétit vient en mangeant_.(139)

We remained more than an hour in the first shop we stopped at. Lorenzo was
in his element. He was a genuine connoisseur in everything. He examined
bronzes, porcelains, furniture of every epoch, carved wood from all
countries, and old tapestry, with a sure and experienced eye, and the
merchant, seeing whom he had to deal with, brought out of his secret
recesses treasures hidden from the vulgar, and multiplied temptations
Lorenzo seemed very little inclined to resist. As for me, I took a seat
beside the counter, and looked with indifference at the various objects
that were spread out before me, but of which I was quite unable to
perceive the value, which was somewhat conventional. I was a little
astonished at the number and value of Lorenzo’s purchases, but, on the
whole, the business did not interest me much, and I felt glad when it was
at an end.

“Bravo! Lorenzo,” said Lando as soon as we re‐entered the carriage. “You
don’t do things half way. That is the way I like to see other people spend
their money. It consoles me for not having any myself to throw out of the
window.”

“I have got to entirely refurnish my palace in Sicily,” said Lorenzo, “as
well as to decorate my house in Naples, which is quite unworthy of her who
is to live in it.”

“You are jesting, Lorenzo,” said I. “You know very well I think nothing is
lacking.”

“That is the consequence of your extreme youth, my dear cousin,” said
Lando. “Wait a while, and you will find out how much becomes indispensable
to one who has lived in Paris.”

“At all events,” said Lorenzo, “now or never is the time for me to gratify
my fancy. I am just going to housekeeping. I have barely spent a third of
my present fortune, and am perfectly confident as to that I shall have;
for everybody knows that a cause undertaken by Fabrizio dei Monti is a
cause gained.”

At that instant a beautiful lady in a conspicuous dress passed us in an
elegant _calèche_, and the conversation suddenly took a different turn.
Lorenzo silently questioned his cousin with a look, and Lando began to
give him in a low tone some information which an instinctive repugnance
prevented me from listening to....

I began (perhaps unjustly) to conceive a strong dislike to this Cousin
Landolfo, and I imagine he would have been very much astonished had he
guessed with what eye I now looked at his face, generally considered so
handsome. It was of a type often admired out of Italy, because somewhat
different from that foreigners are accustomed to, who have no idea to what
a degree it is common in that country. A dark complexion, rather handsome
eyes, fine teeth, and curly black hair, formed in my eyes a most
unpleasing combination, and, without knowing a word they were saying, I
felt positively certain he had never in his life uttered a syllable I
should think worth listening to.

At length we left the boulevards, drove through the Champs Elysées, and at
last found ourselves in the shade of the Bois de Boulogne. While my two
companions were conversing together in a low tone, I abandoned myself to
the pleasure of being in a cool place where I could breathe more freely;
for, unaccustomed to going out during the middle of the day in summer, the
heat had seemed overpowering. Apart from this, there was nothing here to
strike a person accustomed to the loveliest scenery in the world. Unused
as I was to Parisian life, the charm of which often produces an impression
that effaces all others, the things I saw had no other prestige in my eyes
than what they were in themselves. Viewed in this light, the museums,
churches, and palaces seemed less grand and magnificent than those we had
seen before, and the promenades less picturesque and less varied. I missed
particularly the lovely vistas which everywhere in Italy form the
background of the picture, and attract the eye, and elevate the mind to
something higher than the mere treasures of history and art that have
accumulated in all old Italian cities.

And yet it cannot be denied that Paris has the power of making itself
preferred to any other place in the world. It speaks a different language
to every individual, and is comprehended by all. It is filled with
treasures of every kind, and has wherewithal to gratify every taste
indiscriminately, from that which is evil in its vilest form to an excess
of goodness amounting to sublimity; from the most refined extravagance of
fashion to the extreme renunciation of charity; and from pleasure in its
most dangerous aspect to piety in its most perfect manifestations. It
flatters vanity and vice more than would be dared anywhere else, and yet
it prides itself on being able to produce examples of goodness,
devotedness, and humility that are almost unparalleled. In a word, every
one, for a different reason, feels more at home there than anywhere else
in the world. He who once learns to love Paris finds it difficult to like
any other city as well; and he who has lived there finds it hard to resign
himself to live in any other place. It is the one city on earth that has
been able to vie with Rome in the honor of being the home of all
nations....

To Be Continued.




The Rock Of Rest.


S. MATTHEW xvi. 18.

Tossed on many a wave of doctrine,
  Restless, weary, ill at ease
With beliefs that quiet others,
  But as vague to me as these;
I have done with idly chasing
  Phantom lights, that rise and fall;
Drift no more with drifting doctrines—
  Grown indifferent to them all!

Shall I long regret the visions
  Of a rest so inly wooed?
Shall I long go on deploring
  Creeds, that but opinions proved?
Quenched be every weak emotion!
  Bring my future weal or woe,
Weal nor woe shall blight or bless me—
  Faith, nor creed, shall move me now!

Murmuring thus, there came a whisper
  From the Friend who knew me best:
“Seek the rock on which I builded:
  On that rock alone is rest.”
Suddenly, with light supernal,
  Faith, the higher reason, came,
And my foot touched base eternal—
  Benedictions on his name!

R. S. W.

BRUSSELS, BELGIUM.




Anglican Orders. II.


The Validity Of The Edwardine Rite.

Before entering upon the theology of the question, we must meet an initial
objection of Anglicans to our attempting to criticise the Edwardine rite.
They insist that the question has been settled long ago, and in their
favor, by no less an authority than the Holy See and its legate, Cardinal
Pole. The cardinal, they say, in accordance with instructions from Rome,
admitted all the schismatical bishops and clergy, who were not
irreconcilables, in the orders they had received in schism, whether
according to the Pontifical or according to the Edwardine rite. Great
stress has been laid upon this by Anglican controversialists from Bramhall
down to Mr. Haddan; and certainly, if it be a true statement of the case,
the value of the objection can scarcely be overrated. Its truth must be
decided by an appeal to the Papal briefs and to the official acts of the
legate.

The bull of March 8, 1553‐4, granting full legatine faculties to Pole,
authorizes him to deal with two classes of the bishops and clergy—viz., of
the clergy, those who have not received orders at all, and those who have
received them ill; that is to say, orders null and orders irregular
(ordines quos nunquam, aut male susceperunt). The bishops, in like manner,
who have received cathedral churches from Henry or Edward are divided into
those on whom “the gift of consecration has been heretofore conferred,”
and “those on whom it is not yet conferred” (munere consecrationis eis
hactenus impenso vel si illud eis nondum impensum exstiterit). The cases
in which the ordination or consecration had been validly though
irregularly conferred are also described as “received from heretical or
schismatical bishops, or in other respects unduly” (quod iis ab episcopis
hæreticis et schismaticis aut alias minus rite et non servatâ formâ
ecclesiæ consuetâ impensum fuit). By these last words power is given “to
consider cases in which the ancient form of the sacrament had not been
observed, and, if the form used was sufficient for validity, to admit it
as such, and to admit a person ordained in such a manner to exercise the
orders so received.”

Canon Estcourt shows that the “minus rite” cannot be intended to
_designate_, as Mr. Haddan and others have maintained, the Edwardine
orders. He appeals to the dispensations granted to no less than eight
bishops, all ordained according to the Pontifical in Henry VIII.’s time,
wherein their orders are referred to as received “ab episcopis hæreticis
et schismaticis aut alias _minus rite_.”

In the faculties granted by Pole to his bishops for the absolution and
rehabilitation of priests, he carefully explains their limitation to cases
in which “the form and intention of the church have been preserved.” Thus
it is clear “that though the cardinal had power to recognize ordinations
in which some departure had been made from the accustomed form, yet that,
on examination, he found no other form in use which could be admitted by
the church as valid.” In the same faculties he permits the ordination, if
they are otherwise fit, of those whose orders are “null.” He describes
them as persons holding benefices without being ordained.

In 1554, Bonner, Bishop of Bath and Wells, gave a commission to his vicar‐
general “to deal with married laics who, in pretence and under color of
priestly orders, had rashly and unlawfully mingled themselves in
ecclesiastical rights, and had obtained _de facto_ parochial churches with
cure of souls and ecclesiastical dignities, against the sacred sanctions
of the canons and ecclesiastical rights, and to deprive and remove them
from the said churches and dignities.” It is impossible to conjecture who
else these unordained beneficiaries can be, if they are not the Edwardine
clergy.

Anglicans, on the other hand, have made a great deal of a certain
testimonial letter granted by Bonner to Scory, which speaks of the
latter’s sin and repentance, and of his subsequent rehabilitation by
Bonner, and restoration to the public exercise of the ecclesiastical
ministry within the diocese of London. As Scory is spoken of as “our
confrère, lately Bishop of Chichester,” it is urged that the ministry to
the exercise of which he was restored must have been that of a bishop.
Canon Estcourt, after pointing out certain grounds for suspecting the
authenticity of this letter, remarks that Bonner’s faculties only extended
to the case of priests, “so that Scory must have acknowledged the nullity
of his consecration, in order to enable Bonner to deal with him at all”;
and, after all, “the letter does no more than enable him to celebrate Mass
in churches within the diocese of London”—in fact, to exercise that
office, and that office only, which he had received “servatâ formâ et
intentione ecclesiæ.” So much for the Holy See’s approval of the Edwardine
orders.

Anglicans have tried to make out a charge of inconsistency against the
Holy See, on the ground that it did not recognize the episcopate of
Ridley, Latimer, and Ferrer—who were all three supposed to have been
consecrated according to the Roman Pontifical—but degraded them from the
priesthood and inferior orders only. Canon Estcourt admits that Ferrer was
treated merely as a priest, but he shows that his consecration had been a
medley rite, in which the order of the Pontifical was not followed. As to
Latimer, he remarks that there is no pretence for saying that he was not
degraded from the episcopate; and that, with regard to Ridley, the great
weight of authority makes for his having been degraded from the
episcopate. Cardinal Pole, in his commission, ordered that both Ridley and
Latimer should be degraded “from their promotion and dignity of bishops,
priests, and all other ecclesiastical orders.” The Bishop of Lincoln, in
his exhortation to Ridley, says: “You were made a bishop according to our
laws.” Heylin says that they were both degraded from the episcopate. The
only authority for the contrary opinion is Foxe, who makes the acting
commissioner Brookes, Bishop of Gloucester, conclude an address to Ridley
thus: “We take you for no bishop, and therefore we will the sooner have
done with you.” Foxe then proceeds to describe the actual ceremony as a
degradation from the priesthood. Canon Estcourt’s reviewer in the _Dublin
Review_ of July, 1873, maintains that Foxe was right. The reviewer thinks
that Ridley and Latimer were not degraded from the episcopate, because the
_status episcopalis_ was not recognized in those who, though _validly_
consecrated, had not received the Papal confirmation. Upon this we remark,
1st, that the ceremonies of degradation came into use when it was a very
common opinion in the church that degradation destroyed the _potestas
ordinis_. 2. That the form of degradation, in so many words, expresses the
taking away the _potestas ordinis_—“amovemus a te,” “tollemus tibi,”
“potestatem offerendi,” “potestatem consecrandi”—and this in
contradistinction to another form of perpetual suspension—“ab executione
potestatis.” The ceremony aims at effecting the destruction of orders, so
far as this is possible. It may be called a “destruction of orders,” in
the same sense that mortal sin is called the crucifixion of Christ anew.
Indeed, in one place, the clause, “quantum in nobis est,” is introduced.
3. Degradation does not depend upon previous confirmation; for Innocent
II. (1139) thus deals with those who had been consecrated bishops by the
antipope Peter Leo, who therefore assuredly had never been confirmed or
acknowledged in any way by the pope. After exclaiming, “Quoscunque
exaltaverat degradamus,” etc., etc., “he violently wrested their pastoral
staffs from their hands, and ignominiously tore from their shoulders the
pontifical palls in which their high dignity resides. Their rings, too,
which express their espousals with the church, showing them no mercy, he
drew off.”(140) If the Bishop of Gloucester really acted as Foxe
describes, he did so on his own responsibility, and in the teeth of
ecclesiastical precedent.

Perhaps the most important and interesting portion of Canon Estcourt’s
book is that in which he discusses the theological value of the Edwardine
form. It is not merely of controversial importance, but is really
calculated to throw light upon the theology of orders, which, as a
Catholic contemporary well observes, is still in course of formation.

Canon Estcourt, following Benedict XIV., _De Syn. Dioc._, lib. viii. cap.
10, maintains, as the more probable opinion, 1, that, in the case of the
priesthood, the second imposition of hands, with the prayer for the
infusion “of the virtue of the sacerdotal grace,” is all that is really
necessary for validity; although, in practice, we of the West must ordain
again _sub conditione_, if the tradition of the instruments has been
omitted. 2. That in the case of priests, the third imposition of hands,
with the words, “Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins thou dost remit, they
are remitted unto them; and whose sins thou retainest, they are retained,”
is not essential, and, if omitted, is to be supplied without repeating the
rest. 3. That as to the episcopate, the “Accipe Spiritum Sanctum,” with
the imposition of hands, is all that is essential; and, finally, he
allows, in deference to the Holy Office (_vide infra_), that the
form—_i.e._, the prayer immediately accompanying the imposition of
hands—need not express the specific character or work of the order
conferred, as, for instance, the Holy Sacrifice in the ordination of a
priest.

Consistently with these principles, Canon Estcourt admits that, _so far as
words go_, “Receive the Holy Ghost” is a sufficient form both for the
episcopate and the priesthood. As regards the episcopate, this has been
long a common opinion. As regards the priesthood, the Sacred Congregation
of the Inquisition, in 1704, decided that certain Abyssinians had been
validly ordained priests by imposition of hands and the words, “Accipe
Spiritum Sanctum.” From this it follows that the Anglican forms for
ordaining priests and bishops are, _so far as words go_, sufficient. They
are as follows, from 1549 to 1662, for the priesthood: “Receive the Holy
Ghost; whose sins thou dost forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins
thou dost retain, they are retained; and be thou a faithful dispenser of
the word of God and of his holy sacraments, in the name of the Father,
etc.” For the episcopate: “Take the Holy Ghost, and remember that thou
stir up the grace of God which is in thee by imposition of hands; for God
hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power and love and
soberness.” In 1662, certain changes were introduced by the High Church
party. In the form for the priesthood, after the words “Holy Ghost” was
added, “for the office and work of a priest in the church of God, now
committed unto thee by the imposition of our hands.” For the form of the
episcopate was substituted, “Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and
work of a bishop in the church of God, now committed unto thee by the
imposition of our hands, in the name of the Father, etc.”

Of course the value of Anglican orders “secundum formam” must depend upon
the value of the form as it originally stood. The subsequent alterations
are important as marking, 1st, the dissatisfaction of the High Church
party with the forms upon which their orders depended; 2d, the low
theological standard which satisfied them, after all.

So far as the material words of the Edwardine forms go, they are
sufficient—_i.e._, they are words capable of being used in a sense in
which they would be sufficient—but the words are ambiguous. The form of
ordination, although it need not express, must signify or mean, the
essential idea of the order. Where it does not carry its meaning on the
face of it, we must look for it in the rite and liturgy of which it forms
a part. This is not an appeal to the mere subjective intention of the
minister, but to the objective meaning of the words. Upon this principle
we must, in order to get at the value of the Anglican forms, discover,
1st, by an examination of the various admittedly valid rites of
ordination, what such words should mean; 2d, by an examination of the
Anglican rite, what these words, in the position which they occupy in that
rite, do or do not mean.

Canon Estcourt examines the numerous rites which the Roman Church
acknowledges to be valid, whether fallen out of use, and only to be found
in the pages of ancient sacramentaries, or still living and operative, in
East or West, among Catholics or among those who have separated from
Catholic unity. He finds three qualities in which they all unite: 1st, a
recognition of the divine vocation or election of the ordained; 2d, a
recognition of the “virtus sacramentalis” of orders, as something quite
distinct from and beyond the grace which is also given to the ordained to
acquit himself worthily in the duties of his calling; 3d, a constant
recognition of, and appeal to, the main scope and duty of orders—the
offering of the Holy Sacrifice.

Canon Estcourt next proceeds to examine the Anglican liturgy and ordinal
with special reference to these three points: 1. The divine election. 2.
The sacramental virtue. 3. The Holy Sacrifice. And he finds that both the
liturgy and the ordinal are the result of a deliberate manipulation of the
ancient Catholic ritual previously in use, in order to the exclusion of
these three points, which contain the essential idea of holy orders.

Ordination in the Anglical ritual no longer appeals to a divine election,
of which it is the expression and the fulfilment. It is merely the public
expression of the approval of the authorities of church and state. For the
“virtus sacramentalis” it has substituted a mere _grâce d’état_. From this
it only naturally follows that episcopal ordination cannot be of
indispensable necessity, or more than a matter of regulation and propriety
which, in an emergency, may be abrogated. This is the express teaching of
many of the early Anglican reformers. Even when engaged in defending their
episcopal succession, they are careful to say that they do not regard it
as indispensable. Hooker, who is in many respects so much more orthodox
than his predecessors and contemporaries, allows “that there may be
sometimes very just and sufficient reason to allow ordination to be made
without a bishop.”

Canon Estcourt prints considerable portions of the Anglican ordinal and
liturgy in parallel columns, with the corresponding text of the Sarum and
Exeter pontificals and missals. We see with what an unerring sacrilegious
instinct everything bearing upon the Holy Sacrifice, and even upon the
Real Presence, is either cut out or perverted.

As regards the Second Book of 1552, it is clear that it was the work of
sacramentarians who disbelieved in the Real Presence in any sense, and was
undertaken for the express purpose of purging the ritual of what previous
handling had still allowed it to retain of the impress of that Presence.
Mr. Cardwell, in his comparison of the “Two Books of Edward VI.,” pref.
xxvii., admits that Cox and Taylor, who were probably the working members
of the commission, appear to have looked upon the oblation of the
Eucharist as consisting merely of “prayer, thanksgiving, and the
remembrance of our Saviour’s passion.” Of Cranmer, the most influential
member of the commission, we are told that “about a year after the
publication of King Edward’s First Book, Archbishop Cranmer abandoned his
belief in the Real Presence—a change which seems to have been very
acceptable to the young king and his favorites.”(141) In the revision of
1662, an apparent attempt was made to attain to the expression of a higher
doctrine, both as regards orders and the Holy Eucharist; but even if the
expressions introduced were in themselves adequate, as Canon Estcourt
fairly shows they were not, of what avail could have been so tardy a
restoration? But if we examine these restorations and emendations, we can
hardly avoid coming to the conclusion that they were not really dictated
by any conception of, or aspiration after, a higher doctrine, but were the
genuine fruits of a conservative reaction fired by controversial pique.
The First Book substituted for the Catholic faith a hazy Lutheranism; the
Second Book for this again a hazy sacramentarianism; and the revision of
1662, a hazy compound of the two, with the addition of a Catholic phrase
or so in order to support claims to a wider sweep of church authority.
Thus the revisers of 1662 introduced the words “priest” and “bishop” into
the ordination form, whilst doing absolutely nothing toward restoring the
idea of sacrifice to the liturgy.

But, it may be urged, there is one portion of the Anglican form for making
priests which expresses the Catholic doctrine of priestly virtue—the power
of forgiving sins. Unfortunately for Anglicans, whatever force may lie in
this expression—and all precedents are against its being regarded as a
sufficient form—is neutralized by the Lutheran new form of absolution
which had been introduced in addition to the two Catholic forms. At best,
one is left in doubt whether the mighty words have not shrivelled into a
Lutheran sense, in which sins are not forgiven, but the forgiveness of sin
is merely declared.

It is impossible to do justice in a review to the exhaustive completeness
of Canon Estcourt’s treatment of this portion of his subject. His
conspectus of the Catholic missals and the different editions of the _Book
of Common Prayer_ in parallel columns enables us, as it were, to detect
the pulsations of each several heresy, and to appreciate its share in what
may be called the passion of the Catholic liturgy in England. A quotation
from each of his parallels may serve as examples of, 1st, the action of
the Lutheran First Book upon the missal; 2d, the Zuinglian Second Book
upon the First Book; 3d, the compromise of 1662.

The Sarum Missal.

We thy servants, and likewise thy holy people, do offer to thy excellent
Majesty, of thy gifts and bounties, a pure victim, a holy victim, the holy
bread of eternal life, and the chalice of everlasting salvation.

The Book Of Common Prayer, 1549.

We, thy humble servants, do celebrate and make here before thy divine
Majesty, with these thy holy gifts, the memorial which thy Son hath willed
us to make.

1549.

He hath left us in those holy mysteries, as a public pledge of his love,
and a continual remembrance of the same, his own blessed body and precious
blood for us to feed upon spiritually, to our great and endless comfort.

1552, Untouched In 1662.

He hath instituted and ordained holy mysteries, as pledges of his love,
and for a continual remembrance of his death, to our great and endless
comfort.

The Sarum Missal.

“The body of our Lord Jesus Christ [1549: which was given for thee]
preserve thy body and thy soul unto everlasting life.”

1552.

“Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on
him in thy heart with thanksgiving.”

(This form was substituted for that of 1549, in 1552, and was appended to
it in 1662.)

Canon Estcourt’s argument against the validity of Anglican orders is no
argument from lack of sufficient intention on the part of Anglicans.
Neither do we think that such an argument could be maintained, in
accordance with the commonly‐accepted principles of theology. If it is a
sufficient intention for valid baptism to intend to administer the form of
Christian initiation, it is sufficient, in the case of orders, to intend
to administer the form of Christian ordination, although the ceremony in
either case may be regarded as merely an external form without any
intrinsic value. It is only as a witness to the sense of the form that the
intention of Anglicans is brought into court; and it is not the intention
with which they ordain at which we demur, but the intention with which
they have altered the ordination service and liturgy—_i.e._, the form of
ordination and its context. Had these alterations been merely the result
of an antiquarian leaning towards a more primitive though less perfect
utterance of the same truth, or of a puritanic craving after simplicity,
the irreverence would have been of the extremest kind, but still there
would have been no grounds for disputing the orthodox sense, and so the
validity of the form. But, on the contrary, the very object of the
alterations, as Canon Estcourt has shown, was the elimination of the
orthodox doctrines of priesthood and sacrifice, and therefore of the
significance upon which the validity of the form depends.

The doubts which should beset the minds of honest Anglicans on the subject
of their orders, if they have the least scruple as to the orthodoxy of
their position, are simply overwhelming. If they turn to the early church,
they find that there are at least as many precedents and authorities for
regarding as null the ordinations of heretics and schismatics as for
accepting them. Morinus’ opinion is that such ordinations are invalid,
except where the church has thought fit to dispense with the impediment;
and Morinus is a genuine student of antiquity, and no mere
controversialist. True it is Anglicans may appeal to what is undeniably
the more common doctrine in the Roman Church—viz., that such ordinations
are valid—but then she unflinchingly condemns Anglicans, whereas she has
never condemned Morinus. It is nothing to the purpose to say that the
practice of the church prevents her using Morinus’ opinion against
Anglicans—which is begging the question against Morinus; the point is, Can
Anglicans escape using it against themselves? Again, when they direct
their attention to the special facts of their own history, their view is
to the last degree discouraging. Their latest antagonist, Canon Estcourt,
has notoriously given up to them every point to which they could make the
remotest claim, and has broken and thrown away every weapon to which the
least exception could be taken; and yet it has come to this: that their
only title to orders is a succession probably broken by the non‐
consecration of Barlow, and an ambiguous form which, when read in the
light of their mutilated ordinal and liturgy, is unlike any that has been
accepted as even probably adequate either by East or West.

Even if Anglicans could find their identical form, as far as words go, in
approved ordinals, they could not argue from this the sufficiency of their
own form. Mutilation and involution, although they contract within the
same span, can never be identical. You might as well pretend that there is
no difference between a stamen from which you have plucked the leaves and
an undeveloped bud.

It is true that originally different portions of the church were allowed,
in regard to orders, to give expression to the same truth in various forms
with various degrees of explicitness; but this can afford no precedent to
an individual church for mutilating a common form in order to deny a
common truth.

The Abyssinian Decision.

We cannot conclude our review without noticing an important criticism made
upon our author in the shape of a letter to the _Month_, November‐
December, 1873, by the Rev. F. Jones, S.J. F. Jones, whilst expressing his
thorough concurrence with Canon Estcourt in every other particular, thinks
that he has attached an undue force to the decision of the holy office
upon Abyssinian orders.

Canon Estcourt has understood the Sacred Congregation of the Inquisition,
in their decree in 1704, to have ruled that the form, “Accipe Spiritum
Sanctum,” understood in the sense of the Abyssinian liturgical books, is
valid for the priesthood, although, in the particular case, no further
expression is given to this sense, at least no expression within the
limits of the form strictly so called—_i.e._, the verbal formula
synchronous with the matter. The decree which he so understands is as
follows:

Question: “The ordainer passed hurriedly along a line of deacons, laying
his hands upon the head of each, and saying, ‘Accipe Spiritum Sanctum’;
are they validly ordained _in tal modo e forma_, and admissible to the
exercise of their orders?” Answer: “The ordination of a priest with the
imposition of hands and utterance of the form as in the question is
undoubtedly valid.”

F. Jones, whilst allowing that Canon Estcourt’s interpretation is the
natural one according to ordinary canons of criticism, insists that the
decree, “when interpreted in the light of certain rules which arise out of
what is called the _stylus curiæ_,” asserts, indeed, the sufficiency of
the imposition of hands as matter, when used with the form, but does not
define the sufficiency of the particular form, “Accipe Spiritum Sanctum.”

The rules in question are as follows: 1. The meaning of the answer depends
upon the meaning of the _dubium_. 2. Nothing but what is directly stated
is decided. 3. “If there is anything in the wording of a decision which
appears inconsistent with the teaching of an approved body of
theologians—such teaching as amounts to a true theological probability—the
decision is to be interpreted so as to leave such teaching intact, unless
the decision should itself show that it intended to condemn that teaching,
and to take away that probability.” 4. Such decisions are formed on the
presumption that every point except the one in question is correct, on the
maxim, “Standum est pro valore actûs.” 5. When the validity of an
ordination is the subject‐matter of a decision, it must be assumed that
the decision has been made after an inspection of the ordinal. 6. “It is
hardly safe to allege the authority of a decision (I speak merely of a
curial decision), particularly when the details of the case are but
imperfectly known to us, without having ascertained the sense in which,
after its promulgation, it was understood by those who were most competent
to measure its importance.” We shall examine these rules when we come to
consider the worth of F. Jones’ application of them to the case in hand.
But first it will be well to see what effect the elimination of the
Abyssinian decision would have upon Canon Estcourt’s controversial
position.

Pp. 158‐163. Canon Estcourt considers various objections made by Catholic
controversialists to the Anglican form of the priesthood. He is
considering the question of the form in its strict sense—viz., that
portion of the ordination formulary which is synchronous with the matter,
whether this last consist in the tradition of the instruments or in the
imposition of hands. One objection urged by Lequien, amongst others, is
grounded upon the very common doctrine that the form of priestly
ordination must express the principal effect of the sacrament of order by
making mention of the priesthood in relation to the sacrifice, which is
its principal object. Now, if, as F. Jones suggests was the case, the
unmutilated Coptic rite was in use in Abyssinia up to 1704, and the
examples given by Ludolf and Monsignor Beb are merely imperfect copies;
and if no decision as to the form was given in 1704, then, so far as
anything has been shown to the contrary, Lequien’s objection holds good
that no approved form for the priesthood fails to make an appeal to the
Holy Sacrifice.

And now as regards F. Jones’ rules for interpreting the “stylus curiæ,”
and their application to the Abyssinian decision. We have no criticism to
make upon Rules 1 and 2. They are sufficiently obvious even to a non‐
expert. Rule 3 cannot, we think, be admitted without qualification. It is
no doubt an important principle that the presumption is in favor of an
interpretation which leaves intact a probable opinion, supposing that this
is not the formal subject of the decision; but we must not do violence to
the natural sense of words, and it is quite possible that such a decision
might completely evacuate the probability of an opinion of which it took
no direct cognizance whatever. The Council of Florence did not directly
intend to condemn the opinion requiring as absolutely necessary the
tradition of the instruments, yet effectively it has done so. As to Rule
4, “Standum est pro valore actûs,” its application to the case before us
must depend upon whether the course indicated is equivalent to the
introduction of a new “actus.” To ask, as the dubium does, concerning the
validity of “tal modo e forma,” implies that this is given in its
integrity. In the Abyssinian case, it was a question whether certain
persons were to be allowed to say Mass and perform other priestly
functions, and the Sacred Congregation allowed them. As to Rule 5, no
doubt an inspection of the ordinals is to be presumed; but here the very
contention of the questioner is that the ordinal had not been followed.
Moreover, there was ample evidence, in the sacred books quoted by Ludolf
and Monsignor Beb, accessible to the Sacred Congregation, and which,
according to F. Jones’ principle, we may assume it had before it, that in
Abyssinian hands the Coptic ritual had been seriously tampered with. The
translation from the Abyssinian, as given by the above‐named writers, is
certainly not an imperfect version of the Coptic, but a deliberate
compilation from the Coptic form and that of the apostolic constitutions,
which would hardly have been made except for ritual purposes.

If we may accept the earliest and most precise evidence as to actual
practice in Abyssinia—that of the missionary Francis Alvarez (1520), the
one prayer used by the Abuna, with the imposition of hands, is not the
form “Respice,” but, in the Coptic tongue, the prayer “Divina gratia quæ
infirma sanat.”(142) But these words, as Canon Estcourt points out, p.
181, “in the _Coptic_ and Jacobite rites, are said by the archdeacon or
one of the assisting bishops. In the Nestorian and ancient Greek, they are
said by the bishop without imposing his hands; and only in the modern
Greek, the Maronite, and the Armenian are they united with the imposition
of hands.” This looks as if the Abyssinian ritual was a complete medley.

This view is borne out by F. Godigno, S.J. (_De Abyssin. Rebus_, p. 224),
who tells us that the Jesuit Patriarch of Abyssinia, Oviedo, as long as he
lived in Æthiopia, always doubted very much, and with good reason, if the
Abyssinian priests had been duly and lawfully ordained, inasmuch as the
forms of consecration used by the Abuna _were so uncertain that they
seemed to have been corrupted_. On which account, in those matters which
belong to orders, and which require in the minister a real character, he
never could persuade himself to use their offices, lest haply the
sacraments should be rendered void.

F. Jones thinks that Assemani would certainly have noticed these
corruptions, had they existed, in his _Controversia Coptica_, composed for
the information of Propaganda in 1731. But Assemani was not called upon to
consider the corruptions of Abyssinia; for, as he tells us in his preface,
the occasion of his writing was the conversion of two Egyptian monks of
the Alexandrian Church, of whose reordination there was question.

As to Rule 6, obviously nothing can be more important than the estimate of
a decision expressed by contemporary theologians; but it is very easy to
misinterpret their silence. In his defence of the Coptic rite, urges F.
Jones, Assemani ought to have quoted the authorization of a form which _à
fortiori_ authorized the Coptic. We reply that Assemani had no lack of far
more obvious and splendid instances of the recognition of the Coptic rite;
that he had no need of such indirect support. The examination of the
Abyssinian monk Tecla Maria, in 1594, sufficiently shows that it was
impossible to judge of Abyssinian ordinations by the Coptic rite. Assemani
himself acknowledges, p. 227, that either Tecla Maria’s memory failed him,
or his ordainers must have been “poco pratici del rito Coptico o
l’avessero in qualche parte alterato.” F. Godigno (l. c.) says that the
reason of Tecla Maria’s reordination was the corruption of the rite. On
the other hand, it is clearly a great exaggeration to say that the
missionaries made nothing of Abyssinian orders, and that the motive of
reordination was the non‐tradition of the instruments. Of John Bermudes,
the first of the Jesuit patriarchs, Ludolf (pars. ii. p. 473) tells us
that he (Bermudes) has recorded in so many words, that he received all the
sacred orders, including the episcopate, with right of succession to the
patriarchate, from the Abuna Mark, under condition that the pope would
confirm it, and that the pope confirmed and ratified all Mark’s acts.
Again, the Portuguese De Francia, one of the negotiators for the Jesuits,
tells the Abyssinian king that he had been taught that, if he is in danger
of death, and cannot get a Catholic priest, he must ask the Abyssinians
for communion.(143)

Certainly, this Abyssinian decision has not as yet made much mark in
theology. Canon Estcourt is able to mention one work in which it occurs—a
certain edition of the theology of Antoine, a Jesuit, and Prefect of
Propaganda under Benedict XIV. But then there is a vast technical
difference, anyhow, between a decision taking the shape of a practical
rule of procedure and a speculative definition. For more than a century
after the Council of Florence, its recognition of Greek orders had no
perceptible influence upon the language of theologians concerning the
matter of the priesthood. It takes time to translate from the language of
action into that of speculation; but who can deny that in any fair
controversy such action must be discounted.

It remains to be determined whether, everything considered, the decision
of the Sacred Office admits of F. Jones’ interpretation; whether the
dubium can be understood, as he suggests (p. 456), to turn exclusively
upon these two points: the non‐tradition of the instruments and the
deviation from the Coptic rite which prescribes that the bishop’s hands
should be imposed upon each _ordinandus_ during the whole of the form
Respice, instead of during the one phrase, “Repleeum Spiritu Sancto,”
which F. Jones thinks the missionaries paraphrased by “Accipe Spiritum
Sanctum.” Now, we must say that it is hardly probable that in 1704 the
missionaries should be seriously exercised about the non‐tradition of the
instruments. Neither is it likely that they should have proposed, in the
same breath, the two difficulties suggested by F. Jones; for why should
deviation from a rite, the substantial validity of which they doubted, be
a difficulty? They ask about the validity of a form and a manner of
imposing hands, which they describe “talmo do e forma.” There may have
been other prayers used in the service from the Coptic ordinal and
liturgy, but the dubium excludes them from “tal forma.”

F. Jones’ notion that the “Accipe Spiritum Sanctum” is a mistranslation of
the Coptic “Reple eum Spiritu Sancto”—which is not found in the Abyssinian
version—is, we think, quite untenable. No distinction was more thoroughly
appreciated on both sides than that between an imperative and a precatory
form. The Patriarch of the Maronites, in 1572, informs the pope: “In our
Pontifical, the orders are conferred without a form by way of
prayer.”(144) In 1860, the missionaries inform the Sacred Congregation
“that the Monophysites believe the essence of ordination consists in the
expiration (_insuflazione_) the ordainer makes in the act of saying,
‘Accipe Spiritum Sanctum.’ ”(145) Amongst the various deviations from the
Coptic rite which Assemani notes in the evidence of Tecla Maria, the
Abyssinian says of his ordainer, “Insufflavit in faciem meam.” This
“insufflatio” almost implies an imperative form, and so far isolates the
words from any precatory formularies that may precede and follow them.
Most probably this form was obtained from the missionaries with whom the
Abyssinians had been so long in intercourse.

Doubtless the Sacred Congregation did not sanction the form “Accipe
Spiritum Sanctum” taken by itself simply, but specificated in the sense of
the Abyssinian liturgy; but this is exactly Canon Estcourt’s contention
against Anglicans.

In spite of F. Jones’ shrewd and interesting observations, we are of
opinion that Canon Estcourt’s appreciation of the Abyssinian decision is
the true one. At any rate, his interpretation is sufficiently probable to
make it most important to show that, even so understood, it cannot
sanction Anglican orders.

Postscriptum

Since the above was written, the discussion has been continued in the
_Month_ by an answer from Canon Estcourt in January, and an elaborate
rejoinder by F. Jones in February. Something of what we have written has
been anticipated; but, on the whole, we have thought it better to leave
our article as it stands, and content ourselves with appending such
further remarks as may seem called for.

F. Jones, in his second letter, insists that Canon Estcourt has mistaken
what the missionaries proposed as a solitary deviation from a well‐known
and approved rite for the whole form used on the occasion. He proceeds to
support his position by italicizing the concluding words of the answer of
the Holy Office allowing the missionaries to admit the person so ordained
“to the exercise of his orders _according to the rite, approved and
expurgated, in which he was ordained_.” “The Holy Office, then,” he
argues, “did not suppose that the Abyssinians were ordained with only the
words, ‘Accipe Spiritum Sanctum,’ but presumed that some rite, and that an
_approved_ rite, had been followed.”

Now, it is quite certain that the schismatical Abuna did not make use of a
rite expurgated and approved by the Holy See; therefore the word “rite”
must refer to the sacerdotal rite to the exercise of which the person in
question was ordained, which rite he might use in its expurgated and
approved form; but whether the bare words, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, were
used, or the fuller Abyssinian or Coptic forms, the priest would have been
ordained in that rite with a view to the exercise of which he had been
ordained.

As to the question whether the Æthiopic liturgy, as distinct from the
Coptic, was approved, we cannot admit that a conclusion in the negative
can be drawn from the passage F. Jones quotes from the encyclical of
Benedict XIV. The pope lays down that the Oriental churches in communion
with Rome consist of four rites—Greek, Armenian, Syrian, and Coptic; but
he is clearly only giving general heads. The Æthiopic, if approved, might
well have been included under the Coptic. The Melchite and Chaldaic
liturgies are approved; but in this enumeration they are not distinguished
from the Syrian and the Greek, of which they are respectively slight
variations. Further on in this encyclical, the pope says that “Greeks,
Maronites, Armenians, Copts, and Melchites had been given churches in
Rome, in order that they may perform their sacred offices each according
to his rite.” We know that the Abyssinians also had a church in Rome,
where we may assume that they were allowed the same privilege. The fact
that an expurgated edition of the Æthiopic liturgy was brought out in Rome
in 1549 goes some way to show that the liturgy was approved.(146) This was
the first of the Oriental liturgies published in Rome, and may be found in
various editions of the _Bibliotheca Patrum_ (Paris, 1624, tom. vi.),
together with the Æthiopic rite of baptism and confirmation. This rite of
confirmation affords a curious example of the unprincipled variations of
Æthiopic ritual. It is almost the same as the Coptic rite published by
Assemani, to which F. Jones refers, but it carefully eliminates the direct
form, “Accipe Spiritum Sanctum,” wherever it occurs in the Coptic.

We are inclined to believe that the Abuna sometimes ordained in the
Coptic, sometimes in the Abyssinian, tongue; but we must confess that the
only direct testimony we have met with on this point is in favor of the
Coptic. Still, whatever was the language used, there is ample evidence to
show that the Abyssinians were in the habit of materially diverging from
the Coptic ordinal. To the testimonies of Oviedo and Alvarez, already
quoted, we may add that of F. Soller. Referring to F. Bernat’s
correspondence, he says that that father discusses “the different rite of
ordination and other points of difference between the Copts and
Abyssinians.”(147)

We submit that the Holy Office had no grounds for assuming the use of the
Coptic, or, indeed, of any specific ritual in the case brought before
them.




On The Wing. A Southern Flight. V.


“Les Dieux étaient alors si voisins de la terre
Qu’ils y venaient souvent avec ou sans mystère.”(148)

“There is no sense of desolation greater than that produced by the sight
of a dismantled palace and a deserted garden.” These were the words with
which Don Emidio broke a long and somewhat sad silence which had fallen on
our little party the day we went to Portici.

It is a long drive of four miles on the rough pavement of huge slabs
common to Naples and its environs. We passed over the bridge where S.
Januarius had gone forth with cross and banners, incense and choristers,
to meet the torrents of burning lava from Mount Vesuvius, and arrest the
destruction of the city by prayer. It made me shudder to think how very
near that destruction we had then been. For, of course, if the lava had
once gone so far, there was no natural reason why it should not do so
again, and even pass on further still. That bridge is now hardly outside
the town. Indeed, town succeeds town, and the whole way from Naples to
Portici is one long street, chiefly consisting of villas and handsome
palaces, now sadly neglected, but probably still containing many
treasures, and all with more or less of garden ground attached.

Portici is a royal palace; but for years none of the royal family have
resided there, and it is used chiefly for public offices. It is sad to see
these magnificent buildings left nearly empty; and we can only wonder at
the extraordinary wealth of the past when we reflect that Portici is one
only of many other beautiful royal residences which are no longer kept up.
Even Caserta, which is said to be the largest palace in Europe, is all but
deserted. Don Emidio was telling us an anecdote in connection with it.
Just before the revolution of 1860 the palace had been put in order,
partially refurnished, and redecorated, for the reception of Francis II.
and his bride, the ex‐King and Queen of Naples.

Amongst other valuable ornaments, in one room the walls had hangings
attached with massive gold _fleurs‐de‐lis_. When the revolution broke out,
a Neapolitan duke, one of the very few of the really noble families who
turned traitor to their king, was appointed to adapt and readjust the
palace for the usurper. The whole matter was put into his hands, in
perfect confidence, no doubt, that he would see it properly carried out.
For some time the palace was closed to the public. When again it was
opened on certain days, and those who had known it before saw it again,
they observed that all the gold _fleurs‐de‐lis_ had disappeared. Of course
the fact provoked enquiry; but no account of them was ever rendered, and
all researches proved fruitless. No one doubted but that they had been
“annexed” by the liberal aristocrat, but, equally, no one dared call him
to task. For as annexation on a large scale was the order of the day, it
did not answer to look too closely into minor examples of the same.
Nevertheless, the story got whispered abroad, and his reputation, in
consequence, was far less golden than the missing _fleurs‐de‐lis_.

One day the duke was standing at a window in his own palace overlooking
the courtyard, when a poor artisan, who had already sent in his bill more
than once, came to request payment. The duke, who thought, or pretended to
think, the charges in the bill were exorbitant, began to upbraid and scold
the man from the window. At the same moment the wife of one of the men‐
servants of the establishment was crossing the yard. The duke called to
her, exclaiming, “It is a downright theft. But these artisans are all
thieves, are they not, Donna Rafaele?”

“Your excellency is a better judge of that than I am,” was the reply,
“since the greater ought to know the lesser.”

“I wonder how the duke took it?” said I.

Don Emidio gave me a knowing look, and shook his right hand under his left
elbow. We all laughed; but no description can convey the inimitable
drollery of Neapolitan pantomime. It is a thousand times more eloquent
than words. What expression, such as “to make yourself scarce,” or “to
skedaddle,” could convey what is indicated by that wagging of the
straightened hand under the elbow? You _see_ the thief escaping. It is the
same in everything else. There is a gesture for all the emotions and most
of the casualties of daily life. No beggar tells you he is hungry; but
standing silently before you, with a perfectly immovable expression, he
opens his mouth, and points downwards with his finger. A woman and half a
dozen children gathering round you, and all doing the same thing, produces
an effect so curiously divided between the ludicrous and the pathetic that
it is far harder to refuse an alms than if the request were made in
downright words. It is the same with the coachmen of the hired public
carriages. You are driving rapidly along, and your coachman passes another
whom he knows. In less than a second he has conveyed to his friend full
information of where he comes from, where he is going, and how soon he
will be back, probably concluding with the amount of the fare for which he
has agreed to do the distance; and all without a word being uttered.

The Neapolitans carry the same extraordinary pantomimic power into all
scenes and all places, including the pulpit, or, more likely, the
platform, from which the priest delivers his Lenten or Month of Mary
discourses. He walks to and fro in the heat of his argument, he sits down,
and starts up again, he weeps, and he even laughs. It is often very
striking; and it is so natural, it belongs so essentially to the genius of
the people, that it is never ridiculous, nor does it seem out of place. Of
course sometimes it is done less well and gracefully than at others; but
it is too thoroughly in unison with the language and habits of the people
ever to appear incongruous.

We were sitting on the low wall of the outer steps leading to the tower
entrance of a building at the end of the Portici pleasure‐grounds when
this conversation occurred. The tower belongs, I believe, to an
observatory, and all around are the stables, the barracks, and the
appurtenances of the palace, now empty and silent. The grass grew high and
thick in the courtyard. The deep‐red blossoms of the wild sorrel, with the
sunlight shining through them, looked like drops of blood among the grass.
The ox‐eyed daisies boldly faced the blue, glaring sky. The low, long
building used for stables was in front of us. Then a dark, dense wood of
ilex and cork‐trees, like a strong, black line. And beyond that no middle
distance was visible, but stark and sudden rose the seamed and barren
sides of Mount Vesuvius. No beneficent and tender white cloud broke the
intense, monotonous blue of all the wide heavens. The sky, the grim
mountain, the black wood, and the deserted stables—that was all; bathed in
sunshine, sparkling with intense light, silent with brooding heat, and
unspeakably desolate with a broad, unmodulated, horrific beauty like the
face of the sphinx.

Suddenly there came over me a dim, weird feeling of the ancient pagan
world. There was an inner perception and consciousness that in some
undefined way it was homogeneous to the scene around me and to unredeemed
man. It was cruel in its beauty; as poetic, but not picturesque, beauty so
often is.

I started up, and exclaimed, “Let us get back. The old gods are about this
place, and I cannot stay.”

Time has not effaced the impression, and I can recall the inner vision at
any moment. Frank declared we should come again, and have a picnic there
with the Vernons. But I protested I would not be of the party. “By the
bye, Jane,” said Frank, “why did Elizabeth not come?”

“Because little Franceschiella was buried this morning, and neither Ida
nor Elizabeth would leave the poor mother; while Helen remained to keep
Mrs. Vernon company.”

Franceschiella was a lovely child of six years who had died of a fever the
day before. She was the only child, and that fact, added to her quite
extraordinary beauty, had made the trial doubly hard to bear for her
adoring parents. For, indeed, it was little less than adoration that
Franceschiella received, not only in her own home, but from all her
neighbors. We were very much struck in this instance by the poetic nature
of the Italians. The father was a _vignaiuolo_, the mother did a little
needle‐work, or took in washing; but no nobleman’s child was ever more
carefully bathed and dressed and nourished than this one darling, and that
partly in consequence of her angelic beauty and her infantine charm. The
little creature ran every risk of being entirely spoilt by the amount of
petting and flattery that she received on all sides. On Sundays and
holidays they always dressed her in white with a red coral necklace; and
the mother or the cousins would weave a wreath of flowers to crown her
beautiful, golden hair, that fell below her waist. She had deep violet
eyes with black lashes, and a milk‐white skin. She was very forward for
her age, and singularly intelligent. But she was surely never meant to
live long in this rough world. She came to it like a stranger, and she
remained a stranger all the time of her brief sojourn—as though some
princess from the distant lands of poetry and romance had come for a brief
visit to dwell with common mortals. There was an inexpressible refinement
in all the little creature’s ways which would have become a real cross to
her and the occasion of endless trials had she lived long enough to find
the harsh side of life ruffling her angel wings. It was in mercy the child
was taken away before the period of white frocks and fresh flowers had
come to an end. Life could have brought to her nothing but temptation and
anguish. But of course in proportion to her exceptional nature was the
despair of the poor parents in seeing her fading before their eyes. As
little Franceschiella had been unaccustomed to restraint or coercion of
any kind, it was exceedingly difficult, during her short illness, to
induce her to take the necessary remedies. And nothing could be more
touchingly beautiful than the arguments used by the distracted parents to
persuade her to swallow the nauseous draughts. As usual, there was a
crucifix near the bed, and an image of the Mater Dolorosa—the devotion of
the Neapolitans being very specially to the Seven Sorrows of the Blessed
Virgin. They would beg the poor little darling to take her medicine in
honor of Our Lord’s thirst on the cross, or of Our Lady’s anguish when His
dead form was laid in her arms. And these were not unmeaning or merely
mystical phrases, to which the child could attach but little sense. They
were as household words to her; familiar to her childish thoughts from the
moment she could lisp, and woven into her life as the mysteries of the
faith only are in lands altogether Catholic. But nothing was to avail to
keep the pretty human flower from fading fast. And before a week had past
little Franceschiella had taken flight ere any of the ugliness of mortal
life had tarnished her sweet loveliness. They crowned her with roses, and
laid her, dressed in white, in the little wooden coffin filled with
flowers. Then they flung handfuls of colored sugar‐plums over her, and
placed a white camellia between her still red lips, saying, as they did
so, “She breathes flowers.” And so they carried her, in the open bier, the
uncovered, lovely face turned towards the heavens, and thus laid their
darling in the dark grave, but in the full hope of a bright resurrection.

The mother’s anguish was extreme. The Neapolitan women are an excitable
and highly nervous race; which arises, no doubt, in great measure from the
climate, as every stranger knows who finds the effect produced on his
nerves by this intoxicating atmosphere, which I have heard compared to
drinking champagne. As in the case of the peasantry much self‐control has
not been inculcated, the result is the frequency of terrible nervous
attacks producing convulsions—what we should probably designate as very
aggravated hysteria. After Franceschiella’s death the mother became
subject to these attacks, and seemed incapable of receiving any
consolation till heaven granted her the hope of again becoming a mother.
On the day we went to Portici the Vernons had hardly left her. And it was
very charming to see the Christian sense of equality on their side, and
the deference and gratitude shown them by their peasant neighbors on the
other.

But why did Frank so particularly ask why Elizabeth had not come, instead
of asking equally about Ida and Helen?

“You have, then, seen Medusa in the woods of Portici, Miss Jane?” said Don
Emidio suddenly to me, as we were driving home in absolute silence.

I looked up out of my brown study to find his eyes fixed upon me. “Do you
mean that I am changed to stone?”

“You are as silent as one.”

I laughed, and said, “At least, thank heaven, I am not _malheureuse comme
les pièrres_,(149) as the French say, though I may be as silent as they. I
did not, however, see anything in those dark ilex groves. I only suddenly
felt the awfulness of nature when you look at her in all her inexorable
beauty, with the rhythm of her apparently changeless laws and her sublime
disdain of man. She breathes and blossoms, she burns and thunders, she
weeps and smiles, utterly independent of us all. She knows no weakness; no
decay touches her but such as she can repair. She embraces death, that she
may produce life. She is ever fertile, ever lavish of herself and of her
gifts. But she never _cares_. Her mountains are granite even to the feet
of her Creator, as he climbs the heights of Calvary. Her noontide heavens
are brass to the cravings of man’s heart in his midday toil. She will not
pause in the twenty‐four hours of her inevitable day, though sundown
should bring death to one and despair to many again and again. She treads
her ever‐victorious march over ruined nations, buried cities, and broken
hearts. Oh! I could hate her—cruel power, terrible Pythoness; mocking me
with sunshine, scaring me with storms; ever rejoicing in her strength,
ever regardless of me. I cannot explain why these thoughts came to me, as
across the dark wood I traced the violet scars on awful Vesuvius, and
heard the low whispers of the wind in the long grass at our feet. Suddenly
faith seemed to die out of me. I forgot what I believe; and back came
trooping the pagan gods and the pagan world, with the strong feeling that
pantheism is the inevitable religion of the natural man, and that were I
not, thank God, a Christian and a Catholic, some form of it would grow
into my mind, as the impress left by the face of nature. For a moment a
dark cloud overshadowed me while I looked into the depths of the old pagan
belief; and it became so real to me that I shuddered. It has left me
silent; that’s all.”

“That’s all!” repeated Don Emidio with a sly smile, and imitating my voice
in a way that I half thought was rather impertinent. “Allow me to tell you
that I think that is a great deal. I do not imagine there are many young
ladies who come out for a day’s pleasuring to the gardens of Portici or
elsewhere, and indulge in such profound reflections as you do.”

I looked round, and saw that Frank and Mary were listening.

Frank said: “I believe Jane is quite right; and she has so well described
the effect which the aspects of nature produce on the mind of man that I
am convinced her words embody and express the riddle of the sphinx. The
laws of nature, taken without the doctrine of the Incarnation, which alone
is the keystone to the whole creation, form the enigma which is put before
us to understand and answer; failing which, we perish.”

“But all paganism was a falsified adumbration of the Incarnation; the gods
for ever assuming a human form, and the men becoming gods,” said Mary. “It
had that germ of truth in it which every system must have to be built at
all, no matter in what monstrous form. But it required revelation to tell
us that the ‘Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst men.’ And that alone
explains nature. She is the herald, the servant, or rather the slave, of
Him by whom and for whom all things were created. She speeds on her way in
the full vigor of those laws which were impressed upon her as she first
sprang from the hand of her Creator. She does not stop to share our griefs
or our joys, for she has a higher mission. But she has ceased to be
terrible to us, for faith has unveiled her face, and her harmonious forces
no longer scare us by their inexorable relentlessness. Her one mission is
to sing of God, and repeat to Time the refrain of Eternity.”

“Why, then, do we sometimes pine for her sympathy?” said I.

“Ah! Miss Jane,” exclaimed Don Emidio, “that is because we are for ever
looking for sympathy in the wrong place and from the wrong people.”

“Not always,” I replied. What made me say so? And why did Don Emidio
change color and look at me so fixedly? I was still wondering when we
reached home.

Mary and I were, as usual in the evening, sitting in the _loggia_. But
Frank was not with us, and I missed his genial talk and the odor of his
cigar.

“What has become of Frank this evening, Mary?”

“He has gone down to see the Vernons, and said he should persuade them to
come to us.”

“I hope he will succeed, for I do not like his spending his evenings away
from us. This is not the first nor the fourth time he has gone to
Casinelli as soon as he got up from dinner.”

“Ah! well, Jane, we must not be selfish. He has his life to live, as you
have yours; and I must expect one day to lose you both.”

I felt my heart stop, and then beat violently. What did Mary mean? And why
did some veil seem suddenly to fall from my eyes? It was some moments
before 1 spoke; and then I tried to say in my ordinary voice: “You have
some presentiment about Frank, Mary. What is it?”

“I have presentiments about both of you. But I do not want to force your
confidence.”

In a moment I was kneeling by her side. “Dearest Mary, do you suppose I
have any secrets from you? I tell you everything. If I do not tell you
more, it is because I know no more.” It was a sudden impulse, dim but
overwhelming, which made me add those strange words. Mary looked at me
intently. “Has it never struck you that Frank has a reason for going so
often to the Villa Casinelli, as Emidio has a reason for coming so often
here?”

Our eyes met for one moment. Then I hid my face in my hands, and burst
into tears.

“O Mary! what bitter‐sweet things are you saying? I do not want to lose
Frank, and I do not want to leave you, or to tread in other paths than
those I have known since my childhood. Are you sure it is so? Why have I
not known it till now? And even now I doubt.”

“That is because you were not in the least looking out for it, and were
absorbed in other thoughts, preventing that retrospection which would have
shown you that Emidio’s manner towards you has been intensifying with
every day of our stay here. And now what answer will you give when the
time comes?”

“Do not ask me yet, dear Mary. I must have leisure to reflect. At this
moment my heart is more full of Frank and Elizabeth than of anything
else.”

“Ah! my dear, he could not have made a wiser choice; she is a girl after
my own heart, so true, so tender, so good, and so utterly unselfish.”

“I only hope she will not spoil Frank.”

“I am not afraid of that, for she has a high sense of duty for herself and
for all who approach her.”

“And what is to become of Ida and of you, Mary?”

“I cannot think,” said Mary with a sweet, sad smile. “But I suppose we
shall both of us be happy in the happiness of those who are so dear to us.
It is worse for me than for her. She loses a sister. I lose a brother and
sister both.”

“You don’t know that, Mary. Nobody has proposed to me, and, if somebody
did, I am not certain what answer I should give.”

“But I am,” rejoined Mary.

I clapped my hand over her mouth, exclaiming, “Don’t say it, Mary dear.
Let me be free and feel free. I am frightened at the thought of promising
myself to any one, even where I may feel I could love.”

“Be free, dear sister, until the moment has come when you are sure it is
God’s will you should enter on another phase of woman’s destiny.”

“And may I never do so, except to accomplish his will!” I replied; and
with one long kiss on dear Mary’s brow I turned away, for we heard
approaching footsteps.

Frank and Elizabeth entered first. Ida and Padre Cataldo followed. I
looked to see if there were a fifth figure behind, and was rather relieved
to find Don Emidio was not there. I needed time to collect my thoughts
before I saw him again. Perhaps, after all, Mary was mistaken, and
attached more importance to this matter than was necessary. At any rate, I
was in no hurry to see Don Emidio again.

Frank seemed in high spirits, and Elizabeth looked serenely, calmly happy.
Her soft manner and her slow, graceful movements had long ago won for her
the nickname of Pussy; particularly as her velvet ways were not unmixed
with a playful slyness; so that from time to time she came out with some
remark far more acute and incisive that at first you would have given her
credit for. It was a relief to me when I heard Frank say that he had been
particularly anxious to induce Padre Cataldo to join us, because he had
promised to give us the account of an unfortunate man whose execution he
had attended some years ago in the course of his priestly ministrations.
Ida was looking as thoughtful as Mary; and I saw her eyes constantly
wandering to where Frank and Elizabeth were sitting together. We were all
too preoccupied to talk, but were very glad to listen to a long story.

“Frank tells us, reverend father,” began Mary, “that some twenty years ago
you attended the execution of a poor criminal. It would interest us very
much if you would give us the particulars. In what part of Italy did it
occur?”

“It took place in the Basilicata,” replied the father, “and the whole
province was filled with consternation; for the culprit did not belong to
the lower ranks of life, but was a gentleman by birth, education, and
position. He was the proprietor of a château and a considerable patrimony
near one of the towns of the province, and his crime was the murder of his
own brother. For many generations the family had had an undesirable
reputation for deeds of violence and sudden acts of rage or revenge. It
was not the first time that the history of the family chronicled some
bloody act; though it was the first time, at least in modern days, that
any member of this unfortunate house had suffered the utmost penalty of
the law. I am unable to tell you what gave rise to the violent feeling of
hatred which the elder brother entertained for the younger. There had been
many quarrels and disputes between them from their boyhood upwards. Frank
told me the other day you had been talking about the extraordinary power
the Italian, and especially the native of Southern Italy, has of following
out one design through all obstacles and difficulties, silently and
secretly, for years. If they possess this tenacity of character in the
search for wealth, I am afraid they have it equally in questions of
revenge. And for some reason or other this had been the sentiment of Conte
Falcone for his brother, Don Carlo. One day Don Carlo was found stabbed
through the heart, and suspicion immediately fell on Conte Falcone. He was
arrested, but the trial was a long one, and some months were passed in
collecting evidence. At length he was convicted, and from the moment of
his condemnation made no attempt to deny his guilt. At that time the
prison at Potenza, where he was to await his execution, was under the
direction of a Jesuit father, whose efforts were ceaseless for the good of
the unfortunate criminals under his charge.

“Naturally, Conte Falcone was a special object of care and anxiety, from
the enormity of his crime, and from the fact that his position and
circumstances are generally in themselves a guarantee against offences of
so deep a dye.

“No efforts were wanting on the part of the Jesuit priest. He was with his
prisoner day and night, endeavoring to bring him to a true repentance of
his sin against God and against humanity. And he succeeded. He found the
count from the first overwhelmed with remorse, and his object was to
prevent this remorse degenerating into despair, and thus excluding the
light of faith. Happily, Conte Falcone, grievously as he had offended
against the laws of God, had never given place to rationalistic or
scoffing doubts. It needed but to transform the awful bitterness of human
remorse into the tenderness of perfect contrition; and this great work in
the culprit’s soul was happily accomplished in time to give him courage to
bear the dreadful intelligence that all efforts made at the Court of
Appeal to get the sentence commuted had entirely failed. This was an
unusual and remarkable fact, for capital punishment is very rarely carried
out in Italy; many would tell you not sufficiently for the protection of
society. Probably in this case the judges were urged to unusual severity
by the position of the criminal, lest it should appear that, being a
nobleman, he was less severely dealt with than a common man might have
been. Moreover, it was not forgotten that this was the third time one of
his unfortunate family had taken the life of a relation, and it was
thought necessary an example should be made. The priest accordingly
announced to him that his fate was sealed, and that the next morning he
must proceed on the terrible journey which was to be his last.

“In the kingdom of Naples, as well as in some other parts of Italy, it is
the law that the execution of a criminal should take place on or near the
spot where the deed was done.”

“What a terrible law of retribution!” exclaimed Mary.

“Yes, and one strictly in conformity with many passages of the Holy
Scriptures, and with the Biblical spirit generally.”

“Has it not been supposed, father,” asked Frank, “that possibly after
death the souls in purgatory, as also the lost, suffer for their errors
there where they were guilty of them?”

“It is a common opinion, and it goes far towards explaining the accounts
of strange noises and spectral forms in places where it is known there has
been a murder. The very sound of the fatal blow is repeated through the
hours of the night, as though the disembodied spirit were condemned for
ever to re‐enact the semblance of that crime which has grown into one
idea, one all‐absorbing memory of the past. The soul becomes, as it were,
the personification and essence of its fatal crime.”

“What a fearful verification of the worm that dieth not!” said Mary.

“But surely,” I exclaimed, “we may have softer and happier feelings about
the souls in purgatory?”

“Of course we may,” replied the father, almost smiling at my look of
horror and anxiety. “If they frequent the scenes of their past, it is not
to inspire us with fear; for of that dreadful passion they are now
themselves no longer capable, the blessed security of their future
annihilating all touch of apprehension. If they reappear to the living, it
is either to remedy some evil or to solicit our prayers. I never could
understand the terror people have of what they call ghosts.”

“It would be strange indeed,” said Mary, “not to wish to see again those
we have loved and lost, even their disembodied souls.”

“And yet it is not lawful to desire it with ardor or to entreat for it;
because it is outside the bounds of God’s usual dealings with his
creatures to permit the dead to revisit the living, or rather to reappear
to them; for I believe they revisit us constantly, and probably mostly
dwell amongst us, unseen and, alas! generally forgotten.”

“Oh! no, not forgotten, dear father,” said Mary, the tears filling her
eyes.

“Not forgotten by such as you, _figlia mia_.(150) But we have entered on a
subject which might keep us discussing till midnight. I go back to my poor
penitent.”

“Was he your penitent from the first, father? Were you the director of the
prison?”

“You have robbed me of my disguise, _cara figlia_.(151) I meant to have
told you a story, but not to talk of myself. However, it does not matter,
and I will lay aside all disguise. The journey the unhappy count had to
make to his native place was perhaps the most terrible part of his
punishment. But I had the satisfaction of seeing him receive the
announcement with the greatest resignation, once more offering it as an
atonement for his crime. As he was a man of considerable refinement and
education, his resignation arose from no lack of power to appreciate the
dreadful contrast between his present position on returning to his home
and that which he had once filled. It would be impossible to put into
words what he felt on arriving to meet an ignominious death at the place
where he had been the great man and the most influential person. Early in
the morning of the dreadful day on which we began our long journey he was
led out of the prison, and mounted on an ass—such being the law in that
part of Italy. The slow paces of the beast added considerably to the
torture of the count’s feelings, it being impossible to hasten a progress
every hour of which seemed an age. He had made his general confession to
me before that fatal morning, and constantly on the road he would turn to
me for a word of consolation and encouragement, or to renew his frequent
acts of contrition. I need hardly say I never left his side for a moment.
Poor fellow! what an agony the whole journey was to him, and, from
sympathy, hardly less so to me; for he was bound hand and foot, and the
animal was led by one of the guards, the others following and surrounding
him on horseback. You know enough of us Italians to be aware that,
physically and morally, we are more sensitively constituted than any other
European nation. Our feelings are extraordinarily keen, and our
imaginative powers excessive; and these two qualities combine to give us a
most intense love of life. All the incidents of our journey, which
occupied the entire day, must have been, and indeed I can bear testimony
that they were, the perfection of anguish to the count, such as seldom can
fall to the lot of any man, taking his whole life together. The sun poured
its scorching rays on his uncovered head; he, being bound, could not in
any way help himself; and several times he turned so faint that the guards
had to fetch water to revive him. I obtained permission at last for his
poor head to be covered—all the more so as I apprehended a sun‐stroke. I
held the cup for him to drink from, and sometimes supported him for a few
seconds in my arms to relieve him as well as I could from the restraint of
his painful position. It was nightfall when our awful and melancholy
procession reached the prison of the count’s native town. His own château
was not far distant! I had written to have a chapel prepared in the
prison; and in that chapel, kneeling at the foot of the altar, he whom I
had come to love as the very child of my soul spent the entire night.
Naturally, his first thought on arriving was for his wife and his two
little children. And he entreated to be allowed to see them once more. I
was not then aware of what was the custom on such melancholy occasions,
and I applied for permission to send for the countess and her children.
But I found that they had been removed from their home by the order of the
magistrates, and were already at a considerable distance. This had been
done from motives of humanity, that the poor wife might not be almost
within hearing of the dreadful event which was to take place on the
morrow, or his children grow up with a full knowledge of their father’s
fate. It was almost more than I myself could bear when I had to return to
him in the prison, and tell him of the ill‐success of my request. It was
the last drop of extreme bitterness. It was the vinegar and the gall; the
absolute isolation from all that he had loved, the utter desolation of his
human affections. A spasm of agony passed over his face; but the only
words he spoke were, ‘The will of God be done.’ ”

“In the morning he again made his confession with the ardent contrition
and fervor of a saint. He heard a Mass as preparation for his last
communion. He received the Blessed Sacrament at the second Mass, and
assisted at a third in thanksgiving.

“The dreadful moment was now at hand. The horrid black limbs of the fatal
guillotine stood stark and rigid against the bright morning sky in the
great public square of the town.

“Every church in the place was thronged with worshippers, praying and
offering their communions for the salvation of the poor soul so soon to be
wrenched from sweet life, and sent to its everlasting doom. The public
square was also filled with spectators—a silent, awe‐struck throng, while
occasionally a prayer would seem to quiver on the air from the suppressed
voice of a hundred people.

“At length the count appeared, supported by the guards; for by that time
he was in a very exhausted state. His last act was to press my hand in
silence. It was the signal for me to give him the last absolution. I had
just turned aside, hardly conscious myself from excess of feeling, when
the fatal knife fell. A cry of horror ran through the crowd; and then
immediately they dispersed, many of them repeating aloud the _De
profundis_, as they retired to their homes.

“I always remember poor Falcone in my daily Mass; though I cannot say I
think he is in any further need of prayers, but is, I hope, long since in
a position to benefit me by his.”

“What is your opinion, father,” asked Mary, “of public executions?”

“In the present state of feeling in Italy they are beneficial rather than
otherwise. I attended the execution of two soldiers a few years ago at
Terracina. The whole town was crowding to the church the evening before,
and at an early hour on the day itself, to pray for the poor men. It was
like the general communion at the close of a mission; and those who
actually witnessed the execution seemed to do so with no other object than
to assist the poor criminals by their prayers. Many of the women were on
their knees in the public place. And I do not believe but that such a
fervor of devotion had a beneficial effect upon all. It is, or at least it
was, the same thing in Rome. But where, as in London and Paris, that idea
of intercessory prayer has died out with the faith of which it forms a
part, and the vilest rabble collects from a brutal curiosity to see a man
hung or guillotined, then I am convinced that public executions are
demoralizing, and tend to increase the crimes they are meant to repress.”

“All I know is,” said Frank, suddenly starting up, “if a fellow could only
have the good‐luck to be hung in the presence of a large Italian crowd, I
think he would have a better chance of going straight to heaven than by
any other death. I think I should like to go in for that sort of thing
myself.”

“O Frank! what do you mean?”

“Why, this is what I mean: If you have a long illness, you get weak in
mind and in the power of volition, as well as weak in body. I know, if I
have only a headache, how difficult it is to say my prayers. Fancy, then,
what it must be through a long, painful illness. Whereas, if you are going
to be hung, you have all your faculties about you; you are in no doubt of
when you are going to die; the time is fixed to the minute. You have made
your last confession; and I can imagine being able then to make such an
act of perfect contrition, with all the forces of one’s mind and soul,
that would land one safe past the realms of purgatory. I often feel as if
it would be my only chance, and not a bad one, either.”

Padre Cataldo looked amused. Elizabeth did not appear quite to like it,
and I overheard her say to him: “I think you might manage to end an
honorable life in a more honorable way, and secure heaven all the same.” I
thought I heard something in reply about “with your help and your
example”; but I did not listen, as I wanted to induce Padre Cataldo to
tell us about his wonderful escape during the revolution of 1860. I said
something to him about it; but he turned it off, and Mary whispered to me
that he never liked to talk about it, but that Don Emidio knew all about
it, and we could ask him to tell us the next time we met. Padre Cataldo
now took leave, Frank accompanying him back, and promising to return for
the Vernons later.

As soon as they had left, Ida told us that all their troubles and
anxieties in reference to the Casinelli and the chapel bell had been
renewed. There had been an interregnum of comparative peace, and we had
entertained the hope that all was likely to go on quietly. But it turned
out that one of the sisters some days previously had called on Mrs. Vernon
and her daughters to explain that the bell ringing for Mass was such a
cause of annoyance to the other lodgers that she really must request that
it should be entirely given up. Of course Mrs. Vernon refused. The chapel
had been conceded to them; Mass was said there daily by the express
permission of the cardinal archbishop, and was of the greatest benefit to
the neighborhood; and she and her daughters absolutely declined to
sanction such an insult to religion. Signorina Casinelli proposed that the
bell should be hung somewhere in the garden at a considerable distance.
But this also was refused. It was not rung at an early hour. It was not a
large bell, and it was absurd to have the chapel in one place, and the
chapel bell an eighth of a mile away, to say nothing of the trouble of
sending some one to ring it. Signorina Casinelli left the house in high
dudgeon; and the next day she waylaid Padre Cataldo, as he was returning
through the garden from visiting the sick. She flew into a violent rage
the moment she saw him, and told him that, rather than offend their other
tenants, they would, the house being their property, shut up the chapel
entirely.

Unfortunately, no written agreement respecting the use of the chapel
existed between the Vernons and the Casinelli; and it had never entered
any one’s head that they could be guilty of such a transaction. The threat
was, however, only too well carried out. That same evening the bell was
cut down and carried away. The Vernons learnt from the _vignaiuoli_ in
their neighborhood that the Casinelli had had some difficulty in finding
any workmen who would undertake the job. They had first sent for a mason
in their own employ; but he had absolutely refused to have anything to do
with a work which he considered as sacrilegious; and turning to the
_padrona_, the eldest sister, he exclaimed, “Judas also sold his Master
for money, but I will have nothing to do with conduct which resembles his.
You may manage your own affairs in your own way.”

The following Saturday they completed their evil work by literally doing
as they threatened. A message was sent to the Vernons to warn them that
they had better take out of the chapel anything therein which belonged to
them without loss of time, as that night it was to be locked and the keys
withdrawn.

It was a sad office indeed for the Vernons to have to strip the little
chapel of all its ornaments, the work of their hands and their hearts.
They did it in silence, and in silence they bore the heavy trial; for had
they allowed themselves any expressions which would have served as a cry
for the peasantry around, it would have been difficult to restrain the
grief and indignation of these poor people at finding themselves deprived
of their Mass and of the instructions of a priest whom they all loved as a
father. Ida’s delicate health made it very difficult for her to walk to
any church up the high hill at the foot of which Casinelli is situated.
Padre Cataldo had to go elsewhere to say his Mass, to the great
inconvenience of himself and others. But that was as nothing compared to
the grief of seeing all his little flock dispersed.

Signore Casinelli informed his tenant, in the presence of several persons,
that henceforth he might consider himself master of the situation. And so
he has remained. But the Casinelli have never since been able to command
the slightest respect from the _vignaiuoli_ and peasantry of the
neighborhood. They have lost all prestige. And long before these pages see
the light the Vernons will have left Casinelli to establish themselves in
one of the many villas whose doors were open to them from that moment. All
in the neighborhood wanted to let their apartments to them and Padre
Cataldo; and if anything could console them for all they had had to
sacrifice, it might be the amount of sympathy and respect which met them
on all sides and from all classes; while the incident, far from
diminishing Padre Cataldo’s field of usefulness, seemed to have opened out
fresh spheres for him to work in, and to have extended his influence far
and wide.

The garden in which our villa of R—— R—— stood led by steps and winding
paths to a tiny bay and to a long series of rocks and large natural caves.
There was more than one bath, fed by the fresh sea‐water, in whose limpid
depths we not unfrequently saw brilliant sea‐anemones, and even small fish
which sometimes forced their way through to the openings left in an
artificial dike to supply the bath with water. Here and there a wooden
bridge was thrown over some part where the water broke the communication
from one cave to another. The views from the wide, arched openings of the
caves were very lovely; Naples and the bay on one side, and the flower‐
clad, precipitous rocks of the coast of Posilippo on the other. At night
the fishermen’s boats which had been moored in these caves, and in others
like them, came gliding out with a lighted torch at the prow. And all
through the night many of them might be seen, with the black figures of
two or three fishermen dimly distinguished from time to time; though more
generally all that can be seen is the dark, shadowy form of the boat and
the flaring torch, intended to attract the unwary fish into the net.

I should have liked the caves better had they not been disfigured by the
stuffed, gaunt forms of a hippopotamus and some alligators and similar
monsters, which were placed in all sorts of unexpected places, and seemed
to meet you round the corner with gaping jaws. These caves had formed part
of a public place of resort some years ago, but were now deserted and
forgotten, with all the monsters rapidly falling into dusty decay.

We had been for some time at the villa before my curiosity had ever led me
to explore this strange place. When I did so, it was in company with Don
Emidio. But as I protested that I did not like crocodiles and hippopotami,
he suggested that we should climb the rock outside the cave to the pretty
little pink and green kiosk which crowned it, and which commanded a lovely
view from where it stood embedded in aloes and cacti, opuntias and zoccas,
besides many varieties of climbing plants. Nothing could be prettier than
the winding paths, protected on one side by a rustic fence, while every
cranny in the rock on the other side bore some tuft of blossom or afforded
roothold for the wild tresses of some flowering creeper.

Mary and Frank had remained in the lower garden, while we wandered into
every nook and corner, and finally sat down to rest inside the kiosk,
which, with windows all round, presented to us a wide and lovely scene.

It was here I consented to become Don Emidio’s wife.

That effected, no matter how or in what words—for those things seldom read
wisely—I suggested that we should rejoin Mary and Frank. Don Emidio took
the latter by the arm, and walked with him a little way apart. I remained
silent, sitting at Mary’s feet. When Don Emidio joined us, it was without
Frank. I asked where he was. “Gone down to Casinelli,” was the reply. I
knew why. He was determined to have his fate also decided that same day,
that same hour. I had no doubts for him. I knew that Elizabeth would
consent; and I felt partly glad, and partly saddened at the thought that
our life, hitherto so united and bound up in each other, was about to
divide and separate, each following his or her own destiny, and weaving a
new web of life’s joys and sorrows. Don Emidio left us soon. But long
after, I saw him leaning over the parapet of the road, waiting for Frank
to return from Casinelli, that he might learn whether his wishes also were
to be crowned with success. I could see the meeting from my window, as the
tall figures of the two friends stood dark against the deep blue of an
Italian starlight night. I could have no doubt of the nature of the
intelligence conveyed by Frank to his friend; for, to my horror, Don
Emidio threw his arms around him and kissed him, as Italians do. Poor
Frank! thought I, how will he put up with such an un‐English proceeding?
No doubt it had happened to Frank before; for he did not, so far as I
could judge at that distance, start with astonishment. But it set me
thinking about my future husband’s foreign ways. And the next morning,
when Frank and I had talked over the more serious questions in our
affairs, I found myself drifting into that part of the matter. “I wonder,
Frank, if I shall ever get quite reconciled to his Italian customs, so as
either not to notice, or to prefer them?”

“It is to be hoped so, since he will be your husband. But what do you mean
in particular?”

“Why, you know he will call me Miss Jane; any one else would say Miss
Hamilton.”

“That is an evil which is already at an end. No doubt for the future he
will call you simply Jane, and speak of you a short time hence as la
Contessa Gandolfi.”

“Then I wish he would not embrace you, Frank.” Frank laughed aloud.

“He would be hurt if I repulsed him. They all do it. He will soon see that
in England it is not the custom, and then he will give it up—at least
while there.”

“Another thing is, I do not like his wearing a large ring—though I own it
is a handsome one—on his forefinger. We think that vulgar in England.”

“And it does not happen to be vulgar here; that is all about it, my dear
Jane. I am afraid I cannot help you in that matter. But possibly in time
you will succeed in bringing him round to your views; though I doubt your
ever being able to break him of occasionally transferring that ring from
his finger to his thumb whenever he is particularly anxious to remember
something. When you see his palazzo in Rome, you will find that he
possesses a beautiful portrait, by Vandyke, of an ancestor on his mother’s
side. That very ring is on the forefinger of the portrait. Emidio is the
living image of that picture. And you can hardly blame a man for carrying
out a likeness he has such reason to be proud of.”

“There is one other thing, Frank, which strikes me as odd. If he is
sitting in the arm‐chair when Mary or I come into the room (and you know
we are not rich in arm‐chairs here), he never gives either of us that
chair, but fetches us another, and goes back to the arm‐chair himself.”

“Jane, you are a little fool. Do you not know that in Italy, at least in
the south, it is the height of ill‐breeding to offer any one the chair you
have just occupied yourself? A cool seat is always a desideratum in this
climate, even though it may be a less luxurious one.”

“Shall I ever, do you think, be able to take back to England with me a
husband with such a name as Emidio? What a pity he was not christened
Paul, or Stephen, or even Anthony! But Emidio!” By this time we were both
laughing—Frank at me, I at myself.

“You need never call him Emidio in public. We call him so because, when we
have been travelling about Italy alone together, we found it convenient to
drop his title. But you know he is il Conte Gandolfi. His mother was the
only child of a noble Roman family, and consequently a great heiress. She
married a Neapolitan Conte Gandolfi; and that is how it happens that with
a Neapolitan name his chief residence is in Rome, in the palazzo that
belonged to his mother. His father was not a man of very considerable
fortune, and his only property here is his villa at Capo di Monte, where
he spends the summer. A nobler heart and a finer nature I never saw. There
is the simplicity of a child, the honor of a true‐born gentleman, the
delicacy of a woman, the courage of a hero, and the piety of a saint.”

The tears stood in my eyes; and taking dear Frank’s hand in mine, I said,
“Thank you, dear old fellow, for saying that. And, thank God, you too have
drawn a prize!”




A Discussion With An Infidel.



IV. Immortality Of Matter.


_Reader._ And now, doctor, what other argument do you allege against
creation?

_Büchner._ The immortality of matter, and the immortality of force.

_Reader._ The immortality of matter?

_Büchner._ Yes, sir. “Matter is immortal, indestructible. There is not an
atom in the universe which can be lost. We cannot, even in thought, remove
or add an atom without admitting that the world would thereby be
disturbed, and the laws of gravitation and the equilibrium of matter
interfered with. It is the great merit of modern chemistry to have proved
in the most convincing manner that the uninterrupted changes of matter
which we daily witness, the origin and decay of organic and inorganic
forms and tissues, do not arise, as was hitherto believed, from new
materials, but that this change consists in nothing else but the constant
and continuous metamorphosis of the same elementary principles, the
quantity and quality of which ever are, and ever remain, the same” (p. 9).
“The atoms are in themselves unchangeable and indestructible; to‐day in
this, tomorrow in another form, they present by the variety of their
combinations the innumerable forms in which matter appears to our senses.
The number of atoms in any element remains, on the whole, the same; not a
single particle is formed anew; nor can it, when formed, disappear from
existence” (p. 11).

_Reader._ Do you say in the same breath that no particle of matter can be
formed anew, and that, _when formed_, it cannot disappear? When is it
formed, if it cannot be formed at all?

_Büchner._ The phrase may be incorrect, but the idea is sound, and the
argument conclusive.

_Reader._ Poor doctor! the idea is as inconsistent as the phrase is
incorrect; and the argument is not worthy of the name. Let us admit that
matter, elements, and atoms have been observed to remain always and
everywhere the same. Does it follow that matter, elements, and atoms are
indestructible? By no means; it only follows that, be they destructible or
not, they have not been actually destroyed. You say that by the
destruction or addition of an atom “the world would be disturbed.” Let it
be disturbed; what then?

_Büchner._ Then the laws of gravitation and the equilibrium of matter
would be interfered with; which cannot be admitted. The laws of nature are
unchangeable. What has been constantly true for the past must be true for
ever.

_Reader._ You are utterly mistaken, doctor. The world may be disturbed by
the creation or the annihilation of matter without the laws of nature
being interfered with. I admit that the laws of nature are unchangeable;
they have been true for the past, and they will be true for ever. But what
is the object of these laws? Nothing but the mode of production of the
phenomena of the material world. Hence you have a law of gravitation, a
law of propagation of sound, a law of impact, a law of reflection and of
refraction, and generally laws of motion, but you have no law of
_existence_ and no law of _substance_. Whence it is clear that all your
laws of nature would remain exactly the same whether any new portion of
matter were brought into being or any portion of existing matter
annihilated. Suppose that your own body were annihilated; would any law of
nature be upset? Would the sun cease to illuminate the earth? Would the
earth cease to revolve round its axis or to attract bodies? Would the
ocean cease rolling its waves to the shore? Would fire cease to burn? In
one word, would any law of statics or of dynamics cease to be true?

Nor can you decline this supposition by saying that annihilation itself
would be against the laws of nature. For all your laws of nature, as I
have just remarked, regard the movements, and not the substance, of the
material world. Your laws suppose the existence of matter in the same
manner as civil laws suppose the existence of civil society; and as these
latter are not modified by an increase or a decrease in the number of the
individuals subject to them, so neither would the former be modified by
any increase or decrease in the number of material elements. There would
be, of course, a change in the phenomena themselves, because the execution
of the laws would be carried on suitably to the new condition of the case;
but the laws would remain the same. Consequently any amount of matter
could be annihilated without the least change in the laws of nature. Let
the moon be annihilated; the ebb and flow of the ocean will be altered,
but the laws of motion will remain the same; for the ebbing and flowing of
the waters will still be proportional to the action of the disturbing
causes. Let a stone be annihilated in the act of its falling to the
ground; the law of attraction will remain unaltered, as it will still be
true that every falling body must acquire, under gravitation, a uniformly
increasing velocity. Hence the unchangeableness of natural laws cannot be
alleged as a proof of the indestructibility of matter; and your argument
is worthless. The utmost you can be allowed to assume is that matter,
whether destructible or not, has hitherto continued to exist, and no
particle of it has ever been annihilated.

This last assertion, however, is admitted by natural philosophers, not
because there is any scientific proof of it, but simply because science
has no grounds for denying it. Science has no means of ascertaining, for
instance, whether any remote star has been annihilated, or any new star
created, in the last thousand years; and if the common belief is that no
new matter has been created, and no portion of matter annihilated, we owe
it, not to science, but to the teaching of the Bible, which represents the
work of creation as long ago completed, and the conservation of all
created substances as the effect of design. But you, who laugh at
revelation, and pretend to substantiate all your assertions by facts, have
no right to assume that no matter has ever been annihilated. Hence not
only are you unable to show that matter is indestructible, but you cannot
even maintain that no particle of matter has ever been destroyed.

But I will no longer insist on this point. I admit that no atom of matter
can ever be lost to the world _by natural processes_. My reason is that
the natural actions of bodies, whether physical or chemical, tend merely
to the production, modification, or neutralization of movement, and that
no amount of change in the movement of an atom can cause the atom to
vanish. This is not, however, a discovery of modern chemistry, as you seem
to believe. The scholastic philosophers had not the fortune to know modern
chemistry; yet they never believed that new compounds were made of new
materials, though you recklessly assert that “it was hitherto believed”;
but they always uniformly taught that matter was ingenerable and
incorruptible. There was therefore scarcely any need of modern chemistry
to teach us that no portion of matter can be lost by natural processes.
Yet this is not the real question. What we want to know is whether an
atom, or any number of atoms, has a necessary existence and cannot be
annihilated by God. This is your assumption; and this is what you are
unable to show. Your argument is, in fact, nothing but a vicious circle.
You say: “There is no God; and therefore matter cannot be annihilated”;
and at the same time you say: “Matter cannot be annihilated; and therefore
there is no God.” This is, in reality, the covert drift of your
argumentation, when from the assumed indestructibility of matter you
conclude, first, that matter could not have been created, and, further,
that the existence of a Creator is a gratuitous hypothesis. On the other
hand, you cannot make good your assertion that matter is indestructible
without first denying the existence of a Creator. Such is your nice logic
in what you probably consider to be one of your best arguments.

And let me here make a passing remark on the word “immortality,” which you
have chosen to designate the pretended indestructibility of matter.
Immortality is not simply “existence without end,” but “life without end.”
Hence living beings alone can be immortal. Do you assume, then, that a
grain of dust or an atom of matter is a living being? If you say _yes_,
where are the facts that will lend a support to such an unscientific
doctrine? If you say _no_, then the immortality of your matter is nothing
indeed but a new form of what you would style “philosophical
charlatanism.”

To conclude: the indestructibility of matter is a ridiculous invention of
ignorant empiricists, who know neither what matter is nor what is
philosophical reasoning. They make, indeed, a great deal of noise with
their scientific publications; but their ephemeral celebrity is due to an
organized system of mutual laudation and to Masonic support, as you know.
Let only twenty years pass, and you may be sure that our children will
laugh at your celebrities: and if your _Force and Matter_ is to reach
them, they will laugh at you too. Common sense cannot slumber for ever;
and when it awakes, then will all your infidel scribes be pronounced
designing knaves.

_Büchner._ I thought you would never end, sir; but, long as your answer
has been, it has failed to convince me. The force of my argument lies in
this: that what can have an end must have had a beginning. If, therefore,
matter is not indestructible, it must have had a beginning.

_Reader._ Certainly.

_Büchner._ But a beginning of matter is inconceivable. For how could
matter come into existence?

_Reader._ By creation out of nothing.

_Büchner._ This is what I deny. For out of nothing nothing can arise. This
is an axiom. Hence “never can an atom arise anew or disappear; it can only
change its combinations.... Matter must have existed from eternity, and
must last for ever” (p. 12).

_Reader._ I am not in the least surprised to hear that my long talk did
not convince you. It is always difficult to convince a man against his
will. My object, however, was not to give you a positive demonstration of
the fact of creation, but only to show that the reasons which you were
parading against creation amount to nothing. Of this I hope I have not
failed to convince you. But now you come forward with a new argument,
which indeed is very old, consisting in a pretended axiom, that out of
nothing nothing can arise. Suppose, doctor, that I deny your axiom. How
would you show that I deny a truth?

_Büchner._ “How can any one deny the axiom that out of nothing nothing can
arise?” (p. 12).

_Reader._ You must know, doctor, that what you assume to be an old axiom
is only an old error. In fact, why do you say that out of nothing nothing
can arise? Simply because natural energies can do nothing without pre‐
existing materials. Hence your argument amounts to this. “Natural energies
never make anything out of nothing; therefore out of nothing nothing can
be made.” That this conclusion is a great blunder I need not prove, I
presume, as logic teaches that no conclusion can be more general than its
premises. Where is, then, the ground of your pretended axiom?

Nor can you reply that the natural energies are the only energies known to
us, and that, if these cannot make anything out of nothing, the axiom is
unexceptionably true. This would be to assume what you are bound to prove,
to wit, that there is no power above the natural forces; and to assume
this is what logicians call _Petitio principii_. On the other hand, you
cannot maintain that such natural forces are the only ones we know; for
you cannot limit the range of human knowledge within the narrow sphere of
mere empiricism without denying human reason.

_Büchner._ We have no notion of supersensible forces.

_Reader._ You talk without reflection, doctor. If you have no such a
notion, what is it, then, that compels you to admit any demonstrated
truth? Is it attraction, heat, electricity, or any of your physical or
chemical forces? No; it is the force of demonstration, it is the force of
truth. This is no vain theory; I appeal to your own experience. Your
intellect is obliged to yield to the force of evidence and demonstration
just as inevitably as the pendulum is obliged to yield to the force of
gravitation. And since a real effect requires a real cause, hence whatever
thus really compels your intellect to yield must have a real power, and
that evidently supersensible.

But reverting to your pretended axiom, I have yet to remark that, strictly
speaking, it does not even hold in the case of natural causes; in other
terms, I say that nothing is ever produced by natural causes except out of
nothing. Of course no tailor ever made a coat without cloth, and no
carpenter ever built a ship without pre‐existing materials. This I admit;
but if you closely examine the point, you will see that to make a coat or
a ship is not _to produce_ it, and that the action of the tailor and the
carpenter wholly consists in modifying and arranging the materials so as
to give them a form. It is, therefore, this _form_ alone that is produced.
Now, clearly, this form, before its production, was nothing; for it had no
existence. And therefore the work of the tailor or the carpenter is a
production of something out of nothing.(152) And thus either you must deny
that anything is ever produced, or you must give up your axiom that
nothing can be produced out of nothing.

_Büchner._ I cannot give up my axiom without inconsistency. I will rather
deny that anything is ever really produced. In fact, “Those are children,
or persons with a narrow sphere of vision, says Empedocles, who imagine
that anything arises that has not existed before, or that anything can
entirely die and perish” (p. 15).

_Reader._ These are empty words.

_Büchner._ On the other hand, “the immortality of matter is now a fact
scientifically established, and can no longer be denied” (p. 13).

_Reader._ Indeed?

_Büchner._ Yes; “Its actual proof is given by our scales and retorts” (p.
13).

_Reader._ I thought I had already shown that your scales and retorts are
incapable of giving such a proof.

_Büchner._ “Sebastian Frank, a German who lived in 1528, says: Matter was
in the beginning in God, and is on that account eternal and infinite. The
earth and everything created may pass away, but we cannot say that that
will perish out of which matter is created. The substance remains for
ever” (p. 14).

_Reader._ Do you endorse these words?

_Büchner._ Certainly.

_Reader._ Then you catch yourself in your own trap. For if matter is
created, as your German writer says, surely there is a Creator.

_Büchner._ But if matter was in the beginning in God, and was eternal, it
is plain that matter could not be created.

_Reader._ Perfectly true. And therefore, since matter, according to your
German authority, has been created, surely matter was not in the beginning
in God. But, after all, can you endorse Frank’s words without admitting a
God? And can you admit a God and a Creator while fighting against creation
and the existence of God? Be honest, doctor, and confess that bad indeed
must a cause be which cannot be maintained but by clumsy sophistry and
shameful contradiction.



V. Immortality Of Force.


_Reader._ In your theory, doctor, force is immortal. This I cannot
understand. Would you tell me how you come to such a conclusion?

_Büchner._ “Indestructible, imperishable, and immortal as matter is also
its immanent force. Intimately united to matter, force revolves in the
same never‐ending cycle, and emerges from any form in the same quantity as
it entered. If it be an undoubted fact that matter can neither be produced
nor destroyed, but merely transformed, then it must also be assumed as an
established principle that there is not a single case in which force can
be produced out of, or pass into, nothing; or, in other words, can be born
or annihilated. In all cases where force is manifested it may be reduced
to its sources; that is to say, it can be ascertained from what other
forces a definite amount of force has been obtained, either directly or by
conversion. This convertibility is not arbitrary, but takes place
according to definite equivalents, so that not the smallest quantity of
force can be lost” (p. 16).

_Reader._ How do you account for this theory?

_Büchner._ “Logic and our daily experience teach us that no natural motion
or change, consequently no manifestation of force, can take place without
producing an endless chain of successive motions and changes, as every
effect becomes immediately the cause of succeeding effects. There is no
repose of any kind in nature; its whole existence is a constant cycle, in
which every motion, the consequence of a preceding motion, becomes
immediately the cause of an equivalent succeeding one; so that there is
nowhere a gap, nowhere either loss or gain. No motion in nature proceeds
from or passes into nothing; and as in the material world every individual
form can only realize its existence by drawing its materials from the
immense storehouse of matter, so does every motion originate from the
equally immense storehouse of forces, to which sooner or later the
borrowed quantity of force is again returned. The motion may become
latent—_i.e._, apparently concealed; but nevertheless it is not lost,
having merely been converted into equivalent states, from which it will
escape again in some shape. During this process force has changed its
mode; for force may, though essentially the same, assume in the universe a
variety of modes. The various forms may, as already stated, be converted
into others without loss, so that the sum‐total of existing forces can
neither be increased nor diminished, the forms only changing” (pp. 17,
18).

_Reader._ What do you mean by “forms of forces”?

_Büchner._ Physics, as I stated to you on another occasion, “makes us
acquainted with eight different forces—gravitation, mechanical force,
heat, light, electricity, magnetism, affinity, cohesion, which,
inseparably united to matter, form and give shape to the world. These
forces are, with few exceptions, mutually convertible, so that nothing is
lost in the process of conversion” (p. 18).

_Reader._ “With few exceptions”? I fear that any exception will prove
fatal to your theory. But go on, doctor; I wish to hear more about your
conversion of forces.

_Büchner._ “We may cite a few instances of transformation or
convertibility of forces. Heat and light are produced by combustion. Heat
again is converted into mechanical power in steam, and mechanical force
can again by friction be reconverted into heat, and, as in the electro‐
magnetical machine, into heat, electricity, magnetism, and light. One of
the most frequent conversions of force is that of heat into mechanical
force, and _vice versa_” (pp. 18, 19).

_Reader._ What conclusion do you draw from these and similar facts?

_Büchner._ I draw the conclusion that in speaking of forces “the word
_lost_ is an incorrect expression; for in all these and similar cases
there is not a minim of power lost as regards the universe, but merely as
regards the immediate object. The expended force has in reality only
assumed different forms, the sum‐total of which is equivalent to the
original force. Innumerable examples may be adduced to establish this law,
which is expressed in the axiom that _force can neither be created nor
destroyed_—an axiom from which results the immortality of force, and the
impossibility of its having a beginning or an end. The consequence of this
recently‐discovered natural truth is the same as that deduced from the
immortality of matter, and both form and manifest from eternity the sum of
phenomena which we term _world_. The cycle of matter sides, as a necessary
correlate, with the cycle of force, and teaches that nothing is generated
anew, that nothing disappears, and that the secret of nature lies in an
eternal and immanent cycle, in which cause and effect are connected
without beginning or end. That only can be immortal which has existed from
eternity; and what is immortal cannot have been created” (pp. 21, 22).

_Reader._ I have heard with great attention all you have said, doctor, and
I am sorry to see that you are as wrong as ever. Your argument is
altogether ludicrous.

_Büchner._ It is, however, a mere statement of known facts.

_Reader._ I question this very much. But even if the alleged facts were
unquestionable, and could not receive any other interpretation than that
which you give of them, your conclusion about the “immortality of force”
would still be groundless. In fact, the forces of which you speak are all
material, and have their existence in matter alone. It is therefore vain
and preposterous to argue about the immortality of such forces when you
have already failed to show the immortality of matter itself. You boast
that your argument is a mere statement of facts; and so do all modern
sciolists, more or less awkwardly, when pushed to the wall. But what are
the facts? Is heat a form of force? Is it a form convertible into another
form? I perceive from your style that you never studied this subject; you
only repeat like a parrot what other parrots have learned to say, without
the least notion of the true state of things. Tell me, what is a form of
force? What is force itself?

_Büchner._ It is not my duty to define force. I accept the definition of
the physicists.

_Reader._ This is exactly what I expected to hear. Yet when a man
undertakes to philosophize on anything, he ought to know very distinctly
what that thing is. Do you make any difference between “forces” and
“powers”?

_Büchner._ No, sir, as is evident from my terminology.

_Reader._ Do you discriminate between “force” and “quantity of action”?

_Büchner._ No, sir.

_Reader._ Do you identify “force” with “quantity of movement”?

_Büchner._ Yes, sir.

_Reader._ Then it is evident that you confound force, power, quantity of
action, and quantity of movement.

_Büchner._ All these terms are substantially identical in science.

_Reader._ True, the lowest school of physicists considers them as
substantially identical, and in this manner they succeed in persuading
themselves and many others that the quantity of living force existing in
the world is always invariably the same. But, after all, those physicists
speak very incorrectly, and are not to be followed in their blundering
terminology. A quantity of movement is not an action, but the result of
action; and a quantity of action is not a power, but the exertion of
power. In fact, the same power acts with different intensity in different
conditions; and equal actions produce different movements in bodies
actually subject to different dynamical determinations. Hence it is
impossible to admit that powers, actions, and movements are synonymous.

And now, which of these three notions do you choose to identify with
force? If you say that force is “a quantity of movement,” then it will be
false that no force is ever lost; for any quantity of movement can be lost
_without compensation_. Thus a stone thrown up vertically loses its
quantity of movement without compensation.(153) If you say that force is
“a quantity of action,” it will again be false that no force is ever lost;
for all successive actions successively pass away, and continually change
their direction and their intensity, according as the distances and
positions of the bodies acted on are altered. Lastly, if you say that
force is “power,” then it is false that forces are transformed or
convertible; for the power of each element of matter remains unalterably
the same, as you yourself acknowledge, throughout all the vicissitudes of
time. “A particle of iron,” you say with Dubois‐Reymond, “is and remains
the same, whether it crosses the horizon in the meteoric stone, rushes
along in the wheel of the steam‐engine, or circulates in the blood through
the temples of the poet.”

_Büchner._ Would you, then, repudiate science?

_Reader._ By no means. I love and respect true science. I only repudiate
that false and presumptuous dogmatism which prompts a class of physicists
to draw general conclusions from particular, and often questionable,
premises.

_Büchner._ Do you, then, condemn the method of induction?

_Reader._ Not at all. I condemn the abuse of that method. What right have
modern scientists of extending the principle of the “conservation of
force” beyond the boundaries marked by observation and experiment? All
they have a right to say is that _in the impact of bodies an equal
quantity of movement __ is lost by one body and acquired by another_. This
is the fact. But does it follow that therefore the movement lost by the
one body passes _identically_ into the other? This is what they imagine;
and this is what cannot be proved, because it is absurd. Movement is an
affection of matter, and has no independent existence, as you well know.
It cannot, therefore, pass identically from body to body any more than a
movement of anger can pass identically from man to man. And yet it is on
this absurd notion of _nomadic_ movement that the whole theory of the
conservation of force, as now held by your advanced thinkers, has been
raised. They say: “The quantity of movement which is lost by one of the
bodies, and that which is acquired by the other, are perfectly equal;
therefore a quantity of movement passes identically from one body to
another.” In other terms they say: “There is equality; therefore there is
identity.” Is this legitimate induction? Good logic would lead us to argue
in the following manner: The actions of the two struggling bodies, being
equal and opposite, must produce equal and opposite quantities of
movement; hence the quantity of movement which is _destroyed_ in the
impinging body must equal the quantity of movement _produced_ in the body
impinged upon. Such is the only logical view of the subject; it agrees
both with reason and with fact, and it strikes your theory at the root.
For what is destroyed is no more; and what is produced had no existence
before its production.

We might allow you to talk of the “conservation” and “conversion” of
forces, were you reasonable enough to consider such expressions as mere
conventional technicalities suited to explain the relations of effects to
effects rather than of effects to causes. But you construe the technical
phrases into real and absolute principles, and try to explain causation by
substituting the effect for the cause; which is as ridiculous an abuse of
the word “force” as if a carpenter pretended that his iron square is the
square spoken of in the treatises of geometry. But this is not all. What
right have you to apply such a theory, whether right or wrong, to
gravitation?

_Büchner._ “The pendulum of every clock shows the conversion of
gravitation into motion” (p. 21).

_Reader._ Indeed? What do you mean by gravitation? The attractive power of
the earth, or its action, or the weight of the pendulum? Surely the
attractive power of the earth is not converted into movement; for it
remains in the earth, and it continues its work. Neither is the weight of
the pendulum converted into movement; for the pendulum does not cease,
while moving, to have weight, nor does it weigh more when, at rest; and at
the end of its oscillation is not found to have expended or consumed any
portion of its weight. You are therefore obliged to say that it is the
action of the earth that is converted into movement. But such an
expression can have no meaning; because the action is the production of an
act, and it is the act itself, not its production, that constitutes the
formal principle of the movement. On the other hand, a production which
becomes the thing produced is such an absurdity that not even a lunatic
could dream of it. Thus it is quite evident that in no imaginable sense
can gravitation be considered as _converted_ into movement. It produces
movement, but is not converted into it. You see, doctor, that your so
boasted theory has no foundation either in reason or in fact.

_Büchner._ But we cannot deny that mechanical movement is convertible into
heat, that heat may become light, and that all other such forces can be
transformed.

_Reader._ I repeat, and, on the strength of the reasons which I have
brought forward, I maintain that the term “conversion of forces” may be
admitted as a conventional phrase, but not as exhibiting a philosophical
notion. A real conversion of mechanical movement into heat would require
that a movement of translation should be transformed into a movement of
vibration by being distributed among the molecules of the body which is
heated. This I have already shown to be impossible. Things follow a
different course. When the hammer falls upon the anvil, its action (and
not its movement) shakes the first range of molecules which it encounters.
These molecules are thus constrained to approach the following set of
molecules lying immediately under them, and to trouble their relative
equilibrium. These latter, in their turn, trouble the equilibrium of the
following set, and so on till all the molecules of the anvil partake in
the movement, each molecule undergoing alternate _compression_ and
_dilatation_, the first through the violent action of its neighbors, and
the second by the reaction due to its immanent powers. The consequence of
all this is that a rapid succession of vibratory movements is originated
in each molecule; and thus, as soon as the movement of translation of the
falling hammer is extinguished, the movement of vibration is awakened in
the molecules of both the anvil and the hammer. Now, what is this but a
case of impact? For just as the hammer impinges on the surface of the
anvil does each molecule of the anvil impinge on its neighbor; and
therefore what you call a transformation of mechanical into vibratory
movement is not a real transformation of the one into the other, but the
extinction of the one and the production of the other. Thus heat is
generated by percussion; and in a similar manner it would be generated by
friction and by other mechanical processes. Whenever heat is produced,
molecules are set into vibrations of a certain intensity, and their
relative equilibrium disturbed. Evidently, such a disturbance of the
molecular equilibrium is due to interaction of molecules—that is, to
molecular impact. Now, I have already shown, and you have understood it, I
hope, that, in the case of impact, the movement never passes identically
from this matter to that, but is produced in the one at the same rate as
it is extinguished in the other.

I might say a great deal more on this subject, but here I stop, as I
almost regret having said so much. Your theory of the conservation of
force does not bear out your “immortality of force,” and is so destitute
of proof that it does not deserve the honor of a longer refutation.(154)



VI. Infinity Of Matter.


_Reader._ How do you account, doctor, for your assertion that “matter is
infinite”?

_Büchner._ In a very simple manner: “Whether we investigate the extension
of matter in its magnitude or minuteness, we never come to an end or to an
ultimate form of it. When the invention of the microscope disclosed
unknown worlds, and exhibited to the eye of the investigator the infinite
minuteness of organic elements, the hope was raised that we might discover
the ultimate organic atom, perhaps the mode of its origin. This hope
vanished with the improvement of our instruments. The microscope showed
that in the hundredth part of a drop of water there existed a world of
animalcules, of the most delicate and definite forms, which move and
digest like other animals, and are endowed with organs, the structure of
which we have little conception of” (p. 23). “We term the most minute
particle of matter, which we imagine to be no longer capable of division,
an _atom_, and consider matter to be composed of such atoms, acquiring
from them its qualities, and existing by their reciprocal attraction and
repulsion. But the word _atom_ is merely an expression for a necessary
conception, required for certain purposes. We have no real notion of the
thing we term _atom_; we know nothing of its size, form, composition, etc.
No one has seen it. The speculative philosophers deny its existence, as
they do not admit that a thing can exist which is no longer divisible.
Thus neither observation nor thought leads us, in regard to the minuteness
of matter, to a point where we can stop; nor have we any hope that we
shall ever reach that point” (p. 24, 25).

_Reader._ That point has been reached, doctor. The theory of primitive,
unextended elements is well known and advocated by good scientists and
thoughtful philosophers. But let this pass, as I long for your
demonstration of the infinity of matter.

_Büchner._ “Like the microscope in respect to the minuteness, so does the
telescope conduct us to the universe at large. Astronomers boldly thought
to penetrate into the inmost recesses of the world; but the more their
instruments were improved, the more worlds expanded before their
astonished eyes. The telescope resolved the whitish nebulæ in the sky into
myriads of stars, worlds, solar and planetary systems; and the earth with
its inhabitants, hitherto imagined to be the crown and centre of
existence, was degraded from its imaginary height to be a mere atom moving
in universal space. The distances of the celestial bodies are so immense
that our intellect wonders at the contemplation of them, and becomes
confused. Light, moving with a velocity of millions of miles in a minute,
required no less than two thousand years to reach the earth from the
galaxy! And the large telescope of Lord Rosse has disclosed stars so
distant from us that their light must have travelled thirty millions of
years before it reached the earth. But a simple observation must convince
us that these stars are not at the limit of space. All bodies obey the law
of gravitation, and attract each other. In assuming, now, a limitation,
the attraction must tend towards an imagined centre of gravity, and the
consequence would be the conglomeration of all matter in one celestial
body. However great the distances may be, such an union must happen; but
as it does not happen, although the world exists from eternity, there can
be no attraction towards a common centre. And this gravitation towards a
centre can only be prevented by there being, beyond the bodies visible to
us, others still further which attract from without—and so forth _ad
infinitum_. Every imagined limitation would render the existence of the
world impossible” (pp. 25, 26).

_Reader._ Is this the whole of your argument?

_Büchner._ Yes, sir.

_Reader._ I should like to know how could the large telescope of Lord
Rosse disclose stars so distant from us that their light must have
travelled thirty millions of years before it reached the earth? Do you not
know that in thirty millions of years light travels two million millions
of times over the distance from the earth to the sun? And do you hope the
world will believe that, thanks to Lord Rosse’s telescope, it has been
possible to determine the parallax of a star two million millions of times
more distant from us than we are from the sun? The world indeed is
ignorant and credulous; but when the lie is too impudent, it is apt to cry
you down as a charlatan. You are most imprudent, doctor. You had no need
of Lord Rosse’s telescope for your argumentation; and your mention of the
distant stars disclosed by it was therefore an inexcusable blunder. But
the argument itself has no foundation. You imagine that, if the world were
not infinitely expanded in all directions, all matter, by universal
gravitation, would have conglomerated into one celestial body. But tell
me, Does the moon gravitate towards the earth?

_Büchner._ Of course it does.

_Reader._ How do you account, then, for the fact that the moon has not
fallen, nor is likely to fall, on the earth? Is it because the moon is
attracted by some matter lying outside its orbit?

_Büchner._ It is on account of centrifugal force accompanying its
curvilinear motion.

_Reader._ I am delighted to see that you can explain the fact without
appealing to the infinity of matter. Let us go on. As the moon gravitates
towards the earth, so do all satellites towards their planets, and all
planets towards the sun. And yet none of the satellites have fallen into
their planets, and none of the planets into the sun. Is this owing to the
matter which lies outside of the planetary and solar system? I presume,
doctor, that the enormous distance of fixed stars from us will not
encourage you to believe that their attraction on any planet can cope with
its gravitation towards the sun. On the other hand, this gravitation is
not neutralized by the action of any exterior matter; for all planets
actually obey the solar attraction, as their orbital movement conclusively
shows. This same orbital movement implies also a centrifugal tendency; and
this tendency sufficiently prevents the falling of the planets on the sun.
This is unquestionable doctrine.

_Büchner._ I admit the doctrine.

_Reader._ Accordingly it is evident there is no need of infinite matter to
prevent the celestial bodies from clustering into one central body.
Centrifugal forces, in fact, are sufficient, even by your own admission,
to remove all danger of such a catastrophe; and centrifugal forces are to
be found wherever there is curvilinear movement around a centre of
attraction, that is, throughout all the world, according to astronomical
induction. Consequently your argument in favor of the infinity of matter
is a mere delusion.

_Büchner._ “If we can find no limit to minuteness, and are still less able
to reach it in respect to magnitude, we must declare matter to be infinite
in either direction, and incapable of limitation in time or space. If the
laws of thought demonstrate an infinite divisibility of matter, and if it
be further impossible to imagine a limited space or a nothing, it must be
admitted that there is here a remarkable concordance of logical laws with
the results of our scientific investigations” (p. 27).

_Reader._ Your great scientific investigations give no result that favors
the infinity of matter. This we have just seen. Logical laws give no
better results. It is idle, doctor, to assume that there is any law of
thought which demonstrates the infinite divisibility of matter; and it is
as capricious to assert the impossibility of imagining that the space
occupied by matter is limited. You say that outside that space there would
be nothing, and therefore there would be no space except that occupied by
matter; whence you conclude that space would be limited. Do not fear,
doctor, for the fate of space. Outside the space which is occupied by
matter there is yet infinite space unoccupied by matter. Space is not made
up of matter. Move the matter; you will not move space. Remove all matter;
space will not disappear. Of course you cannot understand this, because
whoever blots God out of the world extinguishes the source of his
intellectual light, and is therefore doomed to grope for ever in the dark.
But we Christian philosophers, who admit a God infinite and immense, have
no great difficulty to understand how there can be space not occupied by
matter. Wherever God is, there is space which can be occupied by matter;
for wherever God is, there he can create any amount of matter; and
wherever matter can be placed, there is space; for space is nothing but
the possibility of locating matter.

It is not my intention to dilate on this topic, nor is it necessary. To
answer your difficulty I need only say that space, though void of matter,
is always full of God’s substance, to whose immensity alone we must
resort, if we desire to account at all for the existence of infinite
space.



VII. Dignity Of Matter.


_Reader._ I scarcely expected, doctor, that you would devote a chapter of
your book to such a trifling and unscientific subject as the dignity of
matter. Is not matter, as such, the lowest of all known substances? What
is the dignity of matter?

_Büchner._ You belong to the old school, sir. I will tell you what is the
modern view of matter: “To despise matter and our own body because it is
material, to consider nature and the world as dust which we must endeavor
to shake off, nay, to torment our own body, can only arise from a
confusion of notions, the result of ignorance and fanaticism” (p. 28).

_Reader._ You begin with a false assumption, doctor. We of the old school
do not despise the body “because it is material.” God created matter; and
whatever proceeds from God is very good. We, however, consider the body as
of a lower nature than our rational soul, and try to put a check to its
unruly appetites—a thing which you, being a physician, will surely approve
and commend as conducive to the preservation of health, not to say of
morality.

_Büchner._ “Matter is not inferior to, but the peer of, spirit; the one
cannot exist without the other; and matter is the vehicle of all mental
power, of all human and earthly greatness” (p. 28).

_Reader._ This is, doctor, the most abject and degrading materialism.

_Büchner._ I am not afraid of this word, sir. “We frequently hear those
persons contemptuously called _materialists_ who do not share the
fashionable contempt for matter, but endeavor to fathom by its means the
powers and laws of existence; who have discerned that spirit could not
have built the world out of itself, and that it is impossible to arrive at
a just conception of the world without an exact knowledge of matter and
its laws. In this sense the name of materialist can nowadays be only a
title of honor. It is to materialists that we owe the conquest over matter
and a knowledge of its laws, so that, almost released from the chains of
gravitation, we fly with the swiftness of the wind across the plain, and
are enabled to communicate, with the celerity of thought, with the most
distant parts of the globe. Malevolence is silenced by such facts; and the
times are past in which a world produced by a deceitful fancy was
considered of more value than the reality” (p. 29).

_Reader._ You commit blunders upon blunders, doctor. We do not call
materialists those who do not share “the fashionable contempt for matter,”
but those who deny the existence of a spiritual soul, or teach that matter
is not inferior to, but the peer of, spirit, and that the one cannot exist
without the other, just as you teach. And therefore your definition of
materialism is your first blunder. Again, contempt for matter is not, and
never has been, “fashionable”; second blunder. That materialists endeavor
“to fathom the powers and laws of existence” is a third blunder; for they
are not even capable of fathoming their own ignorance, as our present
discussion shows very clearly. A further blunder is to speak of “the
powers and laws of existence,” as if there were any law of existence. A
fifth blunder is to give credit to the materialists for having discerned
“that spirit could not have built the world _out of itself_.” This was
discerned long ago by Christian philosophers; whereas your materialists
have even failed to discern that spirit could create the world _out of
nothing_. A sixth blunder is contained in your assertion that “it is to
materialists that we owe the conquest over matter and a knowledge of its
laws.” Indeed, you might as well say that we owe light to darkness, and
wisdom to dolts. Go and study, O great doctor and president of the medical
association of Hessen‐Darmstadt! and then tell us whether Newton, Volta,
Galileo, Galvani, Biot, Ampère, Cuvier, Faraday, Liebig, and scores of
other great scientists were materialists. To such men we owe modern
science; but what does science owe to your materialists? What law did they
discover? What conquests have they achieved? It is absurd for them to
complain of “malevolence” when they are treated with the contempt they
deserve. They are, in fact, mere plunderers and traitors of science.

But I wonder, doctor, whether your love of materialism is much calculated
to show the _dignity_ of matter. You have not adduced as yet any reason
why we should think of matter very highly. You have said, indeed, that
matter is “the peer of spirit”; but this is mere twaddle, as you admit of
no other spirit than what would be a result of material combination. I
want something better—something like a good argument—before I can
appreciate the dignity of matter.

_Büchner._ “Pretended worshippers of God have in the middle ages carried
their contempt for matter so far as to nail their own bodies, the noble
works of nature, to the pillory” (p. 29).

_Reader._ What do you mean?

_Büchner._ “Some have tormented, others crucified themselves ...”
(_ibid._)

_Reader._ Who crucified himself? When? Where? Can any one nail himself to
a cross any more than he can raise himself by his belt?

_Büchner._ “Crowds of flagellants travelled through the country,
exhibiting their lacerated backs. Strength and health were undermined in
the most refined manner, in order to render to the spirit—considered as
independent of the body—its superiority over the sinful flesh” (p. 29).

_Reader._ The flagellants were a set of fanatics; but their excesses do
not prove the dignity of matter. After all, had they been materialists,
they would surely have done something worse than to scourge themselves.
They may have undermined their strength and their health, as you remark;
but how much greater is the number of materialists who shorten their lives
by shameful disorders, since they have lost all hope of a future and
better life? Do you pretend that what is done by your adepts for the sake
of worldly or sensual pleasure cannot be done by Christians for the sake
of eternal salvation? We believe in eternal salvation, and we know what we
believe. Strength and health are goods of a lower order than morality, and
no true man would hesitate to endanger them for a superior good. But on
what authority do you assume that in the middle ages strength and health
were undermined “in the most refined manner”?

_Büchner._ “Feuerbach relates that S. Bernard had, by his exaggerated
asceticism, lost his sense of taste, so that he took grease for butter,
oil for water” (p. 30).

_Reader._ You know that Feuerbach is no authority; and yet I should like
to know, how can a man lose his sense of taste _by asceticism_? Does
asceticism affect the tongue or the palate? S. Bernard lived sixty‐three
years, in spite of continuous intellectual and corporal work, so that you
can scarcely say that his manner of undermining his strength and health
was “most refined.” As to grease and butter, I have the honor to inform
you that S. Bernard seldom tasted either, as they were excluded from the
Cistercian table. What do you say to that?

_Büchner._ “Rostan reports that in many cloisters the superiors were in
the habit of frequently bleeding their monks, in order to repress their
passions” (p. 30).

_Reader._ Bosh.

_Büchner._ “He further states that injured nature avenged itself, and that
rebellion, the use of poison and the dagger against superiors, were by no
means rare in these living tombs” (p. 30).

_Reader._ And you believe such lies? Of course there is no reason why they
should not be circulated among the ignorant and superstitious. They are
fond of believing such things, and they are served according to their
taste. The supply always meets the demand. Oh! how truly right was S. Paul
when he said that _those who turn a deaf ear to truth are doomed to
swallow fables_! Those who do not believe the Catholic Church, the highest
authority on earth, by just judgment stupidly believe the lies of a Rostan
and of a hundred other charlatans of modern times. But let us not forget
the real point at issue. Your object was to show the dignity of matter.
Where are your proofs? Do you think that the dignity of matter can be
established by defamation? Every intelligent reader will infer, on the
contrary, that it is from lack of reasons that you are obliged to disgrace
your work with libel and slander.

_Büchner._ I am not a forger, after all. I have cited my authorities. But
the dignity of matter appears from the fact that it is to matter that we
owe science. “Have those who start from God and not from matter ever given
us any clue as to the quality of matter and its laws, after which they say
the world is governed? Could they tell us whether the sun moves or is at
rest? whether the earth is a globe or a plain? what was God’s design? No!
That would be an impossibility. To start from God in the investigation of
nature is a phrase without meaning. The unfortunate tendency to proceed in
the investigation of nature from theoretical premises, and to construe the
world and natural truths by way of speculation, is long abandoned; and it
is by pursuing an opposite course of scientific investigation that the
great advance of our knowledge of nature in recent times must be ascribed”
(pp. 31, 32).

_Reader._ It is evident that all our knowledge begins in sensible
representations, and therefore depends on matter. But how can you infer
from this the dignity of matter? When you ascend a ladder, the first step
is always the lowest; which shows the contrary of what you wish to prove.
Matter is the lowest of all objects of knowledge, while the highest is
God. From matter we start, and in God we must end. This every one admits;
you, however, assume that some philosophers “start from God, and not from
matter.” Who are they? Are they, forsooth, those who teach that matter has
been created by God? Then you are unjust to them, and falsify the history
of science, by giving us to understand that they could not tell us whether
the sun moves or is at rest, and whether the earth is a globe or a plain.
It was not the atheist or the materialist that taught us astronomy and
geography. The materialist can only tell us, as you do, that “all natural
and mental forces are inherent in matter” (p. 32), which is no science at
all; and that “in matter alone forces can manifest themselves,” or that
“matter is the origin of all that exists” (_ibid._), which is the reverse
of science. _This_ they can prate; but as for the great laws of nature,
they had to learn them from us—I mean from men who did not preach the
dignity of matter with the foolish and ignoble purpose of dethroning God.
You condemn those who “construe the world and natural truths by way of
speculation.” This I have already answered; but I may remind you that by
condemning speculation you condemn yourself. Experimental knowledge is
very good; but it is by speculation alone that our knowledge acquires its
scientific character. Hence your view of science without speculation is as
absurd as your assumption of matter without spirit and without God. This
may suit materialists, for they stop supinely at the lowest step of the
ladder; but intellectual men have a mind to ascend the ladder to the very
top. What is the use of knowing matter, if you know nothing else? Matter
is the alphabet of science; to study matter, and to ignore the methods of
rising from matter to spirit, and from the world to God, is to study the
alphabet alone during all your life, and to die an abecedarian. This is
what you crave; this is what you adorn with the venerable name of science;
whereas we believers not only study the alphabet, but also read the great
book of the universe, and know that the book has an Author, whose thoughts
it reveals. You have vainly labored to establish the dignity of matter.
Had you known how to read the book of nature, you would have discovered
that matter has no natural dignity but that of being the lowest work _of
Him whose works are all perfect_.

To Be Continued.




Who Will Remember?


Like as a pebble on the salt sea‐sands
  That some wave washes to an unknown shore,
So shall we quietly be swept away
  From out the millions to be seen no more.

Who will remember, who will say “dear friend”?
  Who will walk sadly seeking yet a trace
Of well‐known footsteps, of caressing hands,
  Of some remembrance of a lost, dead face?

Ask not too much of human hearts that wait;
  Fresh buds will blossom for their eyes at last,
And flowers dead, however sweet they were,
  Are, like the whole of earth’s dead treasures, past.




Church Music.(155)



I.


From the earliest times music has had a place in the public worship of all
peoples—among the pagans, among the Jews, among Christians. Its use in
this connection has been dictated by God himself in the act of
constituting the human mind; it has, moreover, received his express
sanction, as we learn from the ordinances of the Jewish people. In the new
law it has even been consecrated by his own divine example, since we read
that our Lord and his apostles sang hymns together. His birth was heralded
to the world by the song of his angels, and heaven is represented to the
Christian as a place where we shall sing for ever the praises of God.

Church music, therefore, dates from the origin of Christianity, and has
constituted ever since an integral, though not an essential, part of
public worship among Christians.

The church has her simple offices and her solemn offices, and she has made
the use of music one of the chief marks by which they are distinguished.

Church music grew with the growth of the church. As Christians increased
and prospered, music was more and more cultivated, and was more largely
introduced into their solemn exercises of worship.

The extent to which sacred music was cultivated in the early church cannot
be easily determined; we have no reason to think it was very great.

When Europe emerged from that sad state of confusion which came over it
with the invasion of the northern barbarians, and music was revived as a
science and an art, it was, like the other branches of learning, at first
confined mostly to the clergy, and its productions were for a long time
almost exclusively of a sacred character.

The church being an indestructible institution, her traditions are handed
down by one generation of her children to another. It was thus that in a
dark day of confusion and destruction she preserved for us the treasures
of ancient learning and the arts; and the world to‐day owes to her not
only the modern developments of poetry, painting, sculpture, and
architecture, but also the beautiful and varied combinations of modern
music.

At first, as we have just said, there was no music but that which was
dedicated to holy purposes, except such rude melodies as nature in all
ages teaches the most uncultivated.

The musical drama did not exist; and music does not seem to have made any
essential part of the pageants or spectacles destined for the public
entertainment.

It was from the church that music was introduced into the chamber, the
hall, and the street, and in the beginning secular music imitated and
borrowed the forms of that which was sacred.

The music used in the sacred offices at first and during many centuries
was the plain chant. How much of this chant was taken from pagan or Jewish
sources cannot be determined, for authorities differ widely; but in any
case it was so modified and improved by the fathers of the Eastern Church,
and afterwards in the West by SS. Ambrose and Gregory, when they adapted
it to the purposes of Christian worship, that it is now frequently called
the _ecclesiastical chant_, though it is oftener called _Gregorian_, from
the pope just mentioned.

In the beginning it was what its name indicates—_plain_ and simple. It was
sung in unison, and its melodies did not exceed the compass of the most
ordinary voices.

But unison was found monotonous, as also the uniformity of time or measure
generally observed in plain chant. The first departure from the old and
severe forms was made when, about the middle of the IXth century, they
introduced a sort of rude harmony constructed on the chant.

But this did not satisfy the craving for change, and the love of novelty,
once indulged, led the way to many excesses.

Baini gives us an example of the abuses that then became prevalent. “They
would write, for example, a Mass,” he says, “taking as a subject the
melody of the Gregorian _Ave Maria_. Three parts in the harmony would sing
portions of the _Kyrie_, _Gloria_, and _Credo_ at the same time, while a
fourth would take up at intervals the entire _Ave Maria_.”

Not merely were the sacred words of the composition itself “shaken
together in most admired confusion,” but, as we have just said, the words
of other sacred pieces were foisted among them, so that they no longer
expressed any one idea. Worse far, the gaps were even sometimes filled up
“with snatches of old songs,” the ballads of the day, and those not always
of the most unexceptionable character.

Attempts were also made to vary the stately measure of the chant.

Indeed, all sorts of devices were introduced in the search for novelty,
and so great had become the abuse about the period of the Council of Trent
that a celebrated cardinal declared that some of the church music of his
day was so unfit to be offered to God that nothing but invincible
ignorance could excuse from mortal sin those who offered it.

At this juncture arose the illustrious Palestrina.

Born in an age of the most vitiated taste, and himself not quite exempt
from its unfavorable influences at the opening of his professional career,
his exalted and discriminating genius was guided to disentangle the sweet
spirit of song from the mazes in which it was well‐nigh lost, and to
rescue his art from the merited reproaches which it was receiving on every
side. He was encouraged and assisted in his task by two saints, S. Charles
Borromeo and S. Philip Neri. When his celebrated _Missa Papæ Marcelli_ was
first heard in 1565, it at once banished from the churches all the profane
novelties that had preceded it, and became the model for church
compositions during the next hundred years, when with Carissimi began the
change to what is modern.

When Pius IV., the reigning pontiff, heard it, he declared it satisfied
all the requirements of sacred music; in fact, so charmed was he by its
exquisite strains that he compared it to the melodies that the Apostle S.
John had heard in the heavenly Jerusalem, saying that another John
(Palestrina’s Christian name was John) had given us in the earthly
Jerusalem a foretaste of the music in heaven.

From that day to this the use of Palestrina’s music has been retained in
the Pope’s own choir, to the exclusion of all other except the simple
plain chant, with which it is made to alternate. Even when the Pope
officiates or presides at any celebration outside his own chapel, his
choir accompanies him and sings the same music.

It is this music, _alla Palestrina_, that travellers go to Rome to hear,
especially during Holy Week. One generation has thus followed another to
Rome for three hundred years; and the harmonies of Palestrina, though ever
ancient, are, like the beauty of divine truth, found to be ever new.

Though Palestrina has retained his hold on the Papal choir at Rome, music
far different in character from his has been introduced into the other
choirs, even of Rome.

The perfection of the organ and of other instruments used to accompany the
voices of singers, and the consequent discovery of other and more
scientific complications in the art of harmony, especially since the
introduction of the natural discord, the development of melody, joined
with much greater skill in execution and the incessant thirst for novelty,
have led to the introduction into nearly all the churches of compositions
in which the voices and instruments are heard together in every variety of
combination.

Add to this that about two centuries ago the opera took its rise, and the
dramatic style, followed in it and developed by it, made its influence
felt in the church.

For kings and princes then began the practice of selecting the same
musician to preside over the performances of their theatres and of their
chapels; nay, the whole staff of the theatre was brought into the chapel
on Sundays, as is done to‐day in Dresden. Nothing better and nothing
different was required for the chapel, except the substitution of other
words and a toning down of the measures of the drama, and thus the chapel
became merely a sort of sacred concert‐room.

But the _maîtres de chapelle_ at these courts were the first musicians of
their day, and their success in operatic music, sounded over all Europe,
caused their sacred compositions to be looked on with undiscriminating
favor by the public. And as the weakness of human nature is such that
inferiors naturally imitate their superiors, and sometimes even copy their
faults, it became the fashion to sing in churches the sacred music used in
court‐chapels, especially as this was more easily obtained, being printed
at the expense of the courts.

Besides this, the modern composers of opera seem to have the ambition of
composing also for the church. But they generally forget how very
different the church and the theatre are, and they seldom care to follow a
different method in the church from that which gains them applause in the
theatre; and the public are frequently as forgetful in this matter as the
composers.

It must be added that the directors of choirs seem to have a fatal habit
of following, even in church, if they are allowed, the _prevailing __
style_ set by the latest and most popular writers for the stage.

When the model so successfully set by Palestrina was first departed from,
and instrumental music used in conjunction with vocal, there may have been
a certain gain, as the chant became more melodious and less monotonous
without losing its depth and solemnity. Gradually, however, the grave
style of the older musicians disappeared, and the music of the church has
become, at least in some places, almost as light and as airy as that of
the theatre.

This music sometimes seems written in derision or contempt of the sacred
words; as, 1, when a prayer of supplication, such as the _Kyrie eleison_
and _Dona nobis pacem_, is set to numbers as lively as those of a jig
(frequently the case with Haydn). 2. When the words are omitted, even
though they be of importance; as the words of the Creed, _qui ex Patre
Filioque procedit_ (nearly always omitted, even in the longest Masses of
Haydn). 3. When they are interminably repeated or senselessly inverted. In
Mozart’s Twelfth Mass we have: _Crucifixus, et homo factus est_.

What shall we say of the operatic solos, duos, trios, etc., instrumental
interludes, sincopations, etc., which, to any one who reflects, are in
direct contradiction to all our notions of what is reverent and
appropriate to the church?



II.


From what has been said in the preceding pages, there are three general
forms of church music: the plain chant, the music termed _alla
Palestrina_, and modern figured music.

(a.) Plain chant is the old and original song of the church, of which the
forms, like those of a dead language, are fixed and immutable. Long, long
ago the secret of plain chant _composition_ was lost, and it is probable
that we have lost in great measure also the secret of its proper
_execution_.

“The leading idea which is represented by plain chant,” says Canon
Oakeley,(156) “and in no degree by any other style of music, except that
which consists in bare recitative, is that in certain cases music best
discharges her office by retreating, as it were, in despair before certain
divine words, and contenting herself with merely providing a vehicle for
their utterance, so simple as not by any studied beauty of its own to
detract from their intrinsic majesty and power. This, I think, will be
admitted to be the leading idea of plain chant, though I am far from
denying that accidentally this idea produces some of the most attractive
charms of the divine art in its results.... In many of these accidental
instances plain chant not only excels other music, but absolutely sets it
at defiance in its own particular line.” Hence a celebrated musician is
reported to have said that he preferred the plain chant of the Preface and
the _Pater Noster_ to all he himself had ever written.

In the beginning this chant was not even harmonized. It was plain and
unadorned, as its name implies—_cantus planus_.

(b.) The music of Palestrina is the last and triumphant result of the
efforts that were made in his time and before it to vary, to modify, and
to adorn the plain chant, which all had found too simple and too
monotonous.

Pope John XXII., elected in 1316, complains of the novelties introduced
into the execution of plain chant in his day. These innovations he
condemns as unbecoming and undevotional, especially the attempts to vary
the measure; but he immediately adds: “We do not intend by this to
prohibit that occasionally, especially on festival days, either at the
solemn Masses or the other divine offices, some harmonious combinations
(_consonantiæ quæ melodiam sapiunt_), viz., harmonies of the octave, the
fifth, the fourth, and such like, on the simple ecclesiastical chant, be
sung; in such manner, however, that the integrity of the chant remain
untouched, and nothing of this grave and stately music (_musica bene
morata_) be changed, especially since _these harmonies delight the ear,
excite devotion, and prevent the spirit of those who sing to God from
drooping_” (_torpere non sinunt_). (Extr. Comm., lib. iii., cap. 1, _Docta
Sanctorum_.) This Constitution is the earliest utterance of the popes
concerning church music—at least since innovations were attempted—that we
possess. The abuses of which Pope John XXII. complained continued to
exist, and even to increase, till the time of the Council of Trent, when
Palestrina produced that style of music which is known by his name, and
which, though built upon the plain chant, is as unlike it as Grecian is
unlike Italian architecture. It is equally unlike modern music. It differs
from plain chant, being an unbroken series of artistically‐constructed
harmonies, in which unison is unknown. It differs from modern music by the
absolute disuse of instruments of any kind (even the organ), by the
exclusion of all passages for _soli_, and by being written in plain chant
tonality. “With the grave Gregorian melody, learnedly elaborated in
rigorous counterpoint, and reduced to greater clearness and elegance
without any instrumental aid,” says Picchianti, “Palestrina knew how to
awaken among his hearers mysterious, grand, deep, vague sensations that
seemed caused by the objects of an unknown world, or by superior powers in
the human imagination.”(157)

(c.) Modern music differs essentially from all that went before it, and
this difference is attributable to two principal causes: 1. The
improvement in the manufacture and the use of instruments, and their
introduction into the church; and, 2, The influence of theatrical music on
that of the church, before alluded to. Modern music could not be in
ancient times, for the want of modern instruments. As the perfection of
the art of vaulting gave us that advance on the simple lines and heavy
masses of Grecian architecture which we have in Gothic and Italian
architecture, so the modern developments in orchestration have changed the
whole character of music in the church and out of it.

The influence of operatic music on that of the church is seen in the
attempt of modern composers of church music to make it dramatic. Church
music, as Palestrina and the other great masters of the old Roman school
had conceived it, had been treated as an emanation of pure sentiment,
stripped of all human passion—as something ideal. The modern composers, on
the contrary, pretend by their music to express dramatically the sense of
the text. They say that, to be dramatic, it is not necessary to be
theatrical, and they point to certain compositions of Cherubini,
Beethoven, Hummel, and even Haydn, in which they say the contrary is
practically demonstrated.(158)

It must, however, be confessed that modern composers, by trying to be
dramatic, have more frequently fallen into the great fault of being
theatrical than they have avoided it.

The use of instrumentation and of dramatic expression has given them
immense scope, but their success bears no proportion to their talents,
their opportunities, their numbers, and the immense quantity of their
compositions.

Like the Athenians of old (Acts xvii.) spoken of by S. Paul, they
incessantly crave something new, and, in their search for novelty, more
often give us what is novel and strange than what is beautiful and
appropriate, so that their compositions hardly ever continue to be used
for a long time; they are soon thrown aside and forgotten; and, indeed, we
think it no exaggeration to say that, if all their compositions, except a
very few, were burned, or should otherwise perish, the church would suffer
no loss.

In consequence of the failure of modern composers to meet the requirements
of Catholic devotion, though their music has been introduced into our
churches and given every chance of trial, complaints against it are heard
on every side. We grumble about it in our conversations; we write against
its excesses in the public journals; bishops complain of it in pastoral
letters; provincial councils are forced to issue decrees about it; the
Sovereign Pontiffs themselves not unfrequently raise their voices,
sometimes in warning, sometimes in threats—in a word, the evil seems to
have attracted general attention, as a similar evil did in the time of
John XXII. and at the period of the Council of Trent, and a remedy is
called for.

I. On account of the unsatisfactory character of most modern compositions,
some have proposed that we should go back plainly and simply to the
original or plain song. This was proposed in two able articles in THE
CATHOLIC WORLD, Dec., 1869, and Feb., 1870, and the Paulists of New York
have actually made the experiment.

The reasons in favor of the resumption of plain chant and the exclusion of
all other music may be stated thus:

1. It is the original song of the church; it is of venerable antiquity; it
was originated under ecclesiastical influences, and has been sanctified by
having been always associated with what is best and holiest in the history
of the church.

2. It is so dissimilar from the music of the world that it is recognized
at once and by everybody as ecclesiastical, and can never be confounded
with secular music.

3. It possesses, when well sung, an air of stateliness and solemnity which
is never reached by all the refinements and artifices of modern music. If
it is less dramatic than figured music, it is also more expressive,
because in it the words of the ritual speak for themselves naturally and
without affectation, and therefore most eloquently; whereas in figured
music the words are made so subservient to the musical numbers, are so
senselessly repeated and so jumbled together, that their meaning is
disguised rather than conveyed, and they cannot speak intelligibly to the
mind, especially of the uneducated. Now, S. Paul says that psalmody should
speak to the understanding; and Benedict XIV., speaking of S. Augustine,
who used to be moved to tears by the Ambrosian chants he heard at Milan,
says: “The music moved him indeed, but still more so the words he heard.
But he would weep now also for grief; for although he heard the singing,
he could not distinguish the words.”

No one will dare to say that to the ninety‐nine one‐hundredths of every
congregation the Requiem of Mozart, with all its beauty of melody and its
wealth of harmony, would be as expressive and as provocative of the
feelings proper to the funeral service as the old and ever‐charming plain
chant Requiem.

4. Plain chant is the best safeguard against vainglorious display and its
host of attendant evils, because it allows no scope for personal
exhibition, and does not give undue prominence to individuals.

5. It is the only chant used in many places, and is found sufficient for
the purposes of worship.

6. It alone has had the express authorization of the church.

This is a fair exposition of the arguments in favor of plain chant.

We admit the full force of the arguments derived from the venerable
antiquity of plain chant, its Christian origin, its long and exclusive
connection with the rites of religion, its dissimilarity with the music of
the world, its simplicity, its impressiveness, and its incompatibility
with individual display; but it must be remembered against it that it
requires for its execution, especially here, where the knowledge of it and
the taste for it are to be acquired, conditions not easily fulfilled; that
its range is very limited; and that, however grand the impression it
sometimes creates, its resources are soon exhausted; whence to those who
for a long time hear it and nothing else it becomes extremely monotonous,
and burdens the ear with a dull weight of sound not always tolerable. This
will be admitted by all who in seminaries and monasteries have been most
accustomed to hear it.

In those countries where plain chant is exclusively used every sort of
device is resorted to on festival days to escape its monotony, _e.g._, by
harmonies on the chant which are out of all keeping with it, as also by
interludes on the _grand orgue_, by which one‐half of the words of the
text are absolutely omitted, and the recollections of the world are
frequently as vividly brought to mind as by any modern vocal compositions.

No one will deny the appropriateness and impressiveness of plain chant on
certain solemn occasions, especially those of sorrow, but it is
confessedly unequal to the task of evoking and expressing the feelings of
Christian joy and triumph. If the plain chant Requiem is superior to
Mozart’s, the Masses of Haydn are far more suitable to the joys of Easter‐
day than anything we can find in plain chant.

The writer in THE CATHOLIC WORLD before alluded to tells us that plain
chant prays. Give me, he says, the chant that prays. But prayer is
fourfold, like the Sacrifice of the Mass; viz., it is latreutic—that is,
the homage of adoration; it is propitiatory, inasmuch as it tries to
appease God’s anger; it is impetratory—that is, it asks and supplicates
for what we need; but it is also eucharistic—that is, it gives God praise
and thanksgiving. Now, if plain chant expresses better our feelings of
adoration and supplication, it certainly must borrow from figured music
the triumphant strains of praise and thanksgiving.

However, if the argument from authority for plain chant held good,
notwithstanding all we have said, we should instantly waive further
discussion. But the force of this argument we absolutely deny.

Dr. Burney has created the impression that the Council of Trent was at one
time on the point of banishing figured music from the church. This was not
the case. Benedict XIV. (l. xi., c. 7, _De Syn. Diœc._), following
Cardinal Pallavicini, the historian of the council, says: “It was proposed
by some bishops, zealous for ecclesiastical discipline, that musical chant
should altogether be banished from the churches, and the plain chant alone
retained; [but] as others observed that this novelty [_sic_] would give
rise to innumerable complaints and immense trouble, it was finally
resolved, not that musical chants should be prohibited, but that they
should be reformed, according to certain rules, to the requirements of
piety and gravity.” And, in fact, the Council of Trent merely decreed that
Ordinaries should banish from their churches that music in which, either
by the organ or by the chant, “anything lascivious or impure is
introduced, in order that the house of God may seem to be and may be a
house of prayer” (Sess. xxii., _Decr. de obs. et ev. in cel. Missæ._) The
other decree (Sess. xxiv., cap. 12, _De Ref._) adds nothing to this.

The teaching of the theologians is much more lenient than that of many of
our modern dogmatists.

The great theologian, Suarez (_De Orat. Voc._, lib. iii., c. 8), arguing
against Navarre, a rigorist of his day, says: “It is a sufficient argument
that this use (of organic or figured music) is retained throughout the
church, and that in the very church of Rome itself, and in the chapel of
the Sovereign Pontiff, the divine offices are sung after this manner.” He
then proceeds to comment as strongly as any one on the danger of excesses
and abuses; only he does not seem to feel, either with the objectors of
his day or with some writers of the present time, that figured music is
intrinsically mischievous, any more than that it is ecclesiastically
irregular.

A later and better authority, Benedict XIV., speaking as a theologian in
his work _De Synodo Diœc._, loco cit., and as Pope, in his Constitution
_Annuus_; 19th Feb., 1749, addressed to the bishops of the Pontifical
States, says that it would be an extreme measure to banish figured music
from the church, and that he considers it sufficient to banish such music
as is theatrical (_modi theatrales_).

Much has been made of the plea that plain chant is the only chant that has
ever been expressly authorized.

Now, it must be remembered, 1, that when plain chant originated, music was
not used outside of the church, and that in the dark ages churchmen were
the only ones who knew music, and that the church was necessarily its
guardian; and, 2, that for three hundred years the church has treated her
_authorized_ version with strange _incuria_; for of this chant there is
now no version _commanded_ (though the differences of versions are very
remarkable indeed), and till within a year or two there was no version to
which any special _authorization_ or even _recommendation_ was given by
the popes. Even the version now being prepared under the supervision of
the Roman Congregation of Rites is merely recommended.

We must be excused for this long argument about plain chant, but we have
been forced into it by the exaggerations of the advocates of this chant,
who are, like some of the advocates of Gothic architecture, extremists,
and in their zeal fear not to censure the whole church, and even the Pope
himself.

They indeed censure the church; for the use of figured music has
penetrated everywhere with episcopal sanction and Papal toleration, and,
say what we may, it must be admitted that all the theories advanced for
the exclusive use of plain chant have invariably fallen to the ground
under the hand of practice.

We deny, then, the obligation of confining ourselves to plain chant, if we
except that which is in the _Missal_ and the _Pontifical_, and which
contains what is sung by the priest or bishop at the altar.

But while we deny the obligation of using the plain chant exclusively, we
would retain a large portion of it, 1, because there are parts of it so
appropriate to special services that we can invent nothing better; such as
the Requiem, the Lamentations, the _Veni Creator_, and many hymns, and the
incomparable psalm tones, as charming to‐day as when heard by S.
Augustine, who says of them: “As the voices flowed into my ears, truth was
instilled into my heart, and the affections of piety overflowed in tears
of joy.” 2. Because, like our vestments and other appendages of our
ceremonial, it carries us back to the never‐to‐be‐forgotten past. 3.
Because by being used alternately (as in the Papal choir) with music of a
different and more modern character, it contributes most powerfully, by
the effect of contrast, to the dignity and grandeur of church
celebrations.

To Be Concluded Next Month.




Comparison Of Waves With Flowers.


Certainly, no more am I gladdened by the emulous reflections which the
earth and sea, with dark shades and distant projections, form; when alike
in charms and powers the sparkling foam competes with snow‐white flowers,
for the garden, envious of the curling waves of ocean, loves to imitate
their motion, and the amorous zephyr gives back the perfumes which it
drinks in by blowing over the shining waters, and makes the waving leaves
an ocean of bright flowers; when the sea, sad to view the natural beauties
of the garden, while it tries to adorn its own realm, destroys its
majestic mien, and, subject to second laws, blends with sweet effect
fields of blue with waves of green; colored now like heaven’s blue dome,
now plumed with various hues, the garden seems a sea of flowers, and the
sea a garden of bright foam.—_Calderon._




A Glimpse of the Green Isle. III—Concluded.


I return to some incidents in our journey to and arrival at Dublin.
Goold’s Cross is the nearest station to the Rock of Cashel, from which it
is distant about five miles. We alight here. We go to visit one who is kin
and more than kind. His lares are enshrined at Mora House. An Irish
conveyance, called a covered car, takes us thither pretty comfortably.
There are three kinds of cars for the transportation of travellers in
Ireland, not including the “low‐backed car” which is, or was, designed for
the movement of farm produce, and, according to Sam Lover, of rustics on
ante‐nuptial expeditions intent. Apropos, I did not see a specimen of the
“low‐backed car” from Queenstown to Kingstown. That time‐honored and
poetical vehicle seems to have given place to a modern box‐cart, in the
East and South at least. The three varieties of car above mentioned belong
to the genus known as jaunting‐cars. First, there is the “outside car,” on
which the passengers are seated facing outward and back to back. The space
between the backs of the sitters is railed off into a place for
baggage—or, _Anglicé_, luggage—called the “well.” It is one of the wells
in which truth is not always to be found. At the front end of “the well”
is a raised seat for the driver. The “outside car” furnishes seats for
from two to three persons on each side. When the seats are not full, the
driver usually sits on a side “to balance the cyar.” The “inside car” is
the converse of the “outside.” In the former the sitters face each other;
their legs are in a space between the wheels, instead of outside them, as
on the latter. It is entered by a small door at the back. The driver
occupies a raised seat in front. The “covered car” is an “inside” with a
high, square covering of black oil‐cloth. It is used in rainy weather. It
has some disadvantages. You can see only through the curtain at the back.
There are no openings at the sides, and the small glazed apertures in
front are placed too high to admit even of an occasional glimpse of the
face of Nature. You can only see the dame from behind. Both the “inside”
and the “covered car” have a tendency to tilt backwards. You are eternally
slipping down the seat toward the door. A sudden start may drop you out
like a too well‐warmed plate from the hand of a greedy guest. I came near
dropping out once or twice in a ride of a few miles. In one of these
conveyances it is wise to take a double hitch around infant America.

A hearty welcome meets us at Mora House. It is situated in the heart of a
most lovely country. The house is embowered in trees and shrubbery. The
walls, offices, and outhouses are covered with ivy. Along the front of the
house is a conservatory. Around it are parterres with evergreens and early
flowers, and borders of dark‐green box. Broad pastures, spreading their
green slopes into the distance, are relieved here and there by clumps of
tall oaks. Cattle and sheep dot the landscape, giving it life without
taking from its beautiful repose. In the background the Rock of Cashel,
with its ruins and lofty round tower, rears its grim silhouette against
the evening sky. The frame of the picture is completed by the mountains of
misty blue in the far distance. Among them towers the peak from which,
according to tradition, his sable majesty—in a very hungry moment
doubtless—is said to have taken a “Devil’s Bit.” Over all this is spread a
sky half blue, half cloud, with the softest of clare‐obscures. What a
feeling of peace steals over my soul as I look upon this sweet landscape!
What a lovely spot for that retirement, “friend to life’s decline,”


    “To husband out life’s taper at the close,
    And keep the lamp from wasting by repose”!


Alas! there is no such gentle decline for us, poor nomads of the New
World! We must work with tongue, or pen, or sword, or pencil by the
failing light of the lamp until the last of its flickering rays dies into
darkness for ever.

After luncheon our gentle cousin takes us to look at his horses and his
dogs. One is a Mount St. Bernard, a colossal brute and a prime favorite.
Then we visit his kitchen garden, and his cows, and his bee‐hives, and, in
short, everything that is his. Next we examine the paintings and the
photographs; among the former a life‐size oil‐painting, by O’Keefe, of an
uncle, a university man, a brilliant scholar, who sat in more than one
professor’s chair.

Thus we occupied the time until dinner was announced. Then we sat down to
one of those long‐drawn‐out, old‐fashioned dinners which commence at six
in the evening and end any time before midnight. Gentle cousin, having
heard the Lady from Idaho express a desire to see an Irish turf‐fire, had
one made in the dining‐room; and a bright, pleasant, cheerful, cleanly
fire it is. We persuaded the ladies to honor in the breach, for this once,
the absurd British custom of withdrawing from the table after the dessert.
What a pleasant evening we spent!

Next morning we found rain still falling. It softened the atmosphere
without obscuring it. The Rock of Cashel loomed up grimly but distinctly
in the distance.

There is now little that is regal about “Cashel of the Kings.” It has its
ruins, but nothing else. The approaches to the ruins show more of poverty
and discomfort than I remember to have seen in any other town in Ireland.
There is a majesty about the ruins. The rock on which they stand is about
three hundred feet high. There is a lofty round tower in a good state of
preservation. The frescos in one of the halls, said to have been the
council‐chamber, are in a state of wonderful freshness. The floors of some
of the apartments in the second story seem as perfect as ever they could
have been. The carved stone‐work over the porch of one of the entrances—to
Cormac’s Chapel, I think—is the admiration of connoisseurs. Every foot of
this ground awakens a historical remembrance. I see the rude rulers of
ancient Ireland assembled in their regal state. The second Henry and
Edward Bruce pass before my mind’s eye. I see that fierce and unscrupulous
nobleman, the eighth of the Geraldine earls of Kildare, and think of his
astonishing ideas of right and wrong. When Mormon Harry took him to task
for burning the Cathedral of Cashel, he pleaded as his excuse that when he
fired the church he thought the bishop was in it! What a pleasant neighbor
Lord Gerald must have been!

We have a delightful drive to the little old town of Thurles. The green of
the fields and the hedges is enhanced by the contrast of thousands of
soft, yellow primroses. How purely fresh those primroses look! Here
bunches of violets peer forth bashfully, their modest little faces freshly
washed by the gently‐dropping rain!

Thurles is a station on the Great Southern and Western Railway. There we
take rail for Dublin. It is an old town with a quaint old ivy‐mantled
tower which dates from the XIIIth century. The tower stands by a bridge,
and watches over an infant stream that becomes a broad river before it
reaches the sea. It is a relic of the time when Thurles was a walled town.
Thurles is the seat of the Catholic Archbishop of Cashel. There are two
convents, the Presentation and the Ursuline. The Sisters of the former
institution devote themselves to the education of the poor. The Ursuline
Sisters have an academy for young ladies of the wealthier and more
aristocratic classes. The Presentation school gets a share of the
Government educational fund, and is subject to the supervision of the
Government inspectors. The mode of teaching in the Presentation school is
very similar to that of the public schools in New York. The children sang
in chorus remarkably well. There is also a collegiate institution for the
education of candidates for the priesthood. We visited both convents, and
were kindly and hospitably received.

Among the objects most worthy of a visit is the cathedral, which in taste
and magnificence of decoration promises to surpass all modern
ecclesiastical buildings in Ireland. It has rich marbles from Italy, fine
specimens of native marble, _lapis lazuli_ and _verd‐antique_, in stones
that are worth their weight in gold. Some of the work on the altars is
exquisite. The cathedral will be a superb memorial of the piety and taste
of the present archbishop, Dr. Leahy. We had the pleasure of visiting, and
being visited by, that distinguished ecclesiastic and most refined and
courteous gentleman. Very kindly and hospitably did he entreat us.

About four or five miles from Thurles are the ruins of Holy Cross Abbey.
Our ride thither was through a delightful country in all the humid beauty
of an Irish spring. The ruins are not extensive. They have been so often
and so minutely described that a detailed description is not necessary
here. Besides, I am not writing a guide‐book. I must mention, however, a
stone balustrade which is quite artistic in its effect. The principal
window is a splendid piece of work. It is in excellent preservation. There
are a number of tombs of considerable age in the abbey. Near the principal
window is one to which a singular legend is attached. It was related to us
by the guardian of the place, an old woman of eighty, but hale and hearty,
chatty and cheerful—such a pleasant female Old Mortality as the immortal
Sir Walter would have loved to study and depict. I have often wondered at
the cheerfulness with which the old among the Irish poor bear the burden
of lengthened existence. The tomb is of stone, and in its upper surface is
a hollow. The old woman told us that it was worn by a rain‐drop which for
many years fell unceasingly from the roof until the constant dropping wore
into the stone the hollow that we saw. The drop began to fall on the
commission of some crime, or some offence against the church—she did not
recollect which—by “one of the family”—“perhaps some trouble with the
priest of the parish.” It continued to fall, drip, drip, drip, rain or
shine, year in and year out, until the crime was atoned for, or the
offence pardoned, or the family sold out and left the country. Then the
drop ceased to fall, and has never fallen since.

“Do you think the story is really true?” asked the Lady from Idaho of the
old custodian.

“Do I think its thrue, ma’am?” said the old woman, giving her territorial
ladyship a diplomatic look. “Shure, it isn’t for the likes o’ me to be
denyin’ the likes of that. And shure, ma’am, can’t you see the hole for
yourself?”

“Of course. There is no better proof than that.”

“And don’t you see, ma’am, that it’s rainin’ now at the very minnit that
I’m talkin’ to ye?”

“There certainly can be no doubt about that,” replied the Lady from Idaho,
glancing upwards at the umbrella which Cousin George held over her head.

“And don’t you see, ma’am, that niver a dhrop falls on the tomb where the
hole is, now?” added the old woman triumphantly.

“I do indeed,” replied Mme. Idaho. “That last argument is conclusive. Even
if it were not, I am of easy faith in such matters.”

“And wisely so,” chimed in Cousin George. “Doubting Thomas makes a
miserable traveller. He loses the pleasures of travel in the search for
proofs that he is not enjoying himself without proper warrant. If he finds
evidence for us that our pleasures of association are not justified by
fact, that we have no right to be pleased by legends he can disprove, we
tell him he is a fool for his pains. We do not want his facts. We are
determined to believe in our favorite legends, in spite of him and all the
Gradgrinds in the world.”

The old woman looked at Cousin George with rather a puzzled air. She had
listened most attentively, leaning her old head forward, and with withered
forefinger pushing back her mob‐cap from her time‐dulled ear; but Cousin
George’s harangue was evidently Greek to her. She instinctively divined,
nevertheless, that George was talking on her side of the question; for she
said, nodding her head approvingly the while:

“Faith, and shure it’s mighty right ye are, yer honor!”

A gratuity, calculated according to the American standard, resulted in a
series of blessings and a succession of antique “dips,” known as
“courtesies” by the Irish peasant women of a past generation.

We took the cars again at Thurles on our way Dublin‐ward.

There is an air of comfort and solidity about the few farm‐houses we
notice on our route, but they were indeed few. The proportion of land
under tillage was comparatively very small. The country seemed generally
to be in pasturage. Large flocks of sheep and herds of cattle were to be
seen. The small proprietors and farmers had disappeared. We saw a couple
of women working in the fields. This annoyed the Lady from Idaho very
much. She said that no matter how beautiful the landscape might be, that
blot destroyed all her enjoyment of it. Our travelling companion, Viator,
bade her season her admiration for a while until she reached the interior
of Germany, where she would see many a team of wayward sisters harnessed
to the plough and driven by a beery lord of the creation. Mme. Idaho said
she did not want to go where such sights could be seen.

We pass Kildare, with its world‐famed “Curragh,” an extensive flat, on
which a few thousand British troops were encamped at the time. At every
station we find a policeman or two casting argus eyes over things in
general. Physically, the policemen—the “Royal Irish Constabulary”—are
among the finest specimens of the _genus homo_ I have seen. They are tall,
generally over six feet, and magnificently moulded. Their uniform, though
somewhat sombre, is in good taste: a dark, green tunic and trousers, with
a small, visorless forage‐cap ornamented in front with a harp in scarlet.

Clondalkin, which is within a few miles of Dublin, possesses a round tower
in excellent preservation. It is about eighty feet high. The entrance is
about twelve feet from the ground. It has four openings or windows some
ten feet below the roof.

We are in Dublin, at King’s Bridge terminus, so called from being near the
bridge erected over the Liffey to commemorate the visit to Dublin of the
fourth of the royal personages so unflatteringly designated by the author
of _Childe Harold_. A charming Irish landscape greets the eye as you
approach the city; on the left the prettiest portion of the Liffey and the
Phœnix Park; on the right a gently‐undulating expanse of green fields
bordered by old trees and dotted with ancient churches and picturesque
cottages, bounded in the distance by the soft outline of the Wicklow
Hills.

One of our party expected to meet a brother whom he had not seen since
they were both boys nearly a quarter of a century ago. Arrived at the
terminus, and once more restored to liberty by the unlocking of the
carriage‐doors, he looked around anxiously for the individual he expected
to find waiting for him. He could pick out no one in the crowd whom he
could claim as a brother.

“I do not think there is any one here,” said Mr. Hibernicus with an air of
disappointment, after vainly peering into the faces of a dozen gentlemen,
who seemed rather surprised by his close scrutiny.

“What kind of a brother do you expect, Mr. Hibernicus?” asked the Lady
from Idaho.

“I assure you, my dear madam,” replied Mr. Hibernicus, “I have not the
remotest idea what Jack looks like now. He was quite a boy when we parted,
and I have not seen even a photograph of him since. I hoped that instinct
would reveal to me, as to honest Jack Falstaff, the ‘true prince.’ ”

We stood irresolute for a moment, when a gentleman with a long beard _à
l’Américaine_ approached our group. Raising his hat, and acknowledging the
presence of ladies by a bow, he said to Mr. Hibernicus, who was still
endeavoring to bring his instinct into play:

“May I ask, sir, if you are looking for anybody?”

“I am looking for my brother, sir,” replied Mr. Hibernicus. “Permit me to
inquire if you expect any one?”

“I expect my brother,” returned the gentleman.

“Are you Jack?”

“I am Jack.”

“How are you, Jack?”

And the brothers, after a vigorous hand‐shake and some inquiries after
“So‐and‐so,” took things as coolly as if they had only been parted a
quarter of an hour instead of a quarter of a century.

Decidedly, people born to the English tongue have a horror of anything
approaching to demonstrative sensibility. They have nothing dramatic about
them. What a _scène_ two Frenchmen or two Italians would have made out of
such a meeting after many roving years! During the days when a generous
and romantic credulity gave me undeserved credit for burning the midnight
oil over Homer and Horace, I had a French student‐friend named l’Orient—an
_ami intime_ of six months’ standing. L’Orient made a six weeks’ trip to
England, and I was at the station to receive the great traveller when he
returned.

“_Te revoilà toi! Comment vas‐tu?_” said I, putting forth my hand for a
friendly shake. But l’Orient was not to be put off with anything so
commonplace as the usual English pump‐handle reception.

“_Enfin, je te revois!_” he exclaimed, throwing his arms around me, “_ce
cher ami! Ce brave Jeem! Ce vieux de la vieille!_” And putting a hand
behind each of my ears, thus rendering escape impossible, he kissed me
vigorously on both cheeks. Then we walked toward our hotel, l’Orient
holding my hand in his. We met Jules; and l’Orient left me, and threw
himself on Jules: “Ce cher Jules! Ce brave Jules!” etc., etc., and
performed a double osculation on Jules. Next we met Victor, and then
Benoit and several others, each of whom was accosted by l’Orient and
embraced in the same effusive manner. Our two brothers meet after a
separation of half a century with a simple “How are you, Jack?” and a
hand‐shake. What demonstration would be lively enough for my old friend
l’Orient under such circumstances? Yet l’Orient did not feel a tithe of
what Jack and his brother felt. I often think it would be better for us if
we were more demonstrative. We should perhaps be better satisfied with
ourselves, and perhaps others would be better satisfied with us also.

I had directed my telegram from Queenstown to a wrong number, but the
telegraph people took the trouble to find the person to whom it was
addressed. I have had occasion frequently to use the postal telegraph. I
have found its management admirable. The post‐office department is also
excellently well conducted. If there is any possibility of delivery, a
