CHAPTER VIII. THE SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS.




§ 1. The Roman Saturnalia.


(M238) In an earlier part of this book we saw that many peoples have been
used to observe an annual period of license, when the customary restraints
of law and morality are thrown aside, when the whole population give
themselves up to extravagant mirth and jollity, and when the darker
passions find a vent which would never be allowed them in the more staid
and sober course of ordinary life. Such outbursts of the pent-up forces of
human nature, too often degenerating into wild orgies of lust and crime,
occur most commonly at the end of the year, and are frequently associated,
as I have had occasion to point out, with one or other of the agricultural
seasons, especially with the time of sowing or of harvest. Now, of all
these periods of license the one which is best known and which in modern
languages has given its name to the rest, is the Saturnalia. This famous
festival fell in December, the last month of the Roman year, and was
popularly supposed to commemorate the merry reign of Saturn, the god of
sowing and of husbandry, who lived on earth long ago as a righteous and
beneficent king of Italy, drew the rude and scattered dwellers on the
mountains together, taught them to till the ground, gave them laws, and
ruled in peace. His reign was the fabled Golden Age: the earth brought
forth abundantly: no sound of war or discord troubled the happy world: no
baleful love of lucre worked like poison in the blood of the industrious
and contented peasantry. Slavery and private property were alike unknown:
all men had all things in common. At last the good god, the kindly king,
vanished suddenly; but his memory was cherished to distant ages, shrines
were reared in his honour, and many hills and high places in Italy bore
his name.(703) Yet the bright tradition of his reign was crossed by a dark
shadow: his altars are said to have been stained with the blood of human
victims, for whom a more merciful age afterwards substituted
effigies.(704) Of this gloomy side of the god’s religion there is little
or no trace in the descriptions which ancient writers have left us of the
Saturnalia. Feasting and revelry and all the mad pursuit of pleasure are
the features that seem to have especially marked this carnival of
antiquity, as it went on for seven days in the streets and public squares
and houses of ancient Rome from the seventeenth to the twenty-third of
December.(705)

(M239) But no feature of the festival is more remarkable, nothing in it
seems to have struck the ancients themselves more than the license granted
to slaves at this time. The distinction between the free and the servile
classes was temporarily abolished. The slave might rail at his master,
intoxicate himself like his betters, sit down at table with them, and not
even a word of reproof would be administered to him for conduct which at
any other season might have been punished with stripes, imprisonment, or
death.(706) Nay, more, masters actually changed places with their slaves
and waited on them at table; and not till the serf had done eating and
drinking was the board cleared and dinner set for his master.(707) So far
was this inversion of ranks carried, that each household became for a time
a mimic republic in which the high offices of state were discharged by the
slaves, who gave their orders and laid down the law as if they were indeed
invested with all the dignity of the consulship, the praetorship, and the
bench.(708) Like the pale reflection of power thus accorded to bondsmen at
the Saturnalia was the mock kingship for which freemen cast lots at the
same season. The person on whom the lot fell enjoyed the title of king,
and issued commands of a playful and ludicrous nature to his temporary
subjects. One of them he might order to mix the wine, another to drink,
another to sing, another to dance, another to speak in his own dispraise,
another to carry a flute-girl on his back round the house.(709)

(M240) Now, when we remember that the liberty allowed to slaves at this
festive season was supposed to be an imitation of the state of society in
Saturn’s time, and that in general the Saturnalia passed for nothing more
or less than a temporary revival or restoration of the reign of that merry
monarch, we are tempted to surmise that the mock king who presided over
the revels may have originally represented Saturn himself. The conjecture
is strongly confirmed, if not established, by a very curious and
interesting account of the way in which the Saturnalia was celebrated by
the Roman soldiers stationed on the Danube in the reign of Maximian and
Diocletian. The account is preserved in a narrative of the martyrdom of
St. Dasius, which was unearthed from a Greek manuscript in the Paris
library, and published by Professor Franz Cumont of Ghent. Two briefer
descriptions of the event and of the custom are contained in manuscripts
at Milan and Berlin; one of them had already seen the light in an obscure
volume printed at Urbino in 1727, but its importance for the history of
the Roman religion, both ancient and modern, appears to have been
overlooked until Professor Cumont drew the attention of scholars to all
three narratives by publishing them together some years ago.(710)
According to these narratives, which have all the appearance of being
authentic, and of which the longest is probably based on official
documents, the Roman soldiers at Durostorum in Lower Moesia celebrated the
Saturnalia year by year in the following manner. Thirty days before the
festival they chose by lot from amongst themselves a young and handsome
man, who was then clothed in royal attire to resemble Saturn. Thus arrayed
and attended by a multitude of soldiers he went about in public with full
license to indulge his passions and to taste of every pleasure, however
base and shameful. But if his reign was merry, it was short and ended
tragically; for when the thirty days were up and the festival of Saturn
had come, he cut his own throat on the altar of the god whom he
personated.(711) In the year 303 A.D. the lot fell upon the Christian
soldier Dasius, but he refused to play the part of the heathen god and
soil his last days by debauchery. The threats and arguments of his
commanding officer Bassus failed to shake his constancy, and accordingly
he was beheaded, as the Christian martyrologist records with minute
accuracy, at Durostorum by the soldier John on Friday the twentieth day of
November, being the twenty-fourth day of the moon, at the fourth hour.

Since this narrative was published by Professor Cumont, its historical
character, which had been doubted or denied, has received strong
confirmation from an interesting discovery. In the crypt of the cathedral
which crowns the promontory of Ancona there is preserved, among other
remarkable antiquities, a white marble sarcophagus bearing a Greek
inscription, in characters of the age of Justinian, to the following
effect: “Here lies the holy martyr Dasius, brought from Durostorum.” The
sarcophagus was transferred to the crypt of the cathedral in 1848 from the
church of San Pellegrino, under the high altar of which, as we learn from
a Latin inscription let into the masonry, the martyr’s bones still repose
with those of two other saints. How long the sarcophagus was deposited in
the church of San Pellegrino, we do not know; but it is recorded to have
been there in the year 1650. We may suppose that the saint’s relics were
transferred for safety to Ancona at some time in the troubled centuries
which followed his martyrdom, when Moesia was occupied and ravaged by
successive hordes of barbarian invaders.(712) At all events it appears
certain from the independent and mutually confirmatory evidence of the
martyrology and the monuments that Dasius was no mythical saint, but a
real man, who suffered death for his faith at Durostorum in one of the
early centuries of the Christian era. Finding the narrative of the
nameless martyrologist thus established as to the principal fact recorded,
namely, the martyrdom of St. Dasius, we may reasonably accept his
testimony as to the manner and cause of the martyrdom, all the more
because his narrative is precise, circumstantial, and entirely free from
the miraculous element. Accordingly I conclude that the account which he
gives of the celebration of the Saturnalia among the Roman soldiers is
trustworthy.

(M241) This account sets in a new and lurid light the office of the King
of the Saturnalia, the ancient Lord of Misrule, who presided over the
winter revels at Rome in the time of Horace and of Tacitus. It seems to
prove that his business had not always been that of a mere harlequin or
merry-andrew whose only care was that the revelry should run high and the
fun grow fast and furious, while the fire blazed and crackled on the
hearth, while the streets swarmed with festive crowds, and through the
clear frosty air, far away to the north, Soracte shewed his coronal of
snow. When we compare this comic monarch of the gay, the civilized
metropolis with his grim counterpart of the rude camp on the Danube, and
when we remember the long array of similar figures, ludicrous yet tragic,
who in other ages and in other lands, wearing mock crowns and wrapped in
sceptred palls, have played their little pranks for a few brief hours or
days, then passed before their time to a violent death, we can hardly
doubt that in the King of the Saturnalia at Rome, as he is depicted by
classical writers, we see only a feeble emasculated copy of that original,
whose strong features have been fortunately preserved for us by the
obscure author of the _Martyrdom of St. Dasius_. In other words, the
martyrologist’s account of the Saturnalia agrees so closely with the
accounts of similar rites elsewhere, which could not possibly have been
known to him, that the substantial accuracy of his description may be
regarded as established; and further, since the custom of putting a mock
king to death as a representative of a god cannot have grown out of a
practice of appointing him to preside over a holiday revel, whereas the
reverse may very well have happened, we are justified in assuming that in
an earlier and more barbarous age it was the universal practice in ancient
Italy, wherever the worship of Saturn prevailed, to choose a man who
played the part and enjoyed all the traditionary privileges of Saturn for
a season, and then died, whether by his own or another’s hand, whether by
the knife or the fire or on the gallows-tree, in the character of the good
god who gave his life for the world. In Rome itself and other great towns
the growth of civilization had probably mitigated this cruel custom long
before the Augustan age, and transformed it into the innocent shape it
wears in the writings of the few classical writers who bestow a passing
notice on the holiday King of the Saturnalia. But in remoter districts the
older and sterner practice may long have survived; and even if after the
unification of Italy the barbarous usage was suppressed by the Roman
government, the memory of it would be handed down by the peasants and
would tend from time to time, as still happens with the lowest forms of
superstition among ourselves, to lead to a recrudescence of the practice,
especially among the rude soldiery on the outskirts of the empire over
whom the once iron hand of Rome was beginning to relax its grasp.(713)

(M242) The resemblance between the Saturnalia of ancient and the Carnival
of modern Italy has often been remarked; but in the light of all the facts
that have come before us, we may well ask whether the resemblance does not
amount to identity. We have seen that in Italy, Spain, and France, that
is, in the countries where the influence of Rome has been deepest and most
lasting, a conspicuous feature of the Carnival is a burlesque figure
personifying the festive season, which after a short career of glory and
dissipation is publicly shot, burnt, or otherwise destroyed, to the
feigned grief or genuine delight of the populace.(714) If the view here
suggested of the Carnival is correct, this grotesque personage is no other
than a direct successor of the old King of the Saturnalia, the master of
the revels, the real man who personated Saturn and, when the revels were
over, suffered a real death in his assumed character. The King of the Bean
on Twelfth Night and the mediaeval Bishop of Fools, Abbot of Unreason, or
Lord of Misrule are figures of the same sort and may perhaps have had a
similar origin. We will consider them in the following section.




§ 2. The King of the Bean and the Festival of Fools.


(M243) The custom of electing by lot a King and often also a Queen of the
Bean on Twelfth Night (Epiphany, the sixth of January) or on the eve of
that festival used to prevail in France, Belgium, Germany, and England,
and it is still kept up in some parts of France. It may be traced back to
the first half of the sixteenth century at least, and no doubt dates from
a very much more remote antiquity. At the French court the Kings
themselves did not disdain to countenance the mock royalty, and Louis XIV.
even supported with courtly grace the shadowy dignity in his own person.
Every family as a rule elected its own King. On the eve of the festival a
great cake was baked with a bean in it; the cake was divided in portions,
one for each member of the family, together with one for God, one for the
Virgin, and sometimes one also for the poor. The person who obtained the
portion containing the bean was proclaimed King of the Bean. Where a Queen
of the Bean was elected as well as a King, a second bean was sometimes
baked in the cake for the Queen. Thus at Blankenheim, near Neuerburg, in
the Eifel, a black and a white bean were baked in the cake; he who drew
the piece with the black bean was King, and she who drew the white bean
was Queen. In Franche-Comté, at the beginning of the nineteenth century,
they used to put as many white haricot beans in a hat as there were
persons present, and two coloured beans were added; the beans were drawn
at haphazard from the hat by a child, and they who got the coloured beans
were King and Queen. In England and perhaps elsewhere the practice was to
put a bean in the cake for the King and a pea for the Queen. But in some
places only the King was elected by lot, and after his election he chose
his Queen for himself. Sometimes a coin was substituted for the bean in
the cake; but though this usage was followed in southern Germany as early
as the first half of the sixteenth century, it is probably an innovation
on the older custom of employing a bean as the lot. In France the
distribution of the pieces of the cake among the persons present was made
in accordance with the directions of a child, the youngest boy present,
who was placed under or on the table and addressed by the name of “Phoebe”
or “Tébé”; he answered in Latin “_Domine_.” The master of the house,
holding a piece of the cake in his hand, asked the child to whom he should
give it, and the child named any person he pleased. Sometimes the first
slice of cake was regularly assigned to “the good God” and set aside for
the poor. In the name “Phoebe” or “Tébé,” by which the child was
addressed, learned antiquaries have detected a reference to the oracle of
Apollo; but more probably the name is a simple corruption of the Latin or
French word for bean (Latin _faba_, French _fève_). Immediately on his
election the King of the Bean was enthroned, saluted by all, and thrice
lifted up, while he made crosses with chalk on the beams and rafters of
the ceiling. Great virtue was attributed to these white crosses. They were
supposed to protect the house for the whole year against


                                “_all injuryes and harmes_
    _Of cursed devils, sprites, and bugges, of conjurings and
                charmes._”


Then feasting and revelry began and were kept up merrily without respect
of persons. Every time the King or Queen drank, the whole company was
expected to cry, “The King drinks!” or “The Queen drinks!” Any person who
failed to join in the cry was punished by having his face blackened with
soot or a burned cork or smeared with the lees of wine. In some parts of
the Ardennes the custom was to fasten great horns of paper in the hair of
the delinquent and to put a huge pair of spectacles on his nose; and he
had to wear these badges of infamy till the end of the festival.(715) The
custom of electing a King and Queen of the Bean on Twelfth Day is still
kept up all over the north of France. A miniature porcelain figure of a
child is sometimes substituted for the bean in the cake. If the lot,
whether bean or doll, falls to a boy he becomes King and chooses his
Queen; if it falls to a girl she becomes Queen and chooses her King.(716)

(M244) So far, apart from the crosses chalked up to ban hobgoblins,
witches, and bugs, the King and Queen of the Bean might seem to be merely
playful personages appointed at a season of festivity to lead the revels.
However, a more serious significance was sometimes attached to the office
and to the ceremonies of Twelfth Day in general. Thus in Lorraine the
height of the hemp crop in the coming year was prognosticated from the
height of the King and Queen; if the King was the taller of the two, it
was supposed that the male hemp would be higher than the female, but that
the contrary would happen if the Queen were taller than the King.(717)
Again, in the Vosges Mountains, on the borders of Franche-Comté, it is
customary on Twelfth Day for people to dance on the roofs in order to make
the hemp grow tall.(718) Further, in many places the beans used in the
cake were carried to the church to be blessed by the clergy, and people
drew omens from the cake as to the good or ill that would befall them
throughout the year. Moreover, certain forms of divination were resorted
to on Twelfth Night for the purpose of ascertaining in which month of the
year wheat would be dearest.(719)

(M245) In Franche-Comté, particularly in the Montagne du Doubs, it is
still the custom on the Eve of Twelfth Night (the fifth of January) to
light bonfires, which appear to have, in the popular mind, some reference
to the crops. The whole population takes part in the festivity. In the
afternoon the young folk draw a cart about the street collecting fuel.
Some people contribute faggots, others bundles of straw or of dry hemp
stalks. Towards evening the whole of the fuel thus collected is piled up a
little way from the houses and set on fire. While it blazes, the people
dance round it, crying, “Good year, come back! Bread and wine, come back!”
In the district of Pontarlier the young folk carry lighted torches about
the fields, shaking sparks over the sowed lands and shouting, “_Couaille,
couaille, blanconnie!_”—words of which the meaning has been
forgotten.(720) A similar custom is commonly observed on the same day (the
Eve of Twelfth Night, the fifth of January) in the Bocage of Normandy,
except that it is the fruit-trees rather than the sowed fields to which
the fire is applied. When the evening shadows have fallen on the
landscape, the darkness begins to be illuminated here and there by
twinkling points of fire, which multiply as the night grows late, till
they appear as numerous on earth as the stars in the sky. About every
village, in the fields and orchards, on the crests of the hills, wandering
lights may be discerned, vanishing and suddenly reappearing, gathering
together and then dispersing, pursuing each other capriciously, and
tracing broken lines, sparkling arabesques of fire in the gloom of night
The peasants are observing the ceremony of the “Moles and Field-mice”
(_Taupes et Mulots_); and that evening there is not a hamlet, not a farm,
hardly a solitary cottage that does not contribute its flame to the
general illumination, till the whole horizon seems in a blaze, and houses,
woods, and hills stand out in dark relief against the glow of the sky. The
villages vie with each other in the number and brilliancy of the fires
they can exhibit on this occasion. Woods and hedges are scoured to provide
the materials for the blaze. Torches of straw wound about poles are
provided in abundance; and armed with them men and women, lads and lasses,
boys and girls, pour forth from the houses at nightfall into the fields
and orchards. There they run about among the trees, waving the lighted
torches under the branches and striking the trunks with them so that the
sparks fly out in showers. And as they do so they sing or scream at the
top of their voices certain traditional curses against the animals and
insects that injure the fruit-trees. They bid the moles and field-mice to
depart from their orchards, threatening to break their bones and burn
their beards if they tarry. The more they do this, the larger, they
believe, will be the crop of fruit in the following autumn. When everybody
has rushed about his own orchard, meadow or pasture in this fashion, they
all assemble on a height or crest of a hill, where they picnic, each
bringing his share of provisions, cider, or brandy to the feast. There,
too, they kindle a huge bonfire, and dance round it, capering and
brandishing their torches in wild enthusiasm.(721) Customs of the same
sort used to be observed on the same day (the Eve of Epiphany, the fifth
of January) in the Ardennes. People ran about with burning torches,
commanding the moles and field-mice to go forth. Then they threw the
torches on the ground, and believed that by this proceeding they purified
the earth and made it fruitful.(722)

(M246) This ceremony appears to be intended to ensure a good crop of fruit
by burning out the animals and insects that harm the fruit-trees. In some
parts of England it used to be customary to light fires at the same season
for the purpose, apparently, of procuring a plentiful crop of wheat in the
ensuing autumn. Thus, “in the parish of Pauntley, a village on the borders
of the county of Gloucester, next Worcestershire, and in the
neighbourhood, a custom prevails, which is intended to prevent the smut in
wheat. On the Eve of Twelfth-day, all the servants of every farmer
assemble together in one of the fields that has been sown with wheat. At
the end of twelve lands, they make twelve fires in a row with straw,
around one of which, much larger than the rest, they drink a cheerful
glass of cider to their master’s health, and success to the future
harvest; then, returning home, they feast on cakes soaked in cider, which
they claim as a reward for their past labours in sowing the grain.”(723)
Similarly in Herefordshire, “on the Eve of Twelfth Day, at the approach of
evening, the farmers, their friends, servants, etc., all assemble, and,
near six o’clock, all walk together to a field where wheat is growing. The
highest part of the ground is always chosen, where twelve small fires, and
one large one are lighted up. The attendants, headed by the master of the
family, pledge the company in old cyder, which circulates freely on these
occasions. A circle is formed round the large fire, when a general shout
and hallooing takes place, which you hear answered from all the villages
and fields near; as I have myself counted fifty or sixty fires burning at
the same time, which are generally placed on some eminence. This being
finished, the company all return to the house, where the good housewife
and her maids are preparing a good supper, which on this occasion is very
plentiful. A large cake is always provided, with a hole in the middle.
After supper, the company all attend the bailiff (or head of the oxen) to
the wain-house, where the following particulars are observed. The master,
at the head of his friends, fills the cup (generally of strong ale), and
stands opposite the first or finest of the oxen (twenty-four of which I
have often seen tied up in their stalls together); he then pledges him in
a curious toast; the company then follow his example with all the other
oxen, addressing each by their name. This being over, the large cake is
produced, and is, with much ceremony, put on the horn of the first ox,
through the hole in the cake; he is then tickled to make him toss his
head: if he throws the cake behind, it is the mistress’s perquisite; if
before (in what is termed the _boosy_), the bailiff claims this prize.
This ended, the company all return to the house, the doors of which are in
the meantime locked, and not opened till some joyous songs are sung. On
entering, a scene of mirth and jollity commences, and reigns thro’ the
house till a late, or rather an early, hour, the next morning.”(724)

(M247) The custom was known as Wassailing and it was believed to have a
beneficial effect on the crops.(725) According to one Herefordshire
informant, “on Twelfth Day they make twelve fires of straw and one large
one to burn the old witch; they sing, drink, and dance round it; without
this festival they think they should have no crop.”(726) This explanation
of the large fire on Twelfth Day is remarkable and may supply the key to
the whole custom of kindling fires on the fields or in the orchards on
that day. We have seen that witches and fiends of various sorts are
believed to be let loose during the Twelve Days and that in some places
they are formally driven away on Twelfth Night.(727) It may well be that
the fires lighted on that day were everywhere primarily intended to burn
the witches and other maleficent beings swarming invisible in the
mischief-laden air, and that the benefit supposed to be conferred by the
fires on the crops was not so much the positive one of quickening the
growth of vegetation by genial warmth as the negative one of destroying
the baleful influences which would otherwise blast the fruits of the earth
and of the trees. This interpretation of the English and French custom of
lighting fires in fields and orchards on Twelfth Night is confirmed by a
parallel custom observed by Macedonian peasants for the express purpose of
burning up certain malicious fiends, who are believed to be abroad at this
season. These noxious beings are known as _Karkantzari_ or _Skatsantzari_.
They are thought to be living people, whether men or women, who during the
Twelve Days are transformed into horrible monsters, with long nails, red
faces, bloodshot eyes, snottering noses, and slobbering mouths. In this
hideous guise they roam about by night haunting houses and making the
peasant’s life well-nigh unbearable; they knock at the doors and should
they be refused admittance they will scramble down the chimney and pinch,
worry, and defile the sleepers in their beds. The only way to escape from
these tormenters is to seize and bind them fast with a straw rope. If you
have no such rope or your heart fails you, there is nothing for it but to
shut yourself up in the house before dark, fasten the door tight, block up
the chimney, and wait for daylight; for it is only at night that the
monsters are on the prowl, during the day they resume their ordinary human
shape. However, in some places strenuous efforts are made during the
Twelve Days to destroy these hateful nocturnal goblins by fire. For
example, on Christmas Eve some people burn the _Karkantzari_ by lighting
faggots of holm-oak and throwing them out into the streets at early dawn.
In other places, notably at Melenik, they scald the fiends to death on New
Year’s Eve by means of pancakes frizzling and hissing in a pan. While the
goodwife is baking the cakes, the goodman disguises himself as one of the
fiends in a fur coat turned inside out, and in his assumed character
dances and sings outside the door, while he invites his wife to join him
in the dance. In other districts people collect faggots during the whole
of the Twelve Days and lay them up on the hearth. Then on the Eve of
Twelfth Night they set fire to the pile in order that the goblins, who are
supposed to be lurking under the ashes, may utterly perish.(728) Thus the
view that the large fire in Herefordshire on Twelfth Night is intended “to
burn the old witch” is far more probable than the opinion that it
represents the Virgin Mary, and that the other twelve fires stand for the
twelve apostles.(729) This latter interpretation is in all probability
nothing more than a Christian gloss put upon an old heathen custom of
which the meaning was forgotten.

(M248) The Gloucestershire custom was described by the English traveller
Thomas Pennant in the latter part of the eighteenth century. He says: “A
custom savouring of the Scotch Bel-tien prevales in Gloucestershire,
particularly about Newent and the neighbouring parishes, on the twelfth
day, or on the Epiphany, in the evening. All the servants of every
particular farmer assemble together in one of the fields that has been
sown with wheat; on the border of which, in the most conspicuous or most
elevated place, they make twelve fires of straw, in a row; around one of
which, made larger than the rest, they drink a cheerful glass of cyder to
their master’s health, success to the future harvest, and then returning
home, they feast on cakes made of carraways, etc., soaked in cyder, which
they claim as a reward for their past labours in sowing the grain.”(730)
In Shropshire also it used to be customary to kindle festal fires on the
tops of hills and other high places on Twelfth Night.(731) Again, in
Ireland “on Twelfth-Eve in Christmas, they use to set up as high as they
can a sieve of oats, and in it a dozen of candles set round, and in the
centre one larger, all lighted. This in memory of our Saviour and his
Apostles, lights of the world.”(732) Down to the present time, apparently,
in the county of Roscommon, “Twelfth Night, which is Old Christmas Day, is
a greater day than Christmas Day itself. Thirteen rushlights are made in
remembrance of the numbers at the Last Supper, and each is named after
some member of the family. If there are not enough in the household other
relations’ names are added. The candles are stuck in a cake of cow-dung
and lighted, and as each burns out, so will be the length of each person’s
life. Rushlights are only used for this occasion.”(733)

(M249) In these English and Irish customs observed on Twelfth Night the
twelve fires or candles probably refer either to the twelve days from
Christmas to Epiphany or to the twelve months of the year. In favour of
this view it may be said that according to a popular opinion, which has
been reported in England(734) and is widely diffused in Germany and the
German provinces of Austria, the weather of the twelve days in question
determines the weather of the twelve following months, so that from the
weather on each of these days it is possible to predict the weather of the
corresponding month in the ensuing year.(735) Hence in Swabia the days are
called “the Twelve Lot Days”; and many people seek to pry into the future
with scientific precision by means of twelve circles, each subdivided into
four quadrants, which they chalk up over the parlour door or inscribe on
paper. Each circle represents a month, and each quadrant represents a
quarter of a month; and according as the sky is overcast or clear during
each quarter of a day from Christmas to Epiphany, you shade the
corresponding quadrant of a circle or leave it a blank. By this
contrivance, as simple as it is ingenious, you may forecast the weather
for the whole year with more or less of accuracy.(736) At Hosskirch in
Swabia they say that you can predict the weather for the twelve months
from the weather of the twelve hours of Twelfth Day alone.(737) A somewhat
different system of meteorology is adopted in various parts of
Switzerland, Germany, and Austria. On Christmas, New Year’s Day, or
another of the twelve days you take an onion, slice it in two, peel off
twelve coats, and sprinkle a pinch of salt in each of them. The twelve
coats of the onion stand for the twelve months of the year, and from the
amount of moisture which has gathered in each of them next morning you may
foretell the amount of rain that will fall in the corresponding
month.(738)

(M250) But the belief that the weather of the twelve months can be
predicted from the weather of the twelve days is not confined to the
Germanic peoples. It occurs also in France and among the Celts of Brittany
and Scotland. Thus in the Bocage of Normandy “the village old wives have a
very simple means of divining the general temperature of the coming
season. According to them, the twelve days between Christmas and Epiphany,
including Epiphany, represent the twelve months of the year. So the thing
to do is to mark the temperature of each of these days, for the
temperature of the corresponding month will be relatively the same. Some
people say that this experience is rarely at fault, and more trust is put
in it than in the predictions of the _Double-Liégois_.”(739) In
Cornouaille, Brittany, it is popularly believed that the weather of the
last six days of December and the first six of January prognosticates the
weather of the twelve months; but in other parts of Brittany it is the
first twelve days of January that are supposed to be ominous of the
weather for the year. These days are called _gour-deziou_, which is
commonly interpreted “male days,” but is said to mean properly “additional
or supplementary days.”(740) Again, in the Highlands of Scotland the
twelve days of Christmas (_Da latha dheug na Nollaig_) “were the twelve
days commencing from the Nativity or Big _Nollaig_, and were deemed to
represent, in respect of weather, the twelve months of the year. Some say
the days should be calculated from New Year’s Day.”(741) Others again
reckon the Twelve Days from the thirty-first of December. Thus Pennant
tells us that “the Highlanders form a sort of almanack or presage of the
weather of the ensuing year in the following manner: they make observation
on twelve days, beginning at the last of December, and hold as an
infallible rule, that whatsoever weather happens on each of those days,
the same will prove to agree in the correspondent months. Thus, January is
to answer to the weather of December 31st; February to that of January
1st; and so with the rest. Old people still pay great attention to this
augury.”(742) It is interesting to observe that in the Celtic regions of
Scotland and France popular opinion hesitates as to the exact date of the
twelve days, some people dating them from Christmas, others from the New
Year, and others again from the thirty-first of December. This hesitation
has an important bearing on the question of the origin of the twelve days’
period, as I shall point out immediately.

(M251) Thus in the popular mind the twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany
are conceived as a miniature of the whole year, the character of each
particular day answering to the character of a particular month. The
conception appears to be very ancient, for it meets us again among the
Aryans of the Vedic age in India. They, too, appear to have invested
twelve days in midwinter with a sacred character as a time when the three
Ribhus or genii of the seasons rested from their labours in the home of
the sun-god; and these twelve rest-days they called “an image or copy of
the year.”(743)

(M252) This curious coincidence, if such it is, between the winter
festivals of the ancient Aryans of India and their modern kinsfolk in
Europe seems to be best explained on the theory that the twelve days in
question derive their sanctity from the position which they occupied in
the calendar of the primitive Aryans. The coincidence of the name for
month with the name for moon in the various Aryan languages(744) points to
the conclusion that the year of our remote ancestors was primarily based
on observation of the moon rather than of the sun; but as a year of twelve
lunar months or three hundred and fifty-four days (reckoning the months at
twenty-nine and thirty days alternately) falls short of the solar year of
three hundred and sixty-five and a quarter days by roundly twelve days,
the discrepancy could not fail to attract the attention of an intelligent
people, such as the primitive Aryans must be supposed to have been, who
had made some progress in the arts of life; and the most obvious way of
removing the discrepancy and equating the lunar with the solar year is to
add twelve days at the end of each period of twelve lunar months so as to
bring the total days of the year up to three hundred and sixty-six. The
equation is not indeed perfectly exact, but it may well have been
sufficiently so for the rudimentary science of the primitive Aryans.(745)
As many savage races in modern times have observed the discrepancy between
solar and lunar time and have essayed to correct it by observations of the
sun or the constellations, especially the Pleiades,(746) there seems no
reason to doubt that the ancestors of the Indo-European peoples in
prehistoric times were able to make similar observations, and that they
were not, as has been suggested, reduced to the necessity of borrowing the
knowledge of such simple and obvious facts from the star-gazers of ancient
Babylonia. Learned men who make little use of their eyes except to read
books are too apt to underrate the observational powers of the savage, who
lives under totally different conditions from us, spending most of his
time in the open air and depending for his very existence on the accuracy
with which he notes the varied and changing aspects of nature.

(M253) It has been proposed to explain the manifold superstitions which
cluster round the Twelve Days, or rather the Twelve Nights, as they are
more popularly called,(747) by reference to the place which they occupy in
the Christian calendar, beginning as they do immediately after Christmas
and ending with Epiphany.(748) But, in the first place, it is difficult to
see why the interval between these two particular festivals should have
attracted to itself a greater mass of superstitious belief and custom than
the interval between any other two Christian festivals in the calendar; if
it really did so, the ground of its special attraction is still to seek,
and on this essential point the advocates of the Christian origin of the
Twelve Nights throw no light. In the second place, the superstitious
beliefs and customs themselves appear to have no relation to Christianity
but to be purely pagan in character. Lastly, a fatal objection to the
theory in question is that the place of the Twelve Days in the calendar is
not uniformly fixed to the interval between Christmas and Epiphany; it
varies considerably in popular opinion in different places, but it is
significant that the variations never exceed certain comparatively narrow
limits. The twelve-days’ festival, so to speak, oscillates to and fro
about a fixed point, which is either the end of the year or the winter
solstice. Thus in Silesia the Twelve Days are usually reckoned to fall
before Christmas instead of after it; though in the Polish districts and
the mountainous region of the country the ordinary German opinion prevails
that the days immediately follow Christmas.(749) In some parts of Bavaria
the Twelve Days are counted from St. Thomas’s Day (the twenty-first of
December) to New Year’s Day; while in parts of Mecklenburg they begin with
New Year’s Day and so coincide with the first twelve days of January,(750)
and this last mode of reckoning finds favour, as we saw, with some Celts
of Brittany and Scotland.(751) These variations in the dating of the
Twelve Days seem irreconcilable with the theory that they derive their
superstitious character purely from the accident that they fall between
Christmas and Epiphany; accordingly we may safely dismiss the theory of
their Christian origin and recognize, with many good authorities,(752) in
the Twelve Days the relics of a purely pagan festival, which was probably
celebrated long before the foundation of Christianity. In truth the
hypothesis of the Christian derivation of the Twelve Days in all
probability exactly inverts the historical order of the facts. On the
whole the evidence goes to shew that the great Christian festivals were
arbitrarily timed by the church so as to coincide with previously existing
pagan festivals for the sake of weaning the heathen from their old faith
and bringing them over to the new religion. To make the transition as easy
as possible the ecclesiastical authorities, in abolishing the ancient
rites, appointed ceremonies of somewhat similar character on the same
days, or nearly so, thus filling up the spiritual void by a new creation
which the worshipper might accept as an adequate substitute for what he
had lost. Christmas and Easter, the two pivots on which the Christian
calendar revolves, appear both to have been instituted with this
intention: the one superseded a midwinter festival of the birth of the
sun-god, the other superseded a vernal festival of the death and
resurrection of the vegetation-god.(753)

(M254) If the twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany were indeed an
ancient intercalary period inserted for the purpose of equating the lunar
to the solar year, we can better understand the curious superstitions that
have clustered round them and the quaint customs that have been annually
observed during their continuance. To the primitive mind it might well
seem that an intercalary period stands outside of the regular order of
things, forming part neither of the lunar nor of the solar system; it is
an excrescence, inevitable but unaccountable, which breaks the smooth
surface of ordinary existence, an eddy which interrupts the even flow of
months and years. Hence it may be inferred that the ordinary rules of
conduct do not apply to such extraordinary periods, and that accordingly
men may do in them what they would never dream of doing at other times.
Thus intercalary days tend to degenerate into seasons of unbridled
license; they form an interregnum during which the customary restraints of
law and morality are suspended and the ordinary rulers abdicate their
authority in favour of a temporary regent, a sort of puppet king, who
bears a more or less indefinite, capricious, and precarious sway over a
community given up for a time to riot, turbulence, and disorder. If that
is so—though it must be confessed that the view here suggested is to a
great extent conjectural—we may perhaps detect the last surviving
representatives of such puppet kings in the King of the Bean and other
grotesque figures of the same sort who used to parade with the mimic pomp
of sovereignty on one or other of the twelve days between Christmas and
Epiphany. For the King of the Bean was by no means the only such ruler of
the festive season, nor was Twelfth Night the only day on which he and his
colleagues played their pranks. We will conclude this part of our subject
with a brief notice of some of these mummers.

(M255) In the first place it deserves to be noticed that in many parts of
the continent, such as France, Spain, Belgium, Germany, and Austria,
Twelfth Day is regularly associated with three mythical kings named
Caspar, Melchior, and Balthasar, and derives its popular appellation from
them, being known in Germany and Austria as the Day of the Three Kings
(_Dreikönigstag_) and in France as the Festival of the Kings (_Fête des
Rois_). Further, it has been customary in many places to represent the
three kings by mummers, who go about arrayed in royal costume from door to
door, singing songs and collecting contributions from the households which
they visit.(754) The custom may very well be older than Christianity,
though it has received a Christian colouring; for the mythical kings are
commonly identified with the wise men of the East, who are said to have
been attracted to the infant Christ at Bethlehem by the sight of his star
in the sky.(755) Yet there is no Biblical authority for regarding these
wise men as kings or for fixing their number at three. In Franche-Comté
the old custom is still observed, or at all events it was so down to
recent years. The Three Kings are personated by three boys dressed in long
white shirts with coloured sashes round their waists; on their heads they
wear pointed mitres of pasteboard decorated with a gilt star and floating
ribbons. Each carries a long wand topped by a star, which he keeps
constantly turning. The one who personates Melchior has his face blackened
with soot, because Melchior is supposed to have been a negro king. When
they enter a house, they sing a song, setting forth that they are three
kings who have come from three different countries, led by a star, to
adore the infant Jesus at Bethlehem. After the song the negro king
solicits contributions by shaking his money-box or holding out a basket,
in which the inmates of the house deposit eggs, nuts, apples and so forth.
By way of thanks for this liberality the three kings chant a stave in
which they call down the blessing of God on the household.(756) The custom
is similar in the Vosges Mountains, where the Three Kings are held in
great veneration and invoked by hedge doctors to effect various cures. For
example, if a man drops to the ground with the falling sickness, you need
only whisper in his right ear, “_Gaspard fert myrrham, thus Melchior,
Balthasar aurum_,” and he will get up at once. But to make the cure
complete you must knock three nails into the earth on the precise spot
where he fell; each nail must be exactly of the length of the patient’s
little finger, and as you knock it in you must take care to utter the
sufferer’s name.(757) In many Czech villages of Bohemia the children who
play the part of the Three Kings assimilate themselves to the wise men of
the East in the gospel by carrying gilt paper, incense, and myrrh with
them on their rounds, which they distribute as gifts in the houses they
visit, receiving in return money or presents in kind. Moreover they
fumigate and sprinkle the houses and describe crosses and letters on the
doors. Amongst the Germans of West Bohemia it is the schoolmaster who,
accompanied by some boys, goes the round of the village on Twelfth Day. He
chalks up the letters C. M. B. (the initials of Caspar, Melchior, and
Balthasar), together with three crosses, on every door, and fumigates the
house with a burning censer in order to guard it from evil influences and
infectious diseases.(758) Some people used to wear as an amulet a picture
representing the adoration of the Three Kings with a Latin inscription to
the following effect: “Holy three kings, Caspar, Melchior, Balthasar, pray
for us, now and in the hour of our death.” The picture was thought to
protect the wearer not only from epilepsy, headache, and fever, but also
from the perils of the roads, from the bite of mad dogs, from sudden
death, from sorcery and witchcraft.(759) Whatever its origin, the festival
of the Three Kings goes back to the middle ages, for it is known to have
been celebrated with great pomp at Milan in 1336. On that occasion the
Three Kings appeared wearing crowns, riding richly caparisoned horses, and
surrounded by pages, bodyguards, and a great retinue of followers. Before
them was carried a golden star, and they offered gifts of gold,
frankincense, and myrrh to the infant Christ cradled in a manger beside
the high altar of the church of St. Eustorgius.(760)

(M256) In our own country a popular figure during the Christmas holidays
used to be the Lord of Misrule, or, as he was called in Scotland, the
Abbot of Unreason, who led the revels at that merry season in the halls of
colleges, the Inns of Court, the palace of the king, and the mansions of
nobles.(761) Writing at the end of the sixteenth century, the antiquary
John Stow tells us that, “in the feast of Christmas, there was in the
King’s house, wheresoever he was lodged, a Lord of Misrule, or Master of
Merry Disports; and the like had ye in the house of every nobleman of
honour or good worship, were he spiritual or temporal. Amongst the which
the Mayor of London, and either of the Sheriffs, had their several Lords
of Misrule, ever contending, without quarrel or offence, who should make
the rarest pastimes to delight the beholders. These Lords beginning their
rule on Alhollon eve, continued the same til the morrow after the Feast of
the Purification, commonly called Candlemas day. In all which space there
were fine and subtle disguisings, masks and mummeries, with playing at
cards for counters, nails, and points, in every house, more for pastime
than for gain.”(762) Again, in the seventeenth century the ardent royalist
Sir Thomas Urquhart wrote that “they may be likewise said to use their
king ... as about Christmas we do the King of Misrule; whom we invest with
that title to no other end, but to countenance the Bacchanalian riots and
preposterous disorders of the family, where he is installed.”(763) From
the former passage it appears that the Lords of Misrule often or even
generally reigned for more than three months in winter, namely from
Allhallow Even (the thirty-first of October, the Eve of All Saints’ Day)
till Candlemas (the second of February). Sometimes, however, their reign
seems to have been restricted to the Twelve Nights. Thus we are told that
George Ferrers of Lincoln’s Inn was Lord of Misrule for twelve days one
year when King Edward VI. kept his Christmas with open house at
Greenwich.(764) At Trinity College, Cambridge, a Master of Arts used to be
appointed to this honourable office, which he held for the twelve days
from Christmas to Twelfth Day, and he resumed office on Candlemas Day. His
duty was to regulate the games and diversions of the students,
particularly the plays which were acted in the college hall. Similar
masters of the revels were commonly instituted in the colleges at Oxford;
for example, at Merton College the fellows annually elected about St.
Edmund’s Day, in November a Lord of Misrule or, as he was called in the
registers, a King of the Bean (_Rex Fabarum_), who held office till
Candlemas and sometimes assumed a number of ridiculous titles. In the
Inner Temple a Lord of Misrule used to be appointed on St. Stephen’s Day
(the twenty-sixth of December); surrounded by his courtiers, who were
dubbed by various derogatory or ribald names, he presided at the dancing,
feasting, and minstrelsy in the hall. Of the mock monarch who in the
Christmas holidays of 1635 held office in the Middle Temple the
jurisdiction, privileges, and parade have been minutely described. He was
attended by his lord keeper, lord treasurer, with eight white staves, a
band of gentleman pensioners with poleaxes, and two chaplains. He dined
under a canopy of state both in the hall and in his own chambers. He
received many petitions, which he passed on in regal style to his Master
of Requests; and he attended service in the Temple church, where his
chaplains preached before him and did him reverence. His expenses,
defrayed from his own purse, amounted to no less than two thousand
pounds.(765) “I remember to have heard a Bencher of the Temple tell a
story of a tradition in their house, where they had formerly a custom of
choosing kings for such a season, and allowing him his expences at the
charge of the society: One of our kings, said my friend, carried his royal
inclination a little too far, and there was a committee ordered to look
into the management of his treasury. Among other things it appeared, that
his Majesty walking _incog._ in the cloister, had overheard a poor man say
to another, Such a small sum would make me the happiest man in the world.
The king out of his royal compassion privately inquired into his
character, and finding him a proper object of charity, sent him the money.
When the committee read the report, the house passed his accounts with a
plaudite without further examination, upon the recital of this article in
them, ‘For making a man happy, £10:0:0.’ ”(766)

(M257) At the English court the annual Lord of Misrule is not to be
confounded with the Master of the Revels, who was a permanent official and
probably despised the temporary Lord as an upstart rival and intruder.
Certainly there seems to have been at times bad blood between them. Some
correspondence which passed between the two merry monarchs in the reign of
Edward VI. has been preserved, and from it we learn that on one occasion
the Lord of Misrule had much difficulty in extracting from the Master of
the Revels the fool’s coat, hobby-horses, and other trumpery paraphernalia
which he required for the proper support of his dignity. Indeed the
costumes furnished by his rival were so shabby that his lordship returned
them with a note, in which he informed the Master of the Revels that the
gentlemen of rank and position who were to wear these liveries stood too
much on their dignity to be seen prancing about the streets of London
rigged out in such old slops. The Lords of Council had actually to
interpose in the petty squabble between the two potentates.(767)

(M258) In France the counterparts of these English Lords of Misrule
masqueraded in clerical attire as mock Bishops, Archbishops, Popes, or
Abbots. The festival at which they disported themselves was known as the
Festival of Fools (_Fête des Fous_), which fell in different places at
different dates, sometimes on Christmas Day, sometimes on St. Stephen’s
Day (the twenty-sixth of December), sometimes on New Year’s Day, and
sometimes on Twelfth Day. According to one account “on the first day,
which was the festival of Christmas, the lower orders of clergy and monks
cried in unison _Noël_ (Christmas) and gave themselves up to jollity. On
the morrow, St. Stephen’s Day, the deacons held a council to elect a Pope
or Patriarch of Fools, a Bishop or Archbishop of Innocents, an Abbot of
Ninnies; next day, the festival of St. John, the subdeacons began the
dance in his honour; afterwards, on the fourth day, the festival of the
Holy Innocents, the choristers and minor clergy claimed the Pope or Bishop
or Abbot elect, who made his triumphal entry into the church on
Circumcision Day (the first of January) and sat enthroned pontifically
till the evening of Epiphany. It was then the joyous reign of this Pope or
this Bishop or this Abbot of Folly which constituted the Festival of Fools
and dominated its whimsical phases, the grotesque and sometimes impious
masquerades, the merry and often disgusting scenes, the furious orgies,
the dances, the games, the profane songs, the impudent parodies of the
catholic liturgy.”(768) At these parodies of the most solemn rites of the
church the priests, wearing grotesque masks and sometimes dressed as
women, danced in the choir and sang obscene chants: laymen disguised as
monks and nuns mingled with the clergy: the altar was transformed into a
tavern, where the deacons and subdeacons ate sausages and black-puddings
or played at dice and cards under the nose of the celebrant; and the
censers smoked with bits of old shoes instead of incense, filling the
church with a foul stench. After playing these pranks and running,
leaping, and cutting capers through the whole church, they rode about the
town in mean carts, exchanging scurrilities with the crowds of laughing
and jeering spectators.(769)

(M259) Amongst the buffooneries of the Festival of Fools one of the most
remarkable was the introduction of an ass into the church, where various
pranks were played with the animal. At Autun the ass was led with great
ceremony to the church under a cloth of gold, the corners of which were
held by four canons; and on entering the sacred edifice the animal was
wrapt in a rich cope, while a parody of the mass was performed. A regular
Latin liturgy in glorification of the ass was chanted on these occasions,
and the celebrant priest imitated the braying of an ass. At Beauvais the
ceremony was performed every year on the fourteenth of January. A young
girl with a child in her arms rode on the back of the ass in imitation of
the Flight into Egypt. Escorted by the clergy and the people she was led
in triumph from the cathedral to the parish church of St. Stephen. There
she and her ass were introduced into the chancel and stationed on the left
side of the altar; and a long mass was performed which consisted of scraps
borrowed indiscriminately from the services of many church festivals
throughout the year. In the intervals the singers quenched their thirst:
the congregation imitated their example; and the ass was fed and watered.
The services over, the animal was brought from the chancel into the nave,
where the whole congregation, clergy and laity mixed up together, danced
round the animal and brayed like asses. Finally, after vespers and
compline, the merry procession, led by the precentor and preceded by a
huge lantern, defiled through the streets to wind up the day with indecent
farces in a great theatre erected opposite the church.(770)

(M260) A pale reflection or diminutive copy of the Festival of Fools was
the Festival of the Innocents, which was celebrated on Childermas or Holy
Innocents’ Day, the twenty-eighth of December. The custom was widely
observed both in France and England. In France on Childermas or the eve of
the festival the choristers assembled in the church and chose one of their
number to be a Boy Bishop, who officiated in that character with mock
solemnity. Such burlesques of ecclesiastical ritual appear to have been
common on that day in monasteries and convents, where the offices
performed by the clergy and laity were inverted for the occasion. At the
Franciscan monastery of Antibes, for example, the lay brothers, who
usually worked in the kitchen and the garden, took the place of the
priests on Childermas and celebrated mass in church, clad in tattered
sacerdotal vestments turned inside out, holding the books upside down,
wearing spectacles made of orange peel, mumbling an unintelligible jargon,
and uttering frightful cries. These buffooneries were kept up certainly as
late as the eighteenth century,(771) and probably later. In the great
convent of the Congrégation de Notre Dame at Paris down to the latter part
of the nineteenth century the nuns and their girl pupils regularly
exchanged parts on Holy Innocents’ Day. The pupils pretended to be nuns
and a select few of them were attired as such, while the nuns made believe
to be pupils, without however changing their dress.(772)

(M261) In England the Boy Bishop was widely popular during the later
Middle Ages and only succumbed to the austerity of the Reformation. He is
known, for example, to have officiated in St. Paul’s, London, in the
cathedrals of Salisbury, Exeter, Hereford, Gloucester, Lichfield, Norwich,
Lincoln, and York, in great collegiate churches such as Beverley minster,
St. Peter’s, Canterbury, and Ottery St. Mary’s, in college chapels such as
Magdalen and All Souls’ at Oxford, in the private chapels of the king, and
in many parish churches throughout the country. The election was usually
made on St. Nicholas’s Day (the sixth of December), but the office and
authority lasted till Holy Innocents’ Day (the twenty-eighth of December).
Both days were appropriate, for St. Nicholas was the patron saint of
school children, and Holy Innocents’ Day commemorates the slaughter of the
young children by Herod. In cathedrals the Bishop was chosen from among
the choir boys. After his election he was completely apparelled in the
episcopal vestments, with a mitre and crosier, bore the title and
displayed the state of a Bishop, and exacted ceremonial obedience from his
fellows, who were dressed like priests. They took possession of the church
and, with the exception of mass, performed all the ceremonies and offices.
The Boy Bishop preached from the pulpit. At Salisbury the ceremonies at
which he presided are elaborately regulated by the statutes of Roger de
Mortival, enacted in 1319; and two of the great service-books of the Sarum
use, the Breviary and the Processional, furnish full details of the
ministrations of the Boy Bishop and his fellows. He is even said to have
enjoyed the right of disposing of such prebends as happened to fall vacant
during the days of his episcopacy. But the pranks of the mock bishop were
not confined to the church. Arrayed in full canonicals he was led about
with songs and dances from house to house, blessing the grinning people
and collecting money in return for his benedictions. At York in the year
1396 the Boy Bishop is known to have gone on his rounds to places so far
distant as Bridlington, Leeds, Beverley, Fountains Abbey, and Allerton;
and the profits which he made were considerable. William of Wykeham
ordained in 1400 that a Boy Bishop should be chosen at Winchester College
and another at New College, Oxford, and that he should recite the office
at the Feast of the Innocents. His example was followed some forty years
afterwards in the statutes of the royal foundations of Eton College and of
King’s College, Cambridge. From being elected on St. Nicholas’s Day the
Boy Bishop was sometimes called a Nicholas Bishop (_Episcopus
Nicholatensis_).(773) In Spanish cathedrals, also, it appears to have been
customary on St. Nicholas’s Day to elect a chorister to the office of
Bishop. He exercised a certain jurisdiction till Holy Innocents’ Day, and
his prebendaries took secular offices, acting in the capacity of
alguazils, catchpoles, dog-whippers, and sweepers.(774)

(M262) On the whole it seems difficult to suppose that the a curious
superstitions and quaint ceremonies, the outbursts of profanity and the
inversions of ranks, which characterize the popular celebration of the
twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany, have any connexion with the
episodes of Christian history believed to be commemorated by these two
festivals. More probably they are relics of an old heathen festival
celebrated during the twelve intercalary days which our forefathers
annually inserted in their calendar at midwinter in order to equalize the
short lunar year of twelve months with the longer solar year of three
hundred and sixty-five or sixty-six days. We need not assume that the
license and buffooneries of the festive season were borrowed from the
Roman Saturnalia; both celebrations may well have been parallel and
independent deductions from a like primitive philosophy of nature. There
is not indeed, so far as I am aware, any direct evidence that the
Saturnalia at Rome was an intercalary festival; but the license which
characterized it, and the temporary reign of a mock king, who personated
Saturn, suggest that it may have been so. If we were better acquainted
with the intercalary periods of peoples at a comparatively low level of
culture, we might find that they are commonly marked by similar outbreaks
of lawlessness and similar reigns of more or less nominal and farcical
rulers. But unfortunately we know too little about the observance of such
periods among primitive peoples to be warranted in making any positive
affirmation on the subject.

(M263) However, there are grounds for thinking that intercalary periods
have commonly been esteemed unlucky. The Aztecs certainly regarded as very
unlucky the five supplementary days which they added at the end of every
year in order to make up a total of three hundred and sixty-five
days.(775) These five supplementary days, corresponding to the last four
of January and the first of February, were called _nemontemi_, which means
“vacant,” “superfluous,” or “useless.” Being dedicated to no god, they
were deemed inauspicious, equally unfit for the services of religion and
the transaction of civil business. During their continuance no sacrifices
were offered by the priests and no worshippers frequented the temples. No
cases were tried in the courts of justice. The houses were not swept.
People abstained from all actions of importance and confined themselves to
performing such as could not be avoided, or spent the time in paying
visits to each other. In particular they were careful during these fatal
days not to fall asleep in the daytime, not to quarrel, and not to
stumble; because they thought that if they did such things at that time
they would continue to do so for ever. Persons born on any of these days
were deemed unfortunate, destined to fail in their undertakings and to
live in wretchedness and poverty all their time on earth.(776) The Mayas
of Yucatan employed a calendar like that of the Aztecs, and they too
looked upon the five supplementary days at the end of the year as unlucky
and of evil omen; hence they gave no names to these days, and while they
lasted the people stayed for the most part at home; they neither washed
themselves, nor combed their hair, nor loused each other; and they did no
servile or fatiguing work lest some evil should befall them.(777)

(M264) The ancient Egyptians like the Aztecs considered a year to consist
of three hundred and sixty ordinary days divided into months and eked out
with five supplementary days so as to bring the total number of days in
the year up to three hundred and sixty-five; but whereas the Aztecs
divided the three hundred and sixty ordinary days into eighteen arbitrary
divisions or months of twenty days each, the Egyptians, keeping much
closer to the natural periods marked by the phases of the moon, divided
these days into twelve months of thirty days each.(778) This mode of
regulating the calendar appears to be exceedingly ancient in Egypt and may
even date from the prehistoric period; for the five days over and above
the year (_haru duaït hiru ronpit_) are expressly mentioned in the texts
of the pyramids.(779) The myth told to explain their origin was as
follows. Once on a time the earth-god Keb lay secretly with the
sky-goddess Nut, and the sun-god Ra in his anger cursed the goddess,
saying that she should give birth to her offspring neither in any month
nor in any year. He thought, no doubt, by this imprecation to prevent her
from bringing forth the fruit of her womb. But he was outwitted by the
wily Thoth, who engaged the goddess of the moon in a game of draughts and
having won the game took as a forfeit from her the seventieth part of
every day in the year, and out of the fractions thus abstracted he made up
five new days, which he added to the old year of three hundred and sixty
days. As these days formed no part either of a month or of a year, the
goddess Nut might be delivered in them without rendering the sun-god’s
curse void and of no effect. Accordingly she bore Osiris on the first of
the days, Horus on the second, Set or Typhon on the third, Isis on the
fourth, and Nephthys on the fifth. Of these five supplementary or
intercalary days the third, as the birthday of the evil deity Set or
Typhon, was deemed unlucky, and the Egyptian kings neither transacted
business on it nor attended to their persons till nightfall.(780) Thus it
appears that the ancient Egyptians regarded the five supplementary or
intercalary days as belonging neither to a month nor to a year, but as
standing outside of both and forming an extraordinary period quite apart
and distinct from the ordinary course of time. It is probable, though we
cannot prove it, that in all countries intercalary days or months have
been so considered by the primitive astronomers who first observed the
discrepancy between solar and lunar time and attempted to reconcile it by
the expedient of intercalation.

(M265) Thus we infer with some probability that the sacred Twelve Days or
Nights at midwinter derive their peculiar character in popular custom and
superstition from the circumstance that they were originally an
intercalary period inserted annually at the end of a lunar year of three
hundred and fifty-four days for the purpose of equating it to a solar year
reckoned at three hundred and sixty-six days. However, there are grounds
for thinking that at a very early time the Aryan peoples sought to correct
their lunar year, not by inserting twelve supplementary days every year,
but by allowing the annual deficiency to accumulate for several years and
then supplying it by a whole intercalary month. In India the Aryans of the
Vedic age appear to have adopted a year of three hundred and sixty days,
divided into twelve months of thirty days each, and to have remedied the
annual deficiency of five days by intercalating a whole month of thirty
days every fifth year, thus regulating their calendar according to a five
years’ cycle.(781) The Celts of Gaul, as we learn from the Coligny
calendar, also adopted a five years’ cycle, but they managed it
differently. They retained the old lunar year of three hundred and
fifty-four days divided into twelve months, six of thirty days and six of
twenty-nine days; but instead of intercalating twelve days every year to
restore the balance between lunar and solar time they intercalated a month
of thirty days every two and a half years, so that in each cycle of five
years the total number of intercalary days was sixty, which was equivalent
to intercalating twelve days annually. Thus the result at the end of each
cycle of five years was precisely the same as it would have been if they
had followed the old system of annual intercalation.(782) Why they
abandoned the simple and obvious expedient of annually intercalating
twelve days, and adopted instead the more recondite system of
intercalating a month of thirty days every two and a half years, is not
plain. It may be that religious or political motives unknown to us
concurred with practical considerations to recommend the change. One
result of the reform would be the abolition of the temporary king who, if
I am right, used to bear a somewhat tumultuary sway over the community
during the saturnalia of the Twelve Days. Perhaps the annually recurring
disorders which attended that period of license were not the least urgent
of the reasons which moved the rulers to strike the twelve intercalary
days out of the year and to replace them by an intercalary month at longer
intervals.

(M266) However that may be, the equivalence of the new intercalary month
to the old intercalary Twelve Days multiplied by two and a half is
strongly suggested by a remarkable feature of the Coligny calendar; for in
it the thirty days of the intercalary month, which bore the name of
Ciallos, are named after the ordinary twelve months of the year. Thus the
first day of the intercalary month is called Samon, which is the name of
the first month of the year; the second day of the month is called
Dumannos, which is the name of the second month of the year; the third day
of the month is called Rivros, which is the name of the third month of the
year; the fourth day of the month is called Anacan, which is the name of
the fourth month of the year; and so on with all the rest, so that the
thirty days of the intercalary month bear the names of the twelve months
of the year repeated two and a half times.(783) This seems to shew that,
just as our modern peasants regard the Twelve Days as representing each a
month of the year in their chronological order, so the old Celts of Gaul
who drew up the Coligny calendar regarded the thirty days of the
intercalary month as representing the thirty ordinary months which were to
follow it till the next intercalation took place. And we may conjecture
that just as our modern peasants still draw omens from the Twelve Days for
the twelve succeeding months, so the old Celts drew omens from the thirty
days of the intercalary month for the thirty months of the two and a half
succeeding years. Indeed we may suppose that the reformers of the calendar
transferred, or attempted to transfer, to the new intercalary month the
whole of the quaint customs and superstitions which from time immemorial
had clustered round the twelve intercalary days of the old year. Thus,
like the old Twelve Days of midwinter, the thirty days of the new
intercalary month may have formed an interregnum or break in the ordinary
course of government, a tumultuary period of general license, during which
the ordinary rules of law and morality were suspended and the direction of
affairs committed to a temporary and more or less farcical ruler or King
of the Bean, who may possibly have had to pay with his life for his brief
reign of thirty days. The floating traditions of such merry monarchs and
of the careless happy-go-lucky life under them may have crystallized in
after ages into the legend of Saturn and the Golden Age. If that was
so—and I put forward the hypothesis for no more than a web of conjectures
woven from the gossamer threads of popular superstition—we can understand
why the Twelve Days, intercalated every year in the old calendar, should
have survived to the present day in the memory of the people, whereas the
thirty days, intercalated every two and a half years in the new calendar,
have long been forgotten. It is the simplest ideas that live longest in
the simple minds of the peasantry; and since the intercalation of twelve
days in every year to allow the lagging moon to keep pace with the longer
stride of the sun is certainly an easier and more obvious expedient than
to wait for two and a half years till he has outrun her by thirty days, we
need not wonder that this ancient mode of harmonizing lunar and solar time
should have lingered in the recollection and in the usages of the people
ages after the more roundabout method, which reflective minds had devised
for accomplishing the same end, had faded alike from the memory of the
peasant and the page of the historian.




§ 3. The Saturnalia and Lent.


(M267) As the Carnival is always held on the last three days before the
beginning of Lent, its date shifts somewhat from year to year, but it
invariably falls either in February or March. Hence it does not coincide
with the date of the Saturnalia, which within historical times seems to
have been always celebrated in December even in the old days, before
Caesar’s reform of the calendar, when the Roman year ended with February
instead of December.(784) Yet if the Saturnalia, like many other seasons
of license, was originally celebrated as a sort of public purification at
the end of the old year or the beginning of the new one, it may at a still
more remote period, when the Roman year began with March, have been
regularly held either in February or March and therefore at approximately
the same date as the modern Carnival. So strong and persistent are the
conservative instincts of the peasantry in respect to old custom, that it
would be no matter for surprise if, in rural districts of Italy, the
ancient festival continued to be celebrated at the ancient time long after
the official celebration of the Saturnalia in the towns had been shifted
from February to December. Latin Christianity, which struck at the root of
official or civic paganism, has always been tolerant of its rustic
cousins, the popular festivals and ceremonies which, unaffected by
political and religious revolutions, by the passing of empires and of
gods, have been carried on by the people with but little change from time
immemorial, and represent in fact the original stock from which the state
religions of classical antiquity were comparatively late offshoots. Thus
it may very well have come about that while the new faith stamped out the
Saturnalia in the towns, it suffered the original festival, disguised by a
difference of date, to linger unmolested in the country; and so the old
feast of Saturn, under the modern name of the Carnival, has reconquered
the cities, and goes on merrily under the eye and with the sanction of the
Catholic Church.

(M268) The opinion that the Saturnalia originally fell in February or the
beginning of March receives some support from the circumstance that the
festival of the Matronalia, at which mistresses feasted their slaves just
as masters did theirs at the Saturnalia, always continued to be held on
the first of March, even when the Roman year began with January.(785) It
is further not a little recommended by the consideration that this date
would be eminently appropriate for the festival of Saturn, the old Italian
god of sowing and planting. It has always been a puzzle to explain why
such a festival should have been held at midwinter; but on the present
hypothesis the mystery vanishes. With the Italian farmer February and
March were the great season of the spring sowing and planting;(786)
nothing could be more natural than that the husbandman should inaugurate
the season with the worship of the deity to whom he ascribed the function
of quickening the seed. It is no small confirmation of this theory that
the last day of the Carnival, namely Shrove Tuesday, is still, or was down
to recent times, the customary season in Central Europe for promoting the
growth of the crops by means of leaps and dances.(787) The custom fits in
very well with the view which derives the Carnival from an old festival of
sowing such as the Saturnalia probably was in its origin. Further, the
orgiastic character of the festival is readily explained by the help of
facts which met us in a former part of our investigation. We have seen
that between the sower and the seed there is commonly supposed to exist a
sympathetic connexion of such a nature that his conduct directly affects
and can promote or retard the growth of the crops.(788) What wonder then
if the simple husbandman imagined that by cramming his belly, by swilling
and guzzling just before he proceeded to sow his fields, he thereby
imparted additional vigour to the seed?(789)

(M269) But while his crude philosophy may thus have painted gluttony and
intoxication in the agreeable colours of duties which he owed to himself,
to his family, and to the commonwealth, it is possible that the zest with
which he acquitted himself of his obligations may have been whetted by a
less comfortable reflection. In modern times the indulgence of the
Carnival is immediately followed by the abstinence of Lent; and if the
Carnival is the direct descendant of the Saturnalia, may not Lent in like
manner be merely the continuation, under a thin disguise, of a period of
temperance which was annually observed, from superstitious motives, by
Italian farmers long before the Christian era? Direct evidence of this, so
far as I am aware, is not forthcoming; but we have seen that a practice of
abstinence from fleshly lusts has been observed by various peoples as a
sympathetic charm to foster the growth of the seed;(790) and such an
observance would be an appropriate sequel to the Saturnalia, if that
festival was indeed, as I conjecture it to have been, originally held in
spring as a religious or magical preparation for sowing and planting. When
we consider how widely diffused is the belief in the sympathetic influence
which human conduct, and especially the intercourse of the sexes, exerts
on the fruits of the earth, we may be allowed to conjecture that the
Lenten fast, with the rule of continence which is recommended, if not
strictly enjoined, by the Catholic and Coptic churches during that
season,(791) was in its origin intended, not so much to commemorate the
sufferings of a dying god, as to foster the growth of the seed, which in
the bleak days of early spring the husbandman commits with anxious care
and misgiving to the bosom of the naked earth. Ecclesiastical historians
have been puzzled to say why after much hesitation and great diversity of
usage in different places the Christian church finally adopted forty days
as the proper period for the mournful celebration of Lent.(792) Perhaps in
coming to this decision the authorities were guided, as so often, by a
regard for an existing pagan celebration of similar character and duration
which they hoped by a change of name to convert into a Christian
solemnity. Such a heathen Lent they may have found to hand in the rites of
Persephone, the Greek goddess of the corn, whose image, carved out of a
tree, was annually brought into the cities and mourned for forty nights,
after which it was burned.(793) The time of year when these lamentations
took place is not mentioned by the old Christian writer who records them;
but they would fall most appropriately at the season when the seed was
sown or, in mythical language, when the corn-goddess was buried, which in
ancient Italy, as we saw, was done above all in the months of February and
March. We know that at the time of the autumnal sowing Greek women held a
sad and serious festival because the Corn-goddess Persephone or the
Maiden, as they called her, then went down into the earth with the sown
grain, and Demeter fondly mourned her daughter’s absence; hence in
sympathy with the sorrowful mother the women likewise mourned and observed
a solemn fast and abstained from the marriage bed.(794) It is reasonable,
therefore, to suppose that they practised similar rules of mourning and
abstinence for a like reason at the time of the spring sowing, and that
the ancient ritual survives in the modern Lent, which preserves the memory
of the _Mater Dolorosa_, though it has substituted a dead Son for a dead
Daughter.

(M270) Be that as it may, it is worthy of note that in Burma a similar
fast, which English writers call the Buddhist Lent, is observed for three
months every year while the ploughing and sowing of the fields go forward;
and the custom is believed to be far older than Buddhism, which has merely
given it a superficial tinge like the veneer of Christianity which, if I
am right, has overlaid an old heathen observance in Lent. This Burmese
Lent, we are told, covers the rainy season from the full moon of July to
the full moon of October. “This is the time to plough, this is the time to
sow; on the villagers’ exertions in these months depends all their
maintenance for the rest of the year. Every man, every woman, every child,
has hard work of some kind or another. And so, what with the difficulties
of travelling, what with the work there is to do, and what with the custom
of Lent, every one stays at home. It is the time for prayer, for fasting,
for improving the soul. Many men during these months will live even as the
monks live, will eat but before midday, will abstain from tobacco. There
are no plays during Lent, and there are no marriages. It is the time for
preparing the land for the crop; it is the time for preparing the soul for
eternity. The congregations on the Sundays will be far greater at this
time than at any other; there will be more thought of the serious things
of life.”(795)




§ 4. Saturnalia in Ancient Greece.


(M271) Beyond the limits of Italy festivals of the same general character
as the Saturnalia appear to have been held over a considerable area of the
ancient world. A characteristic feature of the Saturnalia, as we saw, was
an inversion of social ranks, masters changing places with their slaves
and waiting upon them, while slaves were indulged with a semblance not
merely of freedom but even of power and office. In various parts of Greece
the same hollow show of granting liberty to slaves was made at certain
festivals. Thus at a Cretan festival of Hermes the servants feasted and
their masters waited upon them. In the month of Geraestius the Troezenians
observed a certain solemnity lasting many days, on one of which the slaves
played at dice with the citizens and were treated to a banquet by their
lords. The Thessalians held a great festival called Peloria, which Baton
of Sinope identified with the Saturnalia, and of which the antiquity is
vouched for by a tradition that it originated with the Pelasgians. At this
festival sacrifices were offered to Pelorian Zeus, tables splendidly
adorned were set out, all strangers were invited to the feast, all
prisoners released, and the slaves sat down to the banquet, enjoyed full
freedom of speech, and were served by their masters.(796)

(M272) But the Greek festival which appears to have corresponded most
closely to the Italian Saturnalia was the Cronia or festival of Cronus, a
god whose barbarous myth and cruel ritual clearly belong to a very early
stratum of Greek religion, and who was by the unanimous voice of antiquity
identified with Saturn. We are told that his festival was celebrated in
most parts of Greece, but especially at Athens, where the old god and his
wife Rhea had a shrine near the stately, but far more modern, temple of
Olympian Zeus. A joyous feast, at which masters and slaves sat down
together, formed a leading feature of the solemnity. At Athens the
festival fell in the height of summer, on the twelfth day of the month
Hecatombaeon, formerly called the month of Cronus, which answered nearly
to July; and tradition ran that Cecrops, the first king of Attica, had
founded an altar in honour of Cronus and Rhea, and had ordained that
master and man should share a common meal when the harvest was got
in.(797) Yet there are indications that at Athens the Cronia may once have
been a spring festival. For a cake with twelve knobs, which perhaps
referred to the twelve months of the year, was offered to Cronus by the
Athenians on the fifteenth day of the month Elaphebolion, which
corresponded roughly to March,(798) and there are traces of a license
accorded to slaves at the Dionysiac festival of the opening of the
wine-jars, which fell on the eleventh day of the preceding month
Anthesterion.(799) At Olympia the festival of Cronus undoubtedly occurred
in spring; for here a low but steep hill, now covered with a tangled
growth of dark holly-oaks and firs, was sacred to him, and on its top
certain magistrates, who bore the title of kings, offered sacrifice to the
old god at the vernal equinox in the Elean month Elaphius.(800)

(M273) In this last ceremony, which probably went on year by year long
before the upstart Zeus had a temple built for himself at the foot of the
hill, there are two points of special interest, first the date of the
ceremony, and second the title of the celebrants. First, as to the date,
the spring equinox, or the twenty-first of March, must have fallen so near
the fifteenth day of the Athenian month Elaphebolion, that we may fairly
ask whether the Athenian custom of offering a cake to Cronus on that day
may not also have been an equinoctial ceremony. In the second place, the
title of kings borne by the magistrates who sacrificed to Cronus renders
it probable that, like magistrates with similar high-sounding titles
elsewhere in republican Greece, they were the lineal descendants of sacred
kings whom the superstition of their subjects invested with the attributes
of divinity.(801) If that was so, it would be natural enough that one of
these nominal kings should pose as the god Cronus in person. For, like his
Italian counterpart Saturn, the Greek Cronus was believed to have been a
king who reigned in heaven or on earth during the blissful Golden Age,
when men passed their days like gods without toil or sorrow, when life was
a long round of festivity, and death came like sleep, sudden but gentle,
announced by none of his sad forerunners, the ailments and infirmities of
age.(802) Thus the analogy of the Olympian Cronia, probably one of the
oldest of Greek festivals, to the Italian Saturnalia would be very close
if originally, as I conjecture, the Saturnalia fell in spring and Saturn
was personated at it, as we have good reason to believe, by a man dressed
as a king. May we go a step further and suppose that, just as the man who
acted King Saturn at the Saturnalia was formerly slain in that character,
so one of the kings who celebrated the Cronia at Olympia not only played
the part of Cronus, but was sacrificed, as god and victim in one, on the
top of the hill? Cronus certainly bore a sinister reputation in antiquity.
He passed for an unnatural parent who had devoured his own offspring, and
he was regularly identified by the Greeks with the cruel Semitic Baals who
delighted in the sacrifice of human victims, especially of children.(803)
A legend which savours strongly of infant sacrifice is reported of a
shrine that stood at the very foot of the god’s own hill at Olympia;(804)
and a quite unambiguous story was told of the sacrifice of a babe to
Lycaean Zeus on Mount Lycaeus in Arcadia, where the worship of Zeus was
probably nothing but a continuation, under a new name, of the old worship
of Cronus, and where human victims appear to have been regularly offered
down to the Christian era.(805) The Rhodians annually sacrificed a man to
Cronus in the month Metageitnion; at a later time they kept a condemned
criminal in prison till the festival of the Cronia was come, then led him
forth outside the gates, made him drunk with wine, and cut his
throat.(806) With the parallel of the Saturnalia before our eyes, we may
surmise that the victim who thus ended his life in a state of intoxication
at the Cronia perhaps personated King Cronus himself, the god who reigned
in the happy days of old when men had nothing to do but to eat and drink
and make merry. At least the Rhodian custom lends some countenance to the
conjecture that formerly a human victim may have figured at the sacrifice
which the so-called kings offered to Cronus on his hill at Olympia. In
this connexion it is to be remembered that we have already found
well-attested examples of a custom of sacrificing the scions of royal
houses in ancient Greece.(807) If the god to whom, or perhaps rather in
whose character, the princes were sacrificed, was Cronus, it would be
natural that the Greeks of a later age should identify him with Baal or
Moloch, to whom in like manner Semitic kings offered up their children.
The Laphystian Zeus of Thessaly and Boeotia, whom tradition associated
with these human sacrifices, was probably, like the Lycaean Zeus of
Arcadia, nothing but the aboriginal deity, commonly known as Cronus, whose
gloomy rites the Greek invaders suffered the priests of the vanquished
race to continue after the ancient manner, while they quieted their
scruples of conscience or satisfied their pride as conquerors by investing
the bloodthirsty old savage with the name, if not with the character, of
their own milder deity, the humane and gracious Zeus.




§ 5. Saturnalia in Western Asia.


(M274) When we pass from Europe to western Asia, from ancient Greece to
ancient Babylon and the regions where Babylonian influence penetrated, we
are still met with festivals which bear the closest resemblance to the
oldest form of the Italian Saturnalia. The reader may remember the
festival of the Sacaea, on which I had occasion to touch in an earlier
part of this work.(808) It was held at Babylon during five days of the
month Lous, beginning with the sixteenth day of the month. During its
continuance, just as at the Saturnalia, masters and servants changed
places, the servants issuing orders and the masters obeying them; and in
each house one of the servants, dressed as a king and bearing the title of
Zoganes, bore rule over the household. Further, just as at the Saturnalia
in its original form a man was dressed as King Saturn in royal robes,
allowed to indulge his passions and caprices to the full, and then put to
death, so at the Sacaea a condemned prisoner, who probably also bore for
the time being the title of Zoganes, was arrayed in the king’s attire and
suffered to play the despot, to use the king’s concubines, and to give
himself up to feasting and debauchery without restraint, only however in
the end to be stript of his borrowed finery, scourged, and hanged or
crucified.(809) From Strabo we learn that this Asiatic counterpart of the
Saturnalia was celebrated in Asia Minor wherever the worship of the
Persian goddess Anaitis had established itself. He describes it as a
Bacchic orgy, at which the revellers were disguised as Scythians, and men
and women drank and dallied together by day and night.(810)

(M275) As the worship of Anaitis, though of Persian origin, appears to
have been deeply leavened with coarse elements which it derived from the
religion of Babylon,(811) we may perhaps regard Mesopotamia as the
original home from which the Sacaean festival spread westward into other
parts of Asia Minor. Now the Sacaean festival, described by the Babylonian
priest Berosus in the first book of his history of Babylon, has been
plausibly identified(812) with the great Babylonian festival of the New
year called Zakmuk, Zagmuk, Zakmuku, or Zagmuku, which has become known to
us in recent times through inscriptions. The Babylonian year began with
the spring month of Nisan, which seems to have covered the second half of
March and the first half of April. Thus the New Year festival, which
occupied at least the first eleven days of Nisan, probably included the
spring equinox. It was held in honour of Marduk or Merodach, the chief god
of Babylon, whose great temple of Esagila in the city formed the religious
centre of the solemnity. For here, in a splendid chamber of the vast
edifice, all the gods were believed to assemble at this season under the
presidency of Marduk for the purpose of determining the fates for the new
year, especially the fate of the king’s life. On this occasion the king of
Babylon was bound annually to renew his regal power by grasping the hands
of the image of Marduk in his temple, as if to signify that he received
the kingdom directly from the deity and was unable without the divine
assistance and authority to retain it for more than a year. Unless he thus
formally reinstated himself on the throne once a year, the king ceased to
reign legitimately. When Babylonia was conquered by Assyria, the Assyrian
monarchs themselves used to come to Babylon and perform the ceremony of
grasping the god’s hands in order to establish by this solemn act their
title to the kingdom which they had won for themselves by the sword; until
they had done so, they were not recognized as kings by their Babylonian
subjects. Some of them indeed found the ceremony either so burdensome or
so humiliating to their pride as conquerors, that rather than perform it
they renounced the title of king of Babylon altogether and contented
themselves with the more modest title of regent. Another notable feature
of the Babylonian festival of the New Year appears to have been a
ceremonial marriage of the god Marduk; for in a hymn relating to the
solemnity it is said of the deity that “he hastened to his bridal.” The
festival was of hoar antiquity, for it was known to Gudea, an old king of
Southern Babylonia who flourished between two and three thousand years
before the beginning of our era, and it is mentioned in an early account
of the Great Flood. At a much later period it is repeatedly referred to by
King Nebuchadnezzar and his successors. Nebuchadnezzar records how he
built of bricks and bitumen a chapel or altar, “a thing of joy and
rejoicing,” for the great festival of Marduk, the lord of the gods; and we
read of the rich and abundant offerings which were made by the high priest
at this time.(813)

(M276) Unfortunately the notices of this Babylonian festival of the New
Year which have come down to us deal chiefly with its mythical aspect and
throw little light on the mode of its celebration. Hence its identity with
the Sacaea must remain for the present a more or less probable hypothesis.
In favour of the hypothesis may be alleged in the first place the
resemblance of the names Sacaea and Zoganes to Zakmuk or Zagmuku, if that
was the real pronunciation of the name,(814) and in the second place the
very significant statement that the fate of the king’s life was supposed
to be determined by the gods, under the presidency of Marduk, at the
Zakmuk or New Year’s festival.(815) When we remember that the central
feature of the Sacaea appears to have been the saving of the king’s life
for another year by the vicarious sacrifice of a criminal on the cross or
the gallows, we can understand that the season was a critical one for the
king, and that it may well have been regarded as determining his fate for
the ensuing twelve months. The annual ceremony of renewing the king’s
power by contact with the god’s image, which formed a leading feature of
the Zakmuk festival, would be very appropriately performed immediately
after the execution or sacrifice of the temporary king who died in the
room of the real monarch.

(M277) A difficulty, however, in the way of identifying the Sacaea with
the Zakmuk arises from the statement of Berosus that the Sacaea fell on
the sixteenth day of Lous, which was the tenth month of the
Syro-Macedonian calendar and appears to have nearly coincided with July.
Thus if the Sacaea occurred in July and the Zakmuk in March, the theory of
their identity could not be maintained. But the dating of the months of
the Syro-Macedonian calendar is a matter of some uncertainty; the month of
Lous in particular appears to have fallen at different times of the year
in different places,(816) and until we have ascertained beyond the reach
of doubt when Lous fell at Babylon in the time of Berosus, it would be
premature to allow much weight to the seeming discrepancy in the dates of
the two festivals. At all events, whether the festivals were the same or
different, we are confronted with difficulties which in the present state
of our knowledge may be pronounced insoluble. If the festivals were the
same, we cannot explain their apparent difference of date: if they were
different, we cannot explain their apparent similarity of character. In
what follows I shall, with some eminent Oriental scholars,(817)
provisionally assume the identity of Zakmuk and Sacaea, but I would ask
the reader to bear clearly in mind that the hypothesis leaves the apparent
discrepancy of their dates unexplained. Towards a solution of the problem
I can only suggest conjecturally either that the date of the festival had
been for some reason shifted in the time of Berosus, or that two different
festivals of the same type may have been held at different seasons of the
year, one in spring and one in summer, perhaps by two distinct but kindred
tribes, who retained their separate religious rites after they had
coalesced in the Babylonian empire. Both conjectures might be supported by
analogies. On the one hand, for example, in the Jewish calendar New Year’s
Day was shifted under Babylonian influence from autumn to spring,(818) and
in a later part of this work we shall see that the Chinese festival of new
fire, at first celebrated in spring, was afterwards shifted to the summer
solstice, only however to be brought back at a later time to its original
date. On the other hand, the popular festivals of our European peasantry
afford many examples of rites which appear to be similar in character,
though they fall at different times of the year; such, for instance, are
the ceremonies concerned with vegetation on May Day, Whitsuntide, and
Midsummer Day,(819) and the fire festivals which are distributed at still
wider intervals throughout the months.(820) Similarly in ancient Italy the
agricultural festival of the Ambarvalia was celebrated by Italian farmers
at different dates in different places.(821) These cases may warn us
against the danger of hastily inferring an essential difference between
Zakmuk and Sacaea on the ground of a real or apparent difference in their
dates.

(M278) A fresh and powerful argument in favour of the identity of the two
festivals is furnished by the connexion which has been traced between both
of them and the Jewish feast of Purim.(822) There are good grounds for
believing that Purim was unknown to the Jews until after the exile, and
that they learned to observe it during their captivity in the East. The
festival is first mentioned in the book of Esther, which by the majority
of critics is assigned to the fourth or third century B.C.,(823) and which
certainly cannot be older than the Persian period, since the scene of the
narrative is laid in Susa at the court of a Persian king Ahasuerus, whose
name appears to be the Hebrew equivalent of Xerxes. The next reference to
Purim occurs in the second book of Maccabees, a work written probably
about the beginning of our era.(824) Thus from the absence of all notice
of Purim in the older books of the Bible, we may fairly conclude that the
festival was instituted or imported at a comparatively late date among the
Jews. The same conclusion is supported by the book of Esther itself, which
was manifestly written to explain the origin of the feast and to suggest
motives for its observance. For, according to the author of the book, the
festival was established to commemorate the deliverance of the Jews from a
great danger which threatened them in Persia under the reign of King
Xerxes. Thus the opinion of modern scholars that the feast of Purim, as
celebrated by the Jews, was of late date and oriental origin, is borne out
by the tradition of the Jews themselves. An examination of that tradition
and the mode of celebrating the feast renders it probable that Purim is
nothing but a more or less disguised form of the Babylonian festival of
the Sacaea or Zakmuk.

(M279) In the first place, the feast of Purim was and is held on the
fourteenth and fifteenth days of Adar, the last month of the Jewish year,
which corresponds roughly to March.(825) Thus the date agrees nearly,
though not exactly, with the date of the Babylonian Zakmuk, which fell a
fortnight later in the early days of the following month Nisan. A trace of
the original celebration of Purim in Nisan may perhaps be found in the
statement that “they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman” in Nisan,
the first month of the year.(826) It has been suggested with some
plausibility that the Jews may have shifted the date of Purim in order
that the new and foreign festival might not clash with their own old
festival of the Passover, which began on the fourteenth day of Nisan.
Another circumstance which speaks at once for the alien origin of Purim
and for its identity with Zakmuk is its name. The author of the book of
Esther derives the name Purim from _pur_, “a lot,”(827) but no such word
with this signification exists in Hebrew, and hence we are driven to look
for the meaning and etymology of Purim in some other language. A specious
theory is that the name was derived from an Assyrian word _puvru_, “an
assembly,” and referred primarily to the great assembly of the gods which,
as we have seen, formed a chief feature of the festival of Zakmuk, and was
held annually in the temple of Marduk at Babylon for the purpose of
determining the fates or lots of the new year;(828) the august assembly
appears to have been occasionally, if not regularly, designated by the
very name _puvru_.(829) On this hypothesis the traditional Jewish
explanation of the name Purim preserved a genuine kernel of historical
truth, or at least of mythical fancy, under the husk of a verbal error;
for the name, if this derivation of it is correct, really signified, not
“the lots,” but the assembly for drawing or otherwise determining the
lots. Another explanation which has been offered is “that _pūr_ or _būr_
seems to be an old Assyrian word for ‘stone,’ and that therefore it is
possible that the word was also used to signify ‘lot,’ like the Hebrew
גורל ‘lot,’ which originally, no doubt, meant ‘little stone.’ ”(830)
Either of these explanations of the name Purim, by tracing it back to the
New Year assembly of the gods at Babylon for settling the lots, furnishes
an adequate explanation of the traditional association of Purim with the
casting of lots—an association all the more remarkable and all the more
likely to be ancient because there is nothing to justify it either in the
Hebrew language or in the Jewish mode of celebrating the festival. When to
this we add the joyous, nay, extravagant festivity which has always been
characteristic of Purim, and is entirely in keeping with a New Year
celebration, we may perhaps be thought to have made out a fairly probable
case for holding that the Jewish feast is derived from the Babylonian New
Year festival of Zakmuk. Whether the Jews borrowed the feast directly from
the Babylonians or indirectly through the Persian conquerors of Babylon is
a question which deserves to be considered; but the Persian colouring of
the book of Esther speaks strongly for the view that Purim came to Israel
by way of Persia, or at all events from Babylon under Persian rule, and
this view is confirmed by other evidence, to which I shall have to ask the
reader’s attention a little later on.

(M280) If the links which bind Purim to Zakmuk are reasonably strong, the
chain of evidence which connects the Jewish festival with the Sacaea is
much stronger. Nor is this surprising when we remember that, while the
popular mode of celebrating Zakmuk is unknown, we possess important and
trustworthy details as to the manner of holding the Sacaea. We have seen
that the Sacaea was a wild Bacchanalian revel at which men and women
disguised themselves and drank and played together in a fashion that was
more gay than modest. Now this is, or used to be, precisely the nature of
Purim. The two days of the festival, according to the author of the book
of Esther, were to be kept for ever as “days of feasting and gladness, and
of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.”(831) And this
joyous character the festival seems always to have retained. The author of
a tract in the Talmud lays it down as a rule that at the feast of Purim
every Jew is bound to drink until he cannot distinguish between the words
“Cursed be Haman” and “Blessed be Mordecai”; and he tells how on one
occasion a certain Rabba drank so deep at Purim that he murdered a rabbi
without knowing what he was about. Indeed Purim has been described as the
Jewish Bacchanalia, and we are told that at this season everything is
lawful which can contribute to the mirth and gaiety of the festival.(832)
Writers of the seventeenth century assert that during the two days, and
especially on the evening of the second day, the Jews did nothing but
feast and drink to repletion, play, dance, sing, and make merry; in
particular they disguised themselves, men and women exchanging clothes,
and thus attired ran about like mad, in open defiance of the Mosaic law,
which expressly forbids men to dress as women and women as men.(833) Among
the Jews of Frankfort, who inhabited the squalid but quaint and
picturesque old street known as the Judengasse, which many of us still
remember, the revelry at Purim ran as high as ever in the eighteenth
century. The gluttony and intoxication began punctually at three o’clock
in the afternoon of the first day and went on until the whole community
seemed to have taken leave of their senses. They ate and drank, they
frolicked and cut capers, they reeled and staggered about, they shrieked,
yelled, stamped, clattered, and broke each other’s heads with wooden
hammers till the blood flowed. On the evening of the first day the women
were allowed, as a special favour, to open their latticed window and look
into the men’s synagogue, because the great deliverance of the Jews from
their enemies in the time of King Ahasuerus was said to have been effected
by a woman. A feature of the festival which should not be overlooked was
the acting of the story of Esther as a comedy, in which Esther, Ahasuerus,
Haman, Mordecai, and others played their parts after a fashion that
sometimes degenerated from farce into ribaldry.(834) Thus on the whole we
may take it that Purim has always been a Saturnalia, and therefore
corresponds in character to the Sacaea as that festival has been described
for us by Strabo.

(M281) But further, when we examine the narrative which professes to
account for the institution of Purim, we discover in it not only the
strongest traces of Babylonian origin, but also certain singular analogies
to those very features of the Sacaean festival with which we are here more
immediately concerned. The book of Esther turns upon the fortunes of two
men, the vizier Haman and the despised Jew Mordecai, at the court of a
Persian king. Mordecai, we are told, had given mortal offence to the
vizier, who accordingly prepares a tall gallows on which he hopes to see
his enemy hanged, while he himself expects to receive the highest mark of
the king’s favour by being allowed to wear the royal crown and the royal
robes, and thus attired to parade the streets mounted on the king’s own
horse and attended by one of the noblest princes, who should proclaim to
the multitude his temporary exaltation and glory. But the artful intrigues
of the wicked vizier miscarried and resulted in precisely the opposite of
what he had hoped and expected; for the royal honours which he had looked
for fell to his rival Mordecai, and he himself was hanged on the gallows
which he had made ready for his foe. In this story we seem to detect a
reminiscence, more or less confused, of the Zoganes of the Sacaea, in
other words, of the custom of investing a private man with the insignia of
royalty for a few days and then putting him to death on the gallows or the
cross. It is true that in the narrative the part of the Zoganes is divided
between two actors, one of whom hopes to play the king but is hanged
instead, while the other acts the royal part and escapes the gallows to
which he was destined by his enemy. But this bisection, so to say, of the
Zoganes may have been deliberately invented by the Jewish author of the
book of Esther for the sake of setting the origin of Purim, which it was
his purpose to explain, in a light that should reflect glory on his own
nation. Or, perhaps more probably, it points back to a custom of
appointing two mock kings at the Sacaea, one of whom was put to death at
the end of the festival, while the other was allowed to go free, at least
for a time. We shall be the more inclined to adopt the latter hypothesis
when we observe that corresponding to the two rival aspirants to the
temporary kingship there appear in the Jewish narrative two rival queens,
Vashti and Esther, one of whom succeeds to the high estate from which the
other has fallen. Further, it is to be noted that Mordecai, the successful
candidate for the mock kingship, and Esther, the successful candidate for
the queenship, are linked together by close ties both of interest and
blood, the two being said to be cousins. This suggests that in the
original story or the original custom there may have figured two pairs of
kings and queens, of whom one pair is represented in the Jewish narrative
by Mordecai and Esther and the other by Haman and Vashti.

(M282) Some confirmation of this view is furnished by the names of two at
least out of the four personages. It seems to be now generally recognized
by Biblical scholars that the name Mordecai, which has no meaning in
Hebrew, is nothing but a slightly altered form of Marduk or Merodach, the
name of the chief god of Babylon, whose great festival was the Zakmuk; and
further, it is generally admitted that Esther in like manner is equivalent
to Ishtar, the great Babylonian goddess whom the Greeks called Astarte,
and who is more familiar to English readers as Ashtaroth. The derivation
of the names of Haman and Vashti is less certain, but some high
authorities are disposed to accept the view of Jensen that Haman is
identical with Humman or Homman, the national god of the Elamites, and
that Vashti is in like manner an Elamite goddess whose name Jensen read as
Mashti in inscriptions. Now, when we consider that the Elamites were from
time immemorial the hereditary foes of the Babylonians and had their
capital at Susa, the very place in which the scene of the book of Esther
is laid, we can hardly deny the plausibility of the theory that Haman and
Vashti on the one side and Mordecai and Esther on the other represent the
antagonism between the gods of Elam and the gods of Babylon, and the final
victory of the Babylonian deities in the very capital of their
rivals.(835) “It is therefore possible,” says Professor Nöldeke, “that we
here have to do with a feast whereby the Babylonians commemorated a
victory gained by their gods over the gods of their neighbours the
Elamites, against whom they had so often waged war. The Jewish feast of
Purim is an annual merrymaking of a wholly secular kind, and it is known
that there were similar feasts among the Babylonians. That the Jews in
Babylonia should have adopted a festival of this sort cannot be deemed
improbable, since in modern Germany, to cite an analogous case, many Jews
celebrate Christmas after the manner of their Christian fellow-countrymen,
in so far at least as it is a secular institution. It is true that
hitherto no Babylonian feast coinciding, like Purim, with the full moon of
the twelfth month has been discovered; but our knowledge of the Babylonian
feasts is derived from documents of an earlier period. Possibly the
calendar may have undergone some change by the time when the Jewish feast
of Purim was established. Or it may be that the Jews intentionally shifted
the date of the festival which they borrowed from the heathen.”(836)

(M283) However, the theory of an opposition between the gods of Babylon
and the gods of Elam at the festival appears to break down at a crucial
point; for the latest and most accurate reading of the Elamite
inscriptions proves, I am informed, that the name of the goddess which
Jensen read as Mashti, and which on that assumption he legitimately
compared to the Hebrew Vashti,(837) must really be read as Parti, between
which and Vashti there is no connexion. Accordingly, in a discussion of
the origin of Purim it is safer at present to lay no weight on the
supposed religious antagonism between the deities of Babylon and
Elam.(838)

(M284) If we are right in tracing the origin of Purim to the Babylonian
Sacaea and in finding the counterpart of the Zoganes in Haman and
Mordecai, it would appear that the Zoganes during his five days of office
personated not merely a king but a god, whether that god was the
Babylonian Marduk or some other deity not yet identified. The union of the
divine and royal characters in a single person is so common that we need
not be surprised at meeting with it in ancient Babylon. And the view that
the mock king of the Sacaea died as a god on the cross or the gallows is
no novelty. The acute and learned Movers long ago observed that “we should
be overlooking the religious significance of oriental festivals and the
connexion of the Sacaea with the worship of Anaitis, if we were to treat
as a mere jest the custom of disguising a slave as a king. We may take it
for certain that with the royal dignity the king of the Sacaea assumed
also the character of an oriental ruler as representative of the divinity,
and that when he took his pleasure among the women of the king’s harem, he
played the part of Sandan or Sardanapalus himself. For according to
ancient oriental ideas the use of the king’s concubines constituted a
claim to the throne, and we know from Dio that the five-days’ king
received full power over the harem. Perhaps he began his reign by publicly
cohabiting with the king’s concubines, just as Absalom went in to his
father’s concubines in a tent spread on the roof of the palace before all
Israel, for the purpose of thereby making known and strengthening his
claim to the throne.”(839)

(M285) Whatever may be thought of this latter conjecture, there can be no
doubt that Movers is right in laying great stress both on the permission
given to the mock king to invade the real king’s harem, and on the
intimate connexion of the Sacaea with the worship of Anaitis. That
connexion is vouched for by Strabo, and when we consider that in Strabo’s
time the cult of the old Persian goddess Anaitis was thoroughly saturated
with Babylonian elements and had practically merged in the sensual worship
of the Babylonian Ishtar or Astarte,(840) we shall incline to view with
favour Movers’s further conjecture, that a female slave may have been
appointed to play the divine queen to the part of the divine king
supported by the Zoganes, and that reminiscences of such a queen have
survived in the myth or legend of Semiramis. According to tradition,
Semiramis was a fair courtesan beloved by the king of Assyria, who took
her to wife. She won the king’s heart so far that she persuaded him to
yield up to her the kingdom for five days, and having assumed the sceptre
and the royal robes she made a great banquet on the first day, but on the
second day she shut up her husband in prison or put him to death and
thenceforward reigned alone.(841) Taken with Strabo’s evidence as to the
association of the Sacaea with the worship of Anaitis, this tradition
seems clearly to point to a custom of giving the Zoganes, during his five
days’ reign, a queen who represented the goddess Anaitis or Semiramis or
Astarte, in short the great Asiatic goddess of love and fertility, by
whatever name she was called. For that in Eastern legend Semiramis was a
real queen of Assyria, who had absorbed many of the attributes of the
goddess Astarte, appears to be established by the researches of modern
scholars; in particular it has been shewn by Robertson Smith that the
worship of Anaitis is not only modelled on Astarte worship in general, but
corresponds to that particular type of it which was specially associated
with the name of Semiramis.(842) The identity of Anaitis and the mythical
Semiramis is clearly proved by the circumstance that the great sanctuary
of Anaitis at Zela in Pontus was actually built upon a mound of
Semiramis;(843) probably the old worship of the Semitic goddess always
continued there even after her Semitic name of Semiramis or Astarte had
been exchanged for the Persian name of Anaitis, perhaps in obedience to a
decree of the Persian king Artaxerxes II., who first spread the worship of
Anaitis in the west of Asia.(844) It is highly significant, not only that
the Sacaean festival was annually held at this ancient seat of the worship
of Semiramis or Astarte; but further, that the whole city of Zela was
formerly inhabited by sacred slaves and harlots, ruled over by a supreme
pontiff, who administered it as a sanctuary rather than as a city.(845)
Formerly, we may suppose, this priestly king himself died a violent death
at the Sacaea in the character of the divine lover of Semiramis, while the
part of the goddess was played by one of the sacred prostitutes. The
probability of this is greatly strengthened by the existence of the
so-called mound of Semiramis under the sanctuary. For the mounds of
Semiramis, which were pointed out all over Western Asia,(846) were said to
have been the graves of her lovers whom she buried alive.(847) The
tradition ran that the great and lustful queen Semiramis, fearing to
contract a lawful marriage lest her husband should deprive her of power,
admitted to her bed the handsomest of her soldiers, only, however, to
destroy them all afterwards.(848) Now this tradition is one of the surest
indications of the identity of the mythical Semiramis with the Babylonian
goddess Ishtar or Astarte. For the famous Babylonian epic which recounts
the deeds of the hero Gilgamesh tells how, when he clothed himself in
royal robes and put his crown on his head, the goddess Ishtar was smitten
with love of him and wooed him to be her mate. But Gilgamesh rejected her
insidious advances, for he knew the sad fate that had overtaken all her
lovers, and he reproached the cruel goddess, saying:—


    “_Tammuz, the lover of thy youth,_
    _Thou causest to weep every year._
    _The bright-coloured_ allallu _bird thou didst love_.
    _Thou didst crush him and break his pinions._
    _In the woods he stands and laments, __‘__O my pinions!__’_
    _Thou didst love the lion of perfect strength,_
    _Seven and seven times thou didst dig pit-falls for him._
    _Thou didst love the horse that joyed in the fray,_
    _With whip and spur and lash thou didst urge him on._
    _Thou didst force him on for seven double hours,_
    _Thou didst force him on when wearied and thirsty;_
    _His mother the goddess Silili thou madest weep._
    _Thou didst also love a shepherd of the flock,_
    _Who continually poured out for thee the libation,_
    _And daily slaughtered kids for thee;_
    _But thou didst smite him, and didst change him into a wolf,_
    _So that his own sheep-boys hunted him,_
    _And his own hounds tore him to pieces._”


(M286) The hero also tells the miserable end of a gardener in the service
of the goddess’s father. The hapless swain had once been honoured with the
love of the goddess, but when she tired of him she changed him into a
cripple so that he could not rise from his bed. Therefore Gilgamesh fears
to share the fate of all her former lovers and spurns her proffered
favours.(849) But it is not merely that the myth of Ishtar thus tallies
with the legend of Semiramis; the worship of the goddess was marked by a
profligacy which has found its echo in the loose character ascribed by
tradition to the queen. Inscriptions, which confirm and supplement the
evidence of Herodotus, inform us that Ishtar was served by harlots of
three different classes all dedicated to her worship. Indeed, there is
reason to think that these women personated the goddess herself, since one
of the names given to them is applied also to her.(850)

(M287) Thus we can hardly doubt that the mythical Semiramis is
substantially a form of Ishtar or Astarte, the great Semitic goddess of
love and fertility; and if this is so, we may assume with at least a fair
degree of probability that the high pontiff of Zela or his deputy, who
played the king of the Sacaea at the sanctuary of Semiramis, perished as
one of the unhappy lovers of the goddess, perhaps as Tammuz, whom she
caused “to weep every year.” When he had run his brief meteoric career of
pleasure and glory, his bones would be laid in the great mound which
covered the mouldering remains of many mortal gods, his predecessors, whom
the goddess had honoured with her fatal love.(851)

(M288) Here then at the great sanctuary of the goddess in Zela it appears
that her myth was regularly translated into action; the story of her love
and the death of her divine lover was performed year by year as a sort of
mystery-play by men and women who lived for a season and sometimes died in
the character of the visionary beings whom they personated. The intention
of these sacred dramas, we may be sure, was neither to amuse nor to
instruct an idle audience, and as little were they designed to gratify the
actors, to whose baser passions they gave the reins for a time. They were
solemn rites which mimicked the doings of divine beings, because man
fancied that by such mimicry he was able to arrogate to himself the divine
functions and to exercise them for the good of his fellows. The operations
of nature, to his thinking, were carried on by mythical personages very
like himself; and if he could only assimilate himself to them completely
he would be able to wield all their powers. This is probably the original
motive of most religious dramas or mysteries among rude peoples. The
dramas are played, the mysteries are performed, not to teach the
spectators the doctrines of their creed, still less to entertain them, but
for the purpose of bringing about those natural effects which they
represent in mythical disguise; in a word, they are magical ceremonies and
their mode of operation is mimicry or sympathy. We shall probably not err
in assuming that many myths, which we now know only as myths, had once
their counterpart in magic; in other words, that they used to be acted as
a means of producing in fact the events which they describe in figurative
language. Ceremonies often die out while myths survive, and thus we are
left to infer the dead ceremony from the living myth. If myths are, in a
sense, the reflections or shadows of men cast upon the clouds, we may say
that these reflections continue to be visible in the sky and to inform us
of the doings of the men who cast them, long after the men themselves are
not only beyond our range of vision but sunk beneath the horizon.

(M289) The principle of mimicry is implanted so deep in human nature and
has exerted so far-reaching an influence on the development of religion as
well as of the arts that it may be well, even at the cost of a short
digression, to illustrate by example some of the modes in which primitive
man has attempted to apply it to the satisfaction of his wants by means of
religious or magical dramas. For it seems probable that the masked dances
and ceremonies, which have played a great part in the social life of
savages in many quarters of the world, were primarily designed to subserve
practical purposes rather than simply to stir the emotions of the
spectators and to while away the languor and tedium of idle hours. The
actors sought to draw down blessings on the community by mimicking certain
powerful superhuman beings and in their assumed character working those
beneficent miracles which in the capacity of mere men they would have
confessed themselves powerless to effect. In fact the aim of these
elementary dramas, which contain in germ the tragedy and comedy of
civilized nations, was the acquisition of superhuman power for the public
good. That this is the real intention of at least many of these dramatic
performances will appear from the following accounts, which for the sake
of accuracy I will quote for the most part in the words of the original
observers.

(M290) A conspicuous feature in the social life of the Indian tribes of
North-Western America are the elaborate masked dances or pantomimes in
which the actors personate spirits or legendary animals. Most of them
appear designed to bring before the eyes of the people the guardian
spirits of the clans. “Owing to the fact that these spirits are
hereditary, their gifts are always contained in the legend detailing their
acquisition by the ancestor of a clan. The principal gifts in these tales
are the magic harpoon which insures success in sea-otter hunting; the
death bringer which, when pointed against enemies, kills them; the water
of life which resuscitates the dead; the burning fire which, when pointed
against an object, burns it; and a dance, a song, and cries which are
peculiar to the spirit. The gift of this dance means that the protégé of
the spirit is to perform the same dances which have been shown to him. In
these dances he personates the spirit. He wears his mask and his
ornaments. Thus the dance must be considered a dramatic performance of the
myth relating to the acquisition of the spirit, and shows to the people
that the performer by his visit to the spirit has obtained his powers and
desires. When nowadays a spirit appears to a young Indian, he gives him
the same dance, and the youth also returns from the initiation filled with
the powers and desires of the spirit. He authenticates his initiation by
his dance in the same way as his mythical ancestor did. The obtaining of
the magical gifts from these spirits is called _lokoala_, while the person
who has obtained them becomes _naualaku_, supernatural, which is also the
quality of the spirit himself. The ornaments of all these spirits are
described as made of cedar bark, which is dyed red in the juice of alder
bark. They appear to their devotees only in winter, and therefore the
dances are also performed only in winter.”(852) In some of the dances the
performers imitate animals, and the explanation which the Indians give of
these dances is that “the ceremonial was instituted at the time when men
had still the form of animals; before the transformer had put everything
into its present shape. The present ceremonial is a repetition of the
ceremonial performed by the man animals or, as we may say, a dramatization
of the myth. Therefore the people who do not represent spirits, represent
these animals.”(853)

(M291) Another observer of these Indians writes on the same subject as
follows: “The _dukwally_ (_i.e._, _lokoala_) and other _tamanawas_(854)
performances are exhibitions intended to represent incidents connected
with their mythological legends. There are a great variety, and they seem
to take the place, in a measure, of theatrical performances or games
during the season of the religious festivals. There are no persons
especially set apart as priests for the performance of these ceremonies,
although some, who seem more expert than others, are usually hired to give
life to the scenes, but these performers are quite as often found among
the slaves or common people as among the chiefs, and excepting during the
continuance of the festivities are not looked on as of any particular
importance. On inquiring the origin of these ceremonies, I was informed
that they did not originate with the Indians, but were revelations of the
guardian spirits, who made known what they wished to be performed. An
Indian, for instance, who has been consulting with his guardian spirit,
which is done by going through the washing and fasting process before
described, will imagine or think he is called upon to represent the owl.
He arranges in his mind the style of dress, the number of performers, the
songs and dances or other movements, and, having the plan perfected,
announces at a _tamanawas_ meeting that he has had a revelation which he
will impart to a select few. These are then taught and drilled in strict
secrecy, and when they have perfected themselves, will suddenly make their
appearance and perform before the astonished tribe. Another Indian gets up
the representation of the whale, others do the same of birds, and in fact
of everything that they can think of. If any performance is a success, it
is repeated, and gradually comes to be looked upon as one of the regular
order in the ceremonies; if it does not satisfy the audience, it is laid
aside. Thus they have performances that have been handed down from remote
ages, while others are of a more recent date.”(855)

(M292) Another writer, who travelled among the Indians of North-Western
America, has expressed himself on this subject as follows: “The task of
representing the gods is undertaken in every tribe by some intelligent
and, according to their own account, inspired men; they form the Secret
Societies, in order that their secret arts and doctrines, their mummeries
and masquerades may not be revealed to the uninitiated and to the public.
The intention of these exhibitions is to confirm the faith of the young
people and the women in the ancient traditions as to the intercourse of
the gods with men and as to their own intimate relations to the gods. In
order to convince possible doubters, the members of the Secret Societies
have had recourse to all kinds of mysterious means, which to a civilized
man must appear the height of savagery; for example, they mutilate their
bodies, rend corpses in pieces and devour them, tear pieces out of the
bodies of living men, and so on. Further, the almost morbid vanity of the
North-Western Indians and their desire to win fame, respect, and
distinction may have served as a motive for joining the Secret Societies;
since every member of them enjoys great respect.

“There were and still are hundreds of masks in use, every one of which
represents a spirit who occurs in their legends. In the exhibitions they
appear singly or in groups, according as the legend to be represented
requires, and the masked men are then looked upon by the astonished crowd,
not only as actors representing the gods, but as the very gods themselves
who have come down from heaven to earth. Hence every such representative
must do exactly what legend says the spirit did. If the representative
wears no mask, as often happens with the _Hametzes_ (the Cannibals or
Biters) or the _Pakwalla_ (Medicine-men), then the spirit whom he
represents has passed into his body, and accordingly the man possessed by
the spirit is not responsible for what he does amiss in this condition. As
the use of masks throws a sort of mysterious glamour over the performance
and at the same time allows the actor to remain unknown, the peculiarly
sacred festivals are much oftener celebrated with masks than without them.
In every Secret Society there are definite rules as to how often and how
long a mask may be used. Amongst the Kwakiutl the masks may not, under the
heaviest penalties, be disposed of for four winters, the season when such
festivals are usually celebrated. After that time they may be destroyed or
hidden in the forest, that no uninitiated person may find them, or they
may be finally sold. The masks are made only in secret, generally in the
deep solitude of the woods, in order that no uninitiated person may detect
the maker at work....

(M293) “The dance is accompanied by a song which celebrates in boastful
words the power of the gods and the mighty deeds represented in the
performance. At the main part of the performance all present join in the
song, for it is generally known to everybody and is repeated in recitative
again and again. It seems that new songs and new performances are
constantly springing up in one or other of the villages through the agency
of some intelligent young man, hitherto without a song of his own, who
treats in a poetical fashion some legend which has been handed down orally
from their forefathers. For every man who takes part in the performances
and festivals must make his _début_ with a song composed by himself. In
this way new songs and dances are constantly originating, the material for
them being, of course, always taken from the tribal deities of the
particular singer and poet.”(856)

(M294) Similar masquerades are in vogue among the neighbours of these
Indians, the Esquimaux of Bering Strait, and from the following account it
will appear that the performances are based on similar ideas and beliefs.
“Shamans make masks representing grotesque faces of supernatural beings
which they claim to have seen. These may be _yu-ă_, which are the spirits
of the elements, of places, and of inanimate things in general; the
_tunghät_, or wandering genii, or the shades of people and animals. The
first-named are seen in lonely places, on the plains and mountains or at
sea, and more rarely about the villages, by the clairvoyant vision of the
shamans. They are usually invisible to common eyes, but sometimes render
themselves visible to the people for various purposes.

“Many of them, especially among the _tunghät_, are of evil character,
bringing sickness and misfortune upon people from mere wantonness or for
some fancied injury. The Eskimo believe that everything, animate or
inanimate, is possessed of a shade, having semihuman form and features,
enjoying more or less freedom of motion; the shamans give form to their
ideas of them in masks, as well as of others which they claim inhabit the
moon and the sky-land. In their daily life, if the people witness some
strange occurrence, are curiously affected, or have a remarkable
adventure, during which they seem to be influenced or aided in a
supernatural manner, the shamans interpret the meaning and describe the
appearance of the being that exerted its power.

(M295) “Curious mythological beasts are also said to inhabit both land and
sea, but to become visible only on special occasions. These ideas furnish
material upon which their fancy works, conjuring up strange forms that are
usually modifications of known creatures. It is also believed that in
early days all animate beings had a dual existence, becoming at will
either like man or the animal forms they now wear. In those early days
there were but few people; if an animal wished to assume its human form,
the forearm, wing, or other limb was raised and pushed up the muzzle or
beak as if it were a mask, and the creature became manlike in form and
features. This idea is still held, and it is believed that many animals
now possess this power. The manlike form thus appearing is called the
_inua_, and is supposed to represent the thinking part of the creature,
and at death becomes its shade. Shamans are believed to have the power of
seeing through the animal mask to the manlike features behind. The ideas
held on this subject are well illustrated in the Raven legends, where the
changes are made repeatedly from one form to another.

(M296) “Masks may also represent totemic animals, and the wearers during
the festivals are believed actually to become the creature represented or
at least to be endowed with its spiritual essence. Some of the masks of
the lower Yukon and the adjacent territory to the Kuskokwim are made with
double faces. This is done by having the muzzle of the animal fitted over
and concealing the face of the _inua_ below, the outer mask being held in
place by pegs so arranged that it can be removed quickly at a certain time
in the ceremony, thus symbolizing the transformation. Another style of
mask from the lower Kuskokwim has the under face concealed by a small
hinged door on each side, which opens out at the proper time in a
ceremony, indicating the metamorphosis. When the mask represents a totemic
animal, the wearer needs no double face, since he represents in person the
shade of the totemic animal.

“When worn in any ceremonial, either as a totem mask or as representing
the shade, _yu-ă_ or _tunghâk_, the wearer is believed to become
mysteriously and unconsciously imbued with the spirit of the being which
his mask represents, just as the namesakes are entered into and possessed
by the shades at certain parts of the Festival to the Dead....(857)

“Mask festivals are usually held as a species of thanksgiving to the
shades and powers of earth, air, and water for giving the hunter success.
The _inuas_ or shades of the powers and creatures of the earth are
represented that they may be propitiated, thus insuring further
success.”(858)

(M297) The religious ritual of the Cora Indians of Mexico comprises
elaborate dramatic ceremonies or dances, in which the actors or dancers
identify themselves with the gods, such as the god of the Morning Star,
the goddess of the Moon, and the divinities of the Rain. These dances form
the principal part of the Cora festivals and are accompanied by liturgical
songs, the words of which the Indians believe to have been revealed to
their forefathers by the gods and to exercise a direct magical influence
upon the deities themselves and through them upon nature.(859) The Kobeua
and Kaua Indians of North-Western Brazil perform masked dances at their
festivals in honour of the dead. The maskers imitate the actions and the
habits of birds, beasts, and insects. For example, there is a large
azure-blue butterfly which delights the eye with the splendour of its
colour, like a fallen fragment of the sky; and in the butterfly dance two
men represent the play of these brilliant insects in the sunshine,
fluttering on the wing and settling on sandbanks and rocks. Again, the
sloth is acted by a masker who holds on to a cross-beam of the house by
means of a hooked stick, in imitation of the sluggish creature which will
hang by its claws from the bough of a tree for hours together without
stirring. Again, the darting of swallows, as they flit to and fro across a
river, is mimicked by masked men dancing side by side: the swarming of
sandflies in the air is acted by a swarm of maskers; and so with the
movements of the black vulture, the owl, the jaguar, the _aracu_ fish, the
house-spider, and the dung-beetle. Yet these representations are not
simple dramas designed to amuse and divert the mourners in their hour of
sorrow; the Indian attributes to them a much deeper significance, for
under the outer husk of beasts and birds and insects he believes that
there lurk foul fiends and powerful spirits. “All these mimicries are
based on an idea of magical efficiency. They are intended to bring
blessing and fertility to the village and its inhabitants, to the
plantations, and to the whole of surrounding nature, thereby compensating,
as it were, for the loss of the dead man in whose honour the festival is
held. By copying as faithfully as possible the movements and actions of
the being whom he personates, the actor identifies himself with him. The
mysterious force which resides in the mask passes into the dancer, turns
the man himself into a mighty demon, and endows him with the power of
banning demons or earning their favour. Especially is it the intention by
means of mimicry to obtain for man control over the demons of growth and
the spirits of game and fish.” When the festival is over, the masks are
burned, and the demons, which are thought to have animated them, take
flight to their own place, it may be to the other world or to a mountain
top, or to the side of a thundering cascade.(860)

(M298) The Monumbo of German New Guinea perform masked dances in which the
dancers personate supernatural beings or animals, such as kangaroos, dogs,
and cassowaries. They consecrate the masks by fumigating them with the
smoke of a certain creeper, and believe that by doing so they put life
into them. Accordingly they afterwards treat the masks with respect, talk
to them as if they were alive, and refuse to part with them to Europeans.
Certain of the masks they even regard as guardian spirits and appeal to
them for fine weather, help in the chase or in war, and so forth. Every
clan owns some masks and the head man of the clan makes all the
arrangements for a masquerade. The dances are accompanied by songs of
which the words are unintelligible even to the natives themselves.(861)
Again, the Kayans of Central Borneo perform masked dances for the purpose
of ensuring abundant crops of rice. The actors personate demons, wearing
grotesque masks on their faces, their bodies swathed in cumbrous masses of
green leaves. “In accordance with their belief that the spirits are more
powerful than men, the Kayans assume that when they imitate the form of
spirits and play their part, they acquire superhuman power. Hence just as
their spirits can fetch back the souls of men, so they imagine that they
can lure to themselves the souls of the rice.”(862)

(M299) When the Sea Dyaks of Borneo have taken a human head, they hold a
Head-feast (_Gawè Pala_) in honour of the war-god or bird-chief Singalang
Burong, who lives far away above the sky. At this festival a long liturgy
called _mengap_ is chanted, the god is invoked, and is believed to be
present in the person of an actor, who poses as the deity and blesses the
people in his name. “But the invocation is not made by the human performer
in the manner of a prayer direct to this great being; it takes the form of
a story, setting forth how the mythical hero Kling or Klieng made a
head-feast and fetched Singalang Burong to it. This Kling, about whom
there are many fables, is a spirit, and is supposed to live somewhere or
other not far from mankind, and to be able to confer benefits upon them.
The Dyak performer or performers then, as they walk up and down the long
verandah of the house singing the _mengap_, in reality describe Kling’s
_Gawè Pala_ [head-feast], and how Singalang Burong was invited and came.
In thought the Dyaks identify themselves with Kling, and the resultant
signification is that the recitation of this story is an invocation to
Singalang Burong, who is supposed to come not to Kling’s house only, but
to the actual Dyak house where the feast is celebrated; and he is received
by a particular ceremony, and is offered food or sacrifice.” At the close
of the ceremony “the performer goes along the house, beginning with the
head man, touches each person in it, and pronounces an invocation upon
him. In this he is supposed to personate Singalang Burong and his
sons-in-law, who are believed to be the real actors. Singalang Burong
himself _nenjangs_ the headmen, and his sons-in-law, the birds, bless the
rest. The touch of the human performer, and the accompanying invocation
are thought to effect a communication between these bird-spirits from the
skies and each individual being. The great bird-chief and his dependants
come from above to give men their charms and their blessings. Upon the men
the performer invokes physical strength and bravery in war; and upon the
women luck with paddy, cleverness in Dyak feminine accomplishments, and
beauty in form and complexion.”(863)

(M300) Thus the dramatic performances of these primitive peoples are in
fact religious or oftener perhaps magical ceremonies, and the songs or
recitations which accompany them are spells or incantations, though the
real character of both is apt to be overlooked by civilized man,
accustomed as he is to see in the drama nothing more than an agreeable
pastime or at best a vehicle of moral instruction. Yet if we could trace
the drama of the civilized nations back to its origin, we might find that
it had its roots in magical or religious ideas like those which still
mould and direct the masked dances of many savages. Certainly the
Athenians in the heyday of their brilliant civilization retained a lively
sense of the religious import of dramatic performances; for they
associated them directly with the worship of Dionysus and allowed them to
be enacted only during the festivals of the god.(864) In India, also, the
drama appears to have been developed out of religious dances or
pantomimes, in which the actors recited the deeds and played the parts of
national gods and heroes.(865) Hence it is at least a legitimate
hypothesis that the criminal, who masqueraded as a king and perished in
that character at the Bacchanalian festival of the Sacaea, was only one of
a company of actors, who figured on that occasion in a sacred drama of
which the substance has been preserved to us in the book of Esther.

(M301) When once we perceive that the gods and goddesses, the heroes and
heroines of mythology have been represented officially, so to say, by a
long succession of living men and women who bore the names and were
supposed to exercise the functions of these fabulous creatures, we have
attained a point of vantage from which it seems possible to propose terms
of peace between two rival schools of mythologists who have been waging
fierce war on each other for ages. On the one hand it has been argued that
mythical beings are nothing but personifications of natural objects and
natural processes; on the other hand, it has been maintained that they are
nothing but notable men and women who in their lifetime, for one reason or
another, made a great impression on their fellows, but whose doings have
been distorted and exaggerated by a false and credulous tradition. These
two views, it is now easy to see, are not so mutually exclusive as their
supporters have imagined. The personages about whom all the marvels of
mythology have been told may have been real human beings, as the
Euhemerists allege; and yet they may have been at the same time
personifications of natural objects or processes, as the adversaries of
Euhemerism assert. The doctrine of incarnation supplies the missing link
that was needed to unite the two seemingly inconsistent theories. If the
powers of nature or a certain department of nature be conceived as
personified in a deity, and that deity can become incarnate in a man or
woman, it is obvious that the incarnate deity is at the same time a real
human being and a personification of nature. To take the instance with
which we are here concerned, Semiramis may have been the great Semitic
goddess of love, Ishtar or Astarte, and yet she may be supposed to have
been incarnate in a woman or even in a series of real women, whether
queens or harlots, whose memory survives in ancient history. Saturn,
again, may have been the god of sowing and planting, and yet may have been
represented on earth by a succession or dynasty of sacred kings, whose gay
but short lives may have contributed to build up the legend of the Golden
Age. The longer the series of such human divinities, the greater,
obviously, the chance of their myth or legend surviving; and when moreover
a deity of a uniform type was represented, whether under the same name or
not, over a great extent of country by many local dynasties of divine men
or women, it is clear that the stories about him would tend still further
to persist and be stereotyped.

(M302) The conclusions which we have reached in regard to the legend of
Semiramis and her lovers probably holds good of all the similar tales that
were current in antiquity throughout the East; in particular, it may be
assumed to apply to the myths of Aphrodite and Adonis in Syria, of Cybele
and Attis in Phrygia, and of Isis and Osiris in Egypt. If we could trace
these stories back to their origin, we might find that in every case a
human couple acted year by year the parts of the loving goddess and the
dying god. We know that down to Roman times Attis was personated by
priests who bore his name;(866) and if within the period of which we have
knowledge the dead Attis and the dead Adonis were represented only by
effigies, we may surmise that it had not always been so, and that in both
cases the dead god was once represented by a dead man. Further, the
license accorded to the man who played the dying god at the Sacaea speaks
strongly in favour of the hypothesis that before the incarnate deity was
put to a public death he was in all cases allowed, or rather required, to
enjoy the embraces of a woman who played the goddess of love. The reason
for such an enforced union of the human god and goddess is not hard to
divine. If primitive man believes that the growth of the crops can be
stimulated by the intercourse of common men and women,(867) what showers
of blessings will he not anticipate from the commerce of a pair whom his
fancy invests with all the dignity and powers of deities of fertility?

(M303) Thus the theory of Movers, that at the Sacaea the Zoganes
represented a god and paired with a woman who personated a goddess, turns
out to rest on deeper and wider foundations than that able scholar was
aware of. He thought that the divine couple who figured by deputy at the
ceremony were Semiramis and Sandan or Sardanapalus. It now appears that he
was substantially right as to the goddess; but we have still to enquire
into the god. There seems to be no doubt that the name Sardanapalus is
only the Greek way of representing Ashurbanapal, the name of the greatest
and nearly the last king of Assyria. But the records of the real monarch
which have come to light within recent years give little support to the
fables that attached to his name in classical tradition. For they prove
that, far from being the effeminate weakling he seemed to the Greeks of a
later age, he was a warlike and enlightened monarch, who carried the arms
of Assyria to distant lands and fostered at home the growth of science and
letters.(868) Still, though the historical reality of King Ashurbanapal is
as well attested as that of Alexander or Charlemagne, it would be no
wonder if myths gathered, like clouds, round the great figure that loomed
large in the stormy sunset of Assyrian glory. Now the two features that
stand out most prominently in the legends of Sardanapalus are his
extravagant debauchery and his violent death in the flames of a great
pyre, on which he burned himself and his concubines to save them from
falling into the hands of his victorious enemies. It is said that the
womanish king, with painted face and arrayed in female attire, passed his
days in the seclusion of the harem, spinning purple wool among his
concubines and wallowing in sensual delights; and that in the epitaph
which he caused to be carved on his tomb he recorded that all the days of
his life he ate and drank and toyed, remembering that life is short and
full of trouble, that fortune is uncertain, and that others would soon
enjoy the good things which he must leave behind.(869) These traits bear
little resemblance to the portrait of Ashurbanapal either in life or in
death; for after a brilliant career of conquest the Assyrian king died in
old age, at the height of human ambition, with peace at home and triumph
abroad, the admiration of his subjects and the terror of his foes. But if
the traditional characteristics of Sardanapalus harmonize but ill with
what we know of the real monarch of that name, they fit well enough with
all that we know or can conjecture of the mock kings who led a short life
and a merry during the revelry of the Sacaea, the Asiatic equivalent of
the Saturnalia. We can hardly doubt that for the most part such men, with
death staring them in the face at the end of a few days, sought to drown
care and deaden fear by plunging madly into all the fleeting joys that
still offered themselves under the sun. When their brief pleasures and
sharp sufferings were over, and their bones or ashes mingled with the
dust, what more natural that on their tomb—those mounds in which the
people saw, not untruly, the graves of the lovers of Semiramis—there
should be carved some such lines as those which tradition placed in the
mouth of the great Assyrian king, to remind the heedless passer-by of the
shortness and vanity of life?

(M304) When we turn to Sandan, the other legendary or mythical being whom
Movers thought that the Zoganes may have personated, we find the arguments
in support of his theory still stronger. The city of Tarsus in Cilicia is
said to have been founded by a certain Sandan whom the Greeks identified
with Hercules; and at the festival of this god or hero an effigy of him
was burned on a great pyre.(870) This Sandan is doubtless the same with
the Sandes whom Agathias calls the old Persian Hercules. Professing to
give a list of the gods whom the Persians worshipped before the days of
Zoroaster, the Byzantine historian mentions Bel, Sandes, and Anaitis, whom
he identifies with Zeus, Hercules, and Aphrodite respectively.(871) As we
know that Bel was a Babylonian, not a Persian deity, and that in later
times Anaitis was practically equivalent to the Babylonian Ishtar or
Astarte, a strong presumption is raised that Sandes also was a Babylonian
or at all events Semitic deity, and that in speaking of him as Persian the
historian confused the ancient Persians with the Babylonians and perhaps
other stocks of Western Asia. The presumption is strengthened when we find
that in Lydia the surname of Sandon, doubtless equivalent to Sandan, is
said to have been borne by Hercules because he wore a woman’s garment
called a _sandyx_, fine and diaphanous as gossamer, at the bidding of
Queen Omphale, whom the hero served for three years in the guise of a
female slave, clad in purple, humbly carding wool and submitting to be
slapped by the saucy queen with her golden slipper.(872) The familiar
legend that Hercules burned himself alive on a great pyre completes the
parallel between the effeminate Hercules Sandon of Lydia and the Assyrian
Sardanapalus. So exact a parallel must surely rest on a common base of
custom as well as of myth. That base, according to the conjecture of the
admirable scholar K. O. Müller, may have been a custom of dressing up an
effigy of an effeminate Asiatic deity in the semblance of a reveller, and
then publicly burning it on a pyre. Such a custom appears to have
prevailed not only at Tarsus in Cilicia, but also in Lydia; for a coin of
the Lydian Philadelphia, a city which lay not far from the old royal
capital Sardes, exhibits a device like that on coins of Tarsus, consisting
of a figure stretched on a pyre. “We may suppose,” says Müller, “that in
the old Assyrian mythology a certain being called Sandan, or perhaps
Sardan, figured beside Baal and Mylitta or Astarte. The character of this
mythical personage is one which often meets us in oriental religion—the
extreme of voluptuousness and sensuality combined with miraculous force
and heroic strength. We may imagine that at the great festivals of Nineveh
this Sandan or Sardan was exhibited as a buxom figure with womanish
features, the pale face painted with white lead, the eyebrows and
eyelashes blackened with kohl, his person loaded with golden chains,
rings, and earrings, arrayed in a bright red transparent garment, grasping
a goblet in one hand and perhaps, as a symbol of strength, a double axe in
the other, while he sat cross-legged and surrounded by women on a
splendidly adorned couch under a purple canopy, altogether not unlike the
figure of Adonis at the court festivals of Alexandria. Then the people of
‘mad Nineveh,’ as the poet Phocylides called it, ‘the well-favoured
harlot,’ as the prophet Nahum has it, would rejoice and make merry with
this their darling hero. Afterwards there may have been another show, when
this gorgeous Sandan or Sardan was to be seen on a huge pyre of precious
wood, draped in gold-embroidered tapestry and laden with incense and
spices of every sort, which being set on fire, to the howling of a
countless multitude and the deafening din of shrill music, sent up a
monstrous pillar of fire whirling towards heaven and flooded half Nineveh
with smoke and smell.”(873)

(M305) The distinguished scholar whom I have just quoted does not fail to
recognize the part which imagination plays in the picture he has set
before us; but he reminds us very properly that in historical enquiries
imagination must always supply the cement that binds together the broken
fragments of tradition. One thing, he thinks, emerges clearly from the
present investigation: the worship and legend of an effeminate hero like
Sandan appear to have spread, by means of an early diffusion of the
Semitic stock, first to the neighbourhood of Tarsus in Cilicia and
afterwards to Sardes in Lydia. In favour of the former prevalence of the
rite in Lydia it may be added that the oldest dynasty of Lydian kings
traced their descent, not only from the mythical Assyrian hero Ninus, but
also from the Greek hero Hercules,(874) whose legendary death in the fire
finds at least a curious echo in the story that Croesus, the last king of
Lydia, was laid by his Persian conqueror Cyrus on a great pyre of wood,
and was only saved at the last moment from being consumed in the
flames.(875) May not this story embody a reminiscence of the manner in
which the ancient kings of Lydia, as living embodiments of their god,
formerly met their end? It was thus, as we have seen, that the old
Prussian rulers used to burn themselves alive in front of the sacred
oak;(876) and by an odd coincidence, if it is nothing more, the Greek
Hercules directed that the pyre on which he was to be consumed should be
made of the wood of the oak and the wild olive.(877) Some grounds have
also been shewn for thinking that in certain South African tribes the
chiefs may formerly have been burnt alive as a religious or magical
ceremony.(878) All these facts and indications tend to support the view of
Movers that at the Sacaea also the man who played the god for five days
was originally burnt at the end of them.(879) Death by hanging or
crucifixion may have been a later mitigation of his sufferings, though it
is quite possible that both forms of execution or rather of sacrifice may
have been combined by hanging or crucifying the victim first and burning
him afterwards,(880) much as our forefathers used to disembowel traitors
after suspending them for a few minutes on a gibbet. At Tarsus apparently
the custom was still further softened by burning an effigy instead of a
man; but on this point the evidence is not explicit. It is worth observing
that as late as Lucian’s time the principal festival of the year at
Hierapolis—the great seat of the worship of Astarte—fell at the beginning
of spring and took its name of the Pyre or the Torch from the tall masts
which were burnt in the court of the temple with sheep, goats, and other
animals hanging from them.(881) Here the season, the fire, and the
gallows-tree all fit our hypothesis; only the man-god is wanting.

(M306) If the Jewish festival of Purim was, as I have attempted to shew,
directly descended either from the Sacaea or from some other Semitic
festival, of which the central feature was the sacrifice of a man in the
character of a god, we should expect to find traces of human sacrifice
lingering about it in one or other of those mitigated forms to which I
have just referred. This expectation is fully borne out by the facts. For
from an early time it has been customary with the Jews at the feast of
Purim to burn or otherwise destroy effigies of Haman. The practice was
well known under the Roman empire, for in the year 408 A.D. the emperors
Honorius and Theodosius issued a decree commanding the governors of the
provinces to take care that the Jews should not burn effigies of Haman on
a cross at one of their festivals.(882) We learn from the decree that the
custom gave great offence to the Christians, who regarded it as a
blasphemous parody of the central mystery of their own religion, little
suspecting that it was nothing but a continuation, in a milder form, of a
rite that had probably been celebrated in the East long ages before the
birth of Christ. Apparently the custom long survived the publication of
the edict, for in a form of abjuration which the Greek church imposed on
Jewish converts and which seems to date from the tenth century, the
renegade is made to speak as follows: “I curse also those who celebrate
the festival of the so-called Mordecai on the first Sabbath (Saturday) of
the Christian fast, and who nail Haman forsooth to the tree, attaching to
it the symbol of the cross and burning him along with it, while they heap
all sorts of imprecations and curses on the Christians.”(883) A Jewish
account of the custom as it was observed in Babylonia and Persia in the
tenth century of our era runs as follows: “It is customary in Babylonia
and Elam for boys to make an effigy resembling Haman; this they suspend on
their roofs, four or five days before Purim. On Purim day they erect a
bonfire, and cast the effigy into its midst, while the boys stand round
about it jesting and singing. And they have a ring suspended in the midst
of the fire, which (ring) they hold and wave from one side of the fire to
the other.”(884) Again, the Arab historian Albîrûnî, who wrote in the year
1000 A.D., informs us that at Purim the Jews of his time rejoiced greatly
over the death of Haman, and that they made figures which they beat and
burned, “imitating the burning of Haman.” Hence one name for the festival
was Hâmân-Sûr.(885) Another Arabic writer, Makrîzî, who died in 1442 A.D.,
says that at the feast of Purim, which fell on the fifteenth day of the
month Adar, some of the Jews used to make effigies of Haman which they
first played with and then threw into the fire.(886) During the Middle
Ages the Italian Jews celebrated Purim in a lively fashion which has been
compared by their own historians to that of the Carnival. The children
used to range themselves in rows opposite each other and pelt one another
with nuts, while grown-up people rode on horseback through the streets
with pine branches in their hands or blew trumpets and made merry round a
puppet representing Haman, which was set on a platform or scaffold and
then solemnly burnt on a pyre.(887) In the eighteenth century the Jews of
Frankfort used at Purim to make pyramids of thin wax candles, which they
set on fire; also they fashioned images of Haman and his wife out of
candles and burned them on the reading-desk in the synagogue.(888)

(M307) Now, when we consider the close correspondence in character as well
as in date between the Jewish Purim and the Christian Carnival, and
remember further that the effigy of Carnival, which is now destroyed at
this merry season, had probably its prototype in a living man who was put
to a violent death in the character of Saturn at the Saturnalia, analogy
of itself would suggest that in former times the Jews, like the
Babylonians, from whom they appear to have derived their Purim, may at one
time have burned, hanged, or crucified a real man in the character of
Haman. There are some positive grounds for thinking that this was so. The
early church historian Socrates informs us that at Inmestar, a town in
Syria, the Jews were wont to observe certain sports among themselves, in
the course of which they played many foolish pranks. In the year 416 A.D.,
being heated with wine, they carried these sports further than usual and
began deriding Christians and even Christ himself, and to give the more
zest to their mockery they seized a Christian child, bound him to a cross,
and hung him up. At first they only laughed and jeered at him, but soon,
their passions getting the better of them, they ill-treated the child so
that he died under their hands. The thing got noised abroad, and resulted
in a serious brawl between the Jews and their Christian neighbours. The
authorities then stepped in, and the Jews had to pay dear for the crime
they had perpetrated in sport.(889) The Christian historian does not
mention, and perhaps did not know, the name of the drunken and jovial
festival which ended so tragically; but we can hardly doubt that it was
Purim, and that the boy who died on the cross represented Haman.(890) In
mediæval and modern times many accusations of ritual murders, as they are
called, have been brought against the Jews, and the arguments for and
against the charge have been discussed on both sides with a heat which,
however natural, has tended rather to inflame the passions of the
disputants than to elicit the truth.(891) Into this troubled arena I
prefer not to enter; I will only observe that, so far as I have looked
into the alleged cases, and these are reported in sufficient detail, the
majority of the victims are said to have been children and to have met
their fate in spring, often in the week before Easter. This last
circumstance points, if there is any truth in the accusations, to a
connexion of the human sacrifice with the Passover, which falls in this
week, rather than with Purim, which falls a month earlier. Indeed it has
often been made a part of the accusation that the blood of the youthful
victims was intended to be used at the Passover. If all the charges of
ritual murder which have been brought against the Jews in modern times are
not, as seems most probable, mere idle calumnies, the baneful fruit of
bigotry, ignorance, and malice, the extraordinary tenacity of life
exhibited by the lowest forms of superstition in the minds of ignorant
people, whether they are Jews or Gentiles, would suffice to account for an
occasional recrudescence of primitive barbarity among the most degraded
part of the Jewish community. To make the Jews as a nation responsible for
outrages which, if they occur at all, are doubtless quite as repugnant to
them as they are to every humane mind, would be a monstrous injustice; it
would be as fair to charge Christians in general with complicity in the
incalculably greater number of massacres and atrocities of every kind that
have been perpetrated by Christians in the name of Christianity, not
merely on Jews and heathen, but on men and women and children who
professed—and died for—the same faith as their torturers and murderers. If
deeds of the sort alleged have been really done by Jews—a question on
which I must decline to pronounce an opinion—they would interest the
student of custom as isolated instances of reversion to an old and
barbarous ritual which once flourished commonly enough among the ancestors
both of Jews and Gentiles, but on which, as on a noxious monster, an
enlightened humanity has long set its heel. Such customs die hard; it is
not the fault of society as a whole if sometimes the reptile has strength
enough left to lift its venomous head and sting.

(M308) But between the stage when human sacrifice goes on unabashed in the
light of common day, and the stage when it has been driven out of sight
into dark holes and corners, there intervenes a period during which the
custom is slowly dwindling away under the growing light of knowledge and
philanthropy. In this middle period many subterfuges are resorted to for
the sake of preserving the old ritual in a form which will not offend the
new morality. A common and successful device is to consummate the
sacrifice on the person of a malefactor, whose death at the altar or
elsewhere is little likely to excite pity or indignation, since it
partakes of the character of a punishment, and people recognize that if
the miscreant had not been dealt with by the priest, it would have been
needful in the public interest to hand him over to the executioner. We
have seen that in the Rhodian sacrifices to Cronus a condemned criminal
was after a time substituted for an innocent victim;(892) and there can be
little doubt that at Babylon the criminals, who perished in the character
of gods at the Sacaea, enjoyed an honour which, at an earlier period, had
been reserved for more respectable persons. It seems therefore by no means
impossible that the Jews, in borrowing the Sacaea from Babylon under the
new name of Purim, should have borrowed along with it the custom of
putting to death a malefactor who, after masquerading as Mordecai in a
crown and royal robe, was hanged or crucified in the character of Haman.
There are some grounds for thinking that this or something of this sort
was done; but a consideration of them had better be deferred till we have
cleared up some points which still remain obscure in Purim, and in the
account which the Jews give of its origin.

(M309) In the first place, then, it deserves to be remarked that the
joyous festival of Purim on the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month
Adar is invariably preceded by a fast, known as the fast of Esther, on the
thirteenth; indeed, some Jews fast for several days before Purim.(893) In
the book of Esther the fast is traditionally explained as a commemoration
of the mourning and lamentation excited among the Jews by the decree of
King Ahasuerus that they should all be massacred on the thirteenth day of
the month Adar; for “in every province, whithersoever the king’s
commandment and his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews,
and fasting, and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and
ashes.” And Esther, before she went into the presence of the king to plead
for the lives of her people, “bade them return answer unto Mordecai, Go,
gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for
me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my
maidens will fast in like manner.” Hence fasting and lamentation were
ordained as the proper preparation for the happy feast of Purim which
commemorated the great deliverance of the Jews from the destruction that
had threatened them on the thirteenth day of Adar.(894) Now we have seen
that, in the opinion of some eminent modern scholars, the basis of the
book of Esther is not history but a Babylonian myth, which celebrated the
triumphs and sufferings of deities rather than of men. On this hypothesis,
how is the fast that precedes Purim to be explained? The best solution
appears to be that of Jensen, that the fasting and mourning were
originally for the supposed annual death of a Semitic god or hero of the
type of Tammuz or Adonis, whose resurrection on the following day
occasioned that outburst of joy and gladness which is characteristic of
Purim. The particular god or hero, whose death and resurrection thus
touched with sorrow and filled with joy the hearts of his worshippers, may
have been, according to Jensen, either the great hero Gilgamesh, or his
comrade and friend Eabani.(895) The doughty deeds and adventures of this
mighty pair are the theme of the longest Babylonian poem that has been as
yet discovered. It is recorded on twelve tablets, and this circumstance
has suggested to some scholars the view that the story may be a solar
myth, descriptive of the sun’s annual course through the twelve months or
the twelve signs of the zodiac. However that may be, the scene of the poem
is laid chiefly at the very ancient Babylonian city of Erech, the chief
seat of the worship of the goddess Ishtar or Astarte, who plays an
important part in the story. For the goddess is said to have been smitten
with the charms of Gilgamesh, and to have made love to him; but he spurned
her proffered favours, and thereafter fell into a sore sickness, probably
through the wrath of the offended goddess. His comrade Eabani also roused
the fury of Ishtar, and was wounded to death. For twelve days he lingered
on a bed of pain, and, when he died, his friend Gilgamesh mourned and
lamented for him, and rested not until he had prevailed on the god of the
dead to suffer the spirit of Eabani to return to the upper world. The
resurrection of Eabani, recorded on the twelfth tablet, forms the
conclusion of the long poem.(896) Jensen’s theory is that the death and
resurrection of a mythical being, who combined in himself the features of
a solar god and an ancient king of Erech, were celebrated at the
Babylonian Zakmuk or festival of the New Year, and that the transference
of the drama from Erech, its original seat, to Babylon led naturally to
the substitution of Marduk, the great god of Babylon, for Gilgamesh or
Eabani in the part of the hero. Although Jensen apparently does not
identify the Zakmuk with the Sacaea, a little consideration will shew how
well his general theory of Zakmuk fits in with those features of the
Sacaean festival which have emerged in the course of our enquiry. At the
Sacaean festival, if I am right, a man, who personated a god or hero of
the type of Tammuz or Adonis, enjoyed the favours of a woman, probably a
sacred harlot, who represented the great Semitic goddess Ishtar or
Astarte; and after he had thus done his part towards securing, by means of
sympathetic magic, the revival of plant life in spring, he was put to
death. We may suppose that the death of this divine man was mourned over
by his worshippers, and especially by women, in much the same fashion as
the women of Jerusalem wept for Tammuz at the gate of the temple,(897) and
as Syrian damsels mourned the dead Adonis, while the river ran red with
his blood. Such rites appear, in fact, to have been common all over
Western Asia; the particular name of the dying god varied in different
places, but in substance the ritual was the same. Fundamentally, the
custom was a religious or rather magical ceremony intended to ensure the
revival and reproduction of life in spring.

(M310) Now, if this interpretation of the Sacaea is correct, it is obvious
that one important feature of the ceremony is wanting in the brief notices
of the festival that have come down to us. The death of the man-god at the
festival is recorded, but nothing is said of his resurrection. Yet if he
really personated a being of the Adonis or Attis type, we may feel pretty
sure that his dramatic death was followed at a shorter or longer interval
by his dramatic revival, just as at the festivals of Attis and Adonis the
resurrection of the dead god quickly succeeded to his mimic death.(898)
Here, however, a difficulty presents itself. At the Sacaea the man-god
died a real, not a mere mimic death; and in ordinary life the resurrection
even of a man-god is at least not an everyday occurrence. What was to be
done? The man, or rather the god, was undoubtedly dead. How was he to come
to life again? Obviously the best, if not the only way, was to set another
and living man to support the character of the reviving god, and we may
conjecture that this was done. We may suppose that the insignia of royalty
which had adorned the dead man were transferred to his successor, who,
arrayed in them, would be presented to his rejoicing worshippers as their
god come to life again; and by his side would probably be displayed a
woman in the character of his divine consort, the goddess Ishtar or
Astarte. In favour of this hypothesis it may be observed that it at once
furnishes a clear and intelligible explanation of a remarkable feature in
the book of Esther which has not yet, so far as I am aware, been
adequately elucidated; I mean that apparent duplication of the principal
characters to which I have already directed the reader’s attention. If I
am right, Haman represents the temporary king or mortal god who was put to
death at the Sacaea; and his rival Mordecai represents the other temporary
king who, on the death of his predecessor, was invested with his royal
insignia, and exhibited to the people as the god come to life again.
Similarly Vashti, the deposed queen in the narrative, corresponds to the
woman who played the part of queen and goddess to the first mock king, the
Haman; and her successful rival, Esther or Ishtar, answers to the woman
who figured as the divine consort of the second mock king, the Mordecai or
Marduk. A trace of the sexual license accorded to the mock king of the
festival seems to be preserved in the statement that King Ahasuerus found
Haman fallen on the bed with Esther and asked, “Will he even force the
queen before me in the house?”(899) We have seen that the mock king of the
Sacaea did actually possess the right of using the real king’s concubines,
and there is much to be said for the view of Movers that he began his
short reign by exercising the right in public.(900) In the parallel ritual
of Adonis the marriage of the goddess with her ill-fated lover was
publicly celebrated the day before his mimic death.(901) A clear
reminiscence of the time when the relation between Esther and Mordecai was
conceived as much more intimate than mere cousinship appears to be
preserved in some of the Jewish plays acted at Purim, in which Mordecai
appears as the lover of Esther; and this significant indication is
confirmed by the teaching of the rabbis that King Ahasuerus never really
knew Esther, but that a phantom in her likeness lay with him while the
real Esther sat on the lap of Mordecai.(902)

(M311) The Persian setting, in which the Hebrew author of the book of
Esther has framed his highly-coloured picture, naturally suggests that the
Jews derived their feast of Purim not directly from the old Babylonians,
but from their Persian conquerors. Even if this could be demonstrated, it
would in no way invalidate the theory that Purim originated in the
Babylonian festival of the Sacaea, since we know that the Sacaea was
celebrated by the Persians.(903) Hence it becomes worth while to enquire
whether in the Persian religion we can detect any traces of a festival
akin to the Sacaea or Purim. Here Lagarde has shewn the way by directing
attention to the old Persian ceremony known as the “Ride of the Beardless
One.”(904) This was a rite performed both in Persia and Babylonia at the
beginning of spring, on the first day of the first month, which in the
most ancient Persian calendar corresponded to March, so that the date of
the ceremony agrees with that of the Babylonian New Year festival of
Zakmuk. A beardless and, if possible, one-eyed buffoon was set naked on an
ass, a horse, or a mule, and conducted in a sort of mock triumph through
the streets of the city. In one hand he held a crow and in the other a
fan, with which he fanned himself, complaining of the heat, while the
people pelted him with ice and snow and drenched him with cold water. He
was supposed to drive away the cold, and to aid him perhaps in discharging
this useful function he was fed with hot food, and hot stuffs were smeared
on his body. Riding on his ass and attended by all the king’s household,
if the city happened to be the capital, or, if it was not, by all the
retainers of the governor, who were also mounted, he paraded the streets
and extorted contributions. He stopped at the doors of the rich, and if
they did not give him what he asked for, he befouled their garments with
mud or a mixture of red ochre and water, which he carried in an
earthenware pot. If a shopkeeper hesitated a moment to respond to his
demands, the importunate beggar had the right to confiscate all the goods
in the shop; so the tradesmen who saw him bearing down on them, not
unnaturally hastened to anticipate his wants by contributing of their
substance before he could board them. Everything that he thus collected
from break of day to the time of morning prayers belonged to the king or
governor of the city; but everything that he laid hands on between the
first and the second hour of prayer he kept for himself. After the second
prayers he disappeared, and if the people caught him later in the day they
were free to beat him to their heart’s content. “In like manner,” proceeds
one of the native writers who has described the custom, “people at the
present time appoint a New Year Lord and make merry. And this they do
because the season, which is the beginning of Azur or March, coincides
with the sun’s entry into Aries, for on that day they disport themselves
and rejoice because the winter is over.”(905)

(M312) Now in this harlequin, who rode through the streets attended by all
the king’s men, and levying contributions which went either to the royal
treasury or to the pocket of the collector, we recognize the familiar
features of the mock or temporary king, who is invested for a short time
with the pomp and privileges of royalty for reasons which have been
already explained.(906) The abrupt disappearance of the Persian clown at a
certain hour of the day, coupled with the leave given to the populace to
thrash him if they found him afterwards, points plainly enough to the
harder fate that probably awaited him in former days, when he paid with
his life for his brief tenure of a kingly crown. The resemblance between
his burlesque progress and that of Mordecai through the streets of Susa is
obvious; though the Jewish author of Esther has depicted in brighter
colours the pomp of his hero “in royal apparel of blue and white, and with
a great crown of gold, and with a robe of fine linen and purple,” riding
the king’s own charger, and led through the city by one of the king’s most
noble princes.(907) The difference between the two scenes is probably not
to be explained simply by the desire of the Jewish writer to shed a halo
of glory round the personage whom he regarded as the deliverer of his
people. So long as the temporary king was a real substitute for the
reigning monarch, and had to die sooner or later in his stead, it was
natural that he should be treated with a greater show of deference, and
should simulate his royal brother more closely than a clown who had
nothing worse than a beating to fear when he laid down his office. In
short, after the serious meaning of the custom had been forgotten, and the
substitute was allowed to escape with his life, the high tragedy of the
ancient ceremony would rapidly degenerate into farce.

(M313) But while the “Ride of the Beardless One” is, from one point of
view, a degenerate copy of the original, regarded from another point of
view, it preserves some features which are almost certainly primitive,
though they do not appear in the kindred Babylonian and Jewish festivals.
The Persian custom bears the stamp of a popular festivity rather than of a
state ceremonial, and everywhere it seems as if popular festivals, when
left to propagate themselves freely among the folk, reveal their old
meaning and intention more transparently than when they have been adopted
into the official religion and enshrined in a ritual. The simple thoughts
of our simple forefathers are better understood by their unlettered
descendants than by the majority of educated people; their rude rites are
more faithfully preserved and more truly interpreted by a rude peasantry
than by the priest, who wraps up their nakedness in the gorgeous pall of
religious pomp, or by the philosopher, who dissolves their crudities into
the thin air of allegory. In the present instance the purpose of the “Ride
of the Beardless One” at the beginning of spring is sufficiently obvious;
it was meant to hasten the departure of winter and the approach of summer.
We are expressly told that the clown who went about fanning himself and
complaining of the heat, while the populace snowballed him, was supposed
to dispel the cold; and even without any such assurance we should be
justified in inferring as much from his behaviour. On the principles of
homoeopathic or imitative magic, which is little more than an elaborate
system of make-believe, you can make the weather warm by pretending that
it is so; or if you cannot, you may be sure that there is some person
wiser than yourself who can. Such a wizard, in the estimation of the
Persians, was the beardless one-eyed man who went through the performance
I have described; and no doubt his physical defects were believed to
contribute in some occult manner to the success of the rite. The ceremony
was thus, as Lagarde acutely perceived, the oriental equivalent of those
popular European customs which celebrate the advent of spring by
representing in a dramatic form the expulsion or defeat of winter by the
victorious summer.(908) But whereas in Europe the two rival seasons are
often, if not regularly, personated by two actors or two effigies, in
Persia a single actor sufficed. Whether he definitely represented winter
or summer is not quite clear; but his pretence of suffering from heat and
his final disappearance suggest that, if he personified either of the
seasons, it was the departing winter rather than the coming summer.

(M314) If there is any truth in the connexion thus traced between Purim
and the “Ride of the Beardless One,” we are now in a position finally to
unmask the leading personages in the book of Esther. I have attempted to
shew that Haman and Vashti are little more than doubles of Mordecai and
Esther, who in turn conceal under a thin disguise the features of Marduk
and Ishtar, the great god and goddess of Babylon. But why, the reader may
ask, should the divine pair be thus duplicated and the two pairs set in
opposition to each other? The answer is suggested by the popular European
celebrations of spring to which I have just adverted. If my interpretation
of these customs is right, the contrast between the summer and winter, or
between the life and death, which figure in effigy or in the persons of
living representatives at the spring ceremonies of our peasantry, is
fundamentally a contrast between the dying or dead vegetation of the old
and the sprouting vegetation of the new year—a contrast which would lose
nothing of its point when, as in ancient Rome and Babylon and Persia, the
beginning of spring was also the beginning of the new year. In these and
in all the ceremonies we have been examining the antagonism is not between
powers of a different order, but between the same power viewed in
different aspects as old and young; it is, in short, nothing but the
eternal and pathetic contrast between youth and age. And as the power or
spirit of vegetation is represented in religious ritual and popular custom
by a human pair, whether they be called Ishtar and Tammuz, or Venus and
Adonis, or the Queen and King of May, so we may expect to find the old
decrepit spirit of the past year personated by one pair, and the fresh
young spirit of the new year by another. This, if my hypothesis is right,
is the ultimate explanation of the struggle between Haman and Vashti on
the one side, and their doubles Mordecai and Esther on the other. In the
last analysis both pairs stood for the powers that make for the fertility
of plants and perhaps also of animals;(909) but the one pair embodied the
failing energies of the past, and the other the vigorous and growing
energies of the coming year.(910) Both powers, on my hypothesis, were
personified not merely in myth, but in custom; for year by year a human
couple undertook to quicken the life of nature by a union in which, as in
a microcosm, the loves of tree and plant, of herb and flower, of bird and
beast were supposed in some mystic fashion to be summed up.(911)
Originally, we may conjecture, such couples exercised their functions for
a whole year, on the conclusion of which the male partner—the divine
king—was put to death; but in historical times it seems that, as a rule,
the human god—the Saturn, Zoganes, Tammuz, or whatever he was
called—enjoyed his divine privileges, and discharged his divine duties
only for a short part of the year. This curtailment of his reign on earth
was probably introduced at the time when the old hereditary divinities or
deified kings contrived to shift the most painful part of their duties to
a substitute, whether that substitute was a son or a slave or a
malefactor. Having to die as a king, it was necessary that the substitute
should also live as a king for a season; but the real monarch would
naturally restrict within the narrowest limits both of time and of power a
reign which, so long as it lasted, necessarily encroached upon and indeed
superseded his own.(912) What became of the divine king’s female partner,
the human goddess who shared his bed and transmitted his beneficent
energies to the rest of nature, we cannot say. So far as I am aware, there
is little or no evidence that she like him suffered death when her primary
function was discharged.(913) The nature of maternity suggests an obvious
reason for sparing her a little longer, till that mysterious law, which
links together woman’s life with the changing aspects of the nightly sky,
had been fulfilled by the birth of an infant god, who should in his turn,
reared perhaps by her tender care, grow up to live and die for the world.




§ 6. Conclusion.


(M315) We may now sum up the general results of the enquiry which we have
pursued in the present chapter. We have found evidence that festivals of
the type of the Saturnalia, characterized by an inversion of social ranks
and the sacrifice of a man in the character of a god, were at one time
held all over the ancient world from Italy to Babylon. Such festivals seem
to date from an early age in the history of agriculture, when people lived
in small communities, each presided over by a sacred or divine king, whose
primary duty was to secure the orderly succession of the seasons, the
fertility of the earth, and the fecundity both of cattle and of women.
Associated with him was his wife or other female consort, with whom he
performed some of the necessary ceremonies, and who therefore shared his
divine character. Originally his term of office appears to have been
limited to a year, on the conclusion of which he was put to death; but in
time he contrived by force or craft to extend his reign and sometimes to
procure a substitute, who after a short and more or less nominal tenure of
the crown was slain in his stead. At first the substitute for the divine
father was probably the divine son, but afterwards this rule was no longer
insisted on, and still later the growth of a humane feeling demanded that
the victim should always be a condemned criminal. In this advanced stage
of degeneration it is no wonder if the light of divinity suffered eclipse,
and many should fail to detect the god in the malefactor. Yet the downward
career of fallen deity does not stop here; even a criminal comes to be
thought too good to personate a god on the gallows or in the fire; and
then there is nothing left but to make up a more or less grotesque effigy,
and so to hang, burn, or otherwise destroy the god in the person of this
sorry representative. By this time the original meaning of the ceremony
may be so completely forgotten that the puppet is supposed to represent
some historical personage, who earned the hatred and contempt of his
fellows in his life, and whose memory has ever since been held up to
eternal execration by the annual destruction of his effigy. The figures of
Haman, of the Carnival, and of Winter or Death which are or used to be
annually destroyed in spring by Jews, Catholics, and the peasants of
Central Europe respectively, appear to be all lineal descendants of those
human incarnations of the powers of nature whose life and death were
deemed essential to the welfare of mankind. But of the three the only one
which has preserved a clear trace of its original meaning is the effigy of
Winter or Death. In the others the ancient significance of the custom as a
magical ceremony designed to direct the course of nature has been almost
wholly obscured by a thick aftergrowth of legend and myth. The cause of
this distinction is that, whereas the practice of destroying an effigy of
Winter or Death has been handed down from time immemorial through
generations of simple peasants, the festivals of Purim and the Carnival,
as well as their Babylonian and Italian prototypes, the Sacaea and the
Saturnalia, were for centuries domesticated in cities, where they were
necessarily exposed to those thousand transforming and disintegrating
currents of speculation and enquiry, of priestcraft and policy, which roll
their turbid waters through the busy haunts of men, but leave undefiled
the limpid springs of mythic fancy in the country.

(M316) If there is any truth in the analysis of the Saturnalia and kindred
festivals which I have now brought to a close, it seems to point to a
remarkable homogeneity of civilization throughout Southern Europe and
Western Asia in prehistoric times. How far such homogeneity of
civilization may be taken as evidence of homogeneity of race is a question
for the ethnologist; it does not concern us here. But without discussing
it, I may remind the reader that in the far east of Asia we have met with
temporary kings whose magical functions and intimate relation to
agriculture stand out in the clearest light;(914) while India furnishes
examples of kings who have regularly been obliged to sacrifice themselves
at the end of a term of years.(915) All these things appear to hang
together; all of them may, perhaps, be regarded as the shattered remnants
of a uniform zone of religion and society which at a remote era belted the
Old World from the Mediterranean to the Pacific. Whether that was so or
not, I may at least claim to have made it probable that if the King of the
Wood at Aricia lived and died as an incarnation of a sylvan deity, the
functions he thus discharged were by no means singular, and that for the
nearest parallel to them we need not go beyond the bounds of Italy, where
the divine king Saturn—the god of the sown and sprouting seed—was annually
slain in the person of a human representative at his ancient festival of
the Saturnalia.

(M317) It is possible that such sacrifices of deified men, performed for
the salvation of the world, may have helped to beget the notion that the
universe or some part of it was originally created out of the bodies of
gods offered up in sacrifice. Certainly it is curious that notions of this
sort meet us precisely in parts of the world where such sacrifices appear
to have been regularly accomplished. Thus in ancient Mexico, where the
sacrifice of human beings in the character of gods formed a conspicuous
feature of the national religion, it is said that in the beginning, when
as yet the light of day was not, the gods created the sun to illumine the
earth by voluntarily burning themselves in the fire, leaping one after the
other into the flames of a great furnace.(916) Again, in the Babylonian
Genesis the great god Bel created the world by cleaving the female monster
Tiamat in twain and using the severed halves of her body to form the
heaven and the earth. Afterwards, perceiving that the earth was waste and
void, he obligingly ordered one of the gods to cut off his, the Creator’s,
head, and with the flowing blood mixed with clay he kneaded a paste out of
which he moulded men and animals.(917) Similarly in a hymn of the Rig Veda
we read how the gods created the world out of the dismembered body of the
great primordial giant Purushu. The sky was made out of his head, the
earth out of his feet, the sun out of his eye, and the moon out of his
mind; animals and men were also engendered from his dripping fat or his
limbs, and the great gods Indra and Agni sprang from his mouth.(918) The
crude, nay savage, account of creation thus set forth by the poet was
retained by the Brahman doctors of a later age and refined by them into a
subtle theory of sacrifice in general. According to them the world was not
only created in the beginning by the sacrifice of the creator Prajapati,
the Lord of Creatures; to this day it is renewed and preserved solely by a
repetition of that mystic sacrifice in the daily sacrificial ritual
celebrated by the Brahmans. Every day the body of the Creator and Saviour
is broken anew, and every day it is pieced together for the restoration
and conservation of a universe which otherwise must dissolve and be
shattered into fragments. Thus is the world continually created afresh by
the self-sacrifice of the deity; and, wonderful to relate, the priest who
offers the sacrifice identifies himself with the Creator, and so by the
very act of sacrificing renews the universe and keeps up uninterrupted the
revolution of time and matter. All things depend on his beneficent, nay
divine activity, from the heaven above to the earth beneath, from the
greatest god to the meanest worm, from the sun and moon to the humblest
blade of grass and the minutest particle of dust. Happily this grandiose
theory of sacrifice as a process essential to the salvation of the world
does not oblige the priest to imitate his glorious prototype by
dismembering his own body and shedding his blood on the altar; on the
contrary a comfortable corollary deduced from it holds out to him the
pleasing prospect of living for the unspeakable benefit of society to a
good old age, indeed of stretching out the brief span of human existence
to a full hundred years.(919) Well is it, not only for the priest but for
mankind, when with the slow progress of civilization and humanity the hard
facts of a cruel ritual have thus been softened and diluted into the
nebulous abstractions of a mystical theology.





NOTE. THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST.(920)


(M318) An eminent scholar has recently pointed out the remarkable
resemblance between the treatment of Christ by the Roman soldiers at
Jerusalem and the treatment of the mock king of the Saturnalia by the
Roman soldiers at Durostorum; and he would explain the similarity by
supposing that the soldiers ridiculed the claims of Christ to a divine
kingdom by arraying him in the familiar garb of old King Saturn, whose
quaint person figured so prominently at the winter revels.(921) Even if
the theory should prove to be right, we can hardly suppose that Christ
played the part of the regular Saturn of the year, since at the beginning
of our era the Saturnalia fell at midwinter, whereas Christ was crucified
at the Passover in spring. There is, indeed, as I have pointed out, some
reason to think that when the Roman year began in March the Saturnalia was
held in spring, and that in remote districts the festival always continued
to be celebrated at the ancient date. If the Roman garrison of Jerusalem
conformed to the old fashion in this respect, it seems not quite
impossible that their celebration of the Saturnalia may have coincided
with the Passover; and that thus Christ, as a condemned criminal, may have
been given up to them to make sport with as the Saturn of the year. But on
the other hand it is rather unlikely that the officers, as representatives
of the State, would have allowed their men to hold the festival at any but
the official date; even in the distant town of Durostorum we saw that the
Roman soldiers celebrated the Saturnalia in December. Thus if the
legionaries at Jerusalem really intended to mock Christ by treating him
like the burlesque king of the Saturnalia, they probably did so only by
way of a jest which was in more senses than one unseasonable.

(M319) But closely as the passion of Christ resembles the treatment of the
mock king of the Saturnalia, it resembles still more closely the treatment
of the mock king of the Sacaea.(922) The description of the mockery by St.
Matthew is the fullest. It runs thus: “Then released he Barabbas unto
them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.
Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and
gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers. And they stripped him, and
put on him a scarlet robe. And when they had platted a crown of thorns,
they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed
the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews! And
they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head. And
after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put
his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.”(923) Compare
with this the treatment of the mock king of the Sacaea, as it is described
by Dio Chrysostom: “They take one of the prisoners condemned to death and
seat him upon the king’s throne, and give him the king’s raiment, and let
him lord it and drink and run riot and use the king’s concubines during
these days, and no man prevents him from doing just what he likes. But
afterwards they strip and scourge and crucify him.”(924) Now it is quite
possible that this remarkable resemblance is after all a mere coincidence,
and that Christ was executed in the ordinary way as a common malefactor;
but on the other hand there are so many scattered hints and indications of
something unusual, so many broken lines seemingly converging towards the
cross on Calvary, that it is worth while to follow them up and see where
they lead us. In attempting to draw these fragmentary data together, to
bridge the chasms, and to restore the shattered whole, we must beware of
mistaking hypothesis for the facts which it only professes to cement; yet
even if our hypothesis should be thought to bear a somewhat undue
proportion to the facts, the excess may perhaps be overlooked in
consideration of the obscurity and the importance of the enquiry. (M320)
We have seen reason to think that the Jewish festival of Purim is a
continuation, under a changed name, of the Babylonian Sacaea, and that in
celebrating it by the destruction of an effigy of Haman the modern Jews
have kept up a reminiscence of the ancient custom of crucifying or hanging
a man in the character of a god at the festival. Is it not possible that
at an earlier time they may, like the Babylonians themselves, have
regularly compelled a condemned criminal to play the tragic part, and that
Christ thus perished in the character of Haman? The resemblance between
the hanged Haman and the crucified Christ struck the early Christians
themselves; and whenever the Jews destroyed an effigy of Haman they were
accused by their Christian neighbours of deriding the most sacred mystery
of the new faith.(925) It is probable that on this painful subject the
Christians were too sensitive; remembering the manner of their Founder’s
death it was natural that they should wince at any pointed allusion to a
cross, a gallows, or a public execution, even when the shaft was not aimed
at them. An objection to supposing that Christ died as the Haman of the
year is that according to the Gospel narrative the crucifixion occurred at
the Passover, on the fourteenth day of the month Nisan, whereas the feast
of Purim, at which the hanging of Haman would naturally take place, fell
exactly a month earlier, namely, on the fourteenth day of the month Adar.
I have no wish to blink or extenuate the serious nature of the difficulty
arising from this discrepancy of dates, but I would suggest some
considerations which may make us hesitate to decide that the discrepancy
is fatal. In the first place, it is possible, though perhaps not probable,
that Christian tradition shifted the date of the crucifixion by a month in
order to make the great sacrifice of the Lamb of God coincide with that
annual sacrifice of the Passover lamb which in the belief of pious hearts
had so long foreshadowed it and was thenceforth to cease.(926) Instances
of gentle pressure brought to bear, for purposes of edification, on
stubborn facts are perhaps not wholly unknown in the annals of religion.
But the express testimony of history is never to be lightly set aside; and
in the investigation of its problems a solution which assumes the veracity
and accuracy of the historian is, on an even balance of probabilities,
always to be preferred to one which impugns them both. Now in the present
case we have seen reason to think that the Babylonian New Year festival,
of which Purim was a continuation, did fall in Nisan at or near the time
of the Passover, and that when the Jews borrowed the festival they altered
the date from Nisan to Adar in order to prevent the new feast from
clashing with the old Passover. A reminiscence of the original date of
Purim perhaps survives, as I have already pointed out, in the statement in
the book of Esther that Haman caused _pur_ or lots to be cast before him
from the month of Nisan onward.(927) It thus seems not impossible that
occasionally, for some special reason, the Jews should have celebrated the
feast of Purim, or at least the death of Haman, at or about the time of
the Passover. But there is another possibility which, remote and fanciful
as it may appear, deserves at least to be mentioned. The mock king of the
Saturnalia, whose resemblance to the dying Christ was first pointed out by
Mr. Wendland, was allowed a period of license of thirty days before he was
put to death. If we could suppose that in like manner the Jews spared the
human representative of Haman for one month from Purim, the date of his
execution would fall exactly on the Passover. Which, if any, of these
conjectural solutions of the difficulty is the true one, I will not
undertake to say. I am fully conscious of the doubt and uncertainty that
hang round the whole subject; and if in this and what follows I throw out
some hints and suggestions, it is more in the hope of stimulating and
directing further enquiry than with any expectation of reaching definite
conclusions.

(M321) It may be objected that the mockery of Christ was done, not by the
Jews, but by the Roman soldiers, who knew and cared nothing about Haman;
how then can we suppose that the purple or scarlet robe, the sceptre of
reed, and the crown of thorns, which the soldiers thrust upon Christ, were
the regular insignia of the Haman of the year? To this we may reply, in
the first place, that even if the legions stationed in Syria were not
recruited in the country, they may have contracted some of the native
superstitions and have fallen in with the local customs. This is not an
idle conjecture. We know that the third legion during its stay in Syria
learned the Syrian custom of saluting the rising sun, and that this formal
salute, performed by the whole regiment as one man at a critical moment of
the great battle of Bedriacum, actually helped to turn the scale when the
fortune of empire hung trembling in the balance.(928) But it is not
necessary to suppose that the garrison of Jerusalem really shared the
beliefs and prejudices of the mob whom they overawed; soldiers everywhere
are ready to go with a crowd bent on sport, without asking any curious
questions as to the history or quality of the entertainment, and we should
probably do the humanity of Roman soldiers too much honour if we imagined
that they would be deterred by any qualm of conscience from joining in the
pastime, which is still so popular, of baiting a Jew to death. But in the
second place it should be observed that, according to one of the
Evangelists, it was not the soldiers of Pilate who mocked Jesus, but the
soldiers of Herod,(929) and we may fairly assume that Herod’s guards were
Jews.

(M322) The hypothesis that the crucifixion with all its cruel mockery was
not a punishment specially devised for Christ, but was merely the fate
that annually befell the malefactor who played Haman, appears to go some
way towards relieving the Gospel narrative of certain difficulties which
otherwise beset it. If, as we read in the Gospels, Pilate was really
anxious to save the innocent man whose fine bearing seems to have struck
him, what was to hinder him from doing so? He had the power of life and
death; why should he not have exercised it on the side of mercy, if his
own judgment inclined that way? His reluctant acquiescence in the
importunate demand of the rabble becomes easier to understand if we assume
that custom obliged him annually at this season to give up to them a
prisoner on whom they might play their cruel pranks. On this assumption
Pilate had no power to prevent the sacrifice; the most he could do was to
choose the victim.

Again, consider the remarkable statement of the Evangelists that Pilate
set up over the cross a superscription stating that the man who hung on it
was king of the Jews.(930) Is it likely that in the reign of Tiberius a
Roman governor, with the fear of the jealous and suspicious old emperor
before his eyes, would have ventured, even in mockery, to blazon forth a
seditious claim of this sort unless it were the regular formula employed
on such occasions, recognized by custom, and therefore not liable to be
misconstrued into treason by the malignity of informers and the fears of a
tyrant?

But if the tragedy of the ill-fated aspirant after royal honours was
annually enacted at Jerusalem by a prisoner who perished on the cross, it
becomes probable that the part of his successful rival was also played by
another actor who paraded in the same kingly trappings but did not share
the same fate. If Jesus was the Haman of the year, where was the Mordecai?
Perhaps we may find him in Barabbas.

(M323) We are told by the Evangelists that at the feast which witnessed
the crucifixion of Christ it was the custom for the Roman governor to
release one prisoner, whomsoever the people desired, and that Pilate,
convinced of the innocence of Jesus, attempted to persuade the multitude
to choose him as the man who should go free. But, hounded on by the
priests and elders who had marked out Jesus for destruction, the rabble
would not hear of this, and clamoured for the blood of Jesus, while they
demanded the release of a certain miscreant, by name Barabbas, who lay in
gaol for murder and sedition. Accordingly Pilate had to give way: Christ
was crucified and Barabbas set at liberty.(931) Now what, we may ask, was
the reason for setting free a prisoner at this festival? In the absence of
positive information, we may conjecture that the gaol-bird whose cage was
thrown open at this time had to purchase his freedom by performing some
service from which decent people would shrink. Such a service may very
well have been that of going about the streets, rigged out in tawdry
splendour with a tinsel crown on his head and a sham sceptre in his hand,
preceded and followed by all the tag-rag and bobtail of the town hooting,
jeering, and breaking coarse jests at his expense, while some pretended to
salaam his mock majesty, and others belaboured the donkey on which he
rode. It was in this fashion, probably, that in Persia the beardless and
one-eyed man made his undignified progress through the town, to the
delight of ragamuffins and the terror of shopkeepers, whose goods he
unceremoniously confiscated if they did not hasten to lay their
peace-offerings at his feet. So, perhaps, the ruffian Barabbas, when his
irons were knocked off and the prison door had grated on its hinges to let
him forth, tasted the first sweets of liberty in this public manner, even
if he was not suffered, like his one-eyed brother, to make raids with
impunity on the stalls of the merchants and the tables of the
money-changers. A curious confirmation of this conjecture is supplied by a
passage in the writings of Philo the Jew, who lived at Alexandria in the
time of Christ. He tells us that when Agrippa, the grandson of Herod, had
received the crown of Judaea from Caligula at Rome, the new king passed
through Alexandria on his way to his own country. The disorderly populace
of that great city, animated by a hearty dislike of his nation, seized the
opportunity of venting their spite by publicly defaming and ridiculing the
Jewish monarch. Among other things they laid hold of a certain harmless
lunatic named Carabas, who used to roam the streets stark naked, the butt
and laughing-stock of urchins and idlers. This poor wretch they set up in
a public place, clapped a paper crown on his head, thrust a broken reed
into his hand by way of a sceptre, and having huddled a mat instead of a
royal robe about his naked body, and surrounded him with a guard of
bludgeon-men, they did obeisance to him as to a king and made a show of
taking his opinion on questions of law and policy. To point the jest
unmistakably at the Syrian king Agrippa, the bystanders raised cries of
“Marin! Marin!” which they understood to be the Syrian word for
“lord.”(932) This mockery of the Jewish king closely resembles the mockery
of Christ; and the joke, such as it was, would receive a keener edge if we
could suppose that the riff-raff of Alexandria were familiar with the
Jewish practice of setting up a sham king on certain occasions, and that
they meant by implication to ridicule the real King Agrippa by comparing
him to his holiday counterfeit. May we go a step further and conjecture
that one at least of the titles of the mock king of the Jews was regularly
Barabbas? The poor imbecile who masqueraded in a paper crown at Alexandria
was probably a Jew, otherwise the jest would have lost much of its point;
and his name, according to the Greek manuscripts of Philo, was Carabas.
But Carabas is meaningless in Hebrew, whereas Barabbas is a regularly
formed Hebrew word meaning “Son of the Father.” The palaeographic
difference between the two forms is slight, and perhaps we shall hardly be
deemed very rash if we conjecture that in the passage in question Philo
himself wrote Barabbas, which a Greek copyist, ignorant of Hebrew,
afterwards corrupted into Carabas. If this were granted, we should still
have to assume that both Philo and the authors of the Gospels fell into
the mistake of treating as the name of an individual what in fact was a
title of office.

(M324) Thus the hypothesis which, with great diffidence, I would put
forward for consideration is this. It was customary, we may suppose, with
the Jews at Purim, or perhaps occasionally at Passover, to employ two
prisoners to act the parts respectively of Haman and Mordecai in the
passion-play which formed a central feature of the festival. Both men
paraded for a short time in the insignia of royalty, but their fates were
different; for while at the end of the performance the one who played
Haman was hanged or crucified, the one who personated Mordecai and bore in
popular parlance the title of Barabbas was allowed to go free. Pilate,
perceiving the trumpery nature of the charges brought against Jesus, tried
to persuade the Jews to let him play the part of Barabbas, which would
have saved his life; but the merciful attempt failed and Jesus perished on
the cross in the character of Haman. The description of his last triumphal
ride into Jerusalem reads almost like an echo of that brilliant progress
through the streets of Susa which Haman aspired to and Mordecai
accomplished; and the account of the raid which he immediately afterwards
made upon the stalls of the hucksters and money-changers in the temple,
may raise a question whether we have not here a trace of those arbitrary
rights over property which it has been customary on such occasions to
accord to the temporary king.(933)

(M325) If it be asked why one of these temporary kings should bear the
remarkable title of Barabbas or “Son of the Father,” I can only surmise
that the title may perhaps be a relic of the time when the real king, the
deified man, used to redeem his own life by deputing his son to reign for
a short time and to die in his stead. We have seen that the custom of
sacrificing the son for the father was common, if not universal, among
Semitic peoples; and if we are right in our interpretation of the
Passover, that festival—the traditional date of the crucifixion—was the
very season when the dreadful sacrifice of the first-born was
consummated.(934) Hence Barabbas or the “Son of the Father” would be a
natural enough title for the man or child who reigned and died as a
substitute for his royal sire. Even in later times, when the father
provided a less precious substitute than his own offspring, it would be
quite in accordance with the formal conservatism of religion that the old
title should be retained after it had ceased to be appropriate; indeed the
efficacy of the sacrifice might be thought to require and justify the
pious fiction that the substitute was the very son of that divine father
who should have died, but who preferred to live, for the good of his
people. If in the time of Christ, as I have conjectured, the title of
Barabbas or Son of the Father was bestowed on the Mordecai, the mock king
who lived, rather than on the Haman, the mock king who died at the
festival, this distinction can hardly have been original; for at first, we
may suppose, the same man served in both capacities at different times, as
the Mordecai of one year and the Haman of the next. The two characters, as
I have attempted to shew, are probably nothing but two different aspects
of the same deity considered at one time as dead and at another as risen;
hence the human being who personated the risen god would in due time,
after he had enjoyed his divine honours for a season, act the dead god by
dying in good earnest in his own person; for it would be unreasonable to
expect of the ordinary man-god that he should play the two parts in the
reverse order by dying first and coming to life afterwards. In both parts
the substitute would still be, whether in sober fact or in pious fiction,
the Barabbas or Son of that divine Father who generously gave his own son
to die for the world.(935)

(M326) To conclude this speculation, into which I have perhaps been led by
the interest and importance of the subject somewhat deeper than the
evidence warrants, I venture to urge in its favour that it seems to shed
fresh light on some of the causes which contributed to the remarkably
rapid diffusion of Christianity in Asia Minor. We know from a famous
letter of the younger Pliny addressed to the Emperor Trajan in the year
112 A.D. that by the beginning of our era, less than a hundred years after
the Founder’s death, Christianity had made such strides in Bithynia and
Pontus that not only cities but villages and rural districts were affected
by it, and that multitudes of both sexes and of every age and every rank
professed its tenets; indeed things had gone so far that the temples were
almost deserted, the sacred rites of the public religion discontinued, and
hardly a purchaser could be found for the sacrificial victims.(936) It is
obvious, therefore, that the new faith had elements in it which appealed
powerfully to the Asiatic mind. What these elements were, the present
investigation has perhaps to some extent disclosed. We have seen that the
conception of the dying and risen god was no new one in these regions. All
over Western Asia from time immemorial the mournful death and happy
resurrection of a divine being appear to have been annually celebrated
with alternate rites of bitter lamentation and exultant joy; and through
the veil which mythic fancy has woven round this tragic figure we can
still detect the features of those great yearly changes in earth and sky
which, under all distinctions of race and religion, must always touch the
natural human heart with alternate emotions of gladness and regret,
because they exhibit on the vastest scale open to our observation the
mysterious struggle between life and death. But man has not always been
willing to watch passively this momentous conflict; he has felt that he
has too great a stake in its issue to stand by with folded hands while it
is being fought out; he has taken sides against the forces of death and
decay—has flung into the trembling scale all the weight of his puny
person, and has exulted in his fancied strength when the great balance has
slowly inclined towards the side of life, little knowing that for all his
strenuous efforts he can as little stir that balance by a hair’s-breadth
as can the primrose on a mossy bank in spring or the dead leaf blown by
the chilly breath of autumn. Nowhere do these efforts, vain and pitiful,
yet pathetic, appear to have been made more persistently and
systematically than in Western Asia. In name they varied from place to
place, but in substance they were all alike. A man, whom the fond
imagination of his worshippers invested with the attributes of a god, gave
his life for the life of the world; after infusing from his own body a
fresh current of vital energy into the stagnant veins of nature, he was
cut off from among the living before his failing strength should initiate
a universal decay, and his place was taken by another who played, like all
his predecessors, the ever-recurring drama of the divine resurrection and
death. Such a drama, if our interpretation of it is right, was the
original story of Esther and Mordecai or, to give them their older names,
of Ishtar and Marduk. It was played in Babylonia, and from Babylonia the
returning captives brought it to Judaea, where it was acted, rather as an
historical than a mythical piece, by players who, having to die in grim
earnest on a cross or gallows, were naturally drawn rather from the gaol
than the green-room. A chain of causes which, because we cannot follow
them, might in the loose language of daily life be called an accident,
determined that the part of the dying god in this annual play should be
thrust upon Jesus of Nazareth, whom the enemies he had made in high places
by his outspoken strictures were resolved to put out of the way. They
succeeded in ridding themselves of the popular and troublesome preacher;
but the very step by which they fancied they had simultaneously stamped
out his revolutionary doctrines contributed more than anything else they
could have done to scatter them broadcast not only over Judaea but over
Asia; for it impressed upon what had been hitherto mainly an ethical
mission the character of a divine revelation culminating in the passion
and death of the incarnate Son of a heavenly Father. In this form the
story of the life and death of Jesus exerted an influence which it could
never have had if the great teacher had died, as is commonly supposed, the
death of a vulgar malefactor. It shed round the cross on Calvary a halo of
divinity which multitudes saw and worshipped afar off; the blow struck on
Golgotha set a thousand expectant strings vibrating in unison wherever men
had heard the old, old story of the dying and risen god. Every year, as
another spring bloomed and another autumn faded across the earth, the
field had been ploughed and sown and borne fruit of a kind till it
received that seed which was destined to spring up and overshadow the
world. In the great army of martyrs who in many ages and in many lands,
not in Asia only, have died a cruel death in the character of gods, the
devout Christian will doubtless discern types and forerunners of the
coming Saviour—stars that heralded in the morning sky the advent of the
Sun of Righteousness—earthen vessels wherein it pleased the divine wisdom
to set before hungering souls the bread of heaven. The sceptic, on the
other hand, with equal confidence, will reduce Jesus of Nazareth to the
level of a multitude of other victims of a barbarous superstition, and
will see in him no more than a moral teacher, whom the fortunate accident
of his execution invested with the crown, not merely of a martyr, but of a
god. The divergence between these views is wide and deep. Which of them is
the truer and will in the end prevail? Time will decide the question of
prevalence, if not of truth. Yet we would fain believe that in this and in
all things the old maxim will hold good—_Magna est veritas et
praevalebit._





INDEX.


Abbot of Folly in France, 334

—— of Unreason in Scotland, 331

Abdera, human scapegoats at, 254

Abeghian, Manuk, quoted, 107 _sq._

Abjuration, form of, imposed on Jewish converts, 393

Abonsam, an evil spirit on the Gold Coast, 132

Abrahams, Israel, 393 _n._ 2

Abruzzi, Epiphany in the, 167 _n._ 2

Absalom, his intercourse with his father’s concubines, 368

Absrot, village of Bohemia, 161

Abstinence as a charm to promote the growth of the seed, 347 _sqq._

Abyssinian festival of Mascal or the Cross, 133 _sq._

Accusations of ritual murders brought against the Jews, 394 _sqq._

Acilisena, in Armenia, the worship of Anaitis at, 369 _n._ 1

Acosta, J. de, quoted, 275 _sq._, 277

Adaklu, Mount, in West Africa, 135 _sq._, 206 _sq._

Adam and Eve, 259 _n._ 3

Adar, a Jewish month, 361, 394, 397, 398, 415

Adonis at Alexandria, 390;
  annual death and resurrection of, 398;
  his marriage with Ishtar (Aphrodite), 401.
  _See also_ Tammuz

—— and Aphrodite, 386

Aegisthus and Agamemnon, 19

Aesculapius at Epidaurus, 47

Africa, Northern, cairns in, 21;
  popular cure for toothache in, 62;
  South, dread of demons in, 77 _sq._;
  tribes of, their expulsion of demons, 110 _sq._;
  West, demons in, 74 _sqq._

Agamemnon and Aegisthus, 19

Agathias on Sandes, 389

Agni, creation of the great god, 410

_Agnus castus_, used in ceremony of beating, 252, 257

Agricultural year, expulsions of demons timed to coincide with seasons of
            the, 225

Agrippa, King of Judaea, his mockery at Alexandria, 418

Ague, popular cures for, 56, 57 _sq._;
  Suffolk cure for, 68

Ahasuerus, King, 397, 401;
  the Hebrew equivalent of Xerxes, 360

Ait Sadden, the, of Morocco, 182

—— Warain, a Berber tribe, 178

Aitan, a goddess, 173

Akamba, the, of British East Africa, riddles among the, 122 _n._

Akikuyu of East Africa, 32

Alaska, the Esquimaux of, 124

Albania, expulsion of Kore on Easter Eve in, 157

Albanian custom of beating men and beasts in March, 266

Albanians of the Caucasus, their use of human scapegoats, 218

Albîrûnî, Arab historian, 393

Alençon, the Boy Bishop at, 337 _n._ 1

Aleutian Islands, 3, 16

Alexandria, Adonis at, 390;
  mockery of King Agrippa at, 418

Alexandrian calendar, 395 _n._ 1

Alfoors of Central Celebes, riddles among the, 122 _n._

—— of Halmahera, their expulsion of the devil, 112

Algeria, 31;
  popular cure in, 60

All Souls’ College, Oxford, the Boy Bishop at, 337

_Allallu_ bird beloved by Ishtar, 371

Allhallow Even, 332

Almora, in Kumaon, 197

Altars, bloodless, 307

Ambarvalia, the, 359

Amboyna, belief in spirits in, 85;
  disease-transference in, 187

Ameretât, a Persian archangel, 373 _n._ 1

America, Indian tribes of North-Western, their masked dances, 375 _sqq._

Amoor, Gilyaks of the, 101

Amshaspands, Persian archangels, 373 _n._ 1

Amulets against demons, 95

Anacan, a month of the Gallic calendar, 343

Anadates, at Zela, 373 _n._ 1

Anaitis, a Persian goddess, 355, 368, 369, 370, 389, 402 _n._ 1, 421 _n._
            1

Ancestral spirits, propitiation of, 86

Ancona, sarcophagus of St. Dasius at, 310

Andalusia, 173

Anderson, J. D., 176 _n._ 3

Anderson, Miss, of Barskimming, 169 _n._ 2

Andree-Eysn, Mrs., quoted, 245 _sq._

Animals, transference of evil to, 31 _sqq._;
  as scapegoats, 31 _sqq._, 190 _sqq._, 208 _sqq._, 216 _sq._;
  guardian spirits of, 98;
  prayed to, 236;
  dances taught by, 237;
  imitated in dances, 376, 377, 381, 382

_Aninga_, aquatic plant in Brazil, 264

Annam, 33;
  demon of cholera sent away on a raft from, 190;
  explanation of human mortality in, 303

Anthesteria, Athenian festival of the dead, 152 _sq._

Anthesterion, an Athenian month, 352

Antibes, Holy Innocents’ Day at, 336 _sq._

Antinmas, 167

Antiquity, human scapegoats in classical, 229 _sqq._

Antoninus, Marcus, plague in his reign, 64

Ants, jealousy transferred to, 33;
  stinging people with, 263

Anu, Babylonian god, visit of Ishtar to, 399 _n._ 1

_Apachitas_, heaps of stones, 9

Aphrodite and Adonis, 386

Aphrodite, the Oriental, 369 _n._ 1

Apis, sacred Egyptian bull, 217

Apollo, temple of, at the Lover’s Leap, 254

—— and Artemis, cake with twelve knobs offered to, 351 _n._ 3

April, Siamese festival of the dead in, 150

Arab cure for melancholy, 4

Arabia, 33

Arabs, their custom as to widows, 35;
  their custom in regard to murder, 63;
  beat camels to deliver them from jinn, 260;
  of Morocco, their custom at the Great Feast, 265

Aracan, 12 _n._ 1, 117;
  dances for the crops in, 236

Araucanians, the, of South America, 12

Arawaks of British Guiana, their explanation of human mortality, 302 _sq._

Arcadian custom of beating Pan’s image, 256

Arch to shut out plague, 5;
  creeping through, as a cure, 55

Arches made over paths at expulsion of demons, 113, 120 _sq._

Arctic regions, ceremonies at the reappearance of the sun in the, 124
            _sq._, 125 _n._ 1

Ardennes, the King of the Bean in the, 314;
  the Eve of Epiphany in the, 317

Argentina, 9

Argus, the murder of, 24

Aricia, 305;
  the priest of, 273;
  King of the Wood at, 409

Arician grove, the, 274, 305

—— priesthood, 305

Aries, the constellation, the sun in, 361 _n._ 1, 403

Armenia, the worship of Anaitis in, 369 _n._ 1

Armenians, their belief in demons, 107 _sq._

Arrows, invisible, of demons, 101, 126

Artaxerxes II., his promotion of the worship of Anaitis, 370

_Artemisia laciniata_, garlands of, 284

Aru Archipelago, 121 _n._ 3

Arval Brothers, the college of the, at Rome, 230, 232, 238

Aryan custom of counting by nights instead of days, 326 _n._ 2

—— languages, names for moon and month in, 325

—— peoples, their correction of the lunar year, 342

Aryans of the Vedic age, 324;
  their calendar, 325, 342

Ascalon, Derceto at, 370 _n._ 1

Ascension Day, cures on Eve of, 54;
  annual expulsion of the devil on, 214 _sq._;
  ceremony at Rouen on, 215 _sq._;
  bells rung to make flax grow on, 247 _sq._

Ash-tree in popular cure, 57

Ashantee, annual period of license in, 226 _n._ 1

Ashtaroth, 366

Ashurbanapal and Sardanapalus, 387 _sq._

Asia, Saturnalia in Western, 354 _sqq._

Asia Minor, use of human scapegoats by the Greeks of, 255

Asongtata, an annual ceremony, 208

Aspen in popular cure, 57

Ass in cure for scorpion’s bite, 49 _sq._;
  introduced into church at Festival of Fools, 335 _sq._;
  triumphal ride of a buffoon on an, 402 _sq._

Assam, the Kacharis of, 93;
  the Lushais of, 94;
  the Khasis of, 173;
  the Nagas of, 177;
  the Garos of, 208 _sq._

Assembly of the gods at the New Year in Babylon, 356

Assimilation of human victims to trees, 257, 259 _n._ 3

Assyria, Ashurbanapal, king of, 387 _sq._

Assyrian monarchs, conquerors of Babylonia, 356

Assyrians, the ancient, their belief in demons, 102

Astarte or Ishtar, a great Babylonian goddess, 365.
  _See also_ Ishtar

—— and Semiramis, 369 _sqq._

Aston, W. G., quoted, 213 _n._ 1

Aswang, an evil spirit, exorcism of, 260

Athenians, their use of human scapegoats, 253 _sq._;
  their mode of reckoning a day, 326 _n._ 2;
  their religious dramas, 384

Athens, Cronus and the Cronia at, 351 _sq._

Atkhans, the, of Aleutian Islands, 3

Atlas, Berbers of the Great, 178

Atlatatonan, Mexican goddess of lepers, 292;
  woman annually sacrificed in the character of, 292

Atonement, the Jewish Day of, 210

Attis and Cybele, 386

Aubrey, John, on sin-eating, 43 _sq._

Aucas, the, of South America, 12

Australia, Central, 2

——, demons in, 74;
  annual expulsion of ghosts in, 123 _sq._

Austria, cure of warts in, 48

Autumn, ceremony of the Esquimaux in late, 125

Autun, the Festival of Fools at, 335

Avestad in Sweden, 20

Axim, on the Gold Coast, 131

Aymara Indians, their remedy for plague, 193

Azazel, 210 _n._ 4

Aztecs, their custom of sacrificing human representatives of gods, 275;
  their five supplementary days, 339

Azur, the month of March, 403

Baal, human sacrifices to, 353, 354

_Babalawo_, priest, 212

Babar Archipelago, 8;
  sickness expelled in a boat from the, 187

Baboons sent by evil spirits, 110 _sq._

Baby, effigy of, used to fertilize women, 245, 249

Babylon, festival of the Sacaea at, 354 _sqq._

Babylonia, belief in demons in ancient, 102 _sq._;
  conquered by Assyria, 356;
  the feast of Purim in, 393

Babylonian calendar, 398 _n._ 2

Bacchanalia, Purim a Jewish, 363

Badagas, the, of the Neilgherry Hills, 36

Badi, performer at a ceremony, 197

Baffin Land, the Esquimaux of, 125

Baganda, the, of Central Africa, 4, 7, 17 _sq._, 27, 32;
  human scapegoats among the, 42

Bahima, the, of the Uganda Protectorate, 6, 32

Baiga, aboriginal priest, 27

Bali, belief in demons in, 86;
  periodical expulsion of demons in, 140

Ball, games of, played as a magical ceremony, 179 _sq._;
  in Normandy, 183 _sq._

_Balolo_, a sea-slug, 141

Bamboo-rat sacrificed for riddance of evils, 208 _sq._

Bananas, mode of fertilizing, 264;
  the cause of human mortality, 303

Bangkok, 150

Banishment of evil spirits, 86

Banks’ Islands, 9

Banks’ Islanders, their story of the origin of death, 304

Banmanas of Senegambia, their custom at the death of an infant, 261 _sq._

Banquets in honour of the spirits of disease, 119

Bantu tribes, 77

Banyoro, the, 42, 194

Barabbas and Christ, 417 _sqq._

_Baraka_, blessed influence, 265

Barat, a ceremony performed in Kumaon, 196

Barito, river in Borneo, 87

Baron, S., quoted, 148

Barwan, river, 123

Bassa tribe, of the Cameroons, 120

Bassus, Roman officer, 309

Basutos, the, 30 _n._ 2

Batchelor, Rev. J., 261

Baton of Sinope, 350

Battas or Bataks of Sumatra, 34;
  their belief in demons, 87 _sq._;
  their use of human scapegoats, 213

Battle, annual, among boys in Tumleo, 143

Bavaria, mode of reckoning the Twelve Days in, 327

——, Rhenish, 56

Bavarian cure for fever, 49

Bawenda, the, 30 _n._ 2

Bean, the King of the, 313 _sqq._;
  the Queen of the, 313, 315

—— clan, the, 27

Beans thrown about the house at the expulsion of demons, 143 _sq._;
  thrown about the house at the expulsion of ghosts, 155

“Beardless One, the Ride of the,” 402 _sq._

Beating as a mode of purification, 262

—— human scapegoats, 196, 252, 255, 256 _sq._, 272 _sq._

—— people as a mode of conveying good qualities, 262 _sqq._;
  with skins of sacrificial victims, 265;
  with green boughs, 270 _sqq._

—— persons, animals, or things to deliver them from demons and ghosts, 259
            _sqq._

Beating the air to drive away demons or ghosts, 109, 111, 115, 122, 131,
            152, 156, 234

Beauce and Perche, in France, 57, 62

Beauvais, the Festival of Fools at, 335 _sq._

Bechuana king, cure of, 31 _sq._

Bedriacum, the battle of, 416

Befana at Rome and elsewhere, 167

Behar, 37 _n._ 4

Bekes, in Hungary, mode of fertilizing women in, 264

Bel, a Babylonian deity, 389

Belethus, J., 270 _n._

Belgium, the King of the Bean in, 313

Bella Coola Indians of N. W. America, their masked dances, 376 _n._ 2

Bells on animal used as scapegoat, 37;
  rung to expel demons, 117;
  rung as a protection against witches, 157, 158, 159, 161, 165, 166;
  used in the expulsion of evils, 196, 200;
  used at the expulsion of demons, 214, 246 _sq._, 251;
  worn by dancers, 242, 243, 246 _sqq._, 250 _sq._;
  rung to make grass and flax grow, 247 _sq._;
  golden, worn by human representatives of gods in Mexico, 278, 280, 284

Benin, time of the “grand devils” in, 131 _sq._

Bergell in the Grisons, 247

Berkhampstead, cure for ague in, 57 _sq._

Berosus, Babylonian historian, 355, 358, 359

Besisi of the Malay Peninsula, their carnival at rice-harvest, 226 _n._ 1

Bethlehem, the star of, 330

Bevan, Professor A. A., 367 _n._ 2

Beverley minster, the Boy Bishop at, 337

Bhars of India, 190

Bhootan, cairns in, 26

Bhotiyas of Juhar, their use of a scapegoat, 209

Biajas of Borneo, their expulsion of evils, 200

Biggar, “Burning out the Old Year” at, 165

Bikol, in Luzon, 260

Bilaspur, 44

Bilda in Algeria, 60

Birch, sprigs of, a protection against witches, 162;
  used to beat people with at Easter and Christmas, 269, 270

—— -trees in popular cure for gout, 56 _sq._

Bird-chief of the Sea Dyaks, 383, 384

Birds as scapegoats, 35 _sq._, 51 _sq._

Bishop, the Boy, on Holy Innocents’ Day, 336 _sqq._

—— of Innocents, 333

Bishop, Mrs., quoted, 99 _sq._

Bismarck Archipelago, the Melanesians of the, their belief in demons, 83

Bithynia and Pontus, rapid spread of Christianity in, 420 _sq._

Biyars of N. W. India, 230 _n._ 7

Black animals as scapegoats, 190, 192, 193

—— god and white god among the Slavs, 92

Black and white in relation to human scapegoats, 220, 253, 257, 272

—— Mountains in S. France, 166

Blankenheim in the Eifel, the King of the Bean at, 313

Blood, fatigue let out with, 12;
  of children used to knead a paste, 129;
  of pigs used in purificatory rites, 262;
  drawn from ears as penance, 292

Bloodless altars, 307

Blows to drive away ghosts, 260 _sqq._

Boars, evil spirits transferred to, 31

Boas, Franz, quoted, 375 _sq._

Bocage of Normandy, games of ball in the, 183 _sq._;
  mode of forecasting the weather in, 323;
  Eve of Twelfth Night in the, 316 _sq._

Bock, C., quoted, 97

Bogle, George, envoy to Tibet, 203

Bohemia, “Easter Smacks” in, 268, 269;
  the Three Kings of Twelfth Day in, 330

——, the Germans of Western, their custom at Christmas, 270;
  Twelfth Day among, 331

Bohemian cures for fever, 49, 51, 55 _sq._, 58, 59, 63;
  remedy for jaundice, 52

Böhmerwald Mountains, 159

Bolang Mongondo in Celebes, 85 _sq._, 121 _n._ 3

Bolbe in Macedonia, lake of, 142 _n._ 1

Bolivia, 9;
  Indians of, 26, 193

Boloki, the, of the Upper Congo, their fear of demons, 76 _sq._

Bonfires, leaping over, 156;
  on the Eve of Twelfth Day, 316 _sqq._

_Book of the Dead_, the Egyptian, 103

Borneo, the Dyaks of, 14, 383;
  belief in demons in, 87;
  the Kayans of, 154 _n._, 236, 382 _sq._;
  sickness expelled in a ship from, 187;
  the Biajas and Dusuns of, 200

Bourlet, A., quoted, 97 _sqq._

Boy Bishop on Holy Innocents’ Day, 336 _sqq._

Brahmanism, vestiges of, under Mohammedanism, 90 _n._ 1

Brahmans, sacrificial custom of the, 25;
  as human scapegoats, 42 _sq._, 44 _sq._;
  their theory of sacrifice, 410 _sq._

Branches, fatigue transferred to, 8;
  sickness transferred to, 186

Brandenburg, Mark of, cure for headache and giddiness in, 52, 53;
  cure for toothache in, 60

Bras Basah, a village on the Perak river, 199

Brass instrument sounded to frighten away demons, 147

Brazil, Indians of North-Western, 236;
  custom of, 264;
  their masked dances, 381

Breadalbane, use of a scapegoat in, 209

“Brethren of the Ploughed Fields,” 232

Bride, the last, privilege of, 183

Brittany, custom of sticking pins into a saint’s image in, 70;
  riddles in, 121 _sq._, _n._;
  forecasting the weather in, 323 _sq._

Brooms used to sweep misfortune out of house, 5

Broomsticks, witches ride on, 162

Brown, Dr. George, quoted, 142 _n._ 1

Bruguière, Mgr., quoted, 97, 150 _sq._

Brunnen, Twelfth Night at, 165

Buchanan, Francis, quoted, 175 _sq._

Buckthorn chewed to keep off ghosts, 153;
  as a charm against witchcraft, 153 _n._ 1, 163;
  used to beat cattle, 266

Buddha, transmigrations of, 41;
  in relation to spirits, 97;
  offerings to, 150

Buddhism in Burma, 95 _sq._;
  the pope of, 223

Buddhist Lent, the, 349 _sq._

—— monk, ceremony at the funeral of a, 175

—— priests expel demons, 116

Buddhists of Ceylon, 90 _n._ 1;
  nominal, 97

Budge, E. A. Wallis, quoted, 103 _sq._

Buffalo calf, sins of dead transferred to a, 36 _sq._

—— dance to ensure a supply of buffaloes, 171

Buffaloes as scapegoats, 190, 191

Buffooneries at the Festival of Fools, 335 _sq._

Bukaua, the, of German New Guinea, their belief in demons, 83 _sq._

Bulgarian cure for fever, 55

Bulgarians, their way of keeping off ghosts, 153 _n._ 1

Bulls as scapegoats in ancient Egypt, 216 _sq._

Bunyoro, in Central Africa, 195

Burial of infants, 45

Burkitt, Professor F. C., 420 _n._ 1

Burlesques of ecclesiastical ritual, 336 _sq._

Burma, belief in demons in, 95 _sq._;
  expulsion of demons in, 116 _sq._;
  the tug-of-war in, 175 _sq._

Burmese Lent, 349 _sq._

“Burning the Old Year,” 230 _n._ 7;
  at Biggar, 165

—— of Sandan and Hercules, 388 _sqq._

—— witches alive, 19, 319;
  on May Day in the Tyrol, 158 _sq._;
  on Walpurgis Night in Bohemia;
  161, in Silesia and Saxony, 163

Buru, demons of sickness expelled in a proa from, 186

Burying the evil spirit, 110

Bushes, ailments transferred to, 54, 56

Bushmen, the, 16, 30

Butterflies, annual expulsion of, 159 _n._ 1

Butterfly dance, 381

Caffres of South Africa, 11, 30, 31

Cairns to which every passer-by adds a stone, 9 _sqq._;
  near shrines of saints, 21;
  offerings at, 26 _sqq._
  _See also_ Heaps

Cairo, cure for toothache and headache at, 63

Cake on Twelfth Night used to determine the King, 313 _sqq._;
  put on horn of ox, 318 _sq._;
  offered to Cronus, 351

Cakes, special, at New Year, 149 _sq._;
  with twelve knobs offered to gods, 351 _n._ 3

Calabar, Old, biennial expulsion of demons at, 203 _sq._

—— River, 28

Calabria, annual expulsion of witches in, 157

Calendar of the Mayas of Yucatan, 171;
  of the primitive Aryans, 325;
  of the Celts of Gaul, 342 _sqq._;
  the Coligny, 342 _sqq._;
  the Alexandrian, 395 _n._ 1;
  the Babylonian, 398 _n._ 2

Calicut, ceremonies at sowing in, 235

California, the Pomos of, 170 _sq._

Cambodia, annual expulsion of demons in, 149;
  palace of the Kings of Cambodia purged of devils, 172

Cambridge, Lord of Misrule at, 330

Camel, plague transferred to, 33

Camels infested by jinn, 260

Cameroons, the, of West Africa, 120

Candlemas, dances at, 238

—— Day, 332, 333

Candles, twelve, on Twelfth Night, 321 _sq._;
  burnt at the Feast of Purim, 394

Cannibal banquets, 279 _n._ 1, 283, 298

Canton, the province of, 144

Caprification, the artificial fertilization of fig-trees, 257

_Caprificus_, the wild fig-tree, 258

Car Nicobar, annual expulsion of devils in, 201 _sq._

Carabas and Barabbas, 418 _sq._

Carmona in Andalusia, 173

Carnival, bell-ringing processions at the, 247;
  Senseless Thursday in, 248;
  in relation to the Saturnalia, 312, 345 _sqq._

—— and Purim, 394

“Carrying out Death,” 227 _sq._, 230, 252

Casablanca in Morocco, 21

Caspar, Melchior, and Balthasar, the Three Kings of Twelfth Day, 329
            _sqq._

Castilian peasants, their dances in May, 280

Casting the skin supposed to be a mode of renewing youth, 302 _sqq._

Cattle exposed to attacks of witches, 162;
  beaten to do them good, 266 _sq._

Caucasus, the Albanians of the, 218

Caunians of Asia Minor, their expulsion of foreign gods, 116

Cecrops, first king of Attica, 351

Cedar-bark ornaments worn in dances, 376

Celebes, Bolang Mongondo in, 85, 121;
  Minahassa in, 111 _sq._

——, Central, 34, 122 _n._, 265

Celts, their mode of forecasting the weather of the year, 323 _sq._;
  of Gaul, their calendar, 342 _sqq._

Ceram, sicknesses expelled in a ship from, 185

Ceylon, fear of demons in, 94 _sq._

Chaeronea, the “expulsion of hunger” at, 252

Chain used to expel demons, 260

Chains clanked as a protection against witches, 163;
  clanked in masquerade, 244

Chaldeans, magic of, 64

Chalking up crosses as a protection against witches, 162 _sq._

Chamar caste, 196

Chamba in India, 45

Chambers, E. K., quoted, 336 _n._ 1

Chameleon, ceremony at killing a, 28

Chariots, epidemics sent away in toy, 193 _sq._

Cheremiss of Russia, their expulsion of Satan, 156

Cherokee Indians, annual expulsion of evils among the, 128

Cheshire, cure for thrush in, 50;
  cure for warts in, 57

Chickens as scapegoats, 190

Chicomecohuatl, Mexican goddess of maize, 286 _n._ 1, 291, 292;
  girl annually sacrificed in the character of, 292 _sqq._

Childermas (Holy Innocents’ Day), 336

Children personating spirits, 139

China, the Miotse of, 4;
  belief in demons in, 98;
  men possessed by spirits in, 117;
  the Mossos of, 139;
  the Shans of Southern, 141;
  annual expulsion of demons in, 145 _sqq._

——, aboriginal tribes of, their use of a human scapegoat, 196;
  their annual destruction of evils, 202

Chinese festival of new fire, 359

Chins of Burma, their way of keeping off cholera, 123

_Chirouba_, festival in Manapur, 40

Chirus of Assam, 177 _n._ 3

Chitral, devil-driving in, 137

Chittagong, 63 _n._ 4

—— Hill Tracts, the Chukmas of the, 174

Choerilus, historian, 388 _n._ 1

Cholera sent away in animal scapegoats, 190, 191 _sq._

——, demon of, 172;
  expelled, 116, 117;
  sent away on a raft, 190

——, goddess of, 194

Cholula, a city of Mexico, 281

Chota Nagpur in India, 19;
  annual expulsion of disease in, 139

Christ, the crucifixion of, 412 _sqq._

Christian festivals, the great, timed by the Church to coincide with old
            pagan festivals, 328

Christianity, Latin, its tolerance of rustic paganism, 346

Christmas, custom of young men and women beating each other at, 270;
  an old midwinter festival of the sun-god, 328

—— Day, Mexican festival on, 287;
  Old (Twelfth Night), 321

—— Eve, witches active on, 160

Chukmas, the tug-of-war among the, 174

Church bells a protection against witchcraft, 157, 158

Churn-dashers ridden by witches, 160

Chwolsohn, D., on the worship of Haman, 366 _n._ 1

Ciallos, intercalary month of Gallic calendar, 343

Cilicia, Tarsus in, 388, 389, 391

Cingalese, the tug-of-war among the, 181;
  devil-dancers, 38

Cinteotl or Centeotl, Mexican goddess of maize, 286 _n._ 1, 290

Circumcision Day, 334

Clangour of metal used to dispel demons, 233

Clanking chains as a protection against witches, 163

Clark, J. V. H., 209

Clarke, E. D., quoted, 20 _sq._

Clashing of metal instruments a protection against witchcraft, 158;
  used to dispel demons, 233

Clavigero, historian of Mexico, 286 _n._ 1

Clippings of nails in popular cures, 57, 58

Clowns in processions, 244 _sq._

Cochinchina, mode of disposing of ghosts in, 62

Cock, disease transferred to a white, 187;
  white, as scapegoat, 210 _n._ 4

Cocks as scapegoats, 191 _sq._

Coligny calendar of Gaul, 342 _sqq._

Columella on caprification, 258

Comana, sacred harlots at, 370 _n._ 1;
  worship of Ma at, 421 _n._ 1

Comitium, dances of the Salii in the, 232

Communion by means of stones, 21 _sq._

Concubines of a king taken by his successor, 368

Condé in Normandy, 183

Confession of sins, 31, 36, 127

Conflicts, annual, at the New Year, old intention of, 184

Congrégation de Notre Dame at Paris, 337

Consumption, cure for, 51

Cook, A. B., 246 _n._ 2

Cook, Captain James, 80

Cootchie, a demon, 110

Cora Indians of Mexico, their dance at sowing, 238;
  their dramatic dances, 381

Coran, the, 62

Corea, 11, 27;
  traps for demons in, 61 _sq._;
  belief in demons in, 99 _sq._;
  spirit of disease expelled in, 119;
  annual expulsion of demons in, 147;
  the tug-of-war in, 177 _sq._

Coreans, their annual ceremonies for the riddance of evils, 202 _sq._

Corn festivals of the Cora Indians, 381

—— -ears, wreath of, as badge of priestly office, 232

—— -sieve beaten at ceremony, 145

Cornel-tree in popular remedy, 55

Cornouaille in Brittany, 323

“Corpse-praying priest,” 45

Corpses devoured by members of Secret Societies, 377

Cos, custom of Greek peasants in, 266

Cosmogonies, primitive, perhaps influenced by human sacrifices, 409 _sqq._

Cosquin, E., on the book of Esther, 367 _n._ 3

Coughs transferred to animals, 51, 52

Couppé, Mgr., quoted, 82

Crabs change their skin, 303

Crackers ignited to expel demons, 117, 146 _sq._

Creation of the world, legends of, influenced by human sacrifices, 409
            _sqq._

Creator beheaded, 410;
  sacrifices himself daily to create the world afresh, 411

Creeping through an arch as a cure, 55

Cretan festival of Hermes, 350

Crimes, sticks or stones piled on the scene of, 13 _sqq._

Criminals sacrificed, 354, 396 _sq._, 408

Croatia, Good Friday custom in, 268

Croesus on the pyre, 391

Cronia, a Greek festival resembling the Saturnalia, 351;
  at Olympia, 352 _sq._

Cronion, a Greek month, 351 _n._ 2

Cronus and the Cronia, 351 _sq._;
  and the Golden Age, 353;
  and human sacrifice, 353 _sq._, 397

Cross-roads, 6, 7, 10, 24;
  offerings at, 140;
  ceremonies at, 144, 159, 161, 196;
  witches at, 162

Crosses painted with tar as charms against ghosts and vampyres, 153 _n._
            1;
  chalked on doors as protection against witchcraft, 160, 162 _sq._;
  white, made by the King of the Bean, 314

Crow as scapegoat, 193

Crucifixion of Christ, 412 _sqq._

Cumont, Franz, 309, 393 _n._ 1

Cuzco, its scenery, 128 _sq._

Cybele and Attis, 386

Cyrus and Croesus, 391

Dahomey, Porto Novo in, 205

Dalton, E. T., quoted, 92 _sq._

Dance at cairns, 29;
  the buffalo dance to ensure a supply of buffaloes, 171;
  to cause the grass to grow, 238

Dancers personate spirits, 375

Dances of the witches, 162;
  of the Salii, 232;
  to promote the growth of the crops, 232 _sqq._, 347;
  at sowing, 234 _sqq._;
  taught by animals, 237;
  for rain, 236 _sq._, 238;
  solemn Mexican, 280, 284, 286, 287, 288, 289;
  of Castilian peasants in May, 280;
  of salt-makers in Mexico, 284;
  to make hemp grow tall, 315;
  as dramatic performances of myths, 375 _sqq._;
  bestowed on men by spirits, 375;
  in imitation of animals, 376, 377, 381, 382

Dances, masked, to promote fertility, 236;
  of savages, 374 _sqq._;
  to ensure good crops, 382

Dancing to obtain the favour of the gods, 236

Dandaki, King, 41

“Dark” moon and “light” moon, 140, 141 _n._ 1

Darwin, Sir Francis, 153 _n._ 1

Dasius, martyrdom of St., 308 _sqq._

Dassera festival in Nepaul, 226 _n._ 1

Date palm, artificial fertilization of the, 272 _sq._

Davies, T. Witton, 360 _n._ 2

Dead, disembodied souls of the, dreaded, 77;
  worship of the, 97;
  ghosts of the, periodically expelled, 123 _sq._;
  souls of the, received by their relations once a year, 150 _sqq._

——, spirits of the, in the Philippine Islands, 82;
  in Timor, 85

Death, the funeral of, 205;
  the ceremony of carrying out, 227 _sq._, 230, 252;
  savage tales of the origin of, 302 _sqq._

Debang monastery at Lhasa, 218

December, annual expulsion of demons in, 145;
  custom of the heathen of Harran in, 263 _sq._;
  the Saturnalia held in, 306, 307, 345

Decle, L., 11 _n._ 1

De Goeje, M. J., 24 _n._ 1

Deified men, sacrifices of, 409

Delaware Indians, their remedies for sins, 263

Demonophobia in India, 91

Demon-worship, 94, 96.
  _See also_ Propitiation

Demons bunged up, 61 _sq._;
  omnipresence of, 72 _sqq._;
  propitiation of, 93, 94, 96, 100;
  religious purification intended to ward off, 104;
  cause sickness, failure of crops, etc., 109 _sqq._;
  of cholera, 116, 117, 123;
  men disguised as, 170 _sq._, 172, 173;
  decoyed by a pig, 200, 201;
  conjured into images, 171, 172, 173, 203, 204, 205;
  put to flight by clangour of metal, 233;
  banned by masks, 246;
  exorcised by bells, 246 _sq._, 251.
  _See also_ Devil _and_ Devils

De Mortival, Roger, 338

Derceto, the fish goddess of Ascalon, 370 _n._ 1

De Ricci, S., 343 _n._

Deslawen, village of Bohemia, 161

Devil driven away by paper kites, 4

Devil-driving in Chitral, 137

Devil’s Neck, the, 16, 30

Devils personated by men, 235.
  _See_ Demons

Devonshire, cure for cough in, 51

Dharmi or Dharmesh, the Supreme God of the Oraons, 92 _sq._

Dice used in divination, 220;
  played at festivals, 350

Dieri tribe of Central Australia, their expulsion of a demon, 110

Dinkas, their use of cows as scapegoats, 193

Dio Chrysostom on the Sacaea, 368;
  his account of the treatment of the mock king of the Sacaea, 414

Dionysiac festival of the opening of the wine jars, 351 _sq._

Dionysus and the drama, 384

Disease transferred to other people, 6 _sq._;
  transferred to tree, 7;
  caused by ghosts, 85;
  annual expulsion of, 139;
  sent away in little ships, 185 _sqq._

Dittmar, C. von, quoted, 100 _sq._

Divination on Twelfth Night, 316

Divine animals as scapegoats, 216 _sq._, 226 _sq._

—— men as scapegoats, 217 _sqq._, 226 _sq._

Dog, sickness transferred to, 33;
  as scapegoat, 51, 208 _sq._;
  sacrifice of white, 127

Dog-demon of epilepsy, 69 _n._

Doreh in Dutch New Guinea, the tug-of-war at, 178

Doubs, Montagne de, 316

Douglas, Alexander, victim of witchcraft, 39

Doutté, E., 22 _n._ 2

Doves of Astarte, the sacred, 370 _n._ 1

_Dracaena terminalis_, its leaves used to beat the sick, 265

Dramas, sacred, as magical rites, 373 _sqq._

Dravidian tribes of N. India, their cure for epilepsy, 259 _sq._

Dreams, festival of, among the Iroquois, 127

_Dreikönigstag_, Twelfth Day, 329

“Driving out the Witches,” 162

_Drowo_, gods, 74

Drums beaten to expel demons, 111, 113, 116, 120, 126, 146, 204

Dubrowitschi, a Russian village, 173

Duck as scapegoat, 50

Dudilaa, a spirit who lives in the sun, 186

Dumannos, a month of the Gallic calendar, 343

Duran, Diego, Spanish historian of Mexico, 295 _n._ 1, 297, 300 _n._ 1

Durostorum in Moesia, celebration of the Saturnalia at, 309

Dussaud, René, 22 _n._ 2

Dusuns of Borneo, their annual expulsion of evils, 200 _sq._

Dyak priestesses, 5;
  transference of evil, 5;
  mode of neutralizing bad omens, 39

Dyaks, their “lying heaps,” 14;
  their Head Feast, 383

Dying god as scapegoat, 227

Eabani, Babylonian hero, 398 _sq._

Ears, blood drawn from, as penance, 292

Earth, the Mistress of the, 85

—— -god, 28;
  the Egyptian, 341

Earthman, the, 61

East, the Wise Men of the, 330 _sq._

—— Indian Islands, 2

—— Indies, the tug-of-war in the, 177

Easter an old vernal festival of the vegetation-god, 328

—— eggs, 269

—— Eve in Albania, expulsion of Kore on, 157

—— Monday, “Easter Smacks” on, 268

“—— Smacks” in Germany and Austria, 268 _sq._

—— Sunday, ceremony on the Eve of, 207 _sq._

—— Tuesday, “Easter Smacks” on, 268

Eastertide, expulsion of evils at, in Calabria, 157

Eck, R. van, quoted, 86

Edward VI., his Lord of Misrule, 332, 334

Effigies, disease transferred to, 7;
  demons conjured into, 204, 205;
  substituted for human victims, 408

Effigy of baby used to fertilize women, 245, 249

Eggs, red Easter, 269

Egypt, mode of laying ghosts in, 63;
  modern, belief in the jinn in, 104;
  Isis and Osiris in, 386

Egyptians, the ancient, their belief in spirits, 103 _sq._;
  their use of bulls as scapegoats, 216 _sq._;
  the five supplementary days of their year, 340 _sq._

Eifel, the King of the Bean in the, 313

Eight days, feast and license of, before expulsion of demons, 131

Ekoi, the, of West Africa, 28

Elamite deities in opposition to Babylonian deities, 366;
  inscriptions, 367

Elamites, the hereditary foes of the Babylonians, 366

Elaphebolion, an Athenian month, 351

Elaphius, an Elean month, 352

Elder brother, the sin of marrying before an, 3

Elgon, Mount, 246

Elis, law of, 352 _n._ 2

Ellis, W., quoted, 80

Embodied evils, expulsion of, 170 _sqq._

Emetics as remedies for sins, 263

Endle, S., quoted, 93

England, cure of warts in, 48;
  the King of the Bean in, 313;
  the Boy Bishop in, 337 _sq._

Enigmas, ceremonial use of, 121 _n._ 3.
  _See_ Riddles

Entlebuch in Switzerland, expulsion of Posterli at, 214

Epidaurus, Aesculapius at, 47

Epidemics attributed to demons, 111 _sqq._;
  kept off by means of a plough, 172 _sq._;
  sent away in toy chariots, 193 _sq._

Epilepsy, cure for, 2, 331;
  Highland treatment of, 68 _n._ 2;
  Roman cure for, 68;
  Hindoo cure for, 69 _n._;
  cured by beating, 260.
  _See also_ Falling Sickness

Epiphany, annual expulsion of the powers of evil at, 165 _sqq._;
  the King of the Bean on, 313 _sqq._
  _See also_ Twelfth Night

Eponyms, annual, as scapegoats, 39 _sqq._

Equinox, the vernal, festival of Cronus at, 352;
  Persian marriages at the, 406 _n._ 3

Equos, a Gallic month, 343 _n._

Erech, Babylonian city, Ishtar at, 398, 399

Erz-gebirge, the Saxon, 271

Esagila, temple at Babylon, 356

Esquimaux of Labrador, their fear of demons, 79 _sq._;
  of Point Barrow, their expulsion of Luña, 124 _sq._;
  of Baffin Land, their expulsion of Sedna, 125 _sq._;
  the Central, the tug-of-war among the, 174;
  of Bering Strait, their masquerades, 379 _sq._

Esther, fast of, 397 _sq._;
  the story of, acted as a comedy at Purim, 364

——, the book of, its date and purpose, 360;
  its Persian colouring, 362, 401;
  duplication of the personages in, 400 _sq._;
  the personages unmasked, 405 _sqq._

—— and Mordecai equivalent to Ishtar and Marduk, 405;
  the duplicates of Vashti and Haman, 406

—— and Vashti, temporary queens, 401

Esthonian mode of transferring bad luck to trees, 54;
  expulsion of the devil, 173

Eton College, Boy Bishop at, 338

Euhemerism, 385

Euripides, 19

Europe, transference of evil in, 47 _sqq._;
  annual expulsion of demons and witches in, 155 _sqq._;
  annual expulsion of evils in, 207 _sqq._;
  masquerades in modern, 251 _sq._

European folk-custom of “carrying out Death,” 227 _sq._

Eve and Adam, 259 _n._ 3

Evening Star, the goddess of the, 369 _n._ 1

Evessen, in Brunswick, 60

Evil, the transference of, 1 _sqq._;
  transferred to other people, 5 _sqq._;
  transferred to sticks and stones, 8 _sqq._;
  transferred to animals, 31 _sqq._;
  transferred to men, 38 _sqq._;
  transference of, in Europe, 47 _sqq._

—— spirits, banishment of, 86.
  _See_ Demons

Evil-Merodach, Babylonian king, 367 _n._ 2

Evils transferred to trees, 54 _sqq._;
  nailed into trees, walls, etc., 59 _sqq._;
  occasional expulsion of, 109 _sqq._, 185 _sqq._;
  periodic expulsion of, 123 _sqq._, 198 _sqq._;
  expulsion of embodied, 170 _sqq._;
  expulsion of, in a material vehicle, 185 _sqq._
  _See also_ Expulsion

Ewe, white-footed, as scapegoat, 192 _sq._

Ewe-speaking negroes of the Slave Coast, 74

Excommunication of human scapegoat, 254

Execution by stoning, 24 _n._ 2

Exeter, the Boy Bishop at, 337

Exorcising spirits at sowing the seed, 235

Exorcism of devils in Morocco, 63;
  annual, of the evil spirit in Japan, 143 _sq._;
  Nicobarese ceremony of, 262

Exorcists, 2 _sq._, 33

Expiation for sin, 39

Expulsion of evils, 109 _sqq._;
  the direct or immediate and the indirect or mediate, 109, 224;
  occasional, 109 _sqq._, 185 _sqq._;
  periodic, 123 _sqq._, 198 _sqq._;
  of embodied evils, 170 _sqq._;
  of evils in a material vehicle, 185 _sqq._;
  annual, of demons and witches in Europe, 155 _sqq._;
  of Trows in Shetland, 168 _sq._;
  of hunger at Chaeronea, 252;
  of winter, ceremony of the, 404 _sq._

_Faditras_ among the Malagasy, 33 _sq._

Faiths of the world, the great, their little influence on common men, 89

Falling sickness, cure for, 52, 330.
  _See also_ Epilepsy

Fans, the, of West Africa, 30 _n._ 2

“Fast of Esther” before Purim, 397 _sq._

Fatigue transferred to stones or sticks, 8 _sqq._;
  let out with blood, 12

Fawckner, Captain James, quoted, 131 _sq._

Fear as a source of religion, 93

Feast, the Great, in Morocco, 180, 182, 265

—— of Lanterns in Japan, 151 _sq._

February and March, the season of the spring sowing in Italy, 346

Ferghana in Turkestan, 184

Ferrers, George, a Lord of Misrule, 332

Fertility of the ground, magical ceremony to promote the, 177

Fertilization, artificial, of fig-trees, 257 _sqq._, 272 _sq._;
  of the date palm, 272

Fertilizing virtue attributed to certain sticks, 264

“Festival of dreams” among the Iroquois, 127

—— of the Flaying of Men, Mexican, 296 _sqq._

—— of Fools in France, 334 _sqq._;
  in Germany, Bohemia, and England, 336 _n._ 1

—— of the Innocents, 336 _sqq._

Festivals, the great Christian, timed by the Church to coincide with old
            pagan festivals, 328

_Fête des Fous_ in France, 334 _sqq._

—— _des Rois_, Twelfth Day, 329

Fever, remedy for, 38;
  Roman cure for, 47;
  popular cures for, 47, 49, 51, 53, 55, 56, 58, 59, 63;
  driven away by firing guns, etc., 121

Fielding, H., quoted, 349 _sq._

Fiends burnt in fire, 320

Fig, the wild, human scapegoats beaten with branches of, 255

Fig-tree, sacred, 61

—— -trees artificially fertilized, 257 _sqq._, 272 _sq._;
  personated by human victims, 257

Fights, annual, at the New Year, old intention of, 184

Figs, black and white, worn by human scapegoats, 253, 257, 272

Fiji, 15;
  annual ceremony at appearance of sea-slug in, 141 _sq._

Fir used to beat people with at Christmas, 270, 271

—— -trees in popular cure, 56

Fire, Mexican god of, 300;
  human sacrifices to, 300 _sqq._;
  to burn witches, 319

—— new, at New Year, 209;
  Chinese festival of the, 359

—— sacred, of King of Uganda, 195;
  kindled by friction, 391 _n._ 4

—— -spirit, annual expulsion of the, 141

Fires extinguished during ceremony, 172;
  ceremonial, on Eve of Twelfth Day, 316 _sqq._;
  to burn fiends, 320.
  _See also_ Bonfires

Five days’ duration of mock king’s reign, 407 _n._ 1

—— days’ reign of mock king at the Sacaea, 355, 357;
  of Semiramis, 369

Flax, giddiness transferred to, 53;
  bells rung to make flax grow, 247 _sq._

Flaying of Men, Mexican festival of the, 296 _sqq._

Flemish cure for ague, 56

Flight from the demons of disease, 122 _sq._

Flint, holed, a protection against witches, 162

Flood, the great, 399 _n._ 1

Flowers, the goddess of, 278

Flying Spirits, the, at Lhasa, 197 _sq._

Food set out for ghosts, 154

Fools in processions of maskers, 243

——, festival of, in France, 334 _sqq._;
  in Germany, Bohemia, and England, 336 _n._ 1

Football, suggested origin of, 184

Fords, offerings and prayers at, 27 _sq._

Formosa, 33

Forty days, man treated as a god during, 281;
  man personating god during, 297

—— nights of mourning for Persephone, 348

Foucart, G., quoted, 341 _n._ 1

Fountains Abbey, 338

Fowler, W. Warde, 67 _n._ 2, 229 _n._ 1

Fowls as scapegoats, 31, 33, 36, 52 _sq._

France, cure of warts in, 48;
  cure for toothache in, 59;
  the King of the Bean in, 313 _sqq._;
  Festival of Fools in, 334 _sqq._

Franche-Comté, the King of the Bean in, 313;
  bonfires on the Eve of Twelfth Night in, 316;
  the Three Kings of Twelfth Day in, 330;
  Lent in, 348 _n._ 1

Frankenwald Mountains, 160

Frankfort, the feast of Purim at, 394

_Fratres Arvales_, 232

“French and English” or the “Tug-of-war” as a religious or magical rite,
            174 _sqq._

French cure for fever, 55

Fresh and green, beating people, 270 _sq._

Frogs, malady transferred to, 50, 53

Fruit-trees, fire applied to, on Eve of Twelfth Night, 317

Fruitful tree, use of stick cut from a, 264

Fumigation with juniper and rue as a precaution against witches, 158

Funeral, relations whipped at a, 260 _sq._

—— of Death, 205

—— ceremony in Uganda, 45 _n._ 2;
  of a Buddhist monk, 175

Furrow drawn round village as protection against epidemic, 172

Gallas, their mode of expelling fever, 121;
  annual period of license among the, 226 _n._ 1;
  their story of the origin of death, 304

Gallows-hill, witches at, 162

Gambling allowed during three days of the year, 150

Games of ball played to produce rain or dry weather, 179 _sq._

Garcilasso de la Vega, 130 _n._ 1

Garos of Assam, their annual use of a scapegoat, 208 _sq._

Gatto, in Benin, 131

Gaul, the Celts of, their calendar, 342 _sqq._

Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain, 82, 303

Ge-lug-pa, a Lamaist sect, 94

Geraestius, a Greek month, 350

Gerard, E., quoted, 106 _sq._

Germany, cure for toothache in, 59;
  the King of the Bean in, 313

Ghansyam Deo, a deity of the Gonds, 217

Ghats, the Eastern, use of scapegoats in the, 191

Ghosts of suicides feared, 17 _sq._;
  impregnation of women by, 18;
  shut up in wood, 60 _sq._;
  modes of laying, 63;
  diseases caused by, 85;
  of the dead periodically expelled, 123 _sq._;
  Roman festival of, in May, 154 _sq._;
  driven off by blows, 260 _sqq._

Giddiness, cure for, 53

Gilgamesh, the epic of, 371, 398 _sq._;
  his name formerly read as Izdubar, 372 _n._ 1;
  a Babylonian hero, beloved by the goddess Ishtar, 371 _sq._, 398 _sq._

Gilgamus, a Babylonian king, 372 _n._ 1

Gilgenburg in Masuren, 269

Gilyaks of the Amoor, their belief in demons, 101 _sq._

Glamorganshire, cure for warts in, 53

Glen Mor, in Islay, 62

Gloucester, the Boy Bishop at, 337

Gloucestershire, Eve of Twelfth Day in, 318, 321

Goat’s Marsh at Rome, 258

Goats, evil transferred to, 31, 32;
  as scapegoats, 190, 191, 192

Gobi, the desert of, 13

God, killing the, 1;
  the black and the white, 92;
  dying, as scapegoat, 227;
  the killing of the, in Mexico, 275 _sqq._;
  resurrection of the, 400

Gods and goddesses represented by living men and women, 385 _sq._

——, Mexican, burn themselves to create the sun, 410;
  Mother of the, 289;
  woman annually sacrificed in the character of the Mother of the, 289
              _sq._

—— shut up in wood, 61;
  of the Maoris, 81;
  of the Pelew Islanders, 81 _sq._;
  personated by priests, 287;
  represented in masquerades, 377

Goitre, popular cure for, 54

Gold Coast of West Africa, expulsion of demons on the, 120, 131 _sqq._

Golden Age, the, 353, 386;
  the reign of Saturn, 306, 344

Golden bells worn by human representatives of gods in Mexico, 278, 280,
            284

Gomes, E. H., on the head-feast of the Sea Dyaks, 384 _n._ 1

Gonds of India, human scapegoats among the, 217 _sq._

Gongs beaten to expel demons, 113, 117, 147

Good Friday, 214;
  expulsion of witches in Silesia on, 157;
  cattle beaten on, 266;
  custom of beating each other with rods on, 268

Goudie, Mr. Gilbert, 169 _n._ 2

_Gour-deziou_, “Supplementary Days,” in Brittany, 324

Gout, popular cures for, 56 _sq._

Graetz, H., 395 _n._ 1

Gran Chaco, Indians of the, 122, 262

Grass to grow, dances to cause the, 238;
  bells rung to cause the, 247

Grasshoppers, sacrifice of, 35

“Grass-ringers,” 247

Graubünden (the Grisons), 239

Graves, heaps of sticks or stones on, 15 _sqq._

Great Bassam in Guinea, exorcism of evil spirit at, 120

—— Feast, the, in Morocco, 180, 182, 265

“—— Purification,” Japanese ceremony, 213 _n._ 1

Greece, ancient, custom of stone-throwing in, 24 _sq._;
  human scapegoats in, 252 _sqq._;
  Saturnalia in, 350 _sqq._

Greek use of swallows as scapegoats, 35;
  of laurel in purification, 262

Greek women, their mourning for Persephone, 349

Greeks, the ancient, their cure for love, 3

—— of Asia Minor, their use of human scapegoats, 255

Green boughs, custom of beating young people with, at Christmas, 270

Grisons, masquerades in the, 239

Groot, J. J. M. de, quoted, 99

Grove, the Arician, 305

Grub in the Grisons, masquerade at, 239

Grubb, W. Barbrooke, quoted, 78 _sq._

Grünberg in Silesia, 163

Guardian spirits of animals, 98

Guatemala, 10;
  Indians of, 26

Guaycurus, Indian nation, their ceremony at appearance of the Pleiades,
            262

Gudea, king of Southern Babylonia, 356

Guessing dreams, 127

Guiana, British, the Arawaks of, 302

——, French, the Roocooyen Indians of, 181, 263;
  their fear of demons, 78 _sq._

Guinea, annual expulsion of the devil in, 131

——, French, 235

—— negroes, 31

Guns fired to expel demons, 116 _sq._, 119, 120, 121, 125, 132, 133, 137,
            147, 148, 149, 150, 203, 204, 221 _n._ 1;
  against witches, 160, 161, 164

Gypsies, annual ceremony performed by the, 207 _sq._

Hagen, B., quoted, 87 _sq._

Hair of patient inserted in oak, 57 _sq._

Hak-Ka, the, a native race in the province of Canton, 144

Halberstadt in Thüringen, annual ceremony at, 214

Hall in the Tyrol, 248

Halmahera, the Alfoors of, 112;
  ceremonies at a funeral in, 260 _sq._

Haman, effigies of, burnt at Purim, 392 _sqq._

—— and Mordecai, 364 _sqq._;
  as temporary kings, 400 _sq._

—— and Vashti the duplicates of Mordecai and Vashti, 406

Haman, a god worshipped by the heathen of Harran, 366 _n._ 1

Hâmân-Sûr, a name for Purim, 393

Hammedatha, father of Haman, 373 _n._ 1

Hammer, sick people struck with a, 259 _n._ 4

Hands of deity, ceremony of grasping the, 356

_Hantoes_, spirits, 87

Hare as scapegoat, 50 _sq._

Harlots, sacred, 370, 371, 372;
  at Comana, 421 _n._ 1

Harpooning a spirit, 126

Harran, the heathen of, their custom in December, 263 _sq._;
  their marriage festival of all the gods, 273 _n._ 1;
  worship a god Haman, 366 _n._ 1

Harrison, Miss J. E., 153 _n._ 1

Harthoorn, S. E., quoted, 86 _sq._

Hartland, E. S., 22 _n._ 2, 69 _n._ 1

Harvest, annual expulsion of demons at or after, 137 _sq._, 225

Hasselt, J. L. van, quoted, 83

Hastings, Warren, 203

Haupt, P., 406 _n._ 2

Hawk, omens from, 384 _n._ 1

Hawthorn a charm against ghosts, 153 _n._ 1

Headache, cure for, 2, 52, 58, 63, 64

Head-feast of the Sea Dyaks, 383, 384 _n._ 1

Headman sacred, 177 _n._ 3

Heaps of stones, sticks, or leaves, to which every passer-by adds, 9
            _sqq._;
  on the scene of crimes, 13 _sqq._;
  on graves, 15 _sqq._;
  “lying heaps,” 14

Hearn, Lafcadio, 144

Hearts of human victims offered to the sun, 279, 298

Hebrews, their custom as to leprosy, 35

Hebron, 21

Hecatombaeon, an Athenian month, 351

Hecquard, H., 120

Heitsi-eibib, Hottentot god or hero, 16

Hemp, augury as to the height of the, 315;
  dances to make hemp grow tall, 315

Hercules, cake with twelve knobs offered to, 351 _n._ 3;
  identified with Sandan, 388;
  his death on a pyre, 391

—— and Omphale, 389

Hereford, the Boy Bishop at, 337

Herefordshire, the sin-eater in, 43;
  Eve of Twelfth Day in, 318 _sqq._

Hermes, wayside images of, 24;
  Cretan festival of, 350

—— and Argus, 24

Herodotus on the worship of Ishtar (Astarte), 372

Hide beaten with rods, 231

Hierapolis, festival of the Pyre at, 392

Highlands of Scotland, 20;
  the Twelve Days in the, 324

Hildesheim, bell-ringing at, on Ascension Day, 247 _sq._

Himalayan districts of N. W. India, 29

Hindoo Koosh, expulsion of demons in the, 225

—— tribes, their annual expulsion of demons after harvest, 137

Hindoos, transference of evil among the, 38;
  their fear of demons, 91 _sq._

Hirt, H., 325 _n._ 3

Hobby-horse to carry away spirit of smallpox, 119

Hochofen, village of Bohemia, 161

Hockey played as a ceremony, 174

Holed flint a protection against witches, 162

Holy Innocents’ Day, 336, 337, 338;
  young people beat each other on, 270, 271

Homoeopathic or imitative magic, 177

Homogeneity of civilization in prehistoric times in Southern Europe and
            Western Asia, 409

Honorius and Theodosius, decree of, 392

Hood Bay in New Guinea, 84

Horns blown to expel demons, 111, 117, 204, 214;
  to ban witches, 160, 161, 165, 166;
  at Penzance on eve of May Day, 163 _sq._;
  by maskers, 243, 244

—— of straw worn to keep off demons, 118;
  of goat a protection against witches, 162

Horse sacrificed to Mars, 230;
  beloved by Ishtar, 371, 407 _n._ 2;
  beloved by Semiramis, 407 _n._ 2

—— -shoes a protection against witches, 162

Horus, the birth of, 341

Hos of N. E. India, their annual expulsion of demons at harvest, 136 _sq._

—— of Togoland, their annual expulsion of evils, 134 _sqq._, 206 _sq._

Hosskirch in Swabia, 323

Hottentots, the, 16, 29

Hoyerswerda in Silesia, 163

_Huddler_ or _Huttler_ in the Tyrol, 248

_Hudel_-running in the Tyrol, 248

Huichol Indians of Mexico, 10, 347 _n._ 3

Huitzilopochtli, great Mexican god, 280, 300;
  young man sacrificed in the character of, 280 _sq._;
  temple of, 287, 290, 297;
  hall of, 294

Huixtocihuatl, Mexican goddess of Salt, 283;
  woman annually sacrificed in the character of, 283 _sq._

Human god and goddess, their enforced union, 386 _sq._

—— representatives of gods sacrificed in Mexico, 275 _sqq._

—— sacrifice, successive mitigations of, 396 _sq._, 408

—— sacrifices, their influence on cosmogonical theories, 409 _sqq._

—— scapegoats, 38 _sqq._, 194 _sqq._, 210 _sqq._;
  in ancient Rome, 229 _sqq._;
  in classical antiquity, 229 _sqq._;
  in ancient Greece, 252 _sqq._;
  reason for beating the, 256 _sq._;
  victims, men clad in the skins of, 265 _sq._

Hunger, expulsion of, at Chaeronea, 252

Hurons, their way of expelling sickness, 121

Husbandman, the Roman, his prayers to Mars, 229

Huss, John, 336 _n._ 1

_Huttler_ or _Huddler_ in the Tyrol, 248

Huzuls, the, of the Carpathians, 32 _sq._, 35

Hyginus on the death of Semiramis, 407 _n._ 2

Hysteria cured by beating, 260

Identification of girl with Maize Goddess, 295

Idols, nails knocked into, 69 _sq._

Igbodu, a sacred grove, 212

Igliwa, a Berber tribe, 178

Ilamatecutli, Mexican goddess, 287;
  woman sacrificed in the character of, 287 _sq._

Ill Luck embodied in an ascetic, 41;
  the casting away of, 144

Im Thurn, Sir Everard F., quoted, 78

Images, demons conjured into, 171, 172, 173, 203

Immestar in Syria, 394

Immortality, how men lost the boon of, 302 _sqq._

Impregnation of women by ghosts, 18

Inanimate objects, transference of evil to, 1 _sqq._

_Inao_, sacred whittled sticks, 261

Inauguration of a king in ancient India, 263

Incas of Peru, their annual expulsion of evils, 128 _sqq._

Incense used against witches, 158, 159

India, fear of demons in, 89 _sqq._;
  epidemics sent away in toy chariots in, 193 _sq._;
  Dravidian tribes of Northern, 259;
  inauguration of a king in ancient, 263;
  the Twelve Days in ancient, 324 _sq._;
  origin of the drama in, 384 _sq._

——, the Central Provinces of, 7;
  expulsion of disease in the, 190

——, the North-Western Provinces of, 61;
  the tug-of-war in, 181

Indian Archipelago, expulsion of diseases in the, 199

—— tribes of N. W. America, their masked dances, 375 _sqq._

Indians, mutual scourgings of South American, 262

Indo-China, worship of spirits in, 97 _sq._

Indra, creation of the great god, 410

Infant, children whipt at death of an, 261 _sq._

Infants, burial of, 45

Infertility, evil spirits of, 250

Influenza expelled by scapegoat, 191, 193

Initiation by spirits, 375

Innocents, Bishop of, in France, 334;
  Festival of the, 336 _sqq._

Innocents’ Day, 336, 337, 338;
  young people beat each other on, 270, 271

Inspired men in China, 117

Intercalary month, 342 _sqq._

—— period of five days, 407 _n._ 1

—— periods, customs and superstitions attaching to, 328 _sq._;
  deemed unlucky, 339 _sqq._

Intercalation, rudimentary, to equate lunar and solar years, 325 _sqq._

Interregnum on intercalary days, 328 _sq._

Inversion of social ranks at the Saturnalia and kindred festivals, 308,
            350, 407

Ireland, Twelfth Night in, 321 _sq._

Iroquois, their “festival of dreams,” 127;
  their use of scapegoats, 209 _sq._, 233

Iser Mountains in Silesia, 163

Iserlohn in Westphalia, 266

Ishtar, a great Babylonian goddess, 365;
  associated with Sirius, 359 _n._ 1;
  at Erech, 398;
  her visit to Anu, 399 _n._ 1;
  goddess of fertility in animals, 406 _n._ 1
  _See also_ Astarte

—— and Gilgamesh, 371 _sq._, 398 _sq._

—— and Semiramis, 369 _sqq._

—— and Tammuz, 399, 406

Isis, the birth of, 341

—— and Osiris, 386

Italian cure for fever, 55;
  season of sowing in spring, 346

Italy, cure of warts in, 48

Izdubar. _See_ Gilgamesh

Jackson, Professor Henry, 35 _n._ 3

Jacobsen, J. Adrian, on the Secret Societies of N. W. America, 377 _sqq._

Jalno, temporary ruler at Lhasa, 218, 220, 221, 222

James, M. R., 395 _notes_  2 and  3

Jamieson, J., on Trows, 168 _n._ 1, 169 _n._ 2

Japan, cure for toothache in, 71;
  expulsion of demons in, 118 _sq._, 143 _sq._;
  Feast of Lanterns in, 151 _sq._;
  annual expulsion of evil in, 212 _sq._

Jastrow, M., on the epic of Gilgamesh, 399 _n._ 1

_Jataka_, the, 41

Jaundice, cure for, 52

Java, belief in demons in, 86 _sq._;
  the Tenggerese of, 184

Jay, blue, as scapegoat, 51

Jealousy, cure for, 33

Jensen, P., 362 _n._ 1;
  his theory of Haman and Vashti as Elamite deities, 366 _sq._;
  on Anaitis, 369 _n._ 1;
  on the fast of Esther, 398 _sq._

Jepur in India, use of scapegoat at, 191

Jerusalem, the weeping for Tammuz at, 400

Jewish calendar, New Year’s Day of the, 359

—— converts, form of abjuration used by, 393

—— Day of Atonement, 210

—— festival of Purim, 360 _sqq._

—— use of scapegoats, 210

Jews accused of ritual murders, 394 _sqq._;
  the great deliverance of the, at Purim, 398

Jinn, belief in the, 104;
  infesting camels, 260

Jochelson, W., quoted, 101

Johns, Rev. C. H. W., 357 _n._ 2, 367 _notes_ 2 and 3

Joustra, M., quoted, 88

Juhar, the Bhotiyas of, 209

July, the _Nonae Caprotinae_ in, 258

June, Mexican human sacrifice in, 283

Jungle Mother, the, 27

Juniper burned to keep out ghosts, 154 _n._;
  used to beat people with, 271

—— berries, fumigation with, as a precaution against witches, 158

Juno Caprotina, 258

Jupiter, temple of Capitoline, 66

Kabyle cure for jealousy, 33

Kacharis, the, of Assam, their fear of demons, 93

Kachins of Burma, their belief in demons, 96

Kai, the, of German New Guinea, 264

_Kalau_, demons, 101

_Kaliths_, gods of the Pelew Islanders, 81 _sq._

Kamtchatka, the tug-of-war in, 178

Kamtchatkans, their fear of demons, 89

Kanagra in India, 45

Kanhar river, 60

Karens of Burma, their belief in demons, 96

_Karkantzari_, fiends or monsters in Macedonia, 320

Karpathos, a Greek island, 55

Kasan Government in Russia, the Wotyaks of the, 156

Kaua Indians of N. W. Brazil, 236;
  their masked dances, 381

Kaumpuli, god of plague, 4

_Kausika Sutra_, Indian book of magic, 192

Kayans, the, of Borneo, 19, 154 _n._;
  their masked dances, 236, 382 _sq._

Keb, the Egyptian Earth-god, 341

Kei Islands, expulsion of demons in the, 112 _sq._

—— river, 11

Kengtung in Burma, 116

Kennedy, Prof. A. R. S., quoted, 210 _n._ 4

Kharwars of N. India, their use of scapegoats, 192

Khasis of Assam, their annual expulsion of demon of plague, 173

Khonds, their annual expulsion of demons at seed-time, 138, 234;
  their treatment of human victims, 259

Killing the god, 1;
  in Mexico, 275 _sqq._

King, temporary, in Siam, 151;
  in ancient India, inauguration of a, 263;
  assembly for determining the fate of the, 356;
  mock or temporary, 403 _sq._

—— and Queen of May, 406

—— of the Bean, 313 _sqq._;
  at Merton College, Oxford, 332

—— of the Saturnalia, 308, 311, 312

—— of the Years at Lhasa, 220, 221

King’s College, Cambridge, Boy Bishop at, 338

Kings, the Three, on Twelfth Day, 329 _sqq._;
  magistrates at Olympia called, 352;
  marry the wives and concubines of their predecessors, 368

Kingsley, Mary H., quoted, 74

Kioga Lake, 246

Kiriwina, in S. E. New Guinea, 134

Kirkland, Rev. Mr., 210

Kitching, A. L., quoted, 246 _sq._

Kites, artificial, used to drive away the devil, 4;
  paper, flown as scapegoats, 203

Kleintitschen, P. A., quoted, 82 _sq._

Kleptomania, cure for, 34

Kling or Klieng, a mythical hero of the Dyaks, 383, 384 _n._ 1

Knives under the threshold, a protection against witches, 162

Knots tied in branches of trees as remedies, 56 _sq._

Knotted thread in magic, 48

Kobeua Indians of N. W. Brazil, their masked dances, 236, 381

Kore, expulsion of, on Easter Eve in Albania, 157

Korkus, the, of India, 7

Korwas of Mirzapur, their use of scapegoats, 192

Koryaks, the, of N. E. Asia, their belief in demons, 100 _sq._;
  expulsion of demons among the, 126 _sq._

Kubary, J., quoted, 81 _sq._

Kumaon, in N. W. India, 37;
  sliding down a rope in, 196 _sq._

Kumis, the, of S. E. India, 117

Kurmis of India, 190

Kururumany, the Arawak creator, 302

Kuskokwin River, 380

Kwakiutl Indians of N. W. America, their masked dances, 376 _n._ 2, 378

Labrador, fear of demons in, 79 _sq._

Labruguière, in S. France, 166

Lagarde, on the “Ride of the Beardless One,” 402, 405

Lakor, island of, 199

Lama of Tibet, the Grand, 197, 220, 221, 222

——, the Teshu, 203

Lamaist sects, 94

_Lanchang_, a Malay craft, 187

Lande-Patry in Normandy, 183

Lane, E. W., quoted, 104

Lanterns, feast of, in Japan, 151 _sq._

Laos, 29

Laosians of Siam, their belief in demons, 97

Last day of the year, annual expulsion of demons on the, 145 _sqq._

Latin Christianity, its tolerance of rustic paganism, 346

Laurel in purification, 262

Laurels, ceremony of renewing the, 346 _n._ 1

Lawes, W. G., quoted, 84 _sq._

Lead, melted, in cure, 4

Leafman, the, 61

Leaping over bonfires, 156

Leaps to promote the growth of the crops, 232, 238 _sqq._

Leaves, disease transferred to, 2;
  fatigue transferred to, 8 _sqq._;
  used to expel demons, 201, 206;
  sickness transferred to, 259;
  used in exorcism, 262

Lehmann-Haupt, C. F., 412 _n._ 1, 415 _n._ 1

Lehner, Stefan, quoted, 83 _sq._

Leith Links, witches burnt on, 165

Leme, the river, 182

Lengua Indians, 78

Lent, ceremony at Halberstadt in, 214;
  perhaps derived from an old pagan period of abstinence observed for the
              growth of the seed, 347 _sqq._

—— and the Saturnalia, 345 _sqq._

Lenten fast, its origin, 348

Leobschütz district of Silesia, 268

Leprosy, Hebrew custom as to, 35;
  Mexican goddess of, 292

Lerwick, ceremony of Up-helly-a’ at, 169

Leti, island of, 199

Leucadians, their use of human scapegoats, 254

Lhasa, ceremony of the Tibetan New Year at, 197 _sq._, 218 _sqq._

“Liar’s mound, the,” in Borneo, 14

License, month of general, 148;
  periods of, preceding or following the annual expulsion of demons, 225
              _sq._, 306, 328 _sq._, 343, 344;
  granted to slaves at the Saturnalia, 307 _sq._, 350 _sq._, 351 _sq._

Licentious rites for the fertilization of the ground, 177

Lichfield, the Boy Bishop at, 337

Licorice root used to beat people with at Easter, 269

Liebrecht, F., 392 _n._ 1

Lienz in the Tyrol, masquerade at, 242, 245

Lime-tree in popular cure, 59 _sq._

Limewood used at expulsion of demons, 156

Lincoln, the Boy Bishop at, 337

Lion beloved by Ishtar, 371

“—— with the Sheepskins,” 265

Livuans, the, of New Britain, 82

Livy on the annual custom of knocking a nail, 66;
  on the Saturnalia, 345 _n._ 1

Lizard or snake in annual ceremony for the riddance of evils, 208

Lizards and serpents supposed to renew their youth by casting their skins,
            302 _sqq._

Llama, black, as scapegoat, 193

Loango, practice of knocking nails into idols in, 69 _sq._

_Lokoala_, initiation by spirits, 376

Lord of the Diamond, 29

—— of Misrule, 251;
  in England, 331 _sqq._

Lorraine, King and Queen of the Bean in, 315

Loth, J., 325 _n._ 3

Lots cast at Purim, 361 _sq._

Louis XIV. as King of the Bean, 313

Lous, a Babylonian month, 355, 358

Love, cure for, 3

Lover’s Leap, 254

Lovers of Semiramis and Ishtar, their sad fate, 371 _sq._

Lucian, as to the rites of Hierapolis, 392

Ludlow in Shropshire, the tug-of-war at, 182

Lugg, river, 183

Lules or Tonocotes of the Gran Chaco, their behaviour in an epidemic, 122
            _sq._

Lumholtz, C., quoted, 10, 347 _n._ 3

Lunar year equated to solar year by intercalation, 325, 342 _sq._

Lusatia, the “Witch-burning” in, 163

Lushais of Assam, their belief in demons, 94

Luzon, exorcism in, 260

Lycaeus, Mount, in Arcadia, human sacrifice on, 353

Lydia, the burning of kings in, 391

Lydus, Joannes, 229 _n._ 1

Ma, goddess worshipped at Comana, 421 _n._ 1

MacCulloch, J. A., 326 _n._

Macdonald, Rev. James, 111 _n._ 1

Macdonell, Lady Agnes, 164 _n._ 1

Macedonian superstitions as to the Twelve Days, 320

Machindranath temple at Lhasa, 219

Mackenzie, Sheriff David J., 169 _n._ 2

Macrobius on institution of the Saturnalia, 345 _n._ 1

Madagascar, 19

Madis, the, of Central Africa, 217

Magdalen College, Oxford, the Boy Bishop at, 337

Magic in ancient India, 91;
  and witchcraft, permanence of the belief in, 89;
  homoeopathic or imitative, 177, 232, 257

Magnesia on the Maeander, 397 _n._ 2

Mahadeva, propitiation of, 197

Maize, the goddess of the Young, 278;
  Mexican goddesses of, 285 _sq._, 286 _n._ 1, 290, 291, 292, 294, 295

Majhwars, Dravidian race of Mirzapur, 36, 60

Makrîzî, Arabic writer, 393

Malabar, use of cows as scapegoats in, 216

Malagasy, _faditras_ among the, 33 _sq._

Malay Peninsula, the Besisi of the, 226 _n._ 1

Malays, their use of birds as scapegoats, 35;
  stratification of religious beliefs among the, 90 _n._ 1

Mallans of India, 190

Mamurius Veturius in ancient Rome, 229 _sqq._, 252, 257

Man-god in China, 117 _sq._

Mandan Indians, their annual expulsion of the devil, 171

Manipur, Rajah of, 39 _sq._;
  annual eponyms in, 39 _sq._

Mannhardt, W., on processions of maskers, 250;
  on beating human scapegoats, 255, 272

Mantras, the, of the Malay Peninsula, their fear of demons, 88 _sq._

Maori gods, 81

Maraves, the, of South Africa, 19

Marcellus of Bordeaux, 48, 50

March, annual expulsion of demons in, 149;
  annual expulsion of witches in, 157;
  annual expulsion of evils in, 199;
  ceremony of Mamurius Veturius in, 229, 231;
  old Roman year began in, 231, 345;
  dances of the Salii in, 232;
  bell-ringing procession on the first of, 247;
  custom of beating people and cattle in, 266;
  marriage festival of all the gods in, 373 _n._ 1;
  festival of the Matronalia in, 346

Marduk or Merodach, Babylonian god, 356, 357, 399;
  as a deliverer from demons, 103;
  his ceremonial marriage at New Year, 356;
  the votaries of, 372 _n._ 2

Marjoram a protection against witchcraft, 160

Mar-na, a Philistine deity, 418 _n._ 1

Marriage of the god Marduk, 356

——, mock or real, of human victims, 257 _sq._

—— festival of all the gods, 273 _n._ 1

Mars a god of vegetation, 229 _sq._;
  the Old, at Rome, 229, 231, 252

—— Silvanus, 230

_Marsaba_, a demon, 109

Marseilles, human scapegoats at, 253

Marsh-marigolds a protection against witches, 163

Martin, Rev. John, quoted, 132 _sq._

Martyrdom of St. Dasius, 308 _sqq._

Mascal or Festival of the Cross in Abyssinia, 133 _sq._

Mashti, supposed name of Elamite goddess, 366 _sq._

Mask, two-faced, worn by image of goddess, 287.
  _See also_ Masks

Masked dances and ceremonies of savages, 374 _sqq._;
  to promote fertility, 236

Maskers in the Tyrol and Salzburg, 242 _sqq._;
  as bestowers of fertility, 249;
  supposed to be inspired by the spirits whom they represent, 380, 382,
              383

Masks worn at expulsion of demons, 111, 127, 145, 213;
  intended to ban demons, 246;
  worn at ceremonies to promote the growth of the crops, 236, 240, 242
              _sqq._, 247, 248 _sq._;
  worn by the _Perchten_, 242, 243, 245, 247;
  worn by priests who personate gods, 287;
  worn in religious dances and performances, 375, 376 _n._ 2, 378, 379,
              380, 382;
  burned at end of masquerade, 382;
  treated as animate 382

Masquerades in modern Europe, intention of certain, 251 _sq._

Master of the Revels, 333 _sq._

Masuren, “Easter Smacks” in, 269

Mateer, S., quoted, 94

_Mater Dolorosa_, the ancient and the modern, 349

Material vehicles of immaterial things (fear, misfortune, disease, etc.),
            1 _sqq._, 22 _n._ 2, 23 _sqq._

Materialization of prayer, 22 _n._ 2

Matronalia, festival of the, in March, 346

Matse negroes of Togoland, 3

Mawu, Supreme Being of Ewe negroes, 74 _sq._

Maxwell, W. E., quoted, 90 _n._ 1

May, Mexican human sacrifices in, 276, 280;
  dances of Castilian peasants in, 280;
  the King and Queen of, 406

—— Day, 359;
  Eve of, witches abroad on, 158 _sqq._;
  in the Tyrol, “Burning out of the Witches” on, 158 _sq._;
  witches rob cows of milk on, 267

—— morning, custom of herdsmen on, 266

Mayas of Yucatan, their annual expulsion of the demon, 171;
  their calendar, 171;
  their five supplementary days, 340

Mecca, stone-throwing at, 24

Mecklenburg, custom on Good Friday in, 266;
  mode of reckoning the Twelve Days in, 327

Medicine-man, need of, 76

Melanesia, belief in demons in, 82

Melenik in Macedonia, 320

Men, evil transferred to, 38 _sqq._;
  possessed by spirits in China, 117;
  divine, as scapegoats, 217 _sqq._;
  sacrifices of deified, 409

—— and women forbidden by Mosaic law to interchange dress, 363

_Mengap_, a Dyak liturgy, 383

Merodach or Marduk, Babylonian deity, 356

Merton College, Oxford, King of the Bean at, 332

Metageitnion, a Greek month, 354

Mexican temples, their form, 279

Mexico, Indians of, 10;
  the Cora Indians of, 238, 381;
  the Tarahumare Indians of, 236 _sq._;
  use of skins of human victims in ancient, 265 _sq._;
  killing the god in, 275 _sqq._;
  story of the creation of the sun in, 410

Meyer, Eduard, 349 _n._ 4

Midsummer Day, 359

—— Eve, witches active on, 158, 160

Milan, festival of the Three Kings of Twelfth Day at, 331

Milk, heifers beaten to make them yield, 266 _sq._

Milky juice of wild fig-tree in religious rite, 258

Mimicry the principle of religious or magical dramas, 374

Minahassa in Celebes, expulsion of demons in, 111 _sq._

_Mingoli_, spirits of the dead, 77

Miotse, the, of China, 4

Mirzapur, 6, 27, 36;
  the Korwas and Pataris of, 192

Misfortune swept out of house with brooms, 5

Misrule, the Lord of, 251;
  in England, 331 _sqq._

Missiles hurled at dangerous ghosts or spirits, 17 _sqq._

Mistress of the Earth, 85

Mitigations of human sacrifice, 396 _sq._, 408

Mnevis, sacred Egyptian bull, 217

Moa, island of, 199

Mock king, 403 _sq._

—— marriage of human victims, 257 _sq._

Mockery of Christ, 412 _sqq._

_Modai_, invisible spirits, 93

Moesia, Durostorum in Lower, 309

Mogador, 63

Mohammed and the devil, 24

Mohammedan custom of raising cairns, 21

—— saints, 21, 22

“Moles and Field-mice,” fire ceremony on Eve of Twelfth Night, 317

Molina, Spanish historian, 130 _n._ 1

Molonga, a demon, 172

Mommsen, August, 153 _n._ 1

Mongol transference of evil, 7 _sq._

Monkey sacrificed for riddance of evils, 208 _sq._

Montagne du Doubs, 316

Month during which men disguised as devils go about, 132;
  of general license before expulsion of demons, 148;
  intercalary, 342 _sqq._

—— and moon, names for, in Aryan languages, 325

Monumbo, the, of German New Guinea, their masked dances, 382

Moon, bodily ailments transferred to the, 53 _sq._;
  the waning, 60;
  the “dark” and the “light,” 140, 141 _n._ 1;
  temple of the, 218;
  hearts of human victims offered to the, 282;
  the goddess of the, 341, 381

—— and month, names for, in Aryan languages, 325

Moors of Morocco, 31

Moravia, precautions against witchcraft in, 162;
  “Easter Smacks” in, 268, 269

Mordecai, his triumphal ride in Susa, 403

—— and Esther equivalent to Marduk and Ishtar, 405;
  the duplicates of Haman and Vashti, 406

—— and Haman, 364 _sqq._;
  as temporary kings, 400 _sq._

Morning Star, personated by a man, 238;
  the god of the, 381

Morocco, 21, 31;
  exorcism in, 63;
  the tug-of-war in, 178 _sq._, 182;
  custom of beating people in, 265, 266

Morris-dancers, 250 _sq._

Mortality, savage explanations of human, 302 _sqq._

Mortlock Islanders, their belief in spirits, 82

Mosaic law forbids interchange of dress between men and women, 363

Moses, the tomb of, 21

Moslem custom of raising cairns, 21

Mossos of China, their annual expulsion of demons, 139

Mosul, cure for headache at, 64

Mother of the Gods, Mexican goddess, 289;
  woman annually sacrificed in the character of the, 289 _sq._

—— -kin in royal families, 368 _n._ 1

Moulton, Professor J. H., 325 _n._ 3, 373 _n._ 1

Mounds of Semiramis, 370, 371, 373

Mountain of Parting, 279

Movers, F. C., on the Sacaea, 368, 387, 388, 391

Mowat in British New Guinea, 265

Mrus, the, of Aracan, 12 _n._ 1

Mule as scapegoat, 50

Müller, K. O., on Sandan, 389 _sq._

Mundaris, the, of N. E. India, their annual saturnalia at harvest, 137

Munich, annual expulsion of the devil at, 214 _sq._

Munzerabad in S. India, 172

Muota Valley in Switzerland, 166

Murder, heaps of sticks or stones on scenes of, 15

Mylitta, Babylonian goddess, 372 _n._ 2, 390

Mysore in S. India, 172

Mysteries as magical ceremonies, 374

Mythical beings represented by men and women, 385 _sq._

Myths in relation to magic, 374;
  performed dramatically in dances, 375 _sqq._

Nabu, Babylonian god, 358 _n._

Nagas of Assam, the tug-of-war among the, 177

Nahum, the prophet, on Nineveh, 390

Nahuntí, an Elamite goddess, 369 _n._ 1

Nailing evils into trees, walls, etc., 59 _sqq._

Nails, clippings of, in popular cures, 57, 58;
  knocked into trees, walls, etc., as remedy, 59 _sqq._;
  knocked into idols or fetishes, 69 _sq._;
  knocked in ground as cure for epilepsy, 330

Nakiza, the river, 27

_Nat_ superstition in Burma, 90 _n._ 1

_Nats_, spirits in Burma, 175 _sq._;
  propitiation of, 96

Navona, Piazza, at Rome, ceremony of Befana on the, 166 _sq._

Nebuchadnezzar, his record of the festival of Marduk, 357

Negritos, religion of the, 82

Neilgherry Hills, 36, 37

Nelson, E. W., on the masquerades of the Esquimaux, 379 _sqq._

_Nemontemi_, the five supplementary days of the Aztec calendar, 339

Nepaul, Dassera festival in, 226 _n._ 1

Nephthys, the birth of, 341

Nettles, whipping with, 263

Neugramatin in Bohemia, 270

Neumann, J. B., quoted, 87

New Britain, the Melanesians of, their belief in demons, 82 _sq._;
  expulsion of devils in, 109 _sq._;
  Gazelle Peninsula in, 303

—— Caledonia, burying the evil spirit in, 110;
  mode of promoting growth of taros in, 264

—— College, Oxford, Boy Bishop at, 338

—— Guinea, annual expulsion of demons in, 134

—— Guinea, British, 265;
  belief in ghosts in, 84 _sq._

—— Guinea, Dutch, 178;
  the Papuans of, their belief in demons, 83

—— Guinea, German, the Yabim of, 188;
  the Bukaua of, their belief in demons, 83 _sq._;
  the Kai of, 264;
  the Monumbo of, 382

—— Hebrideans, their story of the origin of death, 304

—— yams, ceremonies before eating the, 134 _sqq._

—— Year, expulsion of evils at the, 127, 133, 149 _sq._, 155;
  not reckoned from first month, 149 _n._ 2;
  sham fight at the, 184;
  ceremony at the Tibetan, 197 _sq._;
  festival among the Iroquois, 209 _sq._;
  the Tibetan, 218;
  festival at Babylon, 356 _sqq._

—— Year’s Day in Corea, annual riddance of evil on, 202;
  in Tibet, ceremony on, 203;
  among the Swahili, 226 _n._ 1;
  young women beat young men on, 271;
  of the Jewish calendar, 359

—— Zealand, human scapegoats in, 39

_Nganga_, medicine-man, 76

Ngoc hoang, his message to men, 303

Nias, expulsion of demons in, 113 _sqq._;
  explanation of human mortality in, 303

Nicaragua, 9

Nicholas Bishop, 338

Nicobar Islanders, their belief in demons, 88;
  their annual expulsion of demons, 201 _sq._

—— Islands, demon of disease sent away in a boat from the, 189 _sq._

Nicobarese ceremony of exorcism, 262

Nights, custom of reckoning by, 326 _n._ 2

Nineveh, tomb of Sardanapalus at, 388 _n._ 1;
  the burning of Sandan at, 390

Ninus, Assyrian hero, 391

Nirriti, goddess of evil, 25

Nisan, Jewish month, 356, 361, 415

_No_, annual expulsion of demons in China, 145 _sq._

Noises made to expel demons, 109 _sqq._, 147

Nöldeke, Professor Th., on Purim and Esther, 366, 367 _n._ 1, 368 _n._;
  on Omanos and Anadates, 373 _n._ 1

_Nonae Caprotinae_, Roman celebration of the, 258

Normandy, the Bocage of, 183 _sq._, 316, 323

Northamptonshire cure for cough, 51

Nortia, Etruscan goddess, 67

Norwegian sailors, their use of rowan, 267

Norwich, the Boy Bishop at, 337

November, annual ceremony in, at catching sea-slug, 143;
  expulsion of demons in, 204

Nut, the Egyptian sky-goddess, 341

Nyassa, Lake, 10

Oak and wild olive, pyre of Hercules made of, 391

—— -trees in popular cures, 57, 60

Obassi Nsi, earth-god, 28

October, annual expulsion of demons in, 226 _n._ 1;
  Roman sacrifice of horse in, 230

Oels, in Silesia, 157

Oesel, Esthonian island, 14

Offerings at cairns, 26 _sqq._;
  to demons, 96

_Oho-harahi_, a Japanese ceremony, 213

Old Christmas Day (Twelfth Night), 321

Oldenberg, H., quoted, 90 _sq._

Oldenburg, popular cures in, 49, 51, 52, 53-58

Oldfield, H. A., quoted, 226 _n._ 1

Olive, wild, and oak, pyre of Hercules made of, 391

—— -tree in popular remedy, 60

Olympia, festival of Cronus at, 352 _sq._

Olynthiac, river, 142 _n._ 1

Olynthus, tomb of, 143 _n._

Omanos at Zela, 373 _n._ 1

Omens, mode of neutralizing bad, 39

Omnipresence of demons, 72 _sqq._

Omphale and Hercules, 389

One-eyed buffoon in New Year ceremony, 402

Onions used to foretell weather of the year, 323

Onitsha, on the Niger, annual expulsion of evils at, 133;
  use of human scapegoats at, 210 _sq._

Opening of the Wine-jars, Dionysiac festival of the, 352

Oraons, the, of Bengal, their belief in demons, 93 _sq._;
  their use of a human scapegoat, 196

Orchards, fire applied to, on Eve of Twelfth Day, 317, 319, 320

Orestes, purification of, 262

Origin of death, savage tales of the, 302 _sqq._

Orinoco, Indians of the, 303

Orkney Islands, 29;
  transference of sickness in the, 49

Orlagau in Thüringen, 271

Oscans, the enemies of Rome, 231

Osiris, the birth of, 341

—— and Isis, 386

Ottery St. Mary’s, the Boy Bishop at, 337

Oude, burial of infants in, 45

“Our Mother among the Water,” Mexican goddess, 278

Owl represented dramatically as a mystery, 377

Ox, disease transferred to, 31 _sq._

Oxen pledged on Eve of Twelfth Day, 319

Oxford, Lords of Misrule at, 332

Pairing dogs, stick that has beaten, 264

Palm Sunday, Russian custom on, 268

Pan’s image beaten by the Arcadians, 256

Pancakes to scald fiends on New Year’s Eve, 320

Pandarus, tattoo marks of, 47 _sq._

Papa Westray, one of the Orkney Islands, 29

Papuans, their belief in demons, 83

Parkinson, R., quoted, 83

Parti, name of an Elamite deity, 367

Passover, accusations of murders at, 395 _sq._;
  the crucifixion of Christ at, 414 _sqq._

Patagonians, their remedy for smallpox, 122

Pataris of Mirzapur, their use of scapegoats, 192

Pathian, a beneficent spirit, 94

Paton, L. B., 360 _n._ 1

Paton, W. R., on human scapegoats in ancient Greece, 257 _sq._, 259, 272;
  on Adam and Eve, 259 _n._ 3;
  on the crucifixion, 413 _n._ 2

Pauntley, parish of, Eve of Twelfth Day in, 318

Pawnees, their human sacrifice, 296

Payne, E. J., 286 _n._ 1

Peach-tree in popular remedy, 54

_Peaiman_, sorcerer, 78

Peg used to transfer disease to tree, 7

Pegging ailments into trees, 58 _sqq._

Pelew Islanders, their gods, 81 _sq._

Peloria, a Thessalian festival resembling the Saturnalia, 350

Pelorian Zeus, 350

_Pemali_, taboo, 39

Pembrokeshire, cure for warts in, 53

Penance by drawing blood from ears, 292

Pennant, Thomas, quoted, 321, 324

Penzance, horn-blowing at, on the Eve of May Day, 163 _sq._

Perak, periodic expulsion of evils in, 198 _sqq._;
  the rajah of, 198 _sq._

Perche and Beauce, in France, 57, 62

Perchta, Frau, 240 _sq._

Perchta’s Day, 240, 242, 244

_Perchten_, maskers in Salzburg and the Tyrol, 240, 242 _sqq._

Percival, R., quoted, 94 _sq._

Perham, Rev. J., on the Head-feast of the Sea Dyaks, 383 _sq._

Periodic expulsion of evils in a material vehicle, 198 _sqq._

Periods of license preceding or following the annual expulsion of demons,
            225 _sq._

Περίψημα, 255 _n._ 1

Persephone, mourning for, 348 _sq._

Persia, cure for toothache in, 59;
  the feast of Purim in, 393

Persian framework of the book of Esther, 362, 401

—— kings married the wives of their predecessors, 368 _n._ 1

—— marriages at the vernal equinox, 406 _n._ 3

Persians annually expel demons, 145;
  the Sacaea celebrated by the, 402

Peru, Indians of, 3;
  Incas of, 128;
  Aymara Indians of, 193;
  autumn festival in, 262

Peruvian Indians, 9, 27

_Phees_ (_phi_), evil spirits, 97

Philadelphia in Lydia, coin of, 389

Philippine Islands, spirits of the dead in the, 82

Philippines, the Tagbanuas of the, 189

Philo of Alexandria, on the mockery of King Agrippa, 418

Phocylides, the poet, on Nineveh, 390

Phrygia, Cybele and Attis in, 386

Piazza Navona at Rome, Befana on the, 166 _sq._

Pig used to decoy demons, 200, 201

Pig’s blood used in purificatory rites, 262

Pilate and Christ, 416 _sq._

Piles of sticks or stones. _See_ Heaps

Pillar, fever transferred to a, 53

Pine-resin burnt as a protection against witches, 164

Pins stuck into saint’s image, 70 _sq._

Pinzgau district of Salzburg, 244

Pitch smeared on doors to keep out ghosts, 153

Pitchforks ridden by witches, 160, 162

Pithoria, village in India, 191

Pitteri Pennu, the god of increase, 138

Plague transferred to plantain-tree, 4 _sq._;
  god of, 4;
  transferred to camel, 33;
  preventive of, 64;
  demon of, expelled, 173;
  sent away in scapegoat, 193

Plato on parricide, etc., 24 _sq._;
  on poets, 35 _n._ 3;
  on sorcery, 47

Playfair, Major A., quoted, 208 _sq._

Pleiades, ceremony at the appearance of the, 262;
  observed by savages, 326

Pliny on cure of warts, 48 _n._ 2;
  on cure for epilepsy, 68

Pliny’s letter to Trajan, 420

Plough drawn round village to keep off epidemic, 172 _sq._

—— Monday, the rites of, 250 _sq._

Ploughing, ceremonies at, 235

Plutarch on “the expulsion of hunger,” 252

Po Then, a great spirit, 97

Point Barrow, the Esquimaux of, 124

Pollution caused by murder, 25

Polynesia, demons in, 80 _sq._

Pomerania, 17

Pomos of California, their expulsion of devils, 170 _sq._

Pongau district of Salzburg, 244

Pontarlier, Eve of Twelfth Day in, 316

Pontiff of Zela in Pontus, 370, 372

Pontus, rapid spread of Christianity in, 420 _sq._

Porphyry on demons, 104

Port Charlotte in Islay, 62

—— Moresby in New Guinea, 84

Porto Novo, annual expulsion of demons at, 205

Poseidon, cake with twelve knobs offered to, 351

Posterli, expulsion of, 214

Potala Hill at Lhasa, 197

Poverty, annual expulsion of, 144 _sq._

Powers, Stephen, quoted, 170 _sq._

Prajapati, the sacrifice of the creator, 411

Prayer, the materialization of, 22 _n._ 2;
  at sowing, 138

Prayers at cairns or heaps of sticks or leaves, 26, 28, 29 _sq._

Presteign in Radnorshire, the tug-of-war at, 182 _sq._

Priest, the corpse-praying, 45

Priests personating gods, 287

Proa, demons of sickness expelled in a, 185 _sqq._;
  diseases sent away in a, 199 _sq._

Processions for the expulsion of demons, 117, 233;
  bell-ringing, at the Carnival, 247;
  to drive away demons of infertility, 245;
  of maskers, W. Mannhardt on, 250

Procopius, quoted, 125 _n._ 1

Propertius, 19

Propitiation of ancestral spirits, 86;
  of demons, 93, 94, 96, 100

Prussia, “Easter Smacks” in, 268

——, West, 17

Prussian rulers, formerly burnt, 391

Public expulsion of evils, 109 _sqq._

—— scapegoats, 170 _sqq._

_Puḫru_, “assembly,” 361

_Puithiam_, sorcerer, 94

Puna Indians, 9

Punjaub, human scapegoats in the, 196

Puppy, blind, as scapegoat, 50

_Pur_ in the sense of “lot,” 361

Purification by bathing or washing, 3 _sq._;
  by means of stone-throwing, 23 _sqq._;
  religious, intended to keep off demons, 104 _sq._;
  the Great, a Japanese ceremony, 213 _n._ 1;
  by beating, 262;
  Feast of the, (Candlemas), 332

—— festival among the Cherokee Indians, 128

Purim, the Jewish festival of, 360 _sqq._;
  custom of burning effigies of Haman at, 392 _sqq._;
  compared to the Carnival, 394;
  its relation to Persia, 401 _sqq._

Purushu, great primordial giant, 410

Pyre, traditionary death of Asiatic kings and heroes on a, 387, 388, 389
            _sqq._;
  festival of the, at Hierapolis, 392

Pythagoras, his saying as to swallows, 35 _n._ 3

Quauhtitlan, city in Mexico, 301

Queen of the Bean, 313, 315

Queensland, tribes of Central, their expulsion of a demon, 172

Quetzalcoatl, a Mexican god, 281, 300;
  man sacrificed in the character of, 281 _sq._

“Quickening” heifers with a branch of rowan, 266 _sq._

Quixos, Indians of the, 263

Ra, the Egyptian Sun-god, 341

Races to ensure good crops, 249

Radnorshire, 182

Rafts, evils expelled in, 199, 200 _sq._

Rain, charms to produce, 175 _sq._, 178 _sq._;
  or drought, games of ball played to produce, 179 _sq._;
  dances to obtain, 236 _sq._, 238;
  festival to procure, 277;
  divinities of the, 381

—— gods of Mexico, 283

Rainy season, expulsion of demons at the beginning of the, 225

Rajah of Manipur, 39 _sq._;
  of Travancore, 42 _sq._;
  of Tanjore, 44

Ramsay, Sir W. M., 421 _n._ 1

Ranchi, in Chota Nagpur, 139

Rattles to keep out ghosts, 154 _n._

Raven legends among the Esquimaux, 380

Red thread in popular cure, 55

—— and yellow paint on human to represent colours of maize, 285

Reed, W. A., quoted, 82

Reinach, Salomon, 420 _n._ 1

Renan, Ernest, 70

Renewal, annual, of king’s power at Babylon, 356, 358

Resurrection, the divine, in Mexican ritual, 288, 296, 302;
  of the dead god, 400

Revelry at Purim, 363 _sq._

Revels, Master of the, 333 _sq._

Rhea, wife of Cronus, 351

Rhodians, their annual sacrifice of a man to Cronus, 353 _sq._, 397

Rhys, Sir John, 343 _n._;
  quoted, 70 _sq._

Ribhus, Vedic genii of the seasons, 325

Rice-harvest, carnival at the, 226 _n._ 1

Richalm, Abbot, his fear of devils, 105 _sq._

Riddles asked at certain seasons or on certain occasions, 120 _sq._, _n._

“Ride of the Beardless One,” a Persian New Year ceremony, 402 _sq._

Ridgeway, W., 353 _n._ 4;
  on the origin of Greek tragedy, 384 _n._ 2

Ridley, Rev. W., quoted, 123 _sq._

Riedel, J. G. F., quoted, 85

Rig Veda, story of creation in the, 410

Ring suspended in Purim bonfire, 393

Rings, headache transferred to, 2

Ritual murder, accusations of, brought against the Jews, 394 _sqq._

River of Good Fortune, 28

Rivers used to sweep away evils, 3 _sq._, 5;
  offerings and prayers to, 27 _sq._

Rivros, a month of the Gallic calendar, 343

Rockhill, W. W., 220 _n._ 1

Rogations, 277

Roman cure for fever, 47;
  for epilepsy, 68

—— festival in honour of ghosts, 154 _sq._

—— husbandman, his prayers to Mars, 229

—— seasons of sowing, 232

—— soldiers, celebration of the Saturnalia by, 308 _sq._

Romans, their mode of reckoning a day, 326 _n._ 2

Rome, the knocking of nails in ancient, 64 _sqq._;
  Piazza Navona at, 166 _sq._;
  ancient, human scapegoats in, 229 _sqq._;
  the Saturnalia at, 307 _sq._

Romulus, disappearance of, 258

Roocooyen Indians of French Guiana, 263;
  their tug-of-war, 181

Roof, dances on the, 315

Rook, expulsion of devil in island of, 109

Rope, ceremony of sliding down a, 196 _sqq._

Ropes used to keep off demons, 120, 149;
  used to exclude ghosts, 152 _sq._, 154 _n._

Roscher, W. H., on the Salii, 231 _n._ 3

Roscommon, Twelfth Night in, 321 _sq._

Rosemary, used to beat people with, 270, 271

Rouen, ceremony on Ascension Day at, 215 _sq._

Roumanians of Transylvania, 16;
  their belief in demons, 106 _sq._

Rowan-tree, cattle beaten with branches of, on May Day, 266 _sq._;
  used to keep witches from cows, 267

Rue, fumigation with, as a precaution against witches, 158

Rupture, popular cures for, 52, 60

Russia, the Wotyaks of, 155 _sq._

Russian custom on Palm Sunday, 268

—— villagers, their precautions against epidemics, 172 _sq._

_Rutuburi_, a dance of the Tarahumare Indians, 237

Sacaea, a Babylonian festival, 354 _sqq._;
  in relation to Purim, 359 _sqq._;
  and Zakmuk, 399;
  celebrated by the Persians, 402

Sacred dramas, as magical rites, 373 _sqq._

—— harlots, 370, 371, 372

—— slaves, 370

Sacrifice, human, successive mitigations of, 396 _sq._, 408;
  the Brahmanical theory of, 410 _sq._

Sacrifices, human, their influence on cosmogonical theories, 409 _sqq._;
  of deified men, 409

Sacrificial victims, beating people with the skins of, 265

Sagar in India, use of scapegoat at, 190 _sq._

Sahagun, B. de, 276, 280, 300 _n._ 1, 301 _n._ 1

“Saining,” a protection against spirits, 168

St. Barbara’s Day, custom of putting rods in pickle on, 270

St. Dasius, martyrdom of, 308 _sqq._

St. Edmund’s Day in November, 332

St. Eustorgius, church of, at Milan, 331

St. George, Eve of, witches active on the, 158

St. George’s Day among the South Slavs, 54

St. Guirec, 70

St. Hiztibouzit, 413 _n._ 2

St. John the Baptist, 53

St. John (the Evangelist), festival of, 334

St. John’s Day in Abyssinia, 133

St. John’s wort a protection against witchcraft, 160

St. Joseph, feast of, 297

St. Nicholas Day, 337, 338

St. Paul’s, London, the Boy Bishop at 337

St. Peter’s, Canterbury, the Boy Bishop at, 337

St. Peter’s Day (22nd February), ceremony on, 159 _n._ 1

St. Pierre d’Entremont in Normandy, 183

St. Romain, the shrine of, at Rouen, 216

St. Stephen’s Day, 333, 334;
  custom of beating young women on, 270

St. Sylvester’s Day (New Year’s Eve), precautions against witches on, 164
            _sq._

—— Eve at Trieste, 165

St. Tecla, 52

St. Thomas’s Eve, witches active on, 160

Saints, cairns near shrines of, 21;
  Mohammedan, 21, 22

Salii, the dancing priests of Mars, 231 _sqq._

Salisbury, the Boy Bishop at, 337, 338

Salt, the goddess of, 278, 283

—— -makers worship the goddess of Salt, 283;
  their dance, 284

Saluting the rising sun, a Syrian custom, 416

Salzburg, the _Perchten_ in, 240, 242 _sqq._

Samon, a month of the Gallic calendar, 343

Sampson, Agnes, a witch, 38

Samsi-Adad, king of Assyria, 370 _n._ 1

Samyas monastery near Lhasa, 220

San Pellegrino, church of, at Ancona, 310

Sandan, 368;
  legendary or mythical hero of Western Asia, 388 _sqq._

Sandes, the Persian Hercules, 389.
  _See_ Sandan

Santiago Tepehuacan, Indians of, 4, 347. 4

Sarawak, the Sea Dyaks of, 154

Sardan or Sandan, the burning of, 389 _sq._

Sardanapalus, 368; the epitaph of, 388

—— and Ashurbanapal, 387 _sq._

Sardes in Lydia, 389, 391

Sarn, valley of the, in Salzburg, 245

Sarum use, service-books of the, 338

Satan annually expelled by the Wotyaks, 155 _sq._;
  by the Cheremiss, 156

Saturn, the Roman god of sowing, 232, 306, 307 _n._ 1;
  his festival the Saturnalia, 306 _sqq._;
  and the Golden Age, 306, 344, 386;
  man put to death in the character of, 309;
  dedication of the temple of, 345 _n._ 1;
  the old Italian god of sowing, 346

Saturnalia among the Hos and Mundaris of N. E. India, 136 _sq._;
  and kindred festivals, 306 _sqq._;
  the Roman, 306 _sqq._;
  as celebrated by Roman soldiers, 308 _sq._;
  the King of the, 308, 311, 312;
  its relation to the Carnival, 312, 345 _sqq._;
  and Lent, 345 _sqq._;
  in ancient Greece, 350 _sqq._;
  in Western Asia, 354 _sqq._;
  wide prevalence of festivals like the, 407 _sqq._

Savages, their regulation of the calendar, 326

Saxon cure for rupture, 52

Scapegoat, plantain-tree as a, 5;
  decked with women’s ornaments, 192;
  Jewish use of, 210;
  a material vehicle for the expulsion of evils, 224

Scapegoats, immaterial objects as, 1 _sqq._;
  animals as, 31 _sqq._, 190 _sqq._, 208 _sqq._;
  birds as, 35 _sq._;
  human beings as, 38 _sqq._, 210 _sqq._;
  public, 170 _sqq._;
  divine animals as, 216 _sq._, 226 _sq._;
  divine men as, 217 _sqq._, 226 _sq._;
  in general, 224 _sqq._

——, human, 194 _sqq._;
  in classical antiquity, 229 _sqq._;
  in ancient Greece, 252 _sqq._;
  beaten, 252, 255;
  stoned, 253, 254;
  cast into the sea, 254 _sq._;
  reason for beating the, 256 _sq._

“Scaring away the devil” at Penzance on the Eve of May Day, 163 _sq._

Scarlet thread in charm against witchcraft, 267

Schechter, Dr. S., 364 _n._ 1

Scheil, Father, on Elamite inscriptions, 367 _n._ 3

_Schmeckostern_ in Germany and Austria, 268 _sq._

Schönthal, the abbot of, 105

Schönwert, village of Bohemia, 161

Schrader, O., 326 _n._

Schuyler, E., 45

Schwaz, on the Inn, the “grass-ringers” at, 247

Scorpion’s bite, cure for, 49 _sq._

Scotch witch, 38 _sq._

Scotland, the Highlands of, 20;
  cure of warts in, 48;
  witches burnt in, 165;
  Abbot of Unreason in, 331.
  _See also_ Highlands

Scourgings, mutual, of South American Indians, 262

Scythian kings married the wives of their predecessors, 368 _n._ 1

Scythians, revellers disguised as, 355

Sea, scapegoats cast into the, 254 _sq._

—— Dyaks of Sarawak, their Festival of Departed Spirits, 154

Sea-god, sacrifice to, 255

—— -slugs, ceremonies at the annual appearance of, 141 _sqq._

Secret Societies in North-Western America, 377 _sq._

Sedna, Mistress of the Nether World, among the Esquimaux, 125 _sq._

Seed-time, annual expulsion of demons at, 138

Selangor, demons of disease expelled in a ship from, 187 _sq._

Selemnus, the river, 3

Seler, E., 277

Seleucia, 64

Semiramis, mythical and historical, 369 _sqq._;
  the mounds of, 370, 371, 373, 388 _n._ 1;
  the sad fate of her lovers, 371;
  burnt herself on a pyre, 407 _n._ 2

Sena-speaking people, 7

Senegambia, 16;
  the Banmanas of, 261

Senseless Thursday in Carnival, 248

September, expulsion of evils by the Incas of Peru in, 128

Serpents and lizards supposed to renew their youth by casting their skins,
            302 _sqq._

Servians, their precaution against vampyres, 153 _n._ 1

Set, the birth of, 341

Sham fight at New Year, 184;
  as religious rite, 289

Shaman, function of the, 79 _sq._

Shamans, necessity of, 99, 100;
  expel demons, 126;
  among the Esquimaux, 379, 380

Shammuramat and Semiramis, 370 _n._ 1

Shampoo, the fatal, 42

Shans of Kengtung, their expulsion of demons, 116 _sq._;
  of Southern China, their annual expulsion of the fire-spirit, 141

Shawms blown to ban witches, 160

Sheepskins, people beaten with, 265

Shepherd beloved by Ishtar, 371

Shetland Islands, Yule in the, 167 _sqq._

Shinto priest, 116

Ship, sicknesses expelled in a, 185 _sqq._;
  demons expelled in a, 201 _sq._

Shogun’s palace in Japan, 144

“Shooting the Witches,” 164

Shropshire, 182;
  the sin-eater in, 44;
  fires on Twelfth Night in, 321

Shrove Tuesday, the tug-of-war on, 182 _sq._;
  dances to promote the growth of the crops on, 239, 347

Siam, the Laosians of, 97;
  annual expulsion of demons in, 149 _sqq._;
  human scapegoats in, 212

Siamese year of twelve lunar months, 149 _n._ 2

Sicily, Ascension Day in, 54

Sickness transferred to animals in Europe, 49 _sqq._;
  ascribed to demons, 109 _sqq._

Sicknesses expelled in a ship, 185 _sqq._

Sihanaka, the, of Madagascar, 2

Sikhim, cairns in, 26;
  demonolatry in, 94

Silence, compulsory, to deceive demons, 132 _sq._, 140.
  _Compare_ 142

Silesia, expulsion of witches on Good Friday in, 157;
  precautions against witches in, 162 _sq._, 164;
  “Easter Smacks” in, 268, 269;
  mode of reckoning the Twelve Days in, 327

Silili, a Babylonian goddess, 371

Sin-eater, the, 43 _sq._

Sin-eating in Wales, 43 _sq._

Singalang Burong, a Dyak war-god, 383

Sins, confession of, 36, 127;
  transferred to a buffalo calf, 36 _sq._;
  transferred vicariously to human beings, 39 _sqq._;
  of people transferred to animals, 210;
  Delaware Indian remedies for, 263

Sirius associated with Ishtar, 359 _n._ 1

Situa, annual festival of the Incas, 128

Siyins, of N. E. India, their belief in demons, 93

Skin disease, supposed remedy for, 266;
  Mexican remedy for, 298

Skins, creatures that slough their, supposed to renew their youth, 302
            _sqq._

—— of human victims, worn by men in Mexico, 265 _sq._, 288, 290, 294
            _sq._, 296 _sqq._, 301 _sq._

—— of sacrificial victims used to beat people, 265

Sky-goddess, the Egyptian, 341

Sladen, Colonel, 141

Slave Coast, 74

—— women, religious ceremony performed by, 258

Slaves, license granted to, at the Saturnalia, 307 _sq._, 350 _sq._, 351
            _sq._;
  feasted by their masters, 308, 350 _sq._;
  feasted by their mistresses, 346

Slavonia, Good Friday custom in, 268

Slavonic custom of “carrying out Death,” 230

—— peoples, “Easter Smacks” among the, 268

—— year, the beginning of the, 228

Slavs, black god and white god among the, 92

Sleeman, General Sir William, 191

Sloth, the animal, imitated by masker, 381

Sloughing the skin supposed to be a mode of renewing youth, 302 _sqq._

Smallpox, cure for, 6;
  attributed to a devil, 117, 119, 120, 123;
  expelled in a proa, 186

——, demon of, 172;
  sent away in a canoe, 188 _sq._

Smell, foul, used to drive demons away, 112

Smith, W. Robertson, on Semiramis, 369 _sq._

Smut in wheat, ceremony to prevent, 318

Snails as scapegoats, 52, 53

Snake or lizard in annual ceremony for the riddance of evils, 208

Snipe as scapegoat, 51

Social ranks, inversion of, at festivals, 350, 407

Socrates, church historian, 394

Sods, freshly cut, a protection against witches, 163

Soldiers, Roman, celebration of the Saturnalia by, 308 _sq._

Solomon Islanders, their expulsion of demons, 116

—— Islands, 9

Solstice, the winter, ceremony after the, 127

Soma, worship of, 90

Songs, liturgical, revealed by gods, 381

—— and dances, how they originate, 378 _sq._

Sonnenberg, popular cure for gout in, 56

Soracte, Mount, 311

Sorcerers as protectors against demons, 94;
  exorcise demons, 113

_Soule_, a ball contended for in Normandy, 183

Souls of the dead received once a year by their relations, 150 _sqq._

South American Indians, 12, 20

Sow as scapegoat, 33

Sowing, prayer at, 138;
  expulsion of demons at, 225;
  the god of, 232;
  dances at, 234 _sqq._;
  Saturn the god of, 346;
  in Italy, season of the spring, 346

Sown fields, fire applied to, on Eve of Twelfth Night, 316, 318, 321

Spain, the Boy Bishop in, 338

Spear, sacred, 218

Spears used to expel demons, 115, 116

Spirits, retreat of the army of, 72 _sq._;
  guardian, 98;
  good and evil, personated by children, 139;
  Festival of Departed, 154

Spitting as a mode of transferring evil, 3, 10, 11;
  as a mode of transferring disease, 187;
  at ceremony for expulsion of evils, 208

Spittle as a protection against demons, 118

Spring, rites to ensure the revival of life in, 400

Squills used to beat human scapegoats, etc., 255 _sq._

Star, the Morning, personated by a man, 238;
  of Bethlehem, 330

Steele, Sir Richard, quoted, 333

Sternberg, L., quoted, 101 _sq._

Sticks, fertilizing virtue attributed to certain, 264 _sq._

—— and stones, evils transferred to, 8 _sqq._;
  piled on the scene of crimes, 13 _sqq._
  _See also_ Throwing

Stinging young people with ants and wasps, custom of, 263

Stone-throwing at Mecca, rite of, 24;
  in ancient Greece, 24 _sq._

Stones heaped up near shrines of saints, 21;
  communion by means of, 21 _sq._;
  thrown at demons, 131, 146, 152

—— and sticks, evil transferred to, 8 _sqq._;
  piled on the scene of crimes, 13 _sqq._
  _See also_ Throwing

Stoning, execution by, 24 _n._ 2

—— human scapegoats, 253, 254

_Stopfer_, maskers in Switzerland, 239

Stow, John, on Lords of Misrule, quoted, 331 _sq._

Strabo, on the Sacaea, 355, 369;
  on the worship at Zela, 370 _n._ 4;
  on the sanctuary at Zela, 421 _n._ 1

Strack, H. L., 395 _n._ 3

Stratification of religious beliefs among the Malays, 90 _n._ 1

Straw wrapt round fruit-trees as a protection against evil spirits, 164

Strehlitz, in Silesia, 157

Strudeli and Strätteli, 165

Substitutes in human sacrifice, 396 _sq._, 408

Sucla-Tirtha in India, expulsion of sins in, 202

Suffering, principle of vicarious, 1 _sq._

Suffolk cure for ague, 68

Suicides, ghosts of, feared, 17 _sq._

Sukandar river, 60

Sumatra, the Battas or Bataks of, 87, 213

Sun, appeal to the, 3;
  charm to prevent the sun from setting, 30 _n._ 2;
  reappearance of, in the Arctic regions, ceremonies at, 124 _sq._, 125
              _n._ 1;
  temple of the, at Cuzco, 129;
  spirit who lives in the, 186;
  hearts of human victims offered to the, 279, 298;
  Mexican story of the creation of the, 410;
  Syrian custom of saluting the rising, 416

—— -god, Christmas, an old pagan festival of the, 328;
  the Egyptian, 341

Sunderland, cure for cough in, 52

_Süntevögel_ or _Sunnenvögel_, 159 _n._ 1

Superhuman power supposed to be acquired by actors in sacred dramas, 382,
            383

Supplementary days of the year, 171

Supreme Being in West Africa, 74 _sq._

—— God of the Oraons, 92 _sq._

Susa, capital of the Elamites, 366

Swabia, the “Twelve Lot Days” in, 322

Swahili, the, of East Africa, their New Year’s Day, 226 _n._ 1

Swallow dance, 381

Swallows as scapegoats, 35

Sweden, 14, 20, 27

Sweeping misfortune out of house with brooms, 5

—— out the town, annual ceremony of, 135

Swords used to ward off or expel demons, 113, 118, 119, 120, 123, 203;
  carried by mummers, 245

Syria, 17, 21;
  Aphrodite and Adonis in, 386

Syro-Macedonian calendar, 358 _n._ 1

Tagbanuas of the Philippines, their custom of sending spirits of disease
            away in little ships, 189

Tahiti, transference of sins in, 45 _sq._

Tahitians, the, 80

Taigonos Peninsula, 126

Taleins, the, of Burma, their worship of demons, 96

Talmud, the, on Purim, 363

Tamanachiers, Indian tribe of the Orinoco, 303

_Tamanawas_, dramatic performances of myths, 376, 377

Tamarisk branches used to beat people ceremonially, 263

_Tambaran_, demons, 82, 83

Tammuz, the lover of Ishtar, 371, 373;
  annual death and resurrection of, 398;
  at Jerusalem, the weeping for, 400.
  _See also_ Adonis

—— and Ishtar, 399, 406

Tanganyika, Lake, 10

Tangkhuls of Assam, 177

Tanjore, Rajah of, 44

Taoism, 99

Tar to keep out ghosts and witches, 153 _n._ 1

—— -barrels burnt, 169

Tarahumares, the, of Mexico, 10;
  their dances for the crops, 236 _sqq._

Taros, mode of fertilizing, 264

Tarsus in Cilicia, Sandan at, 388, 389, 391, 392

_Taupes et Mulots_, fire ceremony on Eve of Twelfth Night, 317

Tavernier, J. B., quoted, 148 _n._ 1

Taylor, Rev. J. C., quoted, 133, 211

Taylor, Rev. R., quoted, 81

Tellemarken in Norway, 14

Telugu remedy for a fever, 38

Temple, Sir Richard C., quoted, 88

Temple, the Inner and the Middle, Lords of Misrule in the, 333

—— church, Lord of Misrule in the, 333

Temporary king, 403 _sq._;
  in Siam, 151

Tench as scapegoat, 52

Tenggerese of Java, their sham fight at New Year, 184

Tepehuanes, the, of Mexico, 10

Teshu Lama, the, 203

—— Lumbo in Tibet, 203

Teso people of Central Africa, their use of bells to exorcise fiends, 246
            _sq._

Tezcatlipoca, great Mexican god, 276;
  young man annually sacrificed in the character of, 276 _sqq._

Thales on spirits, 104

Thargelia, human scapegoats at the festival of the, 254, 255, 256, 257,
            259, 272, 273

Thay, the, of Indo-China, their worship of spirits, 97 _sq._

Theal, G. McCall, on fear of demons, 77 _sq._

_Theckydaw_, expulsion of demons, 147 _sq._

_Then_, spirits, 97

Theodosius and Honorius, decree of, 392

Theory of sacrifice, the Brahmanical, 410 _sq._

Thompson Indians of British Columbia, their charms against ghosts, 154
            _n._

Thorns, wreaths of, 140

Thrace, Abdera in, 254

Thrashing people to do them good, 262 _sqq._
  _See also_ Beating _and_ Whipping

Thread, red, in popular cure, 55

Three Kings on Twelfth Day, 329 _sqq._

Threshold protected against witches by knives, 162;
  by sods, 163

Throwing of sticks or stones interpreted as an offering or token of
            respect, 20 _sqq._, 25 _sqq._;
  as a mode of riddance of evil, 23 _sqq._

Thule, ceremony in Thule at the annual reappearance of the sun, 125 _n._ 1

Thunder, the first peal heard in spring, 144;
  demon of, exorcised by bells, 246 _sq._

Thüringen, expulsion of witches in, 160;
  custom of beating people on Holy Innocents’ Day in, 271

Tiamat, mythical Babylonian monster, 410

Tibet, demonolatry in, 94;
  human scapegoats in, 218 _sqq._

Tiger-spirits, 199

Tikopia, island of, 189

Timbo in French Guinea, 235

Time, personification of periods of, 230

Timor, the island of, 8;
  belief in the spirits of the dead in, 85

_Timor fecit deos_, 93

Timor-laut Islands, the tug-of-war in the, 176;
  demons of sicknesses expelled in a proa from, 185 _sq._

Tinchebray in Normandy, 183

Tjingilli tribe of Central Australia, 2

Tlacaxipeualiztli, Mexican festival, 296

Tlaloc, temple of, in Mexico, 284, 292

Tlemcen in Algeria, 31

Toad as scapegoat, 193, 206 _sq._

Toboongkoo, the, of Central Celebes, riddles among the, 112 _n._

Toci, Mexican goddess, 289

Todas, the, of the Neilgherry Hills, 37

Togoland, 3; the Hos of, 134, 206;
  the negroes of, their remedy for influenza, 193

Tokio, annual expulsion of demons at, 213

Tomb of Moses, 21

Tonan, Mexican goddess, 287;
  woman sacrificed in the character of, 287 _sq._

Tonocotes. _See_ Lules

Tonquin, demon of sickness expelled in, 119;
  annual expulsion of demons in, 147 _sq._

Toothache, cure for, 6, 57, 58, 59 _sq._, 62, 63, 71

Toradjas, the, of Central Celebes, 34;
  their cure by beating, 265

Torches used in the expulsion of demons, 110, 117, 120, 130, 131, 132, 133
            _sq._, 139, 140, 146, 157, 171;
  used in the expulsion of witches, etc., 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 163,
              165, 166;
  carried in procession by maskers, 243;
  applied to fruit-trees on Eve of Twelfth Night, 316 _sq._

Torquemada, J. de, Spanish historian of Mexico, 279 _n._ 1, 286 _n._ 1,
            300 _n._ 1

Totec, Mexican god, 297, 298;
  personated by a man wearing the skin of a human victim, 300

Totonacs, their worship of the corn-spirit, 286 _n._ 1

Tototectin, men clad in skins of human victims, 298

Toxcatl, fifth month of old Mexican year, 149 _n._ 2;
  Mexican festival, 276

Trajan, Pliny’s letter to, 420

Transference of evil, 1 _sqq._;
  to other people, 5 _sqq._;
  to sticks and stones, 8 _sqq._;
  to animals, 31 _sqq._;
  to men, 38 _sqq._;
  in Europe, 47 _sqq._

Transformation of animals into men, 380

Transylvania, the Roumanians of, 16, 106 _sq._

Travancore, Rajah of, 42 _sq._;
  demon-worship in, 94

Tree, disease transferred to, 6;
  use of stick cut from a fruitful, 264

Trees, evils transferred to, 52, 54 _sqq._

Trieste, St. Sylvester’s Eve at, 165

Trinity, the Batta, 88 _n._ 1

—— College, Cambridge, Lord of Misrule at, 332

_Trinouxtion_, 343 _n._

Tripoli, mode of laying ghosts in, 63

Troezenians, their festival resembling the Saturnalia, 350

Trows in Shetland, 168 _sq._

Trumpets blown to expel demons, 116, 117, 156;
  blown at the feast of Purim, 394

_Tsuina_, expulsion of demons in Japan, 212 _sq._

Tsûl, a Berber tribe, 179

Tuaran district of British North Borneo, 200

Tug-of-war as a religious or magical rite, 173 _sqq._;
  as a charm to produce rain, 175 _sq._, 178 _sq._

Tul-ya’s e’en in Shetland, 168

Tullus Hostilius, 345 _n._ 1

Tumleo, annual fight in, 142 _sq._

Tuna, a spirit, expulsion of, 124 _sq._

Tung ak, a powerful spirit, 79, 80

Turkestan, 45;
  Ferghana in, 184

Turkish tribes of Central Asia, riddles among the, 122 _n._

Turner, L. M., quoted, 79 _sq._

Tuscan Romagna, the, 167

Twelfth Day, serious significance of, 315;
  the Three Kings on, 329 _sqq._
  _See also_ Twelfth Night

—— Day, Eve of, 318;
  expulsion of witches, etc., on, 166 _sq._

—— Night, expulsion of the powers of evil on, 165 _sqq._;
  dances on, 238;
  Perchta’s Day, 244;
  (Epiphany), the King of the Bean on, 313 _sqq._
  _See also_ Twelfth Day

—— Night, Eve of, 316;
  old Mrs. Perchta on, 240, 241;
  ceremonial fires on, 316 _sqq._

Twelve Days, weather of the twelve months supposed to be determined by the
            weather of the, 322 _sqq._;
  in Macedonia, superstitions as to the, 320;
  in ancient India, 324 _sq._;
  accounted a miniature of the year, 324;
  in the Highlands of Scotland, 324;
  difference of opinion as to the date of the, 324, 327;
  probably an old intercalary period at midwinter, 338 _sq._, 342

—— Days from Christmas to Twelfth Night (Epiphany), precautions against
            witches during the, 158 _sqq._, 164 _sqq._

—— Days or Twelve Nights not of Christian origin, 326 _sqq._

—— fires on Eve of Twelfth Day, 318 _sq._, 321 _sq._

Two-faced mask worn by image of goddess, 287

Typhon, the birth of, 341

Tyre and Sidon, 17

Tyrol, annual “Burning out of the Witches” in the, 159 _sq._;
  the _Perchten_ in the, 240, 242 _sq._;
  Senseless Thursday in the, 248

Uganda Protectorate, 6, 42;
  funeral ceremony in, 45 _n,_ 2;
  human scapegoats in, 194 _sq._
  _See also_ Baganda

Unalashka, one of the Aleutian Islands, 16

Unkareshwar, the goddess of cholera at, 194

Unreason, Abbot of, in Scotland, 331

Up-helly-a’ in Shetland, 168 _sq._

Urquhart, Sir Thomas, quoted, 332

Usener, H., 167 _n._ 1, 229 _n._ 2

Utch Kurgan, in Turkestan, 45

Vampyres, charms against, 153 _n._ 1

Vashti and Esther, temporary queens, 401

—— and Haman the duplicates of Esther and Mordecai, 406

Vedic times, 3;
  cure for consumption in, 51;
  the creed of the, 90;
  riddles in, 122 _n._;
  the Aryans of the, 324

Vegetation, Mars a deity of, 229 _sq._;
  out-worn deity of, 231;
  processions representing spirits of, 250

—— -god, Easter an old vernal festival of the, 328

Vehicle, expulsion of evils in a material, 185 _sqq._, 198 _sqq._, 224

Vehicles, material, of immaterial things (fear, misfortune, disease,
            etc.), 1 _sqq._, 22 _n._ 2, 23 _sqq._

Venus and Adonis, 406.
  _See also_ Adonis, Aphrodite

Verrall, A. W., 391 _n._ 4

Vicarious suffering, principle of, 1 _sq._

Vienne, the Boy Bishop at, 337 _n._ 1

Vieux-Pont, in Orne, 183 _n._ 3

Vitzilopochtli, great Mexican god, 280;
  young man annually sacrificed in the character of, 280 _sq._

Vohumano or Vohu Manah, a Persian archangel, 373 _n._ 1

Voigtland, cure for toothache in, 59;
  belief in witchcraft in, 160;
  “Easter Smacks” in, 268;
  young people beat each other at Christmas in, 271

Vosges, cure for toothache in the, 59

—— Mountains, dances on Twelfth Day in the, 315;
  the Three Kings of Twelfth Day in the, 330

Vulsinii in Etruria, 67

Wagogo, the, of German East Africa, 6

Walpurgis Night, witches abroad on, 158 _sqq._;
  annual expulsion of witches on, 159 _sqq._;
  dances on, 238

Warramunga tribe of Central Australia, 2

Warts, transference of, 48 _sq._;
  popular cures for, 54, 57

Washamba, the, of German East Africa, 29

Wasps, stinging people with, 263

Wassailing on Eve of Twelfth Day, 319

Wax figures in magic, 47

Weapons turned against spiritual foes, 233

Weariness transferred to stones or sticks, 8 _sqq._

Weather of the twelve months determined by the weather of the Twelve Days,
            322 _sqq._

Weber, A., on origin of the Twelve Days, 325 _n._ 3

Weeks, Rev. John H., quoted, 76 _sq._

Weights and measures, false, corrected in time of epidemic, 115

Weinhold, K., 327 _n._ 4

Welsh cure for cough, 51

—— custom of sin-eating, 43 _sq._

Wendland, P., on the crucifixion of Christ, 412 _sq._, 418 _n._ 1

Wends of Saxony, their precautions against witches, 163

Westermarck, Dr. Edward, 180

Westphalia, 266

Westphalian form of the expulsion of evil, 159 _n._ 1

Whale represented dramatically as a mystery, 377

Whipping people to rid them of ghosts, 260 _sqq._

Whips used in the expulsion of demons and witches, 156, 159, 160, 161,
            165, 214;
  used by maskers, 243, 244

White as a colour to repel demons, 115

—— and black in relation to human scapegoats, 220;
  figs worn by human scapegoats, 253, 257, 272

—— cock, disease transferred to, 187;
  as scapegoat, 210 _n._ 4

—— crosses made by the King of the Bean, 314

—— dog, sacrifice of, 127;
  as scapegoat, 209 _sq._

—— god and black god among the Slavs, 92

—— Nile, the Dinkas of the, 193

Whitsuntide, 359

Whydah, the King of, 234

Widow, bald-headed, in cure, 38

Widows, cleansing of, 35 _sq._

Wild Huntsman, 164, 241

Willcock, Dr. J., 169 _n._ 2

William of Wykeham, 338

Williams, Monier, quoted, 91 _sq._

Willow used to beat people with at Easter and Christmas, 269, 270

—— -trees in popular remedies, 56, 58, 59

Willow-wood used against witches, 160

Winchester College, Boy Bishop at, 338

Wind, charm to produce a rainy or dry, 176, 178 _sq._

Winnowing-basket beaten at ceremony, 145

Winter, ceremony at the end of, 124;
  dances performed only in, 376;
  ceremony of the expulsion of, 404 _sq._;
  effigies of, destroyed, 408 _sq._

—— solstice, ceremony after the, 126

Witch, fire to burn old, on Twelfth Day, 319

Witchcraft in Scotland, 38 _sq._;
  on the Congo, dread of, 77 _n._ 2;
  permanence of the belief in, 89;
  in Moravia, precautions against, 162

Witches burnt alive, 19;
  the burning out of the, in the Tyrol, 158 _sq._;
  in Bohemia, 161;
  in Silesia and Saxony, 163;
  special precautions against, at certain seasons of the year, 157 _sqq._;
  annually expelled in Calabria, Silesia, and other parts of Europe, 157
              _sqq._;
  active during the Twelve Days from Christmas to Twelfth Night, 158
              _sqq._;
  shooting the, 164;
  driving out the, 164;
  burnt in Scotland, 165;
  beaten with buckthorn, 266;
  rob cows of milk on May Day, 267

Wives of a king taken by his successor, 368 _n._ 1

Woman’s ornaments, scapegoat decked with, 192

Women impregnated by ghosts, 18;
  fertilized by effigy of a baby, 245, 249;
  mode of fertilizing, 264;
  put to death in the character of goddesses in Mexico, 283 _sqq._

Wood, King of the, at Aricia, 409

World conceived as animated, 90 _sq._;
  daily created afresh by the self-sacrifice of the deity, 411

Worship of the dead, 97;
  paid to human representatives of gods in Mexico, 278, 282, 289, 293

Wotyaks of Russia, annual expulsion of Satan among the, 155 _sq._

Wuttke, A., 327 _n._ 4

Xerxes identified with Ahasuerus, 360

Xilonen, Mexican goddess of the Young Maize, 285;
  woman annually sacrificed in the character of, 285 _sq._

Xipe, Mexican god, 297, 298, 299;
  statuette of, 291 _n._ 1;
  his festival, 296 _sqq._;
  his image, 297

Xixipeme, men clad in skins of human victims, 298, 299

Yabim of German New Guinea, their custom of sending disease away in a
            small canoe, 188 _sq._

Yams, ceremonies before eating the new, 134

Year, burning out the Old, 165, 230 _n._ 7;
  the old Roman, began in March, 229;
  supposed representatives of the old, 230.
  _See also_ New Year

——, lunar, of old Roman calendar, 232;
  equated to solar year by intercalation, 325, 342 _sq._

——, solar, intercalation of the, 407 _n._ 1

—— -man, the, in Japan, 144

Years named after eponymous magistrates, 39 _sq._

——, the King of the, 220, 221

Yellow the royal colour among the Malays, 187

Yopico, temple in Mexico, 299

York, the Boy Bishop at, 337, 338

Yoruba negroes of West Africa, their use of human scapegoats, 211 _sq._

Younghusband, Sir Francis, 13

Youth supposed to be renewed by sloughing of skin, 302 _sqq._

Yucatan, the Mayas of, 171, 340

Yukon River, the Lower, 380

Yules, the, in Shetland, 168

_Yumari_, a dance of the Tarahumare Indians, 237 _sq._

Zakmuk or Zagmuk, the Babylonian festival of the New Year, 356 _sqq._

—— and the Sacaea, 399

Zambesi, the river, 7, 11

Zela in Pontus, Anaitis and the Sacaea at, 370, 372, 373, 421 _n._ 1;
  Omanos and Anadates at, 373 _n._ 1

Zeus, cake with twelve knobs offered to, 351;
  an upstart at Olympia, 352;
  identified with the Babylonian Bel, 389

——, Laphystian, associated with human sacrifices, 354

——, Lycaean, human sacrifices to, 353, 354

——, Olympian, his temple at Athens, 351

——, Pelorian, 350

Zimmern, H., 358 _n._, 359 _n._ 1, 361 _n._ 4, 406 _n._ 2

Zoganes, a mock king at Babylon, 355, 357, 365, 368, 369, 387, 388, 406

Zoroaster, 389

Zündel, G., on demonolatry in West Africa, 74 _sqq._

Zuni sacrifice of turtle, 217






FOOTNOTES


   M1 The principle of vicarious suffering.
   M2 Transference of evil to things. Evils swept away by rivers.

    1 J. G. F. Riedel, _De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes
      en Papua_ (The Hague, 1886), pp. 266 _sq._, 305, 357 _sq._; compare
      _id._, pp. 141, 340.

    2 Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, _The Northern Tribes of Central
      Australia_ (London, 1904), p. 474.

    3 J. Pearse, “Customs connected with Death and Burial among the
      Sihanaka,” _The Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine_, vol.
      ii., _Reprint of the Second four Numbers_ (Antananarivo, 1896), pp.
      146 _sq._

    4 Ivan Petroff, _Report on the Population, Industries, and Resources
      of Alaska_, p. 158.

    5 H. Oldenberg, _Die Religion des Veda_ (Berlin, 1894), p. 322.

    6 J. Spieth, _Die Ewe-Stämme_ (Berlin, 1906), p. 800.

    7 Pausanias, vii. 23. 3.

    8 P. J. de Arriaga, _Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Piru_ (Lima,
      1621), p. 29.

   M3 Transference of evil to things.

    9 This I learned from my friend W. Robertson Smith, who mentioned as
      his authority David of Antioch, _Tazyin_, in the story “Orwa.”

   10 R. Andree, _Ethnographische Parallele und Vergleiche_ (Stuttgart,
      1878), pp. 29 _sq._

   11 “Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepehuacan à son évêque sur les mœurs et
      coutumes des Indiens soumis à ses soins,” _Bulletin de la Société de
      Géographie_ (Paris), Deuxième Série, ii. (1834) p. 182.

   12 Rev. J. Roscoe, _The Baganda_ (London, 1911), pp. 309 _sq._

   M4 Dyak transference of evil to things.

   13 C. Hupe, “Korte Verhandeling over de Godsdienst, Zeden enz. der
      Dajakkers,” _Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië_, 1846, dl. iii. pp.
      149 _sq._; F. Grabowsky, “Die Theogonie der Dajaken auf Borneo,”
      _Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie_, v. (1892) p. 131.

   M5 Evils transferred to other persons through the medium of things.

   14 J. Dawson, _Australian Aborigines_ (Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide,
      1881), p. 59.

   15 W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), i. 164 _sq._

   16 Rev. J. Roscoe, “The Bahima, a Cow Tribe of Enkole,” _Journal of the
      Royal Anthropological Institute_, xxxvii. (1907) p. 103.

   17 Rev. J. Cole, “Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa,” _Journal
      of the Anthropological Institute_, xxxiii. (1902) p. 313.

   M6 Evils transferred to images. Mongol transference of evil to things.

   18 Rev. J. Roscoe, _The Baganda_ (London, 1911), pp. 343 _sq._

   19 Dudley Kidd, _The Essential Kafir_ (London, 1904), p. 146.

_   20 Central Provinces, Ethnographic Survey_, iii., _Draft Articles on
      Forest Tribes_ (Allahabad, 1907), p. 63.

   21 M. v. Beguelin, “Religiöse Volksbräuche der Mongolen,” _Globus_,
      lvii. (1890) pp. 209 _sq._

   M7 Fatigue transferred to stones, sticks, or leaves.

   22 J. G. F. Riedel, “Die Landschaft Dawan oder West-Timor,” _Deutsche
      geographische Blätter_, x. 231.

   23 J. G. F. Riedel, _De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes
      en Papua_ (The Hague, 1886), p. 340.

   24 R. H. Codrington, D.D., _The Melanesians_ (Oxford, 1891), p. 186.

   M8 Heaps of stones or sticks among the American Indians.

   25 G. F. de Oviedo, _Histoire du Nicaragua_ (Paris, 1840), pp. 42 _sq._
      (Ternaux-Compans, _Voyages, Relations et Mémoires originaux, pour
      servir à l’Histoire de la Découverte de l’Amérique_).

   26 P. J. de Arriaga, _Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Piru_ (Lima,
      1621), pp. 37, 130. As to the custom compare J. J. von Tschudi,
      _Peru_ (St. Gallen, 1846), ii. 77 _sq._; H. A. Weddell, _Voyage dans
      le Nord de la Bolivia et dans les parties voisines du Pérou_ (Paris
      and London, 1853), pp. 74 _sq._ These latter writers interpret the
      stones as offerings.

   27 Baron E. Nordenskiöld, “Travels on the Boundaries of Bolivia and
      Argentina,” _The Geographical Journal_, xxi. (1903) p. 518.

   28 C. Lumholtz, _Unknown Mexico_ (London, 1903), ii. 282.

   29 Brasseur de Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations civilisées du Mexique
      et de l’Amérique-Centrale_ (Paris, 1857-1859), ii. 564; compare iii.
      486. Indians of Guatemala, when they cross a pass for the first
      time, still commonly add a stone to the cairn which marks the spot.
      See C. Sapper, “Die Gebräuche und religiösen Anschauungen der
      Kekchi-Indianer,” _Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie_, viii.
      (1895) p. 197.

   M9 Heaps of stones or sticks among the natives of Africa.

   30 F. F. R. Boileau, “The Nyasa-Tanganyika Plateau,” _The Geographical
      Journal_, xiii. (1899) p. 589. In the same region Mr. L. Decle
      observed many trees or rocks on which were placed little heaps of
      stones or bits of wood, to which in passing each of his men added a
      fresh stone or bit of wood or a tuft of grass. “This,” says Mr. L.
      Decle, “is a tribute to the spirits, the general precaution to
      ensure a safe return” (_Three Years in Savage Africa_, London, 1898,
      p. 289). A similar practice prevails among the Wanyamwezi (_ibid._
      p. 345). Compare J. A. Grant, _A Walk across Africa_ (Edinburgh and
      London, 1864), pp. 133 _sq._

   31 Cowper Rose, _Four Years in Southern Africa_ (London, 1829), p. 147.

   32 Dudley Kidd, _The Essential Kafir_ (London, 1904), p. 264.

  M10 The heaps of stones or sticks generally on the tops of mountains or
      passes.

   33 S. Kay, _Travels and Researches in Caffraria_ (London, 1833), pp.
      211 _sq._; Rev. H. Callaway, _Religious System of the Amazulu_, i.
      66; D. Leslie, _Among the Zulus and Amatongas_ (Edinburgh, 1875),
      pp. 146 _sq._ Compare H. Lichtenstein, _Reisen im südlichen Africa_
      (Berlin, 1811-1812), i. 411.

   34 W. Gowland, “Dolmens and other Antiquities of Corea,” _Journal of
      the Anthropological Institute_, xxiv. (1895) pp. 328 _sq._; Mrs.
      Bishop, _Korea and her Neighbours_ (London, 1898), i. 147, ii. 223.
      Both writers speak as if the practice were to spit on the cairn
      rather than on the particular stone which the traveller adds to it;
      indeed, Mrs. Bishop omits to notice the custom of adding to the
      cairns. Mr. Gowland says that almost every traveller carries up at
      least one stone from the valley and lays it on the pile.

   35 D. Forbes, “On the Aymara Indians of Peru and Bolivia,” _Journal of
      the Ethnological Society of London_, ii. (1870) pp. 237 _sq._; G. C.
      Musters, “Notes on Bolivia,” _Journal of the Royal Geographical
      Society_, xlvii. (1877) p. 211; T. T. Cooper, _Travels of a Pioneer
      of Commerce_ (London, 1871), p. 275; J. A. H. Louis, _The Gates of
      Thibet, a Bird’s Eye View of Independent Sikkhim, British Bhootan,
      and the Dooars_ (Calcutta, 1894), pp. 111 _sq._; A. Bastian, _Die
      Völker des östlichen Asien_, ii. (Leipsic, 1866) p. 483. So among
      the Mrus of Aracan, every man who crosses a hill, on reaching the
      crest, plucks a fresh young shoot of grass and lays it on a pile of
      the withered deposits of former travellers (T. H. Lewin, _Wild Races
      of South-Eastern India_, London, 1870, pp. 232 _sq._).

  M11 Fatigue let out with the blood.

   36 A. d’Orbigny, _Voyage dans l’Amérique Méridionale_, ii. (Paris and
      Strasburg, 1839-1843) pp. 92 _sq._

  M12 Piles of stones or sticks on the scene of crimes. The Liar’s Heap.

   37 (Sir) F. E. Younghusband, “A Journey across Central Asia,”
      _Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society_, x. (1888) p. 494.

   38 F. Liebrecht, _Zur Volkskunde_ (Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 274 _sq._

   39 F. Liebrecht, _Zur Volkskunde_, p. 274; J. B. Holzmayer, “Osiliana,”
      _Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat_,
      vii. (1872) p. 73.

   40 Spenser St. John, _Life in the Forests of the Far East_2 (London,
      1863), i. 88.

   41 E. H. Gomes, _Seventeen Years among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo_
      (London, 1911), pp. 66 _sq._

   42 Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, _The Pagan Tribes of Borneo_ (London,
      1912), i. 123.

  M13 Heaps of stones, sticks, or leaves on scenes of murder. Heaps of
      stones or sticks on graves.

   43 A. C. Haddon, “A Batch of Irish Folk-lore,” _Folk-lore_, iv. (1893)
      pp. 357, 360; Laisnel de la Salle, _Croyances et Légendes du Centre
      de la France_ (Paris, 1875), ii. 75, 77; J. Brand, _Popular
      Antiquities_, ii. 309; Hylten-Cavallius, quoted by F. Liebrecht,
      _Zur Volkskunde_, p. 274; K. Haupt, _Sagenbuch der Lausitz_
      (Leipsic, 1862-1863), ii. 65; K. Müllenhoff, _Sagen, Märchen und
      Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg_ (Kiel,
      1845), p. 125; A. Kuhn, _Märkische Sagen und Märchen_ (Berlin,
      1843), p. 113; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, _Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen
      und Gebräuche_ (Leipsic, 1848), p. 85; A. Treichel, “Reisighäufung
      und Steinhäufung an Mordstellen,” _Am Ur-Quelle_, vi. (1896) p. 220;
      Georgeakis et Pineau, _Folk-lore de Lesbos_, p. 323; A. Leared,
      _Morocco and the Moors_ (London, 1876), pp. 105 _sq._; E. Doutté,
      “Figuig,” _La Géographie, Bulletin de la Société de Géographie_
      (Paris), vii. (1903) p. 197; _id._, _Magie et Religion dans
      l’Afrique du Nord_ (Algiers, 1908), pp. 424 _sq._; A. von
      Haxthausen, _Transkaukasia_ (Leipsic, 1856), i. 222; C. T. Wilson,
      _Peasant Life in the Holy Land_ (London, 1906), p. 285; W. Crooke,
      _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_ (Westminster,
      1896), i. 267 _sq._; J. Bricknell, _The Natural History of North
      Carolina_ (Dublin, 1737), p. 380; J. Adair, _History of the American
      Indians_ (London, 1775), p. 184; K. Martin, _Bericht über eine Reise
      nach Nederlandsch West-Indien_, Erster Theil (Leyden, 1887), p. 166;
      G. C. Musters, “Notes on Bolivia,” _Journal of the Royal
      Geographical Society_, xlvii. (1877) p. 211; B. F. Matthes, _Einige
      Eigenthümlichkeiten in den Festen und Gewohnheiten der Makassaren
      und Büginesen_, p. 25 (separate reprint from _Travaux de la 6e
      Session du Congrès International des Orientalistes à Leide_, vol.
      ii.); R. A. Cruise, _Journal of a Ten Months’ Residence in New
      Zealand_ (London, 1823), p. 186.

   44 Ch. Wilkes, _Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition_,
      New Edition (New York, 1851), iii. 50.

   45 Captain James Cook, _Voyages_ (London, 1809), vi. 479.

   46 E. Gerard, _The Land beyond the Forest_ (Edinburgh and London,
      1888), i. 311, 318.

   47 H. Lichtenstein, _Reisen im Südlichen Africa_ (Berlin, 1811-1812),
      i. 349 _sq._; Sir James E. Alexander, _Expedition of Discovery into
      the Interior of Africa_ (London, 1838), i. 166; C. J. Andersson,
      _Lake Ngami_, Second Edition (London, 1856), p. 327; W. H. I. Bleek,
      _Reynard the Fox in South Africa_ (London, 1864), p. 76; Th. Hahn,
      _Tsuni-Goam, the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi_ (London, 1881), p.
      56. Compare _The Dying God_, p. 3.

   48 Th. Hahn, “Die Buschmänner,” _Globus_, xviii. 141.

   49 Th. Waitz, _Anthropologie der Naturvölker_, ii. (Leipsic, 1860) p.
      195, referring to Raffenel, _Nouveau Voyage dans le pays des nègres_
      (Paris, 1856), i. 93 _sq._

   50 Eijūb Abēla, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss abergläubischer Gebräuche in
      Syrien,” _Zeitschrift des Deutschen Palaestina-Vereins_, vii. (1884)
      p. 102.

   51 Note by G. P. Badger, on _The Travels of Ludovico di Varthema_,
      translated by J. W. Jones (Hakluyt Society, 1863), p. 45. For more
      evidence of the custom in Syria see W. M. Thomson, _The Land and the
      Book_ (London, 1859), p. 490; F. Sessions, “Some Syrian Folklore
      Notes,” _Folk-lore_, ix. (1898) p. 15; A. Jaussen, _Coutumes des
      Arabes au pays de Moab_ (Paris, 1908), p. 336.

  M14 Stones and sticks hurled as missiles at dangerous ghosts and demons.
      Missiles to ward off dangerous ghosts.

   52 A. Treichel, “Reisig- und Steinhäufung bei Ermordeten oder
      Selbstmördern,” _Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für
      Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, 1888_, p. (569) (bound
      up with _Zeitschrift für Ethnologie_, xx. 1888).

   53 Rev. J. Roscoe, _The Baganda_ (London, 1911), pp. 20 _sq._, 46
      _sq._, 124 _sq._, 126 _sq._, 289 _sq._ Stones are not mentioned
      among the missiles hurled at ghosts, probably because stones are
      scarce in Uganda. See J. Roscoe, _op. cit._ p. 5.

   54 Father Finaz, S.J., in _Les Missions Catholiques_, vii. (1875) p.
      328.

   55 “Der Muata Cazembe und die Völkerstämme der Maraves, Chevas,
      Muembas, Lundas, und andere von Süd-Afrika,” _Zeitschrift für
      allgemeine Erdkunde_, vi. (1856) p. 287.

_   56 Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal_, lxxii. Part iii.
      (Calcutta, 1904) p. 87.

   57 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, _In Centraal Borneo_ (Leyden, 1900), i. 146.

   58 Euripides, _Electra_, 327 _sq._

   59 Propertius, v. 5. 77 _sq._

  M15 But the stones and sticks thrown on heaps cannot always be explained
      as missiles discharged at spiritual foes. Cairns raised in honour of
      Moslem saints.

   60 M. Merker, _Die Masai_ (Berlin, 1904), p. 193.

   61 A. C. Hollis, _The Masai_ (Oxford, 1905), pp. 305 _sq._

   62 E. D. Clarke, _Travels in various Countries of Europe and Asia_, vi.
      (London, 1823) p. 165.

   63 W. H. D. Rouse, “Notes from Syria,” _Folk-lore_, vi. (1895) p. 173.
      Compare F. Sessions, “Some Syrian Folklore Notes, gathered on Mount
      Lebanon,” _Folk-lore_, ix. (1898) p. 15.

   64 E. Doutté, _Magie et Religion dans l’ Afrique du Nord_ (Algiers,
      1908), pp. 420-422.

  M16 Stones as channels of communication with saints, living or dead.

   65 E. Doutté, _Magie et Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord_, p. 440,
      quoting De Ségonzac, _Voyage au Maroc_, p. 82.

   66 I follow the exposition of E. Doutté, whose account of the sanctity
      or magical influence (_baraka_) ascribed to the persons of living
      Mohammedan saints (marabouts) is very instructive. See his _Magie et
      Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord_, pp. 438 _sqq._ Mr. E. S. Hartland
      had previously explained the custom of throwing stones and sticks on
      cairns as acts of ceremonial union with the spirit who is supposed
      to reside in the cairn. See his _Legend of Perseus_, ii. (London,
      1895) p. 128. While this theory offers a plausible explanation of
      some cases of the custom, I do not think that it will cover them
      all. M. René Dussaud argues that the stones deposited at shrines of
      holy men are simply material embodiments of the prayers which at the
      same time the suppliants address to the saints; and he holds that
      the practice of depositing stones at such places rests on a
      principle entirely different from that of throwing stones for the
      purpose of repelling evil spirits. See René Dussaud, “La
      matérialisation de la prière en Orient,” _Bulletins et Mémoires de
      la Société d’ Anthropologie de Paris_, V. Série, vii. (1906) pp.
      213-220. If I am right, the fundamental idea in these customs is
      neither that the stones or sticks are offerings presented to good
      spirits nor that they are missiles hurled at bad ones, but that they
      embody the evil, whether disease, misfortune, fear, horror, or what
      not, of which the person attempts to rid himself by transferring it
      to a material vehicle. But I am far from confident that this
      explanation applies to all cases. In particular it is difficult to
      reconcile it with the custom, described in the text, of throwing a
      marked stone at a holy man and then recovering it. Are we to suppose
      that the stone carries away the evil to the good man and brings back
      his blessing instead? The idea is perhaps too subtle and
      far-fetched.

      The word _baraka_, which in North Africa describes the powerful and
      in general beneficent, yet dangerous, influence which emanates from
      holy persons and things, is no doubt identical with the Hebrew
      _bĕrakhah_ (ברכה) “blessing.” The importance which the ancient
      Hebrews ascribed to the blessing or the curse of a holy man is
      familiar to us from many passages in the Old Testament. See, for
      example, Genesis xxvii., xlviii. 8 _sqq._; Deuteronomy xxvii. 11
      _sqq._, xxviii. 1 _sqq._

  M17 The rite of throwing sticks or stones is perhaps best explained as a
      mode of purification, the evil being thought to be embodied in the
      missile which is thrown away.

   67 E. Doutté, _Magie et Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord_ (Algiers,
      1908), pp. 430 sq.; J. Wellhausen, _Reste arabischen Heidentums_2
      (Berlin, 1897), p. 111. The explanation given in the text is
      regarded as probable by Professor M. J. de Goeje (_Internationales
      Archiv für Ethnographie_, xvi. ,1904, p. 42.)

  M18 This interpretation of stone-throwing agrees with ancient Greek and
      Indian tradition and custom.

_   68 Etymologicum Magnum_, _s.v._ Ἑρμαῖον, pp. 375 _sq._; Eustathius on
      Homer, _Odyssey_, xvi. 471. As to the heaps of stones see Cornutus,
      _Theologiae Graecae Compendium_, 16; Babrius, _Fabulae_, xlviii. 1
      _sq._; Suidas, _s.v._ Ἑρμαῖον; Scholiast on Nicander, _Ther._ 150;
      M. P. Nilsson, _Griechische Feste_ (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 388 _sqq._
      The method of execution by stoning may perhaps have been resorted to
      in order to avoid the pollution which would be entailed by contact
      with the guilty and dying man.

   69 Plato, _Laws_, ix. 12, p. 873 A-C λίθον ἕκαστος φέρων ἐπὶ τὴν
      κεφαλὴν τοῦ νεκροῦ βάλλων ἀφοσιούτω τὴν πόλιν ὅλην.

_   70 Satapatha Brahmana_, ix. 1. 2. 9-12, Part iv. p. 171 of J.
      Eggeling’s translation (_Sacred Books of the East_, vol. xliii.,
      Oxford, 1897). As to Nirriti, the Goddess of Destruction, see H.
      Oldenberg, _Die Religion des Veda_ (Berlin, 1894), pp. 323, 351,
      354, 489 note 3.

  M19 The throwing of sticks or stones on piles is sometimes explained as
      a sacrifice. Certainly the throwing of stones is sometimes
      accompanied by sacrifices. Heaps of sticks at the fords of rivers in
      Africa.

   71 See, for example, O. Baumann, _Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle_
      (Berlin, 1894), p. 214; G. M. Dawson, “Notes on the Shuswap People
      of British Columbia,” _Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada_,
      ix. (1891) section ii. p. 38; F. Liebrecht, _Zur Volkskunde_
      (Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 267 _sq._, 273 _sq._, 276, 278 _sq._; R.
      Andree, _Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche_ (Stuttgart,
      1878), p. 48; Catat, in _Le Tour du Monde_, lxv. (1893), p. 40. Some
      of these writers have made a special study of the practices in
      question. See F. Liebrecht, “Die geworfenen Steine,” _Zur
      Volkskunde_, pp. 267-284; R. Andree, “Steinhaufen,” _Ethnographische
      Parallelen und Vergleiche_, pp. 46-58; E. S. Hartland, _The Legend
      of Perseus_, ii. (London, 1895) pp. 204 _sqq._; E. Doutté, _Magie et
      Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord_ (Algiers, 1908), pp. 419 _sqq._
      With the views of the last of these writers I am in general
      agreement.

   72 However, at the waterfall of Kriml, in the Tyrol, it is customary
      for every passer-by to throw a stone into the water; and this
      attention is said to put the water-spirits in high good humour; for
      they follow the wayfarer who has complied with the custom and guard
      him from all the perils of the dangerous path. See F. Panzer,
      _Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie_ (Munich, 1848-1855), ii. 236
      _sq._

   73 J. A. H. Louis, _The Gates of Thibet_, Second Edition (Calcutta,
      1894), pp. 111 _sq._

   74 L. A. Waddell, _Among the Himalayas_ (Westminster, 1899), pp. 115,
      188.

   75 Brasseur de Bourbourg, _Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique
      et de l’Amérique-Centrale_, ii. 564.

   76 C. Sapper, “Die Gebräuche und religiösen Anschauungen der
      Kekchí-Indianer,” _Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie_, viii.
      (1895) pp. 197 _sq._

   77 D. Forbes, “On the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru,” _Journal of
      the Ethnological Society of London_, ii. (1870) pp. 237 _sq._; G. C.
      Musters, “Notes on Bolivia,” _Journal of the Royal Geographical
      Society_, xlvii. (1877) p. 211; Baron E. Nordenskiöld, “Travels on
      the Boundaries of Bolivia and Argentina,” _The Geographical
      Journal_, xxi. (1903) p. 518.

   78 P. J. de Arriaga, _Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Piru_ (Lima,
      1621), pp. 37, 130.

   79 F. Liebrecht, _Zur Volkskunde_, p. 274; Brett, “Dans la Corée
      Septentrionale,” _Les Missions Catholiques_, xxxi. (1899) p. 237.

   80 W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), i. 115. “In some parts of Bilaspore there may
      be seen heaps of stones, which are known as _kuriyā_, from the word
      _kurhonā_, meaning to heap or pile-up. Just how and why the practice
      was started the people cannot explain; but to this day every one who
      passes a _kuriyā_ will take up a stone and throw it on the pile.
      This, they say, has been done as long as they can remember” (E. M.
      Gordon, _Indian Folk Tales_, London, 1908, p. 14).

   81 W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), i. 267 _sq._

   82 Rev. J. Roscoe, _The Baganda_ (London, 1911), p. 163.

   83 P. Amaury Talbot, _In the Shadow of the Bush_ (London, 1912), p.
      242. As to the goddess Nimm, see _id._, pp. 2 _sq._

   84 P. Amaury Talbot, _op. cit._ p. 91.

   85 A. Karasek, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Waschambaa,”
      _Baessler-Archiv_, i. (1911) p. 194.

   86 M. Martin, “A Description of the Western Islands of Scotland,” in
      John Pinkerton’s _Voyages and Travels_ (London, 1808-1814), iii.
      691.

  M20 The throwing of stones and sticks is sometimes accompanied by
      prayers. Gradual transformation of an old magical ceremony into a
      religious rite.

   87 E. Aymonier, _Notes sur le Laos_ (Saigon, 1885), p. 198.

   88 E. T. Atkinson, _The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western
      Provinces of India_, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) p. 832.

   89 T. T. Cooper, _Travels of a Pioneer of Commerce_ (London, 1871), p.
      275. Compare W. W. Rockhill, _The Land of the Lamas_ (London, 1891),
      pp. 126 _sq._

   90 Rev. J. Macdonald, “Manners, Customs, Superstitions, and Religions
      of South African Tribes,” _Journal of the Anthropological
      Institute_, xx. (1891) p. 126.

   91 Sir James E. Alexander, _Expedition of Discovery into the Interior
      of Africa_ (London, 1838), i. 166.

   92 S. Kay, _Travels and Researches in Caffraria_ (London, 1833), pp.
      211 _sq._ When the Bishop of Capetown once passed a heap of stones
      on the top of a mountain in the Amapondo country he was told that
      “it was customary for every traveller to add one to the heap that it
      might have a favourable influence on his journey, and enable him to
      arrive at some kraal while the pot is yet boiling” (J. Shooter, _The
      Kaffirs of Natal_, London, 1857, p. 217). Here there is no mention
      of a prayer. Similarly a Basuto on a journey, when he fears that the
      friend with whom he is going to stay may have eaten up all the food
      before his guest’s arrival, places a stone on a cairn to avert the
      danger (E. Casalis, _The Basutos_, London, 1861, p. 272). The reason
      alleged for the practice in these cases is perhaps equivalent to the
      one assigned by the Melanesians and others; by ridding the traveller
      of his fatigue it enables him to journey faster and so to reach his
      destination before supper is over. But sometimes a travelling
      Mowenda will place a stone, not on a cairn, but in the fork of a
      tree, saying, “May the sun not set before I reach my destination.”
      See Rev. E. Gottschling, “The Bawenda,” _Journal of the
      Anthropological Institute_, xxxv. (1905) p. 381. This last custom is
      a charm to prevent the sun from setting. See _The Magic Art and the
      Evolution of Kings_, i. 318. In Senegal the custom of throwing
      stones on cairns by the wayside is said to be observed “in order to
      ensure a speedy and prosperous return.” See Dr. Bellamy, “Notes
      ethnographiques recueillies dans le Haut-Sénégal,” _Revue d’
      Ethnographie_, v. (1886) p. 83. In the Fan country of West Africa
      the custom of adding a leafy branch to a heap of such branches in
      the forest was explained by a native, who said that it was done to
      prevent the trees and branches from falling on the traveller’s head,
      and their roots from wounding his feet. See Father Trilles, “Mille
      lieues dans l’inconnu,” _Les Missions Catholiques_, xxxiv. (1902) p.
      142.

   93 Th. Hahn, “Die Buschmänner,” _Globus_, xviii. 141. As to the cairn
      in question, see above, p. 16.

  M21 Evils transferred to animals in Africa.

   94 J. Smith, _Trade and Travels in the Gulph of Guinea_ (London, 1851),
      p. 77.

   95 O. Dapper, _Description de l’Afrique_ (Amsterdam, 1686), p. 117.

   96 A. Leared, _Morocco and the Moors_ (London, 1876), p. 301. Compare
      E. Doutté, _Magie et Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord_ (Algiers,
      1908), p. 454.

   97 E. Doutté, _op. cit._ pp. 454 _sq._

   98 Dudley Kidd, _The Essential Kafir_ (London, 1904), p. 261.

   99 Rev. John Campbell, _Travels in South Africa_ (London, 1822), ii.
      207 _sq._

  100 Rev. J. Roscoe, _The Baganda_ (London, 1911), pp. 342 _sq._

  101 P. Cayzac, “La religion des Kikuyu,” _Anthropos_, v. (1910) p. 311.

  102 Rev. J. Roscoe, “The Bahima, a Cow Tribe of Enkole,” _Journal of the
      Royal Anthropological Institute_, xxxvii. (1907) p. 111.

  M22 Evils transferred to animals in various parts of the world.

  103 Dr. R. F. Kaindl, “Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,” _Globus_, lxxvi.
      (1899) p. 254.

  104 J. Goldziher, _Muhammedanische Studien_ (Halle a. S., 1888-1890), i.
      34.

  105 E. Diguet, _Les Annamites_ (Paris, 1906), pp. 283 _sq._

  106 W. Müller, “Über die Wildenstämme der Insel Formosa,” _Zeitschrift
      für Ethnologie_, xlii. (1910) p. 237. The writer’s use of the
      pronoun (_sie_) is ambiguous.

  107 Father E. Amat, in _Annales de la Propagation de la Foi_, lxx.
      (1898) pp. 266 _sq._

  M23 Vehicles for the transference of evils in Madagascar.

  108 Rev. W. Ellis, _History of Madagascar_ (London, N.D.), i. 422 _sq._;
      compare _id._, pp. 232, 435, 436 _sq._; Rev. J. Sibree, _The Great
      African Island_ (London, 1880), pp. 303 _sq._ As to divination by
      the _sikidy_, see J. Sibree, “Divination among the Malagasy,”
      _Folk-lore_, iii. (1892) pp. 193-226.

  109 W. Ellis, _op. cit._ i. 374; J. Sibree, _The Great African Island_,
      p. 304; J. Cameron, in _Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine,
      Reprint of the First Four Numbers_ (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 263.

  M24 Extraction of kleptomania by spiders and crabs. Evils transferred to
      birds, which fly away with them.

  110 N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruijt, _De Bare’e-sprekende Toradja’s van
      Midden-Celebes_, i. (Batavia, 1912) p. 399.

  111 W. Ködding, “Die Batakschen Götter,” _Allgemeine
      Missions-Zeitschrift_, xii. (1885) p. 478; Dr. R. Römer, “Bijdrage
      tot de Geneeskunst der Karo-Batak’s,” _Tijdschrift voor Indische
      Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde_, l. (1908) p. 223.

  112 W. E. Maxwell, “The Folklore of the Malays,” _Journal of the Straits
      Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society_, No. 7 (June, 1881), p. 27; W.
      W. Skeat, _Malay Magic_ (London, 1900), pp. 534 _sq._

  113 Dio Chrysostom, _Orat._ liii. vol. ii. pp. 164 _sq._ ed. L. Dindorf
      (Leipsic, 1857). Compare Plato, _Republic_, iii. 9, p. 398 A, who
      ironically proposes to dismiss poets from his ideal state in the
      same manner. These passages of Plato and Dio Chrysostom were pointed
      out to me by my friend Professor Henry Jackson. There was a Greek
      saying, attributed to Pythagoras, that swallows should not be
      allowed to enter a house (Plutarch, _Quaest. Conviv._ viii. 7, 1).

  114 Dr. R. F. Kaindl, “Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,” _Globus_, lxxvi.
      (1899) pp. 255 _sq._

  115 Leviticus xiv. 7, 53.

  116 J. Wellhausen, _Reste arabischen Heidentumes_ (Berlin, 1887), p.
      156; W. Robertson Smith, _Religion of the Semites_, New Edition
      (London, 1894), pp. 422, 428.

  M25 Evils transferred to animals in India.

  117 W. Crooke, _Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and
      Oudh_ (Calcutta, 1896), iii. 434.

  118 E. Thurston, _Castes and Tribes of Southern India_ (Madras, 1909),
      i. 113-117; _id._, _Ethnographic Notes in Southern India_ (Madras,
      1906), pp. 192-196; Captain H. Harkness, _Description of a Singular
      Aboriginal Race inhabiting the Summit of the Neilgherry Hills_
      (London, 1832), p. 133; F. Metz, _The Tribes inhabiting the
      Neilgherry Hills_, Second Edition (Mangalore, 1864), p. 78; Jagor,
      “Ueber die Badagas im Nilgiri-Gebirge,” _Verhandlungen der Berliner
      Gesellschaft für Anthropologie_ (1876), pp. 196 _sq._ At the Badaga
      funerals witnessed by Mr. E. Thurston “no calf was brought near the
      corpse, and the celebrants of the rites were satisfied with the mere
      mention by name of a calf, which is male or female according to the
      sex of the deceased.”

  119 H. Harkness, _l.c._

  120 J. W. Breeks, _An Account of the Primitive Tribes and Monuments of
      the Nīlagiris_ (London, 1873), pp. 23 _sq._; W. H. R. Rivers, _The
      Todas_ (London, 1906), pp. 376 _sq._

  121 E. T. Atkinson, _The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western
      Provinces of India_, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) pp. 927 _sq._ In other
      parts of North-Western India on the eleventh day after a death a
      bull calf is let loose with a trident branded on its shoulder or
      quarter “to become a pest.” See (Sir) Denzil C. J. Ibbetson, _Report
      on the Revision of Settlement of the Panipat Tahsil and Karnal
      Parganah of the Karnal District_ (Allahabad, 1883), p. 137. In
      Behar, a district of Bengal, a bullock is also let loose on the
      eleventh day of mourning for a near relative. See G. A. Grierson,
      _Bihār Peasant Life_ (Calcutta, 1885), p. 409.

  M26 Evils transferred to human beings in India and elsewhere.

  122 W. Caland, _Altindisches Zauberritual_ (Amsterdam, 1900), p. 83;
      _Hymns of the Atharva-Veda_, translated by Maurice Bloomfield
      (Oxford, 1897), pp. 308 _sq._ (_Sacred Books of the East_, vol.
      xlii.).

  123 M. N. Venketswami, “Telugu Superstitions,” _The Indian Antiquary_,
      xxiv. (1895) p. 359.

  124 A. Grünwedel, “Sinhalesische Masken,” _Internationales Archiv für
      Ethnographie_, vi. (1893) pp. 85 _sq._

  125 J. G. Dalyell, _Darker Superstitions of Scotland_ (Edinburgh, 1834),
      pp. 104 _sq._ I have modernised the spelling.

  126 J. Perham, “Sea Dyak Religion,” _Journal of the Straits Branch of
      the Royal Asiatic Society_, No. 10 (December 1882), p. 232.

  M27 Sins and misfortunes transferred to human scapegoats in New Zealand
      and Manipur. Annual eponyms in Manipur. Eponymous magistrates as
      public scapegoats.

  127 Rev. Richard Taylor, _Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its
      Inhabitants_, Second Edition (London, 1870), p. 101.

  128 T. C. Hodson, “The Native Tribes of Manipur,” _Journal of the
      Anthropological Institute_, xxxi. (1901) p. 302; _id._, _The
      Meitheis_ (London, 1908), pp. 106 _sq._

  129 T. C. Hodson, “The Native Tribes of Manipur,” _Journal of the
      Anthropological Institute_, xxxi. (1901) p. 302.

  130 T. C. Hodson, _The Meitheis_ (London, 1908), pp. 104-106.

  131 Compare _The Dying God_, pp. 116 _sq._

  M28 Indian story of the transference of sins to a holy man.

_  132 The Jataha or Stories of the Buddha’s former Births_, vol. v.,
      translated by H. T. Francis (Cambridge, 1905), pp. 71 _sq._

  M29 Transference of evils to human scapegoats in Uganda.

  133 Rev. J. Roscoe, _The Baganda_ (London, 1911), p. 342.

  M30 Transference of sins to a Brahman in Travancore. Transference of
      sins to a Sin-eater in England.

  134 Rev. S. Mateer, _Native Life in Travancore_ (London, 1883), p. 136.

  135 J. Aubrey, _Remaines of Gentilisme and Judaisme_ (Folk-lore Society,
      London, 1881), pp. 35 _sq._

  136 Bagford’s letter in Leland’s _Collectanea_, i. 76, quoted by J.
      Brand, _Popular Antiquities_, ii. 246 _sq._, Bohn’s edition (London,
      1882-1883).

  137 In _The Academy_, 13th Nov. 1875, p. 505, Mr. D. Silvan Evans stated
      that he knew of no such custom anywhere in Wales; and the custom
      seems to be now quite unknown in Shropshire. See C. S. Burne and G.
      F. Jackson, _Shropshire Folk-lore_ (London, 1883), pp. 307 _sq._

  138 The authority for the statement is a Mr. Moggridge, reported in
      _Archaeologia Cambrensis_, second series, iii. 330. But Mr.
      Moggridge did not speak from personal knowledge, and as he appears
      to have taken it for granted that the practice of placing bread and
      salt upon the breast of a corpse was a survival of the custom of
      “sin-eating,” his evidence must be received with caution. He
      repeated his statement, in somewhat vaguer terms, at a meeting of
      the Anthropological Institute, 14th December 1875. See _Journal of
      the Anthropological Institute_, v. (1876) pp. 423 _sq._

  M31 Transference of sins to a sin-eater in India.

  139 J. A. Dubois, _Mœurs des Peuples de l’Inde_ (Paris, 1825), ii. 32
      _sq._

  140 R. Richardson, in _Panjab Notes and Queries_, i. p. 86, § 674 (May,
      1884).

_  141 Panjab Notes and Queries_, i. p. 86, § 674, ii. p. 93, § 559
      (March, 1885). Some of these customs have been already referred to
      in a different connexion. See _The Dying God_, p. 154. In Uganda the
      eldest son used to perform a funeral ceremony, which consisted in
      chewing some seeds which he took with his lips from the hand of his
      dead father; some of these seeds he then blew over the corpse and
      the rest over one of the childless widows who thereafter became his
      wife. The meaning of the ceremony is obscure. The eldest son in
      Uganda never inherited his father’s property. See the Rev. J.
      Roscoe, _The Baganda_ (London, 1911), p. 117.

_  142 Panjab Notes and Queries_, iii. p. 179, § 745 (July, 1886).

  143 E. Schuyler, _Turkistan_ (London, 1876), ii. 28.

  M32 Transference of sins in Tahiti.

  144 W. Ellis, _Polynesian Researches_, Second Edition (London,
      1832-1836), i. 401 _sqq._

  145 The Welsh custom of “sin-eating” has been interpreted by Mr. E. S.
      Hartland as a modification of an older custom of eating the corpse.
      See his article, “The Sin-eater,” _Folk-lore_, iii. (1892) 145-157;
      _The Legend of Perseus_, ii. 291 _sqq._, iii. p. ix. I cannot think
      his interpretation probable or borne out by the evidence. The Badaga
      custom of transferring the sins of the dead to a calf which is then
      let loose and never used again (above, pp. 36 _sq._), the Tahitian
      custom of burying the sins of a person whose body is carefully
      preserved by being embalmed, and the Manipur and Travancore customs
      of transferring the sins of a Rajah before his death (pp. 39, 42
      _sq._) establish the practice of transferring sins in cases where
      there can be no question of eating the corpse. The original
      intention of such practices was perhaps not so much to take away the
      sins of the deceased as to rid the survivors of the dangerous
      pollution of death. This comes out to some extent in the Tahitian
      custom.

  M33 Transference of evils in ancient Greece. The transference of warts.
      Transference of sickness in Scotland, Germany, and Austria.

  146 Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ xxviii. 86.

  147 Plato, _Laws_, xi. 12, p. 933 B.

  148 Ἐφημερὶς ἀρχαιολογική, 1883, col. 213, 214; G. Dittenberger,
      _Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum_,2 No. 802, lines 48 _sqq._ (vol.
      ii. pp. 652 _sq._).

  149 Marcellus, _De medicamentis_, xxxiv. 102. A similar cure is
      described by Pliny (_Nat. Hist._ xxii. 149); you are to touch the
      warts with chick-peas on the first day of the moon, wrap the peas in
      a cloth, and throw them away behind you. But Pliny does not say that
      the warts will be transferred to the person who picks up the peas.
      On this subject see further J. Hardy, “Wart and Wen Cures,”
      _Folk-lore Record_, i. (1878) pp. 216-228.

  150 Z. Zanetti, _La Medicina delle nostre donne_ (Città di Castello,
      1892), pp. 224 _sq._; J. B. Thiers, _Traité des Superstitions_
      (Paris, 1679), p. 321; B. Souché, _Croyances, présages et traditions
      diverses_ (Niort, 1880), p. 19; J. W. Wolf, _Beiträge zur deutschen
      Mythologie_ (Göttingen, 1852-1857), i. 248, § 576; Dr. R. F. Kaindl,
      “Aus dem Volksglauben der Rutenen in Galizien,” _Globus_, lxiv.
      (1893) p. 93; J. Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, _Lancashire Folk-lore_
      (Manchester and London, 1882), p. 157; G. W. Black, _Folk-medicine_
      (London, 1883), p. 41; W. Gregor, _Folk-lore of the North-East of
      Scotland_ (London, 1881), p. 49; J. G. Campbell, _Witchcraft and
      Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland_ (Glasgow,
      1902), pp. 94 _sq._

  151 L. Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_
      (Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 71, § 85; E. Monseur, _Le Folklore Wallon_
      (Brussels, N.D.), p. 29; H. Zahler, _Die Krankheit im Volksglauben
      des Simmenthals_ (Bern, 1898), p. 93; R. Andree, _Braunschweiger
      Volkskunde_ (Brunswick, 1896), p. 306.

  152 A. Birlinger, _Volksthümliches aus Schwaben_ (Freiburg im Breisgau,
      1861-1862), i. 483.

  153 Thiers, Souché, Strackerjan, Monseur, _ll.cc._; J. G. Campbell,
      _Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of
      Scotland_ (Glasgow, 1902), p. 95.

  154 Ch. Rogers, _Social Life in Scotland_ (Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii.
      226.

  155 G. Lammert, _Volksmedizin und medizinischer Aberglaube in Bayern_
      (Würzburg, 1869), p. 264.

_  156 Ibid._ p. 263.

  157 J. V. Grohmann, _Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren_
      (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 167, § 1180.

  158 L. Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_
      (Oldenburg, 1867), i. 71, § 85.

  M34 Sickness transferred to asses, frogs, dogs, and other animals.

_  159 Geoponica_, xiii. 9, xv. 1; Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ xxviii. 155. The
      authorities for these cures are respectively Apuleius and
      Democritus. The latter is probably not the atomic philosopher. See
      J. G. Frazer, “The Language of Animals,” _The Archæological Review_,
      vol. i. (May, 1888) p. 180, note 140.

  160 Marcellus, _De medicamentis_, xii. 24.

  161 W. G. Black, _Folk-medicine_ (London, 1883), pp. 35 _sq._

  162 Marcellus, _De medicamentis_, xvii. 18.

  163 Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ xxx. 61; Marcellus, _De medicamentis_, xxvii.
      33. The latter writer mentions (_op. cit._ xxviii. 123) that the
      same malady might similarly be transferred to a live frog.

  164 Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ xxx. 64; Marcellus, _De medicamentis_, xxviii.
      132.

  165 Marcellus, _De medicamentis_, xxix. 35.

  166 W. Henderson, _Folk-lore of the Northern Counties_ (London, 1879),
      p. 143; W. G. Black, _Folk-medicine_, p. 35; Marie Trevelyan,
      _Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales_ (London, 1909), p. 226.

  167 L. Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_
      (Oldenburg, 1867), i. 72, § 86.

  M35 Sickness transferred to birds, snails, fish, and fowls.

  168 J. V. Grohmann, _Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren_
      (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 166, § 1173, quoting Kuhn’s
      translation of _Rig-veda_, x. 97. 13. A slightly different
      translation of the verse is given by H. Grassmann, who here follows
      R. Roth (_Rig-veda übersetzt_, vol. ii. p. 379). Compare _Hymns of
      the Rigveda_, translated by R. T. H. Griffith (Benares, 1889-1892),
      iv. 312.

  169 L. Strackerjan, _op. cit._ i. 72, § 87.

  170 W. Henderson, _Folk-lore of the Northern Counties_ (London, 1879),
      p. 143.

  171 J. D. H. Temme, _Die Volkssagen der Altmark_ (Berlin, 1839), p. 83;
      A. Kuhn, _Märkische Sagen und Märchen_ (Berlin, 1843), p. 384, § 62.

  172 R. Wuttke, _Sächsische Volkskunde_2 (Dresden, 1901), p. 372.

  173 J. V. Grohmann, _op. cit._ p. 230, § 1663. A similar remedy is
      prescribed in Bavaria. See G. Lammert, _Volksmedizin und
      medizinischer Aberglaube in Bayern_ (Würzburg, 1869), p. 249.

  174 J. Brand, _Popular Antiquities_, ii. 375; W. G. Black,
      _Folk-medicine_, p. 46.

  175 Marie Trevelyan, _Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales_ (London,
      1909), pp. 229 _sq._

  M36 Sickness and ill-luck transferred to inanimate objects.

  176 B. Schmidt, _Das Volksleben der Neugriechen_ (Leipsic, 1871), p. 82.

  177 A. Kuhn, _Märkische Sagen und Märchen_ (Berlin, 1843), p. 386.

  178 L. Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_
      (Oldenburg, 1867), i. 74, § 91.

  M37 Sickness and trouble transferred to trees and bushes.

  179 F. J. Wiedemann, _Aus dem inneren und äussern Leben der Ehsten_ (St.
      Petersburg, 1876), pp. 451 _sq._

_  180 Le Tour du Monde_, lxvii. (1894) p. 308; _id._, Nouvelle Série, v.
      (1899) p. 521.

  181 F. S. Krauss, _Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven_
      (Münster i. W., 1890), pp. 35 _sq._

  182 F. S. Krauss, _op. cit._ p. 39.

  183 A. Strausz, _Die Bulgaren_ (Leipsic, 1898), p. 400, compare p. 401.

_  184 Blackwood’s Magazine_, February 1886, p. 239.

  185 Z. Zanetti, _La medicina delle nostre donne_ (Città di Castello,
      1892), p. 73.

  186 J. B. Thiers, _Traité des Superstitions_ (Paris, 1679), pp. 323
      _sq._

  187 J. V. Grohmann, _Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren_
      (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 167, § 1178. A Belgian cure of the
      same sort is reported by J. W. Wolf (_Beiträge zur deutschen
      Mythologie_, Göttingen, 1852-1857, i. 223 (wrongly numbered 219), §
      256).

  M38 Sickness transferred to trees by means of knots.

  188 L. Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_
      (Oldenburg, 1867), i. 74, § 90.

  189 J. Grimm, _Deutsche Mythologie_4 (Berlin, 1875-1878), ii. 979.

_  190 Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern_, iv. 2
      (Munich, 1867), p. 406.

  191 A. Schleicher, _Volkstümliches aus Sonnenberg_ (Weimar, 1858), p.
      150; A. Witschel, _Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen_
      (Vienna, 1878), p. 283, § 82.

  192 W. Kolbe, _Hessische Volks-Sitten und Gebrauche_2 (Marburg, 1888),
      pp. 88 _sq._

  M39 Sickness transferred to trees by means of the patient’s hair or
      nails.

  193 C. Meyer, _Der Aberglaube des Mittelalters_ (Bâle, 1884), p. 104.

  194 H. Zahler, _Die Krankheit im Volksglauben des Simmenthals_ (Bern,
      1898), p. 94.

  195 W. G. Black, _Folk-medicine_, p. 38.

  196 F. Chapiseau, _Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche_ (Paris,
      1902), i. 213.

  197 W. G. Black, _Folk-medicine_, p. 39.

  M40 Toothache, headache, and fevers plugged up in trees.

  198 A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche Volksaberglaube_2 (Berlin, 1869), p. 310, §
      490.

  199 J. V. Grohmann, _Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren_,
      p. 165, § 1160.

  200 L. Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_,
      ii. 74 _sq._, § 89.

  201 J. Grimm, _Deutsche Mythologie_,4 ii. 979.

  202 T. J. Pettigrew, _On Superstitions connected with the History and
      Practice of Medicine and Surgery_ (London, 1844), p. 77; W. G.
      Black, _Folk-medicine_, p. 37.

  M41 Sickness and pain pegged or nailed into trees.

  203 J. V. Grohmann, _Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren_,
      p. 167, § 1182.

  204 L. Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_,
      i. 73, § 89; A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche Volksaberglaube_,2 pp. 309
      _sq._, § 490.

  205 L. F. Sauvé, _Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges_ (Paris, 1889), p. 40;
      A. Meyrac, _Traditions, Coutumes, Légendes et Contes des Ardennes_
      (Charleville, 1890), p. 174; A. Schleicher, _Volkstümliches aus
      Sonnenberg_ (Weimer, 1858), p. 149; J. A. E. Köhler, _Volksbrauch,
      Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande_
      (Leipsic, 1867), p. 414; A. Witzschel, _Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
      aus Thüringen_ (Vienna, 1878), p. 283, § 79; H. Zahler, _Die
      Krankheit im Volksglauben des Simmenthals_ (Bern, 1898), p. 93.

  206 R. Andree, _Braunschweiger Volkskunde_ (Brunswick, 1896), p. 307.

  207 A. Kuhn, _Märkische Sagen und Märchen_ (Berlin, 1843), p. 384, § 66.

  208 H. Zahler, _loc. cit._

  209 P. Wagler, _Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit_, i. (Wurzen, N.D.) p.
      23.

  M42 Ghosts and gods bunged up in India. Demon plugged up and ghost
      nailed down.

  210 E. Doutté, _Magie et Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord_ (Algiers,
      1908), p. 436.

  211 W. Crooke, _The Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and
      Oudh_ (Calcutta, 1896), iii. 436 _sq._; compare _id._, _Popular
      Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_ (Westminster, 1896), i.
      43, 162. Compare E. Thurston, _Ethnographic Notes in Southern India_
      (Madras, 1906), pp. 313, 331.

  212 W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), i. 102 _sq._

  213 Mrs. Bishop, _Korea and her Neighbours_ (London, 1898), ii. 143
      _sq._

  214 P. Giran, _Magie et Religion Annamites_ (Paris, 1912), pp. 132 _sq._

  M43 Evils nailed into stones, walls, door-posts, and so on.

  215 R. C. Maclagan, “Notes on folk-lore Objects collected in
      Argyleshire,” _Folk-lore_, vi. (1895) p. 158.

  216 R. Andree, _Braunschweiger Volkskunde_ (Brunswick, 1896), p. 307.

  217 F. Chapiseau, _Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche_ (Paris,
      1902), i. 170.

  218 E. Doutté, _Magie et Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord_ (Algiers,
      1908), pp. 228 _sq._

  219 J. V. Grohmann, _Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren_,
      p. 116, § 1172.

  M44 Devils and ghosts nailed down in Morocco, Tunis, and Egypt. Headache
      nailed into a door or a wall. Plague pegged into a hole.

  220 A. Leared, _Morocco and the Moors_ (London, 1876), pp. 275 _sqq._

  221 R. C. Thompson, _Semitic Magic_ (London, 1908), p. 17. It would seem
      that in Macedonia demons and ghosts can be hammered into walls. See
      G. F. Abbott, _Macedonian Folklore_ (Cambridge, 1903), p. 221. In
      Chittagong, as soon as a coffin has been carried out of the house, a
      nail is knocked into the threshold “to prevent death from entering
      the dwelling, at least for a time.” See Th. Bérengier, “Les
      funérailles à Chittagong,” _Les Missions Catholiques_, xiii. (1881)
      p. 504.

  222 E. W. Lane, _Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians_ (Paisley
      and London, 1895), ch. x. p. 240.

  223 R. C. Thompson, _Semitic Magic_ (London, 1908), p. 18.

  224 L. Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_,
      ii. 120, § 428 _a_. A similar story is told of a house in Neuenburg
      (_op. cit._ ii. 182, § 512 _c_).

  225 Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 6. 24.

  M45 Plague nailed down in ancient Rome.

  226 Livy, vii. 1-3. The plague raged from 365 to 363 B.C., when it was
      happily stayed in the manner described in the text.

  M46 Pestilence and civil discord nailed into a wall in Rome.

  227 Livy, ix. 28. This happened in the year 313 B.C.

  228 Livy, viii. 18. These events took place in 331 B.C.

  M47 The annual ceremony of knocking in a nail at Rome.

  229 Livy, vii. 3. Livy says nothing as to the place where the nails were
      affixed; but from Festus (p. 56 ed. C. O. Müller) we learn that it
      was the wall of a temple, and as the date of the ceremony was also
      the date of the dedication of the temple of Jupiter on the Capitol
      (Plutarch, _Publicola_, 14), we may fairly conjecture that this
      temple was the scene of the rite. It is the more necessary to call
      attention to the uncertainty which exists on this point because
      modern writers, perhaps misunderstanding the words of Livy, have
      commonly stated as a fact what is at best only a more or less
      probable hypothesis. Octavian seems to have provided for the
      knocking of a nail into the temple of Mars by men who had held the
      office of censor. See Dio Cassius, lv. 10, ἧλόν τε αὐτῷ ὑπὸ τῶν
      τιμητευσάντων προσπήγνυσθαι.

  M48 The ceremony was probably a purificatory rite designed to disarm and
      disable all evils that might threaten the Roman state in the course
      of the year. Roman cure for epilepsy.

  230 Livy, vii. 3. Festus speaks (p. 56 ed. C. O. Müller) of “the annual
      nail, which was fixed in the walls of temples for the purpose of
      numbering the years,” as if the practice were common. From Cicero’s
      passing reference to the custom (“_Ex hoc die clavum anni movebis_,”
      _Epist. ad Atticum_, v. 15. 1) we see that it was matter of
      notoriety. Hence we may safely reject Mommsen’s theory, which Mr. W.
      Warde Fowler is disposed to accept (_The Roman Festivals of the
      period of the Republic_, London, 1899, pp. 234 _sq._), that the
      supposed annual custom never existed except in the brains of Roman
      Dryasdusts.

  231 See Livy and Festus, _ll.cc._

  232 Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ xxviii. 63.

_  233 County Folk-lore, Suffolk_, edited by Lady E. C. Gurdon (London,
      1893), p. 14. In the north-west Highlands of Scotland it used to be
      customary to bury a black cock alive on the spot where an epileptic
      patient fell down. Along with the cock were buried parings of the
      patient’s nails and a lock of his hair. See (Sir) Arthur Mitchell,
      _On various Superstitions in the North-West Highlands and Islands of
      Scotland_ (Edinburgh, 1862), p. 26; J. G. Campbell, _Witchcraft and
      Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland_ (Glasgow,
      1902), p. 97. Probably the disease was supposed to be buried with
      the cock in the ground. The ancient Hindoos imagined that epilepsy
      was caused by a dog-demon. When a boy fell down in a fit, his father
      or other competent person used to wrap the sufferer in a net, and
      carry him into the hall, not through the door, but through an
      opening made for the purpose in the roof. Then taking up some earth
      in the middle of the hall, at the place where people gambled, he
      sprinkled the spot with water, cast dice on it, and laid the boy on
      his back on the dice. After that he prayed to the dog-demon, saying,
      “Doggy, let him loose! Reverence be to thee, barker, bender! Doggy,
      let him loose! Reverence be to thee, barker, bender!” See _The
      Grihya Sutras_, translated by H. Oldenberg, Part i. (Oxford, 1886)
      pp. 296 _sq._; _id._ Part ii. (Oxford, 1892) pp. 219 _sq._, 286
      _sq._ (_Sacred Books of the East_, vols. xxix. and xxx.). Apparently
      the place where people gambled was for some reason supposed to be a
      spot where an epileptic could divest himself most readily of his
      malady. But the connexion of thought is obscure.

  234 The analogy of the Roman custom to modern superstitious practices
      has been rightly pointed out by Mr. E. S. Hartland (_Folk-lore_, iv.
      (1893) pp. 457, 464; _Legend of Perseus_, ii. 188), but I am unable
      to accept his general explanation of these and some other practices
      as modes of communion with a divinity.

  M49 Knocking nails into idols as a means of attracting the attention of
      the deity or spirit.

  235 A. Bastian, _Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste_ (Jena,
      1874-1875), ii. 176.

  236 A. Bastian, _op. cit._ ii. 175-178. Compare Father Campana, “Congo,
      Mission Catholique de Landana,” _Les Missions Catholiques_, xxvii.
      (1895) p. 93; _Notes Analytiques sur les Collections Ethnographiques
      du Musée du Congo_, i. (Brussels, 1902-1906) pp. 153, 246; B. H.
      Mullen, “Fetishes from Landana, South-West Africa,” _Man_, v. (1905)
      pp. 102-104; R. E. Dennett, “Bavili Notes,” _Folk-lore_, xvi. (1905)
      pp. 382 _sqq._; _id._, _At the Back of the Black Man’s Mind_
      (London, 1906), pp. 85 _sqq._, 91 _sqq._ The Ethnological Museum at
      Berlin possesses a number of rude images from Loango and Congo,
      which are thickly studded with nails hammered into their bodies. The
      intention of the custom, as explained to me by Professor von
      Luschan, is to pain the fetish and so to refresh his memory, lest he
      should forget to do his duty.

  237 Sir John Rhys, “Celtae and Galli,” _Proceedings of the British
      Academy_, ii. (1905-1906) pp. 114 _sq._

  238 Lafcadio Hearn, _Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan_ (London, 1894), ii.
      598 _sq._, note.

  M50 Two different spiritual applications of nails or pins.
  M51 Attempts to get rid of the accumulated sorrows of a whole people.
  M52 Sorrows conceived of as the work of demons.
  M53 Primitive belief in the omnipresence of demons.
  M54 Demons in Australia and West Africa.

  239 A. Oldfield, “The Aborigines of Australia,” _Transactions of the
      Ethnological Society of London_, N.S., iii. (1865) p. 228.

  240 J. Büttikoffer, “Einiges über die Eingebornen von Liberia,”
      _Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie_, i. (1888) p. 85.

  241 Mary H. Kingsley, _Travels in West Africa_ (London, 1897) pp. 442
      _sq._

  242 G. Zündel, “Land und Volk der Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in
      Westafrika,” _Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin_,
      xii. (1877) pp. 412-414. Full details as to the religious creed of
      the Ewes, including their belief in a Supreme Being (_Mawu_), are
      given, to a great extent in the words of the natives themselves, by
      the German missionary Jakob Spieth in his elaborate and valuable
      works _Die Ewe-Stämme_ (Berlin, 1906) and _Die Religion der Eweer in
      Süd-Togo_ (Leipsic, 1911). As to _Mawu_ in particular, the meaning
      of whose name is somewhat uncertain, see J. Spieth, _Die
      Ewe-Stämme_, pp. 421 _sqq._; _Die Religion der Eweer in Süd-Togo_,
      pp. 15 _sqq._

  M55 Demons on the Congo. Demons in South Africa.

  243 Rev. J. H. Weeks, “Anthropological Notes on the Bangala of the Upper
      Congo River,” _Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute_, xl.
      (1910) p. 377.

  244 Rev. John H. Weeks, _Among Congo Cannibals_ (London, 1913), p. 261.

  245 Rev. J. H. Weeks, “Anthropological Notes on the Bangala of the Upper
      Congo River,” _Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute_, xl.
      (1910) pp. 368, 370. The singular form of _mingoli_ is _mongoli_, “a
      disembodied spirit.” Compare _id._, _Among Congo Cannibals_ (London,
      1913), p. 252; and again _ibid._ p. 275. But great as is the fear of
      evil spirits among the natives of the Congo, their dread of
      witchcraft seems to be still more intense. See Rev. J. H. Weeks,
      “Notes on some Customs of the Lower Congo People,” _Folk-lore_, xx.
      (1909) pp. 51 _sq._: “The belief in witchcraft affects their lives
      in a vast number of ways, and touches them socially at a hundred
      different points. It regulates their actions, modifies their mode of
      thought and speech, controls their conduct towards each other,
      causes cruelty and callousness in a people not naturally cruel, and
      sets the various members of a family against each other. A man may
      believe any theory he likes about creation, about God, and about the
      abode of departed spirits, but he must believe in witches and their
      influence for evil, and must in unmistakable terms give expression
      to that belief, or be accused of witchcraft himself.... But for
      witchcraft no one would die, and the earnest longing of all
      right-minded men and women is to clear it out of the country by
      killing every discovered witch. It is an act of
      self-preservation.... Belief in witches is interwoved into the very
      fibre of every Bantu-speaking man and woman, and the person who does
      not believe in them is a monster, a witch, to be killed as soon as
      possible.” Could we weigh against each other the two great terrors
      which beset the minds of savages all over the world, it seems
      probable that the dread of witches would be found far to outweigh
      the dread of evil spirits. However, it is the fear of evil spirits
      with which we are at present concerned.

  246 G. McCall Theal, _Records of South-Eastern Africa_, vii. (1901) pp.
      405 _sq._

  247 On this subject Mr. Dudley Kidd has made some judicious observations
      (_Savage Childhood_, London, 1906, pp. 131 _sq._). He says: “The
      Kafirs certainly do not live in everlasting dread of spirits, for
      the chief part of their life is not spent in thinking at all. A
      merrier set of people it would be hard to find. They are so
      easy-going that it would seem to them too much burden to be for ever
      thinking of spirits.”

  M56 Demons in South America.

  248 (Sir) E. F. im Thurn, _Among the Indians of Guiana_. (London, 1883),
      pp. 356 _sq._ As to the dread which the Brazilian Indians entertain
      of demons, see J. B. von Spix and C. F. Ph. von Martius, _Reise in
      Brasilien_ (Munich, 1823-1831), iii. 1108-1111.

  249 W. Barbrooke Grubb, _An Unknown People in an Unknown Land_ (London,
      1911), pp. 118, 119.

  M57 Demons in Labrador.

  250 L. M. Turner, “Ethnology of the Ungava District, Hudson Bay
      Territory,” _Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology_
      (Washington, 1894), pp. 193 _sq._

  M58 Demons in Polynesia. Demons in New Zealand.

  251 W. Ellis, _Polynesian Researches_, Second Edition (London,
      1832-1836), i. 331.

  252 W. Ellis, _op. cit._ i. 406.

_  253 The Voyages of Captain James Cook round the World_ (London, 1809),
      vi. 152.

  254 R. Taylor, _Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants_,
      Second Edition (London, 1870), p. 104.

  M59 Demons in the Pelew Islands.

  255 J. Kubary, “Die Religion der Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s _Allerlei aus
      Volks- und Menschenkunde_ (Berlin, 1888), i. 46.

  256 J. Kubary, “Die Bewohner der Mortlock-Inseln,” _Mittheilungen der
      geographischen Gesellschaft in Hamburg_, 1878-79, p. 36.

  M60 Demons in the Philippines and in Melanesia.

  257 W. A. Reed, _Negritos of Zambales_ (Manilla, 1904), p. 65
      (_Ethnological Survey Publications_, vol. ii. Part i.).

  258 Mgr. Couppé “En Nouvelle-Poméranie,” _Les Missions Catholiques_,
      xxiii. (1891) pp. 355 _sq._

  259 P. A. Kleintitschen, _Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel_
      (Hiltrup bei Münster, preface dated 1906), pp. 336 _sq._ Compare
      Joachim Graf Pfeil, _Studien und Beobachtungen aus der Südsee_
      (Brunswick, 1899), p. 159; _id._, in _Journal of the Anthropological
      Institute_, xxvii. (1898) pp. 183 _sq._

  260 R. Parkinson, _Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee_ (Stuttgart, 1907), pp.
      120, 121.

  M61 Demons in Dutch New Guinea and German New Guinea.

  261 J. L. van Hasselt, “Die Papuastämme an der Geelvinkbai
      (Neu-guinea),” _Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu
      Jena_, ix. (1891) p. 98. As to Mr. van Hasselt’s twenty-five years’
      residence among these savages, see _id._, p. 22.

  262 Stefan Lehner, “Bukaua,” in R. Neuhauss’s _Deutsch Neu-Guinea_, iii.
      (Berlin, 1911) pp. 414-416.

  M62 Demons in British New Guinea.

  263 W. G. Lawes, “Notes on New Guinea and its Inhabitants,” _Proceedings
      of the Royal Geographical Society_, 1880, p. 615.

  M63 Demons in Timor and Celebes.

  264 J. G. F. Riedel, “Die Landschaft Dawan oder West-Timor,” _Deutsche
      geographische Blätter_, x. 278 _sq._

  265 G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoëvell, _Ambon en meer bepaaldelijk de
      Oeliasers_ (Dordrecht, 1875), p. 148.

  266 N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz, “Het heidendom en de Islam in Bolaang
      Mongondou,” _Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
      Zendelinggenootschap_, xi. (1867) p. 259.

  M64 Demons in Bali and Java.

  267 R. van Eck, “Schetsen van het eiland Bali,” _Tijdschrift voor
      Nederlandsch Indië_, August, 1880, p. 83.

  268 S. E. Harthoorn, “De Zending op Java en meer bepaald die van
      Malang,” _Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
      Zendelinggenootschap_, iv. (1860) pp. 116 _sq._

  M65 Demons in Borneo and Sumatra.

  269 C. A. L. M. Schwaner, _Borneo, Beschrijving van het stroomgebied van
      den Barito_ (Amsterdam, 1853-54), i. 176.

  270 J. B. Neumann, “Het Pane- en Bila-stroomgebied,” _Tijdschrift van
      het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap_, Tweede Serie, iii.
      Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2 (Amsterdam, 1886), p.
      287.

  271 B. Hagen, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Battareligion,” _Tijdschrift
      voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde_, xxviii. (1883) p. 508.
      The persons of the Batta Trinity are Bataraguru, Sori, and
      Balabulan. The most fundamental distinction between the persons of
      the Trinity appears to be that one of them is allowed to eat pork,
      while the others are not (_ibid._ p. 505).

  272 M. Joustra, “Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten der Bataks,”
      _Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap_,
      xlvi. (1902) p. 412.

  M66 Demons in the Nicobars, in the Malay Peninsula, and in Kamtchatka..

_  273 The Census of India, 1901_, vol. iii. _The Andaman and Nicobar
      Islands_, by Lieut.-Colonel Sir Richard C. Temple (Calcutta, 1903),
      p. 206.

  274 Borie, “Notice sur les Mantras, tribu sauvage de la péninsule
      Malaise,” _Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde_, x.
      (1860) p. 434.

  275 S. Krascheninnikow, _Beschreibung des Landes Kamtschatka_ (Lemgo,
      1766), p. 215.

  M67 Demons in India. The high gods come and go, but demons remain.

  276 We may compare the instructive remarks made by Mr. W. E. Maxwell on
      the stratification of religious beliefs among the Malays (“The
      Folk-lore of the Malays,” _Journal of the Straits Branch of the
      Royal Asiatic Society_, No. 7, June, 1881, pp. 11 _sq._). He says:
      “Two successive religious changes have taken place among them, and
      when we have succeeded in identifying the vestiges of Brahmanism
      which underly the external forms of the faith of Muhammed, long
      established in all Malay kingdoms, we are only half-way through our
      task. There yet remain the powerful influences of the still earlier
      indigenous faith to be noted and accounted for. Just as the
      Buddhists of Ceylon turn, in times of sickness and danger, not to
      the consolations offered by the creed of Buddha, but to the
      propitiation of the demons feared and reverenced by their early
      progenitors, and just as the Burmese and Talaings, though Buddhists,
      retain in full force the whole of the _Nat_ superstition, so among
      the Malays, in spite of centuries which have passed since the
      establishment of an alien worship, the Muhammedan peasant may be
      found invoking the protection of Hindu gods against the spirits of
      evil with which his primitive faith has peopled all natural
      objects.”

  M68 Demons in ancient India.

  277 H. Oldenberg, _Die Religion des Veda_ (Berlin, 1894), pp. 39 _sq._

  M69 Demons in modern India.

  278 Monier Williams, _Religious Thought and Life in India_ (London,
      1883), pp. 210 _sq._

  279 Monier Williams, _op. cit._ pp. 230 _sq._ The views here expressed
      by the late Professor Monier Williams are confirmed from personal
      knowledge by Mr. E. T. Atkinson, _The Himalayan Districts of the
      North-Western Provinces of India_, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) p. 840.

  M70 Demons in Bengal, Assam, the Chin Hills Sikhim, Tibet, and
      Travancore.

  280 E. T. Dalton, _Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal_ (Calcutta, 1872),
      pp. 256, 257, 258.

  281 Rev. S. Endle, _The Kacharis_ (London, 1911), p. 33.

  282 Bertram S. Carey and H. N. Tuck, _The Chin Hills_, i. (Rangoon,
      1896) p. 196.

  283 L. A. Waddell, “Demonolatry in Sikhim Lamaism,” _The Indian
      Antiquary_, xxiii. (1894) p. 197.

  284 L. A. Waddell, _The Buddhism of Tibet_ (London, 1895), p. 152.

  285 Lt.-Colonel J. Shakespear, _The Lushei Kuki Clans_ (London, 1912),
      pp. 61, 65 _sq._, 67.

  286 Rev. S. Mateer, _The Land of Charity_ (London, 1883), p. 207.

  M71 Demons in Ceylon.

  287 R. Percival, _Account of the Island of Ceylon_, Second Edition
      (London, 1805), pp. 211-213.

  M72 Demons in Burma.

  288 C. J. F. S. Forbes, _British Burma_ (London, 1878), pp. 221 _sq._

  289 Shway Yoe, _The Burman, his Life and Notions_ (London, 1882), i. 276
      _sq._

  290 Shway Yoe, _op. cit._ i. 278. “To the Burman,” says A. Bastian, “the
      whole world is filled with nats. Mountains, rivers, waters, the
      earth, etc., have all their nat.” (_Die Völker des östlichen Asien_,
      ii. 497).

  M73 Demons in Siam and Indo-China.

  291 Mgr. Pallegoix, _Description du royaume Thai ou Siam_ (Paris, 1854),
      i. 42.

  292 C. Bock, _Temples and Elephants_ (London, 1884), p. 198.

  293 Mgr. Bruguière, in _Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la
      Foi_, v. (1831) p. 128.

  294 J. Deniker, _The Races of Man_ (London, 1900), pp. 400 _sqq._

  295 A. Bourlet, “Les Thay,” _Anthropos_, ii. (1907) p. 619.

  296 A. Bourlet, _op. cit._ p. 632.

  M74 Demons in China.

  297 J. J. M. de Groot, _The Religious System of China_, v. (Leyden,
      1907) p. 470.

  298 J. J. M. de Groot, _op. cit._ vi. (Leyden, 1910) pp. 930-932. This
      sixth volume of Professor de Groot’s great work is mainly devoted to
      an account of the ceaseless war waged by the Chinese people on
      demons or spectres (_kwei_). A more summary notice of this curious
      national delusion will be found in his work _The Religion of the
      Chinese_ (New York, 1910), chapter ii., “The Struggle against
      Spectres,” pp. 33-61.

  M75 Demons in Corea.

  299 Mrs. Bishop (Isabella L. Bird), _Korea and her Neighbours_ (London,
      1898), ii. 227 _sq._, 229. I have taken the liberty of changing the
      writer’s “daemon” and “daemoniacal” into “demon” and “demoniacal.”

  M76 Demons among the Koryaks.

  300 C. von Dittmar, “Über die Koräken und die ihnen sehr nahe verwandten
      Tschuktschen,” _Bulletin de la Classe Historico-philologique de
      l’Académie Impériale des Sciences de St. Pétersbourg_, xiii. (1856)
      coll. 123 _sq._

  301 W. Jochelson, _The Koryak_ (Leyden and New York, 1908), p. 28 (_The
      Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the American Museum of
      Natural History_).

  M77 Demons among the Gilyaks.

  302 L. Sternberg, “Die Religion der Giljaken,” _Archiv für
      Religionswissenschaft_, viii. (1905) pp. 460 _sq._

  M78 Demons in ancient Babylonia and Assyria.

  303 M. Jastrow, _The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_ (Boston, 1898),
      pp. 260 _sqq._; _id._, _Die Religion Babyloniens und Assyriens_, i.
      (Giessen, 1905) pp. 278 _sqq._; C. Fossey, _La Magie Assyrienne_
      (Paris, 1902), pp. 27-30, 34; E. Schrader, _Die Keilinschriften und
      das Alte Testament_, Dritte Auflage, neu bearbeitet von H. Zimmern
      und H. Winckler (Berlin, 1902), pp. 458 _sqq._

  M79 Demons in ancient and modern Egypt.

  304 E. A. Wallis Budge, _Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection_ (London,
      1911), ii. 150.

  305 E. W. Lane, _Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians_ (Paisley
      and London, 1895), chap. x. pp. 231 _sq._

  306 C. B. Klunzinger, _Bilder aus Oberägypten, der Wüste und dem Rothen
      Meere_ (Stuttgart, 1877), p. 382; compare _ibid._ pp. 374 _sq._

  M80 Demons in ancient Greece and mediaeval Europe.

  307 Aristotle, _De anima_, i. 5. 17; Diogenes Laertius, i. 1. 27.

  308 Porphyry, quoted by Eusebius, _Praeparatio Evangelii_, iv. 23.

  309 Elsewhere I have attempted to shew that a particular class of
      purifications—those observed by mourners—is intended to protect the
      living from the disembodied spirits of the dead (“On certain Burial
      Customs as illustrative of the Primitive Theory of the Soul,”
      _Journal of the Anthropological Institute_, xv. (1886) pp. 64
      _sqq._).

  310 C. Meyer, _Der Aberglaube des Mittelalters_ (Bâle, 1884), pp.
      109-111, 191 _sq._

  M81 Demons in modern Europe.

  311 E. Gerard, _The Land beyond the Forest_ (Edinburgh and London,
      1888), i. 328. The superstitions of the Roumanians of Transylvania
      have been collected by W. Schmidt in his tract _Das Jahr und seine
      Tage in Meinung und Brauch der Romänen Siebenbürgens_ (Hermannstadt,
      1866).

  M82 Demons in modern Armenia.

  312 Manuk Abeghian, _Der armenische Volksglaube_ (Leipsic, 1899), pp. 31
      _sq._

  M83 General clearances of evils take the form of expulsions of demons.
  M84 General expulsions of demons in Melanesia, Australia and South
      Africa.

  313 Paul Reina, “Über die Bewohner der Insel Rook,” _Zeitschrift für
      allgemeine Erdkunde_, N.F., iv. (1858) p. 356.

  314 R. Parkinson, _Im Bismarck-Archipel_ (Leipsic, 1887), p. 142; _id._,
      _Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee_ (Stuttgart, 1907), p. 119.

  315 O. Opigez, “Aperçu général sur la Nouvelle-Calédonie,” _Bulletin de
      la Société de Géographie_ (Paris), VII. Série, vii. (1886) p. 443.

  316 S. Gason, in _Journal of the Anthropological Institute_, xxiv.
      (1895) p. 170.

  317 Rev. James Macdonald, _Religion and Myth_ (London, 1893), pp.
      100-102. The writer, who describes the ceremony at first hand,
      remarks that “there is no periodic purging of devils, nor are more
      spirits than one expelled at a time.” He adds: “I have noticed
      frequently a connection between the quantity of grain that could be
      spared for making beer, and the frequency of gatherings for the
      purging of evils.”

  M85 General expulsion of demons in Minahassa, Halmahera, and the Kei
      Islands.

  318 [P. N. Wilken], “De godsdienst en godsdienstplegtigheden der
      Alfoeren in de Menahassa op het eiland Celebes,” _Tijdschrift voor
      Nederlandsch Indië_, December 1849, pp. 392-394; _id._, “Bijdragen
      tot de kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der Alfoeren in de
      Minahassa,” _Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
      Zendelinggenootschap_, vii. (1863) pp. 149 _sqq._; J. G. F. Riedel,
      “De Minahasa in 1825,” _Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
      Volkenkunde_, xviii. (1872) pp. 521 _sq._ Wilken’s first and fuller
      account is reprinted in N. Graafland’s _De Minahassa_ (Rotterdam,
      1869), i. 117-120. A German translation of Wilken’s earlier article
      is printed in _Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde_, N.F., x. (1861)
      pp. 43-61.

  319 J. G. F. Riedel, “Galela und Tobeloresen,” _Zeitschrift für
      Ethnologie_, xvii. (1885) p. 82; G. A. Wilken, “Het Shamanisme bij
      de Volken van de Indischen Archipel,” _Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land-
      en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indie_, xxxvi. (1887) p. 484; _id._,
      _Verspreide Geschriften_ (The Hague, 1912), iii. 383. When smallpox
      is raging, the Toradjas of Central Celebes abandon the village and
      live in the bush for seven days in order to make the spirit of
      smallpox believe that they are all dead. But it does not appear that
      they forcibly expel him from the village. See N. Adriani en Alb. C.
      Kruijt, _De Bare’e-sprekende Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes_, i.
      (Batavia, 1912) p. 417.

  320 C. M. Pleyte, “Ethnographische Beschrijving der Kei-eilanden,”
      _Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap_,
      Tweede Serie, x. (1893) pp. 834 _sq._ A briefer account of the
      custom had previously been given by J. G. F. Riedel (_De sluik- en
      kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua_, The Hague, 1886, p.
      239).

  M86 Demons of sickness expelled in Nias.

  321 J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. von Rosenberg, “Verslag omtrent het
      eiland Nias,” _Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van
      Kunsten en Wetenschapen_, xxx. (Batavia, 1863) pp. 116 _sq._; H. von
      Rosenberg, _Der Malayische Archipel_ (Leipsic, 1878), pp. 174 _sq._
      Compare L. N. H. A. Chatelin, “Godsdienst en Bijgeloof der
      Niassers,” _Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde_,
      xxvi. (1880) p. 139; E. Modigliani, _Un Viaggio a Nías_ (Milan,
      1890), pp. 195, 382. The Dyaks also drive the devil at the point of
      the sword from a house where there is sickness. See C. Hupe, “Korte
      verhandeling over de godsdienst, zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,”
      _Tijdschrift voor Neérlands Indië_, 1846, dl. iii. p. 149.

  M87 Spiritual quarantine against demons of sickness in Nias.

  322 Fr. Kramer, “Der Götzendienst der Niasser,” _Tijdschrift voor
      Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde_, xxxiii. (1890) pp. 486-488.

  323 Herodotus, i. 172.

  M88 Demons of sickness expelled in the Solomon Islands, Burma, India,
      China.

  324 G. C. Wheeler, “Sketch of the Totemism and Religion of the People of
      the Islands in the Bougainville Straits (Western Solomon Islands),”
      _Archiv für Religionswissenschaft_, xv. (1912) pp. 49, 51 _sq._

  325 C. J. F. S. Forbes, _British Burma_ (London, 1878), p. 233; Shway
      Yoe, _The Burman, his Life and Notions_ (London, 1882), i. 282, ii.
      105 _sqq._; A. Bastian, _Die Völker des östlichen Asien_, ii. 98;
      Max and Bertha Ferrars, _Burma_ (London, 1900), p. 128.

  326 (Sir) J. George Scott and J. P. Hardiman, _Gazetteer of Upper Burma
      and the Shan States_, Part ii. vol. i. (Rangoon, 1901) p. 440.

  327 T. H. Lewin, _Wild Tribes of South-Eastern India_ (London, 1870), p.
      226.

  328 J. J. M. de Groot, _The Religious System of China_, vi. (Leyden,
      1910) pp. 981 _sqq._; _id._, _The Religion of the Chinese_ (New
      York, 1910), pp. 40 _sqq._

  M89 Demons of sickness expelled in Japan, Corea and Tonquin.

  329 This description is taken from a newspaper-cutting, which was sent
      to me from the west of Scotland in October 1890, but without the
      name or date of the paper. The account, which is headed “Exorcism of
      the Pest Demon in Japan,” purports to be derived from a series of
      notes on medical customs of the Japanese, which were contributed by
      Dr. C. H. H. Hall, of the U.S. Navy, to the _Sei-I Kwai Medical
      Journal_. Compare Lafcadio Hearn, _Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan_
      (London, 1894), i. 147.

  330 Masanao Koike, “Zwei Jahren in Korea,” _Internationales Archiv für
      Ethnographie_, iv. (1891) p. 10; Mrs. Bishop, _Korea and her
      Neighbours_ (London, 1898), ii. 240.

_  331 Lettres édifiantes et curieuses_, Nouvelle Édition (Paris,
      1780-1783), xvi. 206. It will be noticed that in this and the
      preceding case the principle of expulsion is applied for the benefit
      of an individual, not of a whole community. Yet the method of
      procedure in both is so similar to that adopted in the cases under
      consideration that I have allowed myself to cite them.

  M90 Demons of sickness expelled in Africa, America.

  332 G. Zündel, “Land und Volk der Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in
      Westafrika,” _Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin_,
      xii. (1877) pp. 414 _sq._

  333 H. Hecquard, _Reise an die Küste und in das Innere von West-Afrika_
      (Leipsic, 1854), p. 43.

  334 Dr. A. Plehn, “Beobachtungen in Kamerun, über die Anschauungen und
      Gebräuche einiger Negerstämme,” _Zeitschrift für Ethnologie_, xxxvi.
      (1904) pp. 717 _sq._

  335 Ph. Paulitschke, _Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die materielle
      Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl_ (Berlin, 1893), p. 177.

  336 F. Gabriel Sagard, _Le Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons_, pp. 279
      _sqq._ (195 _sq._ of the reprint, Paris, Libraire Tross, 1865).
      Compare _Relations des Jésuites_, 1639, pp. 88-92 (Canadian reprint,
      Quebec, 1858), from which it appears that each man demanded the
      subject of his dream in the form of a riddle, which the hearers
      tried to solve. The custom of asking riddles at certain seasons or
      on certain special occasions is curious and has not yet, so far as I
      know, been explained. Perhaps enigmas were originally
      circumlocutions adopted at times when for certain reasons the
      speaker was forbidden the use of direct terms. They appear to be
      especially employed in the neighbourhood of a dead body. Thus in
      Bolang Mongondo (Celebes) riddles may never be asked except when
      there is a corpse in the village. See N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
      “Allerlei over het land en volk van Bolaäng Mongondou,”
      _Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap_, xi.
      (1867) p. 357. In the Aru archipelago, while a corpse is uncoffined,
      the watchers propound riddles to each other, or rather they think of
      things which the others have to guess. See J. G. F. Riedel, _De
      sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua_, pp. 267
      _sq._ In Brittany after a burial, when the rest have gone to partake
      of the funeral banquet, old men remain behind in the graveyard, and
      having seated themselves on mallows, ask each other riddles. See A.
      de Nore, _Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France_
      (Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 199. Among the Akamba of British East
      Africa boys and girls at circumcision have to interpret certain
      pictographs cut on sticks: these pictographs are called “riddles.”
      See C. W. Hobley, _Ethnology of A-Kamba and other East African
      Tribes_ (Cambridge, 1910), pp. 71 _sq._ In Vedic times the priests
      proposed enigmas to each other at the great sacrifice of a horse.
      See _The Satapatha Brahmana_, translated by J. Eggeling, Part v.
      (Oxford, 1900), pp. 314-316 (_Sacred Books of the East_, vol.
      xliv.); H. Oldenberg, _Die Religion des Veda_ (Berlin, 1894), p.
      475. Compare O. Schrader, _Reallexikon der indogermanischen
      Altertumskunde_ (Strasburg, 1901), pp. 647 _sq._ Among Turkish
      tribes of Central Asia girls publicly propound riddles to their
      wooers, who are punished if they cannot read them. See H. Vambery,
      _Das Türkenvolk_ (Leipsic, 1885), pp. 232 _sq._ Among the Alfoors of
      Central Celebes riddles may only be asked during the season when the
      fields are being tilled and the crops are growing. People meeting
      together at this time occupy themselves with asking riddles and
      telling stories. As soon as some one has found the answer to a
      riddle, they all cry out, “Make our rice to grow, make fat ears to
      grow both in the valleys and on the heights.” But during the months
      which elapse between harvest and the preparation of new land for
      tillage the propounding of enigmas is strictly forbidden. The writer
      who reports the custom conjectures that the cry “Make our rice to
      grow” is addressed to the souls of the ancestors. See A. C. Kruijt,
      “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van
      den Poso-Alfoer,” _Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
      Zendelinggenootschap_, xxxix. (1895) pp. 142 _sq._ Amongst the
      Toboongkoo of Central Celebes riddles are propounded at harvest and
      by watchers over a corpse. See A. C. Kruijt, “Eenige ethnografische
      aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” _Mededeelingen
      van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap_, xliv. (1900) pp.
      223, 228.

  M91 Flight from the demons of sickness.

  337 A. d’Orbigny, _Voyage dans l’Amérique Méridionale_, ii. (Paris and
      Strasburg, 1839-1843) p. 190.

  338 Pedro Lozano, _Description Chorographica del Terreno, Rios, Arboles,
      y Animales de las dilatadissimas Provincias del Gran Chaco,
      Gualamba_, etc. (Cordova, 1733) p. 100.

  339 H. H. Bancroft, _Natives Races of the Pacific States_ (London,
      1875-1876), i. 589 note 259, quoting Arlegui, _Chrón. de Zacatecas_,
      pp. 152-3, 182.

  340 Bertram S. Carey and H. N. Tuck, _The Chin Hills_, i. (Rangoon,
      1896) p. 198.

  M92 The periodic expulsion of evils. Annual expulsion of ghosts in
      Australia.

  341 Rev. W. Ridley, in J. D. Lang’s _Queensland_ (London, 1861), p. 441.
      Compare Rev. W. Ridley, _Kamilaroi_ (Sydney, 1875), p. 149.

  M93 Annual expulsion of Tuña among the Esquimaux of Alaska.

_  342 Report of the International Polar Expedition to Point Barrow,
      Alaska_ (Washington, 1885), pp. 42 _sq._ It is said that in Thule,
      where the sun disappeared below the horizon for forty days every
      winter, the greatest festival of the year was held when the luminary
      reappeared. “It seems to me,” says Procopius, who records the fact,
      “that though the same thing happens every year, these islanders are
      very much afraid lest the sun should fail them altogether.” See
      Procopius, _De bello Gothico_, ii. 15.

  M94 Annual expulsion of Sedna among the Esquimaux of Baffin Land.

  343 Fr. Boas, “The Eskimo,” _Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal
      Society of Canada for 1887_, vol. v. (Montreal, 1888) sect. ii. 36
      _sq._; _id._, “The Central Eskimo,” _Sixth Annual Report of the
      Bureau of Ethnology_ (Washington, 1888), pp. 603 _sq._ Elsewhere,
      however, the writer mentions a different explanation of the custom
      of harpooning Sedna. He says: “Sedna feels kindly towards the people
      if they have succeeded in cutting her. If there is no blood on the
      knife, it is an ill omen. As to the reason why Sedna must be cut,
      the people say that it is an old custom, and that it makes her feel
      better, that it is the same as giving a thirsty person drink.” See
      Fr. Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” _Bulletin of
      the American Museum of Natural History_, xv. (New York, 1901) p.
      139. However, this explanation may well be an afterthought devised
      to throw light on an old custom of which the original meaning had
      been forgotten.

  M95 Annual expulsion of demons among the Koryaks.

  344 W. Jochelson, _The Koryak_ (Leyden and New York, 1908), p. 88 (_The
      Jesup North Pacific Expedition_, vol. vi., _Memoir of the American
      Museum of Natural History_).

  M96 Annual expulsion of demons among the Iroquois and the Cherokees..

  345 Above, p. 121.

_  346 Relations des Jésuites_, 1656, pp. 26-28 (Canadian reprint, Quebec,
      1858); J. F. Lafitau, _Mœurs des Sauvages Ameriquains_ (Paris,
      1724), i. 367-369; Charlevoix, _Histoire de la Nouvelle France_, vi.
      82 _sqq._; Timothy Dwight, _Travels in New England and New York_
      (London, 1823), iv. 201 _sq._; L. H. Morgan, _League of the
      Iroquois_ (Rochester, 1851), pp. 207 _sqq._; Mrs. E. A. Smith,
      “Myths of the Iroquois,” _Second Annual Report of the Bureau of
      Ethnology_ (Washington, 1883), pp. 112 _sqq._; Horatio Hale,
      “Iroquois Sacrifice of the White Dog,” _American Antiquarian_, vii.
      (1885) pp. 7 _sqq._; W. M. Beauchamp, “Iroquois White Dog Feast,”
      _ibid._ pp. 235 _sqq._ “They had one day in the year which might be
      called the Festival of Fools; for in fact they pretended to be mad,
      rushing from hut to hut, so that if they ill-treated any one or
      carried off anything, they would say next day, ‘I was mad; I had not
      my senses about me.’ And the others would accept this explanation
      and exact no vengeance” (L. Hennepin, _Description de la Louisiane_,
      Paris, 1683, pp. 71 _sq._).

  347 J. H. Payne, quoted in “Observations on the Creek and Cherokee
      Indians, by W. Bartram, 1789, with prefatory and supplementary notes
      by E. G. Squier,” _Transactions of the American Ethnological
      Society_, vol. iii. Part i. (1853) p. 78.

  M97 Annual expulsion of evils among the Incas of Peru.

  348 C. Gay, “Fragment d’un voyage dans le Chili et au Cusco patrie des
      anciens Incas,” _Bulletin de la Société de Géographie_ (Paris), ii.
      Série, xix. (1843) pp. 29 _sq._

  349 Garcilasso de la Vega, _Royal Commentaries of the Yncas_, translated
      by (Sir) Clements R. Markham (Hakluyt Society, London, 1869-1871),
      Part i. bk. vii. ch. 6, vol. ii. pp. 228 _sqq._; Molina, “Fables and
      Rites of the Yncas,” in _Rites and Laws of the Yncas_ (Hakluyt
      Society, 1873), pp. 20 _sqq._; J. de Acosta, _History of the
      Indies_, bk. v. ch. 28, vol. ii. pp. 375 _sq._ (Hakluyt Society,
      London, 1880). The accounts of Garcilasso and Molina are somewhat
      discrepant, but this may be explained by the statement of the latter
      that “in one year they added, and in another they reduced the number
      of ceremonies, according to circumstances.” Molina places the
      festival in August, Garcilasso and Acosta in September. According to
      Garcilasso there were only four runners in Cuzco; according to
      Molina there were four hundred. Acosta’s account is very brief. In
      the description given in the text features have been borrowed from
      all three accounts, where these seemed consistent with each other.

  M98 Annual expulsion of demons among the negroes of Guinea.

  350 W. Bosman, “Description of the Coast of Guinea,” in J. Pinkerton’s
      _Voyages and Travels_, xvi. (London, 1814) p. 402; Pierre Bouche,
      _La Côte des Esclaves_ (Paris, 1885), p. 395.

  351 Rev. J. Leighton Wilson, _Western Africa_ (London, 1856), p. 217.

  M99 Annual expulsion of demons in Benin.

_  352 Narrative of Captain James Fawckner’s Travels on the Coast of
      Benin, West Africa_ (London, 1837), pp. 102 _sq._

 M100 Annual expulsion of demons at Cape Coast Castle.

  353 “Extracts from Diary of the late Rev. John Martin, Wesleyan
      Missionary in West Africa, 1843-1848,” _Man_, xii. (1912) pp. 138
      _sq._ Compare Major A. J. N. Tremearne, _The Tailed Head-hunters of
      Nigeria_ (London, 1912), pp. 202 _sq._

 M101 Annual expulsion of evils on the Niger and in Abyssinia.

  354 S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor, _The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger_
      (London, 1859), p. 320.

  355 Mansfield Parkyns, _Life in Abyssinia_, Second Edition (London,
      1868), pp. 285 _sq._

 M102 Annual expulsion of spirits at the yam harvest in New Guinea. Annual
      expulsion of demons among the Hos of West Africa before eating the
      new yams.

  356 George Brown, D.D., _Melanesians and Polynesian_ (London, 1910), pp.
      413 _sq._

  357 As to the ceremony of eating the new yams, see _Spirits of the Corn
      and of the Wild_, ii. 58 _sqq._

  358 J. Spieth, _Die Ewe-Stämme_ (Berlin, 1906), pp. 305-307. At
      Kotedougou a French officer saw a number of disguised men called
      _dou_ dancing and performing various antics about the houses, under
      the trees, and in the fields. Hemp and palm leaves were sewn on
      their garments and they wore caps of hemp surmounted by a crest of
      red-ochred wood, sometimes by a wooden beak of a bird. He gathered
      that the ceremony takes place at the beginning of winter, and he
      thought that the processions “are perhaps intended to drive away the
      evil spirits at the season of tillage or perhaps also to procure
      rain.” See Le Capitaine Binger, _Du Niger au Golfe de Guinée par le
      pays de Kong et le Mossi_ (Paris, 1892), pp. 378-380.

 M103 Annual expulsion of demons among the Hos of North-Eastern India at
      harvest.

  359 E. T. Dalton, _Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal_ (Calcutta, 1872),
      pp. 196 _sq._ We have seen that among the Pondos of South Africa the
      harvest festival of first-fruits is in like manner a period of
      licence and debauchery. See _Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_,
      ii. 66 _sq._

 M104 Annual expulsion of demons among the Hindoo Koosh tribes at harvest.
      Annual expulsion of demons among the Khonds at sowing.

  360 Major J. Biddulph, _Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh_ (Calcutta, 1880), p.
      103.

  361 W. Macpherson, _Memorials of Service in India from the
      Correspondence of the late Major S. C. Macpherson_ (London, 1865),
      pp. 357 _sq._ Possibly this case belongs more strictly to the class
      of mediate expulsions, the devils being driven out upon the car.
      Perhaps, however, the car with its contents is regarded rather as a
      bribe to induce them to go than as a vehicle in which they are
      actually carted away. Anyhow it is convenient to take this case
      along with those other expulsions of demons which are the
      accompaniment of an agricultural festival.

 M105 Annual expulsion of disease in Chota Nagpur. Annual expulsion of
      demons among the Mossos of China.

  362 H. C. Streatfield, “Ranchi,” _Journal of the Asiatic Society of
      Bengal_, lxxii. Part iii. (Calcutta, 1904) p. 36.

_  363 Le Tour du Monde_, iii. (Paris, 1897) pp. 227 _sq._, quoting _Aux
      sources de l’Irraouaddi, d’Hanoï à Calcutta par terre_, par M. E.
      Roux, Troisième Partie.

 M106 Periodical expulsion of demons in Bali.

  364 R. van Eck, “Schetsen van het eiland Bali,” _Tijdschrift voor
      Nederlandsch Indië_, N.S., viii. (1879) pp. 58-60. Van Eck’s account
      is reprinted in J. Jacobs’s _Eenigen tijd onder de Baliërs_
      (Batavia, 1883), pp. 190 _sqq._ According to another writer, each
      village may choose its own day for expelling the devils, but the
      ceremony must always be performed at the new moon. A necessary
      preliminary is to mark exactly the boundaries of the village
      territory, and this is done by stretching the leaves of a certain
      palm across the roads at the boundaries. See F. A. Liefrinck,
      “Bijdrage tot de kennis van het eiland Bali,” _Tijdschrift voor
      Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde_, xxxiii. (1890) pp. 246 _sq._
      As to the “dark moon” it is to be observed that some eastern
      nations, particularly the Hindoos and the Burmese, divide the
      monthly cycle of the moon into two parts, which they call the light
      moon and the dark moon respectively. The light moon is the first
      half of the month, when the luminary is waxing; the dark moon is the
      second half of the month, when the luminary is waning. See Francis
      Buchanan, “On the Religion and Literature of the Burmas,” _Asiatick
      Researches_, vi. (London, 1801) p. 171. The Balinese have no doubt
      derived the distinction, like much else, from the Hindoos.

 M107 Annual expulsion of the fire-spirit among the Shans. Annual ceremony
      in Fiji. Annual ceremony in Tumleo.

  365 J. Anderson, _Mandalay to Momien_ (London, 1876), p. 308.

_  366 United States Exploring Expedition, Ethnography and Philology_, by
      H. Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), pp. 67 _sq._; Ch. Wilkes, _Narrative
      of the U.S. Exploring Expedition_, New Edition (New York, 1851),
      iii. 90 _sq._, 342. According to the latter writer, the sea-slug was
      eaten by the men alone, who lived during the four days in the
      temple, while the women and boys remained shut up in their houses.
      As to the annual appearance and catch of the sea-slug in the seas of
      Fiji, see further B. Seeman, _Viti, an Account of a Government
      Mission to the Vitian or Fijian Islands in the Years 1860-1862_
      (Cambridge, 1862), pp. 59-61; Basil Thomson, _The Fijians_ (London,
      1908), pp. 324-327. A somewhat different account of the appearance
      of the slug (_Palolo veridis_) in the Samoan Sea is given from
      personal observation by Dr. George Brown. He says: “This annelid, as
      far as I can remember, is about 8 or 12 inches long, and somewhat
      thicker than ordinary piping-cord. It is found only on two mornings
      in the year, and the time when it will appear and disappear can be
      accurately predicted. As a general rule only a few _palolo_ are
      found on the first day, though occasionally the large quantity may
      appear first; but, as a rule, the large quantity appears on the
      second morning. And it is only found on these mornings for a very
      limited period, viz. from early dawn to about seven o’clock, _i.e._
      for about two hours. It then disappears until the following year,
      except in some rare instances, when it is found for the same limited
      period in the following month after its first appearance. I kept
      records of the time, and of the state of the moon, for some years,
      with the following result: that it always appeared on two out of the
      following three days, viz. the day before, the day of, and the day
      after the last quarter of the October moon.” See George Brown, D.D.,
      _Melanesians and Polynesians_ (London, 1910), pp. 135 _sq._ The slug
      is also caught in the sea off Samoa, according to one account, at
      intervals of six months. One of its appearances takes place on the
      eighth day after the new moon of October. So regular are the
      appearances of the creature that the Samoans reckon their time by
      them. See E. Boisse, “Les îles Samoa, Nukunono, Fakaafo, Wallis et
      Hoorn,” _Bulletin de la Société de Géographie_ (Paris), vi. Série,
      x. (1875) pp. 430 _sq._ In antiquity every year vast shoals of a
      small fish used to ascend the river Olynthiac from the lake of Bolbe
      in Macedonia, and all the people of the neighbourhood caught and
      salted great store of them. They thought that the fish were sent to
      them by Bolbe, the mother of Olynthus, and they noted it as a
      curious fact that the fish never swam higher up than the tomb of
      Olynthus, which stood on the bank of the river Olynthiac. The shoals
      always made their appearance in the months of Anthesterion and
      Elaphebolion, and as the people of Apollonia (a city on the bank of
      the lake) celebrated their festival of the dead at that season,
      formerly in the month of Elaphebolion, but afterwards in the month
      of Anthesterion, they imagined that the fish came at that time on
      purpose. See Athenaeus, viii. 11, p. 334 F.

  367 M. J. Erdweg, “Die Bewohner der Insel Tumleo Berlinhafen,
      Deutsch-New-Guinea,” _Mittheilungen der anthropologischen
      Gesellschaft in Wien_, xxxii. (1902) pp. 329 _sq._

 M108 Annual expulsion of demons in Japan.

  368 A. Humbert, _Le Japon illustré_ (Paris, 1870), ii. 326.

  369 A. Bastian, _Die Völker des östlichen Asien_, v. (Jena, 1869) p.
      367.

  370 W. G. Aston, _Shinto_ (London, 1905), p. 309.

  371 Lafcadio Hearn, _Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan_ (London, 1894), ii.
      498 _sq._ The writer agrees with Mr. Aston as to the formula of
      exorcism—“_Oni wa soto! fuku wa uchi_”, “Devils out! Good fortune
      in!”

 M109 Annual expulsion of poverty and demons in China, India, and Persia.

  372 Eitel, “Les Hak-ka,” _L’Anthropologie_, iv. (1893) pp. 175 _sq._

_  373 Panjab Notes and Queries_, ii. pp. 146 _sq._, § 792 (June, 1885);
      D. C. J. Ibbetson, _Outlines of Panjab Ethnography_ (Calcutta,
      1883), p. 119; W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern
      India_ (Westminster, 1896), ii. 188, 295 _sq._

  374 John Richardson, _Dictionary of Persian, Arabic, and English_, New
      Edition (London, 1829), p. liii.

 M110 Annual expulsion of demons in China at the end of the year.

  375 J. J. M. de Groot, _The Religious System of China_, vi. (Leyden,
      1910) pp. 977 _sq._

  376 J. J. M. de Groot, _op. cit._ vi. 978.

  377 J. J. M. de Groot, _op. cit._ vi. 979.

  378 J. J. M. de Groot, _The Religious System of China_, vi. 944 _sqq._;
      _id._, _The Religion of China_ (New York, 1910), pp. 38 _sq._; J. H.
      Gray, _China_ (London, 1878), i. 251 _sq._

  379 W. Woodville Rockhill, “Notes on some of the Laws, Customs, and
      Superstitions of Korea,” _The American Anthropologist_, iv. (1891)
      p. 185.

 M111 Annual expulsion of demons in Tonquin.

  380 S. Baron, “Description of the Kingdom of Tonqueen,” in J.
      Pinkerton’s _Voyages and Travels_, ix. (London, 1811) pp. 673, 695
      _sq._; compare Richard, “History of Tonquin,” _ibid._ p. 746. The
      account of the ceremony by Tavernier (whom Baron criticises very
      unfavourably) is somewhat different. According to him, the expulsion
      of wicked souls at the New Year is combined with sacrifice to the
      honoured dead. “At the beginning of every year they have a great
      solemnity in honour of the dead, who were in their lives renowned
      for their noble actions and valour, reckoning rebels among them.
      They set up several altars, some for sacrifices, others for the
      names of the persons they design to honour; and the king, princes,
      and mandarins are present at them, and make three profound
      reverences to the altars when the sacrifices are finished; but the
      king shoots five times against the altars where the rebels’ names
      are; then the great guns are let off, and the soldiers give vollies
      of small shot, to put the souls to flight. The altars and papers
      made use of at the sacrifices are burnt, and the bonzes and sages go
      to eat the meat made use of at the sacrifice” (Tavernier, in John
      Harris’s _Collection of Voyages and Travels_, vol. i. (London, 1744)
      p. 823). The translation is somewhat abridged. For the French
      original, see J. B. Tavernier, _Voyages en Turquie, en Perse, et aux
      Indes_ (The Hague, 1718), iii. 230 _sq._

 M112 Annual expulsion of demons in Cambodia and Siam.

  381 É. Aymonier, _Notice sur le Cambodge_ (Paris, 1875), p. 62.

  382 A. Bastian, _Die Völker des östlichen Asien_, iii. (Jena, 1867) pp.
      237, 298, 314, 529 _sq._; Mgr. Pallegoix, _Description du Royaume
      Thai ou Siam_ (Paris, 1854), i. 252. Bastian (p. 314), with whom
      Pallegoix seems to agree, distinctly states that the expulsion takes
      place on the last day of the year. Yet both say that it occurs in
      the fourth month of the year. According to Pallegoix (i. 253) the
      Siamese year is composed of twelve lunar months, and the first month
      usually begins in December. Hence the expulsion of devils would
      commonly take place in March, as in Cambodia. In Laos the year
      begins in the fifth month and it ends in the fifth month of the
      following year. See Lieutenant-Colonel Tournier, _Notice sur le Laos
      Français_ (Hanoi, 1900), p. 187. According to Professor E. Seler the
      festival of Toxcatl, celebrated in the fifth month, was the old
      Mexican festival of the New Year. See E. Seler, _Altmexikanische
      Studien_, ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 153, 166 _sq._ (_Veröffentlichungen
      aus dem königlichen Museum für Völkerkunde_, vi. Heft 2/4). Hence it
      appears that in some calendars the year is not reckoned to begin
      with the first month.

  383 Ernest Young, _The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe_ (Westminster, 1898),
      pp. 135 _sq._

  384 “Lettre de Mgr. Bruguière, évêque de Capse, à M. Bousquet,
      vicaire-général d’Aire,” _Annales de l’Association de la Propagation
      de la Foi_, v. (Paris and Lyons, 1831) p. 188. As to the temporary
      king of Siam, his privileges and the ceremony of ploughing which he
      performs, see _The Dying God_, pp. 149-151.

 M113 Annual reception and expulsion of the spirits of the dead in Japan.

  385 Charlevoix, _Histoire et description generale du Japon_ (Paris,
      1736), i. 128 _sq._; C. P. Thunberg, _Voyages au Japon_ (Paris,
      1796), iv. 18-20; A. Bastian, _Die Völker des östlichen Asien_, v.
      (Jena, 1869) p. 364; Beaufort, in _Journal of the Anthropological
      Institute_, xv. (1886) p. 102; A. Morgan, in _Journal of American
      Folk-lore_, x. (1897) pp. 244 _sq._; Lafcadio Hearn, _Glimpses of
      Unfamiliar Japan_ (London, 1894), i. 106-110, ii. 504 _sq._ The
      custom of welcoming the souls of the dead back to their old homes
      once a year has been observed in many lands. See _Adonis, Attis,
      Osiris_, Second Edition, pp. 301 _sqq._

 M114 Annual reception and expulsion of the spirits of the dead in ancient
      Greece and Rome.

  386 Above, pp. 123 _sq._

  387 Hesychius, _s.v._ μιαραὶ ἡμέραι; τοῦ Ἀνθεστηριῶνος μηνός, ἐν αἶς τὰς
      ψυχὰς τῶν κατοιχομένων ἀνιέναι ἐδόκουν. Photius, _Lexicon_, _s.vv._
      Θύραζε Κᾶρες; οὐκέτ᾽ Ἀνθεστήρια ... τινὲς δὲ οὕτως τὴν παροιμίαν
      φασί; Θύραζε Κῆρες οὐκέτ᾽ Ἀνθεστήρια; ὡς κατὰ τὴν πόλιν τοῖς
      Ἀνθεστηρίοις τῶν ψυχῶν περιερχομένων. _Id._, _s.vv._ μιαρὰ ἡμέρα; ἐν
      τοῖς Χουσὶν Ἀνθεστηριῶνος μηνός, ἐν ᾧ δοκοῦσιν αἱ ψυχαὶ τῶν
      τελευτησάντων ἀνιέναι, ῥάμνῳ ἕωθεν ἐμασῶντο καὶ πίττῃ τὰς θύρας
      ἔχριον. Pollux, viii. 141: περισχοινίσαι τὰ ἱερὰ ἔλεγον ἐν ταῖς
      ἀποφράσι καί τὸ παραφράξαι. As to the closing of the temples, see
      further Athenaeus, x. 49, p. 447 C. As to the Anthesteria in
      general, see E. Rohde, _Psyche_3 (Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903), i.
      236 _sqq._, who rightly adopts Hesychius’s second explanation of
      Κῆρες. The reasons given by August Mommsen for rejecting that
      explanation betray an imperfect acquaintance with popular
      superstition (_Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum_, Leipsic, 1898, p.
      386, note 1). Compare Miss J. E. Harrison, _Prolegomena to the Study
      of Greek Religion_, Second Edition (Cambridge, 1908), pp. 32 _sqq._
      The Greeks thought that branches of buckthorn (_rhamnus_) fastened
      to doors or windows kept out witches (Dioscorides, _De materia
      medica_, i. 119). A similar virtue was attributed to buckthorn or
      hawthorn by the ancient Romans and modern European peasants. See A.
      Kuhn, _Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks_2 (Güterslöh,
      1886), pp. 209 _sq._; J. Murr, _Pflanzenwelt in der griechischen
      Mythologie_ (Innsbruck, 1890), pp. 104-106; _The Magic Art and the
      Evolution of Kings_, ii. 54 _sq._, 191. According to Mr. Murr,
      _rhamnus_ is _Lycium europaeum_ L. I learn from Miss J. E. Harrison
      that Sir Francis Darwin believes it to be buckthorn (_Rhamnus
      catharticus_). In some parts of Bosnia, when peasant women go to pay
      a visit in a house where a death has occurred they put a little
      hawthorn (_Weissdorn_) behind their headcloth, and on returning from
      the house they throw it away on the street. They think that if the
      deceased has turned into a vampyre, he will be so occupied in
      picking up the hawthorn, that he will not be able to follow them to
      their homes. See F. S. Krauss, “Vampyre im südslavischen
      Volksglauben,” _Globus_, lxi. (1892) p. 326. At childbirth also the
      Greeks smeared pitch on their houses to keep out the demons (εἰς
      ἀπέλασιν τῶν δαιμόνων) who attack women at such times (Photius,
      _Lexicon_, _s.v._ ῥάμνος). To this day the Bulgarians try to keep
      wandering ghosts from their houses by painting crosses with tar on
      the outside of their doors, while on the inside they hang a tangled
      skein composed of countless broken threads. The ghost cannot enter
      until he has counted all the threads, and before he has done the sum
      the cock crows and the poor soul must return to the grave. See A.
      Strausz, _Die Bulgaren_ (Leipsic, 1898), p. 454. The Servians paint
      crosses with tar on the doors of houses and barns to keep out
      vampyres. See F. S. Krauss, “Vampyre im südslavischen Volksglauben,”
      _Globus_, lxi. (1892) p. 326. In the Highlands of Scotland it was
      believed that tar put on a door kept witches away. See J. G.
      Campbell, _Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands
      of Scotland_ (Glasgow, 1902), p. 13. The Thompson Indians of British
      Columbia used to bar their houses against ghosts by means not unlike
      those adopted by the Athenians at the Anthesteria. When a death had
      happened, they hung a string of deer-hoofs across the inside of the
      house, and an old woman often pulled at the string to make the hoofs
      rattle. This kept the ghost out. They also placed branches of
      juniper at the door or burned them in the fire for the same purpose.
      See James Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia” (April
      1900), p. 332 (_The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the
      American Museum of Natural History_). With the Athenian use of ropes
      to keep ghosts out of the temples at the Anthesteria we may compare
      the Siamese custom of roping demons out of the city at the New Year
      (above, p. 149). Ropes of rice-straw, which are supposed to repel
      demoniacal and evil influences, are hung by the Japanese in front of
      shrines, and at the New Year they hang them also before ordinary
      houses. See W. G. Aston, _Shinto_ (London, 1905), pp. 335 _sq._ Some
      of the Kayans of Borneo stretch ropes round their houses to keep out
      demons of disease; in order to do so more effectually leaves of a
      certain plant or tree are fastened to the rope. See A. W.
      Nieuwenhuis, _Quer durch Borneo_, i. (Leyden, 1904) p. 448.

  388 Scholiast on Aristophanes, _Frogs_, 218.

  389 J. Perham, “Sea Dyak Religion,” _Journal of the Straits Branch of
      the Royal Asiatic Society_, No. 14, December 1884, pp. 296-298.

  390 Ovid, _Fasti_, v. 419-486; Varro, quoted by Nonius Marcellus, p. 135
      (p. 142 ed. Quicherat), _s.v._ “Lemures”; Festus, p. 87 ed. C. O.
      Müller, _s.v._ “Fabam.” Ovid, who is our chief authority for the
      ceremony, speaks as if the festival lasted only one day (the ninth
      of May). But we know from the inscribed calendars that it lasted
      three days. See W. Warde Fowler, _The Roman Festivals of the period
      of the Republic_ (London, 1899), pp. 106 _sqq._

 M115 Annual expulsion of Satan among the Wotyaks and Cheremiss of Russia.

  391 Max Buch, _Die Wotjäken_ (Stuttgart, 1882), pp. 153 _sq._

  392 A. Bastian, _Der Mensch in der Geschichte_ (Leipsic, 1860), ii. 94;
      P. v. Stenin, “Ein neuer Beitrag zur Ethnographie der
      Tscheremissen,” _Globus_, lviii. (1890) p. 204.

 M116 Annual expulsion of witches and other powers of evil in Christian
      Europe.

  393 Vincenzo Dorsa, _La tradizione greco-latina negli usi e nelle
      credenze popolari della Calabria Citeriore_ (Cosenza, 1884), pp. 42
      _sq._

  394 Vincenzo Dorsa, _La tradizione greco-latina negli usi e nelle
      credenze popolari della Calabria Citeriore_, p. 48.

  395 J. G. von Hahn, _Albanesische Studien_ (Jena, 1854), i. 160. Compare
      _The Dying God_, pp. 264 _sq._

  396 P. Drechsler, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien_ (Leipsic,
      1903-1906), i. 86.

 M117 Widespread fear of witches and wizards in Europe.

  397 As to the activity of the evil powers on the twelve days from
      Christmas to Twelfth Night, see Gustav Bilfinger, _Das germanische
      Julfest_ (Stuttgart, 1901), pp. 74 _sqq._; as to witches on St.
      George’s Eve, May Eve, and Midsummer Eve, see _The Magic Art and the
      Evolution of Kings_, ii. 52 _sqq._, 127, 334 _sqq._

 M118 Annual expulsion of witches on Walpurgis Night (the Eve of May Day),
      on May Day in the Tyrol.

  398 G. Bilfinger, _Das germanische Julfest_ (Stuttgart, 1901), p. 76.

  399 J. M. Ritter von Alpenburg, _Mythen und Sagen Tirols_ (Zurich,
      1857), pp. 260 _sq._ Compare J. E. Waldfreund, “Volksgebräuche und
      Aberglauben,” _Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde_,
      iii. (1855) p. 339. A Westphalian form of the expulsion of evil is
      the driving out the _Süntevögel_, _Sunnenvögel_, or _Sommervögel_,
      that is, the butterfly. On St. Peter’s Day, 22nd February, children
      go from house to house knocking on them with hammers and singing
      doggerel rhymes in which they bid the _Sommervögel_ to depart.
      Presents are given to them at every house. Or the people of the
      house themselves go through all the rooms, knocking on all the
      doors, to drive away the _Sunnenvögel_. If this ceremony is omitted,
      it is thought that various misfortunes will be the consequence. The
      house will swarm with rats, mice, and other vermin, the cattle will
      be sick, the butterflies will multiply at the milk-bowls, etc. See
      J. F. L. Woeste, _Volksüberlieferungen in der Grafschaft Mark_
      (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 24; J. W. Wolf, _Beiträge zur deutschen
      Mythologie_, i. (Göttingen and Leipsic, 1852) p. 87; A. Kuhn,
      _Westfälische Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen_ (Leipsic, 1859), ii. pp.
      119-121, §§ 366-374; Montanus, _Die deutschen Volksfeste,
      Volksbräuche, und deutscher Volksglaube_ (Iserlohn, N.D.), pp. 21
      _sq._; U. Jahn, _Die deutschen Opfergebräuche bei Ackerbau und
      Viehzucht_ (Breslau, 1884), pp. 94-96.

 M119 Annual expulsion of witches on Walpurgis Night in Bavaria and
      Voigtland.

_  400 Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern_ (Munich,
      1860-1866), ii. 272, iii. 302 _sq._, 934; O. Freiherr von
      Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, _Das festliche Jahr_ (Leipsic, 1863), p. 137.

_  401 Encyclopaedia Britannica_, Ninth Edition, xx. 493.

  402 R. Eisel, _Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes_ (Gera, 1871), p. 210.

  403 August Witzschel, _Sitten, Sagen und Gebräuche aus Thüringen_
      (Vienna, 1878), pp. 262 _sq._

 M120 Annual “Burning of the Witches” on Walpurgis Night in Bohemia.

  404 O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, _Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen_
      (Prague, preface dated 1861), pp. 210-212; _id._, _Das festliche
      Jahr_ (Leipsic, 1863), p. 137; Alois John, _Sitte, Brauch und
      Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen_ (Prague, 1905), pp. 70-73.

  405 Alois John, _op. cit._ p. 71.

  406 Willibald Müller, _Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren_
      (Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 324.

 M121 Annual “Burning of the Witches” on Walpurgis Night in Silesia.

  407 P. Drechsler, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien_ (Leipsic,
      1903-1906), i. 108-110. With regard to the dance of the witches in
      the snow, it is a common saying in the northern district of the Harz
      Mountains that the witches must dance the snow away on the top of
      the Blocksberg on the first of May. See A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz,
      _Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche_ (Leipsic, 1848), p. 376.
      At Dabelow in Mecklenburg all utensils are removed from the
      fireplace on Walpurgis Night, lest the witches should ride on them
      to the Blocksberg. See A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, _l.c._

 M122 Annual “Burning of the Witches” on Walpurgis Night among the Wends
      of Saxony.

  408 R. Wuttke, _Sächsische Volkskunde_ (Dresden, 1901), p. 359.

  409 Lady Agnes Macdonell, in _The Times_, May 3rd, 1913, p. 6. In a
      letter to me (dated 31, Kensington Park Gardens, May 5th [1913])
      Lady Macdonell was kind enough to give me some further particulars
      as to the custom. It seems that the boys use their horns on May Day
      as well as on the thirtieth of April. Processions of boys and girls
      decorated with flowers and leaves, and carrying flags and horns,
      went about Penzance on May Day of the present year (1913). The horns
      are straight; some of them terminate in a bell-shaped opening,
      others have no such appendage. The latter and plainer are the older
      pattern.

 M123 Annual expulsion of witches during the Twelve Days from Christmas to
      Epiphany. “Burning out the Old Year” at Biggar.

  410 P. Drechsler, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien_ (Leipsic,
      1903-1906), i. 15-18. With regard to the superstitions attached to
      these twelve days or twelve nights, as the Germans call them, see
      further A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, _Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und
      Gebräuche_ (Leipsic, 1848), pp. 408-418; A. Kuhn, _Sagen, Gebräuche
      und Märchen aus Westfalen_ (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 111-117; L.
      Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_
      (Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 28 _sqq._; M. Toeppen, _Aberglauben aus
      Masuren_2 (Danzig, 1867), pp. 61 _sqq._; A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche
      Volksaberglaube_2 (Berlin, 1869), pp. 61 _sqq._, § 74; E. Mogk,
      “Mythologie,” in H. Paul’s _Grundriss der germanischen Philologie_,2
      iii. (Strasburg, 1900) pp. 260 _sq._; Alois John, _Sitte, Brauch und
      Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen_ (Prague, 1905), pp. 11 _sqq._

  411 O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, _Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen_
      (Prague, preface dated 1861), p. 602.

  412 W. G. Aston, _Shinto_ (London, 1905), p. 312, referring to Lady
      Burton’s life of her husband.

  413 T. Thiselton Dyer, _British Popular Customs_ (London, 1876), p. 506.

  414 J. G. Dalyell, _The Darker Superstitions of Scotland_ (Edinburgh,
      1834), p. 670.

 M124 Annual expulsion of witches and demons in Switzerland and France.

  415 H. Usener, “Italische Mythen,” _Rheinisches Museum_, N.F., xxx.
      (1875) p. 198; _id._, _Kleine Schriften_, iv. (Leipzic and Berlin,
      1913), p. 109; E. Hoffmann-Krayer, _Feste und Bräuche des
      Schweizervolkes_ (Zurich, 1913), p. 101.

  416 H. Herzog, _Schweizerische Volksfeste, Sitten und Gebräuche_ (Aaran,
      1884), pp. 212 _sq._

  417 A. de Nore, _Coutumes, Mythes, et Traditions des Provinces de
      France_ (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 81, 85.

 M125 Befana in the Piazza Navona at Rome, in the Tuscan Romagna.

  418 As to Befana and her connexion with Epiphany, see J. Grimm,
      _Deutsche Mythologie_,4 i. 234. The personified Befana, an ugly but
      good-natured old woman, is known in Sicily as well as Italy. See G.
      Pitrè, _Spettacoli e Feste Popolari Siciliane_ (Palermo, 1881), p.
      167. As to the ceremony in the Piazza Navona, see H. Usener,
      “Italische Mythen,” _Kleine Schriften_, iv. (Leipsic and Berlin,
      1913) pp. 108 _sqq._, who rightly compares it to the Swiss
      ceremonies observed at and near Brunnen on Twelfth Night. I
      witnessed the noisy scene in the Piazza Navona in January, 1901.

  419 P. Fabbri, “Canti popolari raccolti sui monti della
      Romagna-Toscana,” _Archivio per lo Studio delle Tradizioni
      Popolari_, xxii. (1903) pp. 356 _sq._; H. Usener, _Kleine
      Schriften_, iv. 108 note 62. In the Abruzzi, on the evening before
      Epiphany, musicians go from house to house serenading the inmates
      with songs and the strains of fiddles, guitars, organs, and so
      forth. They are accompanied by others carrying lanterns, torches, or
      burning branches of juniper. See Antonio de Nino, _Usi e Costumi
      Abruzzesi_ (Florence, 1879-1883), ii. 178-180; G. Finamore,
      _Credenze, Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi_ (Palermo, 1890), pp. 88 _sq._
      Such house to house visitations may be a relic of an old expulsion
      of witches and demons.

 M126 Expulsion of the Trows in Shetland on Up-helly-a’, the twenty-fourth
      day after Christmas.

  420 Rev. Biot Edmondston and Jessie M. E. Saxby, _The Home of a
      Naturalist_ (London, 1888), p. 136. Compare _County Folk-lore_, vol.
      iii. _Orkney and Shetland Islands_, collected by G. F. Black
      (London, 1903), p. 196. As to the Trows, whose name is doubtless
      identical with the Norse Trolls (Swedish _troll_, Norwegian
      _trold_), see Edmondston and Saxby, _op. cit._ pp. 189 _sqq._; John
      Jamieson, _Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language_, New
      Edition, edited by J. Longmuir and D. Donaldson (Paisley,
      1879-1882), iv. 630 _sq._, who observes that “while the Fairies are
      uniformly represented as social, cheerful, and benevolent beings,
      the _Trows_ are described as gloomy and malignant, ever prone to
      injure men.”

  421 Rev. Biot Edmondston and Jessie M. E. Saxby, _The Home of a
      Naturalist_ (London, 1888), p. 146. Compare _County Folk-lore_, vol.
      iii. _Orkney and Shetland Islands_, collected by G. F. Black
      (London, 1903), pp. 202 _sq._

_  422 The Shetland News_, February 1st, 1913, p. 5. As January 5th is
      reckoned Christmas in Shetland, the celebration of Up-helly-a’ falls
      on January 29th. See J. Nicolson, in _The World’s Work and Play_,
      February, 1906, pp. 283 _sqq._ For further information relating to
      the ceremony I am indebted to the kindness of Sheriff-Substitute
      David J. Mackenzie (formerly of Lerwick, now of Kilmarnock).
      According to one of his correspondents, the Rev. Dr. J. Willcock of
      Lerwick, the present elaborate form of the ceremony dates only from
      1882, when the Duke of Edinburgh visited Lerwick on naval business,
      and Up-helly-a’ was celebrated in his honour on a grander scale than
      ever before. Yet Dr. Willcock apparently does not deny the antiquity
      of the festival in a simpler form, for in his letter he says: “In
      former times an old boat filled with tar was set on fire and dragged
      about, as were also lighted tar-barrels.” Another authority on
      Shetland antiquities, Mr. Gilbert Goudie, writes to Sheriff
      Mackenzie that “the kicking about and burning a tar-barrel is very
      old in Lerwick.” Compare _County Folk-lore_, iii. _Orkney and
      Shetland Islands_, collected by G. F. Black (London, 1903), p. 205:
      “Formerly, blazing tar-barrels were dragged about the town, and
      afterwards, with the first break of morning, dashed over the knab
      into the sea.” Up-helly-a’, the Shetland name for Antinmas, is no
      doubt the same with Uphalyday, which Dr. J. Jamieson (_Dictionary of
      the Scottish Language_, New Edition, iv. 676) defines as “the first
      day after the termination of the Christmas holidays,” quoting two
      official documents of A.D. 1494 and 1541 respectively.

      I have to thank my friend Miss Anderson of Barskimming, Mauchline,
      Ayrshire, for kindly calling my attention to this interesting relic
      of the past.

 M127 Annual expulsion of witches and demons in Europe.
 M128 The expulsion of embodied evils.
 M129 Expulsion of demons personified by men among the American Indians.
      Expulsion of a demon embodied in an image among the Mayas of
      Yucatan.

  423 Stephen Powers, _Tribes of California_ (Washington, 1877), p. 159.

  424 G. Catlin, _North American Indians_, Fourth Edition (London, 1844),
      i. 166 _sqq._; _id._, _O-kee-pa, a Religious Ceremony, and other
      Customs of the Mandans_ (London, 1867).

  425 Diego de Landa, _Relation des Choses de Yucatan_ (Paris, 1864), pp.
      203-205, 211-215; E. Seler, “The Mexican Chronology,” _Bureau of
      American Ethnology, Bulletin 28_ (Washington, 1904), p. 17. As to
      the Maya calendar see further Cyrus Thomas, _The Maya Year_
      (Washington, 1894), pp. 19 _sqq._ (_Smithsonian Institution, Bureau
      of Ethnology_).

 M130 Expulsion of a demon personified by a man among the aborigines of
      Queensland. Expulsion of demons embodied in effigies in India and
      Russia. Expulsion of demons embodied in animals or boys in Esthonia
      and Spain.

  426 W. E. Roth, _Ethnological Studies among the North-West-Central
      Queensland Aborigines_ (Brisbane and London, 1897), pp. 120-125.

  427 J. Moura, _Le Royaume du Cambodge_ (Paris, 1883), i. 172. Compare
      above, p. 149.

  428 R. H. Elliot, _Experiences of a Planter in the Jungles of Mysore_
      (London, 1871), i. 60 _sq._

  429 A. C. Winter, “Russische Volksbräuche bei Seuchen,” _Globus_, lxxix.
      (1901) p. 302. For the Russian ceremony of drawing a plough round a
      village to keep out the cattle plague, see also W. R. S. Ralston,
      _Songs of the Russian People_, Second Edition (London, 1872), pp.
      396 _sqq._

  430 J. G. Kohl, _Die deutsch-russischen Ostseeprovinzen_ (Dresden and
      Leipsic, 1841), ii. 278.

_  431 Folk-lore Journal_, vii. (1889) p. 174.

 M131 Annual expulsion of the demon of plague among the Khasis of Assam.
      The Tug of War probably a contest with demons represented by human
      beings. The Tug of War at funerals in Chittagong and Burma.

  432 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, _The Khasis_ (London, 1907), p. 157; A.
      Bastian, in _Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für
      Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte_, 1881, p. 151; _id._,
      _Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra_ (Berlin, 1883), pp. 6 _sq._

  433 Fr. Boas, “The Central Eskimo,” _Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau
      of Ethnology_ (Washington, 1888), p. 605. See _The Dying God_, p.
      259.

  434 Capt. T. H. Lewin, _Wild Races of South-Eastern India_ (London,
      1870), p. 185.

  435 Father Sangermano, _Description of the Burmese Empire_ (Rangoon,
      1885), p. 98; Capt. C. J. F. S. Forbes, _British Burma_ (London,
      1878), pp. 216 _sq._; Shway Yoe, _The Burman, his Life and Notions_
      (London, 1882), ii. 334 _sq._, 342.

 M132 The Tug of War as a rain-making ceremony in Burma and else where.

  436 F. E. Sawyer, “S. Swithin and Rainmakers,” _The Folk-lore Journal_,
      i. (1883) p. 214.

  437 Francis Buchanan, “On the Religion and Literature of the Burmas,”
      _Asiatick Researches_, vi. (London, 1801) pp. 193 _sq._ Compare
      Lieut.-General A. Fytche, _Burma Past and Present_ (London, 1878),
      i. 248 note 1; Max and Bertha Ferrars, _Burma_ (London, 1900), p.
      184; (Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman, _Gazetteer of Upper Burma
      and the Shan States_ (Rangoon, 1900-1901), Part ii. vol. ii. pp. 95,
      279.

  438 J. G. F. Riedel, _De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Celebes
      en Papua_ (The Hague, 1886), p. 282.

  439 For particulars as to the winds of Assam I am indebted to my friend
      Mr. J. D. Anderson, formerly of the Indian Civil Service, who
      resided many years in that country.

 M133 The Tug of War between the sexes. The Tug of War in Kamtchatka and
      New Guinea.

_  440 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 98 _sq._

  441 G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoevell, “Leti-eilanden,” _Tijdschrift voor
      Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde_, xxxiii. (1890) p. 207.
      However, it is not quite clear from the writer’s words (“_Immers de
      mannen en vrouwen in twee partijeen verdeelt en elk een stuk van de
      roten in de hande houdende bootsen toch ook door’t voor- en
      achteroverbuigen van’t lichaam de bewegingen van cohabitie na_”)
      whether the men and women take opposite sides or are distributed
      between the two.

  442 T. C. Hodson, _The Naga Tribes of Manipur_ (London, 1911), p. 168;
      compare 64. “The Chirus have six crop festivals, one of which, that
      before the crops are cut, is marked by a rope-pulling ceremony of
      the same nature as that observed among the Tangkhuls” (_op. cit._ p.
      172). The headman (_khullākpa_) “is a sacrosanct person, the
      representative of the village in all religious rites, and surrounded
      by special alimentary, social and conjugal _gennas_” or taboos (_op.
      cit._ p. 110).

  443 Stewart Culin, _Korean Games_ (Philadelphia, 1895), p. 35; A. C.
      Haddon, _The Study of Man_ (London and New York, 1898), p. 274.

  444 G. W. Steller, _Beschreibung von dem Lande Kamtschatka_ (Frankfort
      and Leipsic, 1774), pp. 327 _sq._

  445 H. von Rosenberg, _Der malayisch Archipel_ (Leipsic, 1878), p. 462.

 M134 The Tug of War in Morocco to procure rain or sunshine.

  446 Edward Westermarck, “The Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in
      Morocco,” _Folk-lore_, xxii. (1911) pp. 158 _sq._; _id._,
      _Ceremonies and Beliefs connected with Agriculture, Certain Dates of
      the Solar Year, and the Weather in Morocco_ (Helsingfors, 1913), p.
      122.

 M135 Games of ball in Morocco to procure rain or sunshine.

  447 E. Westermarck, _Ceremonies and Beliefs connected with Agriculture,
      Certain Dates of the Solar Year, and the Weather in Morocco_
      (Helsingfors, 1913). pp. 121 _sq._

 M136 The Tug of War in Morocco to ensure prosperity.

  448 E. Westermarck, “The Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,”
      _Folk-lore_, xxii. (1911) p. 159.

 M137 Spiritual significance of the Tug of War. The Tug of War in French
      Guiana, in North-Western India.

  449 H. Coudreau, _Chez nos Indiens, Quatre Années dans la Guayane
      Française_ (Paris, 1895), p. 234.

  450 Major Forbes, _Eleven Years in Ceylon_ (London, 1840), i. 358.

  451 Sir Henry M. Elliot, _Memoirs on the History, Folk-lore, and
      Distribution of the Races of the North-Western Provinces of India_,
      edited, revised, and re-arranged by John Beames (London, 1869), i.
      235.

  452 W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), ii. 321.

  453 E. Westermarck, “The Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,”
      _Folk-lore_, xxii. (1911) p. 158.

 M138 The Tug of War in Shropshire and Radnorshire. Contests for a ball
      (_soule_) in Normandy.

  454 John Brand, _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_, New Edition
      (London, 1883), i. 92; Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F. Jackson,
      _Shropshire Folk-lore_ (London, 1883), pp. 319-321.

  455 C. S. Burne and G. F. Jackson, _op. cit._ p. 321.

  456 Jules Lecœur, _Esquisses du Bocage Normand_ (Condé-sur-Noireau,
      1883-1887), i. 13, ii. 153-165. Compare Laisnel de la Salle,
      _Croyances et Légendes du Centre de la France_ (Paris, 1875), i. 86
      _sqq._; and as to the game of _soule_, see Guerry, in _Mémoires des
      Antiquaires de France_, viii. (1829) pp. 459-461.

  457 In the parish of Vieux-Pont, in the department of Orne, the man who
      is last married before the first Sunday in Lent must throw a ball
      from the foot of the cross. The village lads compete with each other
      for its possession. To win it the lad must carry it through three
      parishes without being overtaken by his rivals. See A. de Nore,
      _Coutumes, Mythes, et Traditions des Provinces de France_ (Paris and
      Lyons, 1846), pp. 244 _sq._

 M139 Annual sham fights may represent contests with demons.

  458 J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, “Die Tenggeresen, ein alter Javanischer
      Volksstamm,” _Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
      Nederlandsch-Indië_, liii. (1901) pp. 140 _sq._

  459 Edouard Chavannes, _Documents sur les Tou-Kiue (Turcs) Occidentaux_
      (St. Petersburg, 1903), p. 148.

 M140 Demons of sickness expelled in a small ship in Ceram.

  460 François Valentyn, _Oud- en nieuw Ost-Indiën_ (Dordrecht and
      Amsterdam, 1724-1726), iii. 14. L. de Backer (_L’Archipel Indien_,
      Paris, 1874, pp. 377 _sq._) copies from Valentyn.

 M141 Demons of sickness expelled in a small ship in Timor-laut, in a ship
      in Buru, removed from the persons of the sufferers.

  461 J. G. F. Riedel, _De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes
      en Papua_ (The Hague, 1886), pp. 304 _sq._

  462 J. G. F. Riedel, _op. cit._ pp. 25 _sq._

_  463 Ibid._ p. 141.

  464 See above, p. 155.

  465 J. G. F. Riedel, _op. cit._ p. 78.

_  466 Ibid._ p. 357.

_  467 Ibid._ pp. 266, 304 _sq._, 327, 357; H. Ling Roth, _Natives of
      Sarawak and British North Borneo_ (London, 1896), i. 284.

  468 Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, _The Pagan Tribes of Borneo_ (London,
      1912), ii. 122 _sq._

 M142 Demons of disease expelled in a ship in Selangor.

  469 W. W. Skeat, _Malay Magic_ (London, 1900), pp. 433-435. For other
      examples of sending away plague-laden boats in the Malay region see
      J. G. F. Riedel, _op. cit._ pp. 181, 210; R. van Eck, “Schetsen van
      het eiland Bali,” _Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië_, N.S., viii.
      (1879) p. 104; A. Bastian, _Indonesien_, i. 147; C. Hupe, “Korte
      verhandeling over de godsdienst, zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,”
      _Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië_, 1846, dl. iii. 150; C. F. H.
      Campen, “De godsdienstbegrippen der Halmaherasche Alfoeren,”
      _Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde_, xxvii.
      (1882) p. 441; _Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic
      Society_, No. 12, pp. 229-231; A. L. van Hasselt, _Volksbeschrijving
      van Midden-Sumatra_ (Leyden, 1882), p. 98; C. M. Pleyte,
      “Ethnographische Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,” _Tijdschrift van
      het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap_, Tweede Serie, x.
      (1893) p. 835; H. Ling Roth, “Low’s Natives of Sarawak,” _Journal of
      the Anthropological Institute_, xxii, (1893) p. 25; C. Snouck
      Hurgronje, _De Atjehers_ (Batavia and Leyden, 1893-1894), i. 461
      _sq._; J. A. Jacobsen, _Reisen in der Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres_
      (Berlin, 1896), p. 110.

 M143 Demons of sickness expelled in small ships in New Guinea, the
      Philippines, Tikopia, and the Nicobar Islands.

  470 H. Zahn, “Die Jabim,” in R. Neuhauss’s _Deutsch Neu-Guinea_, iii.
      (1911) pp. 329 _sq._

  471 F. Blumentritt, “Über die Eingeborenen der Insel Palawan und der
      Inselgruppe der Talamianen,” _Globus_, lix. (1891) p. 183.

  472 J. Dumont D’Urville, _Voyage autour du monde et à la recherche de La
      Pérouse, sur la corvette Astrolabe_ (Paris, 1832-1833), v. 311.

  473 Roepstorff, “Ein Geisterboot der Nicobaresen,” _Verhandlungen der
      Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und
      Urgeschichte_ (1881), p. 401; W. Svoboda, “Die Bewohner des
      Nikobaren-Archipels,” _Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie_, vi.
      (1893) pp. 10 _sq._

  474 P. Denjoy, “An-nam, Médecins et Sorciers, Remèdes et Superstitions,”
      etc., _Bulletins de la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris_, v. (1894)
      pp. 409 _sq._ Compare É. Aymonier, _Voyage dans le Laos_ (Paris,
      1895-1897), i. 121. For Siamese applications of the same principle
      to the cure of individuals, see A. Bastian, _Die Völker des
      östlichen Asien_, iii. (Jena, 1867) pp. 295 _sq._, 485 _sq._

 M144 Demons of sickness expelled in the form of animals in India.

_  475 Panjab Notes and Queries_, i. p. 48, § 418 (January, 1884).

_  476 Id._, iii. p. 81, § 373 (February 1886).

  477 W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), i. 142. Bulls are used as scapegoats for
      cholera in Cashmeer (H. G. M. Murray-Aynsley, in _Folk-lore_, iv.
      (1893) pp. 398 _sq._).

  478 Major-General Sir W. H. Sleeman, _Rambles and Recollections of
      Indian Official_, New Edition (Westminster, 1893), i. 203.

  479 Major-General Sir W. H. Sleeman, _op. cit._ i. 198.

 M145 Goats and cocks employed as scapegoats in various parts of India.

  480 F. Fawcett, “On the Saoras (or Savaras), an Aboriginal Hill People
      of the Eastern Ghats,” _Journal of the Anthropological Society of
      Bombay_, i. 213, note.

  481 Mr. Y. V. Athalye, in _Journal of the Anthropological Society of
      Bombay_, i. 37.

  482 W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), i. 169 _sq._; _id._, _Tribes and Castes of the
      North-Western Provinces and Oudh_ (Calcutta, 1896), iii. 445.

_  483 Kausika Sutra_, xiv. 22 (W. Caland, _Altindisches Zauberritual_,
      Amsterdam, 1900, p. 29); H. Oldenberg, _Die Religion des Veda_
      (Berlin, 1894), p. 498.

_  484 Kausika Sutra_, xviii. 16 (W. Caland, _Altindisches Zauberritual_,
      pp. 44 _sq._).

 M146 Cows, toads, and llamas as scapegoats in Africa and America.

  485 Dom Daniel Sour Dharim Dena (a Dinka convert), in _Annales de la
      Propagation de la Foi_, lx. (1888) pp. 57 _sq._

  486 H. Seidel, “Krankheit, Tod, und Begräbnis bei den Togonegern,”
      _Globus_, lxxii. (1897) p. 24.

  487 D. Forbes, “On the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru,” _Journal of
      the Ethnological Society of London_, vol. ii. No. 3 (October, 1870),
      p. 237.

 M147 Goddess of disease expelled in a toy chariot.

  488 Jivangi Jimshedji Modi, B.A., “On the Chariot of the Goddess, a
      Supposed Remedy for driving out an Epidemic,” _Journal of the
      Anthropological Society of Bombay_, vol. iv. No. 8 (Bombay, 1899),
      pp. 420-424; Captain C. Eckford Luard, in _Census of India, 1901_,
      vol. xix., _Central India_ (Lucknow, 1902), p. 78.

 M148 Human scapegoats in Uganda.

  489 Rev. J. Roscoe, _The Baganda_ (London, 1911), p. 342.

  490 Rev. J. Roscoe, _The Baganda_, pp. 109, 200. As to the perpetual
      fire at the entrance to a king’s enclosure, see _id._ pp. 103, 197,
      202 _sq._

 M149 Human scapegoats in China and India. Indian ceremony of sliding down
      a rope.

  491 J. H. Gray, _China_ (London, 1878), ii. 306.

_  492 Panjab Notes and Queries_, i. p. 75, § 598 (April, 1884); W.
      Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), i. 170.

  493 Rev. F. Hahn, “Some Notes on the Religion and Superstitions of the
      Orāōs” _Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal_, lxxii. Part iii.
      (Calcutta, 1904) p. 17; compare H. C. Streatfield, _ibid._ p. 37.

_  494 North Indian Notes and Queries_, i. pp. 55, 74 _sq._, 77, §§ 417,
      499, 516 (July and August, 1891), quoting G. W. Traill, _Statistical
      Sketch of Kumaun_, pp. 68 sq., and Moorcroft and Trebeck, _Travels
      in the Himalayan Provinces of Hindustan and the Panjáb_, i. 17 _sq._
      Compare E. T. Atkinson, _The Himalayan Districts of the
      North-Western Provinces of India_, ii. (Allahabad, 1884), pp. 834
      _sq._

 M150 Tibetan New Year ceremony of sliding down a rope.

  495 W. Woodville Rockhill, “Tibet, A Geographical, Ethnographical, and
      Historical Sketch, derived from Chinese Sources,” _Journal of the
      Royal Asiatic Society for 1891_ (London, 1891), p. 209. Compare Hue,
      _Souvenirs d’un Voyage dans la Tartarie et le Thibet_, Sixième
      Édition (Paris, 1878), ii. 379 _sq._ For a description of Potala
      Hill and its grand palace, see L. Austine Waddell, _Lhasa and its
      Mysteries_ (London, 1905), pp. 330 _sqq._, 387 _sqq._

 M151 Periodic expulsion of evils in a material vehicle. Periodic
      expulsion of spirits in rafts from Perak.

_  496 Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Notes and Queries_,
      No. 3 (Singapore, 1886), pp. 80 _sq._

 M152 Annual expulsion of evils in small ships in the Indian Archipelago.

  497 J. G. F. Riedel, _De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes
      en Papua_ (The Hague, 1886), p. 393.

  498 A. Bastian, _Der Mensch in der Geschichte_ (Leipsic, 1860), ii. 93.

  499 Ivor H. N. Evans, “Notes on the Religious Beliefs, Superstitions,
      Ceremonies and Tabus of the Dusuns of the Tuaran and Tempassuk
      Districts, British North Borneo,” _Journal of the Royal
      Anthropological Institute_, xlii. (1912) pp. 382-384.

 M153 Annual expulsion of demons in little ships in the Nicobar Islands.

  500 A. Bastian, _op. cit._ ii. 91.

  501 V. Solomon, “Extracts from Diaries kept in Car Nicobar,” _Journal of
      the Anthropological Institute_, xxxii. (1902) pp. 228 _sq._

 M154 Annual expulsion of embodied evils in India, China, and Corea.
      Annual expulsion or destruction of demons embodied in images in
      Tibet.

  502 Captain F. Wilford, “An Essay on the Sacred Isles in the West,”
      _Asiatic Researches_, ix. (London, 1809) pp. 96 _sq._

  503 J. H. Gray, _China_ (London, 1878), ii. 306 _sq._

  504 W. Woodville Rockhill, “Notes on some of the Laws, Customs, and
      Superstitions of Corea,” _The American Anthropologist_, iv. (1891)
      p. 185; Mrs. Bishop, _Korea and her Neighbours_ (London, 1898), ii.
      56.

  505 Stewart Culin, _Korean Games_ (Philadelphia, 1895), p. 12.

_  506 Narratives of the Mission of George Bogle to Tibet and of the
      Journey of Thomas Manning to Lhasa_, edited by (Sir) Clements R.
      Markham (London, 1876), pp. 106 _sq._ Compare Sarat Chandra Das,
      _Journey to Lhasa and Central Tibet_ (London, 1902), p. 116.

  507 Missionary Fage, in _Annales de la Propagation de la Foi_, xxix.
      (1857) p. 321.

 M155 Biennial expulsion of demons embodied in effigies at Old Calabar.

  508 T. J. Hutchinson, _Impressions of Western Africa_ (London, 1858), p.
      162; Rev. J. Macdonald, _Religion and Myth_ (London, 1893), pp.
      105-107; Hugh Goldie, _Calabar and its Mission_, New Edition
      (Edinburgh and London, 1901), pp. 49 _sq._; Miss Mary H. Kingsley,
      _Travels in West Africa_ (London, 1897), p. 495; Major A. G.
      Leonard, _The Lower Niger and its Tribes_ (London, 1906), pp.
      449-451. The ceremony takes place both in Creek Town and Duke Town.
      The date of it, according to Miss Kingsley, is either every November
      or every second November; but with the exception of Mr. Macdonald,
      who does not mention the period, the other authorities agree in
      describing the ceremony as biennial. According to Major Leonard it
      is celebrated usually towards the end of the year. Miss Kingsley
      speaks of the effigies being set up in the houses themselves; but
      all the other writers say or imply that they are set up at the doors
      of the houses in the streets. According to Mr. Goldie the spirits
      expelled are “all the ghosts of those who have died since the last
      lustration.” He makes no mention of devils.

 M156 Annual expulsion of demons embodied in effigies at Porto Novo.

  509 Missionary F. Terrien, in _Annales de la Propagation de la Foi_,
      liv. (1882) pp. 375-377.

 M157 Annual expulsion of embodied evils among the Hos of Togoland.

_  510 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 58 _sqq._

  511 Jakob Spieth, _Die Ewe-Stämme_ (Berlin, 1906), pp. 305-307. We have
      seen (above, p. 193) that these people used a toad as a scapegoat to
      free them from the influenza.

 M158 Annual expulsion of embodied evils among the gypsies.

  512 H. von Wlislocki, _Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Zigeuner_
      (Münster i. W., 1891), pp. 65 _sq._

 M159 Annual expulsion of evils in an animal scapegoat among the Garos of
      Assam.

  513 Major A. Playfair, _The Garos_ (London, 1909), p. 92.

 M160 Dogs as scapegoats in India, Scotland and America. The Jewish
      scapegoat.

  514 E. T. Atkinson, “Notes on the History of Religion in the Himalaya of
      the North-West Provinces,” _Journal of the Asiatic Society of
      Bengal_, liii. Pt. i. (1884) p. 62; _id._, _The Himalayan Districts
      of the North-Western Provinces of India_, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) p.
      871.

_  515 Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century_, from the MSS. of
      John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, edited by Alex. Allardyce (Edinburgh,
      1888), ii. 439.

  516 W. M. Beauchamp, “The Iroquois White Dog Feast,” _American
      Antiquarian_, vii. (1885) p. 237.

_  517 Ibid._ p. 236; T. Dwight, _Travels in New England and New York_
      (London, 1823), iv. 202.

  518 Above, p. 127.

  519 Leviticus xvi. The word translated “scapegoat” in the Authorised
      Version is Azazel, which appears rather to be the name of a bad
      angel or demon, to whom the goat was sent away. “In later Jewish
      literature (Book of Enoch) Azazel appears as the prince of the
      fallen angels, the offspring of the unions described in Gen. vi. 1
      ff. The familiar rendering ‘scapegoat,’ _i.e._ the goat which is
      allowed to escape, goes back to the _caper emissarius_ of the
      Vulgate, and is based on an untenable etymology” (Professor A. R. S.
      Kennedy, in his commentary on Leviticus xvi. 8, in the _Century
      Bible_). There is some ground for thinking that the animal was
      killed by being thrown over a certain crag that overhangs a rocky
      chasm not far from Jerusalem. See _Encyclopædia Biblica_, ed. T. K.
      Cheyne and J. S. Black, vol. i. (London, 1899) coll. 394 _sqq._,
      _s.v._ “Azazel.” Modern Jews sacrifice a white cock on the eve of
      the Day of Atonement, nine days after the beginning of their New
      Year. The father of the family knocks the cock thrice against his
      own head, saying, “Let this cock be a substitute for me, let it take
      my place, let death be laid upon this cock, but a happy life
      bestowed on me and on all Israel.” Then he cuts its throat and
      dashes the bird violently on the ground. The intestines are thrown
      on the roof of the house. The flesh of the cock was formerly given
      to the poor. See J. Buxtorf, _Synagoga Judaica_ (Bâle, 1661), ch.
      xxv. pp. 508 _sqq._

 M161 Human scapegoats formerly put to death every year in Africa.

  520 S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor, _The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger_
      (London, 1859), pp. 343-345. Compare J. F. Schön and S. Crowther,
      _Journals_ (London, 1848), pp. 48 _sq._ The account of the custom by
      J. Africanus B. Horton (_West African Countries and Peoples_, pp.
      185 _sq._) is taken entirely from Taylor.

  521 Major A. G. Leonard, _The Lower Niger and its Tribes_ (London,
      1906), pp. 446 _sqq._

  522 An Igbodu is a sacred grove in which oracles are given. It is
      divided into three compartments by fences of palm branches and the
      _omu_ shrub. Into the first compartment women and uninitiated men
      may enter; into the other two only priestly officials are permitted,
      according to their rank in the hierarchy, to enter. See Bishop James
      Johnson, “Yoruba Heathenism,” quoted by R. E. Dennett, _At the Back
      of the Black Man’s Mind_ (London, 1906), p. 254.

  523 Bishop James Johnson, _op. cit._ p. 263. Bishop Johnson is a native
      African. It does not appear whether the sacrifice which he describes
      is occasional or periodical.

 M162 Human scapegoats formerly put to death every year in Siam. Annual
      human scapegoats in Japan and Sumatra.

  524 Turpin, “History of Siam,” in J. Pinkerton’s _Voyages and Travels_
      (London, 1808-1814), ix. 579.

  525 The _oho-harahi_ or “Great Purification” is a ceremony, which used
      to be performed in the Japanese capital twice every year, namely on
      the last days of the sixth and twelfth month. It included a
      preliminary lustration, expiatory offerings, and the recital of a
      _norito_ or formula (not a prayer), in which the Mikado, by virtue
      of an authority transmitted to him from the Sun-goddess, pronounced
      to his ministers and people the absolution and remission of their
      sins. See W. G. Aston, _Shinto_ (London, 1905), pp. 294 _sqq._ The
      writer adds (p. 295): “The Chinese had an _oho-harahi_, defined by
      Mr. Giles in his _Chinese Dictionary_ as ‘a religious ceremony of
      purification performed in spring and autumn, with a view to secure
      divine protection for agricultural interests.’ ” The popular
      celebrations of the first of May and the first of November in Europe
      seem to be relics of similar biennial purifications.

  526 W. G. Aston, _Shinto_, pp. 308 _sq._

  527 W. Ködding, “Die Batakschen Götter und ihr Verhältnis zum
      Brahmanismus,” _Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift_, xii. (1885) pp.
      476, 478.

 M163 Annual human scapegoats in Europe. The expulsion of Posterli in
      Switzerland.

  528 Aeneas Sylvius, _Opera_ (Bâle, 1571), pp. 423 _sq._

  529 H. Usener, “Italische Mythen,” _Rheinisches Museum_, N.F., xxx.
      (1875) p. 198; _id._, _Kleine Schriften_, iv. (Leipsic and Berlin,
      1913) pp. 109 _sq._ The custom seems to have been revived in the
      latter part of the nineteenth century; perhaps it may still be
      observed. See H. Herzog, _Schweizerische Volksfeste, Sitten und
      Gebräuche_ (Aarau, 1884), pp. 293 _sq._; E. Hoffmann-Krayer, _Feste
      und Bräuche des Schweizervolkes_ (Zurich, 1913), p. 101.

 M164 Annual expulsion of the devil, personified by a man, from Munich on
      Ascension Day.

  530 L. Curtius, “Christi Himmelfahrt,” _Archiv für
      Religionswissenschaft_, xiv. (1911) p. 307, quoting the _Münchener
      Neuesten Nachrichten_, No. 235, May 21st, 1909.

 M165 The pardoned criminal at Rouen on Ascension Day may have been a
      public scapegoat.

_  531 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 164 _sqq._

  532 On the use of eponymous magistrates as annual scapegoats see above,
      pp. 39-41.

 M166 Divine animals as scapegoats in India and ancient Egypt.

  533 J. Thomas Phillips, _Account of the Religion, Manners, and Learning
      of the People of Malabar_ (London, 1717), pp. 6, 12 _sq._

  534 Herodotus, ii. 39.

  535 Herodotus, ii. 38-41; Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson, _Manners and Customs
      of the Ancient Egyptians_, New Edition (London, 1878), iii. 403
      _sqq._

  536 Herodotus, _l.c._ As to the worship of sacred bulls in ancient
      Egypt, see further _Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 34
      _sqq._

_  537 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 175 _sqq._, 314 _sq._

 M167 Divine men as scapegoats among the Gonds of India and the Albanians
      of the Caucasus.

_  538 Panjab Notes and Queries_, ii. p. 54, § 335 (December, 1884).

  539 Strabo, xi. 4. 7, p. 503. For the custom of standing upon a
      sacrificed victim, compare Demosthenes, _Or._ xxiii. 68, p. 642;
      Pausanias, iii. 20. 9.

 M168 Annual human scapegoats in Tibet. The Jalno, the temporary ruler of
      Lhasa.
 M169 The Jalno and the King of the Years. Expulsion of the King of the
      Years.

  540 The ceremony referred to is perhaps the one performed on the tenth
      day, as described in the text.

  541 “Report of a Route Survey by Pundit—from Nepal to Lhasa,” etc.,
      _Journal of the Royal Geographical Society_, xxxviii. (1868) pp.
      167, 170 _sq._; “Four Years Journeying through Great Tibet, by one
      of the Trans-Himalayan Explorers,” _Proceedings of the Royal
      Geographical Society_, N.S. vii. (1885) pp. 67 _sq._; W. Woodville
      Rockhill, “Tibet, a Geographical, Ethnographical, and Historical
      Sketch, derived from Chinese Sources,” _Journal of the Royal Asiatic
      Society for 1891_ (London, 1891), pp. 211 _sq._; L. A. Waddell, _The
      Buddhism of Tibet_ (London, 1895), pp. 504 _sqq._, 512 _sq._; J. L.
      Dutreuil de Rhins, _Mission Scientifique dans la Haute Asie
      1890-1895: Récit du Voyage_ (Paris, 1897), pp. 257 _sq._ The
      accounts supplement each other, though they differ in some
      particulars. I have endeavoured to combine them. According to Mr.
      Rockhill’s account, which is drawn from Chinese sources, at one
      point of the ceremonies the troops march thrice round the temple and
      fire volleys of musketry to drive away the devil. With the like
      intent they discharge a great old cannon, which bears the
      inscription, “My power breaks up and destroys rebellion.” The same
      account speaks of a fencing with battle-axes by a troop of
      boy-dancers, a great illumination of the cathedral with lanterns,
      and its decoration with figures made out of butter and flour to
      represent men, animals, dragons, etc.; also it makes mention of a
      horse-race and a foot-race, both run by boys. The clerical invasion
      of the capital at this season is graphically described by an
      eye-witness. See Huc, _Souvenirs d’un Voyage dans la Tartarie et le
      Thibet_, Sixième Édition (Paris, 1878), ii. 380 _sq_.

 M170 The Grand Lama, the Jalno, and the King of the Years in their
      relations to each other. Probability that of old the Tibetan
      scapegoat was put to death as a substitute for the Grand Lama.
 M171 General remarks.
 M172 First, the immediate and the mediate expulsions of evil are
      identical in intention.
 M173 Second, the annual expulsion of evil generally coincides with some
      well-marked change of season, such as the beginning or end of
      winter, the beginning or end of the rainy season, etc.
 M174 Third, the annual expulsion of evil is commonly preceded or followed
      by a period of general license.

  542 In the Dassera festival, as celebrated in Nepaul, we seem to have
      another instance of the annual expulsion of demons preceded by a
      time of license. The festival occurs at the beginning of October and
      lasts ten days. “During its continuance there is a general holiday
      among all classes of the people. The city of Kathmandu at this time
      is required to be purified, but the purification is effected rather
      by prayer than by water-cleansing. All the courts of law are closed,
      and all prisoners in jail are removed from the precincts of the
      city.... The Kalendar is cleared, or there is a jail-delivery always
      at the Dassera of all prisoners.” This seems a trace of a period of
      license. At this time “it is a general custom for masters to make an
      annual present, either of money, clothes, buffaloes, goats, etc., to
      such servants as have given satisfaction during the past year. It is
      in this respect, as well as in the feasting and drinking which goes
      on, something like our ‘boxing-time’ at Christmas.” On the seventh
      day at sunset there is a parade of all the troops in the capital,
      including the artillery. At a given signal the regiments begin to
      fire, the artillery takes it up, and a general firing goes on for
      about twenty minutes, when it suddenly ceases. This probably
      represents the expulsion of the demons. “The grand cutting of the
      rice-crops is always postponed till the Dassera is over, and
      commences all over the valley the very day afterwards.” See the
      description of the festival in H. A. Oldfield’s _Sketches from
      Nipal_ (London, 1880), ii. 342-351. On the Dassera in India, see J.
      A. Dubois, _Mœurs, Institutions et Cérémonies des Peuples de l’Inde_
      (Paris, 1825), ii. 329 _sqq._ The Besisi of the Malay Peninsula hold
      a regular carnival at the end of the rice-harvest, when they are
      said to be allowed to exchange wives. See W. W. Skeat and C. O.
      Blagden, _Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula_ (London, 1906), ii.
      70, 76, 145, compare 120 _sq._ Amongst the Swahili of East Africa
      New Year’s Day was formerly a day of general license, “every man did
      as he pleased. Old quarrels were settled, men were found dead on the
      following day, and no inquiry was instituted about the matter.” See
      Ch. New, _Life, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern Africa_ (London,
      1873), p. 65; and _The Golden Bough_,2 iii. 250. An annual period of
      anarchy and license, lasting three days, is reported by Borelli to
      be observed by some of the Gallas. See Ph. Paulitschke,
      _Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die geistige Cultur der Danâkil,
      Galla und Somal_ (Berlin, 1896), p. 158. In Ashantee the annual
      festival of the new yams is a time of general license. See _Spirits
      of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 62.

 M175 Fourth, the use of a divine man or animal as a scapegoat is
      remarkable.
 M176 Why a dying god should serve as a scapegoat.
 M177 The use of a divinity as scapegoat explains an ambiguity in the
      ceremony of “Carrying out Death.”

  543 See _The Dying God_, pp. 233 _sqq._, 264.

  544 Above, pp. 186, 189, 201.

  545 H. Usener, “Italische Mythen,” _Rheinisches Museum_, N.F. (1875)
      xxx. 194; _id._, _Kleine Schriften_, iv. (Leipsic and Berlin, 1913)
      p. 105.

 M178 Annual expulsion of “the Old Mars” in the month of March in ancient
      Rome.

  546 Joannes Lydus, _De mensibus_, iii. 29, iv. 36. Lydus places the
      expulsion on the Ides of March, that is 15th March. But this seems
      to be a mistake. See H. Usener, “Italische Mythen,” _Rheinisches
      Museum_, xxx. (1875) pp. 209 _sqq._; _id._, _Kleine Schriften_, iv.
      (Leipsic and Berlin, 1913) pp. 122 _sqq._ Again, Lydus does not
      expressly say that Mamurius Veturius was driven out of the city, but
      he implies it by mentioning the legend that his mythical prototype
      was beaten with rods and expelled the city. Lastly, Lydus only
      mentions the name Mamurius. But the full name Mamurius Veturius is
      preserved by Varro, _De lingua latina_, vi. 45; Festus, ed. C. O.
      Müller, p. 131; Plutarch, _Numa_, 13. Mr. W. Warde Fowler is
      disposed to be sceptical as to the antiquity of the ceremony of
      expelling Mamurius. See his _Roman Festivals of the period of the
      Republic_ (London, 1899), pp. 44-50.

  547 H. Usener, “Italische Mythen,” pp. 212 _sq._; _id._, _Kleine
      Schriften_, iv. 125 _sq._; W. H. Roscher, _Apollon und Mars_
      (Leipsic, 1873), p. 27; L. Preller, _Römische Mythologie_3 (Berlin,
      1881-1883), i. 360; A. Vaniček, _Griechisch-lateinisches
      etymologisches Wörterbuch_ (Leipsic, 1877), p. 715. The three latter
      scholars take Veturius as = _annuus_, because _vetus_ is
      etymologically equivalent to ἔτος. But, as Usener argues, it seems
      quite unallowable to take the Greek meaning of the word instead of
      the Latin.

  548 Cato, _De agri cultura_, 141.

  549 Varro, _De lingua latina_, v. 85.

  550 See the song of the Arval Brothers in _Acta Fratrum Arvalium_, ed.
      G. Henzen (Berlin, 1874), pp. 26 _sq._; J. Wordsworth, _Fragments
      and Specimens of Early Latin_ (Oxford, 1874), p. 158; H. Dessau,
      _Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae_, ii. Pars i. (Berlin, 1902) p. 276.

_  551 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 42 _sqq._

  552 Cato, _De agri cultura_, 83.

_  553 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 50 _sq._, 55, 124
      _sq._

  554 L. Preller, _Römische Mythologie_,3 i. 360; W. H. Roscher, _Apollon
      und Mars_, p. 49; _id._, _Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie_,
      ii. 2408 _sq._; H. Usener, _op. cit._ The ceremony also closely
      resembles the Highland New Year ceremony already described. See
      _Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 322 _sqq._

  555 But the Biyârs, a mixed tribe of North-Western India, observe an
      annual ceremony which they call “burning the old year.” The old year
      is represented by a stake of the wood of the cotton-tree, which is
      planted in the ground at an appointed place outside of the village,
      and then burned on the day of the full moon in the month of Pûs.
      Fire is first put to it by the village priest, and then all the
      people follow his example, parch stalks of barley in the fire, and
      afterwards eat them. Next day they throw the ashes of the burnt wood
      in the air; and on the morrow the festival ends with a regular
      saturnalia, at which decency and order are forgotten. See W. Crooke,
      _Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh_
      (Calcutta, 1896), ii. 137 _sq._ Compare _id._, _Popular Religion and
      Folk-lore of Northern India_ (Westminster, 1896), ii. 319.

  556 Propertius, v. 2. 61 _sq._; H. Usener, “Italische Mythen,” p. 210;
      _id._, _Kleine Schriften_, iv. 123.

 M179 “The Old Mars” seems to have been beaten by the Salii, the dancing
      priests of Mars. The dances of the Salii in spring and autumn were
      perhaps intended to quicken the growth of the corn sown at these
      seasons. The armed processions of the Salii may have been intended
      to rout out and expel the demons lurking in the city.

  557 Varro, _De lingua latina_, vi. 45 ed. C. O. Müller; Festus, _s.v._
      “Mamuri Veturi,” p. 131 ed. C. O. Müller; Ovid, _Fasti_, iii. 389
      _sqq._; Plutarch, _Numa_, 13.

  558 Servius, on Virgil, _Aen._ vii. 188, “_Cui [scil. Mamurio] et diem
      consecrarunt, quo pellem virgis feriunt_”; Minucius Felix,
      _Octavius_, 24, “_Nudi cruda hieme discurrunt, alii incedunt
      pilleati, scuta vetera circumferunt, pelles caedunt_.” Neither
      Servius nor Minucius Felix expressly mentions the Salii, but the
      description given by the latter writer (“_pilleati, scuta vetera
      circumferunt_”) proves that he alludes to them. The expression of
      Minucius Felix _pelles caedunt_ is conclusive in favour of _pellem_
      in the passage of Servius, where some would wrongly substitute
      _peltam_, the reading of a single MS. That the beating of the
      skin-clad representative of Mamurius was done by the Salii was long
      ago rightly pointed out by Dr. W. H. Roscher (_Apollon und Mars_, p.
      49).

  559 Varro, _De lingua latina_, v. 85, “_Saliia salitando, quod facere in
      comitio in sacris quotannis et solent et debent_.” Compare Ovid,
      _Fasti_, iii. 387, “_Iam dederat Saliis a saltu nomina dicta_”;
      Plutarch, _Numa_, 13; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, _Antiquitates
      Romanae_, ii. 70.

  560 J. Marquardt, _Römische Staatsverwaltung_, iii.2 (Leipsic, 1885) p.
      431; G. Wissowa, _Religion und Kultus der Römer_2 (Munich, 1912), p.
      144; W. Warde Fowler, _The Religious Experience of the Roman People_
      (London, 1911), pp. 96 _sq._

  561 Festus, ed. C. O. Müller, p. 325, “_Qui deus in saliaribus Saturnus
      nominatur, videlicet a sationibus_.” In this passage Ritschl reads
      _Saeturnus_ for _Saturnus_. The best MSS. of the epitome read
      _Sateurnus_. See J. Wordsworth, _Fragments and Specimens of Early
      Latin_ (Oxford, 1884), p. 405. As to Saturn in this capacity see
      below, p. 306.

  562 Columella, _De re rustica_, ii. 9. 6 _sq._

_  563 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, i. 137 _sqq._

  564 J. Marquardt, _Römische Staatsverwaltung_, iii.2 (Leipsic, 1885) pp.
      427 _sq._

  565 L. Preller, _Römische Mythologie_3 (Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 359. As
      to the lunar year of the old Roman Calendar see L. Ideler, _Handbuch
      der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie_ (Berlin, 1825-1826),
      ii. 38 _sqq._

  566 As to their number and badge see Aulus Gellius, vi. (vii., ed. M.
      Hertz) 7. 8; as to their function see Varro, _De lingua latina_, v.
      85, “_Fratres Arvales dicti sunt, qui sacra publica faciunt
      propterea ut fruges ferant arva, a ferendo et arvis fratres arvales
      dicti_.”

  567 Livy, i. 20. 4; Plutarch, _Numa_, 13; Dionysius Halicarnasensis,
      _Antiquitates Romanae_, ii. 70. Livy only mentions the shields. From
      an ancient relief we learn that the staves of the Salii terminated
      in a knob at each end. Hence we may correct the statement of
      Dionysius, who describes the weapon doubtfully as λόγχην ἣ ῥάβδον ἤ
      τι τοιοῦθ ἕτερον. See J. Marquardt, _Römische Staatsverwaltung_,
      iii.2 432, note 6.

  568 See above, pp. 113, 116, 117, 132, 139, 141, 147, 158, 159, 161,
      163, 165, 166, 186, 191, 196, 200, 204, 214.

  569 Livy, i. 20. 4; J. Marquardt, _op. cit._ iii.2 432 _sq._; W. Smith,
      _Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities_, Third Edition (London,
      1891), vol. ii. p. 590, _s.v._ “Salii.”

  570 See above, pp. 111 _sqq._

 M180 The demons expelled by the Salii may have been above all the demons
      of blight and infertility. This conjecture is supported by analogous
      ceremonies performed by savages for the purpose of driving off the
      demons that would harm the crops.

  571 See above, p. 138.

  572 Labat, _Voyage du Chevalier Des Marchais en Guinée, Isles voisines,
      et à Cayenne_ (Amsterdam, 1731), ii. 80 (p. 99 of the Paris
      edition).

  573 Olivier de Sanderval, _De l’Atlantique au Niger par le
      Foutah-Djallon_ (Paris, 1883), p. 230. The phrase which I have
      translated “for exorcising the spirits” is “_pour conjurer les
      esprits_.”

 M181 Dances of masked men in India, Borneo, and South America to promote
      the growth of the crops.

  574 Ludovico di Varthema, _Travels in Egypt, Syria_, etc., translated by
      J. W. Jones (Hakluyt Society, London, 1863), pp. 166 _sq._

_  575 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, i. 95, 186 _sq._

_  576 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, i. 111 _sq._

 M182 Dances in Aracan for the sake of the crops. Dances of the Tarahumare
      Indians of Mexico to procure rain for their crops.

_  577 Annales de la Propagation de la Foi_, liii. (1881) p. 178.

  578 C. Lumholtz, _Unknown Mexico_ (London, 1903), i. 330 _sq._

 M183 Dances of the Tarahumare Indians to cause rain to fall, corn to
      sprout, grass to grow, and animals to multiply.

  579 C. Lumholtz, _Unknown Mexico_ (London, 1903), i. 335 _sqq._, 352
      _sq._

 M184 Dance of the Cora Indians at the sowing festival.

  580 K. Th. Preuss, _Die Nayarit-Expedition_, I. _Die Religion der
      Cora-Indianer_ (Leipsic, 1912), pp. xcviii. _sq._, 61-63. As to the
      sowing festival of the Mexican Indians, compare K. Th. Preuss, “Die
      religiösen Gesänge und Mythen einiger Stämme der mexikanischen
      Sierra Madre,” _Archiv für Religionswissenschaft_, xi. (1908) pp.
      374 _sqq._

 M185 Dances and leaps of European peasants to make the corn grow tall.

_  581 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, i. 137-139.

  582 Dr. F. J. Vonbun, _Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie gesammelt in
      Churrhaetien_ (Chur, 1862), p. 21, quoting J. Stumpf and Ulr.
      Campell. As the passage is curious and the work probably rare, I
      will quote the original in full: “_Sicherlich auch im zusammenhange
      mit Donarcultus war ein brauch der leute in der Grub (in
      Graubünden)._ ‘_Die landleute in der Grub haben noch etwas anererbte
      bräuche, indem dass sie sich zu etlichen jahren (meistens zur zeit
      der sonnenwende) besammelten, verbutzten (sich als masken
      vermummten) und einander unbekannt machten, legten harnisch und
      geweer an, und nahm jeder ein grossen kolben oder knüttel, zugen in
      einer rott mit einander von einem dorf zum andern, triben hohe
      sprünge und seltsame abentheur.—Sie luffen gestracks laufs
      aneinander, stiessen mit kräften je einer den andern, dass es
      erhillt, stiessen laut mit ihren grössen stöcken und knütteln,
      deswegen sie vom landvolk genannt werden die Stopfer. Diese
      thorechte abentheuer triben sie zum aberglauben, dass ihnen das korn
      destobas gerathen sölle, haben aber anjetzo abgelassen, und sind
      diese Stopfer in keiner achtung mehr_.’ (Joh. Stumpf). _Auch Ulr.
      Campell erwähnt dieses volksbrauch (s. 11) und bemerkt_: ‘_mit
      diesem gebrauche hing früher der glaube zusammen, dass dessen
      ausübung ein fruchtbares jahr bringe._’ ” The word _Stopfer_ means
      “stopper,” “rammer,” “crammer,” etc.

 M186 Dances of mummers called _Perchten_ in Austria for the good of the
      crops. The mythical old woman called Perchta.

  583 J. Grimm, _Deutsche Mythologie_4 (Berlin, 1875-1878), i. 226 _sqq._,
      iii. 88 _sq._; Fr. Panzer, _Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie_
      (Munich, 1848-1855), i. 247 _sq._, ii. 381; I. V. Zingerle, “Perahta
      in Tirol,” _Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie_, iii. (Göttingen,
      1855), pp. 203-206; _id._, _Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des
      Tiroler Volkes_2 (Innsbruck, 1871), pp. 128 _sq._, 138 _sq_.; J. M.
      Ritter von Alpenburg, _Mythen und Sagen Tirols_ (Zürich, 1857), pp.
      46-51, 63-65; _Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs
      Bayern_ (Munich, 1860-1867), i. 365; A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche
      Volksaberglaube_2 (Berlin, 1869), § 25, pp. 25-27; W. Mannhardt,
      _Der Baumkultus der Germanen und ihrer Nachbarstämme_ (Berlin,
      1875), pp. 542 _sq._; Karl Weinhold, _Weinacht-Spiele und Lieder aus
      Süddeutschland und Schlesien_ (Vienna, 1875), pp. 19 _sqq._; E.
      Mogk, in H. Paul’s _Grundriss der germanischen Philologie_,2 iii.
      (Strasburg, 1900), pp. 280 _sq_. (where it is said that Perchta
      “_spendet dem Acker Fruchtbarkeit und lässt das Vieh gedeihen_”); E.
      H. Meyer, _Mythologie der Germanen_ (Strasburg, 1903), pp. 424
      _sqq._; P. Herrmann, _Deutsche Mythologie_ (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 303
      _sqq._; M. Andree-Eysen, _Volkskundliches aus dem
      bayrisch-österreichischen Alpengebiet_ (Brunswick, 1910), pp. 156
      _sqq._; E. Hoffmann-Krayer, _Feste und Bräuche des Schweizervolkes_
      (Zürich, 1913), pp. 118 _sqq._

 M187 The running and leaping of the _Perchten_ mummers on Twelfth Night.
      The Beautiful _Perchten_ and the Ugly _Perchten_.

  584 J. Grimm, _Deutsche Mythologie_,4 i. 231; I. V. Zingerle, _Sitten,
      Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes_2 (Innsbruck, 1871), pp.
      138 _sq._; W. Mannhardt, _Baumkultus_, pp. 542 _sq._; J. M. Ritter
      von Alpenburg, _Mythen und Sagen Tirols_ (Zürich, 1857), pp. 50
      _sq._; K. Weinhold, _Weinacht-Spiele und Lieder aus Süddeutschland
      und Schlesien_ (Vienna, 1875), pp. 21 _sqq._

 M188 The Ugly _Perchten_ in Salzburg.
 M189 The Beautiful _Perchten_ in Salzburg.

  585 Marie Andree-Eysn, _Volkskundliches aus dem
      bayrisch-österreichischen Alpengebiet_ (Brunswick, 1910), pp.
      156-175.

 M190 Mrs. Andree-Eysn on the _Perchten_; according to her, the
      processions of Perchten are intended to promote fertility by
      banishing the demons that would thwart it.

  586 Marie Andree-Eysn, _Volkskundliches aus dem
      bayrisch-österreichischen Alpengebiet_ (Brunswick, 1910), pp. 179
      _sq._ The authoress kindly presented me with a copy of her valuable
      work in May 1910, when I had the pleasure of visiting her and her
      husband, the eminent anthropologist, the late Dr. Richard Andree, in
      their home at Munich.

 M191 The bells worn by the _Perchten_ mummers may be intended to ban
      demons. Bells rung to make the grass grow in spring. Bells rung to
      make the flax grow. Whips cracked to make the flax grow.

  587 See P. Sartori, “Glockensagen und Glockenaberglaube,” _Zeitschrift
      des Vereins für Volkskunde_, vii. (1897) pp. 360 _sqq._ The use in
      classical antiquity of bells, gongs, and the clash of bronze
      generally to ban the demon host has been learnedly illustrated by
      Mr. A. B. Cook in his article, “The Gong at Dodona,” _Journal of
      Hellenic Studies_, xxii. (1902) pp. 14 _sqq._

  588 Rev. A. L. Kitching, _On the Backwaters of the Nile_ (London, 1912),
      p. 264. As to the country of the Teso people, who do not belong to
      the Bantu stock, see _id._, pp. 26 _sq._

  589 Marie Andree-Eysn, _op. cit._ pp. 180-182. As to the custom of
      “ringing-out the grass,” see further W. Mannhardt, _Baumkultus_, p.
      540; _The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 343 _sq._

  590 Marie Andree-Eysn, _op. cit._ p. 182.

  591 Marie Andree-Eysn, _l.c._

  592 K. Seifart, _Sagen, Märchen, Schwänke und Gebräuche aus Stadt und
      Stift Hildesheim_2 (Hildesheim, 1889), p. 180. For more evidence of
      the supposed fertilizing influence of bells, see P. Sartori,
      “Glockensagen und Glockenaberglaube,” _Zeitschrift des Vereins für
      Volkskunde_, vii. (1897) pp. 363 _sq._

  593 I. V. Zingerle, Sitten, _Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes_2
      (Innsbruck, 1871), pp. 135 _sq._, 139, § 1196, 1211, 1212.

  594 W. Mannhardt, _Baumkultus_, pp. 268 _sq._

 M192 Certain features in these processions or races of mummers seem to
      shew that the mummers represent beneficent spirits of fertility, who
      quicken the seed in the ground and offspring in the wombs of women.
      The view of W. Mannhardt.

  595 Marie Andree-Eysn, _op. cit._ pp. 182 _sq._

  596 W. Mannhardt, _Baumkultus_, p. 548.

  597 W. Mannhardt, _l.c._

 M193 Confirmations of this view. The use of bells and swords in these
      ceremonies.

  598 See above, p. 236.

_  599 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 325 _sqq._

  600 T. F. Thiselton Dyer, _British Popular Customs_ (London, 1876), p.
      32; _County Folk-lore, Printed Extracts, No. 3, Leicestershire and
      Rutlandshire_, collected and edited by C. J. Billson (London, 1895),
      pp. 93 _sq._

  601 Mrs. Lilly Grove (Mrs. J. G. Frazer), _Dancing_ (London, 1895), pp.
      147 _sqq._; E. K. Chambers, _The Mediaeval Stage_ (Oxford, 1903), i.
      195 _sqq._

  602 As to the swords carried by the _Perchten_ see above, p. 245; as to
      those carried by the dancers on Plough Monday, see J. Brand,
      _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_ (London, 1882-1883), i. 505.
      As to the sword-dance in general, see K. Müllenhoff, “Über den
      Schwerttanz,” in _Festgaben für Gustav Homeyer_ (Berlin, 1871), pp.
      111-147 (who compares the dances of the Salii); Mrs. Lilly Grove,
      _op. cit._ pp. 189 _sqq._, 211 _sqq._; E. K. Chambers, _op. cit._ i.
      182 _sqq._

  603 See below, pp. 331 _sqq._

 M194 These masquerades originally intended both to stimulate vegetation
      in spring and to expel demons.
 M195 Application of these conclusions to the expulsion of “the Old Mars”
      in ancient Rome.
 M196 Human scapegoats in ancient Greece. The “Expulsion of Hunger” at
      Chaeronea.

  604 Plutarch, _Quaest. conviv._ vi. 8.

  605 See above, pp. 143 _sqq._, 209.

 M197 Human scapegoats at Marseilles. Human scapegoats put to death at
      Athens. Human scapegoats annually stoned to death at Abdera.

  606 Servius on Virgil, _Aen._ iii. 57, following Petronius; Lactantius
      Placidius, _Commentarii in Statii Thebaida_ x. 793, p. 452, ed. R.
      Jahnke (Leipsic, 1898). According to the former writer, the
      scapegoat was cast out (“_projiciebatur_”); according to the latter,
      he was stoned to death by the people outside of the walls (“_extra
      pomeria saxis occidebatur a populo_”). The statement of some modern
      writers that he was killed by being hurled from a height rests on a
      reading (“_praecipitabatur_” for “_projiciebatur_”) in the text of
      Servius, which appears to have no manuscript authority and to be
      merely a conjecture of R. Stephan’s. Yet the conjecture has been
      inserted in the text by F. Buecheler in his edition of Petronius
      (Third Edition, Berlin, 1882, p. 109) without any intimation that
      all the MSS. present a different reading. See the critical edition
      of Servius edited by G. Thilo and H. Hagen, vol. i. (Leipsic, 1881),
      p. 346.

  607 Helladius, in Photius, _Bibliotheca_, p. 534 A, ed. Im. Bekker
      (Berlin, 1824); Scholiast on Aristophanes, _Frogs_, 734, and on
      _Knights_, 1136; Hesychius, _Lexicon_, _s.v._ φαρμακοὶ; compare
      Suidas, _Lexicon_, _s.vv._ κάθαρμα, φαρμακός, and φαρμακούς; Lysias,
      _Orat._ vi. 53. That they were stoned is an inference from
      Harpocration. See next note. When the people of Cyrene sacrificed to
      Saturn (Cronus), they wore crowns of fresh figs on their heads. See
      Macrobius, _Saturn_, i. 7. 25.

  608 Harpocration, _Lexicon_, _s.v._ φαρμακός, who says δύο ἄνδρας
      ᾽Αθήνησιν ἐξῆγον καθάρσια ἐσομένους τῆς πόλεως ἐν τοῖς Θαργηλίοις,
      ἕνα μὲν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀνδρῶν, ἕνα δὲ ὑπὲρ τῶν γυναικῶν. He does not
      expressly state that they were put to death; but as he says that the
      ceremony was an imitation of the execution of a mythical Pharmacus
      who was stoned to death, we may infer that the victims were killed
      by being stoned. Suidas (_s.v._ φαρμακός) copies Harpocration. As to
      the human scapegoats employed by the Greeks at the Thargelia and on
      other occasions see W. Mannhardt, _Mythologische Forschungen_
      (Strasburg, 1884), pp. 124 _sqq._; J. Töpffer, _Beiträge zur
      griechischen Altertumswissenschaft_ (Berlin, 1897), pp. 130 _sqq._;
      August Mommsen, _Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum_ (Leipsic, 1898),
      pp. 468 _sqq._; Miss J. E. Harrison, _Prolegomena to the Study of
      Greek Religion_, Second Edition (Cambridge, 1908), pp. 95 _sqq._; M.
      P. Nilsson, _Griechische Feste_ (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 105 _sqq._; W.
      R. Paton, “The φαρμακοί and the Story of the Fall,” _Revue
      Archéologique_, iv. Série ix. (1907) pp. 51-57.

  609 Ovid, _Ibis_, 467 _sq._:

      “_Aut te devoveat certis Abdera diebus_
      _ Saxaque devotum grandine plura petant_,”

      with the two scholia quoted respectively by M. P. Nilsson,
      _Griechische Feste_, p. 108 note 6, and by O. Schneider, in his
      _Callimachea_ (Leipsic, 1870-1873), ii. 684. The scholiast refers to
      Callimachus as his authority.

 M198 Annual human scapegoats in Leucadia. Human scapegoats annually put
      to death at the festival of the Thargelia in Asia Minor.

  610 Strabo, x. 2. 9, p. 542; Photius, _Lexicon_, _s.v._ Λευκάτης; L.
      Ampelius, _Liber Memorialis_, viii. 4; Servius, on Virgil, _Aen._
      iii. 279; Ptolemaeus Hephaest., _Nov. Histor._ in Photius,
      _Bibliotheca_, cod. 190, p. 153, ed. Im. Bekker; _Mythographi
      Graeci_, ed. A. Westermann (Brunswick, 1843), pp. 198 _sq._
      According to the manuscript reading in Photius, _l.c._, the priests
      flung themselves into the sea; but the reading has been altered by
      the editors. As to the Kumaon ceremony see above, pp. 196 _sq._

  611 Suidas and Photius, _Lexicon_, _s.v._ περίψημα. The word which I
      have translated “offscouring” (περίψημα) occurs in 1 Corinthians iv.
      13, where it is similarly translated in the English version. It
      means properly that on which something is wiped off, like a sponge
      or a duster.

  612 J. Tzetzes, _Chiliades_, v. 726-761 (ed. Th. Kiesseling, Leipsic,
      1826). Tzetzes’s authority is the satirical poet Hipponax. The tune
      which was played by the flutes while the man was being beaten is
      mentioned by Hesychius, _s.v._ Κραδίης νόμος. Compare _id._, _s.v._
      Κραδησίτης; Plutarch, _De musica_, 8.

  613 This may be inferred from the verse of Hipponax, quoted by
      Athenaeus, ix. 9, p. 370 B, where for φαρμάκου we should perhaps
      read φαρμακοῦ with Schneidewin (_Poetae lyrici Graeci_,3 ed. Th.
      Bergk, ii. 763).

 M199 Mannhardt’s interpretation of the custom of beating the human
      scapegoat on the genitals: it was intended to free his reproductive
      energies from any restraint laid on them by demoniacal or other
      malignant agency.

  614 W. Mannhardt, _Mythologische Forschungen_ (Strasburg, 1884), pp. 113
      _sqq._, especially 123 _sq._, 133.

  615 Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ xx. 101; Dioscorides, _De materia medica_, ii.
      202; Lucian, _Necyom._ 7; _id._, Alexander, 47; Theophrastus,
      _Superstitious Man_.

  616 Theocritus, vii. 106 _sqq._ with the scholiast.

  617 Compare Aug. Mommsen, _Heortologie_ (Leipsic, 1864), pp. 414 _sqq._,
      _id._, _Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum_ (Leipsic, 1898), pp. 468
      _sq._, 479 _sqq._; M. P. Nilsson, _Griechische Feste_ (Leipsic,
      1906), pp. 105, iii _sqq._; W. Mannhardt, _Antike Wald- und
      Feldkulte_ (Berlin, 1877), p. 215.

  618 At certain sacrifices in Yucatan blood was drawn from the genitals
      of a human victim and smeared on the face of the idol. See Diego de
      Landa, _Relation des choses de Yucatan_, texte espagnol et
      traduction française par l’Abbé Brasseur de Bourbourg (Paris, 1864),
      p. 167. Was the original intention of this rite to transfuse into
      the god a fresh supply of reproductive energy?

  619 Aelian, _Nat. Anim._ ix. 26.

_  620 The Dying God_, pp. 239 _sq._

_  621 The Dying God_, p. 114.

 M200 W. R. Paton’s view that the human scapegoats at the Thargelia
      personated the spirits of fig-trees, and that the ceremony was a
      magical rite for the fertilization of fig-trees, being copied from
      the process of caprification.

  622 On the other hand, W. Mannhardt regarded the victims as representing
      the demons of infertility, dearth, and sickness, who in the persons
      of their representatives were thus hounded with blows out of the
      city. See his _Mythologische Forschungen_, p. 129.

  623 W. R. Paton, “The φαρμακοί and the Story of the Fall,” _Revue
      Archéologique_, iv. Série, ix. (1907) pp. 51 _sqq._

 M201 This theory is confirmed by a comparison with the Roman rites of the
      _Nonae Caprotinae_.

_  624 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 313 _sqq._

  625 Dionysius Halicarnasensis, _Antiquitates Romanae_, ii. 56. 4.
      Compare Livy, i. 16. 4; Plutarch, _Romulus_, 27.

_  626 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, i. 248. Compare _Adonis,
      Attis, Osiris_, Second Edition, pp. 331 _sqq._

  627 See, for example, Helladius, cited by Photius, _Bibliotheca_, p. 534
      _a_, ed. Im. Bekker, καὶ ἐκράτει τὸ ἔθος ἀεὶ καθαίρειν τὴν πόλιν
      τοῖς φαρμακοῖς; Harpocration, _s.v._ φαρμακός (vol. i. p. 298, ed.
      G. Dindorf), δύο ἄνδρας Ἀθήνησιν ἐξῆγον καθάρσια ἐσομένους τῆς
      πόλεως; Scholiast on Aristophanes, _Knights_, 1136, δημοσίους δέ,
      τοὺς λεγομένους φαρμακούς, οἵπερ καθαίρουσι τὰς πόλεις τῷ ἑαυτῶν
      φόνῳ.

  628 Mr. Paton ingeniously suggests that in the Biblical narrative of
      Adam and Eve, who for eating a particular fruit were condemned to
      death and driven out of the happy garden with aprons of fig-leaves
      about their loins (Genesis iii.), we have a reminiscence of a custom
      of fertilizing fig-trees by a pair of human scapegoats, who, like
      the victims at the Thargelia, assimilated themselves to the tree by
      wearing its foliage or fruit. See W. R. Paton, “The φαρμακοί and the
      Story of the Fall,” _Revue Archéologique_, iv. Série, ix. (1907) pp.
      55 _sq._

 M202 Beating as a mode of dispelling evil influences.

  629 Above, pp. 2, 186. Compare Plutarch, _Parallela_, 35, where a woman
      is represented as going from house to house striking sick people
      with a hammer and bidding them be whole.

  630 W. Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India_
      (Westminster, 1896), i. 99, 155; _id._, _Tribes and Castes of the
      North-Western Provinces and Oudh_ (Calcutta, 1896), iii. 333, 441,
      445.

  631 A. Certeux et E. H. Carnoy, _L’Algérie Traditionnelle_ (Paris and
      Algiers, 1884), p. 189.

  632 H. Kern, “Een Spanisch schrijver over den godsdienst der heidensche
      Bikollers,” _Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
      Nederlandsch-Indië_, xlvii. (1897) pp. 232 _sq._ The Spanish
      authority is Father José Castaño. An ancient Egyptian relief from
      Saqqarah represents a mummy at the entrance of the tomb, while the
      women tear out their hair and the men wave palm-branches, apparently
      to drive evil spirits away. The custom has been inherited by the
      modern Arabs, who similarly beat off the invisible foes with
      palm-branches. See A. Wiedemann, _Herodots Zweites Buch_ (Leipsic,
      1890), p. 347. However, in these cases the blows seem to be
      administered to the demons and not to the corpse.

 M203 Beating people to rid them of clinging ghosts. Exorcism of ghosts by
      means of leaves and pig’s blood.

  633 J. M. van Baarda, “Ile de Halmaheira,” _Bulletins de la Société
      d’Anthropologie de Paris_, Quatrième Série, iii. (1892) p. 545. As
      to throwing a banana-trunk into the grave, see _Spirits of the Corn
      and of the Wild_, ii. 97.

  634 Rev. J. Batchelor, _The Ainu and their Folk-lore_ (London, 1901), p.
      550.

_  635 Revue d’Ethnographie_, iii. (1885) pp. 395 _sq._

  636 R. Schomburgk, _Reisen in Britisch-Guiana_ (Leipsic, 1847-1848), ii.
      457 _sqq._; Rev. J. H. Bernau, _Missionary Labours in British
      Guiana_ (London, 1847), p. 52; C. F. Ph. von Martius, _Zur
      Ethnographie Amerika’s, zumal Brasiliens_ (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 694
      _sq._; J. Crevaux, _Voyages dans l’Amérique du Sud_ (Paris, 1883),
      p. 548.

  637 Servius, on Virgil, _Aen._ i. 329. For more evidence see C.
      Boetticher, _Der Baumkultus der Hellenen_ (Berlin, 1856), pp. 369
      _sqq._

  638 See my note on Pausanias, ii. 31. 8, vol. ii. pp. 276 _sqq._

  639 V. Solomon, “Extracts from Diaries kept in Car Nicobar,” _Journal of
      the Anthropological Institute_, xxxii. (1902) p. 227.

 M204 Beating practised by South American Indians and others as a mode of
      conveying good qualities.

  640 J. de Acosta, _History of the Indies_, vol. ii. p. 375 (Hakluyt
      Society, London, 1880). See above, pp. 128 _sqq._

  641 P. Lozano, _Descripcion Chorographica del terreno, rios, arboles, y
      animales de las dilatadissimas provincias del Gran Chaco, Gualamba_,
      etc. (Cordova, 1733), p. 67. The reappearance of the Pleiades
      probably marked the beginning of the year for these people. See
      _Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, i. 307 _sqq._

  642 G. Osculati, _Esplorazione delle regioni equatoriali lungo il Napo
      ed il fiume delle Amazzoni_ (Milan, 1850), p. 118.

  643 H. Coudreau, _Chez nos Indiens: quatre années dans la Guyane
      Française_ (Paris, 1895), p. 544.

  644 G. H. Loskiel, _History of the Mission of the United Brethren among
      the Indians in North America_ (London, 1794), Part i. p. 37.

  645 The _Satapatha Brahmana_, v. 4. 4. 7, translated by J. Eggeling,
      Part iii. (Oxford, 1894) p. 108 (_Sacred Books of the East_, vol.
      xli.).

  646 D. Chwolsohn, _Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus_ (St. Petersburg,
      1856), ii. 34.

 M205 Beating people with instruments which possess and impart special
      virtues.

  647 On the positive benefits supposed in certain cases to flow from a
      beating compare S. Reinach, “La flagellation rituelle,” _Cultes,
      Mythes et Religions_, i. (Paris, 1905) pp. 180 _sqq._; E. S.
      Hartland, _Primitive Paternity_ (London, 1909-1910), i. 102 _sqq._

  648 Ch. Keysser, “Aus dem Leben der Kaileute,” in R. Neuhauss’s _Deutsch
      Neu-Guinea_, iii. (Berlin, 1911) p. 124.

  649 Father Lambert, “Mœurs et Superstitions de la tribu Bélep,” _Les
      Missions Catholique_, xii. (1880) p. 273; _id._, _Mœurs et
      Superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens_ (Nouméa, 1900), p. 218.

  650 F. J. de Santa-Anna Nery, _Folk-lore Brésilien_ (Paris, 1889), p.
      253.

  651 R. Temesváry, _Volksbräuche und Aberglauben in der Geburtshilfe und
      der Pflege des Neugeborenen in Ungarn_ (Leipsic, 1900), p. 8.
      Compare E. S. Hartland, _Primitive Paternity_ (London, 1909-1910),
      i. 106.

  652 A. C. Kruyt, “Het koppensnellen der Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes, en
      zijne beteekenis,” _Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Koninklijke
      Akademie van Wetenschappen_, Afdeeling Letterkunde, iv. Reeks, iii.
      (Amsterdam, 1899) p. 199.

  653 E. Beardmore, “The Natives of Mowat, Daudai, New Guinea,” _Journal
      of the Anthropological Institute_, xix. (1890) p. 464.

 M206 Custom in Morocco of beating people with the skins of sacrificed
      sheep or goats.

  654 E. Westermarck, “The Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,”
      _Folk-lore_, xxii. (1911) pp. 163-165.

  655 See below, pp. 298, 302, 304.

  656 E. Westermarck, _op. cit._ pp. 165 _sq._, 170, 178. The purificatory
      character of the rite is duly recognised by Dr. Westermarck (_op.
      cit._ p. 178).

 M207 European custom of beating cattle with branches to make them healthy
      or drive away the witches from them. The rowan-tree as a protection
      against witchcraft.

  657 J. G. v. Hahn, _Albanesische Studien_ (Jena, 1854), i. 155.

  658 W. H. D. Rouse, “Folk-lore from the Southern Sporades,” _Folk-lore_,
      x. (1899) p. 179.

  659 K. Bartsch, _Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg_ (Vienna,
      1879-1880), ii. p. 258, § 1348.

  660 J. F. L. Woeste, _Volksüberlieferungen in der Grafschaft Mark_
      (Iserlohn, 1848), pp. 25 _sq._; A. Kuhn, _Die Herabkunft des Feuers
      und des Göttertranks_2 (Gütersloh, 1886), pp. 161 _sqq._ The
      ceremony takes its name of “quickening” from _Quieke_ or
      _Quickenbaum_, a German name for the rowan-tree. Quicken-tree is
      also an English name for the rowan.

_  661 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 52 _sqq._

  662 Rev. W. Gregor, _Notes on the Folk-lore of the North-east of
      Scotland_ (London, 1881), p. 188.

  663 A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche Volksaberglaube_2 (Berlin, 1869), p. 106, §
      145.

  664 J. F. L. Woeste, _Volksüberlieferungen in der Grafschaft Mark_
      (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 26. Compare A. Kuhn, _Die Herabkunft des Feuers
      und des Göttertranks_2 (Gütersloh, 1886), p. 179.

 M208 European custom of beating people with branches at Easter to do them
      good: “Easter Smacks.”

  665 F. S. Krauss, _Kroatien und Slavonien_ (Vienna, 1889), p. 108.

  666 W. Mannhardt, _Baumkultus_, p. 257.

  667 Th. Vernaleken, _Mythen und Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich_
      (Vienna, 1859), pp. 300 _sq._; O. Freiherr von
      Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, _Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen_ (Prague, preface
      dated 1861), pp. 163-167; A. Peter, _Volksthümliches aus
      Österreichisch-Schlesien_ (Troppau, 1865-1867), ii. 285; J. A. E.
      Köhler, _Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
      Überlieferungen im Voigtlande_ (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 173 _sq._; M.
      Toeppen, _Aberglauben aus Masuren_2, (Danzig, 1867), pp. 69 _sq._;
      A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche Volksaberglaube_2 (Berlin, 1869), p. 70, §
      83; W. Mannhardt, _Der Baumkultus_ (Berlin, 1875), pp. 258-263; W.
      Müller, _Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren_ (Vienna
      and Olmütz, 1893), pp. 322, 399 _sq._; Dr. F. Tetzner, “Die
      Tschechen und Mährer in Schlesien,” _Globus_, lxxviii. (1900) p.
      340; P. Drechsler, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien_
      (Leipsic, 1903-1906), pp. 100 _sq._; Alois John, _Sitte, Brauche und
      Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen_ (Prague, 1905), pp. 67 _sq._
      Mannhardt’s whole discussion of what he calls “the Blow with the Rod
      of Life” (“_Der Schlag mit der Lebensrute_”) deserves to be studied.
      See his _Baumkultus_, pp. 251-303; and compare his treatment of the
      same theme, “Der Schlag mit dem Februum,” _Mythologische
      Forschungen_ (Strasburg, 1884), pp. 113-153. The custom of “Easter
      Smacks” can be traced back to the twelfth century, when the practice
      was for women to beat their husbands on Easter Monday and for
      husbands to retaliate on their wives on Easter Tuesday. See J.
      Belethus, _Rationale Divinorum Officiorum_, cap. 120, appended to G.
      Durandus’s _Rationale Divinorum Officiorum_ (Lyons, 1584), p. 546
      recto: “_Notandum quoque est in plerisque regionibus secundo die
      post Pascha mulieres maritos suos verberare, ac vicissim viros eas
      tertio die quemadmodum licebat servis in Decembri dominos suos
      impune accusare._”

 M209 European custom of beating people with branches in the Christmas
      holidays (Holy Innocents’ Day, etc.) to do them good.

  668 Alois John, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen_
      (Prague, 1905), pp. 5, 23 _sq._, 25, 28. Compare Th. Vernaleken,
      _Mythen und Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich_ (Vienna, 1859), pp.
      301 _sq._

  669 J. A. E. Köhler, _Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
      Überlieferungen im Voigtlande_ (Leipsic, 1867), p. 174; W.
      Mannhardt, _Baumkultus_, pp. 264 _sq._

  670 August Witzschel, _Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen_
      (Vienna, 1878), pp. 181 _sq._; W. Mannhardt, _Baumkultus_, p. 265.
      Compare G. Bilfinger, _Unterschungen über die Zeitrechnung der alten
      Germanen_, ii., _Das Germanische Julfest_ (Stuttgart, 1901), pp. 85
      _sq._

 M210 The intention of beating people with fresh green leaves is to renew
      their life and vigour.
 M211 Hence the custom of beating the human victims at the Thargelia with
      fig-branches and squills was probably a charm to increase their
      reproductive energies.

_  671 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 24 sq. It is highly
      significant that the heathen of Harran celebrated the marriage
      festival of all the gods and goddesses in the very month (March) in
      which the artificial fertilization of the date-palm was effected (D.
      Chwolsohn, _Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus_, St. Petersburg, 1856,
      ii. 36, 251). The frequency with which the artificial fertilization
      of the palm-tree by a mythical winged figure is represented on
      Assyrian monuments furnishes strong evidence of the religious and
      economic importance of the ceremony.

 M212 Hence the human victims at the Thargelia may have primarily
      represented spirits of vegetation.
 M213 Parallel between the human sacrifices at the Thargelia and the
      bloody ritual of the Arician Grove.

_  672 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, i. 40 _sqq._, ii. 376
      _sqq._

 M214 The custom of sacrificing human representatives of the gods among
      the Aztecs of Mexico.

  673 J. de Acosta, _The Natural and Moral History of the Indies_ (London,
      Hakluyt Society, 1880), ii. 323. I have modernized the spelling of
      the old English translator, whose version was originally published
      in 1604. Acosta resided both in Peru and Mexico, and published his
      work at Seville in 1590. It was reprinted in a convenient form at
      Madrid in 1894. Compare A. de Herrera, _General History of the Vast
      Continent and Islands of America_, translated by Captain John
      Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iii. 207 _sq._

 M215 Sacrifice of a man in the character of the great god Tezcatlipoca at
      the festival of Toxcatl in the fifth Aztec month.

  674 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la
      Nouvelle-Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon (Paris,
      1880), pp. 61 _sq._: “_On appelait le cinquième moi_ toxcatl. _Au
      premier jour on faisait une grande fête en l’honneur du dieu appelé_
      Titlacauan, _autrement dit_ Tezcatlipoca, _que l’on croyait être le
      dieu des dieux. C’était en son honneur que l’on tuait, le jour de sa
      fête, un jeune homme choisi.... Cette fête était la principale de
      toutes, comme qui dirait la Pâque, et, en réalité, elle se célébrait
      aux environs de la Pâque de résurrection, ou quelques jours après_.”
      Compare J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_, lib. x. cap. 14, vol.
      ii. p. 256 (Madrid, 1723). As to Tezcatlipoca, the greatest of the
      Mexican gods, see J. G. Müller, _Geschichte der amerikanischen
      Urreligionen_ (Bâle, 1867), pp. 613 _sqq._; H. H. Bancroft, _The
      Native Races of the Pacific States_ (London, 1875-1876), iii. 199
      _sqq._, 237 _sqq._; E. Seler, _Altmexikanische Studien_, ii.
      (Berlin, 1899) pp. 125 _sqq._ (_Veröffentlichungen aus dem
      königlichen Museum für Völkerkunde_, vol. vi. Heft 2/4).

  675 On the twenty-third of April according to the Spanish text of
      Sahagun’s work as translated in French by D. Jourdanet and R. Simeon
      (p. 52); the twenty-seventh of April according to the Aztec text of
      Sahagun’s work as translated into German by Professor E. Seler
      (_Altmexikanische Studien_, ii. 194).

  676 J. de Acosta, _Natural and Moral History of the Indies_ (Hakluyt
      Society, London, 1880), ii. 378, 380; Diego Duran, _Historia de las
      Indias de Nueva España_ (Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 99, 101; _Manuscrit
      Ramirez, Histoire de l’Origine des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle
      Espagne selon leurs traditions_, publié par D. Charnay (Paris,
      1903), pp. 159, 160 _sq._ According to Clavigero, the fifth Mexican
      month, in which the sacrifice of the human representative of
      Tezcatlipoca took place, began on the 17th of May (_History of
      Mexico_, translated by C. Cullen, London, 1807, i. 299); but this
      must be an error.

  677 E. Seler, _Altmexikanische Studien_, ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 117 note
      1, 121-125, 153 _sq._, 166 _sq._ (_Veröffentlichungen aus dem
      königlichen Museum für Völkerkunde_, vol. vi. Heft 2/4).

  678 J. de Acosta, _op. cit._ ii. 380; Diego Duran, _op. cit._ ii. 101;
      _Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire de l’Origine des Indiens qui habitent
      la Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs traditions_, publié par D. Charnay
      (Paris, 1903), p. 160; J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_, lib.
      x. cap. 14, vol. ii. p. 257 (Madrid, 1723). I have modernized the
      spelling of Acosta’s old translator (Edward Grimston).

 M216 The training and equipment of the human god. The manner of the
      sacrifice.

  679 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet, et R. Siméon (Paris, 1880), pp.
      61 _sq._, 96-99, 103; E. Seler, _Altmexikanische Studien_, ii.
      (Berlin, 1899), pp. 116-165, 194-209 (the latter passage contains
      the Aztec text of Sahagun’s account with a German translation); J.
      de Acosta, _The Natural and Moral History of the Indies_ (Hakluyt
      Society, London, 1880), pp. 350 _sq._; _Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire
      de l’Origine des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle Espagne selon
      leurs traditions_, publié par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903), pp. 157
      _sqq._, 180 _sq._; Diego Duran, _Historia de las Indias de Nueva
      España_ (Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 98-105; J. de Torquemada,
      _Monarquia Indiana_, lib. x. cap. 14, vol. ii. pp. 256 _sqq._
      (Madrid, 1723); F. S. Clavigero, _History of Mexico_, translated by
      Charles Cullen, Second Edition (London, 1807), i. 300; Brasseur de
      Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations civilisées du Mexique et de
      l’Amérique-Centrale_ (Paris, 1857-1859), iii. 510-512; H. H.
      Bancroft, _The Native Races of the Pacific States_ (London,
      1875-1876), iii. 319 _sq._ According to Torquemada the flesh of the
      human victim was eaten by the elders “as a sacred and divine flesh”;
      but this is not mentioned by the other authorities of the sixteenth
      century cited above. Elsewhere (_Spirits of the Corn and of the
      Wild_, ii. 92 _sq._) I cited this cannibal banquet as an example of
      a sacramental communion with the deity; but the silence of most
      early writers on the point makes it doubtful whether the custom has
      been correctly reported by Torquemada and later writers.

 M217 Sacrifice of a man in the character of the great Mexican god
      Vitzilopochtli (Huitzilopochtli) in the month of May.

  680 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon (Paris, 1880), pp.
      99-104; E. Seler, _Altmexikanische Studien_, ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp.
      159-165, 202-209; F. S. Clavigero, _History of Mexico_, translated
      by Ch. Cullen, Second Edition (London, 1807), i. 301-303; Brasseur
      de Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations civilisées du Mexique et de
      l’Amérique-Centrale_, iii. 512-516; H. H. Bancroft, _The Native
      Races of the Pacific States_, ii. 321-324. As to the dances of the
      maidens wearing garlands of maize, see also J. de Acosta, _Natural
      and Moral History of the Indies_ (London, 1880), ii. 380.

 M218 Sacrifice of a man in the character of the great Mexican god
      Quetzalcoatl in the month of February.

  681 J. de Acosta, _The Natural and Moral History of the Indies_ (Hakluyt
      Society, London, 1880), ii. 321; Diego Duran, _Historia de las
      Indias de Nueva España_ (Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 118-120; _Manuscrit
      Ramirez, Histoire de l’Origine des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle
      Espagne selon leurs traditions_, publié par D. Charnay (Paris,
      1903), pp. 182 _sq._ Acosta’s description of the idol is abridged.
      As to the Mexican god Quetzalcoatl, worshipped especially by the
      people of Cholula, see J. G. Müller, _Geschichte der amerikanischen
      Urreligionen_ (Bâle, 1867), pp. 577 _sqq._; H. H. Bancroft, _The
      Native Races of the Pacific States_ (London, 1875-1876), iii. 248
      _sqq._

  682 J. de Acosta, _The Natural and Moral History of the Indies_ (Hakluyt
      Society, London, 1880), ii. 384-386. I have modernized the old
      translator’s spelling. The accounts of Duran and the anonymous
      author of the Ramirez manuscript agree verbally with that of Acosta.
      It is plain that Acosta and Duran drew on the same source, which may
      be the Ramirez manuscript. However, Duran is the only one of the
      three who gives the date of the festival (the third of February).
      See Diego Duran, _Historia de las Indias de Nueva España_ (Mexico,
      1867-1880), ii. 120 _sq._; _Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire de l’Origine
      des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs
      traditions_, publié par de Charnay (Paris, 1903), pp. 182 _sqq._
      Compare A. de Herrera, _The General History of the Vast Continent
      and Islands of America_, translated by Captain John Stevens (London,
      1725-1726), iii. 218 _sq._; J. G. Müller, _Geschichte der
      amerikanischen Urreligionen_ (Bâle, 1867), pp. 589 _sq._; H. H.
      Bancroft, _The Native Races of the Pacific States_ (London,
      1875-1876), iii. 286.

 M219 Sacrifice of a woman in the character of the Mexican Goddess of Salt
      in the month of June.

  683 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon (Paris, 1880), pp.
      64, 115-117; J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_ (Madrid, 1723),
      lib. x. cap. 18, vol. ii. p. 268. Compare F. S. Clavigero, _History
      of Mexico_, translated by C. Cullen (London, 1807), i. 305; Brasseur
      de Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations Civilisées du Mexique et de
      l’Amérique-Centrale_, iii. 517 _sq._; H. H. Bancroft, _The Native
      Races of the Pacific States_, ii. 325-327.

 M220 Sacrifice of a woman in the character of the Mexican Goddess of the
      Young Maize about Mid-summer.

  684 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet R. Siméon (Paris, 1880), pp. 65
      _sq._, 118-126; J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_ (Madrid,
      1723), lib. x. cap. 19, vol. ii. pp. 269-271; E. J. Payne, _History
      of the New World called America_, i. (Oxford, 1892) pp. 421-423.
      Compare Brasseur de Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations civilisées du
      Mexique et de l’Amérique-Centrale_, iii. 518-520; H. H. Bancroft,
      _The Native Races of the Pacific States_, ii. 326 _sq._ I have
      followed Torquemada (vol. ii. p. 269) and the French translators of
      Sahagun (p. 65, note 2) in deriving the name of Xilonen from
      _xilotl_ in the sense of “young cobs of maize.” But according to E.
      J. Payne, the word _xilotl_ means “hair,” and Xilonen is “Hairy
      Mother” (_Mater comata_) with reference to the hair-like fibres or
      tassels that shoot from the maize-cobs. See E. J. Payne, _op. cit._
      i. 417. On either interpretation the goddess is a personification of
      the young maize. The goddess of the maize in general was called
      Cinteotl or Centeotl (Centeutl), a name which, according to
      Torquemada, is derived from _centli_, “maize-cob” (_Monarquia
      Indiana_, lib. vi. cap. 25, vol. ii. p. 52). But E. J. Payne, while
      he regards Cinteotl as the maize-goddess, explains her name
      differently. He says (_op. cit._ i. 416 _sq._): “The Totonacs
      worshipped the corn-spirit under names which were translated into
      Mexican as Tzinteotl (goddess of beginning or origin) and
      Tonacayohua (provider of our food). They considered her to be the
      wife of the sun, their supreme god. Theoretically subordinated to
      him, the maize-goddess was in practice the chief deity of the
      Totonacs: it was to her service that the principal warriors,
      quitting their wives and children, dedicated themselves in their old
      age.” Similarly Clavigero, who lived many years in Mexico and
      learned the Mexican language, explains Cinteotl (Tzinteotl) to mean
      “original goddess”; he adds that the Maize Goddess changed her name
      “according to the different states of the grain in the progress of
      its growth” (_History of Mexico_, translated by C. Cullen, i. 253
      note p). Another name applied to the Maize Goddess Cinteotl was
      Chicomecohuatl or “Seven Snakes.” See J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia
      Indiana_, lib. x. cap. 13, vol. ii. p. 255; J. G. Müller,
      _Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreligionen_ (Bâle, 1867), pp. 491
      _sqq._; E. Seler, _Altmexikanische Studien_, ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp.
      108 _sq._, 112. Some have held that Cinteotl was a Maize God rather
      than a Maize Goddess. See H. H. Bancroft, _The Native Races of the
      Pacific States_, iii. 349 _sqq._

 M221 Sacrifice of a woman in the character of the Mexican goddess “Our
      Mother” on Christmas Day.

  685 The Mexican year of three hundred and sixty-five days was divided
      into eighteen months of twenty days each, with five supplementary
      days over. See J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_, lib. x. cap.
      36, vol. ii. p. 300 (Madrid, 1723); B. de Sahagun, _Histoire
      Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne_, traduite par D.
      Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880), p. lxvii.; F. S. Clavigero,
      _History of Mexico_, translated by C. Cullen (London, 1807), i. 290
      _sq._

  686 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880), pp.
      75, 158-160; J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_, lib. x. cap. 29,
      vol. ii. pp. 284 _sq._ (Madrid, 1723). Compare F. S. Clavigero,
      _History of Mexico_, translated by C. Cullen (London, 1807), i. 312;
      Brasseur de Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations Civilisées du Mexique
      et de l’ Amérique-Centrale_, iii. 535 _sq._; H. H. Bancroft, _The
      Native Races of the Pacific States_, ii. 337 _sq._

 M222 Sacrifice of a woman in the character of the Mexican goddess the
      Mother of the Gods at the end of August or beginning of September.
 M223 The farewell to the market. The skin of the sacrificed woman flayed
      and worn by a man who personated the goddess.

  687 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880), pp.
      18 _sq._, 68 _sq._, 133-139: J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_
      (Madrid, 1723), lib. x. cap. 23, vol. ii. pp. 275 _sq._; Diego
      Duran, _Historia de las Indias de Nueva España_ (Mexico, 1867-1880),
      ii. 185-191. Compare Brasseur de Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations
      civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique-Centrale_, iii. 523-525; H.
      H. Bancroft, _The Native Races of the Pacific States_, iii. 353-359;
      E. J. Payne, _History of the New World called America_, i. (Oxford,
      1892), pp. 470 _sq._ A statue of basalt, about half the size of
      life, said to have come from Tezcuco, represents a man clothed in a
      human skin which he wears on his body, his arms, and his face; his
      own skin is painted bright red, the other skin a dirty white. See H.
      H. Bancroft, _op. cit._ iv. 522; Marquis de Nadaillac, _L’Amérique
      Préhistorique_ (Paris, 1883), p. 295, fig. 119. In the Art Museum
      (_Kunst-Museum_) at Bâle there is a statuette of the same sort. It
      is labelled: “_Xipe. Der in einer Menschenhaut gekleidete Gott.
      Gesch. v. H. Luk. Vischer (1828-1837)._” The figure is about
      eighteen inches high and appears to be made of a porous stone. It
      represents a man seated on his haunches with his feet crossed in
      front of him and his hands resting on his knees. His own skin, of
      which the legs, feet, hands, wrists, neck and part of the face are
      visible, is coloured a terra-cotta red. The rest of his body is
      covered by the representation of the skin of a human victim, of a
      greyish colour, quite distinct from that of the wearer, and this
      skin is also worn like a mask on his face. At his back the jacket of
      human skin only partially meets, displaying the wearer’s red skin
      under it for some distance; it is as if the skin of the human victim
      had been split up the back and then drawn together and fastened at
      the back of the wearer like an ill-fitting and imperfectly buttoned
      coat. The hands of the human victim are represented dangling at the
      wrists of the seated figure. I saw this remarkable statuette in the
      Museum at Bâle on July 25th, 1912, but I was not able to remove it
      from the case for closer examination. As to Xipe, the Mexican god
      clad in a human skin, whom the statuette represents, see below, pp.
      296 _sqq._

 M224 Young girl chosen to personate the Mexican Goddess of the Maize,
      Chicomecohuatl.

  688 As to this name for the Maize Goddess, see above, p. 286, note 1.

 M225 Adoration of the girl who personated the Goddess of the Maize.
 M226 The girl who personated the Goddess of the Maize carried in
      procession and worshipped with offerings of human blood. The human
      representative of the Maize Goddess put to death on a heap of corn
      and her skin flayed and worn by a priest.

  689 Diego Duran, _Historia de las Indias de Nueva España_ (Mexico,
      1867-1880), ii. 179-184. This remarkable festival appears not to be
      noticed by the other early Spanish writers such as Sahagun, Acosta,
      and Torquemada, who have given us detailed descriptions of the
      Mexican festivals. It might perhaps have been conjectured that Duran
      was here describing the similar festival of the Mother of the Gods
      (see above, pp. 288 _sqq._), which fell about the same time of the
      year. But the conjecture is excluded by the simple fact that Duran
      describes both festivals, the one immediately after the other,
      assigning as their dates the fifteenth and sixteenth of September
      respectively (_op. cit._ ii. 180, 185 _sq._). Almost nothing is
      known about Duran except that he was a Spanish monk, apparently a
      native of Mexico, who had weak health and died in 1588. His work
      remained in manuscript till it was edited at Mexico in 1867-1880 by
      José F. Ramirez. The original manuscript is preserved in the
      Natìonal Library at Madrid. The accounts contained in his history
      bear internal marks of authenticity and are in general supported by
      the independent testimony of the other early Spanish authorities.

 M227 Identification of the human victim with the Goddess of Maize whom
      she personated.

_  690 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, i. 236 _sqq._

 M228 The resurrection of the Maize Goddess set forth by the wearing of
      the skin of her human representative.
 M229 Xipe, the Flayed God, and the Mexican festival of the Flaying of
      Men.
 M230 The human shambles. The holy beggars clad in the skins of the flayed
      human victims.
 M231 Various Mexican gods personated by the men clad in the skins of the
      human victims.

  691 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880), pp.
      37 _sq._, 58-60, 87-94, 584 _sq._; E. Seler, _Altmexikanische
      Studien_, ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 76-100, 171-188 (the latter passage
      gives the Aztec text of Sahagun’s account with a German
      translation); Diego Duran, _Historia de las Indias de Nueva España_
      (Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 147-155; J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia
      Indiana_, lib. x. cap. 11, vol. ii. pp. 252 _sq._ (Madrid, 1723).
      Compare F. S. Clavigero, _History of Mexico_, translated by C.
      Cullen, Second Edition (London, 1807), i. 297 _sq._; Brasseur de
      Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations civilisées du Mexique et de
      l’Amérique-Centrale_ (Paris, 1857-1859), iii. 503 _sq._; H. H.
      Bancroft, _The Native Races of the Pacific States_ (London,
      1875-1876), ii. 306 _sqq._ According to Torquemada, the prisoners
      were flayed alive, but this statement is not, so far as I know,
      supported by the other early Spanish authorities. It is Duran who
      gives the 20th of March as the date of the festival at which the
      captives were killed and skinned; but this is inconsistent with the
      evidence of Sahagun, according to whom the second Aztec month, in
      which the festival fell, ended with the 13th of March. See B. de
      Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne_, p.
      51.

 M232 Men roasted alive as images of the Fire-god.

  692 J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_, lib. x. cap. 30, vol. ii. pp.
      285 _sq._ (Mexico, 1723); B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des
      Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R.
      Simeon (Paris, 1880), pp. 164 _sq._ The latter writer does not
      describe the mode in which the victims were sacrificed at this
      quadriennial festival; but he describes as in the text the annual
      sacrifice of victims in honour of the fire-god in the tenth month of
      the Mexican year (_op. cit._ pp. 67 _sq._, 129 _sqq._). Compare F.
      S. Clavigero, _History of Mexico_, translated by C. Cullen, Second
      Edition (London, 1807), i. 306 _sq._; H. H. Bancroft, _The Native
      Races of the Pacific States_, ii. 329 _sq._

 M233 Women flayed in honour of the Fire-god and their skins worn by men
      who personated gods.

  693 J. de Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_, lib. x. cap. 30, vol. ii. p.
      286 (Madrid, 1723). Compare F. S. Clavigero, _History of Mexico_,
      translated by C. Cullen, Second Edition (London, 1807), i. 283
      _sq._; Brasseur de Bourbourg, _Histoire des Nations civilisées du
      Mexique et de l’Amérique-Centrale_, iii. 539 _sq._

 M234 The personation of a god by a man wearing the skin of a human victim
      is probably intended to represent and ensure the resurrection of the
      deity. The idea of resurrection from the dead is suggested by the
      observation of snakes and other creatures that cast their skins.

  694 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon, pp. 37, 93; E.
      Seler, _Altmexikanische Studien_, ii. (Berlin. 1889) pp. 96, 185
      (quoting the Aztec text of Sahagun).

  695 R. Schomburgk, _Reisen in Britisch-Guiana_ (Leipsic, 1847-1848), ii.
      319. I have already noticed this and the following stories of the
      origin of death in _The Belief in Immortality_, i. 69 _sqq._

  696 R. Schomburgk, _op. cit._ ii. 320.

 M235 Savage notion that men would have been immortal, if only they could
      have cast their skins like serpents and crabs.

  697 A. Landes, “Contes et Légendes Annamites,” _Cochinchine française,
      Excursions et Reconnaissances_, No. 25 (Saigon, 1886), pp. 108 _sq._

  698 H. Sundermann, “Die Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst,”
      _Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift_, xi. (1884) p. 451; _id._, _Die
      Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst_ (Barmen, 1905), p. 68; E.
      Modigliani, _Un Viaggio a Nias_ (Milan, 1890), p. 295; A. Fehr, _Der
      Niasser im Leben und Sterben_ (Barmen, 1901), p. 8.

  699 P. Kleintitschen, _Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel_ (Hiltrup
      bei Münster, preface dated Christmas, 1906), p. 334.

  700 R. H. Codrington, _The Melanesians_ (Oxford, 1891), pp. 260, 265; W.
      Gray, “Some Notes on the Tannese,” _Internationales Archiv für
      Ethnographie_, vii. (1894) p. 232. The same story of the origin of
      death has been recorded in the Shortlands Islands and among the Kai
      of German New Guinea. See C. Ribbe, _Zwei Jahre unter den Kannibalen
      der Salomo-Inseln_ (Dresden-Blasowitz, 1903), p. 148; Ch. Keysser,
      “Aus dem Leben der Kaileute,” in R. Neuhauss’s _Deutsch Neu-Guinea_,
      iii. (Berlin, 1911) pp. 161 _sq._ It is also told with some
      variations by the natives of the Admiralty Islands. See Josef Meier,
      “Mythen und Sagen der Admiralitätsinsulaner,” _Anthropos_, iii.
      (1908) p. 193.

  701 Miss A. Werner, “Two Galla Legends,” _Man_, xiii. (1913) pp. 90
      _sq._

 M236 Hence the Mexicans apparently thought that they could renew their
      own skins by putting on those of other people.
 M237 General conclusion: the custom of putting human beings to death in
      the character of gods has prevailed in many parts of the world.

_  702 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, i. 40 _sqq._, ii. 376
      _sqq._

 M238 Annual periods of license. The Roman Saturnalia.

  703 Virgil, _Georg._ ii. 536-540, _Aen._ viii. 319-327, with the
      comments of Servius; Tibullus, i. 3. 35-48; Ovid, _Fasti_, i. 233
      _sqq._; Lucian, _Saturnalia_, 7; Macrobius, _Saturn._ i. 7. 21-26;
      Justin, xliii. 1. 3-5; Aurelius Victor, _Origo gentis Romanae_, 3;
      Dionysius Halicarnasensis, _Antiquit. Rom._ i. 34. On Saturn and the
      Saturnalia see especially L. Preller, _Römische Mythologie_,3 ii. 10
      _sqq._ Compare J. Marquardt, _Römische Staatsverwaltung_, iii.2
      (Leipsic, 1885) pp. 586 _sqq._; W. Warde Fowler, _The Roman
      Festivals of the Period of the Republic_ (London, 1899), pp.
      268-273; G. Wissowa, _Religion und Kultus der Römer_2 (Munich,
      1912), pp. 204 _sqq._; _id._, in W. H. Roscher’s _Ausführliches
      Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie_, iv. 427 _sqq._ A good
      account of the Saturnalia, based on the texts of the classical
      writers, is given by Dezobry (_Rome au siècle d’Auguste_,3 iii. 143
      _sqq._). The name Saturn seems to be etymologically akin to _satus_
      and _satio_, “a sowing” or “planting.” Compare Varro, _De lingua
      Latina_, v. 64, “_Ab satu est dictus Saturnus_”; Festus, _s.v._
      “Opima spolia,” p. 186 ed. C. O. Müller: “_ipse [Saturnus] agrorum
      cultor habetur, nominatus a satu, tenensque falcem effingitur, quae
      est insigne agricolae_.” Compare Tertullian, _Ad Nationes_, ii. 12;
      Arnobius, _Adversus Nationes_, iv. 9; Augustine, _De civitate Dei_,
      vii. 2, 3, 13, 15, 18, 19. The god’s name appears in the form
      Saeturnus inscribed on an ancient bowl (H. Dessau, _Inscriptiones
      Latinae Selectae_, vol. ii. pars i. p. 2, No. 2966).

  704 Dionysius Halicarnasensis, _Ant. Rom._ i. 38; Macrobius, _Saturn._
      i. 7. 31; Lactantius, _Divin. Inst._ i. 21; Arnobius, _Adversus
      Nationes_, ii. 68.

  705 For the general dissipation of the Saturnalia see Seneca, _Epist._
      18; for the seven days of the popular festival see Martial, xiv. 72.
      2; Macrobius, _Sat._ i. 10. 2; Lucian, _Saturnalia_, 21.

 M239 The license granted to slaves at the Saturnalia. The mock King of
      the Saturnalia.

  706 Horace, _Sat._ ii. 7. 4 _sq._; Macrobius, _Saturn._ i. 7. 26;
      Justin, xliii. 1. 4; Plutarch, _Sulla_, 18; Lucian, _Saturnalia_, 5,
      7; Porphyry, _De antro nympharum_, 23.

  707 Macrobius, _Saturn._ i. 12. 7, i. 24. 23; Solinus, i. 35; Joannes
      Lydus, _De mensibus_, iii. 15; Athenaeus, xiv. 44, p. 639 B; Dio
      Cassius, lx. 19.

  708 Seneca, _Epist._ 47. 14. Compare Porphyry, _De abstinentia_, ii. 23.

  709 Tacitus, _Annals_, xiii. 15; Arrian, _Epicteti Dissert._ i. 25. 8;
      Lucian, _Saturnalia_, 4.

 M240 Personation of Saturn at the Saturnalia by a soldier who afterwards
      suffered death. The sarcophagus of St. Dasius, the martyr on whom
      the lot fell to play the part of Saturn.

  710 “Les Actes de S. Dasius,” _Analecta Bollandiana_, xvi. (1897) pp.
      5-16. I have to thank Prof. Cumont for courteously sending me a copy
      of this important paper. The bearing of the new evidence on the
      Saturnalia has been further discussed by Messrs. Parmentier and
      Cumont (“Le roi des Saturnales,” _Revue de Philologie_, xxi. (1897)
      pp. 143-153).

  711 The phrase of the Paris MS. is ambiguous (τοῖς ἀνωνύμοις καὶ
      μυσαροῖς εἰδώλοις προσεκόμιζεν ἑαυτὸν σπονδήν, ἀναιρούμενος ὑπὸ
      μαχαίρας); but the other two versions say plainly that the mock king
      perished by his own hand (μέλλοντα ἑαυτὸν ἐπισφάξαι τῷ βωμῷ τοῦ
      Κρόνου, Berlin MS.; ἑαυτὸν ἐπισφάξαι αὐτοχείρως τῷ Κρόνῳ, Milan
      MS.).

  712 Franz Cumont, “Le tombeau de S. Dasius de Durostorum,” _Analecta
      Bollandiana_, xxvii. (Brussels, 1908) pp. 369-372. The inscription
      on the sarcophagus runs thus: Ἐνταῦθα κατακεῖται ὁ ἅγιος μάρτυς
      Δάσιος ἐνεχθεὶς ἀπὸ Δωροστόλου. The inscription on the altar runs
      thus: “_Vetere diruta nobiliorem FF. Karmelitani excalciati aram
      extruxerunt subter qua sanctorum martyrum Peregrini Flaviani Dasii
      corpora et infantium ab Herode necatorum ossa minus decenter
      antiquitus recondita honorificentius et populo spectanda reponi
      curaverunt die virgini et matri Theresiae sacro anno MDCCCIV._”

 M241 The mock King of the Saturnalia may have been the degenerate
      successor of a series of temporary kings who personated Saturn at
      the Saturnalia and were put to death in the character of the god.

  713 The opinion that at Rome a man used to be sacrificed at the
      Saturnalia cannot be regarded as in itself improbable, when we
      remember that down apparently to the establishment of Christianity a
      human victim was slaughtered every year at Rome in honour of Latian
      Jupiter. See Tertullian, _Apologeticus_, 9, _Contra Gnosticos
      Scorpiace_, 7; Minucius Felix, _Octavius_, 22 and 30; Lactantius,
      _Divin. Instit._ i. 21; Porphyry, _De abstinentia_, ii. 56. We may
      conjecture that at first the sacrifice took place on the top of the
      Alban Mountain, and was offered to Saturn, to whom, as we have seen,
      high places were sacred.

 M242 The modern Carnival perhaps the equivalent of the ancient
      Saturnalia.

_  714 The Dying God_, pp. 220 _sqq._

 M243 The King of the Bean on Twelfth Night. Crosses made by the King of
      the Bean to protect the house against demons and witchcraft.

  715 Joannes Boemus, _Mores, Leges, et Ritus Omnium Gentium_ (Lyons,
      1541), p. 122; _The Popish Kingdome or reigne of Antichrist, written
      in Latin verse by Thomas Naogeorgus and Englyshed by Barnabe Googe,
      1570_, edited by R. C. Hope (London, 1880), pp. 45 _sq._; E.
      Pasquier, _Recherches de la France_ (Paris, 1633), pp. 375 _sq._; R.
      Herrick, “Twelfth Night, or King and Queene,” _The Works of Robert
      Herrick_ (Edinburgh, 1823), ii. 171 _sq._; J. Brand, _Popular
      Antiquities of Great Britain_ (London, 1883), i. 21 _sqq._; T. F.
      Thiselton Dyer, _British Popular Customs_ (London, 1876), pp. 24-28;
      R. Chambers, _The Book of Days_ (London and Edinburgh, 1886), i. 61
      _sqq._; Desgranges, “Usages du Canton de Bonneval,” _Mémoires de la
      Société Royale des Antiquaires de France_, i. (Paris, 1817) pp.
      233-236; L. Beaulieu, _Archéologie de la Lorraine_ (Paris,
      1840-1843), i. 255 _sq._; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, _Calendrier Belge_
      (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 23 _sqq._; _id._, _Das festliche Jahr_
      (Leipsic, 1863), pp. 20-23; E. Cortet, _Essai sur les Fêtes
      religieuses_ (Paris, 1867), pp. 29-50; J. H. Schmitz, _Sitten und
      Sagen, Lieder, Sprüchwörter und Räthsel des Eifler Volkes_ (Trèves,
      1856-1858), i. 6; Laisnel de la Salle, _Croyances et Légendes du
      Centre de la France_ (Paris, 1875), i. 19-29; J. Lecœur, _Esquisses
      du Bocage Normand_ (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887), ii. 125; L.
      Bonnemère, “Le Jour des Rois en Normandie,” _Revue des Traditions
      populaires_, ii. (1887) pp. 55 _sq._; P. Sébillot, “La Fête des
      Rois,” _Revue des Traditions populaires_, iii. (1888) pp. 7-12; A.
      Meyrac, _Traditions, Coutumes, Légendes et Contes des Ardennes_
      (Charleville, 1890), pp. 74 _sq._; J. L. M. Noguès, _Les Mœurs
      d’autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis_ (Saintes, 1891), pp. 49
      _sqq._; L. F. Sauvé, _Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges_ (Paris, 1889),
      pp. 16 _sq._; Ch. Beauquier, _Les Mois en Franche-Comté_ (Paris,
      1900), pp. 16 _sq._; F. Chapiseau, _Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du
      Perche_ (Paris, 1902), i. 312-315; Anatole France, “Le roy boit,”
      _Annales Politiques et Littéraires_, 5 Janvier, 1902, pp. 4 _sq._;
      _La Bresse Louhannaise_, Janvier, 1906, pp. 42-46. The custom of
      making white crosses on the ceiling is reported for Germany and
      Switzerland, but apparently not for France. It is mentioned in the
      earliest of the works cited above, namely that of Joannes Boemus,
      whose description applies especially to Franconia (Franken).

  716 This I learn from my friend M. Léon Chouville of Rouen and
      Cambridge. The custom is also kept up in Bresse (_La Bresse
      Louhannaise_, Janvier, 1906, pp. 44-46).

 M244 Serious significance of the King of the Bean and Twelfth Night.
      Divination on Twelfth Night.

  717 L. Beaulieu, _Archéologie de la Lorraine_ (Paris, 1840-1843), i. 256
      note 1; E. Cortet, _Essai stir les Fêtes religieuses_ (Paris, 1867),
      p. 43.

  718 L. F. Sauvé, _op. cit._ pp. 17 _sq._

  719 Anatole France, “Le roy boit,” _Annales Politiques et Littéraires_,
      5 Janvier, 1902, p. 5. In some parts of France divination was
      practised for this purpose on Christmas Day. Twelve grains of wheat,
      each representing a month of the year, were placed, one after the
      other, on a hot fire-shovel; if the grain bounced up from the
      shovel, wheat would be dear in the corresponding month, but it would
      be cheap if the grain remained still. See J. B. Thiers, _Traité des
      Superstitions_ (Paris, 1679), p. 268. See further P. Sébillot, _Le
      Folk-lore de France_, iii. (Paris, 1906) pp. 510 _sq._

 M245 Bonfires on the Eve of Twelfth Night. Fire applied to the
      fruit-trees on the Eve of Twelfth Night in Normandy and the
      Ardennes.

  720 Ch. Beauquier, _Les Mois en Franche-Comté_ (Paris, 1900), p. 12.

  721 J. Lecœur, _Esquisses du Bocage Normand_ (Condé-sur-Noireau,
      1883-1887), ii. 126-129. Compare Amélie Bosquet, _La Normandie
      Romanesque et Merveilleuse_ (Paris and Rouen, 1845), pp. 295 _sq._;
      W. Mannhardt, _Der Baumkultus_ (Berlin, 1875), pp. 536 _sqq._

  722 A. Meyrac, _Traditions, Coutumes, Légendes et Contes des Ardennes_
      (Charleville, 1890), pp. 75 _sq._

 M246 Fires kindled on Twelfth Night or the Eve of Twelfth Night in
      England for the sake of the crops.

  723 J. Brand, _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_, New Edition
      (London, 1883), i. 33. In many parishes of Gloucestershire it used
      to be customary on Twelfth Day to light twelve small fires and one
      large one (J. Brand, _op. cit._ i. 28).

_  724 The Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. lxi., February, 1791, p. 116. The
      article is signed J. W. and dated “Hereford, Jan. 24.” The passage
      is quoted, correctly in substance, but with many verbal changes, by
      J. Brand, _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_, i. 30 _sq._, and
      by (Mrs.) E. M. Leather, _The Folk-lore of Herefordshire_ (Hereford
      and London, 1912), p. 93.

 M247 One of the fires on Twelfth Day said to be intended “to burn the old
      witch.” Parallel custom observed in Macedonia on the Eve of Twelfth
      Night.

  725 (Mrs.) Ella Mary Leather, _The Folk-lore of Herefordshire_ (Hereford
      and London, 1912), pp. 93 _sq._

  726 (Mrs.) E. M. Leather, _op. cit._ pp. 94 _sq._

  727 See above, pp. 164 _sqq._

  728 G. F. Abbott. _Macedonian Folk-lore_ (Cambridge, 1903), pp. 73-75.

  729 This opinion is mentioned by (Mrs.) E. M. Leather, _The Folk-lore of
      Herefordshire_, p. 95.

 M248 Other accounts of the fires on Twelfth Night in England and Ireland.

  730 Thomas Pennant, “A Tour in Scotland, 1769,” in John Pinkerton’s
      _Voyages and Travels_ (London, 1808-1814), iii. 49.

  731 Thomas Hyde, _Historia religionis veterum Persarum_ (Oxford, 1700),
      p. 257.

  732 Sir Henry Piers, _Description of the County of Westmeath_, quoted by
      J. Brand, _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_ (London, 1883), i.
      25.

  733 H. J. Byrne, “All Hallows Eve and other Festivals in Connaught,”
      _Folk-lore_, xviii. (1907) p. 439.

 M249 Belief of the Germanic peoples that the weather for the twelve
      months of the year is determined by the weather of the Twelve Days.

  734 C. S. Burne and G. F. Jackson, _Shropshire Folk-lore_ (London,
      1883), p. 408.

_  735 The Popish Kingdome or reigne of Antichrist, written in Latin verse
      by Thomas Naogeorgus and Englyshed by Barnabe Googe, 1570_, edited
      by R. C. Hope (London, 1880), p. 46; E. Meier, _Deutsche Sagen,
      Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben_ (Stuttgart, 1852), p. 473, § 237;
      A. Birlinger, _Volksthümliches aus Schwaben_ (Freiburg im Breisgau,
      1861-1862), i. 468, § 696; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, _Norddeutsche
      Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche_ (Leipsic, 1848), p. 411; A. Kuhn,
      _Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen_ (Leipsic, 1859), ii.
      115, § 354; A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche Volksaberglaube_2 (Berlin,
      1869), p. 61, § 74; Montanus, _Die deutschen Volksfeste,
      Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube_ (Iserlohn, N.D.), p. 18; M.
      Toeppen, _Aberglauben aus Masuren_2 (Danzig, 1867), p. 61; L.
      Strackerjan, _Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg_
      (Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 29, § 294; August Witzschel, _Sagen, Sitten
      und Gebräuche aus Thüringen_ (Vienna, 1878), p. 175; K. Bartsch,
      _Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg_ (Vienna, 1880), p.
      250, § 1292; Christian Schneller, _Märchen und Sagen aus
      Wälschtirol_ (Innsbruck, 1867), p. 231; J. Haltrich, _Zur Volkskunde
      der Siebenbürger Sachsen_ (Vienna, 1885), p. 282; Willibald Müller,
      _Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren_ (Vienna and
      Olmutz, 1893), p. 317; Alois John, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im
      deutschen Westböhmen_ (Prague, 1905), p. 12; P. Drechsler, _Sitte,
      Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien_ (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 16
      _sq._

  736 E. Meier, _Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben_
      (Stuttgart, 1852), p. 473, § 237; A. Birlinger, _Volksthümliches aus
      Schwaben_ (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861-1862), i. 468, § 696.

  737 A. Birlinger, _op. cit._ i. 470.

  738 F. J. Vonbun, _Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie_ (Chur, 1862), p.
      131; A. Birlinger, _Volksthümliches aus Schwaben_, i. 469; Chr.
      Schneller, _Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol_ (Innsbruck, 1867), p.
      231.

 M250 Belief of the Celtic peoples that the weather for the twelve months
      of the year is determined by the weather of the Twelve Days.

  739 Jules Lecoeur, _Esquisses du Bocage Normand_ (Condé-sur-Noireau,
      1883-1887), ii. 20 _sq._

  740 J. Loth, “Les douze jours supplémentaires (_gourdeziou_) des Bretons
      et les douze jours des Germains et des Indous,” _Revue Celtique_,
      xxiv. (1903) pp. 310 _sq._

  741 J. G. Campbell, _Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and
      Islands of Scotland_ (Glasgow, 1902), p. 243.

  742 Thomas Pennant, “A Tour in Scotland and Voyage to the Hebrides in
      1772,” in John Pinkerton’s _Voyages and Travels_ (London,
      1808-1814), iii. 384.

 M251 The Twelve Nights among the ancient Aryans of India.

_  743 The Hymns of the Rigveda_, translated by R. T. H. Griffith
      (Benares, 1889-1892), book iv. hymn 33, vol. ii. pp. 150 _sqq._; H.
      Zimmer, _Altindisches Leben_ (Berlin, 1879), pp. 365-367; A.
      Hillebrandt, _Ritual-Litteratur, Vedische Opfer und Zauber_
      (Strasburg, 1897), pp. 5 _sq._ However, the Ribhus are very obscure
      figures in Vedic mythology. Compare H. Oldenberg, _Die Religion des
      Veda_ (Berlin, 1894), pp. 235 _sq._; A. A. Macdonnell, _Vedic
      Mythology_ (Strasburg, 1897), pp. 131 _sqq._

 M252 The Twelve Nights are probably an ancient intercalary period
      introduced to equate twelve lunar months to the solar year.

  744 F. Max Müller, _Lectures on the Science of Language_, Sixth Edition
      (London, 1871), i. 6 _sqq._; O. Schrader, _Reallexikon der
      indogermanischen Altertumskunde_ (Strasburg, 1901), p. 547; _id._,
      _Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte_3 (Jena, 1906-1907), ii. 228.

  745 This explanation of the sacredness of the twelve days among the
      Indo-European peoples of the East and West is due to A. Weber. See
      O. Schrader, _Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde_
      (Strasburg, 1901), pp. 391-394; _id._, _Sprachvergleichung und
      Urgeschichte_3 (Jena, 1906-1907), ii. 2. pp. 228-234. It is accepted
      by J. Loth (in _Revue Celtique_, xxiv. 1903, pp. 311 _sq._),
      Professor H. Hirt (_Die Indogermanen_, Strasburg, 1905-1907, ii.
      537, 544), Professor J. H. Moulton (_Two Lectures on the Science of
      Language_, Cambridge, 1903, pp. 47 _sq._), and J. A. MacCulloch (in
      Dr. J. Hastings’s _Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics_, iii. 81
      _sq._), but is rejected on what seem to me insufficient grounds by
      Professor O. Schrader (_ll.cc._).

_  746 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, i. 307 _sqq._

 M253 The superstitions attaching to the Twelve Nights are not of
      Christian origin.

_  747 Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie_ (Chemnitz, 1759), pp. 860, 861;
      _Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern_ (Munich,
      1860-1867), i. 365; A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche Volksaberglaube_2
      (Berlin, 1869), p. 61; P. Drechsler, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube
      in Schlesien_ (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 15; A. John, _Sitte, Brauch
      und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen_ (Prague, 1905), p. 11. The
      phrase “the Twelve Nights” in the sense of “the Twelve Days and
      Nights” is doubtless derived from the ancient Aryan custom of
      counting by nights instead of by days and of regarding the period of
      the earth’s revolution on its axis as beginning with the night
      rather than with the day. See Caesar, _De bello Gallico_, vi. 18;
      Tacitus, _Germania_, 11; O. Schrader, _Reallexikon der
      indogermanischen Altertumskunde_ (Strasburg, 1901), pp. 844 _sqq._;
      J. Loth, “L’Année celtique,” _Revue Celtique_, xxv. (1904) pp. 115
      _sqq._ The Athenians reckoned a day from sunset to sunset, and the
      Romans reckoned it from midnight to midnight (Censorinus, _De die
      natali_, xxiii. 3).

  748 A. Tille, _Die Geschichte der deutschen Weihnacht_ (Leipsic, preface
      dated 1893), pp. 3 _sq._, 281 _sqq._; O. Schrader, _Reallexikon der
      indogermanischen Altertumskunde_ (Strasburg, 1901), p. 392.

  749 P. Drechsler, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien_ (Leipsic,
      1903-1906), i. 15.

  750 A. Wuttke, _Der deutsche Volksaberglaube_2 (Berlin, 1869), p. 61, §
      74. As to the varying dates of the Twelve Nights see further E.
      Mogk, “Mythologie,” in H. Paul’s _Grundriss der germanischen
      Philologie_, iii.2 (Strasburg, 1900), p. 260.

  751 See above, p. 324.

  752 Thus A. Wuttke observes that by far the greater part of the
      superstitions attaching to the Twelve Nights are of purely heathen
      origin (_Der deutsche Volksaberglaube_,2 p. 61); and K. Weinhold
      similarly remarks that the superstitions in question cannot have
      originated in Christian dogmas, and that they point to the
      sacredness of the winter solstice among the heathen tribes of
      Germany (_Weinacht-Spiele und Lieder aus Süddeutschland und
      Schlesien_, Vienna, 1875, p. 4).

  753 See _Adonis, Attis, Osiris_, Second Edition, pp. 254 _sqq._; and for
      Easter in particular see my letter “Attis and Christ,” _The
      Athenaeum_, No. 4184, January 4th, 1908, pp. 19 _sq._; Franz Cumont,
      _Les Religions orientales dans le Paganisme romain_2 (Paris, 1909),
      pp. 106 _sq._, 333 _sq._

 M254 An intercalary period a natural subject of superstition to primitive
      peoples.
 M255 The Three Kings of Twelfth Night.

  754 J. Brand, _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_ (London, 1883), i.
      21 _sq._; E. Cortet, _Essai sur les Fêtes religieuses_ (Paris,
      1867), pp. 32, 38, 39-42; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, _Calendrier Belge_
      (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 21 _sq._, 30 _sq._; _id._, _Fest-Kalender
      aus Böhmen_ (Prague, N.D.), p. 18; _id._, _Das festliche Jahr_
      (Leipsic, 1863), pp. 23-26; _Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des
      Königreichs Bayern_ (Munich, 1860-1867), ii. 262 _sq._; L. F. Sauvé,
      _Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges_ (Paris, 1889), pp. 15-18; Ch.
      Beauquier, _Les Mois en Franche-Comté_ (Paris, 1900), pp. 13-15; _La
      Bresse Louhannaise_, Janvier, 1906, p. 42; P. Drechsler, _Sitte,
      Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien_ (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 51; A.
      John, _Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen_
      (Prague, 1905), pp. 32-34; E. Hoffmann-Krayer, _Feste und Bräuche
      des Schweizervolkes_ (Zürich, 1913), pp. 104, 121.

  755 Matthew ii. 1-12.

  756 Ch. Beauquier, _Les Mois en Franche-Comté_ (Paris, 1900), pp. 13-16.

  757 L. F. Sauvé, _Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges_ (Paris, 1889), pp.
      15-17. Compare the old Roman cure for the falling sickness (above,
      p. 68).

  758 O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, _Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen_
      (Prague, N.D.), pp. 17 _sq._

  759 Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, _Calendrier Belge_ (Brussels, 1861-1862), i.
      22. The mere names of the three kings worn on the person were
      believed to be a cure for epilepsy. See J. B. Thiers, _Traité des
      Superstitions_ (Paris, 1679), pp. 350 _sq._

  760 R. Chambers, _The Book of Days_ (London and Edinburgh, 1886), i. 62,
      referring to Warton’s _History of English Poetry_.

 M256 The Lord of Misrule in England. Reign of the Lord of Misrule during
      the Twelve Days. Lord of Misrule in the Temple.

  761 J. Brand, _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_ (London, 1883), i.
      497 _sqq._; E. K. Chambers, _The Mediaeval Stage_ (Oxford, 1903), i.
      403 _sqq._

  762 John Stow, _A Survey of London, written in the year 1598_, edited by
      William J. Thoms (London, 1876), p. 37.

  763 Sir Thomas Urquhart, _The Discovery of a most Exquisite Jewel, more
      precious than Diamonds inchased in Gold_ (Edinburgh, 1774), p. 146.

  764 J. Brand, _op. cit._ i. 499.

  765 J. Brand, _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_ (London, 1883), i.
      497 _sqq._ As to the Lords of Misrule in colleges and the Inns of
      Court see further E. K. Chambers, _The Mediaeval Stage_, i. 407
      _sqq._

  766 Sir Richard Steele, in _The Spectator_, Friday, 14th December 1711.

 M257 Lord of Misrule at the English Court.

  767 E. K. Chambers, _The Mediaeval Stage_, i. 405-407.

 M258 The Festival of Fools in France.

  768 L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, _Superstitions et Survivances_, iv.
      (Paris, 1896) pp. 4 _sq._, quoting Jacob, _Mœurs et Coutumes du
      Moyen-Age_. Compare E. Cortet, _Essai sur les Fêtes religieuses_
      (Paris, 1867), pp. 50 _sqq._ In some places the festival was held on
      the octave of Epiphany. See E. K. Chambers, _The Mediaeval Stage_
      (Oxford, 1903), i. 323.

  769 E. Cortet, _op. cit._ p. 51; Papon, _Histoire Générale de la
      Provence_, iii. p. 212, quoted by L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, _op.
      cit._ iv. 9 _sq._; E. K. Chambers, _The Mediaeval Stage_ (Oxford,
      1903), i. 293 _sq._, quoting a circular letter which was addressed
      by the Faculty of Theology at Paris to the bishops and chapters of
      France on March 12th, 1445. Many details as to the mode of
      celebrating the Festival of Fools in different parts of France are
      on record. See A. de Nore, _Coutumes, Mythes, et Traditions des
      Provinces de France_ (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 293-295; E.
      Cortet, _op. cit._ pp. 52 _sqq._; L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, _op.
      cit._ iv. 5 _sqq._; G. Bilfinger, _Untersuchungen über die
      Zeitrechnung der alten Germanen_, ii. _Das germanische Julfest_
      (Stuttgart, 1901), pp. 72 _sq._; and especially E. K. Chambers, _The
      Mediaeval Stage_, i. 274 _sqq._

 M259 Buffooneries in the churches at the Festival of Fools.

  770 E. Cortet, _Essai sur les Fêtes religieuses_ (Paris, 1867), pp.
      53-56; L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, _Superstitions et Survivances_, iv.
      28-41; E. K. Chambers, _The Mediaeval Stage_ (Oxford, 1903), i.
      330-334. While the Festival of Fools appears to have been most
      popular in France, it is known to have been celebrated also in
      Germany, Bohemia, and England. See E. K. Chambers, _op. cit._ i. 318
      _sqq._ In his youth the Bohemian reformer John Huss took part in
      these mummeries. The revellers wore masks. “A clerk, grotesquely
      vested, was dubbed ‘bishop,’ set on an ass with his face to the
      tail, and led to mass in the church. He was regaled on a platter of
      broth and a bowl of beer, and Huss recalls the unseemly revel which
      took place. Torches were borne instead of candles, and the clergy
      turned their garments inside out and danced” (E. K. Chambers, _op.
      cit._ i. 320 _sq._).

 M260 Festival of the Innocents and the Boy Bishop in France.

  771 E. Cortet, _Essai sur les Fêtes religieuses_, p. 58; E. K. Chambers,
      _The Mediaeval Stage_ (Oxford, 1903), i. 317 _sq._, 336 _sqq._
      Compare L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, _Superstitions et Survivances_,
      iv. 25-28. From the evidence collected by the latter writer it
      appears that in some places the election of the Boy Bishop took
      place on other days than Childermas. At Alençon the election took
      place on the sixth of December; at Vienne, in Dauphiné, on the
      fifteenth, and at Soissons on St. Thomas’s Day (the twenty-first of
      December).

  772 This I learn from my wife, who as a girl was educated in the
      convent.

 M261 The Boy Bishop in England.

  773 J. Brand, _Popular Antiquities of Great Britain_ (London, 1883), i.
      421-431; E. K. Chambers, _The Mediaeval Stage_ (Oxford, 1903), i.
      352 _sqq._; (Mrs.) Ella Mary Leather, _The Folk-lore of
      Herefordshire_ (Hereford and London, 1912), pp. 138 _sq._; _County
      Folk-lore_, II. _North Riding of Yorkshire, York and the Ainsty_,
      edited by Mrs. Gutch (London, 1901), pp. 352 _sq._

  774 J. Brand, _op. cit._ i. 426.

 M262 The customs and superstitions associated with the Twelve Days or
      Nights are probably relics of an old heathen festival of
      intercalation at midwinter.
 M263 Superstitions associated with intercalary periods among the Aztecs
      of Mexico and the Mayas of Yucatan.

  775 As to the Aztec year see above, p. 287 note 1.

  776 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880), pp.
      77, 283; E. Seler, “The Mexican Chronology,” in _Bureau of American
      Ethnology, Bulletin No. 28_ (Washington, 1904), p. 16 (where some
      extracts from the Aztec text of Sahagun are quoted and translated);
      J. de Acosta, _Natural and Moral History of the Indies_ (Hakluyt
      Society, London, 1880), ii. 392.

  777 Diego de Landa, _Relation des Choses de Yucatan_ (Paris, 1864), pp.
      204 _sq._, 276 _sq._

 M264 The five supplementary days of the year in ancient Egypt.

  778 Geminus, _Elementa Astronomiae_, viii. 18, p. 106, ed. C. Manitius
      (Leipsic, 1898).

  779 G. Foucart, in Dr. J. Hastings’s _Encyclopaedia of Religion and
      Ethics_, iii. (1910) p. 93. Professor Ed. Meyer adduces astronomical
      and other grounds for thinking that the ancient Egyptian calendar,
      as we know it, began on the 19th of July, 4241 B.C., which
      accordingly he calls “the oldest sure date in the history of the
      world.” See Ed. Meyer, _Geschichte des Altertums_2, i. 2. (Stuttgart
      and Berlin, 1909), pp. 101 _sq._, § 197; and against this view C. F.
      Lehmann-Haupt, in the _English Historical Review_, April 1913, p.
      348.

  780 Plutarch, _Isis et Osiris_, 12. Compare Diodorus Siculus, i. 13. 4
      _sq._ As to Keb and Nut, the parents of Osiris, Isis, and the rest,
      see A. Erman, _Die ägyptische Religion_ (Berlin, 1905), p. 29. The
      Egyptian deities Keb, Nut, and Thoth are called by Plutarch by the
      Greek names of Cronus, Rhea, and Hermes. On account of these Greek
      names the myth was long thought to be of comparatively recent date;
      “but the Leyden Papyrus (i. 346) has shown that the legend existed
      in its essential features in the time of the Thebans, and the Texts
      of the Pyramids have carried it back to the very beginnings of
      Egyptian mythology” (G. Foucart, _l.c._). As five days are the
      seventy-second, not the seventieth, part of three hundred and sixty
      days, it was proposed by Wyttenbach to read τὸ ἑβδομηκοστὸν δεύτερον
      instead of τὸ ἑβδομηκοστὸν in Plutarch’s text. See D. Wyttenbachius,
      _Animadversiones in Plutarchi Moralia_ (Leipsic, 1820-1834), iii.
      143 _sq._

 M265 Early attempts of the Aryan peoples to correct the lunar year by
      intercalating a month at intervals of several years instead of
      intercalating twelve days in every year.

  781 H. Zimmer, _Altindisches Leben_ (Berlin, 1879), pp. 365-370. Compare
      _The Hymns of the Rigveda_, translated by R. T. H. Griffith
      (Benares, 1889-1892), Book i. Hymn 164, stanza 48 (vol. i. p. 293),
      Book iii. Hymn 55, stanza 18 (vol. ii. pp. 76 _sq._).

  782 J. A. MacCulloch, in Dr. J. Hastings’s _Encyclopaedia of Religion
      and Ethics_, iii. (Edinburgh, 1910) pp. 78 _sqq._ Compare S. de
      Ricci, “Le calendrier Gaulois de Coligny,” _Revue Celtique_, xix.
      (1898) pp. 213-223; _id._, “Le calendrier Celtique de Coligny,”
      _Revue Celtique_, xxi. (1900) pp. 10-27; _id._, “Un passage
      remarquable du calendrier de Coligny,” _Revue Celtique_, xxiv.
      (1903) pp. 313-316; J. Loth, “L’année Celtique,” _Revue Celtique_,
      xxv. (1904) pp. 113-162; Sir John Rhys, “The Coligny Calendar”,
      _Proceedings of the British Academy, 1909-1910_, pp. 207 _sqq._ As
      the calendar stands, the number of days in the ordinary year is 355,
      not 354, seven of the months having thirty days and five of them
      twenty-nine days. But the month Equos has attached to it the sign
      ANM, which is attached to all the months of twenty-nine days but to
      none of the months of thirty days except Equos, all of which, except
      Equos, are marked with the sign MAT. Hence, following a suggestion
      of M. S. de Ricci (_Revue Celtique_, xxi. 25), I suppose that the
      month Equos had regularly twenty-nine days instead of thirty, and
      that the attribution of thirty days to it is an error of the scribe
      or mason who engraved the calendar.

      In the Coligny calendar the summer solstice seems to be marked by
      the word _trinouxtion_ affixed to the seventeenth day of the first
      month (Samonios, nearly equivalent to our June). As interpreted by
      Sir John Rhys (_op. cit._ p. 217), the word means “a period of three
      nights of equal length.” If he is right, it follows that the Celts
      who constructed the calendar had observed the summer solstice.

 M266 Equivalence of the new intercalary month to the old intercalary
      Twelve Days multiplied by two and a half. The intercalary month may
      have been a period of license, during which the reins of government
      were held by a temporary king.

  783 J. A. MacCulloch, in Dr. J. Hastings’s _Encyclopaedia of Religion
      and Ethics_, iii. 79. Compare Sir J. Rhys, “The Coligny Calendar,”
      _Proceedings of the British Academy, 1909-1910_, pp. 292 _sq._

 M267 The modern Carnival is perhaps the equivalent of the ancient
      Saturnalia.

  784 We know from Livy (xxii. i. 19 _sq._) that the Saturnalia was
      celebrated in December as early as the year 217 B.C.; and in his
      learned discussion of the proper date of the festival the antiquary
      Macrobius gives no hint that it ever fell at any other time than in
      December (_Saturnal._ i. 10). It would be a mistake to infer from
      Livy’s account of the Saturnalia in the year 217 B.C. that he
      supposed the festival to have been first instituted in that year;
      for elsewhere (ii. 21. 1) he tells us that it was established at the
      time when the temple of Saturn was dedicated, namely in the year 497
      B.C. Macrobius (_Saturn._ i. 8. 1) refers the institution of the
      Saturnalia to King Tullus Hostilius. More probably the festival was
      of immemorial antiquity.

 M268 The Saturnalia may have originally fallen at the end of February,
      which would be an appropriate time for a festival of sowing.

  785 Macrobius, _Sat._ i. 12. 7; Solinus, i. 35, p. 13 ed. Th. Mommsen
      (Berlin, 1864); Joannes Lydus, _De Mensibus_, iii. 15. On the other
      hand, we know that the ceremony of renewing the laurels, which
      originally took place on the first of March, was long afterwards
      transferred to the first of January. See Ovid, _Fasti_, iii. 135
      _sqq._, and Macrobius, _Saturn._ i. 12. 6, compared with
      _Geoponica_, xi. 2. 6, where the note of the commentator Niclas may
      be consulted. This transference is strictly analogous to the change
      which I conjecture to have been made in the date of celebrating the
      Saturnalia.

  786 Palladius, _De re rustica_, books iii. and iv. _passim._

_  787 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, i. 137-139.

_  788 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, i. 136-144, ii. 97
      _sqq._

  789 Compare C. Lumholtz, _Unknown Mexico_ (London, 1903), ii. 268: “To
      the Huichol so closely are corn, deer, and hikuli associated that by
      consuming the broth of the deer-meat and the hikuli they think the
      same effect is produced—namely, making the corn grow. Therefore when
      clearing the fields they eat hikuli before starting the day’s work.”

 M269 The Lenten fast in spring may be an old heathen period of abstinence
      intended to promote the growth of the seed. Autumnal rites of
      mourning and fasting for the sake of the seed.

_  790 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 104 _sqq._ The
      Indians of Santiago Tepehuacan abstain from flesh, eggs, and grease
      while they are engaged in sowing cotton and chilis, because they
      believe that were they to partake of these viands at that time, the
      blossoms would fall and the crop would suffer. See “Lettre du curé
      de Santiago Tepehuacan à son évêque sur les mœurs et coutumes des
      Indiens,” _Bulletin de la Société de Géographie_ (Paris), Deuxième
      Série, ii. (1834) p. 181.

  791 In Franche-Comté not only husbands and wives were expected to be
      continent from the first Sunday of Lent to the first Sunday after
      Easter, but even sweethearts separated during that time, bidding
      each other a formal farewell on the first of these days and meeting
      again with similar formality on the last. See C. Beauquier, _Les
      Mois en Franche-Comté_ (Paris, 1900), p. 35. I am informed that the
      observance of chastity during Lent is enjoined generally by the
      Catholic church. As to its injunction by the Coptic church see F.
      Wüstenfeld, _Macrizi’s Geschichte der Copten_ (Göttingen, 1845), p.
      84; _Il_ Fetha Nagast, _o Legislazione dei Re, codice ecclesiastico
      e civile di Abissinia, tradotto e annotato da_ Ignazio Guidi (Rome,
      1899), p. 164.

  792 Socrates, _Historia Ecclesiastica_, v. 22; Sozomenus, _Historia
      Ecclesiastica_, vii. 19 (Migne, _Patrologia Graeca_, lxvii. coll.
      632-636, 1477); W. Smith and S. Cheetham, _Dictionary of Christian
      Antiquities_, _s.v._ “Lent,” vol. ii. pp. 972 _sq._; Mgr. L.
      Duchesne, _Origines du Culte Chrétien_ (Paris, 1903), pp. 241-243.

  793 Firmicus Maternus, _De errore profanarum religionum_, 27.

  794 Plutarch, _Isis et Osiris_, 69: καὶ γὰρ Ἀθήνῃσι νηστεύουσιν αἱ
      γυναῖκες ἐν θεσμοφορίοις χαμαὶ καθήμεναι, καὶ Βοιωτοὶ τὰ τῆς Ἀχαιᾶς
      μέγαρα κινοῦσιν, ἐπαχθῆ τὴν ἑορτὴν ἐκείνην ὀνομάζοντες, ὡς διὰ τὴν
      τῆς Κόρης κάθοδον ἐν ἄχει τῆς Δήμητρος οὕσης. Ἔστι δὲ ὁ μὴν οὗτος
      περὶ πλειάδα σπόριμος, ὂν Ἀθὺρ Αἰγύπτιοι, Πυανεψιῶνα δ᾽ Ἀθηναῖοι,
      Βοιωτοὶ δὲ Δαμάτριον καλοῦσι. As to the festival and the rule of
      chastity observed at it, see further _Spirits of the Corn and of the
      Wild_, i. 116, ii. 17 _sq._

 M270 The Buddhist Lent.

  795 H. Fielding, _The Soul of a People_ (London, 1898), pp. 172 _sq._
      The orthodox explanation of the custom is that during these three
      months the Buddha retired to a monastery. But “the custom was far
      older even than that—so old that we do not know how it arose. Its
      origin is lost in the mists of far-away time.” Compare C. J. F. S.
      Forbes, _British Burma_ (London, 1878), pp. 170 _sq._; Shway Yoe,
      _The Burman, his Life and Notions_ (London, 1882), i. 257, 262
      _sqq._

 M271 Inversion of social ranks at ancient Greek festivals held in Crete,
      Troezen, and Thessaly.

  796 Athenaeus, xiv. 44 _sq._, pp. 639 B-640 A.

 M272 The Greek festival of the Cronia compared to the Roman Saturnalia.
      The Olympian Cronia held at the spring equinox.

  797 Macrobius, _Saturn._ i. 7. 37 and i. 10. 22; Demosthenes, _Or._
      xxiv. 26, p. 708. As to the temple of Cronus and Rhea, see
      Pausanias, i. 18. 7; Im. Bekker’s _Anecdota Graeca_ (Berlin,
      1814-1821), i. p. 273, lines 20 _sq._ That the Attic month
      Hecatombaeon was formerly called Cronius is mentioned by Plutarch
      (_Theseus_, 12). Other Greek states, including Samos, Amorgos,
      Perinthus, and Patmos, had a month called Cronion, that is, the
      month of Cronus, which seems to have coincided with June or July.
      See G. Dittenberger, _Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum_2 (Leipsic,
      1898-1901), Nos. 644 and 645; E. Bischoff, “De fastis Graecorum
      antiquioribus,” _Leipziger Studien für classischen Philologie_, vii.
      (1884) p. 400. At Magnesia on the Maeander the month of Cronion was
      the time of sowing (Dittenberger, _op. cit._ No. 553, lines 15
      _sq._), which cannot have fallen in the height of summer. Compare
      _Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 8.

_  798 Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum_, iii. No. 77; Ch. Michel, _Recueil
      d’Inscriptions Grecques_ (Brussels, 1900), No. 692, pp. 595 _sq._;
      I. de Prott et L. Ziehen, _Leges Graecorum Sacrae_, i. (Leipsic,
      1896), No. 3, pp. 7 _sq._; E. S. Roberts and E. A. Gardner,
      _Introduction to Greek Epigraphy_, Part II. (Cambridge, 1905), No.
      142, pp. 387 _sq._ From the same inscription we learn that cakes
      with twelve knobs were offered to other deities, including Apollo
      and Artemis, Zeus, Poseidon, and Hercules.

  799 Scholiast on Hesiod, _Works and Days_, 370 (p. 170 ed. E. Vollbehr,
      Kiel, 1844): Καὶ ἐν τοῖς πατρίοις ἐστιν ἑορτὴ Πιθοιγία, καθ᾽ ἣν οὒτε
      οἰκέτην οὔτε μισθωτὸν εἴργειν τῆς ἀπολαύσεως τοῦ οἴνου θεμιτὸν ἦν,
      ἀλλὰ θύσαντας πᾶσι μεταδιδόναι τοῦ δώρου τοῦ Διονύσου. As to the
      festival of the opening of the wine-jars see August Mommsen,
      _Heortologie_ (Leipsic, 1864), pp. 349 _sqq._; _id._, _Feste der
      Stadt Athen im Altertum_ (Leipsic, 1898), pp. 384 _sqq._ “When the
      slaves,” says Plutarch, “feast at the Cronia or go about celebrating
      the festival of Dionysus in the country, the shouts they raise and
      the tumult they make in their rude merriment are intolerable” (_Non
      posse suaviter vivi secundum Epicurum_, 26). That the original
      festival of Cronus fell at Athens in Anthesterion is the view of
      Aug. Mommsen (_Heortologie_, pp. 22, 79; _Feste der Stadt Athen_, p.
      402).

  800 Pausanias, vi. 20. 1. Compare Dionysius Halicarnasensis, _Antiquit.
      Rom._ i. 34. The magistrates called “kings” (βασίλαι) by Pausanias
      are doubtless identical with “the kings” (τοὶ βασιλᾶες) mentioned in
      a law of Elis, which was found inscribed on a bronze plate at
      Olympia. See H. Roehl, _Inscriptiones Graecae Antiquissimae_
      (Berlin, 1882), No. 112, p. 39; C. Cauer, _Delectus Inscriptionum
      Graecarum propter dialectum memorabilium_2 (Leipsic, 1883), No. 253,
      p. 175; H. Collitz, _Sammlung der griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften_,
      No. 1152 (vol. i. Göttingen, 1884, p. 321); Ch. Michel, _Recueil
      d’Inscriptions Grecques_, No. 195, p. 179.

 M273 The magistrates called Kings who celebrated the Cronia at Olympia
      may have personated King Cronus himself. Perhaps the man who
      annually personated King Cronus was put to death. A man annually
      sacrificed to Cronus at the Cronia in Rhodes.

  801 See _The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, i. 44 _sqq._, ii.
      177, 361.

  802 Hesiod, _Works and Days_, 111, 169; Plato, _Politicus_, p. 269 A;
      Diodorus Siculus, iii. 61, v. 66; Julian, _Epistola ad Themistium_,
      p. 258 C (pp. 334 _sq._, ed. F. C. Hertlein, Leipsic, 1875-1876);
      “Anonymi Chronologica,” printed in L. Dindorf’s edition of J.
      Malalas (Bonn, 1831), p. 17. See further M. Mayer’s article
      “Kronos,” in W. H. Roscher’s _Lexikon der griech. und röm.
      Mythologie_, ii. (Leipsic, 1890-1897) col. 1458.

  803 See M. Mayer, _op. cit._ ii. 1501 _sqq._

  804 Pausanias, vi. 20. 4 _sq._

  805 Plato, _Republic_, ix. p. 565 D E; pseudo-Plato, _Minos_, p. 315 C;
      Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ viii. 81; Pausanias, viii. 2 and 38; Porphyry,
      _De abstinentia_, ii. 27; Augustine, _De civitate Dei_, xviii. 17.
      The suggestion that Lycaean Zeus may have been merely a successor of
      Cronus is due to my friend Professor W. Ridgeway.

  806 Porphyry, _De abstinentia_, ii. 54.

_  807 The Dying God_, pp. 161 _sqq._

 M274 The Babylonian festival of the Sacaea.

_  808 The Dying God_, pp. 113 _sqq._

  809 Athenaeus, xiv. 44, p. 639 C; Dio Chrysostom, _Or._ iv. 69 _sq._
      (vol. i. p. 76 ed. L. Dindorf, Leipsic, 1857). From Athenaeus we
      learn that the festival was described or mentioned by Berosus in his
      first book and by Ctesias in his second.

  810 Strabo, xi. 8. 5, p. 512.

 M275 The Sacaea by some identified with Zakmuk or Zagmuk, the Babylonian
      festival of the New Year, which was held about the spring equinox in
      March. Annual renewal of the king of Babylon’s power at the Zakmuk
      festival.

  811 Strabo, xi. 14. 16, pp. 532 _sq._; Ed. Meyer’s article “Anaitis,” in
      W. H. Roscher’s _Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie_, i.
      (Leipsic, 1884-1890) pp. 330 _sqq._

  812 By A. H. Sayce, _Religion of the Ancient Babylonians_ (London and
      Edinburgh, 1887), p. 68; Bruno Meissner, “Zur Entstehungsgeschichte
      des Purimfestes,” _Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen
      Gesellschaft_, l. (1896) pp. 296-301; H. Winckler, _Altorientalische
      Forschungen_, Zweite Reihe, ii. Heft 3 (Leipsic, 1900), p. 345; C.
      Brockelmann, “Wesen und Ursprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,”
      _Zeitschrift für Assyriologie_, xvi. (1902) pp. 391 _sq._

  813 P. Jensen, _Die Kosmologie der Babylonier_ (Strasburg, 1890), pp. 84
      _sqq._; H. Zimmern, “Zur Frage nach dem Ursprunge des Purimfestes,”
      _Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft_, xi. (1891) pp.
      159 _sqq._; A. Jeremias, _s.v._ “Marduk,” in W. H. Roscher’s
      _Lexicon der griech. und röm. Mythologie_, ii. 2347 _sq._; M.
      Jastrow, _Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_ (Boston, U.S.A., 1898),
      pp. 186, 677 _sqq._; R. F. Harper, _Assyrian and Babylonian
      Literature_ (New York, 1901), pp. 136 _sq._, 137, 140, 149; C.
      Brocklemann, “Wesen und Ursprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,”
      _Zeitschrift für Assyriologie_, xvi. (1902) pp. 391 _sqq._; H.
      Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s _Die Keilinschriften und das Alte
      Testament_3 (Berlin, 1902), pp. 370 _sq._, 374, 384 _n._4, 402, 514
      _sqq._; _id._, “Zum Babylonischen Neujahrsfest,” _Berichte über die
      Verhandlungen der königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft der
      Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Philologisch-historische Klasse_, lviii.
      (1906) pp. 126-156; M. J. Lagrange, _Études sur les Religions
      Sémitiques_2 (Paris, 1905); pp. 285 _sqq._ King Gudea is thought to
      have flourished about 2340 B.C. See Ed. Meyer, _Geschichte des
      Altertums_,2 i. 2. (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1909) pp. 488 _sq._ As to
      the ceremony of grasping the hands of Marduk’s image, see also C. F.
      Lehmann (-Haupt), _Šamaššumukin, König von Babylonien_ (Leipsic,
      1892), pp. 50 _sqq._; Sir G. Maspero, _Histoire Ancienne des Peuples
      de l’Orient Classique_, iii. _Les Empires_ (Paris, 1899). pp. 381
      _sq._

 M276 Reasons for identifying the Sacaea with Zakmuk.

  814 On this subject the Master of St. Catharine’s College, Cambridge
      (the Rev. C. H. W. Johns), has kindly furnished me with the
      following note: “ZAG is the name of the ideogram meaning ‘head or
      beginning.’ MU is the sign for ‘year.’ When put together ZAG-MU
      means ‘beginning of year.’ But ZAG-MU-KU means ZAG MU-d, _i.e._ ZAG
      with MU suffixed. Therefore it is the name of the ideogram, and
      there is as yet no _proof_ that it was ever read Zakmuk. Hence any
      similarity of sound with either Sacaea or Zoganes is precarious. I
      cannot prove that the signs were _never_ read Zakmuku, but that is
      not a Semitic word nor a Sumerian word.”

  815 The statement occurs in an inscription of Nebuchadnezzar. See P.
      Jensen, _Die Kosmologie der Babylonier_, p. 85; H. Zimmern, in E.
      Schrader’s _Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament_3 (Berlin,
      1902), p. 402. The title of the president of the divine synod, “king
      of the gods of heaven and earth,” is believed by Professor Zimmern
      to have originally referred to the god Nabu, though at a later time
      it was applied to Marduk.

 M277 A difficulty in identifying the Sacaea with Zakmuk is that the two
      festivals seem to have been celebrated at different times of the
      year, Zakmuk falling in March and the Sacaea in July. Suggested ways
      of meeting the difficulty.

_  816 See The Dying God_, p. 116 note 1. In Egypt the Macedonian calendar
      seems to have fallen into great confusion. See W. Dittenberger,
      _Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae_ (Leipsic, 1903-1905), ii.
      pp. 649 _sq._ I would remind the reader that while the _dates_ of
      the Syro-Macedonian months varied in different places, their _order_
      was the same everywhere.

  817 See above, p. 355, note 5. On the other hand Prof. H. Zimmern
      prefers to suppose that the Sacaea was quite distinct from Zakmuk,
      and that it fell in July at the time of the heliacal rising of
      Sirius, which seems to have been associated with the goddess Ishtar.
      See H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s _Die Keilinschriften und das Alte
      Testament_3 (Berlin, 1902), pp. 426 _sq._

_  818 Encyclopaedia Biblica_, _s.v._ “Year,” vol. iv. (London, 1903)
      coll. 5365 _sqq._

_  819 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 59 _sqq._

_  820 The Golden Bough_, Second Edition, iii. 237 _sqq._

  821 J. Marquardt, _Römische Staatsverwaltung_2 (Leipsic, 1885), pp. 200
      _sq._

 M278 An argument for identifying Sacaea and Zakmuk is the apparent
      connexion of both with the Jewish festival of Purim.

  822 H. Zimmern, “Zur Frage nach dem Ursprunge des Purimfestes,”
      _Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft_, xi. (1891) pp.
      157-169; W. Nowack, _Lehrbuch der hebräischen Archäologie_ (Freiburg
      i. B. and Leipsic, 1894), ii. 198 _sqq._; Br. Meissner, “Zur
      Entstehungsgeschichte des Purimfestes,” _Zeitschrift der deutschen
      morgenländischen Gesellschaft_, l. (1896) pp. 296-301; Fr. Cumont,
      “Le roi des Saturnales,” _Revue de Philologie_, xxi. (1897) p. 150;
      P. Haupt, _Purim_ (Leipsic, 1906). The various theories which have
      been propounded as to the origin of Purim are stated and discussed
      by Prof. L. B. Paton in his _Commentary on the Book of Esther_
      (Edinburgh, 1908), pp. 77-94. See also _Encyclopaedia Biblica_,
      _s.v._ “Purim,” vol. iii. (London, 1902) coll. 3976 _sqq._

  823 S. R. Driver, _Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament_8
      (Edinburgh, 1909), p. 484. Professor T. Witton Davies would date the
      book about 130 B.C. See _Ezra, Nehemiah and Esther_, edited by Rev.
      T. Witton Davies (Edinburgh and London, N.D.), pp. 299-301 (_The
      Century Bible_).

  824 2 Maccabees xv. 36. As to the date of this book, see S. R. Driver,
      _op. cit._ p. 481.

 M279 The Jewish festival of Purim seems to be derived from the Babylonian
      festival of Zakmuk.

  825 We know from Josephus (_Antiquit._ iii. 10. 5) that in the month
      Nisan, the first month of the Jewish year, the sun was in Aries. Now
      the sun is in Aries from March 20th or 21st to April 19th or 20th;
      hence Nisan answers approximately to April, and Adar to March.

  826 Esther iii. 7.

  827 Esther iii. 7, ix. 26.

  828 This is the view of H. Zimmern (_Zeitschrift für die
      alttestamentliche Wissenschaft_, xi. (1891) pp. 157 _sqq._), and it
      is favoured by W. Nowack (_Lehrbuch der hebräischen Archäologie_,
      ii. 198 _sq._). Compare H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s _Die
      Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament_3 (Berlin, 1902), p. 518.

  829 P. Jensen, _Die Kosmologie der Babylonier_, pp. 240 _sq._

  830 The explanation is that of P. Jensen, quoted by Th. Nöldeke in
      _Encyclopaedia Biblica_, _s.v._ “Esther,” vol. ii. (London, 1901)
      col. 1404 note 1. In Greek, for a similar reason, the word for
      “pebble” and “vote” is identical (ψῆφος). As to this etymology see
      also C. H. W. Johns, _s.v._ “Purim,” _Encyclopaedia Biblica_, iii.
      (London, 1902) coll. 3979 _sq._

 M280 Connexion of Purim with the Sacaea. The joyous nature of Purim.

  831 Esther x. 22.

  832 J. Buxtorf, _Synagoga Judaica_ (Bâle, 1661), pp. 554 _sq._, 559
      _sq._

  833 J. Buxtorf, _op. cit._ p. 559; Schickard, quoted by Lagarde,
      “Purim,” _Abhandlungen der kön. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu
      Göttingen_, xxxiv. (1887) pp. 54 _sq._ Compare J. Chr. G.
      Bodenschatz, _Kirchliche Verfassung der heutigen Juden_ (Erlangen,
      1748), ii. 256. For the rule forbidding men and women to exchange
      garments, see Deuteronomy xxii. 5.

  834 J. J. Schudt, _Jüdische Merkwürdigkeiten_ (Frankfort and Leipsic,
      1714), ii. Theil, pp. 309, 314, 316, iv. Theiles die ii.
      Continuation, p. 347; I. Abrahams, _Jewish Life in the Middle Ages_
      (London, 1896), pp. 261 _sqq._ I have to thank my learned friend Dr.
      S. Schechter for bringing both these works to my notice.

 M281 The origin of Purim according to the book of Esther. The rival pairs
      Mordecai and Esther on the one side, Haman and Vashti on the other.
 M282 Analysis of the names Mordecai and Esther, Haman and Vashti.
      Jensen’s theory that Haman and Vashti were Elamite deities in
      opposition to the Babylonian deities Mordecai (Marduk) and Esther
      (Ishtar).

  835 P. Jensen, “Elamitische Eigennamen,” _Wiener Zeitschrift für die
      Kunde des Morgenlandes_, vi. (1892) pp. 47-70; compare _ib._ pp.
      209-212. All Jensen’s etymologies are accepted by W. Nowack
      (_Lehrbuch der hebräischen Archäologie_, Freiburg i. Baden and
      Leipsic, 1894, ii. 199 _sq._); H. Gunkel (_Schöpfung und Chaos_,
      Göttingen, 1895, pp. 310 _sq._); D. G. Wildeboer (in his commentary
      on Esther, pp. 173 _sqq._, forming part of K. Marti’s _Kurzer
      Hand-Commentar zum alten Testament_, Freiburg i. B. 1898); Th.
      Nöldeke (_s.v._ “Esther,” _Encyclopaedia Biblica_, vol. ii. coll.
      1404 _sq._); and H. Zimmern (in E. Schrader’s _Die Keilinschriften
      und das Alte Testament_,3 Berlin, 1902, pp. 485, 516 _sq._). On the
      other hand, Br. Meissner (_Zeitschrift der deutschen
      morgenländischen Gesellschaft_, I. (1896) p. 301) and M. Jastrow
      (_The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_, p. 686, note 2) suspend
      their judgment as to the identification of Haman and Vashti with
      Elamite deities, though they apparently regard the identification of
      Mordecai and Esther with Marduk and Ishtar as quite certain. The
      doubt which these scholars felt as to the derivation of one at least
      of these names (Vashti) is now known to be well founded. See below,
      p. 367, note 3.

      It deserves to be noted that on the twenty-seventh day of the month
      Tammuz the heathen of Harran used to sacrifice nine male lambs to
      Haman, “the supreme God, the father of the gods,” and they ate and
      drank on that day. Chwolsohn suggests a comparison of the festival
      with the Athenian Cronia. See D. Chwolsohn, _Die Ssabier und der
      Ssabismus_ (St. Petersburg, 1856), ii. 27 _sq._, 211 _sqq._

  836 Th. Nöldeke, _s.v._ “Esther,” in _Encyclopaedia Biblica_, vol. ii.
      (London, 1901) coll. 1405. But in a letter, written to me (20th May
      1901) since the publication of the last edition of this book,
      Professor Nöldeke expresses a doubt whether he has not followed
      Jensen’s mythological identifications in the book of Esther too far.

 M283 But the proposed etymology of Vashti is untenable.

  837 “The change of _m_ to _w_ or _v_ (the Hebrew ו = _waw_) is frequent
      and certain” (the Rev. C. H. W. Johns in a letter to me, May 19th,
      1913). The change is vouched for also by my friend Professor A. A.
      Bevan, who cites as an instance the name of the Babylonian king
      Amel-Marduk, which in Hebrew is changed into Evil-Merodach (2 Kings
      xxv. 27; Jeremiah lii. 31). See E. Schrader, _Die Keilinschriften
      und das Alte Testament_3 (Berlin, 1902), p. 396.

  838 The name of the Elamite goddess is read as Parti by the Rev. Father
      Scheil. See E. Cosquin, _Le Prologue-cadre des Mille et Une Nuits,
      les Légendes Perses, et le Livre d’Esther_ (Paris, 1909), p. 68
      (extract from the _Revue Biblique Internationale_, Janvier et Avril,
      1909, published by the Dominicans of Jerusalem). The Master of St.
      Catharine’s College, Cambridge (the Rev. C. H. W. Johns), has kindly
      examined the facsimile of the inscriptions for me. He informs me
      that Father Scheil’s reading is correct and that the reading Mashti
      is quite wrong. He further tells me that Jensen was misled by an
      incorrect edition of the inscriptions to which alone he had access.
      The signs for _par_ (or _bar_) and _mash_ in the inscriptions
      resemble each other and therefore might easily be confused by a
      copyist. All Jensen’s etymologies, except that of Mordecai, are
      adversely criticized by M. Emile Cosquin in the work to which I have
      referred (pp. 67 _sqq._). He prefers with Oppert to derive all the
      names except Mordecai (the identity of which with Marduk he does not
      dispute) from the old Persian. However, these derivations from the
      Persian are rejected by Professor Th. Nöldeke, whose opinion on such
      a point is entitled to carry great weight. See _Encyclopaedia
      Biblica_, ii. (London, 1901) col. 1402, _s.v._ “Esther.”

 M284 The mock king of the Sacaea seems to have personated a god. The view
      of Movers.

  839 F. C. Movers, _Die Phoenizier_, i. (Bonn, 1841) pp. 490 _sq._; 2
      Samuel xvi. 21 _sq._, compare xii. 8. It was a well-attested custom
      of the Assyrian kings, when they had conquered a city, to take into
      their harem the daughters of the vanquished princes and rulers. See
      C. F. Lehmann (-Haupt), _Šamaššumutkîn König von Babylonien_
      (Leipsic, 1892), p. 31. The Persian and Scythian kings seem also to
      have married the wives of their predecessors. See Herodotus, iii. 68
      and 88, iv. 78; K. Neumann, _Die Hellenen im Skythenlande_, i.
      (Berlin, 1855) p. 301. Such a custom points to an old system of
      mother-kin under which the royal dignity was transmitted through
      women. See _The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 268
      _sqq._

 M285 The mock king of the Sacaea may have mated with a woman who played
      the part of a goddess, whether Anaitis, Astarte, or Semiramis.
      Identity of the mythical Semiramis with Astarte. The lovers of
      Semiramis and Ishtar (Astarte).

  840 Ed. Meyer, _s.v._ “Anaitis,” in W. H. Roscher’s _Lexikon der griech.
      und röm. Mythologie_, i. (Leipsic, 1884-1890) coll. 352 _sq._ At the
      temple of Anaitis in Acilisena, a city of Armenia, the daughters of
      the noblest families regularly prostituted themselves for a long
      time before marriage (Strabo, xi. 14. 16, p. 532). Agathias
      identified Anaitis with Aphrodite (_Hist._ ii. 24), and when the
      Greeks spoke of the Oriental Aphrodite, they meant Astarte or one of
      her equivalents. Jensen proposes to identify Anaitis with an Elamite
      goddess Nahuntí, whom he takes to have been equivalent to Ishtar or
      Astarte, especially in her quality of the Evening Star. See his
      article, “Elamitische Eigennamen,” _Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
      des Morgenlandes_, vi. (1892) pp. 64-67, 70.

  841 Diodorus Siculus, ii. 20; Aelian, _Var. Hist._ vii. 1.

  842 W. Robertson Smith, “Ctesias and the Semiramis Legend,” _English
      Historical Review_, ii. (1887) pp. 303-317. Amongst other evidence,
      Smith refers to Diodorus Siculus, from whose account (ii. 4) of the
      birth of Semiramis he infers that she “is the daughter of Derceto,
      the fish goddess of Ascalon, and is herself the Astarte whose sacred
      doves were honoured at Ascalon and throughout Syria.” It seems
      probable that the legendary Semiramis is to be identified with
      Shammuramat, the “palace wife” of Samsi-Adad, king of Assyria, and
      mother of King Adad-Nirari; she lived towards the end of the ninth
      century B.C., and is known to us from Assyrian inscriptions. See C.
      F. Lehmann-Haupt, _Die historische Semiramis und ihre Zeit_
      (Tübingen, 1910), pp. 1 _sqq._; _id._, _s.v._ “Semiramis,” in W. H.
      Roscher’s _Lexicon der griech. und röm. Mythologie_, iv. coll. 678
      _sqq._

  843 Strabo, xii. 3. 37, p. 559, compare xi. 8. 4, p. 512. Zela is the
      modern Zileh, a town of about 20,000 inhabitants clustered at the
      foot of the so-called mound of Semiramis, which is an inconsiderable
      protuberance of natural rock crowned by the walls of an old citadel.
      The place is singularly destitute of ancient remains, but every year
      in the first fortnight of December a fair is held in the town, to
      which merchants come not only from the whole of Asia Minor, but also
      from the Caucasus, Armenia, and Persia. This fair may very well be a
      direct descendant of a great festival held in honour of Anaitis or
      Astarte. See G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, _Histoire de l’Art dans
      l’Antiquité_, iv. (Paris, 1887) p. 649; F. Cumont et E. Cumont,
      _Voyage d’Exploration archéologique dans le Pont et la Petite
      Arménie_ (Brussels, 1906), pp. 188 _sqq._

  844 Berosus, cited by Clement of Alexandria, _Protrept._ v. 65, p. 57
      ed. Potter (where for Ταναΐδος we should read Ἀναΐτιδος, as is done
      by C. Müller, _Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum_, ii. 509).

  845 Strabo, xi. 8. 4, p. 512, xii. 3. 37, p. 559. The nature of the
      ἱερόδουλοι at Zela is indicated by Strabo in a passage (xii. 3. 36)
      where he describes a similar state of things at Comana, a city not
      far from Zela. His words are πλῆθος γυναικῶν τῶν ἐργαζομένων ἀπὸ τοῦ
      σώματος, ὦν αἰ πλείους εἰσὶν ἰεραί.

  846 Herodotus, i. 184; Strabo, xvi. i. 2, p. 737; Diodorus Siculus, ii.
      14.

  847 Ctesias, cited by John of Antioch, in C. Müller’s _Fragmenta
      Historicorum Graecorum_, iv. 539.

  848 Diodorus Siculus, ii. 13. Note that the first husband of Semiramis
      is said to have hanged himself (Diodorus Siculus, ii. 6).

 M286 The sacred harlots of Ishtar.

  849 A. Jeremias, _Izdubar-Nimrod_, (Leipsic, 1891), pp. 23 _sqq._; M.
      Jastrow, _The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_ (Boston, U.S.A.,
      1898), p. 482; L. W. King, _Babylonian Religion and Mythology_
      (London, 1899), pp. 159 _sqq._; P. Jensen, _Assyrisch-Babylonische
      Mythen und Epen_ (Berlin, 1900), pp. 169, 171; R. F. Harper,
      _Assyrian and Babylonian Literature_ (New York, 1901), pp. 338
      _sq._; _Das Gilgamesch-Epos, neu übersetzt von_ Arthur Ungnad _und
      gemeinverständlich erklärt von_ Hugo Gressmann (Göttingen, 1911),
      pp. 31 _sq._ The true name of the Babylonian hero, which used to be
      read as Izdubar, has been found to be Gilgamesh. See M. Jastrow,
      _op. cit._ pp. 468 _sq._; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s _Die
      Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament_3 (Berlin, 1902), p. 566 note
      4; A. Ungnad, _Das Gilgamesch-Epos_, pp. 76 _sq._ Aelian mentions
      (_De natura animalium_, xii. 21) a Babylonian king, Gilgamus, whose
      name is doubtless identical with that of the hero.

  850 A. Jeremias, _op. cit._ pp. 59 _sq._; M. Jastrow, _op. cit._ pp. 475
      _sq._, 484 _sq._; Herodotus, i. 199. The name which Herodotus gives
      to the goddess is Mylitta, but this is only a corruption of one of
      her Semitic titles, whether Baalath (Hebrew בעלת) “mistress,” or
      perhaps rather _Mullittu_, from _Mu’allidtu_ (Hebrew מילדת), “she
      who helps to the birth.” See E. Meyer, _s.v._ “Astarte,” in W. H.
      Roscher’s _Lexicon der griech. und röm. Mythologie_, i. 648; H.
      Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s _Die Keilinschriften und das Alte
      Testament_3 (Berlin, 1902), p. 423 note 7. The female “votaries of
      Marduk” are repeatedly mentioned in the code of Hammurabi. See C. H.
      W. Johns, _Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Contracts, and Letters_
      (Edinburgh, 1904), pp. 54, 55, 59, 60, 61; _Adonis, Attis, Osiris_,
      Second Edition, p. 63.

 M287 The myth of Ishtar (Astarte) and her lovers acted at the Sacaea in
      Zela.

  851 Along with Anaitis at Zela there were worshipped two deities named
      Omanos and Anadates; Strabo says that they were Persian divinities,
      and certainly their ritual as described by him was purely Persian.
      See Strabo, xi. 8. 4, p. 512, xv. 3. 15, p. 733; Franz Cumont, _Les
      Religions orientales dans le Paganisme romain_2 (Paris, 1909), pp.
      214 _sq._ It has been proposed to identify their names, first, with
      those of the two Persian archangels (Amshaspands), Vohumano or Vohu
      Manah (“Good Thought”) and Ameretât (“Immortality”), and, second,
      with those of Haman and his father Hammedatha in the book of Esther
      (iii. 1). In order to support the identification of Anadates with
      Ameretât and Hammedatha it has been further proposed to alter
      Anadates into Amadates or Amardates in the text of Strabo, which
      would assimilate the name to Amurdâd, a late form of Ameretât. See
      P. Jensen, _Hittiter und Armenier_ (Strasburg, 1898), p. 181; Franz
      Cumont, _Textes et Monuments figurés relatifs aux Mystères de
      Mithra_, i. (Brussels, 1899) pp. 130, 131; H. Winckler,
      _Altorientalische Forschungen_, Dritte Reihe, i. (Leipsic, 1901) p.
      4; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s _Die Keilinschriften und das Alte
      Testament_3 (Berlin, 1902), p. 516 note 3; P. Haupt, _Purim_
      (Leipsic, 1906), p. 26; L. B. Paton, _Critical and Exegetical
      Commentary on the Book of Esther_ (Edinburgh, 1908), pp. 88, 92. As
      to the Persian archangels (Amshaspands) see C. P. Tiele, _Geschichte
      der Religion im Altertum_ (Gotha, 1896-1903), ii. 200 _sqq._; L. H.
      Gray, “The Double Nature of the Iranian Archangels,” _Archiv für
      Religionswissenschaft_, vii. (1904) pp. 345 _sqq._; J. H. Moulton,
      _Early Religious Poetry of Persia_ (Cambridge, 1911), pp. 58 _sqq._
      But apart from the philological difficulty created by the forcible
      alteration of Strabo’s text in order to bring it into conformity
      with the theory, it is difficult to see how the highly abstract
      conceptions of the archangels “Good Thought” and “Immortality” could
      have passed into the highly concrete and by no means angelic figures
      of Haman and Hammedatha. This latter difficulty has been pointed out
      to me in a letter (8th June, 1901) by my friend the Rev. Professor
      J. H. Moulton, who further informs me that in Persian religion Vohu
      Manah is never linked with Ameretât, whereas Ameretât is constantly
      linked with another archangel Haurvatât (“Health”). Professor
      Theodor Nöldeke in a letter to me (20th May, 1901) also expresses
      himself sceptical as to the proposed identifications; he tells me
      that the name of a Persian god cannot end in _data_, just as the
      name of a Greek god cannot end in -δωρος or -δοτος. On the whole it
      seems better to leave Omanos and Anadates out of the present
      discussion.

 M288 Such sacred dramas are magical rites intended to influence the
      course of nature.
 M289 Magical intention of sacred dramas and masked dances among savages.
 M290 Masked dances among the Indians of North-West America.

  852 Franz Boas, “The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the
      Kwakiutl Indians,” _Report of the United States National Museum for
      1895_ (Washington, 1897), p. 396.

  853 Franz Boas, _op. cit._ pp. 420 _sq._ The description applies
      specially to the masked dances of the Kwakiutl tribe, but probably
      it holds good for the similar dances of the other Indian tribes on
      the same coast. Thus among the Bella Coola Indians “the masks used
      in the dances represent mythical personages, and the dances are
      pantomimic representations of myths. Among others, the thunder bird
      and his servant ... appear in the dances” (F. Boas, _op. cit._ p.
      651).

 M291 These masked dances represent mythical incidents and are supposed to
      have been revealed to the Indians by their guardian spirits.

_  854 Tamanawas_ or _tamanous_ is a Chinook term signifying “guardian
      spirits.” See _Totemism and Exogamy_, iii. 405 _sqq._

  855 James G. Swan, _The Indians of Cape Flattery_, p. 66, quoted by
      Franz Boas, _op. cit._ pp. 637 _sq._

 M292 Gods or spirits personated by the actors in the masked dances.
 M293 The dances accompanied by songs.

  856 J. Adrian Jacobsen, “Geheimbünde der Küstenbewohner
      Nordwest-America’s,” _Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für
      Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte_ (1891), pp. 384 _sq._
      The passage has been already quoted by me in _Totemism and Exogamy_,
      iii. 500-502.

 M294 Spirits personated by masked performers among the Esquimaux of
      Bering Strait.
 M295 The animal masks worn by the actors.
 M296 Identification of the masked actor with the mythical being whom he
      represents.

  857 As to the belief of these Esquimaux that at the Festival of the Dead
      the spirits of the departed enter into and animate their human
      namesakes, see _Taboo and the Perils of the Soul_, p. 371.

  858 E. W. Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” _Eighteenth Annual
      Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology_, Part i. (Washington,
      1899) pp. 394 _sq._

 M297 Dramatic ceremonies of the Cora Indians of Mexico in which the
      actors personate gods. Masked dances of the Brazilian Indians to
      ensure fertility and abundance.

  859 K. Th. Preuss, _Die Nayarit Expedition_, I. _Die Religion der Cora
      Indianer_ (Leipsic, 1912), pp. xcii. _sqq._, xcv. _sqq._

  860 Th. Koch-Grünberg, _Zwei Jahre unter den Indianern_ (Berlin,
      1909-1910), i. 130-140, ii. 169-201. The passage translated in the
      text occurs in vol. ii. p. 196.

 M298 Masked dances of the Monumbo in German New Guinea. Masked dances of
      the Kayans of Borneo.

  861 F. Vormann, “Tänze und Tanzfestlichkeiten der Monumbo-Papua
      (Deutsch-Neuguinea),” _Anthropos_, vi. (1911) pp. 415 _sq._, 418
      _sqq._, 426 _sq._

  862 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, _Quer durch Borneo_ (Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 324.
      As to these masquerades of the Kayans see _Spirits of the Corn and
      of the Wild_, i. 95 _sq._, 186 _sq._

 M299 Dramatic performances of the Sea Dyaks of Borneo, in which the actor
      personates a god.

  863 Rev. J. Perham, “Mengap, the Song of the Dyak Sea Feast,” _Journal
      of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society_, No. 2
      (Singapore, December, 1878), pp. 123 _sq._, 134; H. Ling Roth, _The
      Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo_ (London, 1896), ii. 174
      _sq._, 183. Compare E. H. Gomes, _Seventeen Years among the Sea
      Dyaks of Borneo_ (London, 1911), pp. 213 _sq._: “This song of the
      head feast takes the form of a story setting forth how the mythical
      hero Klieng held a head feast on his return from the warpath, and
      invited the god of war, Singalang Burong, to attend it. It describes
      at great length all that happened on that occasion. The singing of
      this song takes up the whole night. It begins before 8 P.M., and
      lasts till next morning. Except for a short interval for rest in the
      middle of the night, the performers are marching and singing all the
      time.” On the third day of the festival the people go out on the
      open-air platform in front of the house and sacrifice a pig. “The
      people shout together (_manjong_) at short intervals until a hawk is
      seen flying in the heavens. That hawk is Singalang Burong, who has
      taken that form to manifest himself to them. He has accepted their
      offerings and has heard their cry” (E. H. Gomes, _op. cit._ p. 214).

 M300 Religious or magical origin of the drama.

  864 A. E. Haigh, _The Attic Theatre_ (Oxford, 1889), pp. 4 _sqq,_ The
      religious origin of Greek tragedy is maintained by Professor W.
      Ridgeway (_The Origin of Tragedy_, Cambridge, 1910), but he finds
      its immediate inspiration in the worship of the dead rather than in
      the worship of Dionysus.

  865 H. Oldenberg, _Die Literatur des alten Indien_ (Stuttgart and
      Berlin, 1903), pp. 236 _sqq._ Professor Oldenberg holds that the
      evolution of the Indian drama was probably not influenced by that of
      Greece.

 M301 The representation of mythical beings by living men and women may
      furnish a common ground where two rival schools of mythology can
      meet and be reconciled.
 M302 The legend of Semiramis and her lovers a duplicate of the myth of
      Aphrodite and Adonis, of Cybele and Attis, of Isis and Osiris.

_  866 Adonis, Attis, Osiris_, Second Edition, pp. 239 _sq._

_  867 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 97 _sqq._

 M303 Sardanapalus and Ashurbanapal. The legendary death of Sardanapalus
      in the fire.

  868 C. P. Tiele, _Babylonisch-Assyrische Geschichte_ (Gotha, 1886-1888),
      pp. 351 _sqq._; M. Jastrow, _Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_
      (Boston, U.S.A., 1898), p. 43; Sir G. Maspero, _Histoire Ancienne
      des Peuples de l’Orient Classique_, iii. _Les Empires_ (Paris,
      1899), pp. 378 _sqq._; C. F. Harper, _Assyrian and Babylonian
      Literature_ (New York, 1901), pp. 94 _sqq._

  869 Athenaeus, xii. 38 _sq._, pp. 528 F-530 C; Diodorus Siculus, ii. 23
      and 27; Justin, i. 3. Several different versions of the king’s
      epitaph have come down to us. I have followed the version of
      Choerilus, the original of which is said to have been carved in
      Chaldean letters on a tombstone that surmounted a great barrow at
      Nineveh. This barrow may, as I suggest in the text, have been one of
      the so-called mounds of Semiramis.

 M304 The burning of Sandan, a mythical god or hero of Western Asia. K. O.
      Müller’s description of the burning of Sandan.

  870 Ammianus Marcellinus, xiv. 8; Dio Chrysostom, _Or._ xxxiii. p. 408
      (vol. ii. p. 16 ed. L. Dindorf, Leipsic, 1857). Coins of Tarsus
      exhibit the effigy on the pyre, which seems to be composed of a
      pyramid of great beams resting on a cubical base. See K. O. Müller,
      “Sandon und Sardanapal,” _Kunstarchäologische Werke_ (Berlin, 1873),
      iii. 8 _sqq._, whose valuable essay I follow. For fuller details see
      _Adonis, Attis, Osiris_, Second Edition, pp. 91 _sqq._, 139 _sqq._

  871 Agathias, _Hist._ ii. 24.

  872 Joannes Lydus, _De magistratibus_, iii. 64; Apollodorus,
      _Bibliotheca_, ii. 6. 2 _sq._; Lucian, _Dial. deorum_, xiii. 2.

  873 K. O. Müller, “Sandon und Sardanapal,” _Kunstarchäologische Werke_
      (Berlin, 1873), iii. 16 _sq._ The writer adds that there is
      authority for every stroke in the picture. His principal source is
      the sixty-second speech of Dio Chrysostom (vol. ii. p. 202 ed. L.
      Dindorf), where the unmanly Sardanapalus, seated cross-legged on a
      gilded couch with purple hangings, is compared to “the Adonis for
      whom the women wail.”

 M305 Death in the fire of men who personate gods or heroes.

  874 Herodotus, i. 7.

  875 Herodotus, i. 86 _sq._, with J. C. F. Bähr’s note. According to
      another and perhaps more probable tradition the king sought a
      voluntary death in the flames. See Bacchylides, iii. 24-62; _Adonis,
      Attis, Osiris_, Second Edition, pp. 141 _sqq._

_  876 The Dying God_, pp. 41 _sq._

  877 Sophocles, _Trachiniae_, 1195 _sqq._:

      πολλὴν μὲν ὕλην τῆς βαθυρρίζου δρυὸς κείραντα πολλὸν δ᾽ ἄρσεν
      ἐκτεμόνθ᾽ ὁμοῦ ἄγριον ἔλαιον, σῶμα τουμὸν ἐμβαλεῖν.

      The passage was pointed out to me by my friend the late Dr. A. W.
      Verrall. The poet’s language suggests that of old a sacred fire was
      kindled by the friction of oak and wild olive wood, and that in
      accordance with a notion common among rude peoples, one of the
      pieces of wood (in this case the wild olive) was regarded as male
      and the other (the oak) as female. On this hypothesis, the fire was
      kindled by drilling a hole in a piece of oak with a stick of wild
      olive. As to the different sorts of wood used by the ancients in
      making fire by friction, see A. Kuhn, _Die Herabkunft des Feuers und
      des Göttertranks_2 (Gütersloh, 1886), pp. 35 _sqq._; _The Magic Art
      and the Evolution of Kings_, ii. 249 _sqq._ In South Africa a
      special fire is procured for sacrifices by the friction of two
      pieces of the _Uzwati_ tree, which are known respectively as husband
      and wife. See _Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 65.

_  878 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, ii. 68.

  879 F. C. Movers, _Die Phoenizier_, i. (Bonn, 1841) p. 496.

  880 This suggestion was made by F. Liebrecht, _Zur Volkskunde_
      (Heilbronn, 1879), p. 9. It occurred to me independently.

  881 Lucian, _De dea Syria_, 49.

 M306 Traces of human sacrifice in the Jewish festival of Purim; effigies
      of Haman burnt.

  882 Codex Theodosianus, Lib. XVI. Tit. viii. § 18: “_Judaeos quodam
      festivitatis suae solleni Aman ad poenae quondam recordationem
      incendere, et sanctae crucis adsimulatam speciem in contemptu
      Christianae fidei sacrilega mente exurere provinciarum rectores
      prohibeant: ne locis suis fidei nostrae signum immisceant, sed ritus
      suos infra contemptum Christianae legis retineant: amissuri sine
      dubio permissa hactenus, nisi ab inlicitis temperaverint._” The
      decree is dated at Constantinople, in the consulship of Bassus and
      Philip. For _locis_ we should probably read _jocis_ with Mommsen.

  883 Fr. Cumont, “Une formule grecque de renonciation au judaïsme,”
      _Wiener Studien_, xxiv. (1902) p. 468. The “Christian fast” referred
      to in the formula is no doubt Lent. The mention of the Jewish
      Sabbath (the Christian Saturday) raises a difficulty, which has been
      pointed out by the editor, Franz Cumont, in a note (p. 470): “The
      festival of Purim was celebrated on the 14th of Adar, that is, in
      February or March, about the beginning of the Christian Lent; but
      that festival, the date of which is fixed in the Jewish calendar,
      does not always fall on a Saturday. Either the author made a mistake
      or the civil authority obliged the Jews to transfer their rejoicings
      to a Sabbath” (Saturday).

  884 Israel Abrahams, _The Book of Delight and other Papers_
      (Philadelphia, 1912), pp. 266 _sq._ Mr. Abrahams ingeniously
      suggests (_op. cit._ pp. 267 _sq._) that the ring waved over the
      fire was an emblem of the sun, and that the kindling of the Purim
      fires was originally a ceremony of imitative magic to ensure a
      supply of solar light and heat.

  885 Albîrûnî, _The Chronology of Ancient Nations_, translated and edited
      by Dr. C. Edward Sachau (London, 1879), pp. 273 _sq._

  886 Quoted by Lagarde, “Purim,” p. 13 (_Abhandlungen der königlichen
      Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen_, xxxiv. 1887).

  887 M. Güdemann, _Geschichte des Erziehungswesens und der Cultur der
      abendländischen Juden_ (Vienna, 1880-1888), ii. 211 _sq._; I.
      Abrahams, _Jewish Life in the Middle Ages_ (London, 1896), pp. 260
      _sq._

  888 J. J. Schudt, _Jüdische Merkwürdigkeiten_ (Frankfort and Leipsic,
      1714), ii. Theil, p. 309.

 M307 Accusations of ritual murder brought against the Jews. The
      accusations probably false.

  889 Socrates, _Historia Ecclesiastica_, vii. 16; Theophanes,
      _Chronographia_, ed. J. Classen (Bonn, 1839-1841), vol. i. p. 129.
      Theophanes places the event in the year 408 A.D. From a note in
      Migne’s edition of Socrates, I learn that in the Alexandrian
      calendar, which Theophanes used, the year 408 corresponded to the
      year which in our reckoning began on the first of September 415.
      Hence if the murder was perpetrated in spring at Purim it must have
      taken place in 416.

  890 This is the view of H. Graetz (_Geschichte der Juden_,2 iv. Leipsic,
      1866, pp. 393 _sq._) and Dr. M. R. James (_Life and Miracles of St.
      William of Norwich_ (Cambridge, 1896), by A. Jessopp and M. R.
      James, pp. lxiii. _sq._).

  891 For an examination of some of these reported murders, see M. R.
      James, _op. cit._ pp. lxii. _sqq._; H. L. Strack, _Das Blut im
      Glauben und Aberglauben der Menschheit_ (Munich, 1900), pp. 121
      _sqq._ Both writers incline to dismiss the charges as groundless.

 M308 Mitigation of human sacrifice by the substitution of a criminal for
      the victim.

  892 Above, pp. 353 _sq._

 M309 The “fast of Esther” before Purim. Jensen’s theory that the “fast of
      Esther” was originally a mourning for the annual death of a deity
      like Tammuz.

  893 J. Buxtorf, _Synagoga Judaica_ (Bâle, 1661), cap. xxix. p. 554; J.
      Chr. G. Bodenschatz, _Kirchliche Verfassung der heutigen Juden_
      (Erlangen, 1748), ii. 253 _sq._

  894 Esther iv. 3 and 16, ix. 31.

  895 So far as I know, Professor Jensen has not yet published his theory,
      but he has stated it in letters to correspondents. See W. Nowack,
      _Lehrbuch der hebräischen Archäologie_ (Freiburg i. Baden and
      Leipsic, 1894), ii. 200; H. Günkel, _Schöpfung und Chaos_
      (Göttingen, 1895), pp. 311 _sqq._; D. G. Wildeboer, in his
      commentary on Esther, pp. 174 _sq._ (_Kurzer Hand-Commentar zum
      Alten Testament_, herausgegeben von D. K. Marti, Lieferung 6,
      Freiburg i. B., 1898). In the Babylonian calendar the 13th of Adar
      was so far a fast day that on it no fish or fowl might be eaten. In
      one tablet the 13th of Adar is marked “not good,” while the 14th and
      15th are marked “good.” See C. H. W. Johns, _s.v._ “Purim,”
      _Encyclopaedia Biblica_, iii. (London, 1902) col. 3980.

  896 M. Jastrow, _The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_ (Boston, U.S.A.,
      1898), pp. 471 _sq._, 475 _sq._, 481-486, 510-512; L. W. King,
      _Babylonian Religion and Mythology_ (London, 1899), pp. 146 _sqq._;
      P. Jensen, _Assyrisch-Babylonische Mythen und Epen_ (Berlin, 1900),
      pp. 116-273; R. F. Harper, _Assyrian and Babylonian Literature_ (New
      York, 1901), pp. 324-368; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s _Die
      Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament_3 (Berlin, 1902), pp.
      566-582; _Das Gilgamesch-Epos, neu übersetzt von_ Arthur Ungnad _und
      gemeinverständlich erklärt von_ Hugo Gressmann (Göttingen, 1911).
      Professor Jastrow points out that though a relation cannot be traced
      between each of the tablets of the poem and the corresponding month
      of the year, such a relation appears undoubtedly to exist between
      some of the tablets and the months. Thus, for example, the sixth
      tablet describes the affection of Ishtar for Gilgamesh, and the
      visit which she paid to Anu, her father in heaven, to complain of
      the hero’s contemptuous rejection of her love. Now the sixth
      Babylonian month was called the “Mission of Ishtar,” and in it was
      held the festival of Tammuz, the hapless lover of the goddess.
      Again, the story of the great flood is told in the eleventh tablet,
      and the eleventh month was called the “month of rain.” See M.
      Jastrow, _op. cit._ pp. 484, 510.

  897 Ezekiel viii. 14.

 M310 The resurrection of the dead god perhaps represented by a living man
      who afterwards died in earnest in the character of the god. This
      would explain the apparent duplication of the principal characters
      in the book of Esther: Haman and Vashti would represent the gods
      dying, while Mordecai and Esther would represent the gods rising
      from the dead.

_  898 Adonis, Attis, Osiris_, Second Edition, pp. 183 _sq._, 227.

  899 Esther vii. 8.

  900 See above, p. 368.

_  901 Adonis, Attis, Osiris_, Second Edition, p. 183.

  902 J. J. Schudt, _Jüdische Merkwürdigkeiten_ (Frankfort and Leipsic,
      1714), ii. Theil, p. 316.

 M311 The Persian setting of the book of Esther. The Persian ceremony of
      the “Ride of the Beardless One” in spring.

  903 Dio Chrysostom makes Diogenes say to Alexander the Great, οὐκ
      ἐννενόηκας τὴν τῶν Σακαίων ἑορτήν, ἢν Πέρσαι ἄγουσιν (_Or._ iv. vol.
      i. p. 76 ed. L. Dindorf). The festival was mentioned by Ctesias in
      the second book of his Persian history (Athenaeus, xiv. 44 p. 639
      C); and down to the time of Strabo it was associated with the
      nominal worship of the Persian goddess Anaitis (Strabo, xi. 8. 4 and
      5, p. 512).

  904 Lagarde, “Purim,” pp. 51 _sqq._ (_Abhandlungen der königl.
      Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen_, xxxiv. 1887).

  905 Th. Hyde, _Historia religionis veterum Persarum_ (Oxford, 1700), pp.
      183, 249-251; Albîrûnî, _The Chronology of Ancient Nations_,
      translated and edited by Dr. C. Edward Sachau (London, 1879), p.
      211.

 M312 The “Beardless One” in the Persian ceremony is apparently the
      degenerate successor of a temporary king.

_  906 The Dying God_, pp. 148 _sqq._

  907 Esther vi. 8 _sq._, viii. 15.

 M313 The “Ride of the Beardless One” seems to be a magical ceremony for
      the expulsion of winter.

_  908 The Dying God_, pp. 254 _sqq._

 M314 The opposition of Haman and Vashti to Mordecai and Esther seems to
      be a contrast between the annual death of nature in winter and its
      revival in spring.

  909 The goddess Ishtar certainly seems to have embodied the principle of
      fertility in animals as well as in plants; for in the poem which
      describes her descent into the world of the dead it is said that

      “_After the mistress Ishtar had descended to the land of
      No-Return,_
      _ The bull did not mount the cow, nor did the ass leap upon the
      she-ass,_
      _ The man did not approach the maid in the street,_
      _ The man lay down to sleep upon his own couch,_
      _ While the maid slept by herself._”

      See C. F. Harper, _Assyrian and Babylonian Literature_ (New York,
      1901), pp. 410 _sq._; P. Jensen, _Assyrisch-Babylonische Mythen und
      Epen_ (Berlin, 1900), p. 87.

  910 The interpretation here given of the four principal personages in
      the book of Esther was suggested by me in the second edition of this
      book (1900). It agrees substantially with the one which has since
      been adopted by Professor H. Zimmern (in E. Schrader’s _Die
      Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament_,3 Berlin, 1902, p. 519), and
      by Professor P. Haupt (_Purim_, Leipsic, 1906, pp. 21 _sq._).

  911 In this connexion it deserves to be noted that among the ancient
      Persians marriages are said to have been usually celebrated at the
      vernal equinox (Strabo, xv. 3. 17, p. 733).

  912 The five days’ duration of the mock king’s reign may possibly have
      been an intercalary period introduced, as in ancient Egypt and
      Mexico, for the purpose of equalizing a year of 360 days (twelve
      months of 30 days each) to a solar year reckoned at 365 days. See
      above, pp. 339 _sqq._

  913 However, the legend that Semiramis burned herself on a pyre in
      Babylon for grief at the loss of a favourite horse (Hyginus, _Fab._
      243; compare Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ viii. 155) may perhaps point to an
      old custom of compelling the human representative of the goddess to
      perish in the flames. We have seen (above, p. 371) that one of the
      lovers of Ishtar had the form of a horse. Hence the legend recorded
      by Hyginus is a fresh link in the chain of evidence which binds
      Semiramis to Ishtar.

 M315 Wide prevalence of festivals like the Saturnalia in antiquity. Such
      festivals seem to have been held by agricultural communities for the
      good of the crops, and at them the king or his substitute appears to
      have personated the god of fertility, and to have been put to death
      in that character in order to ensure that the god should rise from
      the dead with renewed youth and vigour.
 M316 The festivals point to a remarkable homogeneity of civilization over
      a great part of the Old World in antiquity.

_  914 The Dying God_, pp. 148 _sqq._

_  915 The Dying God_, pp. 46 _sqq._

 M317 The periodical sacrifice of deified men for the sake of maintaining
      the course of nature perhaps helps to explain traditions which
      represent the world or parts of it as created out of the bodies of
      gods. The Brahmanical theory of the perpetual renewal of the
      creation in the daily sacrifice.

  916 B. de Sahagun, _Histoire Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
      Espagne_, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880), pp.
      478-480. Compare E. Seler, _Altmexikanische Studien_, ii. (Berlin,
      1899) p. 117.

  917 Berosus, quoted by Eusebius, _Chronicorum liber prior_, ed. A.
      Schoene (Berlin, 1875), coll. 14-18; _id._, in _Fragmenta
      Historicorum Graecorum_, ed. C. Muller, ii. 497 _sq._; P. Jensen,
      _Assyrisch-Babylonische Mythen und Epen_ (Berlin, 1900), pp. 2
      _sqq._; L. W. King, _Babylonian Religion and Mythology_ (London,
      1899), pp. 54 _sqq._; M. Jastrow, _The Religion of Babylonia and
      Assyria_ (Boston, U.S.A., 1898), pp. 408 _sqq._; H. Zimmern, in E.
      Schrader’s _Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament_3 (Berlin,
      1902), pp. 488 _sqq._; M. J. Lagrange, _Études sur les Religions
      Sémitiques_2 (Paris, 1905), pp. 366 _sqq._; R. W. Rogers, _Cuneiform
      Parallels to the Old Testament_ (Oxford, preface dated 1911), pp. 31
      _sq._, 36. In the Hebrew account of the creation (Genesis i. 2) “the
      deep” (תהום _tĕhom_) is a reminiscence of the Babylonian mythical
      monster Tiamat.

_  918 Hymns of the Rig Veda_, x. 90 (vol. iv. pp. 289-293 of R. T. H.
      Griffith’s translation, Benares, 1889-1892). Compare A. A.
      Macdonell, _Vedic Mythology_ (Strasburg, 1897), pp. 12 _sq._

_  919 The Satapatha Brâhmana_, translated by Julius Eggeling, Part iv.
      (Oxford, 1897) pp. xiv.-xxiv. (_The Sacred Books of the East_, vol.
      xliii.). Compare Sylvain Lévi, _La doctrine du sacrifice dans les
      Brâhmanas_ (Paris, 1898), pp. 13 _sqq._

  920 [The following Note formed part of the text in the Second Edition of
      _The Golden Bough_ (London, 1900), vol. iii. pp. 186-198. The
      hypothesis which it sets forth has not been confirmed by subsequent
      research, and is admittedly in a high degree speculative and
      uncertain. Hence I have removed it from the text but preserved it as
      an appendix on the chance that, under a pile of conjectures, it
      contains some grains of truth which may ultimately contribute to a
      solution of the problem. As my views on this subject appear to have
      been strangely misunderstood, I desire to point out explicitly that
      my theory assumes the historical reality of Jesus of Nazareth as a
      great religious and moral teacher, who founded Christianity and was
      crucified at Jerusalem under the governorship of Pontius Pilate. The
      testimony of the Gospels, confirmed by the hostile evidence of
      Tacitus (_Annals_, xv. 44) and the younger Pliny (_Epist._ x. 96),
      appears amply sufficient to establish these facts to the
      satisfaction of all unprejudiced enquirers. It is only the details
      of the life and death of Christ that remain, and will probably
      always remain, shrouded in the mists of uncertainty. The doubts
      which have been cast on the historical reality of Jesus are in my
      judgment unworthy of serious attention. Quite apart from the
      positive evidence of history and tradition, the origin of a great
      religious and moral reform is inexplicable without the personal
      existence of a great reformer. To dissolve the founder of
      Christianity into a myth, as some would do, is hardly less absurd
      than it would be to do the same for Mohammed, Luther, and Calvin.
      Such dissolving views are for the most part the dreams of students
      who know the great world chiefly through its pale reflection in
      books. These extravagances of scepticism have been well exposed by
      Professor C. F. Lehmann-Haupt in his _Israel, seine Entwicklung im
      Rahmen der Weltgeschichte_ (Tübingen, 1911), pp. 275-285. In
      reprinting the statement of my theory I have added a few notes,
      which are distinguished by being enclosed in square brackets.]

 M318 The mockery of Christ compared to the mockery of the King of the
      Saturnalia.

  921 P. Wendland, “Jesus als Saturnalien-König,” _Hermes_, xxxiii. (1898)
      pp. 175-179.

 M319 The mockery of Christ compared to the mockery of the King of the
      Sacaea.

  922 The resemblance had struck me when I wrote this book originally
      [1889-1890], but as I could not definitely explain it I preferred to
      leave it unnoticed. [The first in recent years to call attention to
      the resemblance seems to have been Mr. W. R. Paton, who further
      conjectured that the crucifixion of Christ between two malefactors
      was not accidental, but had a ritual significance “as an expiatory
      sacrifice to a triple god.” See F. C. Conybeare, _The Apology and
      Acts of Apollonius and other Monuments of Early Christianity_
      (London, 1894), pp. 257 _sqq._; W. R. Paton, “Die Kreuzigung Jesu,”
      _Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft_, ii. (1901) pp.
      339-341. The grounds for the conjecture are somewhat slender. It is
      true that a Persian martyr, S. Hiztibouzit, is said to have been
      crucified between two malefactors on a hill top, opposite the sun
      (F. C. Conybeare, _op. cit._ p. 270), but the narrator of the
      martyrdom gives no hint of any sacred significance attaching to the
      triple crucifixion.]

  923 Matthew xxvii. 26-31. Mark’s description (xv. 15-20) is nearly
      identical.

  924 Dio Chrysostom, _Or._ iv. vol. i. p. 76 ed. L. Dindorf. As I have
      already mentioned, the Greek word which describes the execution
      (ἐκρέμασαν) leaves it uncertain whether the man was crucified or
      hanged.

 M320 At Purim the Jews may have annually put to death a man in the
      character of Haman, and Christ may have perished in that character.
      But the Passover, at which Christ was crucified, fell a month after
      Purim. Perhaps the annual Haman, like the annual Saturn, was allowed
      a month’s license before being put to death.

  925 See above, p. 392.

  926 [The extreme improbability involved in the suggested transference of
      the date of the Crucifixion is rightly emphasized by my colleague
      and friend Professor C. F. Lehmann-Haupt in some observations and
      criticisms with which he has favoured me. He writes: “I regard it as
      out of the question that ‘Christian tradition shifted the date of
      the Crucifixion by a month.’ You yourself regard it as improbable;
      but in my opinion it is impossible. All that we hear of the Passion
      is only explicable by the Passover festival and by the circumstance
      that at that time every believing Jew had to make a pilgrimage to
      Jerusalem. Without the background of the festival all that we know
      of the Crucifixion and of what led up to it is totally
      unintelligible.”]

  927 Esther iii. 7.

 M321 The part taken by the soldiers in the mockery of Christ.

  928 Tacitus, _Hist._ iii. 24 _sq._, compared with ii. 74.

  929 Luke xxiii. 11.

 M322 The theory that Christ died, not as a malefactor, but in the
      character of Haman helps to explain both Pilate’s reluctance to put
      him to death, and it also explains the remarkable superscription on
      the cross.

  930 Matthew xxvii. 37; Mark xv. 26; Luke xxiii. 38; John xix. 19.

 M323 The part of Mordecai in the annual drama in which Christ died as
      Haman may have been played by Barabbas. The mock King Carabas in
      Egypt.

  931 Matthew xxvii. 15-26; Mark xv. 6-15; Luke xxiii. 16-25; John xviii.
      38-40.

  932 Philo Judaeus, _Adversus Flaccum_, vol. ii. pp. 520-523 ed. Th.
      Mangey (London, 1742). The first to call attention to this passage
      was Mr. P. Wendland (“Jesus als Saturnalien-König,” _Hermes_,
      xxxiii. (1898) pp. 175 _sq._). [Mar-na, “Our Lord,” was the title of
      a Philistine deity worshipped at Gaza and elsewhere. See C. P.
      Tiele, _Geschichte der Religion im Altertum_ (Gotha, 1896-1903), i.
      258. Compare _Hebrew and English Lexicon_, edited by F. Brown, S. R.
      Driver, and Ch. A. Briggs (Oxford, 1906), p. 1101.]

 M324 Hypothesis that every spring at Purim or Passover the Jews paraded
      two prisoners in the characters of Haman and Mordecai, of whom one
      was put to death and the other released.

  933 Matthew xxi. 1-13; Mark xi. 1-17; Luke xix. 28-46; John xii. 12-15.
      [As to the license accorded to temporary kings, see _The Dying God_,
      pp. 56 _sq._, 148 _sqq_.]

 M325 Barabbas (“Son of the Father”) may have been the regular title of
      the prisoner who was released in the character of Mordecai.

  934 [_The Dying God_, pp. 166 _sqq._]

  935 [In favour of the theory in the text, which supposes that in the
      tragic drama of the crucifixion Jesus and Barabbas played parts
      which were the complements, if not the duplicates, of each other, it
      might, as M. Salomon Reinach has pointed out, be alleged that in the
      Armenian and old Syriac versions of Matthew xxvii. 16 and 17, as
      well as in some Greek cursive manuscripts, the name of the prisoner
      whom Pilate proposed to release is given as Jesus Barabbas, a
      reading which was also known to Origen and was not absolutely
      rejected by him. See _Encyclopaedia Biblica_ (London, 1899-1903),
      _s.v._ “Barabbas,” vol. i. col. 477; _Evangelion da-Mepharreshe_,
      edited by F. C. Burkitt (Cambridge, 1904), i. 165, ii. 277 _sq._ In
      the latter passage Prof. Burkitt argues that Jesus Barabbas was
      probably the original reading in the Greek text, though the name
      Jesus is omitted in nearly all our existing manuscripts. Compare S.
      Reinach, “Le roi supplicié,” _Cultes, Mythes, et Religions_, i.
      (Paris, 1905) pp. 339 _sq._]

 M326 The theory that Christ was put to death, not as a criminal, but as
      the annual representative of a god, whose counterparts were well
      known all over Western Asia, may help to explain his early
      deification and the rapid spread of his worship.

  936 Pliny, _Epist._ x. 96. The province which Pliny governed was known
      officially as Bithynia and Pontus, and extended from the river
      Rhyndacos on the west to beyond Amisus on the east. See Professor
      [Sir] W. M. Ramsay, _The Church in the Roman Empire_ (London, 1893),
      p. 224. Professor Ramsay is of opinion “that the description of the
      great power acquired by the new religion in the province applies to
      Eastern Pontus at least.” The chief religious centre of this
      district appears to have been the great sanctuary of Anaitis or
      Semiramis at Zela, to which I have already had occasion to call the
      reader’s attention. Strabo tells us (xii. 3. 37) that all the people
      of Pontus took their most solemn oaths at this shrine. In the same
      district there was another very popular sanctuary of a similar type
      at Comana, where the worship of a native goddess called Ma was
      carried on by a host of sacred harlots and by a high priest, who
      wore a diadem and was second only to the king in rank. At the
      festivals of the goddess crowds of men and women flocked into Comana
      from all the region round about, from the country as well as from
      the cities. The luxury and debauchery of this holy town suggest to
      Strabo a comparison with the famous or rather infamous Corinth. See
      Strabo, xii. 3. 32 and 36, compared with xii. 2. 3. Such were some
      of the hot-beds in which the seeds of Christianity first struck
      root.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN BOUGH (THIRD EDITION, VOL. 9 OF 12)***



CREDITS


May 7, 2013

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>. (This
            file was produced from images generously made available by The
            Internet Archive.)



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 42661‐0.txt or 42661‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/2/6/6/42661/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

