CHAPTER XX.

LYSIS.

Analogy between Lysis and Charmides. Richness of dramatic
incident in both. Youthful beauty   172

Scenery and personages of the Lysis   _ib._

Origin of the conversation. Sokrates promises to give an example
of the proper way of talking to a youth, for his benefit   173

Conversation of Sokrates with Lysis   _ib._

Lysis is humiliated. Distress of Hippothalês   177

Lysis entreats Sokrates to talk in the like strain to
Menexenus   _ib._

Value of the first conversation between Sokrates and Lysis,
as an illustration of the Platonico-Sokratic manner   177

Sokrates begins to examine Menexenus respecting friendship.
Who is to be called a friend? Halt in the dialogue   178

Questions addressed to Lysis. Appeal to the maxims of the
poets. Like is the friend of like. Canvassed and rejected   _ib._

Other poets declare that likeness is a cause of aversion;
unlikeness, of friendship. Reasons _pro_ and _con_.
Rejected   179

Confusion of Sokrates. He suggests, That the Indifferent
(neither good nor evil) is friend to the Good   180

Suggestion canvassed. If the Indifferent is friend to the
Good, it is determined to become so by the contact of felt evil, from
which it is anxious to escape   180

Principle illustrated by the philosopher. His intermediate
condition--not wise, yet painfully feeling his own ignorance   181

Sokrates dissatisfied. He originates a new suggestion. The
Primum Amabile, or object originally dear to us, _per se_: by
relation or resemblance to which other objects become dear   _ib._

The cause of love is desire. We desire that which is akin
to us or our own   182

Good is of a nature akin to every one, evil is alien to every one.
Inconsistency with what has been previously laid down   183

Failure of the enquiry. Close of the dialogue   184

Remarks. No positive result. Sokratic purpose in analysing the familiar
words--to expose the false persuasion of knowledge   _ib._

Subject of Lysis. Suited for a Dialogue of Search. Manner
of Sokrates, multiplying defective explanations, and showing reasons
why each is defective   185

The process of trial and error is better illustrated by a
search without result than with result. Usefulness of the dialogue
for self-working minds   186

Subject of friendship, handled both by the Xenophontic
Sokrates, and by Aristotle   _ib._

Debate in the Lysis partly verbal, partly real.
Assumptions made by the Platonic Sokrates, questionable, such as the
real Sokrates would have found reason for challenging   188

Peculiar theory about friendship broached by Sokrates.
Persons neither good nor evil by nature, yet having a superficial
tinge of evil, and desiring good to escape from it   189

This general theory illustrated by the case of the
philosopher or lover of wisdom. Painful consciousness of ignorance
the attribute of the philosopher. Value set by Sokrates and Plato
upon this attribute   190

Another theory of Sokrates. The Primum Amabile, or
original and primary object of Love. Particular objects are loved
through association with this. The object is Good   191

Statement by Plato of the general law of mental association   _ib._

Theory of the Primum Amabile, here introduced by Sokrates,
with numerous derivative objects of love. Platonic Idea. Generic
communion of Aristotle, distinguished by him from the feebler
analogical communion   192

Primum Amabile of Plato, compared with the Prima Amicitia
of Aristotle. Each of them is head of an analogical aggregate, not
member of a generic family   194

The Good and Beautiful, considered as objects of attachment   _ib._


CHAPTER XXI.

EUTHYDEMUS.

Dramatic and comic exuberance of the Euthydêmus. Judgments
of various critics   195

Scenery and personages   _ib._

The two Sophists, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus: manner in
which they are here presented   196

Conversation carried on with Kleinias, first by Sokrates,
next by the two Sophists   _ib._

Contrast between the two different modes of interrogation   197

Wherein this contrast does not consist   198

Wherein it does consist   199

Abuse of fallacies by the Sophists--their bidding for the
applause of the by-standers _ibid._

Comparison of the Euthydêmus with the Parmenidês   200

Necessity of settling accounts with the negative, before
we venture upon the affirmative, is common to both: in the one the
process is solitary and serious; in the other, it is vulgarised and
ludicrous   201

Opinion of Stallbaum and other critics about the
Euthydêmus, that Euthydêmus and Dionysodorus represent the way in
which Protagoras and Gorgias talked to their auditors   202

That opinion is unfounded. Sokrates was much more Eristic
than Protagoras, who generally manifested himself by continuous
speech or lecture   _ib._

Sokrates in the Euthydêmus is drawn suitably to the
purpose of that dialogue   203

The two Sophists in the Euthydêmus are not to be taken as
real persons, or representatives of real persons   204

Colloquy of Sokrates with Kleinias--possession of good things is
useless, unless we also have intelligence how to use them   _ib._

But intelligence--of what? It must be such intelligence,
or such an art, as will include both the making of what we want, and
the right use of it when made   205

Where is such an art to be found? The regal or political
art looks like it; but what does this art do for us? No answer can be
found. Ends in puzzle   206

Review of the cross-examination just pursued by Sokrates.
It is very suggestive--puts the mind upon what to look for   207

Comparison with other dialogues--Republic, Philêbus, Protagoras.
The only distinct answer is found in the Protagoras   208

The talk of the two Sophists, though ironically admired
while it is going on, is shown at the end to produce no real
admiration, but the contrary   _ib._

Mistaken representations about the Sophists--Aristotle's
definition--no distinguishable line can be drawn between the Sophist
and the Dialectician   210

Philosophical purpose of the Euthydêmus--exposure of
fallacies, in Plato's dramatic manner, by multiplication of
particular examples   211

Aristotle (Soph. Elench.) attempts a classification of
fallacies: Plato enumerates them without classification   212

Fallacies of equivocation propounded by the two Sophists
in the Euthydêmus   _ib._

Fallacies--_à dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter_--in the Euthydêmus   213

Obstinacy shown by the two Sophists in their
replies--determination not to contradict themselves   214

Farther verbal equivocations   _ib._

Fallacies involving deeper logical principles--contradiction
is impossible.--To speak falsely is impossible   215

Plato's Euthydêmus is the earliest known attempt to set
out and expose fallacies--the only way of exposing fallacies is to
exemplify the fallacy by particular cases, in which the conclusion
proved is known _aliunde_ to be false and absurd   216

Mistake of supposing fallacies to have been invented and
propagated by Athenian Sophists--they are inherent inadvertencies and
liabilities to error, in the ordinary process of thinking. Formal
debate affords the best means of correcting them   217

Wide-spread prevalence of erroneous belief, misguided by
one or other of these fallacies, attested by Sokrates, Plato, Bacon,
&c.,--complete enumeration of heads of fallacies by Mill   218

Value of formal debate as a means for testing and
confuting fallacies   221

Without the habit of formal debate, Plato could not have
composed his Euthydêmus, nor Aristotle the treatise De Sophisticis
Elenchis   _ib._

Probable popularity of the Euthydêmus at Athens--welcomed
by all the enemies of Dialectic   222

Epilogue of Plato to the Dialogue, trying to obviate this
inference by opponents--Conversation between Sokrates and Kriton   223

Altered tone in speaking of Euthydêmus--Disparagement of
persons half-philosophers, half-politicians   224

Kriton asks Sokrates for advice about the education of his
sons--Sokrates cannot recommend a teacher--tells him to search for
himself   225

Euthydêmus is here cited as representative of Dialectic
and philosophy   226

Who is the person here intended by Plato,
half-philosopher, half-politician? Is it Isokrates?   227

Variable feeling at different times, between Plato and
Isokrates   228


