CHAPTER XXII.

MENON.

Persons of the Dialogue   232

Question put by Menon--Is virtue teachable? Sokrates confesses that
he does not know what virtue is. Surprise of Menon   _ib._

Sokrates stands alone in this confession. Unpopularity
entailed by it   233

Answer of Menon--plurality of virtues, one belonging to
each different class and condition. Sokrates enquires for the
property common to all of them   _ib._

Analogous cases cited--definitions of figure and colour   235

Importance at that time of bringing into conscious view,
logical subordination and distinctions--Neither logic nor grammar had
then been cast into system   _ib._

Definition of virtue given by Menon: Sokrates pulls it to pieces   236

Menon complains that the conversation of Sokrates confounds
him like an electric shock--Sokrates replies that he is himself in
the same state of confusion and ignorance. He urges continuance of
search by both   237

But how is the process of search available to any purpose? No man
searches for what he already knows: and for what he does not know,
it is useless to search, for he cannot tell when he has found it   _ib._

Theory of reminiscence propounded by Sokrates--anterior immortality
of the soul--what is called teaching is the revival and recognition
of knowledge acquired in a former life, but forgotten   _ib._

Illustration of this theory--knowledge may be revived by
skilful questions in the mind of a man thoroughly untaught. Sokrates
questions the slave of Menon   238

Enquiry taken up--Whether virtue is teachable? without
determining what virtue is   239

Virtue is knowledge--no possessions, no attributes, either
of mind or body, are good or profitable, except under the guidance of
knowledge   _ib._

Virtue, as being knowledge, must be teachable. Yet there
are opposing reasons, showing that it cannot be teachable. No
teachers of it can be found   239

Conversation of Sokrates with Anytus, who detests the
Sophists, and affirms that any one of the leading politicians can
teach virtue   240

Confused state of the discussion. No way of acquiring
virtue is shown   _ib._

Sokrates modifies his premisses--knowledge is not the only thing
which guides to good results--right opinion will do the same   _ib._

Right opinion cannot be relied on for staying in the mind,
and can never give rational explanations, nor teach others--good
practical statesmen receive right opinion by inspiration from the
Gods   241

All the real virtue that there is, is communicated by
special inspiration from the Gods   242

But what virtue itself is, remains unknown   _ib._

Remarks on the dialogue. Proper order for examining the
different topics, is pointed out by Sokrates   _ib._

Mischief of debating ulterior and secondary questions when
the fundamental notions and word are unsettled   _ib._

Doctrine of Sokrates in the Menon--desire of good alleged
to be universally felt--in what sense this is true   243

Sokrates requires knowledge as the principal condition of
virtue, but does not determine knowledge, of what?   244

Subject of Menon; same as that of the Protagoras--diversity
of handling--Plato is not anxious to settle a question and
get rid of it   245

Anxiety of Plato to keep up and enforce the spirit of
research   246

Great question discussed among the Grecian
philosophers--criterion of truth--Wherein consists the process
of verification?   _ib._

None of the philosophers were satisfied with the answer
here made by Plato--that verification consists in appeal to pre-natal
experience   247

Plato's view of the immortality of the soul--difference
between the Menon, Phædrus, and Phædon   249

Doctrine of Plato, that new truth may be elicited by skilful
examination out of the unlettered mind--how far correct?   _ib._

Plato's doctrine about _à priori_ reasonings--different
from the modern doctrine   251

Plato's theory about pre-natal experience. He took no
pains to ascertain and measure the extent of post-natal experience   252

Little or nothing is said in the Menon about the Platonic
Ideas or Forms   253

What Plato meant by Causal Reasoning--his distinction
between knowledge and right opinion   _ib._

This distinction compared with modern philosophical views   254

Manifestation of Anytus--intense antipathy to the Sophists
and to philosophy generally   255

The enemy of Sokrates is also the enemy of the
sophists--practical statesmen   256

The Menon brings forward the point of analogy between
Sokrates and the Sophists, in which both were disliked by the
practical statesmen   257


