CHAPTER XXV.

PHÆDON.

The Phædon is affirmative and expository   377

Situation and circumstances assumed in the Phædon. Pathetic
interest which they inspire   _ib._

Simmias and Kebês, the two collocutors with Sokrates. Their
feelings and those of Sokrates   378

Emphasis of Sokrates in insisting on freedom of debate, active
exercise of reason, and independent judgment for each reasoner   379

Anxiety of Sokrates that his friends shall be on their
guard against being influenced by his authority--that they shall
follow only the convictions of their own reason   380

Remarkable manifestation of earnest interest for reasoned
truth and the liberty of individual dissent   381

Phædon and Symposion--points of analogy and contrast   382

Phædon--compared with Republic and Timæus. No recognition
of the triple or lower souls. Antithesis between soul and body   383

Different doctrines of Plato about the soul. Whether all
the three souls are immortal, or the rational soul alone   385

The life and character of a philosopher is a constant
struggle to emancipate his soul from his body. Death alone enables
him to do this completely   386

Souls of the ordinary or unphilosophical men pass after
death into the bodies of different animals. The philosopher alone is
relieved from all communion with body   387

Special privilege claimed for philosophers in the Phædon
apart from the virtuous men who are not philosophers   388

Simmias and Kebês do not admit readily the immortality of
the soul, but are unwilling to trouble Sokrates by asking for proof.
Unabated interest of Sokrates in rational debate   390

Simmias and Kebês believe fully in the pre-existence of
the soul, but not in its post-existence. Doctrine--That the soul is a
sort of harmony--refuted by Sokrates   _ib._

Sokrates unfolds the intellectual changes or wanderings
through which his mind had passed   391

First doctrine of Sokrates as to cause. Reasons why he
rejected it   _ib._

Second doctrine. Hopes raised by the treatise of
Anaxagoras   393

Disappointment because Anaxagoras did not follow out the
optimistic principle into detail. Distinction between causes
efficient and causes co-efficient   394

Sokrates could neither trace out the optimistic principle
for himself, nor find any teacher thereof. He renounced it, and
embraced a third doctrine about cause   395

He now assumes the separate existence of ideas. These
ideas are the causes why particular objects manifest certain
attributes   396

Procedure of Sokrates if his hypothesis were impugned. He
insists upon keeping apart the discussion of the hypothesis and the
discussion of its consequences   397

Exposition of Sokrates welcomed by the hearers. Remarks
upon it   398

The philosophical changes in Sokrates all turned upon
different views as to a true cause   _ib._.

Problems and difficulties of which Sokrates first sought
solution   399

Expectations entertained by Sokrates from the treatise of
Anaxagoras. His disappointment. His distinction between causes and
co-efficients   400

Sokrates imputes to Anaxagoras the mistake of substituting
physical agencies in place of mental. This is the same which
Aristophanes and others imputed to Sokrates   401

The supposed theory of Anaxagoras cannot be carried out,
either by Sokrates himself or any one else. Sokrates turns to general
words, and adopts the theory of ideas   403

Vague and dissentient meanings attached to the word Cause.
That is a cause, to each man, which gives satisfaction to his
inquisitive feelings   404

Dissension and perplexity on the question.--What is a
cause? revealed by the picture of Sokrates--no intuition to guide him
407

Different notions of Plato and Aristotle about causation,
causes regular and irregular. Inductive theory of causation,
elaborated in modern times   _ib._

Last transition of the mind of Sokrates from things to
words--to the adoption of the theory of ideas. Great multitude of
ideas assumed, each fitting a certain number of particulars   410

Ultimate appeal to hypothesis of extreme generality   411

Plato's demonstration of the immortality of the soul rests
upon the assumption of the Platonic ideas. Reasoning to prove this   412

The soul always brings life, and is essentially living. It
cannot receive death: in other words, it is immortal   413

The proof of immortality includes pre-existence as well as
post-existence--animals as well as man--also the metempsychosis or
translation of the soul from one body to another   414

After finishing his proof that the soul is immortal,
Sokrates enters into a description, what will become of it after the
death of the body. He describes a [Greek: Nekui/a]   415

Sokrates expects that his soul is going to the islands of
the blest. Reply to Kriton about burying his body   416

Preparations for administering the hemlock. Sympathy of
the gaoler. Equanimity of Sokrates   _ib._

Sokrates swallows the poison. Conversation with the gaoler   417

Ungovernable sorrow of the friends present. Self-command
of Sokrates. Last words to Kriton, and death   _ib._

Extreme pathos, and probable trustworthiness of these
personal details   419

Contrast between the Platonic Apology and the Phædon   _ib._.

Abundant dogmatic and poetical invention of the Phædon
compared with the profession of ignorance which we read in the
Apology   421

Total renunciation and discredit of the body in the Phædon.
Different feeling about the body in other Platonic dialogues   422

Plato's argument does not prove the immortality of the
soul. Even if it did prove that, yet the mode of pre-existence and
the mode of post-existence, of the soul, would be quite undetermined   423

The philosopher will enjoy an existence of pure soul
unattached to any body   425

Plato's demonstration of the immortality of the soul did
not appear satisfactory to subsequent philosophers. The question
remained debated and problematical   426




PLATO.

