CHAPTER XIX.

CHARMIDES.

Scene and personages of the dialogue. Crowded palæstra.
Emotions of Sokrates   153

Question, What is Temperance? addressed by Sokrates to the temperate
Charmides. Answer, It is a kind of sedateness or slowness   154

But Temperance is a fine or honourable thing, and slowness
is, in many or most cases, not fine or honourable, but the contrary.
Temperance cannot be slowness   _ib._

Second answer. Temperance is a variety of the feeling of
shame. Refuted by Sokrates   _ib._

Third answer. Temperance consists in doing one's own
business. Defended by Kritias. Sokrates pronounces it a riddle, and
refutes it. Distinction between making and doing   155

Fourth answer, by Kritias. Temperance consists in self-knowledge.   _ib._

Questions of Sokrates thereupon. What good does
self-knowledge procure for us? What is the object known, in this case?
Answer: There is no object of knowledge, distinct from the knowledge
itself   156

Sokrates doubts the possibility of any knowledge, without a
given _cognitum_ as its object. Analogies to prove that
knowledge of knowledge is impossible   156

All knowledge must be relative to some object   157

All properties are relative--every thing in nature has its
characteristic property with reference to something else   _ib._

Even if cognition of cognition were possible, cognition of
non-cognition would be impossible. A man may know what he knows, but
he cannot know what he is ignorant of. He knows the fact _that_
he knows: but he does not know how much he knows, and how much he
does not know   158

Temperance, therefore, as thus defined, would be of
little or no value   159

But even granting the possibility of that which has just
been denied, still Temperance would be of little value. Suppose that
all separate work were well performed, by special practitioners, we
should not attain our end--Happiness   _ib._

Which of the varieties of knowledge contributes most to
well-doing or happiness? That by which we know good and evil   160

Without the science of good and evil, the other special
science will be of little or of no service. Temperance is not the
science of good and evil, and is of little service   161

Sokrates confesses to entire failure in his research. He
cannot find out what temperance is: although several concessions have
been made which cannot be justified   _ib._

Temperance is and must be a good thing: but Charmides
cannot tell whether he is temperate or not; since what temperance is
remains unknown   162

Expressions both from Charmides and Kritias of praise and
devotion to Sokrates, at the close of the dialogue. Dramatic ornament
throughout   _ib._

The Charmides is an excellent specimen of Dialogues of
Search. Abundance of guesses and tentatives, all ultimately
disallowed   163

Trial and Error, the natural process of the human mind.
Plato stands alone in bringing to view and dramatising this part of
the mental process. Sokrates accepts for himself the condition of
conscious ignorance   164

Familiar words--constantly used, with much earnest
feeling, but never understood nor defined--ordinary phenomenon in
human society   165

Different ethical points of view in different Platonic
dialogues   167

Self-knowledge is here declared to be impossible   _ib._

In other dialogues, Sokrates declares self-knowledge to be
essential and inestimable. Necessity for the student to have
presented to him dissentient points of view   _ib._

Courage and Temperance are shown to have no distinct meaning,
except as founded on the general cognizance of good and evil   168

Distinction made between the special sciences and the
science of Good and Evil. Without this last, the special sciences are
of no use   _ib._

Knowledge, always relative to some object known. Postulate
or divination of a Science of Teleology   169

Courage and Temperance, handled both by Plato and by
Aristotle. Comparison between the two   170


