CHAPTER XXIII.

PROTAGORAS.

Scenic arrangement and personages of the dialogue   259

Introduction. Eagerness of the youthful Hippokrates to
become acquainted with Protagoras   260

Sokrates questions Hippokrates as to his purpose and
expectations from Protagoras   _ib._

Danger of going to imbibe the instruction of a Sophist
without knowing beforehand what he is about to teach   262

Remarks on the Introduction. False persuasion of knowledge
brought to light   263

Sokrates and Hippokrates go to the house of Kallias.
Company therein. Respect shown to Protagoras   264

Questions of Sokrates to Protagoras. Answer of the latter,
declaring the antiquity of the sophistical profession, and his own
openness in avowing himself a sophist   _ib._

Protagoras prefers to converse in presence of the assembled
company   266

Answers of Protagoras. He intends to train young men as
virtuous citizens   _ib._

Sokrates doubts whether virtue is teachable. Reasons for
such doubt. Protagoras is asked to explain whether it is or not.   _ib._

Explanation of Protagoras. He begins with a mythe   267

Mythe. First fabrication of men by the Gods. Prometheus and
Epimetheus. Bad distribution of endowments to man by the latter. It
is partly amended by Prometheus   267

Prometheus gave to mankind skill for the supply of
individual wants, but could not give them the social art--Mankind are
on the point of perishing, when Zeus sends to them the dispositions
essential for society   268

Protagoras follows up his mythe by a discourse. Justice and
the sense of shame are not professional attributes, but are possessed
by all citizens and taught by all to all   269

Constant teaching of virtue. Theory of punishment   270

Why eminent men cannot make their sons eminent   271

Teaching by parents, schoolmaster, harpist, laws,
dikastery, &c.   _ib._

All learn virtue from the same teaching by all. Whether a
learner shall acquire more or less of it, depends upon his own
individual aptitude   272

Analogy of learning vernacular Greek. No special teacher
thereof. Protagoras teaches virtue somewhat better than others   273

The sons of great artists do not themselves become great
artists   274

Remarks upon the mythe and discourse. They explain the
manner in which the established sentiment of a community propagates
and perpetuates itself   274

Antithesis of Protagoras and Sokrates. Whether virtue is
to be assimilated to a special art   275

Procedure of Sokrates in regard to the discourse of
Protagoras--he compliments it as an exposition, and analyses some of
the fundamental assumptions   276

One purpose of the dialogue. To contrast continuous
discourse with short cross-examining question and answer   277

Questions by Sokrates--Whether virtue is one and
indivisible, or composed of different parts? Whether the parts are
homogeneous or heterogeneous?   _ib._

Whether justice is just, and holiness holy? How far
justice is like to holiness? Sokrates protests against an answer, "If
you please"   278

Intelligence and moderation are identical, because they
have the same contrary   279

Insufficient reasons given by Sokrates. He seldom cares to
distinguish different meanings of the same term   _ib._

Protagoras is puzzled, and becomes irritated   280

Sokrates presses Protagoras farther. His purpose is, to
test opinions and not persons. Protagoras answers with angry
prolixity   _ib._

Remonstrance of Sokrates against long answers as
inconsistent with the laws of dialogue. Protagoras persists. Sokrates
rises to depart   281

Interference of Kallias to get the debate continued.
Promiscuous conversation. Alkibiades declares that Protagoras ought
to acknowledge superiority of Sokrates in dialogue   282

Claim of a special _locus standi_ and professorship
for Dialectic, apart from Rhetoric   _ib._

Sokrates is prevailed upon to continue, and invites
Protagoras to question him   _ib._

Protagoras extols the importance of knowing the works of
the poets, and questions about parts of a song of Simonides.
Dissenting opinions about the interpretation of the song   283

Long speech of Sokrates, expounding the purpose of the
song, and laying down an ironical theory about the numerous concealed
sophists at Krete and Sparta, masters of short speech   283

Character of this speech--its connection with the
dialogue, and its general purpose. Sokrates inferior to Protagoras in
continuous speech   284

Sokrates depreciates the value of debates on the poets.
Their meaning is always disputed, and you can never ask from
themselves what it is. Protagoras consents reluctantly to resume the
task of answering   285

Purpose of Sokrates to sift difficulties which he really
feels in his own mind. Importance of a colloquial companion for this
purpose   287

The interrupted debate is resumed. Protagoras says that
courage differs materially from the other branches of virtue   288

Sokrates argues to prove that courage consists in
knowledge or intelligence. Protagoras does not admit this. Sokrates
changes his attack   _ib._

Identity of the pleasurable with the good--of the painful
with the evil. Sokrates maintains it. Protagoras denies. Debate   289

Enquiry about knowledge. Is it the dominant agency in the
mind? Or is it overcome frequently by other agencies, pleasure or
pain? Both agree that knowledge is dominant   290

Mistake of supposing that men act contrary to knowledge.
We never call pleasures evils, except when they entail a
preponderance of pain, or a disappointment of greater pleasures   291

Pleasure is the only good--pain the only evil. No man does
evil voluntarily, knowing it to be evil. Difference between pleasures
present and future--resolves itself into pleasure and pain   292

Necessary resort to the measuring art for choosing
pleasures rightly--all the security of our lives depend upon it   293

To do wrong, overcome by pleasure, is only a bad phrase
for describing what is really a case of grave ignorance   294

Reasoning of Sokrates assented to by all. Actions which
conduct to pleasures or freedom from pain, are honourable   295

Explanation of courage. It consists in a wise estimate of
things terrible and not terrible   _ib._

Reluctance of Protagoras to continue answering. Close of
the discussion. Sokrates declares that the subject is still in
confusion, and that he wishes to debate it again with Protagoras.
Amicable reply of Protagoras   297

Remarks on the dialogue. It closes without the least
allusion to Hippokrates   298

Two distinct aspects of ethics and politics exhibited: one
under the name of Protagoras; the other, under that of Sokrates   299

Order of ethical problems, as conceived by Sokrates   _ib._

Difference of method between him and Protagoras flows from
this difference of order. Protagoras assumes what virtue is, without
enquiry   300

Method of Protagoras. Continuous lectures addressed to
established public sentiments with which he is in harmony   301

Method of Sokrates. Dwells upon that part of the problem
which Protagoras had left out   _ib._

Antithesis between the eloquent lecturer and the
analytical cross-examiner   303

Protagoras not intended to be always in the wrong, though
he is described as brought to a contradiction   _ib._

Affirmation of Protagoras about courage is affirmed by
Plato himself elsewhere   _ib._

The harsh epithets applied by critics to Protagoras are
not borne out by the dialogue. He stands on the same ground as the
common consciousness   304

Aversion of Protagoras for dialectic. Interlude about the
song of Simonides   305

Ethical view given by Sokrates worked out at length
clearly. Good and evil consist in right or wrong calculation of
pleasures and pains of the agent   _ib._

Protagoras is at first opposed to this theory   306

Reasoning of Sokrates   307

Application of that reasoning to the case of courage   _ib._

The theory which Plato here lays down is more distinct and
specific than any theory laid down in other dialogues   308

Remarks on the theory here laid down by Sokrates. It is
too narrow, and exclusively prudential   309

Comparison with the Republic   310

The discourse of Protagoras brings out an important part
of the whole case, which is omitted in the analysis by Sokrates   311

The Ethical End, as implied in the discourse of
Protagoras, involves a direct regard to the pleasures and pains of
other persons besides the agent himself   312

Plato's reasoning in the dialogue is not clear or
satisfactory, especially about courage   313

Doctrine of Stallbaum and other critics is not correct.
That the analysis here ascribed to Sokrates is not intended by Plato
as serious, but as a mockery of the sophists   314

Grounds of that doctrine. Their insufficiency   315

Subject is professedly still left unsettled at the close
of the dialogue   316


