The Project Gutenberg EBook of Plato and the Other Companions of Sokrates,
3rd ed. Volume II (of 4), by George Grote

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Plato and the Other Companions of Sokrates, 3rd ed. Volume II (of 4)

Author: George Grote

Release Date: August 7, 2012 [EBook #40436]

Language: English

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLATO, COMPANIONS OF SOKRATES, VOL II ***




Produced by Ed Brandon as part of the on-line Grote Project








PLATO, AND THE OTHER COMPANIONS OF SOKRATES.




PLATO,

AND THE

OTHER COMPANIONS OF SOKRATES.



BY

GEORGE GROTE,

AUTHOR OF THE 'HISTORY OF GREECE'.



_A NEW EDITION._

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. II.



LONDON:

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

1888.

_The right of Translation is reserved._




CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XII.

ALKIBIADES I. AND II.


Situation supposed in the dialogue. Persons--Sokrates and
Alkibiades   1

Exorbitant hopes and political ambition of Alkibiades   2

Questions put by Sokrates, in reference to Alkibiades in
his intended function as adviser of the Athenians. What does he
intend to advise them upon? What has he learnt, and what does he
know?   _ib._

Alkibiades intends to advise the Athenians on questions of
war and peace. Questions of Sokrates thereupon. We must fight those
whom it is better to fight--to what standard does better refer? To
just and unjust   3

How, or from whom, has Alkibiades learnt to discern or
distinguish Just and Unjust? He never learnt it from any one; he
always knew it, even as a boy   4

Answer amended. Alkibiades learnt it from the multitude, as
he learnt to speak Greek.--The multitude cannot teach just and
unjust, for they are at variance among themselves about it.
Alkibiades is going to advise the Athenians about what he does not
know himself   5

Answer farther amended. The Athenians do not generally
debate about just or unjust--which they consider plain to every
one--but about expedient and inexpedient, which are not coincident with
just and unjust. But neither does Alkibiades know the expedient. He
asks Sokrates to explain. Sokrates declines: he can do nothing but
question   6

Comment on the preceding--Sokratic method--the respondent
makes the discoveries for himself   _ib._

Alkibiades is brought to admit that whatever is just, is
good, honourable, expedient: and that whoever acts honourably, both
does well, and procures for himself happiness thereby. Equivocal
reasoning of Sokrates   7

Humiliation of Alkibiades. Other Athenian statesmen are
equally ignorant. But the real opponents, against whom Alkibiades is
to measure himself, are, the kings of Sparta and Persia. Eulogistic
description of those kings. To match them, Alkibiades must make
himself as good as possible   8

But good--for what end, and under what circumstances?
Abundant illustrative examples   9

Alkibiades, puzzled and humiliated, confesses his
ignorance. Encouragement given by Sokrates. It is an advantage to
make such discovery in youth   10

Platonic Dialectic--its actual effect--its anticipated
effect--applicable to the season of youth   11

Know Thyself--Delphian maxim--its urgent importance--What
is myself? My mind is myself   _ib._

I cannot know myself, except by looking into another
mind. Self-knowledge is temperance. Temperance and Justice are the
conditions both of happiness and of freedom   11

Alkibiades feels himself unworthy to be free, and declares
that he will never quit Sokrates   12

Second Alkibiades--situation supposed   _ib._

Danger of mistake in praying to the Gods for gifts which
may prove mischievous. Most men are unwise. Unwise is the generic
word: madmen, a particular variety under it   _ib._

Relation between a generic term, and the specific terms
comprehended under it, was not then familiar   13

Frequent cases, in which men pray for supposed benefits,
and find that when obtained, they are misfortunes. Every one fancies
that he knows what is beneficial: mischiefs of ignorance   14

Mistake in predications about ignorance generally. We must
discriminate. Ignorance of _what?_ Ignorance of good, is always
mischievous: ignorance of other things, not always   _ib._

Wise public counsellors are few. Upon what ground do we
call these few wise? Not because they possess merely special arts or
accomplishments, but because they know besides, upon what occasions
and under what limits each of these accomplishments ought to be used   15

Special accomplishments, without the knowledge of the good
or profitable, are oftener hurtful than beneficial   16

It is unsafe for Alkibiades to proceed with his sacrifice,
until he has learnt what is the proper language to address to the
Gods. He renounces his sacrifice, and throws himself upon the counsel
of Sokrates   _ib._

Different critical opinions respecting these two dialogues   17

Grounds for disallowing them--less strong against the
Second than against the First   18

The supposed grounds for disallowance are in reality only
marks of inferiority   _ib._

The two dialogues may probably be among Plato's earlier
compositions   20

Analogy with various dialogues in the Xenophontic
Memorabilia--Purpose of Sokrates to humble presumptuous young men   21

Fitness of the name and character of Alkibiades for
idealising this feature in Sokrates   _ib._

Plato's manner of replying to the accusers of Sokrates.
Magical influence ascribed to the conversation of Sokrates   22

The purpose proclaimed by Sokrates in the Apology is
followed out in Alkibiades I. Warfare against the false persuasion of
knowledge   24

Difficulties multiplied for the purpose of bringing
Alkibiades to a conviction of his own ignorance   25

Sokrates furnishes no means of solving these difficulties.
He exhorts to Justice and Virtue--but these are acknowledged
Incognita   26

Prolixity of Alkibiadês I.--Extreme multiplication of
illustrative examples--How explained   _ib._

Alkibiadês II. leaves its problem avowedly undetermined   27

Sokrates commends the practice of praying to the Gods for
favours undefined--his views about the semi-regular, semi-irregular
agency of the Gods--he prays to them for premonitory warnings   28

Comparison of Alkibiadês II. with the Xenophontic
Memorabilia, especially the conversation of Sokrates with Euthydemus.
Sokrates not always consistent with himself   29

Remarkable doctrine of Alkibiadês II.--that knowledge is
not always Good. The knowledge of Good itself is indispensable:
without that, the knowledge of other things is more hurtful than
beneficial   _ib._

Knowledge of Good--appears postulated and divined, in many
of the Platonic dialogues, under different titles   31

The Good--the Profitable--what is it?--How are we to know
it? Plato leaves this undetermined   _ib._


