CHAPTER XV.

THEAGES.

Theagês--has been declared spurious by some modern
critics--grounds for such opinion not sufficient   98

Persons of the dialogue--Sokrates, with Demodokus and
Theagês, father and son. Theagês (the son), eager to acquire
knowledge, desires to be placed under the teaching of a Sophist   99

Sokrates questions Theagês, inviting him to specify what he
wants   _ib._

Theagês desires to acquire that wisdom by which he can
govern freemen with their own consent   100

Incompetence of the best practical statesmen to teach any one else.
Theagês requests that Sokrates will himself teach him   _ib._

Sokrates declares that he is not competent to teach--that
he knows nothing except about matters of love. Theagês maintains that
many of his young friends have profited largely by the conversation
of Sokrates   101

Sokrates explains how this has sometimes happened--he
recites his experience of the divine sign or Dæmon   _ib._

The Dæmon is favourable to some persons, adverse to others.
Upon this circumstance it depends how far any companion profits by
the society of Sokrates. Aristeides has not learnt anything from
Sokrates, yet has improved much by being near to him   102

Theagês expresses his anxiety to be received as the
companion of Sokrates   103

Remarks on the Theagês--analogy with the Lachês   104

Chief peculiarity of the Theagês--stress laid upon the
divine sign or Dæmon   _ib._

Plato employs this divine sign here to render some
explanation of the singularity and eccentricity of Sokrates, and of
his unequal influence upon different companions   _ib._

Sokrates, while continually finding fault with other
teachers, refused to teach himself--difficulty of finding an excuse
for his refusal. The Theagês furnishes an excuse   106

Plato does not always, nor in other dialogues, allude to
the divine sign in the same way. Its character and working
essentially impenetrable. Sokrates a privileged person   _ib._


CHAPTER XVI.

ERASTÆ OR ANTERASTÆ--RIVALES.


Erastæ--subject and persons of the dialogue--dramatic
introduction--interesting youths in the palæstra   111

Two rival Erastæ--one of them literary, devoted to
philosophy--the other gymnastic, hating philosophy   _ib._

Question put by Sokrates--What is philosophy? It is the
perpetual accumulation of knowledge, so as to make the largest sum
total   112

In the case of the body, it is not the maximum of exercise
which does good, but the proper, measured quantity. For the mind
also, it is not the maximum of knowledge, but the measured quantity
which is good. Who is the judge to determine this measure?   _ib._

No answer given. What is the best conjecture? Answer of the
literary Erastes. A man must learn that which will yield to him the
greatest reputation as a philosopher--as much as will enable him to
talk like an intelligent critic, though not to practise   113

The philosopher is one who is second-best in several
different arts--a Pentathlus--who talks well upon each   _ib._

On what occasions can such second-best men be useful? There
are always regular practitioners at hand, and no one will call in the
second-best man when he can have the regular practitioner   114

Philosophy cannot consist in multiplication of learned
acquirements   _ib._

Sokrates changes his course of examination--questions put
to show that there is one special art, regal and political, of
administering and discriminating the bad from the good   115

In this art the philosopher must not only be second-best,
competent to talk--but he must be a fully qualified practitioner,
competent to act   _ib._

Close of the dialogue--humiliation of the literary Erastes   116

Remarks--animated manner of the dialogue   _ib._

Definition of philosophy--here sought for the first
time--Platonic conception of measure--referee not discovered   117

View taken of the second-best critical talking man, as
compared with the special proficient and practitioner   118

Plato's view--that the philosopher has a province special
to himself, distinct from other specialties--dimly indicated--regal
or political art   119

Philosopher--the supreme artist controlling other artists   120


