CHAPTER VI.

HEALTH.


It is impossible, in a little work of this description to explain
why it is that one person inherits a weak and ailing body and another
enjoys a strong and robust constitution. Sufficient for us here to
notice that the days of rude, rugged health are passing, and that
man is becoming more highly strung, nervous and psychic in his
make-up. The old type of rude, unconscious health was due to the
animal-like nature of man, which caused his body to be governed more
completely by the instinctive mind. Less evolved humans are not
affected, apparently, by the mental storms, psychic changes, and
spiritual disharmonies that disturb the health of the more evolved
types. We have an illustration of this in the case of some forms of
insanity. The patient "goes out of his mind," with the result that
his bodily health becomes wonderfully good. The instinctive mind takes
control of things, and rude, robust animal health is the result. When
the patient was sane and his mind filled with worry, ambitions, plans,
cares, lusts, hates and griefs, he was probably very far from well.
This would be due to the disturbing effects of his thoughts and
uncontrolled emotions. When, therefore, his conscious mind gave way
and he became happy in an imbecile way, he ceased to think of these
disturbing things, with the result that the instinctive, animal mind
was able to work undisturbed.

It is of no use sighing for "the good old times," when people were
rugged and strong in the way that savages are rugged and strong, for
evolution has decreed that man shall change into a higher and more
nervous and sensitive type. In this sensitive type wrong thoughts
and emotions quickly produce pain and suffering. The majority of
people do not know what good health is. Not only do they suffer from
minor ailments, such as headaches, indigestion, rheumatism, neuritis,
but they also never feel hearty or completely well. They are strangers
to the joy of living. Life does not thrill them: nothing quickens
their blood: they have no moments of vivid ecstasy--in other words,
they do not live, they merely exist at a poor dying rate.

Again, the majority of people are susceptible to infectious diseases
and epidemics, yet, if they were really well, they would be immune.
Instead, however, of seeking immunity through health, they are seeking
it through the use of vaccines and serums, thus adding to the burdens
which the body has to bear. All attempts in this direction are bound
to end in failure, for, as fast as one disease is suppressed another
one will appear.

Many people look upon disease and sickness as inevitable, yet the
truth is that health is the normal state and ill-health an
abnormality. In tracing back ill-health to its source, we find, first
of all, that it is due to disobedience of natural law. Large numbers
of people break nearly every known natural law of health, and are
surprised that they become ill. Yet the wonder is that they are as
well as they are. Yet, while obedience to nature's laws and the use
of nature-cure methods will carry us a certain part of the way, we
find that there must be causes even deeper than those which are
physical. We are confronted by the fact that there are many people
who obey every known physical law of health, who bathe, exercise,
breathe, eat and drink scientifically, who adopt nature-cure methods
instead of drugs and serums, who yet cannot find health. Therefore
we must search deeper and go to the mind in order to discover the
cause of ill-health.

When we look to the mind we find a prolific cause of sickness. Man
thinks himself into ill-health and disease. It is well known that
thinking about disease and sickness produces them in the body. People
who are for ever thinking about disease, illness, operations and other
morbid subjects, become a prey to these things. Those who believe
that sickness is inevitable, manifest it in their life. Morbid
thinking produces a morbid state of the body, causing it either to
fall an easy prey to infection or to break down into chronic
ill-health, or even disease. Allowing the thoughts to dwell upon
morbid things is a sure way to sickness and invalidism.

Man is not only made ill by his own negative thoughts and emotions,
he is also under the hypnotic spell of the race mind. "The God of
this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not." We are
all under the spell, more or less, of a huge illusion. The evil,
disease, sickness and other imperfections that we see and experience,
have no reality, _in reality_, but have an _existence_ in _unreality_.
[7] Although they are not real in a real sense, yet they are terribly
real to this present limited consciousness. By realizing the truth,
and by thinking and living in its light and power, the hypnotic spell
becomes broken, not completely, else we should not grow old, but to
such an extent that a state of greatly improved health can be enjoyed.

  [7] For a fuller explanation of this metaphysical statement see
      Science of Thought Text Books, Nos. I. and II.

We are also hypnotically affected by suggestion, which reaches us
from a thousand different sources. The conversations of friends and
acquaintances, affect us adversely. Their belief in disease and
sickness as realities, and in its inevitableness, colours all their
conversation, and, unless we guard against it, this unconsciously
affects us. Newspapers, magazines, books, all steeped in the same
error, also influence us unless we have become too positive to be
affected. From innumerable sources it is subtly suggested to us that
disease, sickness, infection are realities that cannot be evaded,
and to which we are prone. The effect of all this, putting it in
simple and elementary language, is to divert the life power into
wrong channels, thus producing disease and ill-health in place of
perfection. The normal state of health has to give place to an
abnormal state of disease or sickness. The normal health-state is,
however, restored when Truth is realized, and the life lived in Its
light and power. Absolute Truth and Perfection stand behind all the
illusion and imperfection of the sense life. It is by realizing the
Truth and the perfection of the Reality, and by establishing the
thought-life in Truth, so that our thoughts cease to be negative and
based on error and illusion, that health is to be found.

It is often said that ill-health is the result of sin. It is, for
thinking about disease, sickness and ill-health, believing them to
be inevitable, is one of the greatest of sins. The way of life is
to walk (think and act) after the Spirit (which is perfect, whole,
immortal and incorruptible) and not after the flesh (corruption,
disease, sickness, death). By thinking "after the flesh" we dishonour
God who is absolute Wholeness and Perfection, and cut ourselves off
from the Divine Life and Power.

But there are other ways by which wrong thinking destroys the health.
Thinking thoughts of lust is a prolific cause of unhappiness, sickness
and nervous disease. The divine forces of life are directed into a
wrong channel, resulting either in indulgence and inevitable weakening
of body, brain and will, or in repression and its consequent nervous
diseases. If the thoughts are allowed to dwell upon impurity, evil
results must follow in some form, either in action or ill-health,
or both. Thought must be controlled and reversed continually. Not
repressed, but reversed, be it noted, for there is a tremendous
difference between the two. Repression creates nervous trouble, but
by reversing or transmuting the thoughts the life becomes transformed,
and the bodily health greatly improved.

Further, indulging in thoughts of hate, resentment, ill-will, fear,
worry, care, grief, and anxiety, produces ill-health, and, by lowering
the tone of the body, lays it open to infection and disease. We
therefore see that the state of the mind and the character of the
thoughts are important factors which cannot be ignored. It is useless
to treat either ill-health or disease if they are merely the external
_effects_ of hidden causes of the mind. In order to effect a cure
we have to get back to the cause of the trouble.

Thought control [8] is a great assistance. Substituting a right or
positive thought for a wrong one, will, in course of time, work
wonders in the life. In the sub-conscious we have an illimitable power
of extraordinary intelligence. According to our thoughts this
wonderful power either builds up health, harmony and beauty in our
life and body, or just the reverse. The power is good, the
intelligence is apparently infinite, but it goes where-ever our
thoughts direct it. By our thinking, therefore, we either create or
destroy, produce either good or evil. If, therefore, all our thoughts
are good, positive and constructive, it follows that both our body
and our life must become built up in harmony and perfection. The
question is, can this be done? It can be done if we have the desire,
and are willing to discipline ourselves and persevere in the face,
often, of seeming failure. Some readers may say, at this point, that
they have no desire to be so frightfully good, that they are not
prepared to give up lust, impurity, hate, anger, malice and thoughts
and emotions of this kind. Very well, if this is so, they must go
on and learn, through suffering, the lesson which they refuse to learn
willingly. Others may say: "Yes, I want to control my thoughts, but
how can I cease to worry when I have so much about which to worry,
and how can I cease to hate when I have been so deeply wronged?" This
brings us to an even deeper cause of ill-health than that of mind,
viz., the attitude of the heart. Our scriptures tell us that "as a
man thinketh in his _heart_ so is he." By "heart" is meant the soul
or feeling, desiring part of man. It is here where the conflict
between the self-will and the Divine Will, between the desires of
the flesh and the longings of the Spirit take place. The real root
cause of all unhappiness, disharmony and ill-health is spiritual,
and not merely mental or physical. The latter are contributory causes,
but the former is the fundamental cause. Spiritual disharmony is,
in reality, the cause of all ill-health and disease. Until spiritual
harmony is restored, man is a kingdom divided against itself, which,
as our Lord said, cannot stand. Healing, then, must be of a spiritual
character. Until this harmony exists there can be no overcoming of
hate thoughts, fear thoughts or worry thoughts, and until these are
overcome there can be no true healing. Our Lord's healing was a
gracious healing of the Spirit. It restored inward harmony by
forgiving sin, by changing the heart's desires, by bringing the will
of the subject into harmony with the Divine Will of the Whole. Our
Lord's healing was not accomplished by means of suggestion, neither
was it achieved by human will power; it was done by a bringing into
harmony of the heart and desires and will with the Divine Will. At
the same time there must have been a revelation of the truth that
the Will of God is love, wholeness, joy and perfection, and not
disease, sickness and misery.

  [8] See also "The Power of Thought" by the same author, published
      by The Science of Thought Press, Chichester.

Mental healing does not become possible until we have made our peace
with God. Until we have surrendered entirely to the love principle,
we cannot overcome our hate thoughts and malice thoughts or resentment
thoughts, by transmuting them into thoughts of love. Until we
surrender to the Divine Will and leave all our problems to the
Infinite Mind, we cannot cease to worry and fear. Mental discipline
and thought-control are necessary after this inward change has taken
place, for we all have to work out our own salvation, but the
essential thing is the inward heart surrender in love and trust. So
long as we hate our brother, or fear what the morrow may bring forth,
or worry about the things of this life, we can never be well. When,
however, we have become attuned to the Divine Harmony, and have learnt
to control our thoughts and emotions and to transmute fleshly and
material desires into loving service, a state of wholeness is the
inevitable result. Old, deeply-seated disorders die away, and a steady
improvement in the state of health takes its place.

In order to regain health it is necessary to raise oneself up
continually to the Divine Ideal of health, harmony and perfection.
But this is useless if there still remains a clashing of the personal
will with the Divine Will, or if there is any hate, malice, envy,
or fear in the heart. The will must be surrendered to the greater
Will (this, in reality, is our highest good, for the fulfilment of
the Divine Will is the happy destiny of man): the heart must forgive
and be filled with love; fear must be cast out, and replaced by
confidence and complete trust, before we can enter into that happy,
care-free, restful state which is necessary for healing. Health is
harmony--a delicate balance and adjustment between spirit, soul, mind
and body. This harmony is dependent entirely upon the greater harmony
between ourselves and God. So long as there is a conflict of will,
so long as there is hate or resentment, so long as there is
selfishness or while there is fear, this harmony cannot exist.
Therefore, the bed-rock cause of health is spiritual harmony, all
healing being a restoration of harmony between man and his Divine
Source. When this harmony is restored, man is no longer a kingdom
divided against itself, for he becomes established in _unity_: he
works with the Universe and the Divine Laws of his being, instead
of against them. The Divine Life and Power flow through him unimpeded,
promoting perfect sub-conscious functioning. His thoughts become
cleansed at their source ("Create in me a clean heart, O God, and
renew a right spirit within me," "Cleanse Thou me from _secret_
faults"). He becomes free from the hypnotic spell of the race mind:
his eyes, through the influence of the Divine Spirit, become opened
to the Truth; therefore he is no longer blinded by the Prince of this
world. In the Divine Union he becomes free. (In Christ all are made
alive).

The subject of grief and its effect upon health has purposely been
left to the last. No amount of right thinking will prevent
bereavements in this life. These form part of the necessary discipline
of life, and it depends entirely upon how we meet our trials whether
they shall be hurtful or the greatest possible blessing. By rebelling
against life's discipline, griefs become hurtful, but the hurt is
not in the bereavement itself, but in the attitude of the mind and
heart. Until the soul is able to drink the cup of sorrow willingly,
and say "Thy Will be done," bereavement is hurtful, destroying both
health and happiness. The cause of the hurt is, however, in the
hardness of heart, and not in the bereavement itself. There must,
therefore, be submission and an acknowledgment that the discipline
is necessary. This does not imply, however, a weak giving-in to grief
and mourning. One who has been bereaved can never, it is true, be
the same again, for he or she becomes more chastened, more loving,
more sympathetic, richer and more mellow in character. The loved one
can never be forgotten, but that is no reason why the heart should
be bowed down by grief and the life made desolate by sorrow. In such
cases true religion, not religiousness, is the only thing that can
satisfy the soul, harmonize the mind, and heal the body. To be
established in Truth, knowing that all is well: that God makes no
mistakes and that there is, in reality, no death but only change,
is the only way by which bereavement can be made to be a blessing
in disguise. When this stage is reached, grief is overcome, death
being swallowed up in victory. The only panacea for all life's
troubles is conscious harmony with our Divine Source and the Divine
Will and Purpose which desire only our highest good.




