CHAPTER VIII.

THE POWERS AND LIMITATIONS OF THE SUB-CONSCIOUS MIND.


The sub-conscious mind is the mind of Nature. It possesses
extraordinary powers and intelligence, but no inspiration. It is
instinctive: it is animal: it is natural: but there is nothing
god-like about it--it is of the earth and the physical plane. It can
be described as the inner forces of Nature resident within our body.
Having said this we have said nearly all there is to be said about
the sub-conscious, yet this is the mind of which some people have
made a veritable god.

The sub-conscious mind, if led aright, is a very good friend, reducing
all repeated thoughts and actions into habit, which, in time, become
settled and part of the very life itself. Thus, by conscious right
thinking and conscious right action, a good habit is formed, which
becomes, in course of time, practically automatic. This, of course,
builds up the character, which, in turn, affects the life. It will
be seen then, how important is the right use of this willing and
faithful servant. It is no god, it has no inspiration, but it is a
very useful servant, as we shall see.

Most of our actions or movements are done or made sub-consciously.
The reason that "practice makes perfect" is that the sub-conscious
mind learns to do the task, and, by so doing, takes it off our hands.
How difficult it is to learn to drive a motor-car. How carefully,
at first, we have to double de-clutch and obtain the right engine
speed for a noiseless "change," yet, after a time, the whole action
is performed sub-consciously. It is the same with pianoforte playing.
Many players, some better than others, can play the most difficult
classical music without _consciously_ recalling it to mind. As soon
as they _try to remember_ the whole "piece" leaves them, but as long
as they leave the whole matter to the sub-conscious (which never
forgets) they can keep on playing. I and my conscious mind are not
doing much of the actual writing of this book. We think the thoughts
and have something to do with the formation of the sentences, but
the sub-conscious mind writes them down. If I had to think of each
word and letter, my task would be hopeless, and I should become half
dead with fatigue.

The sub-conscious mind, however, is even more helpful, for it does
the bulk of our thinking, and can be taught to do a great deal more.
If we had to think everything out laboriously, according to the laws
of logic, life would be unbearable. Instead of this our sub-conscious
mind does the bulk or our thinking, and, if we give it a chance, will
do it in an extremely accurate manner, strictly according to the laws
of logic and _without the slightest fatigue_. The more that we train
the sub-conscious to do our ordinary thinking for us, the less we
suffer from fatigue. Fatigue is unknown to the sub-conscious mind,
therefore we can never tire it or overwork it.

The sub-conscious mind can be made to do more and more work for us
if we will delegate definite work for it to deal with. One who has
learnt thought control, who can take up a matter, consider it in all
its bearings, and then dismiss the subject from his conscious thought,
is able to increase his efficiency a hundred per cent., and reduce
his mental fatigue almost to vanishing point. Instead of laboriously
working out his problems and worrying and scheming over them, he
simply dismisses them to his sub-conscious mind to be dealt with by
a master mind which works unceasingly, with great rapidity, extreme
accuracy and entirely without effort. It is necessary, however, to
give the sub-conscious every available information, for it possesses
no inspiration or super-human wisdom, but works out logically,
according to the facts supplied to it.

This great, natural, untiring "mind downstairs," as it has been
called, is also capable of doing even more useful work still. A writer
or speaker, or preacher can collect notes and ideas for his article,
book, speech or sermon, and pass them down to his sub-conscious mind
with orders that they be arranged in suitable order, division,
sub-division and so on. When he comes either to write or prepare the
notes of his speech or sermon, he will find all the work done for
him, and all that he has to do is to write it down, entirely without
effort or fatigue.

Again, a business man who has learnt to make use of his sub-conscious
mind in this way, need not juggle or worry or fatigue himself by
planning and scheming for the future. All that he need do is to submit
the facts to the "greater mind downstairs," and all the planning will
be done for him, entirely without effort, and far more efficiently
than he would have done it through laborious conscious thinking.

The following, which has just been brought to my notice, is a striking
confirmation of the teaching of this chapter.

In a recent issue of _Collier's Magazine_, an interview with Henry
Ford appeared. He spoke of the way with which big business men deal
with problems, and pointed out that they did not spend a lot of time
pondering and puzzling over plans or ideas. He said: "An idea comes
to us: we think of it for a little while, and then _we put it in the
pot to boil_. We let it simmer for a time, and then take it out."
What Henry Ford means, of course, is precisely what we have been
saying, viz., that the idea or problem is dismissed to the
sub-conscious mind, which works it out, and presents it to the
conscious mind for judgment.

Yet again, an inventor or one who is constructing something
mechanical, can make use of the sub-conscious mind in precisely the
same way. Let him sum up the whole problem, arrange all his facts
and available information, and pass them all to his sub-conscious
mind, when, if a successful result is within the range of possibility,
an answer or idea will be forthcoming. All this being done, mark you,
without any effort whatever.

All this may seem, especially to some readers, rather wonderful and
far-fetched, yet there is nothing occult or mysterious about it. I
am perfectly sure that there is no great writer, politician or
business man who does not make use of his sub-conscious mind in this
way. He probably does so unconsciously, but his procedure is the same.
Some employ the whole of their mind naturally. These become men of
achievement, who occupy responsible positions, and who bear immense
burdens without strain, worry or care. Responsibility sits lightly
upon them, and they are serene and untroubled when in positions, and
when confronted by tasks and difficulties, such as would drive an
ordinary individual out of his mind. Such men develop their powers
of attention and concentration (anyone who is in earnest can do this)
to a very high degree. They are at great pains to get to the root
of a problem, and obtain all the available data possible, but, after
that, it is their sub-conscious mind that does all the work, and which
arrives at a decision.

While it comes natural to a few to use their sub-conscious mind in
the correct way, the majority of people find themselves unable to
do so. Such, however, can acquire the art by training. First, it is
necessary to learn thought-control, so as to be able to take up a
problem or dismiss it entirely from the mind _at will_. When a problem
is passed on to the sub-conscious to be worked out, the subject must
be dismissed entirely from the conscious mind. The problem must not
be worried over, nor the thoughts allowed to dwell upon it; it must
be left entirely to the sub-conscious. Second, every possible detail
and information connected with the problem must be grasped by the
conscious mind, and the whole matter, pro and con, visualized before
being passed to the sub-conscious. It will be seen, then, that
thought-control of a high order is necessary, also powers of attention
and concentration. These can all be developed by anyone who is really
in earnest.

A good way of starting the use of the sub-conscious mind is to hold
the problem in the mind just as one is going to sleep. There must
not, upon any account, be any attempt made to solve the problem or
to worry over it. Instead, the main facts of the case, on both sides,
must be marshalled, and the case presented to the sub-conscious mind
in much the same way as you would place it before your lawyer. Having
done this, dismiss the whole matter to your sub-conscious mind, and
in most cases you will find in the morning that a solution has been
arrived at without any effort or fatigue on your part.

This, of course, is only one of the many ways in which the
sub-conscious mind can, and does, serve its master, or the one who
should be master. This great invisible force of Nature is for ever
working. Whatever ideal is held in the mind becomes woven into the
life through the tireless working of the sub-conscious mind. Only
set your attention upon high and lofty achievement, and you will focus
all the invisible inward forces of Nature upon its accomplishment.
In course of time you will reap as you sow. If you will direct your
attention into the right channel, backing it up with energetic,
conscious action, your sub-conscious will help you day and night,
thus making success and achievement possible.




