CHAPTER VII.

THE SECRET OF ABUNDANT SUPPLY.


It is a metaphysical truth that the outward life is a reflection of
the thought life. Our life is affected by our habit of thinking and
attitude of mind, in two ways: first, all our actions are
unconsciously influenced by our thoughts, thus helping to bring into
manifestation, or attracting to us, an environment that corresponds
to our thoughts. [9] Secondly, we discharge or emit an influence,
silent and invisible, that no doubt affects other people. They are
probably not aware of it, but they are either repelled or attracted
by this silent influence. Thus, if our thoughts and mental attitude
are of the wrong type, not only are our actions affected thereby,
but also we exert a silent influence that assists in driving the right
type of friends, opportunity, success and every possible good away
from us. The reverse also is equally true. By right thoughts and a
correct mental attitude we naturally attract to us all the good of
which our present life is capable.

  [9] This may seem, at first sight, to be a sweeping statement, but
      two homely illustrations will prove its reasonableness. First
      we will take the case of a man committed to prison for
      law-breaking. His environment is obviously due to his wrong
      actions, the latter being the offspring of his thoughts, for
      all actions spring from thoughts. Next let us take the case
      of a man who is the trusted head of an efficient business.
      Obviously his position is the result of his actions, for he
      has climbed to it by hard work and faithful service, all due
      in the first place to constructive thinking and a right attitude
      of mind.

The Bible tells us that as a man thinketh in his heart so is he. It
is equally true to say that as a man _is_, so does he _think_, and,
that as he thinks, so do his outer life and circumstances become.
Therefore, as a man _is_, so is his environment. This may sound rather
metaphysical, but it is really quite simple, and proof meets us at
every turn. Take a man from slumdom and put him in nice surroundings,
and note what happens. Very soon he either drifts back to a slum or
turns his new house into a slum dwelling. Take a man of a higher type,
and put him in a slum, and soon he will either leave the slum or
change his slum dwelling into a more decent habitation. Put a slut
in a mansion, and she will turn it into a pig-sty, but put a woman
of a higher type in a hovel and she will make it clean enough to
entertain royalty. Therefore, before you can change a person's
environment it is necessary to change inwardly the person himself.
When a man becomes inwardly changed and filled with new ambitions,
ideals and hopes, he, in course of time, rises above his sordid
surroundings and _attracts to himself an environment that corresponds
to his new state of mind_. It would be useless to tidy up the house
of a slut for her, for she would soon make it like a pig-sty again,
but if you could get a new ideal of neatness, cleanliness, order and
spotlessness into her mind, she would not rest satisfied until her
immediate environment corresponded, in some measure at least, to her
mental ideal or image.

Very often, the failures of a man's life, and its disharmonies and
poverty, either comparative or real, are outward symbols of his
weakness of character. He may have ability in plenty, but he may lack
application or steadfastness, and thus he fails in all his
undertakings, and has to be kept by his wife and daughters. He will
assure you that his circumstances are due to ill-fortune, but the
actual cause of his failure is in his character, or, rather, lack
of character.

If, therefore, a man's poverty and lack, or financial difficulties
are due to weakness of character which manifest in his work and
dealings with others, in the form of inefficiency, poor service and
bad judgment, it follows that he, himself, must change before his
circumstances can be permanently altered for the better. The
difficulty in dealing with unsuccessful people is in getting them
to realize that they, themselves, are the cause of all their troubles.
[10] Until, however, they do realize this, their case is hopeless,
and it is impossible to help them, but when they acknowledge that
the fault is theirs, they can be shown that there is a remedy for
their ills and a way out of their difficulties, by means of
self-improvement. Let them then search for hidden weaknesses, and
build up those weak places in their character, such as lack of grit,
determination, steadfastness, persistence, patience, probity,
decision, which are the cause of their troubles, and they will find
that their circumstances will gradually change for the better.
Everything comes from within--first within, then out, this is the
law--therefore the change must always take place within.

 [10] See also "The Fundamentals of True Success," by the same author
      and published by The Science of Thought Press, Chichester.

Going more deeply into the subject and becoming more metaphysical,
it is necessary to point out that the cause of all manifestation is
Mind. We have already seen that a man's mind and character are
reflected in his circumstances; now let us think, for a moment, about
the Mind that is Infinite. The whole universe, which is, of course,
infinite in extent, has its origin in the Divine Mind, and _is
contained within this Infinite Mind_, just in the same way that you
can hold a mental picture in your own mind. God's Universe, _as it
is imaged in the Divine Mind_, is perfect. We see it as imperfect,
because we only receive a finite sense-perception of that which is
perfect and infinite, from this forming, in our minds, an image that
is necessarily imperfect and finite, which we project outwards, and,
not knowing any better, think is real. But the universe, _as imaged
in the Divine Mind_, and as it actually is in reality, is both
infinite and perfect: it is also infinitely perfect. There is no
poverty or lack in a universe that is infinitely perfect, whole and
complete in the Divine Mind. Poverty and lack have their origin in
the mind of man: they have no place in the Mind of God.

We cannot, in a little elementary work of this kind, go more deeply
into this extremely fascinating subject. Sufficient if we say here
that the only Reality is infinite perfection and wholeness, therefore
there cannot be any lack at all (in reality). The obvious lack and
poverty that we see around us are the product of the human mind. Those
who live in a consciousness of poverty and lack, go through life
closely fettered by limitation. They can never escape from poverty,
it dogs their footsteps like their shadow. In fact, it is a shadow
or reflection, in the outer life, of their state of mind and mental
attitude.

On the other hand, those who live in a consciousness of sufficiency,
are not troubled about supply. Their circumstances reflect their type
of mind and mental attitude. It does not follow that they will be
rich, for many of them prefer to live from hand to mouth, and quite
large numbers of people have no desire whatever to possess wealth
of any kind, but they have no worry about supply, for their needs
are always met by sufficiency.

Many of our readers look upon the possession of wealth as an iniquity.
Personally, I do not see how, at this stage, it can be altogether
avoided. Capital is necessary for the conducting of business and for
the carrying out of enterprises, but, as far as the hoarding of wealth
is concerned, I certainly think that it is both unwise and
unnecessary. There is nothing more deadening to the spiritual life
than riches. There is always hope for the drunkard and the harlot,
but it is most difficult although, of course, not impossible, for
one who is burdened by wealth to enter the kingdom of heaven. Some
are able to do so, but they are allowed to enter simply because they
hold their wealth as of no importance, merely as something of which
they are stewards for a season.

The hoarding of wealth is just as unnecessary as poverty. They are
both based upon a fundamental error. This error is in thinking that
all supply, being material, must necessarily have a material source:
that it is limited in quantity, and therefore must be grabbed at and
fought over. The truth is, of course, that the source of supply is
Spiritual, and therefore without limit; consequently, one who realizes
the truth has no thoughts of poverty or lack, and ceases to fear it.
On the other hand, he has no incentive to hoard or to grab wealth,
for of what use are riches to one whose supply is for ever assured?

All who enter into this truth regarding supply, either despise riches
or hold them very lightly indeed. They cease to have any desire for
wealth. Why should they have any such desire? People hanker after
wealth because they fear poverty with a deadly fear, and long for
wealth because they think that its possession would release them from
their fears. When, however, they know the truth, they also KNOW that
their wants will always be supplied, therefore they no longer desire
wealth and its cares and responsibilities.

Wealth is just as abnormal as poverty. Our Lord showed this to be
the case by choosing to be poor (but not in poverty) and by His
teaching in the Sermon on the Mount. What Jesus promised was adequate
supply, but not wealth or riches, to those who had sufficient faith
in their "Heavenly Father." Many people live this planless life of
utter dependence upon their Spiritual Source. They never become rich,
but all their needs are supplied. Something always arrives in time
to meet their requirements. Such a life requires a very live and
active faith, but its results are as certain as the rising of the
sun.

An understanding of the truth regarding supply is a necessary
foundation for the faith without which the planless life is
impossible. It is necessary to _know_ the utter falseness and
unreality of poverty and lack before we can trust in Divine Providence
or the working of Spiritual (at the same time, mental) law. It is
necessary to know that the universe is Spiritual: that God is Spirit,
in whom we live and move and have our being, and that because we are
a part, very small, but yet a part, of the Whole, all our wants, all
through the ages, must be supplied. Supply, sufficient for all our
needs, is the reality. Poverty and lack, the product of lack of faith,
of fear, of ignorance, of weakness of character, have their origin
in the human mind, and are the unreality--the negative which has no
permanence or reality.

When we have learnt the truth, it is necessary to live in the
Consciousness of it, and to think and act and praise God as though
sufficiency were already ours. Not to spend money that we cannot
afford to spend, nor to incur debt, but to live mentally in an
atmosphere of abundant supply. We have to remember that the change
in consciousness must take place first and become well-established,
before its effects can be seen to manifest in the outer life.

The entering of this higher consciousness where we know and realize
the truth, viz., that the Source of all our supply is Spirit, and
that the Divine Source is limitless, is not easy, although it is less
difficult to some than to others. It demands constant mental activity
and watchfulness: it requires persistence and perseverance in right
thinking, yet it is possible to those who are in earnest. By living
in the consciousness of God's Supply and exercising a lively faith,
the life becomes affected, principally due to both conscious and
unconscious change of action.

Having dealt with the esoteric or inner side of the subject of supply,
I will now treat it more from the outer or practical side, the latter
being, of course, just as important as the former.

The teaching of this chapter does not discourage industry and thrift,
far from it. After the Lord Christ had fed the five thousand, all
the leavings were carefully collected so that nothing should be
wasted. This is in accord with Universal law. There is a law of
economy both in the natural and spiritual worlds. Nature appears,
on the surface, to be very wasteful and prodigal, but, actually, she
never wastes anything, if it can be avoided. Therefore, the action
of the disciples was in accord with universal law. What a lesson for
us! To be careful and saving is a mark of superiority both in mind
and character. The wastefulness of the helpless poor is notorious.
Those who are "well to do" are far more careful and conserving than
the very poor. There are exceptions, it is true, but the rule is that
a man who cannot save money has not it in him to command success in
life. Inability to deny himself certain things shows a weakness of
character and lack of purpose which make success impossible. Two men
that I knew very well built fortunes upon P5, which they saved out
of meagre earnings. It is always the start that is difficult: if you
cannot overcome the preliminary difficulties you have not the
steadfast purpose to hold your own in the battle of life. On the other
hand, once the initial difficulties have been overcome, it is not
difficult to get your barque into the currents of prosperity. When
once you realize that there is unlimited abundance in which you can
share: when once you learn to live in the consciousness of this
abundance, at the same time living within your present income and
doing your present work as well as it is possible for it to be done,
you have set out on the path to affluence. One who realizes and really
believes that there is abundance and plenty for _him_, puts into
operation a powerful law which will surely bring opportunity to him,
sooner or later. Many, however, ruin their hopes by not knowing that
for a time they must live a kind of double life. They must be opulent
in consciousness, but careful and thrifty in actual practice. The
time will come when their means will largely increase, then, if they
are wise, they will live on part of their income, instead of living
up to it. This will give them a wide margin for charitable purposes,
for the taking up of further opportunities and for extensions. Many
business men have to let golden opportunities pass, simply because
they have saved little or nothing, owing to lavish private
expenditure, or they have to let other people in to share their
schemes who, in addition to taking a large share of the profits may
prove a serious handicap and hindrance in other ways.

While in its essence, the Source of Supply is spiritual, it comes
to us through material channels, and, in order to have a share in
it, it is necessary to earn it. We have to give something in exchange
for what we draw from life in the way of supply. We must give in order
to receive, and what we give must be something that the world wants
or needs.

The secret of supply is, then, to realize that there is unlimited
abundance and to live in the consciousness of it, as completely as
though no material channels existed, and, at the same time, to work
as zealously and be as careful as though there were no such thing
as spiritual supply. At the same time we must give the world something
that it wants, or otherwise serve in some useful capacity, exercising
honesty, probity and justice in all our affairs. It is folly to expect
abundance to drop ready-made in our lap; it must be earned by
intelligent and faithful service. [11]

 [11] This subject is treated fully in "The Fundamentals of True
      Success," by the same author. Published by The Science of
      Thought Press, Chichester.

Being a retired business man who started life with nothing, not even
good health, I have looked at this subject from a business man's point
of view. The principle applies, however, to every walk in life, and
each reader can adapt the teaching of this lesson to his or her
particular needs.




