CHAPTER III.

FATE OR FREE-WILL?


Great has been the controversy in the past, over the vexed subject
of fate versus free-will. On the one hand, fatalists claim that man
is so closely bound to the wheel of fate it is impossible for him
to live his life in any different way than that which is mapped out
for him. He can bring a quantity of first-class evidence in support
of his claim and believes in his theory with all his heart. On the
other hand, the advocate of free-will believes just as whole-heartedly
that man is not bound at all, being as free as air. He, too, can bring
plenty of evidence in support of his theory, which confirms him in
his belief. Each one of them thinks that the other is wrong, yet they
cannot both be wrong! Let us therefore examine the subject for
ourselves, for it is an important one, being intimately connected
with the subject which this book discusses.

First of all, let it be said, they are both wrong, in part, and right,
in part. Man is bound to the wheel, yet, at the same time, he has
free-will. Let us, therefore, explain this seeming paradox.

It is an ancient truth of the inner teaching that man, when he is
unevolved and before he is "unfolded," is bound to the wheel of fate
very closely. The unevolved man follows his desires, thus creating
for himself a future from which he cannot escape. When however, he
becomes more evolved and emancipated, he begins to resist following
his desires and strives, instead, to follow higher things. This
creates for him a better future and thus he becomes free in comparison
with his former slave state. Man is a slave to fate as long as he
is a slave to the desires of the earth plane. He is, however, free
to overcome lower things and thus rise to higher. When he does this
he ceases to create a painful future for himself and thus becomes
free.

There is, therefore, fate which is self created. It is necessary to
acknowledge this before we can proceed further. One who has not had
much experience of life or who has not been a close observer, may
deny that there is such a thing, but one who has had great changes
in his life, against which he has fought and struggled in vain, knows
that there is a purpose working behind the events of life, against
which even kings and mighty men are powerless. There come times in
man's life when he moves heaven and earth, figuratively speaking:
prays until he can pray no more: sacrifices, it may be, his money,
his health, his prospects, and does everything that is in the power
of a human being in a vain attempt to stave off a threatened disaster.
But, in spite of all his efforts, in spite of his cries to a pitiless
heaven, the relentless march of fate cannot be stayed. It moves
forward like a huge juggernaut and crushes his hopes, his dearest
idol, his very life itself or all that then makes his life worth
living--and leaves him desolate.

"If then," you may ask, "fate is so pitiless and so powerful, what
can be done with it and where does free-will enter into the matter?"
In reply it must be admitted at once that it is no use fighting fate.
The more man fights it, the more completely he gets broken. There
are certain main events in each life which must come to pass. These
events and changes are inevitable and it is hopeless to fight against
them. While these things, which constitute what we call fate, are
inevitable and therefore cannot be avoided, it rests with ourselves
how we meet these adversities and disasters. If we meet them in the
wrong way they break us. If, however, we meet them in the right way
we become stronger through discipline and experience, thus becoming
better fitted to bear life's responsibilities and to overcome its
difficulties and temptations. One who meets the setbacks, griefs,
bereavements and disasters of life in the right spirit becomes a
strong and rich character. He becomes mellowed through experience,
strong, stable, a helpful influence to all who meet him.

When things go smoothly and life is a merry round, no philosophy or
religion seems necessary, and "as for an inward power, what of it,
we can do very well without it." So say the thoughtless and
inexperienced, but there come times in every life, when, not only
is a philosophy, and that a very sound one, necessary, but also a
power, of which the finite self knows nothing, is needed in order
to raise the soul out of the dust and ashes of its despair. It is
one thing to try and meet trouble and adversity in the right spirit
and quite another thing to have the power to do so. One who thinks
that he has no power within him but that all the power is in
circumstances, can never rise victorious over his troubles and become
a conqueror over life's difficulties; but one who realizes that he
possesses a wonderful power that can raise him up, no matter how
crushed he may be, can never be a failure in life. No matter what
may happen to him he will play the man and act a noble part. He will
rise from the ruins of his life and build it anew in greater beauty
and splendour.

At this stage it is necessary to point out that there is a difference
between "big fate" and the circumstances of life. "Big fate" as it
sometimes is called antedates this present life and its cause does
not come within the scope of this little book. [3] Sufficient if we
say here that, through the ages, we reap as we sow, therefore our
future depends upon how we meet life and its difficulties _now_. Big
fate, then, cannot be successfully fought, simply because it is the
working of Omnipotent Law, but our life generally and its
circumstances depend upon how we meet "big fate," and how we recover
from it. No matter how seemingly unkind "fate" may be, it is possible
for us to make our life a beautiful thing. Inspired and energized
by the Power within, we can rise from the ashes of our dead hopes
to build anew our life in greater beauty and more in harmony with
the Divine Ideal.

  [3] In addition to the "fate" or "future" which every thought and
      action builds, there is, behind all evolution, a gigantic plan.
      This wonderful plan that embraces all, from the stupendous
      conception of a limitless universe down to the smallest
      electron, is being worked out through the ages with absolute
      precision. Nothing can prevent this plan from being brought
      into manifestation. It gathers up our past and weaves it into
      our present life, just in the same way that it is busily
      gathering up our present life and weaving it into future fate.
      It works it all into the big plan, somehow, and with infinite
      skill. The plan is bound to be followed (this, too, is fate)
      but HOW we follow it, either with willingness and happiness,
      or opposition or woe, rests with us (this is free will).

Those who have studied the Occult sciences may say "what about
planetary influences?" They will point out that, according to the
ancient science of astrology, a man's life is determined by the "star"
under which he is born. This is true, if he gives in to the influences
around his path. At different times in his life man meets with
influences that are sometimes "favourable" and at other times,
adverse. These influences are, however, only influences after all,
and one who will stand firm during periods of adversity and refuse
to give in, relying upon the great Power within to carry him through,
will find that he can weather all storms of life and come out of his
trials greatly strengthened. He cannot prevent these influences from
coming around his path of life, but he can rise superior to them.
He will meet with failures and set-backs but he will make of these,
stepping-stones to success. He will experience griefs and
bereavements, but out of these he will build a finer character and
rise to higher things. One, however, who gives in to these things,
refusing to rise again and reconstruct his life, condemns himself
to further suffering, thus making utter shipwreck of his life.

Let the despairing take heart again. Believe in the Power within you
and you will rise to heights before undreamed of. With this Power
to help you, you can accomplish the apparently impossible.


  APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III.


Our life here is not governed by a capricious Being who blows first
hot and then cold or who favours one person and tortures another.
The Supreme Being works through laws that are absolutely just and
unchanging. Therefore all disaster and trouble in the life is the
effect of certain causes. These causes are our own wrong doing in
the past, which set in motion forces, against which the power and
wit and wisdom of man are powerless. [4] However, because the
fundamental law of the Universe is love, it follows that the working
of the law of cause and effect is not vindictive. Its object is our
highest good, viz., to bring us into union with the Divine or in tune
with the Infinite. Therefore, by rising up to a higher plane and
coming more into harmony and union with the Divine, we rob even big
fate of something of its power. We cannot oppose it, for by so doing
we fight against Omnipotence, but we can _forestall_ it by doing
willingly, and of our own accord, that very thing which experience
comes to teach us.

  [4] Another cause is that the soul has failed to learn certain
      lessons, therefore, in this life, many painful experiences are
      brought to bear, in such a way, as to teach the necessary
      lessons. The lessons are, however, learnt only if painful or
      unpleasant experiences are met in the right way. So long as
      man believes that he is unjustly treated by fate and that he
      does not "deserve" what life metes out to him, he intensifies
      his troubles, both now and hereafter, through not learning the
      lessons that life desires to teach. When, however man realizes
      and admits that life is just and that the cause of all his
      troubles is within himself, he, like the prodigal son comes
      to himself and, soon afterwards, begins his homeward journey.
      Yet another cause is that the soul is deficient in character.
      Strength and stability of character can be built up through
      the soul meeting trouble and difficulty. Again it must be
      pointed out that they must be met in the right spirit.

It will be seen then, that our future depends entirely upon the way
we think and act in this life. Our future lies in our own hands. If
we violate the law of love in this life, we create disaster and
suffering for the future, which will have to be met, in the form of
"big fate" of a painful character, some day. Therefore, by right
thinking and right doing now, we not only ameliorate conditions in
this life, but we also create a future that will be more harmonious
and freer than anything we have experienced hitherto.

It is also necessary to point out that, even in this life, some of
its big disasters are the result of thoughts and actions committed
during this present existence. A youth or young man may commit a
folly that brings, in after life, a terrible retribution. Or he may
do another man a grievous wrong and years afterwards someone else
does the same wrong to him. It is always an eye for an eye and a
tooth for a tooth on this plane of cause and effect, but the Great
Way Shower, by His teaching of the power of love, enables us to rise
above these lower things and live a life of harmony and peace.




