The Project Gutenberg eBook of Within You is the Power
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Within You is the Power

Author: Henry Thomas Hamblin


        
Release date: January 1, 2005 [eBook #7224]
                Most recently updated: December 30, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/7224

Credits: Produced by Wendy Crockett






Produced by Wendy Crockett




Within You is the Power.

by

HENRY THOMAS HAMBLIN




CONTENTS.

 PREFACE
 CHAPTER I.--Infinite Life and Power
 CHAPTER II.--The Overcoming of Life's Difficulties
 CHAPTER III.--Fate or Free-Will?
 CHAPTER IV.--Cause and Effect
 CHAPTER V.--Success
 CHAPTER VI.--Health
 CHAPTER VII.--The Secret of Abundant Supply
 CHAPTER VIII.--The Power and Limitations of the Sub-conscious Mind
 CHAPTER IX.--The Use of the Spiritual or Super-conscious Mind
 CHAPTER X.--Character Building and the Overcoming of Habit
 CHAPTER XI.--Happiness and Joy
 CHAPTER XII.--The Use and Mis-Use of Mental and Spiritual Powers
 CHAPTER XIII.--Overcoming Limitations and Awakening Inward Powers




PREFACE.


There is a power lying hidden in man, by the use of which he can rise
to higher and better things.

There is in man a greater Self, that transcends the finite self of
the sense-man, even as the mountain towers above the plain.

The object of this little book is to help men and women to bring their
inward powers of mind and spirit into expression, wisely and in
harmony with universal law; to build up character, and to find within
themselves that wondrous Self, which is their real self, and which,
when found, reveals to them that they are literally and truly sons
of God and daughters of the Most High.

There is no way whereby the discipline of life can be avoided. There
is no means by which fate can be "tricked," nor cunning device by
which the great cosmic plan can be evaded. Each life must meet its
own troubles and difficulties: each soul must pass through its deep
waters, every heart must encounter sorrow and grief. But none need
be overwhelmed in the great conflicts of life, for one who has learned
the great secret of his identity with the Universal life and Power,
dwells in an impregnable city, built upon and into the Rock of Truth,
against which the storms of life beat in vain.

While this little work does not offer any vain promises of an easy
life--for, if this were possible, it would be the greatest of all
disasters--but rather endeavours to show how to become so strong that
life looks almost easy by comparison (the life or fate does not change
or become easier, but the individual alters and becomes stronger),
yet, it does show the reader how to avoid making his life more
difficult than it need be. Most people's lives would be less filled
with trouble and suffering if they took life in the right spirit and
acted in harmony with Universal Law.

It is hoped that this little book may help many to come into harmony
with life's law and purpose and thus avoid much needless suffering:
to find the Greater Self within, which discovery brings with it a
realization of absolute security: to bring into expression and wisely
use their inner spiritual and mental forces and thus enter a life
of overcoming and almost boundless power.




CHAPTER I.

INFINITE LIFE AND POWER.


Man possesses, did he but know it, illimitable Power. [1] This Power
is of the Spirit, therefore, it is unconquerable. It is not the power
of the ordinary life, or finite will, or human mind. It transcends
these, because, being spiritual, it is of a higher order than either
physical or even mental. This Power lies dormant, and is hidden within
man until he is sufficiently evolved and unfolded to be entrusted
with its use.

  [1] The powers of the sub-conscious mind are dealt with in other
      chapters. The Powers of the Spirit are far greater and finer
      than those of the sub-conscious mind.

Thought is a spiritual power of tremendous potency, but this is not
the power of which we speak. By thought, man can either raise himself
up and connect himself with the "Power House" of the Universe, or
cut himself off entirely from the Divine Inflow. His thought is his
greatest weapon, because, by it he can either draw on the Infinite
or sever himself (in consciousness, but not in reality) from his
Divine Source.

Through the Divine Spark within him, which is really his real Self,
man is connected with the Infinite. Divine Life and Power are his,
if he _realizes_ that they are his. So long as he is ignorant of his
oneness with the Divine Source of all life, he is incapable of
appropriating the power that is really his. If, however, he enters
into this inner knowledge, he finds himself the possessor of infinite
power and unlimited resources.

This Power, then, is God's, yet it is also man's, but it is not
revealed to him until he is fit to be entrusted with it. It is only
when man realizes his oneness with his Divine Source that he becomes
filled with Its power. Many teachers and initiates lament the fact
that certain secrets are being spread broadcast to-day; secrets that,
in the past, were kept closely guarded. They fear that unillumined
and un-evolved people may make destructive use of spiritual power.
This, to the writer, appears to be improbable. It is true that strong
personalities, who have a great belief in their own power to achieve
and succeed, draw unconsciously on hidden powers, and thus are able
to raise themselves high above their fellows. The use, however, that
they can make of spiritual power for base purposes is limited, and
is not to be feared. There are others, of course, who are misusing
their powers. These are black magicians, and while they may do a
certain amount of harm, they become reduced, ultimately, to beggary
and impotence. There are also others who spend the whole of their
spare time searching for knowledge of this very subject. They read
every occult book they can lay hands on, but they never find that
for which they seek. There are spiritual powers and influences that
withhold the eyes of the seekers from seeing, until they are ready
for the revelation. When man, in his search for Truth, has given up
all selfish striving after unworthy things, and has ceased to use
his self-will in conflict with the greater Will of the Whole, he is
ready for the revelation of his oneness with the Infinite. Yielding
implicitly to the Will of the Whole may seem, to the unillumined,
an act of weakness, yet it is the entrance to a life of almost
boundless power.

Man is not separate from his Divine Source and never has been. He
is, in reality, one with the Infinite. The separation which he feels
and experiences is mental, and is due to his blindness and unbelief.
Man can never be separated from Spirit, for he himself is Spirit.
He is an integral part of one complete whole. He lives and moves and
has his being in God (Universal, Omnipresent Spirit), and God (Spirit)
dwells in him. The majority of people are unaware of this intimate
relationship with the Divine, and, because they are unaware, or
because they refuse to believe it, they are, in one sense, separated
from the inner life of God. Yet this separation is only in their
thoughts and beliefs, and not in reality. Man is not separated and
never can be, yet so long as he believes that he is separate and
alone, he will be as weak and helpless as though he actually were.
As soon as man realizes the truth of his relationship to the Infinite,
he passes from weakness to power, from death unto life. One moment
he is in the desert, afar off, weak, separate, and alone; the next,
he realizes that he is nothing less than a son of God, with all a
son's privileges and powers. He realizes, in a flash, that he is one
with his Divine Source, and that he can never be separated. He awakens
also to the fact that all the Power of the Infinite is his to draw
upon; that he can never really fail, that he is marching on to
victory.

It will thus be seen how great is the power of man's thought. While
thought is not the power of the Spirit, it is the power by which man
either connects himself up with the Infinite Power, opening himself
to the Divine Inflow, or cuts himself off and separates himself from
his Spiritual Source. Thus, in a sense, man is what he thinks he is.
If he thinks he is separate from God and cut off from His Power, then
it is as though this were really the case, and he is just as impotent
and miserable as though he actually existed apart from God. On the
other hand, if he thinks and believes that he is one with the
Infinite, he finds that it is gloriously true, and that he is really
a son of God. If he believes and thinks that he is a mere material
being, then he lives the limited life of a material being, and is
never able to rise above it. But if, on the contrary, he thinks and
believes that he is a spiritual being, then he finds that he possesses
all the powers of a spiritual being.

Again, if he thinks that his work is difficult and that he is not
equal to his tasks, he finds that really his tasks are difficult and
beyond his powers. Yet on the other hand, if he believes his work
is easy, or, at any rate, within his powers, he finds that such is
the case, and that he can do his work with ease.

The power within is infinite, for, by faith in it, man is directly
"coupled up" with the Spiritual Power of the Universe. The Divine
Spark within him connects him to the Sacred Flame, thus making him
potentially a god in the making.

A change then, must take place within man before he can enter into
his Divine inheritance. He must learn to think after the Spirit,
_i.e._, as a spiritual being, instead of after the flesh, _i.e._,
as a material creature. Like the prodigal son he must "come to
himself," and leave the husks and the swine in the far country,
returning to his Father's house, where there is bread (of life)
enough and to spare.




