CHAPTER III.

THE CASE OF WILD ANIMALS.


That wild animals, no less than domestic animals, have their rights,
albeit of a less positive character and far less easy to define, is
an essential point which follows directly from the acceptance of the
general principle of a _jus animalium_. It is of the utmost importance
to emphasize the fact that, whatever the _legal_ fiction may have been,
or may still be, the rights of animals are not _morally_ dependent on
the so-called rights of property.

The domination of property has left its trail indelibly on the records
of this question. Until the passing of “Martin’s Act” in 1822, the
most atrocious cruelty, even to domestic animals, could only be
punished where there was proved to be an infringement of the rights
of ownership. Some measure of legal protection was, as I have said,
accorded to wild animals in the Wild Animals in Captivity Act of 1900,
which was repealed, re-enacted, and extended in the Protection of
Animals Act, 1911; which Act was itself strengthened by an Amendment
passed in 1921, prohibiting the coursing or hunting of a wild animal
in an enclosed space from which it has no reasonable chance of escape.
With this exception, it is permissible for anyone to kill or torture
them with impunity, except where the sacred privileges of “property”
are thereby offended. “Everywhere,” it has been well said, “it is
absolutely a capital crime to be an unowned creature.”

Yet surely an unowned creature has the same right as another to live
his life unmolested and uninjured except when this is in some way
inimical to human welfare. We are justified by the strongest of all
instincts, that of self-defence, in safe-guarding ourselves against
such a multiplication of any species of animal as might imperil
the established supremacy of man; but we are _not_ justified in
unnecessarily killing--still less in torturing--any harmless being
whatsoever. In this respect the position of wild animals, in their
relation to man, is somewhat analogous to that of the uncivilized
towards the civilized nations. Nothing is more difficult than to
determine precisely to what extent it is morally permissible to
interfere with the autonomy of savage tribes--an interference which
seems in some cases to conduce to the general progress of the race, in
others to foster the worst forms of cruelty and injustice; but it is
beyond question that savages, like other people, have the right to be
exempt from all wanton insult and degradation.

In the same way, while admitting that man is justified, by the
exigencies of his own destiny, in asserting his supremacy over the
wild animals, we must deny him any right to turn his protectorate into
a tyranny, or to inflict one atom more of subjection and pain than is
absolutely unavoidable. To take advantage of the sufferings of animals,
whether wild or tame, for the gratification of sport, or gluttony, or
fashion, is quite incompatible with any possible assertion of animals’
rights. We may kill, if necessary, but never torture or degrade.

  “The laws of self-defence,” says an old writer,[24] “undoubtedly
  justify us in destroying those animals who would destroy us, who
  injure our properties or annoy our persons; but not even these,
  whenever their situation incapacitates them from hurting us. I know
  of no right which we have to shoot a bear on an inaccessible island
  of ice, or an eagle on the mountain’s top, whose lives cannot injure
  us, nor deaths procure us any benefit. We are unable to give life,
  and therefore ought not to take it away from the meanest insect
  without sufficient reason.”

I reserve, for fuller consideration in subsequent chapters, certain
problems which are suggested by the wholesale slaughter of wild animals
by the huntsman or the trapper, for purposes which are loosely supposed
to be inevitable. Meantime a word must be said about the condition of
those tamed or caged animals which, though wild by nature, and not
bred in captivity, are yet to a certain extent “domesticated”--a class
which stands midway between the true domestic and the wild. Is the
imprisonment of such animals a violation of the principle we have laid
down? In most cases I fear this question can only be answered in the
affirmative.

And here, once more I must protest against the common assumption that
these captive animals are laid _under an obligation_ to man by the
very fact of their captivity, and that therefore no complaint can
be made on the score of their loss of freedom and the many miseries
involved therein! It is extraordinary that even humane thinkers and
earnest champions of animals’ rights should permit themselves to be
misled by this most fallacious and flimsy line of argument. “Harmful
animals,” says one of these writers,[25] “and animals with whom man has
to struggle for the fruits of the earth, may of course be so shut up:
they gain by it, for otherwise they would not have been let live.”

And so in like manner it is sometimes contended that a menagerie is a
sort of paradise for wild beasts, whose loss of liberty is more than
compensated by the absence of the constant apprehension and insecurity
which, it is conveniently assumed, weigh so heavily on their spirits.
But all this notion of their “gaining by it” is in truth nothing
more than a mere arbitrary supposition; for, in the first place, a
speedy death may, for all we know, be very preferable to a protracted
death-in-life; while, secondly, the pretence that wild animals enjoy
captivity is even more absurd than the episcopal contention that the
life of a domestic animal is “one of very great comfort, according to
the animal’s own standard.”

To take a wild animal from its free natural state, full of abounding
egoism and vitality, and to shut it up for the wretched remainder of
its life in a cell where it has just space to turn round, and where it
necessarily loses every distinctive feature of its character--this
appears to me to be as downright a denial as could well be imagined
of the theory of animals’ rights. Nor is there much force in the
plea founded on the alleged scientific value of these zoological
institutions, at any rate in the case of the wilder and less tractable
animals, for it cannot be maintained that the establishment of
wild-beast shows is in any way necessary for the advancement of human
knowledge. For what do the good people see, who go to the gardens on a
half-holiday afternoon to poke their umbrellas at a blinking eagle-owl,
or to throw dog-biscuits down the expansive throat of a hippopotamus?
Not wild beasts or wild birds certainly, for there never have been
or can be such in the best of all possible menageries, but merely
the outer semblances and _simulacra_ of the denizens of forest and
prairie--poor spiritless remnants of what were formerly wild animals.
To kill and stuff these victims of our morbid curiosity, instead of
immuring them in lifelong imprisonment, would be at once a humaner and
a cheaper method, and could not possibly be of less use to science.[26]

But of course these remarks do not apply, with anything like the same
force, to the taming of such wild animals as are readily domesticated
in captivity, or trained by man to some intelligible and practical
purpose. For example, though we may look forward to the time when it
will not be deemed necessary to convert wild elephants into beasts
of burden, it must be acknowledged that the exaction of such service,
however questionable in itself, is very different from condemning an
animal to a long term of useless and deadening imbecility. There can be
no absolute standard of morals in these matters, whether it be human
liberty or animal liberty that is at stake; I merely contend that it is
as incumbent on us to show good reason for curtailing the one as the
other. This would be at once recognized, but for the prevalent habit of
regarding the lower animals as devoid of purpose and individuality.

The caging of wild song-birds is another practice which deserves the
strongest reprobation. It is often pleaded that the amusement given
by these unfortunate prisoners to the still more unfortunate human
prisoners of the sick-room, or the smoky city, is a justification of
their sacrifice; but surely such excuses rest only on habit--habitual
inability or unwillingness to look facts in the face. Few invalids, I
fancy, would be greatly cheered by the captive life that hangs at their
window, if they had fully considered how blighted and sterilized a life
it must be. The bird-catcher’s trade and the bird-catcher’s shop are
alike full of horrors, and they are horrors which are due entirely to a
silly fashion and a habit of callous thoughtlessness, not on the part
of the ruffianly bird-catcher (ruffianly enough, too often) who has to
bear the burden of the odium attaching to these cruelties, but of the
respectable customers who buy captured larks and linnets without the
smallest scruple or consideration.

Finally, let me point out that if we desire to cultivate a closer
intimacy with the wild animals, it must be an intimacy based on a
genuine love for them as living beings and fellow-creatures, not on the
superior power or cunning by which we can drag them from their native
haunts, warp the whole purpose of their lives, and degrade them to the
level of pets, or curiosities, or captives. The sanctuaries which the
parks of some large towns now afford to birds, squirrels, etc., suggest
what our relations with wild animals _might_ be, under more humane
conditions.

Of all uses to which animals can be put--and this applies to the
domesticated as well as to the wild--the silliest, perhaps, is that
of training them to “perform.” The true interest of animal life lies
in its naturalness; and to see a dog, or horse, or lion performing a
“trick” is a sight which ought to cause disgust rather than pleasure
in any rational mind, especially as the process of training in most,
if not in all cases, involves the practice of cruelty. Humane persons
should discountenance every sort of entertainment in which animals are
introduced, from the dancing bear in the village to the more elaborate
but not less idiotic performances on the stage. Many of them are cruel;
all of them are stupid; most of them are both.




