CHAPTER V. LIFE AND DEATH


_Invisible Helpers and Mediums._

There are two classes of people in the world. In one class the vital and
dense bodies are so firmly cemented that the ethers cannot be extracted
under any circumstances but remain with the dense body at all times and
under all conditions from birth to death. Those people are insensible to
any supersensuous sights or sounds. They are therefore usually exceedingly
sceptic, and believe nothing exists but what _they_ can see.

There is another class of people in whom the connection between the dense
and the vital bodies is more or less loose, so that the ether of their
vital bodies vibrates at a higher rate than in the first class mentioned.
These people are therefore more or less sensitive to the spiritual world.

This class of sensitives may again be divided. Some are weak characters,
dominated by the will of others in a _negative_ manner, as mediums, who
are the prey of disembodied spirits desirous of obtaining a physical body
when they have lost their own by death.

The other class of sensitives are strong _positive_ characters, who act
only from within, according to their own will. They may develop into
trained clairvoyants, and be their own masters instead of slaves of a
disembodied spirit. In some sensitives of both classes it is possible to
extract part of the ether which forms the vital body. When a disembodied
spirit obtains a subject of that nature, it develops the sensitive as _a
materializing medium_. The man who is capable of extracting his own vital
body by an act of will, becomes a citizen of two worlds, independent and
free. Such are usually known as _Invisible Helpers_. There are certain
other abnormal conditions where the vital body and the dense body are
separated totally or in part, for instance if we place our limb in an
uncomfortable position so that circulation of the blood ceases. Then we
may see the etheric limb hanging down below the visible limb as a
stocking. When we restore circulation and the etheric limb seeks to enter
into place, an intense prickly sensation is felt, due to the fact that the
little streams of force, which radiate all through the ether, seek to
permeate the molecules of the limb and stir them into renewed vibration.
When a person is drowning, the vital body also separates from the dense
vehicle and the intense prickly pain incident to resuscitation is also due
to the cause mentioned.

While we are awake and going about our work in the Physical World, the
desire body and mind both permeate the dense and the vital bodies, and
there is a constant war between the desire nature and the vital body. The
vital body is continually engaged in building up the human organism, while
the impulses of the desire body tend to tire and to break down tissue.
Gradually, in the course of the day, the vital body loses ground before
the onslaughts of the desire body, poisons of decay slowly accumulate and
the flow of vital fluid becomes more and more sluggish, until at length it
is incapable of moving the muscles. The body then feels heavy and drowsy.
At last the vital body collapses, as it were, the little streams of force
which permeate each atom seem to shrivel up, and the Ego is forced to
abandon its body to the restorative powers of sleep.

When a building has become dilapidated and is to be _restored_ and put in
thorough repair, the tenants must move out to let the workmen have a free
field. So also when the building of a spirit has become unfit for further
use, it must withdraw therefrom. As the desire body caused the damage, it
is a logical conclusion that that also must be removed. Every night when
our body has become tired, the higher vehicles are withdrawn, only the
dense and vital bodies are left upon the bed.

Then the process of restoration commences and lasts for a longer or a
shorter time according to circumstances.

At times however, the grip of the desire body upon our denser vehicles is
so strong that it refuses to let go. When it has become so interested in
the proceedings of the day, it continues to ruminate over them after the
collapse of the physical body, and is perhaps only half extracted from
that vehicle. Then it may transmit sights and sounds of the desire world
to the brain. But as the connections are necessarily askew under such
conditions, the most confused dreams result. Furthermore, as the desire
body compels motion, the body is very apt to toss about when the desire
body is not fully extracted, hence the restless sleep which usually
accompanies dreams of a confused nature.

There are times of course when dreams are prophetic and come true, but
such dreams result only _after_ complete extraction of the desire body,
under circumstances where the spirit has seen some danger perhaps, which
may befall, and then impresses the fact upon the brain _at the moment of
awakening_.

It also happens that the spirit goes upon a soul flight and omits to
perform its part of the work of restoration, then the body will not be fit
to re-enter in the morning, so it sleeps on. The spirit may thus roam
afield for a number of days, or even weeks, before it again enters its
physical body and assumes the normal routine of alternating waking and
sleep. This condition is called _trance_, and the spirit may remember upon
its return what it has seen and heard in the super-physical realm, or it
may have forgotten, according to the stage of its development and the
depth of the trance condition. When the trance is very light, the spirit
is usually present in the room where its body lies all the time, and upon
its return to the body it will be able to recount to relatives all they
said and did while its body lay unconscious. Where the trance is deeper,
the returning spirit will usually be unconscious of what happened around
its body, but may recount experiences from the invisible world.

A few years ago a little girl by the name of Florence Bennett in Kankakee,
Illinois, fell into such a trance. She returned to the body every few
days, but stayed within only a few hours each time, and the whole trance
lasted three weeks, more or less. During the returns to her body she told
relatives that in her absence she seemed to be in a place inhabited by all
the people who died. But she stated that none of them spoke about dying
and no one among them seemed to realize that they were dead. Among those
she had seen was a locomotive engineer who had been accidentally killed.
His body was mangled in the accident which caused death. The little girl
perceived him there walking about minus arms, and with lesions upon his
head, all of which is in line with facts usually seen by mystic
investigators. Persons who have been hurt in accidents go about thus,
until they learn that a mere wish to have their body made whole will
supply a new arm or limb, for desire stuff is most quickly and readily
molded by thought.

_Death._

After a longer or shorter time there comes in each life a point where the
experiences which a spirit can gain from its present environment have been
exhausted, and life terminates in death.

Death may be sudden and seemingly unexpected, as for instance by
earthquake, upon the battle-field, or by accident, as we call it, but in
reality, death is never accidental or unforeseen by Higher Powers. Not a
sparrow falls to the ground without divine Will. There are along life’s
path partings of the way, as it were; on one side the main line of life
continues onward, the other path leads into what we might call a blind
alley. If the man takes that path, it soon ends in death. We are here in
life for the sake of gaining experience and each life has a certain
harvest to reap. If we order our life in such a manner that we gain the
knowledge it is intended we should acquire, we continue in life, and
opportunities of different kinds constantly come our way. But if we
neglect them, and the life goes into paths which are not congruous to our
individual development it would be a waste of time to let us stay in such
environment. Therefore the Great and Wise Beings, Who are behind the scene
of evolution, terminate our life, that we may have a fresh start in a
different sphere of influence. The law of conservation of energy is not
confined to the Physical World, but operates in the spiritual realms also.
There is nothing in life that has not its purpose. We do wrong to rail
against circumstances, no matter how disagreeable, we should rather
endeavor to learn the lessons which are contained therein, that we may
live a long and useful life. Some one may object, and say: You are
inconsistent in your teachings. You say there is really no death, that we
go into a brighter existence, and that we have to learn other lessons
there in a different sphere of usefulness! Why then aim to live a long
life here?

It is very true that we make these claims, and they are perfectly
consistent with the other assertions just mentioned, but there are lessons
to be learned _here_ which cannot be learned in the other worlds, and we
have to bring up this physical body through the useless years of
childhood, through hot and impulsive youth, to the ripeness of manhood or
womanhood, before it becomes of true spiritual use. The longer we live
after maturity has been attained, when we have commenced to look upon the
serious side of life and started to truly learn lessons which make for
soulgrowth, the more experience we shall gather and the richer our harvest
will be. Then, in a later existence, we shall be so much more advanced,
and capable of taking up tasks that would be impossible with less length
of life and breadth of activity. Besides, it is hard to die for the man in
the prime of life with a wife and growing family whom he loves; with
ambitions of greatness unfulfilled; with hosts of friends about him, and
with interests all centered upon the material plane of existence. It is
sad for the woman whose heart is bound up in home and the little ones she
has reared, to leave them, perhaps without anyone to care for them; to
know that they have to fight their way alone through the early years when
her tender care is needed, and perhaps to see those little ones abused,
and she unable to lift a hand, though her heart may bleed as freely as it
would in earth life. All these things are sad, and _they bind the spirit
to earth_ for a much longer time than ordinarily, they hinder it from
reaping the experiences it should reap upon the other side of death, and
they make it desirable along with other reasons already mentioned to live
a long life before passing onwards.

The difference between those who pass out at a ripe old age, and one who
leaves this earth in the prime of life, may be illustrated by the manner
in which the seed clings to a fruit in an unripe state. A great deal of
force is necessary to tear the stone from a green peach; it has such a
tenacious hold upon the fruit that shreds of pulp adhere to it when
forcibly removed, so also the spirit clings to the flesh in middle life
and a certain part of its material interest remain and bind it to earth
after death. On the other hand, when a life has been lived to the full,
when the spirit has had time to realize its ambitions or to find out their
futility, when the duties of life have been performed and satisfaction
rests upon the brow of an aged man or woman; or when the life has been
misspent and the pangs of conscience have worked upon the man and shown
him his mistakes; when, in fact, the spirit has learned the lessons of
life, as it must have to come to old age; then it may be likened to the
seed of the ripe fruit which falls out clean, without a vestige of flesh
clinging thereto, at the moment the encasing pulp is opened. Therefore we
say, as before, that though there is a brighter existence in store for
those who have lived well, it is nevertheless best to live a long life and
to live it to the fullest extent possible.

We also maintain, that no matter what may be the circumstances of a man’s
death, it is not accidental; it has either been brought about by his own
neglect to embrace opportunities of growth, or else life has been lived to
the ultimate possible. There is one exception to that rule, and that is
due to man’s exercise of his divine prerogative of interference. If we
lived according to schedule, if we all assimilated the experiences
designed for our growth by the Creative Powers, we should live to the
ultimate length, but _we ourselves_ usually shorten our lives by not
taking advantage of opportunities, and it also happens that _other men_
may shorten our lives and cut them off as suddenly as the so-called
accident whereby the divine rulers terminate our life here. In other
words, murder, or fatal accidents brought about _by human __
carelessness_, are in reality the only termination to life not planned by
invisible leaders of humanity. No one is ever compelled to do murder or
other evil, or there could not come to them a just retribution for their
acts. The Christ said that evil must come but _woe unto him by whom it
cometh_, and to harmonize that with the law of divine justice: “as a man
soweth, so shall he also reap,” _there must at least be absolute free will
in respect to evil acts_.

There are also cases where a person lives such a full and good life of
such vast benefit to humanity and to himself, that his days are lengthened
beyond the ultimate, as they are shortened by neglect, but such cases are
of course too few to allow of their being dwelt upon at length.

Where death is not sudden as in the case of accidents, but occurs at home
after an illness, quietly and peacefully, dying persons usually experience
a falling upon them as of a pall of great darkness shortly before
termination of life. Many pass out from the body under that condition, and
do not see the light again until they have entered the super-physical
realms. There are many other cases however, where the darkness lifts
before the final release from the body. Then the dying person views both
worlds at once, and is cognizant of the presence of both dead and living
friends. Under such circumstances it very often happens that a mother sees
some of her children who have gone before, and she will exclaim joyously:
Oh, there is Johnny standing at the foot of my bed; my but hasn’t he
grown! The living relatives may feel shocked and uneasy, thinking the
mother suffering from hallucinations, while in reality she is more
clear-sighted than they; she perceives those who have passed beyond the
veil who have come to greet and help her to make herself at home in the
new world she is entering.

Each human being is an individual, separate and apart from all others, and
as experiences in the life of each differ from those of all others in the
interval from the cradle to the grave, so we may also reasonably infer
that the experiences of each spirit vary from those of every other spirit
when it passes through the gates of birth and death. We print what
purports to be a _spirit message_ communicated by the late Professor James
of Harvard at the Boston spirit temple, and in which he describes
sensations which he felt when passing through the gate of death. We do not
vouch for its authenticity as we have not investigated the matter
personally.

Professor James had promised to communicate after death with his friends
in this life, and the whole world of psychic research was and still is on
watch for a word from him. Several mediums have claimed that Professor
James has communicated through them, but the most remarkable are those
given through the Boston spirit temple as follows:


    “And this is death, only to fall asleep, only to awaken in the
    morning and to know that all is well. I am not dead, only arisen.

                  -------------------------------------

    “I only know that I experienced a great shock through my entire
    system, as if some mighty bond had been rent asunder. For a moment
    I was dazed and lost consciousness. When I awakened I found myself
    standing beside the old body which had served me faithfully and
    well. To say that I was surprised would only inadequately express
    the sensation that thrilled my very being, and I realized that
    some wonderful change had taken place. Suddenly I became conscious
    that my body was surrounded by many of my friends, and an
    uncontrollable desire took possession of me to speak and touch
    them that they might know that I still lived. Drawing a little
    nearer to that which was so like and yet unlike myself, I
    stretched forth my hand and touched them, but they heeded me not.”

                  -------------------------------------

    “Then it was that the full significance of the great change that
    had taken place flashed upon my newly awakened senses; then it was
    that I realized that an impenetrable barrier separated me from my
    loved ones on earth, and that this great change which had taken
    place was indeed death. A sense of weariness and longing for rest
    took possession of me. I seemed to be transported through space,
    and I lost consciousness, to awaken in a land so different and yet
    so similar to the one which I had lately left. It was not possible
    for me to describe my sensations when I again regained
    consciousness and realized that, though dead, I was still alive.

    “When I first became conscious of my new environment I was resting
    in a beautiful grove, and was realizing as never before what it
    was to be at peace with myself and all the world.”

                  -------------------------------------

    “I know that only with the greatest difficulty shall I be enabled
    to express to you my sensations when I fully realized that I had
    awakened to a new life. All was still, no sound broke the silence.
    Darkness had surrounded me. In fact, I seemed to be enveloped in a
    heavy mist, beyond which my gaze could not penetrate. Soon in the
    distance I discerned a faint glimmer of light, which slowly
    approached me, and then, to my wonder and joy, I beheld the face
    of her who had been my guiding star in the early days of my earth
    life.”


One of the saddest sights witnessed by the seer at a death-bed is the
tortures to which we often subject our dying friends on account of
ignorance of how to care for them in that condition. We have a science of
birth; obstetricians who have been trained for years in their profession
and have developed a wonderful skill, assist the little stranger into this
world. We have also trained nurses attendant upon mother and child, the
ingenuity of brilliant minds is focused upon the problem of how to make
maternity easier, neither pains nor money are spared in these beneficent
efforts for one whom we have never seen, but when the friend of a
lifetime, the man who has served his kind well and nobly in profession,
state, or church, is to leave the scene of his labors for a new field of
activity, when the woman—who has labored to no less good purpose in
bringing up a family to take its part in the world’s work—has to leave
that home and family, when one whom we have loved all our lives is about
to bid us the final farewell, we stand by utterly at a loss how to help;
perhaps we even do the very things most detrimental to the comfort and
welfare of the departing one.

Probably there is no form of torture more commonly inflicted upon the
dying than that which is caused by administering stimulants. Such potions
have the effect of drawing a departing spirit into its body with the force
of a catapult, to remain and to suffer for sometime longer. Investigators
of conditions beyond have heard many complaints of such treatment. When it
is seen that death must inevitably ensue, let not selfish desire to keep a
departing spirit a little longer prompt us to inflict such tortures upon
it. The death chamber should be a place of the utmost quiet, a place of
peace and of prayer, for at that time, and _for three and one-half days
after the last breath_, the spirit is passing through a Gethsemane and
needs all the assistance that can be given. The value of the life that has
just been passed depends greatly upon conditions which then prevail about
the body; yes even the conditions of its future life are influenced by our
attitude during that time, so that if ever we were our brother’s keeper in
life, we are a thousand times more so at death.

Post-mortem examinations, embalming and cremation during the period
mentioned, not only disturb the passing spirit mentally, but are
productive of a certain amount of pain, for there is still a slight
connection with the discarded vehicle. If sanitary laws require us to
prevent decomposition while thus keeping the body for cremation, it may be
packed in ice till the three and one-half days have passed. After that
time the spirit will not suffer, no matter what happens to the body.

_The Panorama of a Past Life._

No matter how long we may keep the spirit from passing out however, at
last there will come a time when no stimulant can hold it and the last
breath is drawn. Then the silver cord, of which the Bible speaks, and
which holds the higher and the lower vehicles together, snaps in the heart
and causes that organ to stop. That rupture releases the vital body, and
that with the desire body and mind float above the visible body for from
one to three and one-half days while the spirit is engaged in reviewing
the past life, an exceedingly important part of its post-mortem
experience. Upon that review depends its whole existence from death to a
new birth.

The question may arise in the student’s mind: How can we review our past
life from the cradle to the grave when we do not even remember what we did
a month ago, and to form a proper basis for our future life, this record
ought to be very accurate, but even the best memory is faulty? When we
understand the difference between the conscious and sub-conscious memory
and the manner in which the latter operates, the difficulty vanishes. This
difference and the manner in which the sub-conscious memory keeps an
accurate record of our life experiences may be best understood by an
illustration, as follows: When we go into a field and view the surrounding
landscape, vibrations in the ether carry to us a picture of everything
within the range of our vision. It is as sad as it is true however, that
“we have eyes and see not,” as the Savior said. These vibrations impinge
upon the retina of our eyes, even to the very smallest details, but they
usually do not penetrate to our consciousness, and therefore are not
remembered. Even the most powerful impressions fade in course of time so
that we cannot call them back at will when they are stored in our
conscious memory.

When a photographer goes afield _with his camera_ the results which he
obtains are different. The ether vibrations emanating from all things upon
which his camera is focused, transmit to the sensitive plate an impression
of the landscape true to the minutest detail, and, mark this well, this
true and accurate picture is in no wise dependent upon whether the
photographer is observant or not. It will remain upon the plate and may be
reproduced under proper conditions. Such is the subconscious memory, and
it is generated automatically by each of us during every moment of time,
independently of our volition, in the following manner.

From the first breath which we draw after birth to our last dying gasp, we
inspire air which is charged with pictures of our surroundings, and the
same ether which carries that picture to the retina of our eye, is inhaled
into our lungs where it enters the blood. Thus it reaches the heart in due
time. In the left ventricle of that organ, near the apex, there is one
little atom which is particularly sensitized, and which remains in the
body all through life. It differs in this respect from all other atoms
which come and go, for it is the particular property of God, and of a
certain spirit. This atom may be called the book of the Recording Angel,
for as the blood passes through the heart, cycle after cycle, the pictures
of our good and evil acts are inscribed thereon to the minutest detail.
This record may be called the sub-conscious memory. It forms the basis of
our future life when reproduced as a panorama just subsequent to death. By
removal of the seed atom—which corresponds to the sensitized plate in a
camera,—the reflecting ether of the vital body serves as a focus, and as
the life unrolls slowly backwards from death to birth the pictures thereof
are etched into the desire body which will be our vehicle during our
sojourn in purgatory and the first heaven where evil is eradicated and
good assimilated, so that in a future life the former may serve as
_conscience_ to withhold the man from repeating mistakes of the past, and
the latter will spur us to greater good.

A phenomenon similar to the panorama of life usually takes place when a
person is drowning. People who have been resuscitated speak of having seen
their whole life _in a flash_. That is because under such conditions the
vital body also leaves the dense body. Of course there is no rupture of
the silver cord, or life could not be restored. Unconsciousness follows
quickly in drowning, while in the usual post-mortem review the
consciousness continues until the vital body collapses in the same manner
that it does when we go to sleep. Then consciousness ceases for a while
and the panorama is terminated. Therefore also the time occupied by the
panorama varies with different persons, according to whether the vital
body was strong and healthy, or had become thin and emaciated by
protracted illness. The longer the time spent in review, and the more
quiet and peaceful the surroundings, the deeper will be the etching which
is made in the desire body. As already said, that has a most important and
far reaching effect, for then the sufferings which the spirit will realize
in purgatory on account of bad habits and misdeeds will be much more keen
than if there is only a slight impression, and in a future life the still
small voice of conscience will warn so much more insistently against
mistakes which caused sufferings in the past.

When conditions are such at the time of death that the spirit is disturbed
by outside conditions, for instance the din and turmoil of a battle, the
harrowing conditions of an accident or the hysterical wailings of
relatives, the distraction prevents it from realizing an appropriate depth
in the etching upon the desire body. Consequently its post-mortem
existence becomes vague and insipid, the spirit does not harvest fruits of
experience as it should have done had it passed out of the body in peace
and under normal conditions. It would therefore lack incentive to good in
a future life, and miss the warning against evil which a deep etching of
the panorama of life would have given. Thus its growth would be retarded
in a very marked degree, but the beneficent powers in charge of evolution
take certain steps to compensate for our ignorant treatment of the dying
and other untoward circumstances mentioned. What these steps are, we shall
discuss when considering the life of children in heaven, for the present
let it be sufficient to say that in God’s kingdom every evil is always
transmuted to a greater good though the process may not be at once
apparent.

_Purgatory._

During life the collapse of the vital body at night terminates our view of
the world about us, and causes us to lose ourselves in unconsciousness of
sleep. When the vital body collapses just subsequent to death, and the
panorama of life is terminated, we also lose consciousness for a time
which varies according to the individual. A darkness seems to fall upon
the spirit, then after a while it wakes up and begins dimly to perceive
the light of the other world, but is only gradually accustomed to the
altered conditions. It is an experience similar to that which we have when
coming out of a darkened room into sunlight, which blinds us by its
brilliancy, until the pupils of our eyes have contracted so that they
admit a quantity of light bearable to our organism.

If under such a condition we turn momentarily from the bright sunlight and
look back into the darkened room, objects there will be much more plain to
our vision than things outside which are illumined by the powerful rays of
the sun. So it is also with the spirit, when it has first been released
from the body it perceives sights, scenes and sounds of the material
world, which it has just left, much more readily than it observes the
sights of the world it is entering. Wordsworth in his Ode to Immortality
noted a similar condition in the case of new-born children, who are all
clairvoyant and much more awake to the spiritual world than to this
present plane of existence. Some lose the spiritual sight very early,
others retain it for a number of years and a few keep it all through life,
but as the birth of a child is a death in the spiritual world and it
retains the spiritual sight for a time, so also death here is a birth upon
the spiritual plane, and the newly dead retain a consciousness of this
world for some time subsequent to demise.

When one awakes in the Desire World after having passed through
aforementioned experiences, the general feeling seems to be one of relief
from a heavy burden, a feeling perhaps akin to that of a diver encased in
a heavy rubber suit, a weighty brass helmet upon his head, leaden soles
under his feet and heavy weights of lead upon his breast and back,
confined in his operations on the bottom of the ocean by a short length of
air tube, and able only to move clumsily with difficulty. When after the
day’s work such a man is hauled to the surface, and divests himself of his
heavy garments and he moves about with the facility we enjoy here, he must
surely experience a feeling of great relief. Something like that is felt
by the spirit when it has been divested of the mortal coil, and is able to
roam all over the globe instead of being confined to the narrow
environment which bound it upon earth.

There is also a feeling of relief for those who have been ill. Sickness,
such as we know it, does not exist there. Neither is it necessary to seek
food and shelter, for in that world there is neither heat nor cold.
Nevertheless, there are many in the purgatorial regions who go to all
bothers of housekeeping, eating and drinking just as we do here. George Du
Maurier in his novel “Peter Ibbetson” gives a very good idea of this
condition in the life lived between the hero and the Countess of Towers.
This novel also illustrates splendidly what has been said of the
sub-conscious memory, for Geo. Du Maurier has somewhere, somehow
discovered an easy method which anyone may apply to do what he calls
“dreaming true.” By taking a certain position in going to sleep, it is
possible, after a little practice, to compel the appearance, in a dream,
of any scene _in our past life_ which we desire to live over again. The
book is well worth reading on that account.

When a fiery nebula has been formed in the sky and commences to revolve, a
little matter in the center where motion is slowest commences to
crystallize. When it has reached a certain density it is caught in the
swirl, and whirled nearer and nearer to the outward extremity of what has,
by that time, become the equator of a revolving globe. Then it is hurled
into space and discarded from the economy of the revolving sun.

This process is not accomplished automatically as scientists would have us
believe,—an assertion which has been proven in _The Rosicrucian Cosmo
Conception_ and other places in our literature. Herbert Spencer also
rejected the nebular theory because it required a First Cause, which he
denied, though unable to form a better hypothesis of the formation of
solar systems,—but it is accomplished through the activity of a Great
Spirit, which we may call God or by any other name we choose. As above, so
below, says the Hermetic axiom. Man, who is a lesser spirit, also gathers
about himself spirit-substance, which crystallizes into matter and becomes
the visible body which the spiritual sight reveals as placed inside an
aura of finer vehicles. The latter are in constant motion. When the dense
body is born as a child it is extremely soft and flexible.

Childhood, youth, maturity and old age are but so many different stages of
crystallization, which goes on until at last a point is reached where the
spirit can no longer move the hardened body and it is thrown out from the
spirit as the planet is expelled from the sun. That is death!—the
commencement of a disrobing process which continues in purgatory. The low
evil passions and desires we cultivated during life have crystallized the
desire stuff in such a manner that that also must be expelled. Thus the
spirit is purged of evil under the same law that a sun is purged of the
matter which later forms a planet. If the life lived has been a reasonably
decent one, the process of purgation will not be very strenuous nor will
the evil desires thus expurgated persist for a long time after having been
freed, but they quickly disintegrate. If, on the other hand, an extremely
vile life has been led, the part of the expurgated desire nature may
persist even to the time when the spirit returns to a new birth for
further experience. It will then be attracted to him and haunt him as a
demon, inciting him to evil deeds which he himself abhors. The story of
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde is not a mere fanciful idea of Robert Louis
Stevenson, but is founded upon facts well known to spiritual
investigators. Such cases are extremes of course, but they are
nevertheless possible and we have unfortunately laws which convert such
possibilities to probabilities in the case of a certain class of so-called
criminals. We refer to laws which decree capital punishment as penalty of
murder.

When a man is dangerous he should of course be restrained, but even apart
from the question of the moral right of a community to take the life of
anyone—which we deny—society by its very act of retaliatory murder defeats
the very end it would serve, for if the vicious murderer is restrained
under whatever discipline is necessary in a prison for a number of years
until his natural death, he will have forgotten his bitterness against his
victim and against society, and when he stands as a free spirit in the
Desire World, he may even by prayer have obtained forgiveness and have
become a good Christian. He will then go on his way rejoicing, and will in
the future life seek to help those whom he hurt here.

When society retaliates and puts him to a violent death shortly after he
has committed the crime, he is most likely to feel himself as having been
greatly injured, and not without cause. Then such a character will usually
seek to “get even” as he calls it, he will go about for a long time
inciting others to commit murder and other crimes. Then we have an
epidemic of murders in a community, a condition not infrequent.

The regicide in Servia shocked the Western World by wiping out an entire
royal house in a most shockingly bloody manner, and the Minister of the
Interior was one of the chief conspirators. Later he wrote his memoirs,
and therein he writes that whenever the conspirators had tried to win
anyone as a recruit, they always succeeded when they burned incense. He
did not know why, but simply mentioned it as a curious coincidence. To the
mystic investigator the matter is perfectly clear. We have shown the
necessity of having a vehicle made of the materials of any world wherein
we wish to function. We usually obtain a physical vehicle by going through
the womb, or perhaps in a few special cases from a particularly good
materializing medium, but where it is only necessary to work upon the
brain and influence someone else to act, we need but a vehicle made of
such ether as may be obtained from fumes of many different substances.
Each kind attracts different classes of spirits, and there is no doubt
that the incense burned at meetings where the conspirators were successful
was of a low and sensual order and attracted spirits who had a grudge
against humanity in general and the King of Servia in particular. These
malcontents were unable to injure the King himself, but used a subtle
influence which helped the conspirators in their work. The released
murderer who has a grudge against society on account of his execution, may
enter low gambling saloons where the fumes of liquor and tobacco furnish
ample opportunity for working upon the class of people who congregate in
such places, and the man whose spiritual sight has been developed is often
sadly impressed when he sees the subtle influences to which those who
frequent such places are exposed. It is a fact of course that a man must
be of a low caliber to be influenced by low thoughts, and that it is as
impossible to incite a person of benevolent character to do murder—unless
we put him into a hypnotic sleep—as to make a tuning fork which vibrates
to C sing by striking another attuned to the key of G, but the thoughts of
both living and dead constantly surround us, and no man ever thought out a
high spiritual philosophy under the influence of tobacco fumes or while
imbibing alcoholic stimulants. Were capital punishment, newspaper
notoriety of criminals, the _manufacture_ of liquor and tobacco eliminated
from society, the gun factories would soon cease to advertise and go out
of business along with most of the locksmiths. The police force would
decrease, so would jails and taxes would be correspondingly minimized.

When a person enters purgatory he is exactly the same person as before he
died. He has just the same appetites, likes and dislikes, sympathies and
antipathies, as before. There is one important difference, however,
namely, that _he has no dense body wherewith to gratify his appetites_.
The drunkard craves drink, in fact, far more than he did in this life, but
has no stomach which can contain liquor and cause chemical combustion
necessary to bring about the state of intoxication in which he delights.
He may and does enter saloons, where he interpolates his body into the
body of a physical drunkard, so that he may obtain his desires at second
hand as it were, he will incite his victim to drink more and more. Yet
there is no true satisfaction. He sees the full glass upon the counter but
his spirit hand is unable to lift it. He suffers tortures of Tantalus
until in time he realizes the impossibility of gratifying his base desire.
Then he is free to go on so far as that vice is concerned. He has been
purged from that evil without intervention of an angry deity or a
conventional devil with hell’s flames and pitchfork to administer
punishment, but under the immutable law that as we sow so shall we reap,
he has suffered exactly according to his vice. If his craving for drink
was of a mild nature, he would scarcely miss the liquor which he cannot
there obtain. If his desires were strong and he simply lived for drink, he
would suffer veritable tortures of hell without need of actual flames.
Thus the pain experienced in eradication of his vice would be exactly
commensurate with the energy he had expended upon contracting the habit,
as the force wherewith a falling stone strikes the earth is proportionate
to the energy expended in hurling it upwards into the air.

Yet it is not the aim of God to “get even;” _love_ is higher than _law_
and in His wonderful mercy and solicitude for our welfare He has opened
the way of repentance and reform whereby we may obtain forgiveness of sin,
as taught by the Lord of Love: the Christ. Not indeed contrary to law, for
His laws are immutable, but by application of a higher law, whereby we
accomplish here that which would otherwise be delayed until death had
forced the day of reckoning. The method is as follows:

In our explanation concerning the sub-conscious memory we noted that a
record of every act, thought and word is transmitted by air and ether into
our lungs, thence to the blood, and finally inscribed upon the tablet of
the heart:—a certain little _seedatom_, which is thus the book of
Recording Angels. It was later explained how this panorama of life is
etched into the desire body and forms the basis of retribution after
death. When we have committed a wrong and our conscience accuses us in
consequence, and this accusation is productive of sincere repentance
_accompanied by reform_, the picture of that wrong act will gradually fade
from the record of our life, so that when we pass out at death it will not
stand accusingly against us. We noted that the panorama of life unwinds
backwards just after death. Later, in the purgatorial life it again passes
before the spiritual vision of the man, who then experiences the exact
feeling of those whom he has wronged. He seems to lose his own identity
for the time being, and assumes the condition of his one time victim, he
experiences all the mental and physical suffering himself which he
inflicted upon others. Thus he learns to be merciful instead of cruel, and
to do right instead of wrong in a future life. But if he awakens to a
thorough realization of a wrong previous to his death, then, as said, the
feeling of sorrow for his victim and the restitution or redress which he
gives of his own free will, make the suffering after death unnecessary,
hence—“his sin is forgiven.”

The Rosicrucian Mystery teaching gives a scientific method whereby an
aspirant to higher life may purge himself continually, and thus be able to
entirely avoid existence in purgatory. Each night after retiring the pupil
reviews his life during the past day _in reverse order_. He starts to
visualize as clearly as possible the scene which took place just before
retiring. He then endeavors to impartially view his actions in that scene
examining them to see whether he did right or wrong. If the latter, he
endeavors to _feel and realize as __ vividly as possible_ that wrong. For
instance, if he spoke harshly to someone, and upon later consideration
finds it was not merited, he will endeavor to _feel_ exactly as that one
felt whom he wronged and at the very earliest opportunity to apologize for
the hasty expression. Then he will call up the next scene in backward
succession which may perhaps be the supper table. In respect of that scene
he will examine himself as to whether he ate to live, sparingly and of
foods prepared without suffering to other creatures of God, (such as flesh
foods that cannot be obtained without taking life). If he finds that he
allowed his appetite to run away with him and that he ate gluttonously, he
will endeavor to overcome these habits, for to live a clean life we must
have a clean body and no one can live to his highest possibilities while
making his stomach a graveyard for the decaying corpses of murdered
animals. In this respect there occurs to the writer a little poem by Ella
Wheeler Wilcox:


    “I am the voice of the voiceless;
      Through me the dumb shall speak,
    Till a deaf world’s ear
      Shall be made to hear
        The wrongs of the wordless weak.

    The same force formed the sparrow
      That fashioned man the king;
    The God of the whole
    Gave a spark of soul
        To furred and feathered thing.

    And I am my brother’s keeper
      And I will fight his fight,
    And speak the word
    For beast and bird
        Till the world shall set things right.


Thus the pupil will continue to review each scene _in reverse order_ from
night till morning, and to _feel really sorry_ for whatever he has done
amiss. He will not neglect to _feel glad_ either when he comes to a scene
where he has done well, and _the more intensely he can feel, the more
thoroughly he will eradicate the record upon the tablet of the heart and
sharpen his conscience_, so that as time goes on from year to year, he
will find less cause for blame and enhance his soul power enormously. Thus
he will grow in a measure impossible by any less systematic method, and
there will be no necessity for his stay in purgatory after death.

This evening exercise and another, for the morning, if persistently
performed day by day, will in time awaken the spiritual vision as they
improve life. This matter has, however, been so thoroughly treated in
number 11 of the lecture series: “_Spiritual Sight and Insight; its safe
culture and control_,” that it is unnecessary to dwell upon the matter
further in this place.

_The First Heaven._

In the first heaven, which is located in the higher regions of the Desire
World, the panorama of life again unrolls and reveals every scene where we
aimed to help or benefit others. They were not felt at the time the spirit
was in the lower regions, for higher desires cannot express themselves in
the coarse matter composing the lower regions of the Desire World, but
when the spirit ascends to the first heaven it reaps from each scene all
the good which it expressed in life. It will feel the gratitude poured out
by those whom it helped; if it comes to a scene where itself received a
favor from others _and was grateful_, it will experience the gratitude
anew. The sum of all these feelings is there amalgamated into the spirit
to serve in a future life as incentives to good.

Thus, the soul is purged from evil in purgatory, and strengthened in good
in the first heaven. In one region the extract of sufferings become
_conscience_ to deter us from doing wrong, in the other region the
quintessence of good is transmuted to _benevolence_ and altruism which are
the basis of all true progress. Moreover, purgatory is far from being a
place of _punishment_, it is perhaps the most beneficent realm in nature,
for _because of purgation we are born innocent_ life after life. The
tendencies to commit the same evil for which we suffered remain with us
and temptations to commit the same wrongs will be placed in our path until
we have consciously overcome the evil here; temptation is not sin,
however, the sin is in yielding.

Among the inhabitants of the invisible world there is one class which
lives a particularly painful life, sometimes for a great many years,
namely, the suicide who tried to play truant from the school of life. Yet
it is not an angry God or a malevolent devil who administers punishment,
but an immutable law which proportions the sufferings differently to each
individual suicide.

We learned previously, when considering the World of Thought, that each
form in this visible world has its archetype there,—a vibrating hollow
mold which emits a certain harmonious sound; that sound attracts and forms
physical matter into the shape we behold, much in the same manner as when
we place a little sand upon a glass plate and rub the edge with a violin
bow, the sand is shaped into different geometrical figures which change as
the sound changes.

The little atom in the heart is the sample and the center around which the
atoms in our body gather. When that is removed at death, the center is
lacking, and although the archetype keeps on vibrating until the limit of
the life has been reached—as also previously explained,—no matter can be
drawn into the hollow shape of the archetype and therefore the suicide
feels a dreadful gnawing pain as if he were hollowed out, a torture which
can only be likened to the pangs of hunger. In his case, the intense
suffering will continue for exactly as many years as he should have lived
in the body. At the expiration of that time, the archetype collapses as it
does when death comes naturally. Then the pain of the suicide ceases, and
he commences his period of purgation as do those who die a natural death.
But the memory of sufferings experienced in consequence of the act of
suicide will remain with him in future lives and deter him from a similar
mistake.

In the first heaven there is a class who have not had any purgatorial
existence and who lead a particularly joyous life: the children. Our homes
may be saddened almost beyond endurance when the little flower is broken
and the sunshine it brought has gone. But could we see the beautiful
existence which these little ones lead, and did we understand the great
benefits which accrue to a child from its limited stay there, our sorrow
would be at least ameliorated in a great measure, and the wound upon our
heart would heal more quickly. Besides, as nothing else in the world
happens without a cause, so there is also a much deeper cause for infant
mortality than we are usually aware of, and as we awake to the facts of
the case, we shall be able to avoid in future the sorrow incident to loss
of our little ones.

To understand the case properly we must revert to the experiences of the
dying in the death hour. We remember that the panorama of the past life is
etched upon the desire body during a period varying from a few hours to
three and one-half days, just subsequent to demise. We recall also, that
upon the depth of this etching depends the clearness of the picture, and
that the more vivid this panorama of life, the more intensely will the
spirit suffer in purgatory and feel the joys of heaven; also, that the
greater the suffering in purgatory the stronger the conscience in the next
life.

It was explained how the horrors of death upon the battlefield, in an
accident or other untoward circumstances would prevent the spirit from
giving all its attention to the panorama of life with the result that
there would be a light etching in the desire body, followed by a vague and
insipid existence in purgatory and the first heaven. It was also stated
that hysterical lamentations in the death chamber would produce the same
effect.

A spirit which had thus escaped suffering proportionate to its misdeeds,
and which had not experienced the pleasure commensurate with the good it
had done, would not in a future life have as well developed a conscience
as it ought to have, nor would it be as benevolent as it ought to be, and
therefore the life, terminated under conditions over which the spirit had
no control, would be partly wasted. The Great Leaders of humanity
therefore take steps to counteract such a calamity and prevent an
injustice. The spirit is brought to birth, caused to die in childhood, it
re-enters the Desire World and in the first heaven it is taught the
lessons of which it was deprived previously.

As the first heaven is located in the Desire World,—which is the realm of
light and color,—where matter is shaped most readily by thought, the
little ones are given wonderful toys impossible of construction here. They
are taught to play with _colors which work upon their moral character_ in
exactly the manner each child requires. Anyone who is at all sensitive is
affected by the color of his clothing and surroundings. Some colors have a
depressing effect, while others inspire us with energy, and others again
soothe and comfort us. In the Desire World the effect of colors is much
more intense, they are much more potent factors of good and evil there
than here, and in this color play, the child imbibes unconsciously the
qualities which it did not acquire on account of accident or lamentations
of relatives. Often it also falls to the lot of such relatives to care for
a child in the invisible world, or perhaps to give it birth and see it
die. Thus they receive just retribution for the wrong committed. As wars
cease, and man learns to be more careful of life, and also how to care for
the dying, infant mortality, which now is so appalling, will decrease.

_The Second Heaven._

When both the good and evil of a life has been extracted, the spirit
discards its desire body and ascends to the second heaven. The desire body
then commences to disintegrate as the physical body and the vital body
have done, but it is a peculiarity of desire stuff, that once it has been
formed and inspired with life, it persists for a considerable time. Even
after that life has fled it lives a semi-conscious, independent life.
Sometimes it is drawn by magnetic attraction to relatives of the spirit
whose clothing it was, and at spiritualistic seances these _shells_
generally impersonate the departed spirit and deceive its relatives. As
the panorama of the past life is etched into the shells they have a memory
of incidents in connection with these relatives, which facilitates the
deception. But as the intelligence has fled, they are of course unable to
give any true counsel, and that accounts for the inane, goody-goody
nonsense of which these things deliver themselves.

When passing from the first to the second heaven, the spirit experiences
the condition known and described previously as “The Great Silence,” where
it stands utterly alone conscious only of its divinity. When that silence
is broken there floats in upon the spirit celestial harmonies of _the
world of tone_ where the second heaven is located. It seems then to lave
in an ocean of sound and to experience a joy beyond all description and
words, as it nears its heavenly home—for this is the first of the truly
spiritual realms from which the spirit has been exiled during its earth
life and the subsequent post-mortem existence. In the Desire World its
work was _corrective_, but in the World of Thought the human spirit
becomes one with the nature forces and its _creative_ activity begins.

Under the law of causation we reap exactly what we sow, and it would be
wrong to place one spirit in an environment where there is a scarcity of
the necessities of life, where a scorching sun burns the crop and millions
die from famine, or where the raging flood sweeps away primitive
habitations not built to withstand its ravages, and to bring another
spirit to birth in a land of plenty, with a fertile soil which yields a
maximum of increase with a minimum of labor, where the earth is rich in
minerals that may be used in industry to facilitate transportation of
products of the soil from one point to another. If we were thus placed
without action or acquiescence upon our part, there would be no justice,
but as our post-mortem existence in purgatory and the first heaven is
based upon our moral attitude in this life so our activities in the second
heaven are determined by our mental aspirations and they produce our
future physical environment, for in the second heaven, the spirit becomes
part of the nature forces which work upon the earth and change its
climate, flora and fauna. A spirit of an indolent nature, who indulges in
day dreams and metaphysical speculations _here_, is not transformed by
death respecting its mental attitude any more than regarding its moral
propensities. It will dream away time in heaven, glorying in its sights
and sounds. Thus it will neglect to work upon its future country and
return to a barren and arid land. Spirits, on the other hand, whose
material aspirations lead them to desire so-called solid comforts of
hearth and home, who aim to promote great industries and whose mind is
concerned in trade and commerce, will build in heaven a land that will
suit their purpose: fertile, immineralized, with navigable rivers and
sheltered harbors. They will return in time to enjoy upon earth the fruits
of their labors in the second heaven, as they reap the result of their
life upon earth in purgatory and the first heaven.

_The Third Heaven._

In the third heaven most people have very little consciousness for reasons
explained in connection with the Region of Abstract Thought, for there the
third heaven is located. It is therefore more of a place of waiting where
the spirit rests between the time when its labors in the second heaven
have been completed and the time when it again experiences the desire for
rebirth. But from this realm inventors bring down their original ideas;
there the philanthropist obtains the clearest vision of how to realize his
utopian dreams and the spiritual aspirations of the saintly minded are
given renewed impetus.

In time the desires of the spirit for further experiences draws it back to
rebirth, and the Great Celestial Beings who are known in the Christian
Religion as Recording Angels, assist the spirit to come to birth in the
place best suited to give it the experience necessary to further unfold
its powers and possibilities.

We have all been here many times and in different families, we have had
relations of varying nature with many different people and usually there
are several families among whom we may seek re-embodiment to work out our
self-generated destiny and reap what we have sown in former life. If there
are no special reasons why we should take birth in any particular family
among certain friends or foes, the spirit is allowed to choose its own
place of birth. Thus it may be said that most of us are in our present
places by our own prenatal choice.

In order to assist us in making that choice the Recording Angels call up
before the spirit’s vision a panorama in general outlines of each of the
offered lives. This panorama will show what part of our past debts we are
to pay, and what fruits we may be expected to reap in the coming life.

The spirit is left free to choose between the several lives offered. But
once a choice has been made no evasion is possible during life. We have
free will with regard to the future, but the past “_mature_” destiny we
cannot escape, as shown by the incident recorded in _The Rosicrucian Cosmo
Conception_, where the writer warned a well known Los Angeles lecturer
that if he left his home upon a certain day, he would be injured by a
conveyance, in head, neck, breast and shoulders. The gentleman believed
and intended to heed our warning. Nevertheless he went to Sierra Madre to
lecture upon the fateful day. He was injured in the places stated by a
collision and later explained: “I thought the twenty-eighth was the
twenty-ninth.”

When the spirit has made its choice, it descends into the second heaven
where it is instructed by the Angels and Archangels how to build an
archetype of the body which it will later inhabit upon earth. Also here we
note the operation of the great law of justice which decrees that we reap
what we sow. If our tastes are coarse and sensual, we shall build an
archetype which will express these qualities; if we are refined and of
aesthetic taste, we shall build an archetype correspondingly refined, but
no one can obtain a better body than he can build. Then, as the architect
who builds a house in which he afterwards lives, will suffer discomfort if
he neglects to properly ventilate it, so also the spirit feels disease in
a poorly constructed body, and as the architect learns to avoid mistakes
and remedy the short-comings of one house when building another, so also
the spirit which suffers from defects in its body, learns in time to build
better and better vehicles.

In the Region of Concrete Thought, the spirit also draws to itself
materials for a new mind. As a magnet draws iron filings but leaves other
substances alone, so also each spirit draws only the kind of mind-stuff
which it used in its former life, plus that which it has learned to use in
its present post-mortem state. Then it descends into the Desire World
where it gathers material for a new desire body such as will express
appropriately its moral characteristics, and later it attracts a certain
amount of ether which is built into the mold of the archetype constructed
in the second heaven and acts as cement between the solids, liquids and
gaseous material from the bodies of parents which forms the dense physical
body of a child, and in due time the latter is brought to birth.

_Birth and Child Life._

It must not be imagined, however, that when the little body of a child has
been born, the process of birth is completed. The dense physical body has
had the longest evolution, and as a shoemaker who has worked at his trade
for a number of years is more expert than an apprentice and can make
better shoes and _quicker_, so also the spirit which has built many
physical bodies produces them quickly, but the vital body is a later
acquisition of the human being. Therefore we are not so expert in building
that vehicle. Consequently it takes longer to construct that from the
materials not used up in making the lining of the archetype, and the vital
body is not born until the seventh year. Then the period of rapid growth
commences. The desire body is a still later addition of composite man, and
is not brought to birth until the fourteenth year when the desire nature
expresses itself most strongly during so-called “hot” youth, and the mind,
which makes man man, does not come to birth until the twenty-first year.
In law that age is recognized as the earliest time he is fitted to
exercise a franchise.

This knowledge is of the utmost importance to parents, as a proper
understanding of the development which should take place in each of the
septenary epochs enables the educator to work intelligently with nature
and thus fulfill more thoroughly the trust of a parent than those who are
ignorant of the Rosicrucian Mystery Teaching. We shall therefore devote
the remaining pages to an elucidation of this matter and of the importance
of the knowledge of astrology upon the part of the parent.

_The Mystery of Light, Color and Consciousness._

“God is Light,” says the Bible, and we are unable to conceive of a grander
simile of His Omnipresence, or the mode of His manifestation. Even the
greatest telescopes have failed to reach the boundaries of light, though
they reveal to us stars millions of miles from the earth, and we may well
ask ourselves, as did the Psalmist of old: Whither shall I flee from Thy
Presence? If I ascend into heaven Thou art there, If I make my bed in the
grave (the Hebrew word _sheol_ means _grave_ and not hell), Thou art
there, If I take the wings of morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of
the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me.

When, in the dawn of Being, _God the Father_ enunciated _The Word_, and
_The Holy Spirit_ moved upon the sea of homogeneous _Virgin Matter_,
primeval _Darkness_ was turned to _Light_. That is therefore the prime
manifestation of Deity, and a study of the principles of Light will reveal
to the mystic intuition a wonderful source of spiritual inspiration. As it
would take us too far afield from our subject we shall not enter into an
elucidation of that theme here, except so far as to give an elementary
idea of how divine Life energizes the human frame and stimulates to
action.

Truly, God is ONE and undivided, He enfolds within His Being all that is,
as the white light embraces all colors. But He appears three-fold in
manifestation, as the white light is refracted in three primary colors:
Blue, Yellow and Red. Wherever we see these colors they are emblematical
of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. These three primary rays of divine
Life are diffused or radiated through the sun and produce _Life_,
_Consciousness_ and _Form_ upon each of the seven light-bearers, the
planets, which are called “the Seven Spirits before the Throne.” Their
names are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus. Bode’s
law proves that Neptune does not belong to our solar system and the reader
is referred to “Simplified Scientific Astrology” by the present writer,
for mathematical demonstration of this contention.

Each of the seven planets receives the light of the sun in a different
measure, according to its proximity to the central orb and the
constitution of its atmosphere, and the beings upon each, according to
their stage of development, have affinity for some of the solar rays. They
absorb the color or colors congruous to them, and reflect the remainder
upon the other planets. This reflected ray bears with it an impulse of the
nature of the beings with which it has been in contact.

Thus the divine Light and Life comes to each planet, either directly from
the sun, or reflected from its six sister planets, and as the summer
breeze which has been wafted over blooming fields carries upon its silent
invisible wings the blended fragrance of a multitude of flowers, so also
the subtle influences from the garden of God bring to us the commingled
impulses of all the Spirits and in that varicolored light we live and move
and have our being.

The rays which come directly from the sun are productive of spiritual
illumination, the reflected rays from other planets make for added
consciousness and moral development and the rays reflected by way of the
moon give physical growth.

But as each planet can only absorb a certain quantity of one or more
colors according to the general stage of evolution there, so each being
upon earth: mineral, plant, animal and man can only absorb and thrive upon
a certain quantity of the various rays projected upon the earth. The
remainder do not affect it or produce sensation, any more than the blind
are conscious of light and color which exist everywhere around them.
Therefore each being is differently affected by the stellar rays and the
science of Astrology a fundamental truth in nature, of enormous benefit in
the attainment of spiritual growth.

From a horoscopic figure in mystic script we may learn our own strength
and weakness, with the path best suited to our development, or we may see
the tendencies of those friends who come to us as children, and what
traits are dormant in them. Thus we shall know clearly how to discharge
our duty as parents, by repressing evil before it comes to birth and
fostering good, so that it may bring forth most abundantly the spiritual
potencies of the soul committed to our care.

As we have already said, man returns to earth to reap that which he has
sown in previous lives and to sow anew the seeds which make for future
experience. The stars are the heavenly time keepers which measure the
year, the moon indicates the month when time will be propitious to harvest
or to sow.

The child is a mystery to us all, we can only know its propensities as
they slowly develop into characteristics, but it is usually too late to
check when evil habits have been formed and the youth is upon the downward
grade. A horoscope cast for the time of birth in a scientific manner shows
the tendencies to good or evil in the child, and if a parent will take
time and trouble necessary to study the science of the stars, he or she
may do the child intrusted to his or her care an inestimable service by
fostering tendencies to good and repressing the evil bent of a child ere
it has crystallized into habit. Do not imagine that a superior
mathematical knowledge is necessary to erect a horoscope. Many construct a
horoscope in such an involved manner, so “fearfully and wonderfully made”
that it is unreadable to themselves or others, while a simple figure easy
of reading may be constructed by anyone who knows how to add and subtract.
This method has been thoroughly elucidated in Simplified Scientific
Astrology which is a complete text book, though small and inexpensive, and
parents who have the welfare of their children thoroughly at heart should
endeavor to learn for themselves, for even though their ability may not
compare with that of a professional astrologer, their intimate knowledge
of the child and their deep interest will more than compensate for such
lack and enable them to see most deeply into the child’s character by
means of its horoscope.

_Education of Children._

Respecting the birth of the various vehicles and the influence which that
has upon life, we may say that during the time from birth to the seventh
year the lines of growth of the physical body are determined, and as it
has been noted that sound is builder both in the great and small, we may
well imagine that rhythm must have an enormous influence upon the growing
and sensitive little child’s organism. The apostle John in the first
chapter of his gospel expresses this idea mystically in the beautiful
words: “In the beginning was the WORD ... and without it was not anything
made that was made ... and the word became flesh;” the word is a rhythmic
sound, which issued from the Creator, reverberated through the universe
and marshaled countless millions of atoms into the multiplex variety of
shapes and forms which we see about us. The mountain, the mayflower, the
mouse and the man are all embodiments of that great Cosmic Word which is
still sounding through the universe and which is still building and ever
building though unheard by our insensitive ears. But though we do not hear
that wonderful celestial sound, we may work upon the little child’s body
by terrestrial music, and though the nursery rhymes are without sense,
they are nevertheless bearers of a wonderful rhythm, and the more a child
is taught to say, sing and repeat them, to dance and to march to them, the
more music is incorporated into a child’s daily life, the stronger and
healthier will be its body in future years.

There are two mottoes which apply during this period, one to the child and
the other to the parent: _Example_ and _Imitation_. No creature under
heaven is more imitative than a little child, and its conduct in after
years will depend largely upon the example set by its parents during its
early life. It is no use to tell the child “not to mind,” it has no mind
wherewith to discriminate, but follows its natural tendency, as water
flows down a hill, when it imitates. Therefore it behooves every parent to
remember from morning till night that watchful eyes are upon him all the
time waiting but for him to act in order to follow his example.

It is of the utmost importance that the child’s clothing should be very
loose, particularly the clothing of little boys, as chafing garments often
produce vices which follow a man through life.

If anyone should attempt to forcibly extract a babe from the protecting
womb of its mother, the outrage would result in death, because the babe
has not yet arrived at a maturity sufficient to endure impacts of the
Physical World. In the three septenary periods which follow birth, the
invisible vehicles are still in the womb of mother nature. If we teach a
child of tender years to memorize, or to think, or if we arouse its
feelings and emotions, we are in fact opening the protecting womb of
nature and the results are equally as disastrous in other respects as a
forced premature birth. Child prodigies usually become men and women of
less than ordinary intelligence. We should not hinder the child from
learning or thinking of _his own volition_, but we should not goad them on
as parents often do to nourish their own pride.

When the vital body is born at the age of seven a period of growth begins
and a new motto, or relation rather, is established between parent and
child. This may be expressed in the two words _Authority_ and
_Discipleship_. In this period the child is taught certain lessons which
it takes upon faith in the authority of its teachers, whether at home or
at school, and as memory is a faculty of the vital body it can now
memorize what is learned. It is therefore eminently teachable;
particularly because it is unbiased by pre-conceived opinions which
prevent most of us from accepting new views. At the end of this second
period: from about twelve to fourteen, the vital body has been so far
developed that puberty is reached. At the age of fourteen we have the
birth of the desire body, which marks the commencement of self-assertion.
In earlier years the child regards itself more as belonging to a family
and subordinate to the wishes of its parents than after the fourteenth
year. The reason is this: In the throat of the fœtus and the young child
there is a gland called the thymus gland, which is largest before birth,
then gradually diminishes through the years of childhood and finally
disappears at ages which vary according to the characteristics of the
child. Anatomists have been puzzled as to the function of this organ and
have not yet come to any settled conclusion, but it has been suggested
that before development of the red marrow bones, the child is not able to
manufacture its own blood, and that therefore the thymus gland contains an
essence, supplied by the parents, upon which the child may draw during
infancy and childhood, till able to manufacture its own blood. That theory
is approximately true, and as the family blood flows in the child, it
looks upon itself as part of the family and not as an Ego. But the moment
it commences to manufacture its own blood, the Ego asserts itself, it is
no longer Papa’s girl or Mamma’s boy, it has an “I”-dentity of its own.
Then comes the critical age when parents reap what they have sown. The
mind has not yet been born, nothing holds the desire nature in check, and
much, very much, depends upon how the child has been taught in earlier
years and what example the parents have set. At this point in life
self-assertion, the feeling “_I am myself_”, is stronger than at any other
time and therefore authority should give place to _Advice_; the parent
should practice the utmost tolerance, for at no time in life is a human
being as much in need of sympathy as during the seven years from fourteen
to twenty-one when the desire nature is rampant and unchecked.

It is a crime to inflict corporal punishment upon a child at any age.
Might is never right, and as the stronger, parents should always have
compassion for the weaker. But there is one feature of corporal punishment
which makes it particularly dangerous to apply it to the youth: namely,
that it wakens the passional nature which is already perhaps beyond the
control of a growing boy.

If we whip a dog, we shall soon break its spirit and transform it into a
cringing cur, and it is deplorable that some parents seem to regard it as
their mission in life to break the spirit of their children with the rule
of the rod. If there is one universal lack among the human race which is
more apparent than any other, it is lack of will, and as parents we may
remedy the evil in a large measure by guiding the wills of our children
along such lines as dictated by our own more mature reason, so that we
help them to grow a backbone instead of a wishbone with which
unfortunately most of us are afflicted. Therefore, never whip a child;
when punishment is necessary, correct by withholding favors or withdrawing
privileges.

At the twenty-first year the birth of the mind transforms the youth into a
man or a woman fully equipped to commence his own life in the school of
experience.

Thus we have followed the human spirit around a life cycle from death to
birth and maturity, we have seen how immutable law governs his every step
and how he is ever encompassed by the loving care of the Great and
Glorious Beings who are the ministers of God. The method of his future
development will be explained in a later work which will deal with “The
Christian Mystic Initiation.”





MT. ECCLESIA


(Transcriber’s Note: This chapter is the series of pages which, earlier,
the author said “had been transferred” to the back of the book.)

A DESCRIPTION OF THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE ROSICRUCIAN FELLOWSHIP

Work in the physical world requires physical means of accomplishment;
therefore a tract of land was bought in 1911 in the town of Oceanside,
ninety miles south of Los Angeles, California. _Southern California was
selected because of the abundance of ether in the atmosphere there, and
this spot was found to be particularly favored in that respect._

On this commanding site having a wide view of the great Pacific Ocean, of
snow capped mountains and smiling valleys, we began to establish our
headquarters in the latter part of 1911. Soon after this we erected a
sanctuary, the Pro-Ecclesia, where the Rosicrucian Temple Service is held
at appropriate times. The Rose Cross Healing Circle holds its meetings
there to help sufferers, and it is the place appointed for the united
morning and evening devotions of the workers. In the latter half of 1920
we built an Ecclesia, which is designed to be a Temple of Healing. The
building, a beautiful domed structure, is of steel and reinforced
concrete. It is twelve sided in shape, corresponding to the twelve signs
of the zodiac. At the present writing, January, 1921, the final work upon
it is just being completed. The esoteric work of the Fellowship will be
carried on here.

We have also built a two-story Administration Building to house the
general office, the book department, the correspondence school in
Christian Mysticism which links Headquarters with students all over the
world, and the editorial offices of our monthly publications, notably the
“_Rosicrucian Fellowship Magazine—Rays from the Rose Cross_.” We have also
an astrological department which conducts a correspondence school. Its
offices are located on the second floor.

The whole first floor is occupied by a modern printing plant and book
bindery required to furnish the immense amount of literature needed in
this work. In the book department we publish all the standard works and
text books of the Rosicrucian Philosophy written by Max Heindel. We are
now in process of publishing in book form his former lessons to students.

In October, 1920, a Training School was established for the preparation of
candidates for the lecture field. It is our intention to thereby maintain
a Lecture Bureau, from which we will send our lecturers throughout the
country to disseminate the teachings and carry the message of our
philosophy to the people to a greater extent than has before been
possible.

A Dining Hall with seating capacity for over one hundred people affords
ample accommodation for workers, students, and patients. The scientific
meatless diet served there preserves or restores health, as required in
each case. Furthermore, it improves the vitality and mentality in an
astonishing degree. A large dormitory, and a number of cottages and tents
provide living quarters for all.

By the liberal use of water and the expenditure of much labor, Mount
Ecclesia is gradually being transformed into a luxuriant tropical park.
There is a deep spiritual purpose in this attempt to make the visible
centre of the new world movement beautiful, for it fosters in the workers
a poise and peace which are absolutely essential to the proper performance
of their work. Without that they cannot escape being disturbed by the
flood of sorrow and trouble which flows into Headquarters from members all
over the world; without that they cannot continue to put heart into the
letters of help, hope and cheer which continually go out to souls who are
groaning under the burden of sickness, but by bathing their souls in the
beauty of the surroundings, whether consciously or not, they gain in
strength and grow in grace, they become better and better fitted for the
Great Work in the Master’s Vineyard.

In order to aid those who feel the upward urge, to prepare intelligently
and reverently for the unfoldment of their inner latent spiritual powers,
the Rosicrucian Fellowship maintains two correspondence courses which
furnish instruction to students all over the world. One deals with
_Astrology_, the other with _Christian Mysticism_.

The Astrology to which we refer is not to be confounded with
fortune-telling; it is a phase of the Mystic Religion, as sublime as the
stars with which it deals, and to the Mystic they are not dead bodies
moving in space in obedience to so-called blind natural law, but they are
the embodiments of “_The Seven Spirits before the Throne_,” mighty
Star-Angels who use their benevolent influences to guide other less
exalted beings, humanity included, upon the path of evolution.

There is a side of the moon which we never see, but that hidden half is as
potent a factor in creating the ebb and flow, as the part of the moon
which is visible. Similarly, there is an invisible part of man which
exerts a powerful influence in life, and as the tides are measured by the
motion of sun and moon, so also the eventualities of existence are
measured by the circling stars, which may therefore be called “the Clock
of Destiny,” and knowledge of their import is an immense power, for to the
competent Astrologer a horoscope reveals every secret of life.

Thus, when you have given an astrologer the data of your birth, you have
given him the key to your innermost soul, and there is no secret that he
may not ferret out. This knowledge may be used for good or ill, to help or
hurt, according to the nature of the man. Only a friend should be trusted
with this key to your soul, and it should never be given to anyone base
enough to prostitute a spiritual science for material gain.

To the medical man Astrology is invaluable in diagnosing diseases and
prescribing a remedy, for it reveals the hidden cause of all ailments, in
a manner that has often perplexed the skeptic and dumbfounded the scoffer.

The opinion of thousands is of great value, but it does not prove
anything, for thousands may hold an opposite view; occasionally a single
man may be right and the rest of the world wrong, as when Galileo
maintained that the earth moves. Today the whole world has been converted
to the opinion for which he suffered torture, and we assert that, _as man
is a composite being, cures are successful only in proportion as they
remedy defects on the physical, moral and mental planes of Being_. We also
maintain that results may be obtained more easily at certain times when
stellar rays are propitious to healing of a particular disease, or by
treatment with remedies previously prepared under auspicious conditions.

If you are a parent the horoscope will aid you to detect the evil latent
in your child and teach you how to apply the ounce of prevention. It will
show you the good points also, that you may make a better man or woman of
the soul entrusted to your care. It will reveal systemic weakness and
enable you to guard the health of your child; it will show what talents
are there, and how the life may be lived to a maximum of usefulness.
Therefore, the message of the marching orbs is so important that you
cannot afford to remain ignorant thereof.

In order to aid those who are willing to help themselves we maintain a
Correspondence Class in Astrology, but make no mistake, we do not teach
fortune-telling; if that is what you are looking for, we have nothing for
you.

OUR LESSONS ARE SERMONS

They embody the highest moral and spiritual principles, together with the
loftiest system of ethics, for Astrology is, to us, a phase of religion;
we never look at a horoscope without feeling that we are in a holy
presence, face to face with an immortal soul, and our attitude is one of
prayer for light to guide that soul aright.

WE DO NOT CAST HOROSCOPES

Despite all we can say, many people write enclosing money for horoscopes,
forcing us to spend valuable time writing letters of refusal and giving us
the trouble of returning their money. Please do not thus annoy us; it will
avail you nothing.

THE COURSE IN CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM

_Christ_ taught the multitude in _parables_, but explained the _mysteries_
to His disciples. _Paul gave milk_ to the babes, but _meat_ to the strong.

Max Heindel, the founder and leader of the Rosicrucian Fellowship,
endeavored to follow in their steps and give to interested and devoted
students a _deeper teaching_ than that promulgated in public.

For that purpose we conduct a correspondence course in _Christian
Mysticism_. The General Secretary may admit applicants to the preliminary
course, but _advancement_ in the deeper degrees depends upon merit. It is
for those alone who have been _tried_, and found true.

HOW TO APPLY FOR ADMISSION

Anyone who is not engaged in fortune-telling or similar methods of
commercializing spiritual knowledge will, upon request, receive an
application blank from the General Secretary, Rosicrucian Fellowship. When
this blank is returned properly filled, he may admit the applicant to
instruction in either or both correspondence courses.

THE COST OF THE COURSE

There are no fixed fees; no esoteric instruction is ever put in the
balance against coin. At the same time, it cannot be given “_free_,” “_for
nothing_,” for those who work to promulgate it must have the necessities
of life. Type, paper, machinery and postage also cost money, and _unless
you pay your part someone else must pay for you_.

There are a few who cannot contribute, and who need these teachings as
much or more than those who may take comfort from financial ease or
affluence. If they make their condition known, they will receive as much
attention as the largest contributors, but others are expected to
contribute for their own good as well as for the good of the work.
Remember, _a closed hand that does not give cannot receive_.





INDEX


Abstract Thought, _see_ Thought, World of, Region of Abstract Thought.

Action, incentive to, 158.

Adepts, pupils of schools of the Greater Mysteries, 10.

Air, charged with pictures of surroundings, 37, 155.

Alchemy, proved by radio-activity, 108.

Alcohol, results of using, 166.

Ambassador from sun, 87.

Ameshaspends, Seven Spirits before the Throne, 87.

Angels, densest body of, composed of ether, 73;
  expert builders in ether, 74;
  family spirits, 80;
  guardians of propagative force, 74;
  instruct ego in building archetype, 184;
  one step beyond human stage, 73.

Angels, Recording, _see_ Recording angels.

Animals, dependent upon group spirit for infusion of stellar rays, 124;
  keyed to lunar month, 124;
  thought processes of, 122.

Aquarian Age, intellect of, 15.

Archangels, densest vehicle of, 79;
  instruct ego in building archetype, 184;
  less evolved become group spirits, 81;
  native of Desire World, 79;
  race and national spirits, 80;
  various grades of, 80;
  work with humanity politically and industrially, 80.

Arche, primordial matter of, 108.

Archetypal forces direct archetypes, 103.

Archetype, duration of, 175;
  vibratory mold, 175.

Assimilation, through ether, 123.

Astrology, estimation of time by, in Desire World, 94;
  value of, 190.

Atom, physical, spherical shape of, 9.

Atom, seed, _see_ Seed atom.

Atoms, chemical, expelled through skin, 127.

Attitude, mental, results of, 181.

Benevolence, acquired in First Heaven, 174.

Bennett, Florence, trance of, 141.

Black magic, punishment of, 17.

Blood, charged with pictures of surroundings, 155;
  relation of, to vital body, 129.

Blue, in stellar ray, life of the Father, 124, 188.

Bode’s law and Neptune, 189.

Body, dense, _see_ Dense body.
  desire, _see_ Desire body.
  vital, _see_ Vital body.

Brain, absorption of stellar rays through, 124.

Breath, record of, 37, 38.

Capital punishment, menace of, 164.

Carelessness, power of, to shorten life, 147.

Causation, law of, attraction of like to like, 48;
  determines environment, 48, 180;
  flexibility of law of, 52.

Chaos, (Cosmic night) seed ground of Cosmos, 112;
  state of orderly segregation, 105.

Chemical atoms, expelled through skin, 127.

Chemical ether, assimilation and growth by, 69;
  seen as blue haze, 65.

Child, post-mortem experiences of, easily investigated, 51;
  prodigies, 195.

Children, clairvoyance of, 160;
  danger of mental forcing, 195;
  discipline of, 195;
  individual blood developed in, 196;
  imitativeness of, 194;
  proper clothing of, 194;
  life of, in First Heaven, 176;
  understanding of, through astrology, 192.

Christ, higher laws taught by, 169;
  rebirth taught by, 46.

Christianity, the flowering of previous religions, 6.

Clairvoyance of children, 160;
  of the dying, 148;
  varieties of, 136.

Clairvoyants, separation of vital body of, 137.

Clairvoyants, trained, positive powers of, 137.

Colors, emotional effect produced by, 178.

Colors, primary, symbolize God, 188.

Community affected by executions, 165.

Concentration in Desire World, 91.

Concrete Thought, _see_ Thought, World of, Region of Concrete Thought.

Conditions of life related to past action, 43.

Conscience, assimilated pictures of past experience, 38, 156.

Consequence, law of, _see_ Causation, law of.

Conservation, law of, and survival of spirit, 35.

Cord, Silver, _see_ Silver Cord.

Corporal punishment, inadvisability of, 197.

Cosmic night, _see_ Chaos.

Cosmos, aggregate of systematic order, 105.

Countries, egos work upon, 180.

Creation of Cosmos, 188.

Creative force, develops spinal nerves, 125.

Creative Hierarchies, aid humanity, 6;
  guide man’s evolution, 5, 52;
  safeguard man from materialism, 8.

Criminals, care of, 164;
  execution of, a menace, 164.

Crucifixion, the Mystic Death, 12.

Crystallization in man’s evolution, 163.

Dead, care of, 152;
  inhabit Desire World, 88;
  intense activity of, 89.

Death, disrobing process of ego, 163;
  foreseen by higher powers, 142;
  peaceful, helpfulness of, 147;
  premature, ill effects of, 145;
  problem of, 27;
  provides fresh start, 143.

Debts, binding nature of, 49.

Demmler, Minna, materializations by, 129.

Dense body, chemical constituents of, 57;
  crystallized spirit substance, 162;
  disease of, due to imperfect archetype, 185;
  energized by divine life, 188;
  improves as spirit progresses, 5;
  quality of, dependent upon ego, 184;
  most evolved of man’s vehicles, 186.

Desire, created and guided by thought, 58;
  forms impelled into action by, 56.

Desire body, basic individual color of, 132;
  born at fourteenth year, 186;
  capable of sense perception, 133;
  cause dreams, 139;
  circulation in currents, 133;
  colors of, 132;
  destructive action of, 138;
  extends beyond dense body, 130;
  gives ability to experience desire and emotion 121, 130, 133;
  impels motion, 56, 139;
  impels to sense gratification, 130;
  main vortex, in the liver, 131;
  rapid locomotion of, 131;
  recent acquisition of, 130;
  shape of, ovoid, 130;
  shell of, persists after death, 163, 179;
  vortices of, 131;
  war of, with vital body, 138;
  withdrawal of, in sleep, 138.

Desire stuff, constant motion of, 77, 131;
  elasticity of, 77;
  force combined with matter, 77;
  modeled by thought, 142;
  permeates atmosphere, 120;
  persistence of, 179;
  responsiveness to feeling, 77.

Desire World, archangels native to, 79;
  dead remain in, varying lengths of time, 78;
  difficulty of concentration in, 91;
  diversity of tongues in, 83;
  effect of colors in, 178;
  ego’s corrective work in, 168-170;
  estimation of time in, 93;
  existence of, makes man’s desires possible, 57;
  force and matter closely related in, 77;
  form blends into sound in, 95;
  head only perceptible in some regions of, 79;
  large population of, 77;
  seasons non-existent in, 93;
  second vehicle of earth, 55;
  time non-existent in, 92;
  universal mode of expression in, 85;
  vision pertaining to, 66;
  world of color, 68.

Earth composed of three interpenetrating worlds, 55, 116;
  structure of dense body, obtained from, 57;
  training school of, 6, 43;
  worked upon, by the disembodied, 104.

Earth lives, intervals between, 52.

Earth spirits, fairies and elves, 70.

Eastern Wisdom, unsuited to Western peoples, 14.

Ego, _see_ Spirit, threefold.

Egyptians painted group spirits, 82.

Electron, discovery of, 107.

Elves, spirits of mountains, 70.

Emotions, relation of, to desire body, 186.

Enmity overcome by its own discomforts, 49.

Environment, suffering caused by, 49.

Ether, avenue for solar forces, 70, 74, 123;
  nature of, 62;
  permeates atomic structure of dense matter, 62.

Ether, chemical, _see_ Chemical ether.

Ether, life, _see_ Life ether.

Ether light, _see_ Light ether.

Ether, reflecting _see_ Reflecting ether.

Etheric sight, distinguished from spiritual, 66;
  extension of physical, 65;
  penetrates opaque substances, 66;
  shows all objects same color, 67.

Ethers, separation of, 136.

Ever-existing essence, 107.

Evil and good acts recorded by breath, 38;
  destruction of, 39;
  transmutation of, to good, 158.

Evolution, from life to life, 53;
  manifests in rest and activity, 42;
  of vehicles, manner of, 185;
  persistent unfoldment in, 42.

Fairies, spirits of the mountains, 70.

Fate, ripe, unavoidability of, 184.

Faults, correction of, 169.

Feeling, right, increases conscience, 172.

First cause, necessity for, 162.

First hand knowledge, possible to all, 52.

First Heaven, good of past life reaped in, 173;
  good strengthened in, 174;
  panorama of life in, 173;
  upper regions of Desire World, 173.

Fluid, vital, cessation of flow of, 138.

Forgiveness of sin, 164, 169.

Form, archetypes of, 175;
  incapable of feeling, 60.

Forms, impelled into action by desire, 56.

Forms, physical, built from chemical substance, 55.

Free will, existence of, 147;
  pertaining to future, 184.

Generation caused by red ray of Holy Spirit, 124.

Germination caused by blue ray of Father, 124.

Gnomes, earth spirits, 70.

God, immanence of, 187.

Good amalgamates with spirit, 39;
  and evil acts recorded by breath, 38.

Great Silence between Desire World and World of Thought, 95, 180;
  may be entered by acts of will, 96.

Group spirit, brings stellar influence to animals, 124;
  less evolved archangels, 81;
  painted by Egyptians, 82.

Growth, physical, carried on through ether, 123;
  caused by yellow rays of Son, 124;
  relation of, to moon, 124;
  relation of, to vital body, 186.

Growth, spiritual, must be slow, 103.

Heaven, among you, 116.

Heaven, First, _see_ First Heaven.

Heaven, Second, _see_ Second Heaven.

Heaven, Third, _see_ Third Heaven.

Hell, existence of, impossible, 117.

Helpers, Invisible, _see_ Invisible Helpers.

Heredity, of the physical only, 47.

Hierarchies, Creative, _see_ Creative Hierarchies.

Higher Self dominates lower by keynote, 99.

Higher senses of man, 16.

Higher vehicles, permeability of, 138;
  withdrawal of, in sleep, 138.

Holy of Holies, temple of our bodies, 134.

Hotz, Dr., spirit photographs taken by, 129.

Humanity, two classes of, 136.

I, badge of self-consciousness, 135.

Ideas clothe themselves in mind stuff, 113;
  embryonic thoughts, 113;
  generated by ego in Region of Abstract Thought, 113;
  originate in chaos, 112.

Ignorance, man’s one sin, 42.

Illumination, induced by solar rays, 123.

Immaculate conception, the Mystic Birth, 12.

Immortality of spirit, 39.

Incense, evil effects of, 165.

Incentive, induced by etchings of life panorama, 158.

Individual auric color, dependent upon ruling planet, 132.

Infant mortality, causes of, 176-179.

Intelligence induced by planetary rays, 123.

Interval between earth lives, 52.

Invisible Helpers, faculties of, 137;
  linguistic abilities, valuable to, 83.

Izzards, 87.

James, Professor William, reputed communication from, 149-151.

Jehovah, _see_ Holy Spirit.

John, Gospel of, spiritual significance of, 105.

Jupiter, auric color of, 132.

Karma, _see_ Causation, law of.

Keynote, creates and maintains form, 98;
  manifestation of Higher Self, 99;
  stopping of, terminates life, 100;
  Voice of Silence, 99.

Knowledge, the only salvation, 42.

Laws of nature, living intelligences, 53.

Life, dualistic theory of, 29;
  lengthened by good deeds, 147;
  long, value of, 144, 146;
  monistic theory of, 29;
  object of, gaining of experience, 142;
  shortened by neglected opportunities, 146.

Life ether, propagation accomplished through medium of, 69.

Life panorama, backward unfoldment of, 156;
  duration of, 153;
  importance of, 153, 158;
  insufficient, causes infant mortality, 177;
  sub-conscious memory, basis of, 154;
  terminated by collapse of vital body, 157.

Light, relation of, to creation, 188.

Light ether, motion due to, 69;
  transmits solar force, 69.

Likes and dislikes determine environment, 48.

Liver, main vortex of desire body, 131.

Logos, Reasonable Thought, 109.

Love, higher than law, 168;
  supreme commandment, 90.

Lunar ray enters body through spleen, 124.;
  induces physical growth, 123, 190.;
  three-fold constitution of, 124..

Magic, black, punishment of, 17.

Man, born innocent of sin, 174;
  composite being of body, soul, spirit, 36;
  desires of, impel to action, 56;
  gathers spiritual substance, 162;
  Great Beings safeguard, 198;
  has evolved from lower forms, 73;
  higher vehicles of, 120;
  keyed to solar month, 125;
  made a little lower than angels, 73;
  spinal nerves of undeveloped, 125;
  spiritual faculties of, 15.

Mars, auric color of, 132.

Materialism and spirituality, necessity of, 7.

Materialistic theory of life, 34-36.

Materialization through incense, 165;
  through mediums, 129.

Mathematics, benefit derived from study of, 115.

Matter, illusory nature of, 114.

Mediums and negative clairvoyance, 137;
  read in reflecting ether, 70.

Memory of Nature, events recorded in, 94.

Memory of past lives, 50.

Memory, sub-conscious, _see_ Sub-conscious memory.

Metamorphosis in higher worlds, 32.

Michael, ambassador from sun to earth, 87.

Michael, archangel, guardian of Jews, 80.

Mind, born at twenty-first year, 186, 198;
  cloudy thought form , 131, 133;
  material for, acquired in Region of Concrete Thought, 185;
  recent acquisition of, 131.

Mind, Lords of, expert builders of mind stuff, 102;
  help man to acquire mind, 103;
  human during dark stage of earth, 101;
  Powers of Darkness, 101;
  worked with man in mineral stage, 102.

Mind stuff, permeability of, 120;
  veils inner spirit, 134.

Monistic, theory of life, 29.

Moon rays, _see_ Lunar rays.

Morality induced by planetary rays, 123, 190.

Music in Desire World, 68;
  soul-speech of World of Thought, 68.

Mystery Orders formed on cosmic lines, 9;
  seven world workers in, 9.

N-rays, etheric radiation of, 128.

Nature, laws of, control nature spirits, 72;
  Great Intelligences, 70.

Nebulae, fiery formation of, 161.

Nebular theory postulates First Cause, 162.

Negative development, mediumship allied to, 137.

Nephesh, 37.

Neptune outside of our solar system, 189.

Occult orders, _see_ Mystery orders.

Odic fluid, _see_ Solar fluid.

Opportunities, each life contains, 142.

Over-eating, ill-effects of, 128.

Painting, related to Desire World, 68.

Palladino, Eusapio, materializations through, 129.

Panorama of Life, _see_ Life Panorama.

Patriotism, inspired by archangels, 80.

Periodicity, law of, determines time of actions, 13.

Personality governed by keynote, 99.

“Peter Ibbettson,” occult information in, 161.

Physical body, anchor of mind, 92.

Physical embodiment, value of, 90, 143.

Pineal gland, localized organ of feeling, 132;
  spiritual sight through development of, 66;
  third eye, 132.

Planetary ray, _see_ Stellar ray.

Planetary spirits, color belonging to, 189;
  names of, 189.

Planets, absorption of solar rays by, 188.

Post-mortem experiences, usefulness of, 143.

Powers of Darkness, _see_ Mind, Lords of.

Powers, spiritual, difficulty of obtaining, 64;
  microscopic and telescopic, 64;
  possible to all, 64.

Prayer, forgiveness of sin through, 164.

Precession of equinoxes, measure of time, 94.

Predestination of great leaders, 45, 46.

Primary colors symbolize God, 188.

Probation, long, necessity for, 64.

Propagation carried on through life ether, 123.

Psychometrists read in reflecting ether, 70.

Puberty, cause of, 196.

Pituitary body and clairvoyance, 66.

Punishment, corporal, evils of, 198.

Purgatory, evil habits corrected in, 167;
  evil of past lives transmuted in, 116;
  experiences in, based on moral attitude of preceding life, 181;
  review of life experiences in, 170.

Race likeness caused by race spirits, 81.

Race Spirits, _see_ Archangels.

Rebirth, law of, alternation of sex in, 52;
  believed in, by Jews, 46;
  Biblical foundation for doctrine of, 46;
  explanation of inequalities, 43, 47;
  harmonious with nature’s methods, 47;
  intervals between, 52;
  preparations for, 185;
  special talents of individual, evidence of, 46;
  specially adapted to ego’s need, 52;
  taught by Christ, 46.

Recording angels aid ego in choice of environment, 183;
  give race religions, 6, 14;
  show ego life panorama, 183.

Red in stellar ray, life of Holy Spirit, 124;
  produces form, 188.

Reflecting ether, impressions of universe recorded in, 69;
  mediums and psychometrists read in, 70.

Regret, time wasted in, 92.

Reincarnation, _see_ Rebirth.

Religions, all have origin in God, 104.

Repentance, benefits received through, 169.

Restrospection, exercise of, 170-173.

Ripe fate, unavoidability of, 184.

Rose Cross, initiates into science of life and being, 8;
  Mystery school of the West, 8;
  thirteen Brothers of, 9;
  thirteenth member, the invisible head, 9;
  works to mould public opinion, 11.

Rosicrucian Fellowship, herald of the Aquarian Age, 15;
  purpose and work of, 14-18.

Rosicrucians, hold doctrine of man’s potential divinity, 5;
  hierophants of Lesser Mysteries, 10;
  influence of, upon writers of modern times, 11;
  midnight service of, 11;
  object of, to unite religion and science, 12;
  work with evolved humanity, 9.

Ruling planet, relation of color of, 132.

Salamanders, fire spirits, 71;
  produce volcanic eruptions, 72.

“School of Athens,” painting of, 29.

Science discovers spiritual side of universe, 34;
  established proofs of spirit survival, 35;
  spiritualized by Rosicrucians, 11.

Sculpture belongs to physical world., 68.

Second Heaven, ego prepares future environment in, 116;
  located in Region of Concrete Thought, 116.

Seed atom, basis of sub-conscious memory, 156;
  etchings of, 37;
  sample and center of other dense atoms, 175;
  transmits pictures to desire body, 156.

Sensitives, separation of ethers in vital body of, 136.

Servia, regicides in, 165.

Seven Spirits before the Throne, _see_ Planetary Spirits.

Sex, alternation of, 52.

Shells, discarded desire bodies, 179;
  retain life panorama, 179;
  spiritualistic impersonations by, 179.

Sight, spiritual, accompanies development of pineal gland and pituitary
            body, 66;
  varieties of, 67.

Silence, Great, _see_ Great Silence.

Silence, Voice of, _see_ Voice of the Silence.

Silver cord holds higher and lower vehicles together, 153;
  snapping of, 153.

Solar fluid, absorption of, by different kingdoms, 124;
  aids in digestion, 127;
  cleansing power of, 128;
  expels disease germs, 127;
  muscular movement by means of, 126;
  permeates nervous system, 123, 126;
  radiates from body, 123;
  transformed to rose color, 123, 126.

Solar rays, direct and indirect, 123;
  spiritual illumination from, 123;
  three-fold constitution of, 124.

Soul, differentiated from spirit, 134;
  product of breath, 37.

Soul flights, time non-existent in, 89.

Soul growth induced by planetary rays, 123.

Soul power, assimilated from past action, 116;
  developed by good action, 38.

Sound, power of, over matter, 175.

Spinal cord, absorbs stellar ray, 124.

Spencer, Herbert, and nebular hypothesis, 162.

Sphinx, faces east, 28;
  riddle of, 28.

Spirit, threefold (ego) abandons vital body in sleep, 138;
  absorbs solar ray, 124;
  destined to become creative intelligence, 103;
  disembodied, relief of, at leaving body, 161;
  distinguished from soul, 134;
  drawn to rebirth by desire for experience, 182;
  earth-bound, condition of, 144;
  encrusted in mind stuff, 101;
  free will of, 184;
  freedom of, in choosing environment, 183;
  has seat in forehead, 124;
  immortality of, 39;
  improvement in vehicles of, 185;
  individualization of, in childhood, 196;
  instructed in building archetype, 184;
  many earth lives of, 183;
  no limitations possible for, 104;
  sowing and reaping of, 104;
  sufferings of, in purgatory, 163;
  uncreate and eternal, 39;
  various human relations of, 183;
  works with archetypes, 103, 180.

Spirits, planetary, _see_ Planetary Spirits.

Spiritual investigations, 63.

Spiritual powers, _see_ Powers, spiritual.

Spiritual sight, _see_ Sight, spiritual.

Spiritual thought, spinal nerves developed by, 125.

Spirituality followed by materialism, 7.

Spleen, entrance for solar forces, 123;
  transmutation for solar energy in, 123.

Stellar ray, absorption of, by brain and spinal cord, 124;
  animals incapable of absorbing, 124;
  induces morality, 123, 190;
  threefold nature of, 124.

Stimulants, effects of, upon dying, 152.

Storms caused by nature spirits, 71.

Sub-conscious memory, basis of future life, 156;
  consciously utilized, 161;
  in seed atom, 155;
  retentiveness of, 154.

Suicide, sufferings of, 174.

Sun, movements of, 94.

Superman, evolution of man into, 53.

Survival after death, established by scientists, 35.

Sylphs, spirits of mists, 70.

Tears, white bleeding, 130.

Temptation, repetition of, 174.

Theological theory of life, 36-39.

Third Heaven, few have consciousness in, 182;
  in Region of Abstract Thought, 116, 182;
  inspiration of philanthropist, 182;
  place of awaiting rebirth, 182;
  source of inventor’s inspiration, 182.

Thompson, J. J., discovery of electron by, 107.

Thought, objects of physical world, crystallized, 97, 131;
  result of union, idea and mind stuff, 113.

Thought, world of, earth’s finest vehicle, 55;
  home of spirit, 58;
  knowledge gained in, 100;
  makes man’s thought possible, 57;
  realm of tone, 180;
  spirit’s work in, 180;
  time non-existent in, 101;
  tonal vision pertaining to, 67.

Thought, World of, Region of Abstract Thought, abstract verities of, 106;
  Third Heaven in, 116.

Thought, World of, Region of Concrete Thought, acme of reality, 97;
  mind built in, 185;
  physical world replica of, 97;
  Second Heaven, 116.

Thymus Gland, function of, 196.

Time, end of, 112;
  relatively non-existent in higher worlds, 92.

Tobacco, fumes of, disembodied work through, 166.

Trance, caused by flight of spirit, 140;
  kinds of, 140.

Truth, freedom by, 114;
  self-evident in higher worlds, 114.

Undines, spirits of water, 70.

Vehicles, improvements in, 185.

Veil of Isis, 134.

Vibration, external, transferred to blood, 37;
  universality of, 36.

Vital body, born at seventh year, 195;
  collapse of, in sleep, 138;
  composed of ether, 122;
  connected with spleen, 123;
  disintegration of, stops life panorama, 157;
  extends beyond dense vehicle, 123;
  in sickness lacks solar rays, 128;
  in third stage of evolution, 131;
  nourishes dense body, 129;
  photographed by scientists, 129;
  polarity of, 129;
  propagation by, 121;
  recuperative work of, 138;
  second vehicle acquired by man, 186;
  separation of ethers of, 137;
  war with desire body, 138;
  well organized state of, 130.

Vital Fluid, _see_ Solar fluid.

Voice of the Silence, 99.

Volcanic eruptions produced by salamanders, 72.

Vortices, whirling, of desire body, 131.

War causes infant mortality, 177, 179.

Wave of spirituality inspired great religions, 7.

Whipping children, evil of, 198.

Will, lack of, racial defect, 198.

Wind, changes of, caused by sylphs, 71.

Word, Creative Fiat, 109.

Word, creative, and key-note, 100;
  God was, 106;
  power of, 110, 193;
  still sounds in cosmos, 112.

World, Desire, _see_ Desire World.

World of Thought, _see_ Thought, World of.

World, physical, world of form, 68.

Worlds, higher, difficulty of investigating, 32.

Yellow in stellar ray, life of Son, 124;
  produces consciousness, 188.

Zoroastrian religion, deities of, 86.





ADVERTISEMENTS


Rays From the Rose Cross

_The American Mystic Monthly_

A Monthly Magazine of Mystic Light devoted to philosophy, occultism,
mystic masonry, astrology, and healing.

_Those who desire knowledge and guidance along the Path of the Western
Wisdom Teachings will find this magazine a constant aid._

It expounds and supports occult and mystical philosophy in a most
instructive and interesting manner. It carries such special departments
as:

_Questions and Answers on Mystical Subjects_
_Editorial Discussion of Current Events_
_Astrological Readings_
_Occult Stories_

_One of the foremost magazines of its kind in America._

Price $2.00 per year in U. S. and Canada.
Other Countries, $2.25.

_The Rosicrucian Fellowship,_
_ Mt. Ecclesia_
_ Oceanside, California._

ROSICRUCIAN INTERPRETATION OF CHRISTIANITY

ANCIENT TRUTHS IN MODERN DRESS

Price 10c Each, Postfree

No. 1. The Riddle of Life and Death.

No. 2. Where Are the Dead?

No. 3. Spiritual Sight and the Spiritual Worlds.

No. 4. Sleep, Dreams, Trance, Hypnotism, Mediumship and Insanity.

No. 5. Death and Life in Purgatory.

No. 6. Life and Activity in Heaven.

No. 7. Birth a Fourfold Event.

No. 8. The Science of Nutrition, Health and Protracted Youth.

No. 9. The Astronomical Allegories of the Bible.

No. 10. Astrology; Its Scope and Limitations.

No. 11. Spiritual Sight and Insight.

No. 12. Parsifal.

No. 13. The Angels as Factors in Evolution.

No. 14. Lucifer, Tempter or Benefactor?

No. 15. The Mystery of Golgotha and the Cleansing Blood.

No. 16. The Star of Bethlehem; A Mystic Fact.

No. 17. The Mystery of the Holy Grail.

No. 18. The Lord’s Prayer.

No. 19. The Coming Force; Vril or What?

No. 20. Fellowship and the Coming Race.

These lectures are particularly suitable for beginners. Read
consecutively, they give a comprehensive outline of our philosophy.

_THEY FIT THE POCKET_

and allow a busy man to utilize time on cars en route to or from business.

_GIVE ONE TO A FRIEND_

It is an inexpensive and a helpful gift.

_The Rosicrucian Fellowship,_
_Mt. Ecclesia_
_Oceanside, California._

CORRESPONDENCE COURSES

IN

The Rosicrucian Philosophy and Astrology

(1) _Rosicrucian Philosophy_:

Using the _Cosmo-Conception_ by Max Heindel as a textbook, this course of
twelve lessons points to a logical explanation of the origin, evolution,
and future development of mankind, and opens the way to a deeper knowledge
of this great subject. This philosophy seeks to make Christianity a
_living factor in the world_, and to combine the eternal facts of Science,
Art, and Religion. This course is open to all those interested.

(2) _Astrology_:

We want to assist you in _helping yourself and others._ This
correspondence course will teach you the importance of astrology as a
phase of religion and a Divine Science. The one restriction is that our
pupils may not prostitute the knowledge thus obtained for gain in any way.
Anyone not engaged in fortune telling or similar methods of
commercializing spiritual knowledge may be admitted to this course.

For admission to these courses address,

(I) Philosophy Secretary.

(II) Astrology Secretary.

_The Rosicrucian Fellowship,_
_ Mt. Ecclesia_
_ Oceanside, California._

THE

ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION

BY MAX HEINDEL

_Eighth Edition With New 70 Page Index_

This book gives a complete outline of the _Western Wisdom Teaching_ as far
as it may be made public at the present time. The Rosicrucian Brotherhood
from time to time gives out occult teachings to the public in such a
manner that their expression conforms to the intellectual development of
the times. This is the latest of their communications.

Max Heindel was the accredited agent of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood,
commissioned to give the contents of this book to the world. There is no
other book that contains so complete an exposition of the factors that
enter into the creation of the universe and of man and all its statements
are in keeping with the results of scientific research.

Part I is a treatise on the Visible and the Invisible Worlds, Man and the
Method of Evolution, Rebirth and the Law of Cause and Effect.

Part II takes up the scheme of Evolution in general and the Evolution of
the Solar System and the Earth in particular.

Part III treats of Christ and His Mission, Future Development of Man and
Initiation, Esoteric Training and a Safe Method of Acquiring First-hand
Knowledge.

616 Pages.   Cloth Bound.   $2.00 Postfree.
_The Rosicrucian Fellowship,_
_Mt. Ecclesia_
_Oceanside, California._

THE MESSAGE OF THE STARS

BY MAX HEINDEL AND AUGUSTA FOSS HEINDEL

One of the most complete systems of character delineation and reading the
horoscope for medical diagnosis yet given to modern astrology.

With many nontechnical articles to interest the general student of the
occult, a simple method of

_PROGRESSION AND PREDICTION_,

and a _new index_ for quickly locating desired information, it is indeed a
classic in its realm.

In the section on Medical Astrology the authors have given a system that
is based on years of practical experience. Thirty-six example horoscopes
are included, and the subject is dealt with most thoroughly.

YOU NEED THIS BOOK!

708 Pages.   Cloth Bound.   $3.50 Postpaid.

_The Rosicrucian Fellowship,_
_Mt. Ecclesia_
_Oceanside, California._

THE WEB OF DESTINY

HOW MADE AND UNMADE

BY MAX HEINDEL

Including

_The Occult Effect of Our Emotions_

_Prayer—A Magic Invocation_

_Practical Methods of Achieving Success_

This book is based on personal occult investigations by the author, in
which he uncovered many of the inner laws governing man’s hidden springs
of action.

It gives information regarding the Dweller on the Threshold, which every
aspirant has to meet, usually at an early stage of his progress into the
unseen worlds. It treats of the causes of obsession of men and animals. It
describes how we create our environment and some of the causes of disease,
pointing the way to final emancipation.

The part devoted to the emotions shows the function of desire, the color
effects of emotion, and the results of worry and remorse.

Prayer is shown here as a magic invocation by which powerful forces may be
marshalled. It throws much light on the nature of prayer, pointing out
that true prayer is based on scientific principles which will bring
results when rightly applied.

Written in a simple and narrative style, it offers at the same time
serious instruction and pleasant relaxation.

175 Pages.    Cloth Bound.

FREEMASONRY AND CATHOLICISM

BY MAX HEINDEL

An Esoteric Treatise on the Underlying Facts regarding these two great
Institutions as determined by occult investigation.

It explains in terms of Mystic Masonry the conflict between the Sons of
Cain and the Sons of Seth, and unravels the allegory dealing with the
building of Solomon’s Temple, the Queen of Sheba, and the Grand Master,
Hiram Abiff.

If you are interested in the symbols of Masonry, in knowing the source of
these mysteries which have come down to us from past ages, this is the
book you want.

Only a trained Seer could have read the Akashic Records of the past and
given such a clear explanation of their meaning.

In addition, read what the author says about the famous Philosopher’s
Stone of the Alchemists, the Path of Initiation, and the Coming Age.

_This Book Should Be in Every Mason’s Library._

98 Pages.   Cloth Bound.   $1.00 Postfree.

_The Rosicrucian Fellowship,_
_ Mt. Ecclesia_
_ Oceanside, California._

GLEANINGS OF A MYSTIC

BY MAX HEINDEL

This book is devoted to practical mysticism, bringing out a vast array of
new information and fine points never before presented in this form. The
information contained in this book will be of immense value to the student
and aspirant, enabling them to make swifter progress in both their
spiritual and material development.

A few chapter headings are appended to give a better idea of the contents:

_Initiation—What It Is and Is Not._

_The Sacraments of Communion, Baptism, and Marriage._

_The Coming Christ._

_The Coming Age._

_Magic, White and Black._

_Our Invisible Government._

_Practical Precepts for Practical People._

_Sound, Silence, and Soul Growth._

_The Mysterium Magnum of the Rose Cross._

_Stumbling Blocks._

_Why I Am a Rosicrucian._

196 Pages.    Cloth Bound.    $2.00 Postpaid.

THE ROSICRUCIAN PHILOSOPHY

_IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS_

BY MAX HEINDEL

A book of ready reference upon all mystic matters, which ought to be in
the library of every occult student. It comprises the answers to hundreds
of questions asked of Max Heindel on the lecture platform.

PARTIAL LIST OF SUBJECTS:

_Life after Death._

_Life on Earth._

_The Bible Teachings._

_Spiritualistic Phenomena._

_Clairvoyance._

_Astrology._

_Animals._

176 Pages.    Cloth Bound.    $2.00 Postpaid.

                  -------------------------------------

HOW SHALL WE KNOW CHRIST AT HIS COMING?

BY MAX HEINDEL

This book tells us that Christ will return in an etheric, not a physical
body. Hence mankind must develop the etheric body to the point where they
can function in it consciously before Christ will return. Then they will
possess the inner spiritual perception by which they will be able to
recognize Him.

These matters are fully elucidated in this book.

29 Pages.    Paper Bound.    15c Postfree.

_The Rosicrucian Fellowship,_
_ Mt. Ecclesia_
_ Oceanside, California._

IN THE LAND OF THE LIVING DEAD

AN OCCULT STORY

BY PRENTISS TUCKER

Among the many post-war books, here is one to interest the soldier,
student, and layman alike. Its appeal is general and lasting in that it
portrays in story form the ever existing conditions on the superphysical
planes. It inclines toward that thing called “The religion of the
trenches,” and will help to open the eyes of many a puzzled participant as
well as of those who lost friends and relatives in the Great War.

Look at some of the chapter headings:

_A Visit to the Invisible Planes._

_A Sergeant’s Experiences after __“__Passing out.__”_

_A Doughboy’s Ideas on Religion._

_Helping a Slain Soldier to Comfort His Mother._

_A Crisis in Love._

168 Pages.    Cloth Bound.    $1.50 Postpaid.

THE MYSTICAL INTERPRETATION OF CHRISTMAS

BY MAX HEINDEL

This treatise covers the Cosmic Significance of Christmas and the annual
Sacrifice of Christ, traces the astrological interpretation up through the
simplicity of nature worship, and sketches a glorious outlook for the
coming age, which inspires the casual reader to seek more Light.

Here is a book most attractively bound in heavy mottled paper which, aside
from its merit as a simple gift, is most useful in answering inquiries on
the occult significance of its subject. The world is beginning to ask the
greater meaning of this holy festival; it is well to be informed.

Heavy Paper Binding.
75 Cents Postpaid.

EARTHBOUND

BY AUGUSTA FOSS HEINDEL

An addition to our Rosicrucian Christianity Series of twenty lectures.
This pamphlet warns against the craze for phenomena, mediumship, and the
ouija board. It cites concrete cases where those who held too closely to
things of this earth were thereby held back in their progress after
leaving the earthy body and passing onward to the unseen realms of being.
It points out how this condition may be avoided; also how some prolong
their stay in the Borderland close to the earth.

It describes the condition of those who are bound to the lower Desire
World after death by sense affiliation, sorrow, or other causes, showing
clearly their delusions and their activities.

13 pages.    Paper Bound.    Price 10c.

SIMPLIFIED SCIENTIFIC ASTROLOGY

BY MAX HEINDEL

_Fifth Edition._

WITH MAX HEINDEL’S PORTRAIT

198 Pages.    Cloth Bound.   $1.50 Postpaid.

A complete textbook on the art of erecting a horoscope, making the process
simple and easy for beginners. It also includes a

Philosophic Encyclopedia

—and—

Tables of Planetary Hours

The Philosophic Encyclopedia fills a long felt want both of beginners and
advanced students for information concerning the underlying reasons for
astrological dicta. It is a mine of knowledge arranged in such a manner as
to be instantly accessible.

The Tables of Planetary Hours enable one to select the most favorable time
for beginning new enterprises.

The unparalleled merits of this book have been amply attested by many
thousands of enthusiastic students who have bought the first four
editions.

No astrological student can afford to be without it.

MYSTERIES OF THE GREAT OPERAS

BY MAX HEINDEL

Faust, Parsifal, The Ring of the Niebelung, Tannhauser, Lohengrin

Folk Lore and its interpretation through music has much to offer to the
general reader as well as to the musician and occultist. These Myths
conceal many of the hidden truths which are now being translated from
symbol and allegory, and this attractive book is the key to these poetic
tales of evolution, sacrifice, and unfoldment.

176 Pages.    Cloth Bound.    $2.00 Postpaid.








