LETTER VI.

You begin your sixth letter by attempting to disprove the arguments of
Thomas Paine upon Jeremiah. You acknowledge the disorder that prevails
in the writings of this prophet; and you modestly assure us, that you
do not know the cause; no more do I: and whatever incidents might have
occasioned it, I am certain that, as it stands, it deserves no degree of
credit. In a former part of your pamphlet you grant, that the history of
the Jews is so connected with the prophetical part, that if the former
was done away the latter could not stand; and now you inform us, "that
prophecy differs from history, in not being subject to an accurate
observance of time and order." This you think a matter of no importance,
but, in my opinion, it is very material to know if a prophecy is written
after the events it alludes to. I shall not follow far, either your
Lordship or Mr. Paine, in proving several of the prophecies of the Bible
false; but if they are not prophecies, why should we trouble ourselves
with disproving them. If they are scraps of history, we know that of
the Jews to be so contradictory, imperfect, so completely without order,
that one historical extract, of prophecy, will often contradict another;
but much more generally these prophecies are strict enough, being copied
from history, and embellished with a little of the figurative style of
prophecy. As to Jeremiah, the works that go under his name, as well
as those of Isaiah, appear on the face of them to be a collection of
extracts from different historians.

While we know so little of the history and genuineness of these
writings, we cannot possibly draw any conclusion concerning them, except
that they are in the utmost disorder, and that when writers intermingle
history with prophecy, we are at a loss to know which is which. I cannot
forbear to mention the ludicrous story of Elisha, the children, the
bears that devoured the children of men, as you are pleased to call
them. Whether Elisha did this as a prophet, I cannot but declare my
abhorrence at your approbation of such abominable cruelty, to murder
individuals because they bestowed the appellation of Baldhead on
another. According to the laudable custom of the church, you appeal to
a miracle, and conclude, that if God wrought a miracle it must have been
just. I suppose this comparatively as when he destroys whole cities for
the sins of a few; but this is the very ground on which every crusader
supported his massacres; and every man may imitate the conduct of Ahod,
the treacherous murderer, patronised by Jehovah, without incurring the
blame of a Bishop. Whether the ridiculous tale which you take for a
sign of God, most probably of his cruelty, converted any person, is not
known; but as the event most undoubtedly never happened, you may suppose
what you please. To murder them is not the way to ingratiate ourselves
with our fellow-citizens. If any person set a few bull-dogs on some
children, and pretended to do so by authority from heaven, he would most
undoubtedly be taken up by our officers of justice. In what respect do
these brutal prophets differ from Mahomet, who decided all disputes by
the sword? Their business was to exterminate and murder by the direct
commands of God.

The writings of Ezekiel are considerably truncated. The very beginning
of his prophecies shows it. The conjunction and texture of the whole
work refers to something that ought to have preceded it. He begins
saying, "That in the 30th year the heavens opened, and he saw visions of
God." And in ver. 5, he adds, "That the Lord had inspired him often
in Chaldea," which refers to some prophecies written in that period.
Besides, Josephus's work, book 10, chap. ix. of the Jewish antiquities,
says, "That Ezekiel had prophecied that Zedekiah should never see
Babylon." This is no where found in Ezekiel, but, on the contrary, in
chap. xi. and xii. he says, "That the king would be carried a prisoner
to Babylon."

As to Daniel, I have already noticed the great similarity between the
first book of Esdras and his, and the probability that they came from
the same author. The seven first chapters, except the first, were
written in Chaldean, and are by the most learned thought to be taken
from Chaldean chronologists. It is also thought by men of great
learning, that the books of Esdras, Daniel, and Esther, were altered a
long time after Judas Maccabeus, because it appears evident that Esdras
could not have written the whole of them, since Nehemiah carries the
genealogy of Jesuhga, the sovereign Pontiff till Jaddua, the sixteenth
in number, who after the defeat of Darius went to meet Alexander. And
Nehemiah, ver. 22, "The Levites, in the days of Eliashib, Joiadah,
and Johanan, and Jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers; also the
priests, to the reign of Darius the Persian." We have no reason to
believe that Esdras or Nehemiah could survive fourteen kings of Persia,
Cyrus having been the first who gave the Jews permission to rebuild the
temple, from whom to Darius there are 230 years.

I now come to the famous prophecy of the seventy weeks of Daniel, which
you exultingly mention as the most wonderful, and, at the same time, the
most incontrovertible prediction in existence, one which never can fail
to confound the most perverse unbeliever. If I prove, that so far from
being the surprising prophecy you pretend, it has altogether a different
meaning, and can nowise apply to the coming of Christ, I shall think
myself fully excused, if I do not go through every individual prediction
in the Bible. The passage alluded to is in Daniel, chap. ix. ver. 24, to
27, as follows: "Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon
thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins,
and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up the vision, and prophecy, and to anoint
the most holy. Know, therefore, and understand, that from the going
forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, unto the
Messiah, the prince, there shall be seven weeks; and threescore and two
weeks the streets shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous
times. And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but
not for himself; and the people of the prince that shall come, shall
destroy the city, and the sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with
a flood, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined. And he
shall confirm the covenant with many, for one week; and, in the midst
of the week, he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease; and for
the overspreading of abominations, he shall make it desolate, even
until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the
desolate."

This passage is generally applied to the coming of Christ. The seventy
weeks are supposed to mean weeks of years, or seven years each. Now
it is evident, that it cannot apply to Jesus Christ; for if from going
forth of the commandment in the time of Artaxerxes Longimanus, until the
coming of the Messiah, there were to be seven weeks or forty-nine years,
how does this agree with what follows? "After threescore and two weeks
(or three hundred and seventy-four years) shall Messiah be cut off."
And again, "He shall confirm the covenant with many for a week." Did
then Jesus Christ live four hundred and twenty-three years, or are there
two Messiahs predicted? Dr. Frideaux acknowledges that some parts of
this prophecy are so injudiciously printed in the English translation of
the Bible, that they are quite unintelligible; his alteration is in the
punctuation, and according to it we read, that, _from the going forth
of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, to the Messiah, the
Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks_; and in verse
27, he puts the half of the week, instead of the midst. The explanation
of the prophecy as thus altered, he gives as follows. From the
commandment given to Ezra by Ar-taxerxes Longimanus, to the
accomplishment of it by Nebemiah forty-nine years, or the first seven
weeks; from this accomplishment to the time of Christ's messenger John
the Baptist sixty-two weeks, or four hundred and thirty-four years; from
thence to the beginning of Christ's public ministry, half a week, or
three years and a half; and from thence to the death of Christ, half
a week, or three years and a half; in which half week he preached and
confirmed the gospel with many; in all, from the going forth of the
commandment, till the death of Christ, seventy weeks, or four hundred
and ninety years.

In the first place, we confidently assert that Dr. Prideaux followed his
fancy, not the original Hebrew, when he altered the punctuation. He is,
however, justified in the alteration of half of a week; but, granting
all, let us see how it applies. Did the Messiah come after seven weeks
from the commandment of Ar-taxerxes Longimanus? The explanation only
says, that Nehemiah finished the work which Ezra began. What has this
to do with the Messiah coming at the end of the first seven weeks? The
prophet says, that after threescore and two weeks, the street and the
wall shall be built. Again, and previously, that after the commandment
for the city to be built, the Messiah shall come in seven weeks. The
learned divine, on the contrary, makes Daniel say, that John the Baptist
began to preach the kingdom of the Messiah sixty-nine weeks after
the commandment, and in the first seven weeks he talks of nothing but
building the temple. Again, how does the oblation cease in half a week?
In fact, the same objection occurs here, as to the passage as it is
written in our Bibles. Daniel speaks quite clear, when he says, that
"from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem,
unto the Messiah, the Prince, shall be seven weeks." If we find,
in whatever explanation of the prophecy, that Christ did not come
forty-nine years after this commandment, and that he did not live four
hundred and thirty-four years afterwards, the whole must be an
untruth. And, if the first period of seven weeks is united with that of
threescore and two, that is, if the period of rebuilding the city, and
of the coming of the Messiah be the same, then let divines inform us
whether this really came to pass, and reconcile it with what follows, in
ver. 26, that the city is to be destroyed at the same time. Did Christ
confirm any covenant with many for seven years?

Let us attempt to unriddle this enigma. The passage evidently talks of
two Messiahs, or makes one live upwards of four hundred years; and is
altogether unintelligible as it stands. For the better understanding of
it, I shall quote some previous part of the same chapter, ver. 1. "In
the first year of Darius, the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the
Medes, which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans. 2. In the
first year of his reign, I, Daniel, understood by books, the number of
the years whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet,
that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem.
3. And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayers and
supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes. 4. And I prayed
unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said." After this
follows his prayer, until the 20th verse; and, in the 21st the angel
began to unfold a prophecy to Daniel, which begins in verse 24, and he
promises to explain the mystery that had so much grieved Daniel, that
is, the prophecy of Jeremiah; then follows the passage I have quoted:
the alterations I conceive ought be made in the reading of which, I
now proceed to mention. In verse 25, the sentence stops after the seven
weeks, as it is in the English Bible, because in the original we find
here the stop Atnach. In verse 26, instead of, _shall Messiah be cut
off?_ we ought to read, _the oblation shall cease_. This is the real
meaning of the expression in the original, according to Tertullian,
Eusebius, and Theodoretus. Eusebius says, _Unctum (vel Christum) nihil
aliud esse quam successionem Pontificum, quos unctos nominare S.
Literae consueverunt._ The Hebrew properly signifies _perdetur unctio_.
Theodoretus understands by this word, the same as _sacerdotes uncti.
Excidetur unctus,_ signifies the same as the _oblation shall be
abolished_; for the verb _excido_ does not always signify to kill, but
is applied to whatever falls into disuse that was once in practice, or
any thing that perishes. It is in this sense used in many parts of Kings
and Chronicles. Samuel says, _excidi de altare_. In Jeremiah,
chapter xxxvii. ver. 18, the verb is used in the same sense, _non
de sacerdotibus Levitis excidet ur homo coram me_, which is given in
English, "neither shall the priests, the Levites, _want a man_ (or
cease to have a man) before me." In verse 27, "and he shall confirm the
covenant with many for one week," means no more than the exemption of
calamities, and is tantamount to, _he shall let many remain in peace_,
as in Genesis, chap. vi. ver. 18, it is used in this sense.

To understand the real meaning of this pretended prophecy, the reader
will remember, that Daniel mourned for the 70 weeks of captivity
prophesied by Jeremiah; the vision of Daniel took place in the
first year of Darius, King of Chaldea, that is, in the year 162 of
Nebuchadnezzar; but, in chap. x. of Daniel we learn, that he ate no
pleasant bread, neither came flesh and wine into his mouth, till three
whole weeks were fulfilled. Now, the term weeks is used in the Bible
indiscriminately for weeks of years, or of days; here it appears clear
it signifies the former, particularly as the whole relates to the 70
years of Jeremiah; and the angel, in chap. x. ver. 14, tells Daniel, in
the same figurative style, "Now I am come to make thee understand what
shall befall thy people in the latter days, for yet the vision is for
many days." If then Daniel wept three weeks of years, or 21 years, from
the destruction of the temple, in the year 141 to the time of the vision
in 162, (the angel, chap. x. ver. 13, says, that the prince of Persia
withstood him 21 days, or years), it is easy to see what Daniel means.
Jeremiah had prophesied a captivity of 70 years, of these, three weeks
or 21 years were past; therefore Daniel, after entreating God to tell
him "how many more years were wanting," received for an answer what
follows, "At the beginning of thy supplications, the commandment came
forth, and I am come to show thee."--"Seventy weeks are determined
upon thy people to seal up the vision and prophecy," that is to complete
the prophecy of Jeremiah; and we find,-therefore, that from the issuing
the commandment to restore the Jews, and to build Jerusalem, or more
properly from the revelation of the angel, (exitu Verbi), promising that
Jerusalem should be rebuilt, ver. 23, to the coming of the Messiah, the
prince, or Cyrus, who freed the Jews from the captivity, there were to
be seven weeks, or 49 years, which, added to the three weeks already
past, made the 70 years of Jeremiah. Cyrus is by Isaiah called the
Lord's anointed: "Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose
right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him for Jacob my
servant's sake." Cyrus gave, at that time, liberty to the Jews, as the
reader may see in Ezra. It is evident, that the word commandment cannot
mean any express order to build Jerusalem, for the angel says, just
before he reveals the prophecy, "at the beginning of thy supplications
the commandment came forth we know that Daniel began to address prayers
unto heaven, at a time when there was no order to build the temple, on
the contrary, the Jews were in captivity.

This is the most difficult part of the pretended prophecy, the remainder
is plain. There shall be 62 weeks till the rebuilding of the wall. The
writer alludes here to the building of the first temple under Zerubbabel
and Jeshua, and then to the rebuilding of the wall, and restoration
of the temple by Judas Maccabeus, after its profanation by Antiochus
Epiphanes. The period of this last event is by the prophecy made to
extend to 63 1/2 weeks, or 444 years. Let us see if chronology confirms
this supposition. The temple was destroyed in the 141st year of Nabuch,
or 4107 of the Julian period; add to this 444 years, or 63 weeks and a
half, and we have the year 4551, or the second year of Judas Maccabeus,
according to Josephus; who also informs us, that having conquered his
enemies, he then built a wall about Sion, which is clearly meant in the
words, "the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous
times," 1 Maccab. chap. iv. ver. 60. At that time also "they builded up
the mount Sion with high walls," &c. Troublous the times certainly were;
the Jews were fighting against the cruelty of Antiochtis Epiphanes. It
is certain then, that after 343 years, or 69 weeks, the wall should be
built, and although it was not really completed till about ten years
after, it is presumable that the loose historian, or prophet, did
not choose to alter the beautiful idea of 70 Weeks. We know how
superstitiously the Jews respected not only the number 7, but all its
different affections. We are besides informed, in the first book of
Maccabees, that after the first depredation of Antiochus, the people
rebuilt the city of David, and made walls and forts; this happened
some years before the building of the wall by Judas, and brings the
prediction nearer to historical accuracy.

The next part of the prophecy is, "And after threescore and two weeks
shall sacrifices cease;" this means in the course of the week that
succeeds the 62. And, no doubt, Antiochus Epiphanes abolished them in
the seventh year of his reign, as we read in I Maccab. chap. i. "And
the people of the prince that shall come, shall destroy the city and the
sanctuary." This Antiochus most certainly did, "and went up (Antiochus)
against Israel and Jerusalem with a great multitude, and entered
proudly into the sanctuary, and took away the golden altars, also he
took the hidden treasures, and there was great mourning in Israel," 1
Maccab. J. "And the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end
of the war desolations are determined." The coming of Antiochus into
Jerusalem is pompously detailed in the first book of Maccabees: the Jews
compared a great calamity, or an invading and irresistible army, to
a flood. Let us proceed with the remainder: "And he shall confirm the
covenant with many for a week," this alludes to the first seven years
of the reign of Antiochus, during which he did not interfere with the
worship of the Jews, although he gave liberty to those who chose to be
heathens to follow their respective worship: it was in the end of the
sixth, and in the beginning of his seventh year that he attacked the
Jews, destroyed the temple, plundered it of its riches, and made himself
the tyrant of Judea.

The last part of the passage is as follows: "And in the half of a week
he shall cause the oblation and sacrifice to cease," and, I have only to
observe, that, from the taking of the city by Antiochus, to the absolute
forbidding Jewish worship, there elapsed about three years and a half,
or half a week, for he came to Jerusalem in the 143d year of the kingdom
of the Greeks, and the erecting of idols was in the year 145; after
which, he continued to persecute the Jews, and promote idolatry, until
the year 148. Now Antiothus attacked Jerusalem at the end of his sixth
year, to which, if we add two years and three months, we have pretty
exactly the period of half a week, or three years and a half. The
expression, "the spreading of abominations," evidently alludes to what
is said in Maccabees, chap. i. ver. 34. "Now the fifteenth day of the
month Casleu, in the 145th year, they (the followers of Antiochus) set
up the abomination of desolation upon the altar, and builded idol altars
throughout the cities of Judah, on every side." Daniel says, chap.
xii. ver. 11, speaking of his vision, "and from the time that the daily
sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that: maketh
desolate set up, there shall be (that is between the first interdict of
Antiochus, and the setting up of idols) 1290 days;" which is a little
more than three years and a half. The wonderful prophecy is then
unriddled, it becomes a contemptible piece of history in an affected
style. I trust the explanation which I have given, after Marsham, will
appear satisfactory. I challenge Bishop Watson to produce a plausible
explanation of the passage according to the sense of the church. It
may not be improper to observe, that Clemens Alexandrinus, many of
the fathers, Calmet, and other persons of great knowledge, have flatly
denied the application of the weeks of Daniel to Jesus. Those who
espouse your cause lose sight of the context of Daniel, they forget
chronology, and evince to what a pitch of delusion their minds have
arrived.

This is the famous prophecy that silenced the Jewish rabbins of Venice;
it is of a pattern with Daniel's four beasts; the fourth is also a story
of Antiochus Epiphanes and Judas who slays the beast. Judas is the son
of man coming in clouds; he is the person of whom the prophets speak,
and who has most ridiculously been distorted to Jesus Christ. This
farrago of prophecies seems to have been the production of Esdras
or some very late writer; and I am not sure, but the doctrine of the
Pythagorean millennium gave rise to some of the expressions in both
writers, about the beasts: they seem to have sprung from the same origin
with those of the Apocalypse; and with the four Indian horses, they
crept among the Jews, together with many other Chaldean mythological
ideas: the Ancient of Ancients appears in his fiery car as Osiris
triumphant, or Chreeshna conquering Chiven; the books are opened before
him, as his kingdom is everlasting, like that of Vishnu with the
Vedams. But visions so ridiculous as that of Daniel deserve not our
consideration; whatever be their source they are but reveries, and may
serve to amuse idle people in their ridiculous speculations about the
world's end. Like Swedenburgh, men may dream, and interpret their own
dreams, and like him have the mortification to be laughed at for the
non-accomplishment of their predictions. We have had of late another
Daniel in Mr. Brothers; he too saw beasts, and, what is more, he
understood their meaning; but unfortunately we are not Jews, and he is
cruelly imprisoned in a madhouse.

I have now followed your animadversions on the objections of Thomas
Paine upon the Old Testament; and I trust I have shown that you have in
no degree been a more successful labourer in the cause of Judaism than
your predecessors; even your wonderful prophecy of Daniel is converted
into a mere historical tale, and the application Jesus Christ makes of
it to himself is accordingly proved to be ridiculous, the more so, as
it comes from the Son of God. I have a few more observations to make,
before I leave this book. I cannot pass in silence the gross blunder you
have committed, when you refer Mr. Paine to Ferguson for an astronomical
proof of the miracle of the total darkness at the crucifixion of Jesus.
An odd conceit, upon my word! You might know that the event is omitted
by all the authors of eminence who wrote at that time; that even Pliny
passes it unnoticed. Lest you should mislead the reader with your
groundless assertions, I shall state the matter as it stands in reality.
You avoid learned disquisitions to be intelligible, but you ought not
to have been so deficient of authority, where it is most needed. Besides
the gospels, the darkness is not mentioned in any author; but divines
have attempted to prove the event from a supposed passage of Phlegon,
related by Eusebius; it is in the following words: "In the fourth year
of the two hundred and second Olympiad, there was the greatest eclipse
ever seen; it was night at six, and even the stars could be seen." This
passage has long been disregarded by men of knowledge; it alludes to an
eclipse, not to a miraculous darkness. Both Mr. Ferguson and you have
blundered in chronology and astronomy. It is certain, in the year of
Christ's crucifixion, according to the common chronology, there could
have been no eclipse of the sun visible at that time at Jerusalem;
Ferguson, therefore, concludes it a miracle. But you ought to have
known, that the fourth year of the two hundred and second Olympiad, is
not the year of the crucifixion in any system of chronology; that there
was an eclipse of the sun, in the year mentioned by Phlegon, in the
month of November, which, however, was not central; and you know that
Jesus is said to have died at the time of the full moon in March, or in
the beginning of April. Besides, had even such a darkness taken place,
are you ignorant of the existence of comets, and would not one passing
between the earth and the sun eclipse that luminary? Have not such
miracles taken place if we credit historians? The death of Caesar
was preceded by wonderful prodigies, and a comet made its appearance
immediately after. The supposed miraculous influence of comets, and
their being prophetic signs, was once an article of faith throughout
all Europe, and the ancient history of every country records many events
which the authors maintain arose from comets.

Your reflections on prophets I cannot pass unnoticed. You pretend to
make a distinction between dreamers, and impostors, and true prophets.
You acknowledge the number of soothsayers and fortunetellers among the
Jews; but you maintain that they were altogether distinct from the
true prophets, and appeal to Jeremiah, who puts the Jews on their guard
against false prophets. Does not every quack, every impostor, do the
same, and caution the world to beware of counterfeits? You might have
saved a great deal of trouble, had you condescended to produce your
proofs of the genuineness of the writings of the prophets; and then we
might enquire concerning the works of these augurs. You pretend that a
sure mark of the reality of a prophet is his predicting bad things, for
a fortune-teller always prophecies good. Pardon me if I suppose you a
follower of Mr. Brothers. For surely the destruction of London was not
a most desirable event. It is in vain you attempt to turn Mr. Paine
into ridicule for his definition of a prophet. He most justly calls them
strolling-poets, fortune-tellers; being in Judea what the gipsies, the
augurs, and the astrologers have been in other nations. The Hebrew word
_Navi_ signifies nothing but an orator, a public speaker, and is by
the Jews applied, in a forced way, to soothsayers and diviners. It is
incontrovertible that they existed among the Jews in colleges, and were
brought up to the business. Their chief employment was to write
the chronicles of the times. The name prophet is given in the Bible
indiscriminately with that of holy man. Among the Hebrews, the first
book of Kings was called the prophecy of Samuel. Abel is called
repeatedly in the New Testament a prophet, (see Matth. chap. xxiii.
ver. 31 and 35, and Luke chap. xi. ver. 50 and 51), although we have no
account of his having predicted any. Among the Jews there certainly were
fortune-tellers, necromancers, and witches, all of which you rank
among the impostors. But had not the witch of Endor a real power of
incantation? Did she not most wonderfully raise up the spirit of Samuel?
Or are we to look upon the story of the witch of Endor in the same
light as those of modern witches? That the prophets of the Jews were
repeatedly deceived, we cannot have the smallest doubt when 400 of
these gentlemen told a downright lie to Ahaz. But you have a very easy
expedient in all these cases. When a prophet tells a lie, you may, as
was done in this particular case, attribute it to a design of God to
cheat the person who consults his oracles, just as Jupiter did of old to
Agamemnon when he sent him the false dream.

You reproach Thomas Paine for want of candour. He has not, you say,
examined the general design of the Old Testament There he would find
the benevolence of the God of the Jews, and his infinite goodness in
selecting them from among the nations, in preserving them from idolatry.
If he chose this people he has certainly exposed them to continual
sufferings, and all for no other purpose than to teach mankind that
idolatry is the greatest of crimes; that to avoid it, murder, plunder,
the crusades, the inquisition, persecution, may all be laudable means
for the preservation of the faith of nations. Thus, the cherished
people, who were most intimate with their God, committed the most
enormous crimes, under the pretence of preserving pure their adoration
of the implacable God Jehovah. Did not all the endeavours of Jehovah to
rescue nations from idolatry prove fruitless? This despicable creature
man has been able to effect what mighty Jehovah never accomplished.
Science is the only antidote against all kinds of superstition. Did
Cicero adore stocks or stones? Or did ever any learned man among the
heathens humble himself before idols? Has not the principal branch of
the church of Christ been notorious idolaters? But what avails all
this? Have you proved that the Heathens "emulated in the transcendent
flagitiousness of their lives, the impure morals of their gods?" You
assert it; but unluckily it is one of the many unsupported and assumed
propositions in your pamphlet. Did nations necessarily imitate the
conduct of their gods, I would tremble at being among the followers
of the bloody Jehovah. The heathens were certainly dreamers in their
adoration of the planets; we are taught by science, that these bodies
resemble our earth in the general laws that govern them. It was natural
for rude men to gaze at the sublimity of the stupendous fabric, the
refulgency of the sun; the blessings derived from his genial influence
could not be contemplated without admiration by the amazed and fearful
savage. Idolatry is ridiculous: but have you proved that Jehovah
deserves more to be revered than the Great Whole of nature, whether
called Pan, or otherwise disguised in emblems, than the harmony of the
planets designed by symbols, the generative powers by Venus, or the
vivifying light emanating from the bright orb of Apollo? Confess at
least, that the allegorical adoration of nature could only deceive
the multitude who were kept in ignorance by their priests. If you are
candid, you must acknowledge, that the Polytheists were tolerant, that
the Atheists or Deists lectured close, to the temple. They did not
exterminate nations, establish inquisitions, murder unbelievers as the
Jews, and the Christians; although, as you observe, they received the
gift of God through Jesus Christ, and were made alive by the covenant of
grace.

In what consists the superiority of the Jewish or Christian notions
of God? Jehovah is a being incomprehensible; he is a jealous and a
revengeful God, he hardens men's hearts, and sacrifices whole nations to
a particular people, who, in their turn, are sacrificed for the boasted
scheme of general good, which is never the nearer being accomplished.
He must be adored and revered, and yet he does not make himself known
to man. He does not even show himself face to face to any but Moses.
You pay no great compliment to his omnipotence, when you observe, that
"probably he could not give to such a being as man a full manifestation
of the end for which he designs him, nor of the means requisite for that
end;"--and, "that it may not be possible for the Father of the universe
to explain to us, infants in apprehension, the goodness and the wisdom
of his dealings with the sons of man." Jehovah, in short, equally the
offspring of fancy with the Heathen Jupiter, is as cruel as Moloch,
and, like other productions of the brain, an invisible phantom, to which
priests give the passions of a tyrant; and, in their desire that he
should reign alone, that men should not worship other deities, his
ministers have preached up this God, and the multitude, eager to admire
what they cannot comprehend, have followed the mandates of the pretended
interpreters of his will. Still, however, the greatest number of
ignorant men are, and will ever be, idolaters; in vain their spiritual
guides preach up incomprehensible and ideal beings in an unintelligible
jargon; man will always seek to satisfy his senses. Even the immediate
presence of Jehovah, and his horrid massacres, could not prevent the
favourite nation from following other gods. Even the inspired, the wise,
the royal Solomon forsook "the God of Israel, holy, just, and good," for
"the impure rabble of heathen Baalim."

According to your nations, according to the doctrines of the Jewish and
the Christian churches, the sole aim of God has been to be exclusively
adored, and jealousy is his prominent feature. It is not in the pursuit
of knowledge, or in the practice of morality that he delights. The
precepts of social virtue occasionally scattered through the Old, as
well as the New Testament, can make little impression when contrasted
with the vindictive cruelty of the Deity. The Jewish Jehovah requires
nothing of his followers but their compliance in executing his bloody
commands against nations whom he calls impious, because he has not
revealed himself to them. The man after his own heart, is the murderer
of thousands of innocent people. Christ orders his followers to despise
the reason he has given them, to avoid pleasure, to hate the world,
and to love pain, to pray, and to spend their lives in continual
mortification, and in gazing over unintelligible mysteries to acquire
his kingdom. If they fail to believe in him, whether from ignorance or
from conviction, he punishes them with eternal damnation, or as _Saint_
Athanasius emphatically expresses it in his celebrated creed, "Whosoever
believeth in these things shall be saved; and whosoever believeth not
shall be damned."




