The Project Gutenberg EBook of Watson Refuted, by Samuel Francis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Watson Refuted
       Being an Answer to The Apology for the Bible, in a Series
       of Letters to the Bishop Of Llandaff

Author: Samuel Francis

Release Date: October 8, 2012 [EBook #40978]

Language: English

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WATSON REFUTED ***




Produced by David Widger





WATSON REFUTED

BEING AN ANSWER TO THE APOLOGY FOR THE BIBLE.

IN A SERIES OF LETTERS TO THE BISHOP OF LLANDAFF.

By Samuel Francis, M.D.

     Pudet me humani generis, cujus mentes et aures talia fern
     potuerunt.

     --Div. Augustin.

LONDON:

PRINTED and PUBLISHED BY R. CARLILE, 55, FLEET STREET




ADVERTISEMENT.

I had written a considerable part of another work, containing strictures
on religion. The appearance of the Bishop of Llandaff's pamphlet, and
the number of editions that have been published for the purpose of
encouraging its sale among the poorer classes, induced me to take up the
pen expressly in answer to this publication, that I might undeceive
the multitude, and show that, under the imposing title of a Bishop,
Dr. Watson has been guilty of the most gross misrepresentations, and,
whether intentionally or from ignorance, has deceived his readers,
while, under the pretence of meekness, he triumphs in the detection of a
few errors, committed by a man who does not pretend to be a Theologian,
or to be possessed of any great learning. He has uniformly passed
over the weighty arguments of the Age of Reason, and stopped at a few
immaterial inaccuracies. I hope, in the following sheets, to show, that
the learned Professor of Divinity has committed errors in the Natural
Sciences and History, which would be inexcusable in any author; but,
when coming from a dignified Clergyman, who wishes to dictate to the
nation, their detection cannot fail to show to the public, how necessary
it is for men to employ their faculty of reason, and not to yield it to
those whose profession is to teach things they acknowledge to be above
reason, and incomprehensible. I shall, as soon as my other avocations
permit, give the world a tract upon religion in general, with strictures
on the Jewish and Christian systems. For this reason, I shall not, in
the present pamphlet, enter deeply into any abstract reasoning, but
confine myself chiefly to the detection of the errors contained in the
Apology for the Bible.

S. F.

London, Aug. 15,

1790,




WATSON REFUTED




LETTER I.

MY LORD,

You have thought it not inconsistent with your dignity as a Bishop, to
oppose the _Age of Reason by Thomas Paine_, and I, as a member of the
community, find myself called upon to expose your reasoning, and stop
the career of error. You disclaim controversy; but if your candour
is any thing more than a vain boast, I entertain hopes of seeing the
defender of Christianity again step forward to answer my arguments, if
he deems them of sufficient weight to disturb his quiet. I am sincerely
glad to find a dignified churchman begin a dispute with men, whom
formerly the pious members of the Church would have deemed fit victims
for the fire or the gallows; at the same time, I feel deep regret, that
the Bishop has not yet altogether laid aside the clerical passion for
the extermination of the heterodox. I hope, says Dr. Watson, that
there is no want of charity in wishing, that Mr. Paine's life had been
terminated long before his publication. This may be consistent with
Christian charity, but nature and reason teach us ugly unbelievers
another doctrine: and, however inveterate I may be against those of
the clergy who persecute and deceive the multitude, I confess, that the
death of a person, whom I conceive to be acting for what he thinks the
public good, would give me no pleasure; and the Bishop allows the purity
of Mr. Paine's motives. The wish of the philosopher is, let reason guide
us, and all parties have freedom of debate. No dogmatical dictates of
bigotted priests, no passive obedience to the mandates of inquisitors,
nor to the persecutions so often fomented by churchmen. To the progress
of letters, during this century, we owe the mildness and condescension
of clergymen: till philosophy taught us, the clergy never discovered,
that persecutions for heresy and witchcraft, or inquisitions and popery,
were horrid institutions. Dares Dr. Watson affirm, that freedom of
inquiry was ever suffered on religious subjects? that people were
allowed to examine the grounds of the doctrines taught by the Church?
No, Sir, your predecessors of all beliefs have ever persecuted
philosophers and inquirers into truth, both in science and in religion.
Neither Galileus nor Rousseau escaped the malevolence of the opposers
of science; and in the Bible they found authorities for their inveterate
opposition to the progress of truth and knowledge. The New Testament
informs us, that the wisdom of God is foolishness to man, that human
learning produces nothing but pride 1, and that the poor in spirit gain
the kingdom of heaven.

     1 "Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain
     deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of
     the world, and not after Christ." Colos. ii. 5, 8.

     "Cum sit nobis divinis literis traditum cognitiones
     philosophorum stultas esse, ad ipsum re et argumentis
     docendum et; ne quit bouesto sapieutiæ nomine inductus, aut
     inanis eloquentiæ splendore deceptus, humanis malet quam
     divinis credere."

     Lactantius, Inst. lib. i. chap. 2.

Under these and other similar pretences, have barbarous priests led
their credulous followers to massacres in the name of their God; by
means of that touchstone word, _Faith_, they made the multitude forget
that their leaders were but men. Now, Sir, we have grown bolder:
knowledge being no longer confined to clerical seminaries, priests are
not kings. The church totters; and a single pamphlet, you say, "has
unsettled the faith of thousands." Now, that you cannot stifle reason,
you pretend to liberality of sentiment.

The natural historian, or the astronomer, fears not the publication of
opinions contrary to his own, except from a scholastic habit, learned in
the clerical seminaries, which still disgrace almost every country. The
chemist eagerly peruses all theories; the divine alone refuses to argue
with his opponents, and trembles at the very name of reason. I differ in
my philosophical opinions from Mr. Paine; my principles extend so much
farther than his, that I suspect I come under the class which you are
pleased to call madmen, and every clergyman would affect to despise, but
dare not argue with, before an unprejudiced tribunal. These, Sir, are
the effects of superstition, and the cunning policy of the Church. The
Bible is hardly suffered to be read in Catholic countries. The English
reformers could not go so far; their revolution sprung from a dawn of
philosophy. The English clergy, however, would confine us to the
reading of that unintelligible farrago, and the still more insufferable
commentaries upon it. So did the scholastics with Aristotle; their
bigotted partiality to this author was nearly of the same force with the
priestly attachment to the Bible. They retarded science; but the motives
of the clergy are stronger. By the Bible they live; and it is not
uncommon to hear the parson deride in private what he preaches from the
pulpit.

But to your first letter.

After the pious wish for Thomas Paine's death, you proceed to state
how miserable the adoption of his doctrines would render the "unhappy
virtuous." Fear not such a dire event: the _pious_ are few in number,
and of those, few have the courage to open a book controverting their
opinions, and which, they are taught to believe, contains nothing but
blasphemies But, should chance lead them to a detection of their errors,
they would only become less devout, and more useful citizens. Freed from
the prospect of hell and heaven, they will have leisure to think of
this world, in which they live somewhat like hermits, loving only their
priests, and ready to sacrifice victims to credulity.

You say, that guillotine massacres were not the effect of the Popish
religion, but of the disbelief of this system. This deserves some
consideration. It is not true, that the majority of the people of Paris
were unbelievers. No, Sir, they swore to the miracles of Abbe Paris,
and were as ready to give testimony to the wonderful cures and prodigies
operated by his intercession, as the Jews or Christians have been
to vouch for theirs. The fact is this: the lively disposition of the
French, the unintelligibility of their religion, and the shameful
conduct of the priests, turned their attention to the more serious
object of politics; but this event could not immediately change the
nature of the murderers of the Protestants on St. Bartholomew's day.
Does your Lordship imagine, that the peasants of La Vendee are models of
morality? If you think so, I must undeceive you. Nothing but ignorance
prevails in that district; like the ancient crusaders, they are led
solely by their priests, who, by means of certain words which early
habits and superstition have made their followers respect, and, together
with want of communication with the rest of France, have inflamed them,
and driven them to slaughter: even miracles have not been wanting in
that part of the country; but in this, as in many other instances, they
have disappeared, on the arrival of incredulous troops, whose hearts are
perhaps hardened by God, like the Egyptians of old. Since God diminishes
men's faith in proportion as he gives them human wisdom, let us not
endeavour to controvert this heavenly will, by endeavouring to make
the enlightened people of the eighteenth century so credulous as in the
former days of ignorance. The Bishop allows, that the higher classes
of every country all lean towards infidelity; they are more guided by
reason, and reason is the avowed enemy of faith, it being the criterion
of faith, that it contains natural impossibilities. It is unfortunate
that so many sects pretend to faith, and differ so much among
themselves; and that to explain their faiths, they use the weapons of
reason against one another. This of itself proves, that faith is but
a cant word, since the faithful argue about what comes not under human
knowledge. Thus all religious sectaries, whether Christians, Jews,
Mahometans, Boodzoists, or Bramins, as staunchly believe contradictory
doctrines, while, in the inquiries that depend on their reason, we find
that, wherever men have long been civilized, they have, in astronomy,
in physics, or ethics, come in general to the same conclusions. The
language of the philosopher is understood in Pekin as well as in Rome;
but the religious fanatics of every country differ in their opinions,
and consider all but themselves as dreamers and impostors. The Bramin
laughs at the story of Noah and the ark, the stopping of the sun, and
the incarnation of God; while the Christian shows the same contempt for
the incarnation of Vishnu, and other articles of the Braminical
faith. The exercise of reason alone shows us the true limits of our
intellectual faculties. Ignorance of this is the cause of all reveries
in science, as in religion; it is only superstition that incites men to
launch beyond their conceptions.

You accuse of infidelity all those who commit crimes against society.
When we answer, that the Jewish and Christian religions have deluged
the world with blood, you reply, that it is not as being Jews and
Christians, but because they were wicked. At the same time, I hope you
allow, that the Spartans, the Athenians, the Romans, the Chinese, did
not commit half the atrocities which disgrace Jewish history, the aera
of the crusades and the Christian persecutions, of the invasion of
America, the massacres of heretics, &c. The candid observer must
therefore conclude, that right and wrong is not confined to sects; that
the Christian religion, whatever its precepts may be, has not been able
to prevent crimes, while nations who knew not so much as the name of
Moses or Christ, produced a Confucius, an Aristides, a Socrates, an
Epaminondas, a Cincinnatus. Among these nations, who knew not the Lord
Jehovah, we find Archimedes, Epicurus, Demosthenes, Plato, Aristotle,
Cicero, while the chosen people of God, and their successors, the
Christians, borrowed their language, the very names of their gods, and
the little science they knew, from these despised infidels. It was not
the oracle of Delphos, the augurs, or the sybils, that enlightened the
Greeks and Romans. The rabble credited them, as the ignorant Jews and
Christians did their prophets and apostles. In short, morals cannot be
invented; there cannot be two systems of morality. The precepts must be
directed to principles existing in the heart of man. Ignorance conceals
from nations the rule of conduct, in the same manner that it prevents
them from knowing geometry; the moment they study either, they are put
in the road of truth. No wonder, then, that in the times of the greatest
oppression, when frightened into certain doctrines by the stories
of nurses and parents, many learned men should not have been able
to conquer their first prejudices. You certainly know the time when
astrology and the philosopher's stone were in fashion; the believers
in these reveries were men of science. Van Helmont, Stahl, Boyle,
and innumerable others were possessed of this madness. You can be no
stranger to the numerous wretches that suffered for witchcraft and
necromancy, and, upon the very brink of death, confessed they were
guilty.

The next reflection the Doctor makes, is respecting gospel moderation,
for which purpose he quotes, "Who art thou that judgest another man's
servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth." Yet has this been
done by all Christian rulers; and the clergy are at this moment,
in express defiance of this maxim, about to send missionaries to
disseminate principles that have ever produced internal dissensions, and
without which infidels have lived in perfect happiness. It is, perhaps,
an excess of piety; but cool observers pretend, that it is the high
priest, not the High God, that they are going to preach: to fill their
knapsacks is the first object of these pilgrims, and their God is
made subservient. Unluckily for the Bishop, he could not adduce a more
detestable maxim, to show his charity, than that which I have just
quoted: it is the pivot of Oriental despotism; it teaches passive
obedience to all classes; the father is the tyrant of his children, the
nabob of his subjects, the emperor of all: it is a maxim whose tendency
is to root in men's minds, that we are the property of one another, and
may be inherited as cattle. To those of my readers who are pleased with
it, I wish a thorough experience of its effects.

The remainder of your first letter contains observations to which I
perfectly accede. Your conclusion against Thomas Paine is perfectly
fair. Any apparent deviation from moral justice in the world must prove
as much against the goodness of God, as a similar inconsistency in his
immediate actions and commands proves against revealed religion. My
Lord, we are in the abyss of error; your question with Thomas Paine
is about the comparative absurdity of the two Opinions. The deistical
notions of your adversary do not agree with his reasonable tenets; but
I readily grant, that, to a religious person, nothing is incredible; and
that the greater the inconsistencies, the more sublime the system.
But let me ask your Lordship, what you conclude against one, who, like
myself, is not a Deist? and repeats, with the first philosopher of the
age, that there are only four possible hypotheses upon the causes of the
universe: 1st. That they are purely good. 2dly. That they are malicious.
3dly. That they are a mixture of good and evil. And, lastly, That they
neither possess benevolence, nor any other passions. The two first
hypotheses are equally contradicted by daily experience, the mixture of
good and evil is too apparent: the third is denied, by the steadiness of
the laws of nature: the last, then, only is admissible.

You next proceed to justify several actions of the Jews, which you and
the Bible are pleased to call God's commands. I must decline following
your reasoning; for the very existence of such crimes as the Jews
ascribe to their enemies, and which, they say, were so repugnant to
God, would of themselves prove against the goodness of that Being. His
frequent threats, and the extermination of so many miserable nations, is
a poor expedient; like that of a man, who, attempting to make a machine,
and foiled in his endeavours, gloried in breaking it in a thousand
pieces. How much more ridiculous is that sublime Artificer, who employs
the same means which impotence or malevolence give rise to in his
wretched children. I am glad you have no recourse to the silly causes of
atheism, as given by that illustrious dreamer, Plato.

The world has too long been imposed upon by ridiculous attempts to
vilify atheists, and show their nonexistence. That name has been a cant
word, like Jacobin in France, and Whig and Tory in England, which
every person applies to his neighbour as it best suits him. In Catholic
countries, all who dare think are heretics; among Protestants, they
are atheists. Being a word of opprobrium, it has ever been used as a
powerful engine in the hands of the clergy. The question is upon the
truth of systems, not upon the character of those who profess them. If
this were the discrimination, and the palm given to that religion that
has had the greatest number of honest men, the Christian system would
certainly lose the contest.

The Bishop seems to think, that savages have not so perfect a notion of
God as we imagine: religion, he supposes, begins as it were in express
revelation. This is but the fancy of a clergyman, unsupported by
any proofs; but at least it shows, that the Bishop involuntarily
acknowledges, that reason alone can hardly give us the idea of a ruling
Being. The savage, it is true, does not discourse in a metaphysical
jargon; he wants expressions: but I wish the Doctor would inform me in
what our Catechism definition of God is clearer than the notions of the
rudest savage, who, trembling at the approach of thunder and violent
convulsions of nature, or enjoying the genial sun and fertilizing
inundations, imagines all the world to be animated with his own
passions. The thunder is a mark of wrath, while the blessings are signs
of a propitious genius. To conciliate these imaginary beings, to avert
their wrath, is the grand object of superstition. Schoolmen conceal,
under their mystical jargon, the real materials which their gods are
made of; they conceal that the Supreme Artificer is the offspring of
fancy, the figurative and unphilosophical symbol of nature, to which
they give human dispositions: in all religious systems men are the
type of their gods. Your letter concludes with a remark sufficiently
extraordinary, that most Deists of your acquaintance disbelieve the
mysterious conversations of God, his miracles, and such other stories,
because they are too wonderful, and against the order of nature. Your
reply is curious: because we never have seen the like of them, does it
follow that they are untrue? Give me leave to tell you, my Lord, that
you have forgotten the rules of logic: you know, that in all cases, but
of demonstration, the philosopher does nothing but weigh probabilities.
Any thing that is conceivable is possible: but are we therefore to
believe in the existence of witches or necromancers? Are we to give
credit to the world having sprung from an egg? That Mahomet divided the
moon? That the sun stood still? That astrology is a science? Yet what
reason have we to disbelieve them? The respective supporters of these
opinions may say with the Doctor, that nothing can be too wonderful, and
that, because these things have not happened in our time, it does not
follow they should be untrue. I acknowledge, with the Doctor, that
many Deists admit a Being as inconceivable as any religious mystery;
therefore it may seem ridiculous in them to stop their credulity; since
we call God just, when nothing but a concatenation of causes and effects
can be perceived in the world; when we proclaim him benevolent,
while the world is full of vice, while millions perish in misery, and
continual calamities befal mankind; while, in short, most men have the
gloomy prospect of damnation before them. These are greater miracles
than an universal deluge, making a woman from a rib, or God's
countenancing the atrocious murders of Jews. He that will believe one
wonder, has no plea for doubting the rest.




