LETTER II.

MY LORD,

Your second letter begins with some nice distinctions between
authenticity and genuineness. The whole reasoning seems to amount to
this, that a book may be authentic, although not genuine, and _vice
versa_. To this proposition we were no strangers; but piety makes
your Lordship forget some other considerations. When the proofs of
authenticity depend in a great measure upon the genuineness of a
book, then the authenticity falls to the ground the moment we prove it
spurious. Thus the Jews strenuously maintained, that the Pentateuch had
been written by an inspired man at a particular time. But if Moses is
shown not to have written these books, I trust you will not declare
them authentic, without other very solid proofs. When a whole nation
is proved to be mistaken respecting the author of a work, we ought not
hastily to credit their legends. Moreover, logic teaches us, that in
proportion as events are incredible, they require a stronger testimony
to prove that they have actually taken place. A battle may have been
fought, a city may have been destroyed, but miracles being against the
order of nature, no testimony can be strong enough to prove them, we
must again appeal to faith. It is so much easier for men to be deceived
or imposed upon, or for persons designedly to mislead their credulous
followers, that unless it were more miraculous that a man should be
mistaken, than that the miracle happened, we ought not to give credit
to such fables. If we drop this rule of logic, we shall readily believe
prodigies of all sorts, whether wrought by Moses, Jesus Christ, Mahomet,
St. Antony of Padua, or any modern wonder-workers, witches, magicians,
astrologers, or magnetisers. Mr. Paine no where asserts, that because
a book is not genuine, it must be false; but certainly he might assert
this of the Bible. You say, that if the works of Titus Livius had been
ascribed to another, they would nevertheless be true; how would you
ascertain it? If the whole Roman nation supposed them to have been
written by a particular author at a certain time, and should we be
enabled to point out many passages evidently written in a posterior
age, would you, without any other proofs, join in the assent to the
authenticity of the history, upon a tradition so vague, and already
proved false in so material a point? Although I am no Bishop, I would
only imagine, that as to probable events contained in such spurious
books, there might have been some grounds for them; but I would receive
them with great caution; and, at any rate, never would I establish a
system of history, much less of religion, upon the productions of an
ignorant people: in all cases, events related against the order of
nature are to be considered as the reveries of dark ages. To elucidate
your principles, you mention Anson's voyage, written by Robins, under
the name of Walter, to prove that a spurious work may contain a true
history; but, my Lord, do you forget, that this was written at a time
when the whole nation knew that Lord Anson had made such a voyage, and
every man in his fleet could testify the particulars of it? But if
our posterity, four or five centuries hence, should discover a book
purporting to be written by a Mr. Walters, detailing the voyage of
Admiral Anson, and if in that book they should meet a passage speaking
of the late revolution in France, or of the author's death and burial,
would not that strike at the authenticity of the whole? Would any part
be believed that was not corroborated by the evidence of respectable
contemporary authors? All that could be inferred would be from the
nature of the events related, such as the accurate description of
countries, and such other particulars as marked either the period of the
observations, or their truth: in the first case, they might suspect the
work to be interpolated; in the second, they would value it only for
the accuracy of information. It is different with scientifical and
historical works: a spurious book of science may contain truths, they
stand for themselves, they are the same at all times and places. Not so
in history: the truth here depends on the universal consent of nations,
on the testimony of authors of credibility confronted with each other,
and in all cases relating things probable. When we read in a Chinese
history, that the goddess Amida peopled the world by bearing male
children from under one arm, and females under another, or, in the
Mahometan writers, that the trees spoke to the founder of that sect,
would a man credit any circumstance, however probable, related in
such histories, without the strongest collateral proofs? And should
we further discover, that these histories detailed events posterior
to their author's death, would not this make the whole still more
improbable? Your remark upon this subject is singular: you say, that if
Joshua, Samuel, or Moses, declared themselves the authors of the works
ascribed to them, then to prove these books spurious would at once
destroy their genuineness and authenticity. I would reason thus: Moses
does not say, that he was the author of the Pentateuch; why then do
we believe that he wrote it? You would, no doubt, answer, that the
tradition of the Jews proclaims him such. I retort, that if the
genuineness of a book may be proved by tradition, we ought as much to
argue against the authenticity of a work, from having proved the general
belief of its genuineness to be founded on error, as if the author had
said, I am the author of this book. This we shall, in the sequel, prove
to be the case with the books of the Old Testament. The addition of
an express declaration of Moses would add no authenticity to the
Pentateuch, since it is as easy to forge a work where the author speaks
in the first as in the third person.

Your next remark is concerning miracles. I have already observed, that
no testimony can give them belief. You maintain, that the degree and
kind of evidence for the prodigies recorded in the Bible exceeds that
for any other wonders. How this happens I am unable to comprehend. I
know they are contained in a book composed by the priests of the
most credulous and ignorant nation that perhaps ever existed; and the
authority of these unknown and obscure persons, is all the evidence
we have for crediting their stories. An English Bishop tells his
countrymen, that the miracle of the sun standing still is better
supported than the prodigies of Abbe Paris, Mesmer, and the late Labre
at Rome, than the numerous Indian, Chinese, and Popish miracles, of
which a great part are attested by magistrates, divines, physicians, and
the most enlightened classes of society; while the wonderful repast of
the angels with Abraham, or the marvellous tale of Jonah's three days'
residence in the belly of a fish, depends upon the authority of a book
which we shall prove to be spurious, to have been lost for several ages,
and to be compiled, if not altogether composed, by some Jewish scribes,
who were, as they themselves acknowledge, the only men versed in the
scriptures of the nation. I thought you would have known sacred history
better than at the present day to make such unsupported assertions.
Have you forgotten the wonders of the magicians of Pharaoh? Do you not
recollect the express acknowledgment of Moses himself, that there may
be miracles and prophecies performed by men who adored not the Lord
Jehovah? Does he not say, in chap. xiii. of Deuteronomy, "If there arise
among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or
a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof he spake unto
thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, &c.--that prophet, or that
dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death, _because he hath spoken to you
to turn away from the Lord your God_." It is not because he is a false
prophet, but because he is not a prophet of Jehovah. Does not this
at once show the grossness of the conceptions of the Jews, and the
sophistical mode of arguing of their legislator? For I would ask, How
did Moses prove himself the oracle of God? Or how did Jesus Christ
show himself the Son of God, but by their pretended miracles? Why then
believe the testimony of a miracle in one instance, and not in another?
But the Jews certainly imagined, that there were several gods, and that
they quarrelled with each other, as kings are used to do; therefore it
was natural that one set of prophets should try to exterminate another,
and be as inveterate against them as the Lord Jehovah was against Baal,
or other rival gods. If the reader imagines I speak at random when I
say, the Jews believed in other gods, I refer him to Judges, chap.
xi. ver. 23, 34, where it is said, "So now the Lord God of Israel hath
dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel, and shouldst
thou not possess it? Wilt thou not possess that which _Chemosh thy god_
giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive
out from before us, them will we possess." There cannot be a fairer
parallel.

I can hardly imagine a Bishop ignorant of the augurs, oracles, and
sybils of the Greeks and Romans, and of the implicit belief these
nations had in them; the truth of their prophecies was fully as well
established as the prophecies of the Jews. Neither were miracles
uncommon among the heathens. You have, no doubt, read St. Ambrose and
Origen, and have found in the works of these and other fathers, that
the only difference between the miracles of the Christians and infidels,
was, that the former were operated by God, and the latter by the devil;
and could I be satisfied that Satan took up Jesus Christ to the top of
that high mountain, (now unknown to geographers) from whose pinnacle all
the world could be seen, this would surprise me as much as to see Jesus
Christ, or any other wonder-worker, bringing a dead man to life. I am
ashamed to have inveighed so long against silly prejudices; but I
could not avoid calling upon your Lordship, to point out the difference
between gospel-miracles and the ridiculous tales believed in all dark
ages, and of which we find so copious collections in the works of the
first fathers. The axiom of philosophers, that no human testimony can
establish the credibility, of miracles, you have left unanswered. You
say it has been confuted an hundred times: had you given the confutation
of it, we would have been able to ascertain the truth of your assertion.
You are writing for the multitude, and being a dignitary of the church,
ought to furnish the people with arms to oppose reason. Perhaps the
unsuccessful attempt of Dr. Campbell has deterred you from at least
recapitulating the principal answers to this proposition. Till you can
prove that the great mass of mankind are not very fallible and easily
deceived by any impostor, or that they are disposed and capable to
examine the truth of reports spread about prodigies, you will never be
able to persuade men of sense, that events impossible are to be believed
upon the testimony of those who not only are, but have constantly been,
the slaves of credulity in all countries.

You then show, that Mr. Paine's objections to the genuineness are not
new. This is true; and I am surprised you have quoted so few supporters
of his opinions. Your attempt to prove the genuineness of the
Pentateuch, by direct evidence, is ridiculous. What! Maimonides, ten
centuries after the destruction of the Jews, a Jew himself, and writing
at a period so remote from the supposed date of the books of the
Old Testament, is, by Dr. Watson, called a direct evidence of the
genuineness of the Pentateuch. Juvenal, a poet, who in more than one
place ridicules the credulity of the Jews, says, that they believe in
Moses--so do the Europeans allow that the Indians believe in Brama.--We
question not the general traditions of the Jews, but the credit they
deserve; and I shall next proceed to show, that the books of the
Pentateuch are spurious, and undeserving of credit. The name of
Moses and the Jews were unknown to the famous Phoenician historian
Sanchoniato, of whom Eusebius has preserved us some extracts; he has
never mentioned a word about this famous legislator: had he done so,
Eusebius was too strenuous an advocate _for_ Christianity not to have
recorded it. The books of the Jews were concealed from all the world
before the famous Greek translation made at the instance of Ptolemy
Philadelphia. Josephus himself acknowledges, that no heathen knew
the Jewish books, which he endeavours to explain, by some miraculous
interference of God to keep them from the impious. It is evident, that
the insignificance and ignorance of the Jews were sufficient to screen
them for a long time from the search of philosophers. Upon the early
history of the Jewish nation, however, we have the testimony of several
of the ancient writers. Manetho, and Chaeremon, Egyptian historians,
give the most unfavourable account of this nation. Lisimachus does not
favour them any more; and, although he differs about the name of the
king who expelled them from Egypt, yet he agrees in calling them a set
of men infected with leprosy, and the meanest of the subjects of the
king of Egypt. Diodorus Siculus is as hard upon these wretched Jews. In
short, the opinion of their being the vilest and most ignorant of men,
has prevailed among all antiquity. All the writers about them agree in
stating that they never produced any work in science; indeed, that they
never improved any branch of useful knowledge. Many of these authors
mention Moses as a priest of Heliopolis, who led them out of Egypt, and
gave them a religion. Diodorus Siculus informs us, that the God of Moses
was Jau, or Jahouh, which is the true pronunciation of Jehovah; and
Plutarch (de Iside) says, that the Thebans adored this God, and had not
images in their temples, because Jau signified the general principle of
life, the soul of the world.

Strabo, in his Geography, book 16, informs us, that Moses, who was an
Egyptian priest, taught his followers to worship the God Jahouh, without
representing it by emblems. This was the God of the Thebans, the soul of
the world. The Jews have even preserved the name of Tsour, or giver of
forms, and commonly translated by the word creator in chap. xxxii. of
Deuteronomy. Herodotus affirms, that the Jews or Syrians of Palestine
borrowed circumcision from the Egyptians. Diodorus says the same; and
even Philo and Josephus do not deny it. A great many other rites
were copied by the Jews from this nation. It is, therefore, of great
consequence to ascertain the age in which the Jewish books were written;
for if we can prove that all the fundamental points of their religion
were copied from their masters the Egyptians, or borrowed from the
Babylonians during the captivities, then the reader will judge of
the truth of the clerical opinion, that a handful of hordes were the
favourite people of God; that a set of ignorant and credulous vagabonds
taught science to the Chinese, Indians, and Egyptians, and preserved
nothing among themselves but some ridiculous accounts of their origin,
and a collection of absurd prodigies. If we succeed in pointing out
from what sources Jewish mythology is derived, there will be but
little difficulty in unravelling the principal fables contained in the
Pentateuch and other Jewish books. We are pretty well acquainted with
the allegories of the heathen mythologies.

I am ready to grant that several of Mr. Paine's objections are not
valid, and often trifling; but I declare, once for all, that I do not
think myself bound to follow Mr. Paine in every instance. I shall direct
my remarks, rather to disprove your reasoning, than to defend every
objection of your opponent; at the same time, I shall avoid repeating
what he has advanced, and you have not disproved. The chief proofs
against the genuineness of the Pentateuch have been overlooked by Mr.
Paine. I shall state them briefly.

First. It was believed, by all the best informed old fathers of the
church, that the Jewish books had been absolutely lost during the
captivity, and that Esdras had written them from inspiration; or, that
he collected the Pentateuch, and all other canonical books, out of
whatever records he could find, and put them together. 1 In either case,
their authority is greatly invalidated; and the more so, as the fourth
book of Esdras, adopted by the Greek church, and generally deemed
authentic, says expressly, that Esdras dictated the holy books during
forty successive days and nights, to five scribes, who were continually
writing. This tale shows sufficiently the general belief that he was
the restorer of the long lost books of the law. In our second book
of Nehemiah, or, properly speaking, Esdras, it is said, that Ezra, or
Esdras the scribe, who was above all the people, brought the book of the
law to the people, and then the people rejoiced much in being instructed
in the law of God, that when they found there the commandment of the
Lord ordering the Jews to perform the feast of the booths, there was
great gladness, "and all the congregation of them that were come again
out of the captivity made booths, and sat under booths: for, since the
days of Joshua the son of Nun, unto that day, had not the children of
Israel done so.". If the Jews had even forgotten a feast, the memory
of which every father would transmit to his son, is this not an evident
proof that they had no books in the captivity? Again, in chap. vii. of
the 1 book of Esdras, it is said, that Esdras "had very great skill,
so that he omitted nothing of the law and commandments of the Lord, but
taught all Israel the ordinances and judgments."

     1 Porro Esdram sancti patres docent iostanratorem suisse
     sacrorum librorum, quod non ita intelligendum est, quasi
     scripturæ sacræ omnes perierint in eversione civitatis, et
     templi Nabuchodonosor, et ab Esdra divinitas inspirato
     reparatæ fuerint, ut fabulatur auctor, L, IV. Esdræ C. XIV.
     Sed quod Scripturas Mosis, et prophetarum in varia volimina
     descriptas, et in varia loca dispenreas, et tempore
     captivitatis non diligenter conservatas, Esdras summa
     diligentia collectas ordinaverit, et in unum quasi corpus
     redigerit. Bellarmin de Script. Ecclesiast. page 22.

Can any man, after this, doubt that Esdras is the compiler of all the
books which the Jews had not known for many centuries? And are we, who
laugh at the Catholic councils, to trust to the word of a Jewish scribe?
it is further stated in 2 Chronicles, chap. xxiv. ver. 15, that Hilkiah
the priest found a book of the law of God _given_ by Moses, and sent it
by Saphan to king Josias, who heard it read, which shows that it must
have been very short; and, by the context, it would appear to have
been the law strictly speaking; another proof that these records were
altogether scattered, and are all without authority, since it was so
easy to forge them among a people who seemed to preserve no more than
a traditional law. Again, although, in the older Jewish books, such as
Kings and Chronicles, we find the name of Moses often mentioned, yet no
word answering to the five books of Pentateuch is to be found. The Code
of laws of Moses seems to have been forgotten; for Solomon ornamented
the temple with calves, in express contempt of that law, and this while
he was the favourite of God, and the wisest man in the world. The very
confusion that pervades the books ascribed to Moses, shows them to
have been compilations. Jerome, who was one of the most learned of the
fathers, confesses that he dares not affirm that Moses is the author
of the Pentateuch; he even adds, that he has no objection to allow that
Esdras wrote the books in question. 1

     1 Sive Mosen dicere volueris auctorem Pentateuchi, sive
     Esdram ejuadem iustauratorem operis, non recuso. Hieronim.
     Op. Tom. IV. p. 134. Apud Edit. Paris 1706,

Secondly. We know that no canon of books ever existed among the Jew's
till the time of the synagogue under the Maccabees. Before their reign,
there had never existed among the Jews any such council; and, if the
word occurs in the Pentateuch, it is a fault of the transcribers and
composers, who lived when there was a synagogue, and is not to be
understood in any other acceptation than a collection of priests. The
Pharisees of the second temple chose the books they thought best among
a multitude of forgeries. The Talmud relates, that this synagogue
were about to reject the Book of Proverbs, Ezekiel's prophecies, and
Ecclesiastes, because they imagined these writings contradictory to the
law of God; but a certain Rabbin having undertaken to reconcile them,
they were preserved as canonical. A prodigious number of forged Books
of Daniel, Esdras, and of the Prophets, were then in circulation; and
to distinguish the genuine from the false works became absolutely
necessary. This doubt and uncertainty conspires to render the decision
of the synagogue very doubtful; particularly, as we shall show in the
sequel, that many passages of the Prophecies are written evidently about
the time of this choice of sacred books, and inserted in them, probably
by some cunning priest, as the oracles of Sybil were forged to suit
Cæsar.

Thirdly. The similarity of the mysteries of the Jews to those of the
Babylonians, is too glaring not to let us see the origin of Genesis in
particular. The creation in six days is a perfect copy of the Gahans,
or Gahan-bars, of Zoroaster; the particulars of each day's work are
literally the same. The serpent was famous among the Babylonians. The
mythological deluge of Ogyges and Xissuthrus, are symbols of changes
arising on earth, as they imagined, from the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies. These, a little ornamented by the historical narration of
Deucalion's inundation related by Berosus, is the pattern of Noah's
flood; the ark of Osiris and emblematical dove and raven were Egyptian
hieroglyphics. The man and the woman in Paradise is a mere copy of
Zoroaster's first pair. The original sin is Pandora's box. The Talmud of
Jerusalem says expressly that the Jews borrowed the names of the angels,
and even of their months, from the Babylonians. The Elohim, or Gods,
(not God), are said in Genesis to have created the world. It was not
Jehovah, but the genii or gods that are in the Hebrew called makers of
the world. And these are the very genii, who according to Sanchoniatho,
were by Mercury excited against Saturn.

Fourthly. We ask, in what language was the Pentateuch written, if it
really was the work of Moses? It is known that Hebrew is a dialect of
the Phenician, and that the Jews spoke Egyptian for a very long time
before they adopted the language of the people among whom they dwelt. In
Psalm lxxxi. we learn that the Jews were surprised to hear the language
of the people beyond the Bed Sea. If, therefore, Moses, or any person of
that age, is the author of the Pentateuch, it is evident that the
Hebrew books are mere translations. What degree of credit does a nation
deserve, who have been able to take for originals books that were in the
face of them translations? Is it right to persecute men, as priests have
done while they had power, for refusing to give credit to this tissue of
contradictory and absurd fables?

Fifthly. In the books of the Old Testament, we find abundant proofs that
they have been written in an age greatly posterior to that of Moses. In
Genesis, chap. xii. ver. 6, we find these words, "And the Canaanite was
then in land." This implies another period when the Canaanite was not
in the land, which, we learn from the Bible, did not happen till after
David, and could not therefore be written by Moses. The beginning of
Deuteronomy is certainly not written by him; for he never passed the
Jordan; he died upon Mount Nebo, to the eastward of it. The English
translation has in chap. i. v. 5, of this book, said, "on this side
of the Jordan," for "on that side," which is in the original. The
translator has taken similar liberties very often. In chap. xxxiii. we
find this expression, "There never was in Judea so great a prophet
as Moses," and such could be pointed out in many places. Here needs no
comment to show that such passages could only be written in a posterior
age, and when there had been several prophets after Moses. Thomas Paine
mentions many other passages, which I shall consider when I come to your
next letter.

The above considerations would be sufficient to invalidate the
genuineness and authenticity of any historical book: but here we find
that the credulity of bigots requires less proof for the authority of
a work, which, according to them, is the fountain of faith, than
for Ossian's poems, or any other book of no consequence. If a common
historical work contains fables, impossible events, and anachronisms;
if its age is not ascertained; if we are certain that it was unknown for
many centuries; if we are even ignorant whether it is an original or a
translation, who would give the slightest credit to such a book? Yet are
enlightened nations led by the testimony of the Jews, a people credulous
beyond measure, extremely ignorant, almost continually in slavery, and
dispersed. This is the nation that pretends to give an account of the
creation, and, with a vanity peculiar to an insignificant people, to
assume the supremacy among nations, and arrogate to themselves the
exclusive protection of Jehovah, and dare make their Adam the common
stock of mankind. You allow, my Lord, that several passages have been
interpolated in the Pentateuch. No person in the least acquainted with
the history can deny that it has suffered great alterations; 1 and I
have already noticed the opinion of the best informed fathers of the
church upon the non-existence of the Pentateuch, several centuries prior
to Esdras. I now beg to be informed, how we are to decide, if Hilkiah,
in the reign of Josias, collected from tradition, or some old book he
found in a chest, the precepts of the law? and whether the other famous
scribe, Esdras, did not compile from hearsay, and some imperfect and
scattered manuscripts of no authority, together with a great many
Babylonish traditions, those venerable five books of Moses? We are
informed, in one of the books that bears his name, that Esdras was
the wisest of his cotemporaries, and therefore a very fit and probable
person to write books out of old legends.

     1 Multa in Hebraicis et Græcis codicibus vitia esse
     ostendimus. Malta mendacia in rebus minutis, eorum pars
     uliqua non exigua nostra editione vulgata extat.---Marian
     pr. edit. vulg. cap. 21.

If the books of the Old Testament were composed at so late a period, no
wonder then that we find all the mysterious part of them so much like
the religion of the ancients, and particularly of the Babylonians, and
the historical part made up of heterogeneous matters, which in our days,
unassisted by any profane writer of that age, we can make nothing of. I
shall mention a few of the most striking points of resemblance between
the Jewish and other mysteries. Abraham, the most famous of their
patriarchs, has ever been celebrated in India. This they seem to have
brought from their native country, Arabia. We have already noticed,
that their account of the creation is exactly copied from Zoroaster, who
says, that the world was made in six periods of time, called by him the
thousands of God and of light, meaning the six summer months; in the
first, God made the heavens; in the second, the waters; in the third,
the earth; in the fourth, trees; in the fifth, animals; and in the
sixth, man. The Etrurians and the Hindoos have very similar traditions
of the highest antiquity, which, though they were emblems at first
perfectly understood, astronomers afterwards converted them into
periods, comprehending as many years as was required for different
revolutions of the planetary system.

Thus, while the Hindoos and Persians called the days or ages of the
world, each of many thousands of years; the Jews, ignorant of astronomy,
and fond of the marvellous, comprised all within six common days. Their
firmament or heaven of crystal, and its windows, are absurdities not
peculiar to them; the feast of the Pascha, which signifies passage, is
of Egyptian origin, and was in reverence for the passage of the sun at
the vernal equinox: the sacrifices of calves or oxen, the ceremony of
the scape-goat, are Egyptian and Indian; the latter, in particular, have
a ceremony altogether the same with that of the scapegoat. It is too
long to insert here, but I refer my readers to Mr. Halhed's introduction
to the code of Gentoo laws for information on this head. The distinction
between pure and impure animals was first made by the Egyptians; the
ladder seen in Jacob's vision, is exactly a copy of that with seven
steps in the cave of Milthra, representing the seven spheres of the
planets, by means of which souls ascended and descended. It is also the
mythology of the Hindoos, whose antiquity no man at the present day
can venture to deny. The seven candlesticks, and the twelve stones are
Egyptian, and were emblems of the seven planets, and twelve signs of
the Zodiac. The serpent is the most famous Egyptian hieroglyphic; it
signifies eternity, or the sum of all things. The fasts before feasts
are also derived from this nation. The Jewish high-priest, like the
Egyptian, wore an image of sapphire, being the emblematic picture of
truth, upon, his breast: in short, the Egyptians, their masters, gave
them the first ideas of mysteries, which, in the course of time, they
mingled with the Chaldaic; and Manetho informs us, in the extract given
by Josephus in his first book against Appian, that, in authors of great
authority, he found the Jews to have been distinguished in Egypt by the
name of captive pastors, which Josephus artfully enough has attempted
to convert into captive kings. These are the men whom sacred historians
pretend to have taught the Egyptians all their arts. These wretches,
despised of all nations, were themselves the emphatical admirers of the
wisdom of the East. Their legislator was an Egyptian priest, and learned
all that he knew from them; and you would persuade us that a set of
Arabian hordes had founded the Egyptian empire, simply because they,
like the Irish, are pleased to say that they were antedeluvians. I
pardon the Jews for their credulity; but Europeans in the 18th century
ought not to think as the inhabitants of Palestine. If we give credit to
all the reports of the origin of nations, we may give up all pretensions
to common sense.

The immortality of the soul is shown, by the learned but superstitious
Warburton, never to have been mentioned in the Pentateuch; nor the
notion of hell, or of future rewards and punishments. There is nothing
more certain, however, than that the Pharisees, long before Christ,
strenuously maintained the immortality of the soul, and in some measure
adopted the doctrine of transmigration of souls, which they had got from
the Greeks and other nations.

The Sadducees, founding themselves upon the Bible, fervently denied
a future life. The Essenians, according to Philostratus, were
Pythagoreans, both in their morals, belief, and mode of life, except
that a few of the Jewish articles of faith, such as the necessity
of circumcision, were mingled with their creed. Josephus himself
acknowledges the similarity between the Essenians and the Plisti among
the Thracians, to whom Zamolxis, the disciple of Pythagoras, taught
his doctrines: The Therapeutes, the pattern and ori--gin of Christian
morals, were reckoned amongst the Jews to be the most holy among the
Essenians. They sacrificed their passions to God; they never swore,
but made simple affirmations; they lived, as it were, in convents; they
despised bodily pain: when they entered their state of perfection, they
abandoned their property, wives, children, and all earthly concerns;
they lived upon bread and water and salt; and spent the six days of the
week in interpreting the allegorical sense of the Bible. They revered
the Sabbath with a most scrupulous exactness; then they assembled in
places set apart for religion, the men ranged on one side, and the
women on the other, separated by a division four feet high, to prevent
temptation. Then they sung praises to God, and preached; they obeyed
all the laws of their country, but never would execute any order to
hurt another person. They, like the Pythagoreans, thought themselves
possessed of the gift of prophecy; they, like the Pythagoreans, believed
in the great year, whence arose the famous millennium of the Christians.
The three sects of Jews--Pharisees, Sadducees, and Essenians, lived all
in perfect harmony; the incredulous Sadducees not being considered as
heretics, but often attaining the dignity of high-priests. This suffices
to show, that the Jews borrowed from other nations those very mysteries
which the ignorance of writers has misled mankind to consider as the
special revelations of Jesus Christ.

I have insisted so much upon this circumstance, because there is not a
single article of Christian morals, nor one religious tenet, contained
in the New Testament, that was not known before Jesus Christ was born.
And the Christian religion, like that of the Jews, is a corruption of
the mythologies of the nations they brand with the name of infidels.

I return to your book. It is now needless to answer your logical
inference, that if Esdras is the compiler of the books of the
Pentateuch, they may still be true. I have already said, that we are not
to sacrifice our reason to the compilations or works of a Jewish scribe,
who borrowed evidently so much, and who pretended to divine inspiration
and conversations with the angels. When I began to read your book, I
was impressed with the idea of your candour; sorry am I to see
the malevolence with which you treat Mr. Paine, and how much you
misrepresent his just aspersions on the conduct of Moses. Your language
almost persuades me that you do not differ from the gentlemen of your
profession. Could Moses affirm, as you pretend he might, that he never
persecuted any man? What! that monster, who, although married with a
Midianite, ordered thousands of his credulous followers to be murdered,
because one of them had slept with a Midianite, whom Josephus states was
his wife! What! when his brother and coadjutor makes a golden calf to
the people, this impostor, instead of punishing him, orders 3,000 men to
be murdered, and appoints Aaron his successor! Because Korah, Da-than,
and Abiram, could not suffer to see him usurping all the power, he
murders them, although Korab was the descendant of Levi. This is Moses,
who says, like Bishop Watson, that he "was a very meek man!" Were these
continual murders necessary to instruct ignorant idolaters who followed
the example of their priests? Have not the founders of our faith been
the most cruel murderers? But all this we are told was the immediate
orders of the Lord Jehovah, a merciful God. How feeble appears the power
of this great God! He is continually repenting, and always obliged to
renew his covenants with a set of wretches, who, although they enjoyed
his special protection, always forsook him, and only fulfilled his
commands strictly when they were ordered to massacre. They might have
been the favourite people of God, but I am sure they were the disgrace
of men. You talk of idolatrous nations sunk in vice. I know of none so
barbarous as the Jews, whose legislator was obliged to fly from Egypt
for murder, a perfect assassin. The laws concerning paternal power,
which you support, are horrid. Their having been adopted by many
nations, is a proof of the general prevalence of superstition,
ignorance, and despotism. I have nothing to answer to your discourses on
tythes. The Bible is preached up, because it teaches passive obedience,
donations to the church, and such other acts of _public utility_.




