LETTER IV.

You enter again upon your favourite topic, genuineness and authenticity.
I shall not repeat what I have already said. I confess my great surprise
at your laying such stress upon the most trifling and false of your
arguments. You now strive to prove, that a book may contain a true
history, although it should be anonymous. Pray, my Lord, do you think,
that to prove a book spurious, when it is believed to be genuine, is a
demonstration of the truth of the contents? You thus leave us uncertain
whether Joshua be a genuine book. You have sadly confused yourself in
the maze you have created. To put it beyond a doubt that the sun stood
still, you appeal to the book of Jasher, which Joshua mentions in the
following words, "Is not this written in the book of Jasher?" And in
like manner, you refer to other books frequently quoted as authorities
in the Bible. Does your zeal blind you so far as not to let you
perceive, that this very argument may with redoubled strength be
retorted against you? for if an author, who is said to write his own
history, appeals to another book for a proof of his actions, that
book must be of much greater authority than his own: we cannot avoid
believing the writer of the work alluded to had better information. In
short, the book appealed to contains the only authentic testimony. Now,
permit me to ask you, who could be better authority than Joshua himself,
writing at a time when we must suppose many of his soldiers who had
witnessed the miracle were alive? What is this anterior book which
Joshua respects so much? Was it written by himself, then it would
be idle to quote it; and, at any rate, whoever had written it, it is
evident that the author of the book of Joshua has no proofs of his
own, but rests solely upon the book of the Holy, or of Jasher. This
circumstance proves clearly, that the writer of the Book of Joshua
composed his book out of some more ancient memoirs, which being lost, we
can say no more of their authority than for that of any old tales. You
talk of the public records of the Jews as confidently as a Member of
Parliament speaks of the papers in the Tower. Do you know at what period
the Jews began to keep written records, and do you also know, whether
those that were kept existed when the books of the Old Testament were
compiled? Had you been instructed in these particulars, and had you
been not altogether divested of candour, you might have informed your
readers, that, previous to the time of kings, we have not a shadow of
proof of the existence of any historical records among the Jews. We, no
doubt, read, that there was a book of the law of Moses, in which Joshua
wrote something too respecting the renewal of a covenant. This seems to
be the only written record among the Jews, and it contained nothing
but religious precepts, or the law, strictly speaking. In Joshua, chap.
viii. ver. 31, we read, "As Moses the servant of the Lord commanded the
children of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses
and ver. 32, He wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses,
which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel and ver. 35,
He read all the words of the law, the blessings, and curses, according
to all that is written in the book of the law of the Lord, and there was
not a word of all that Moses commanded which Joshua read not before the
congregation of Israel." We know, likewise, that this law was written
in the circumference of an altar composed of twelve stones. This is the
only book either Moses or Joshua were ever said to have written; the
writers of the Pentateuch, and of the other books, certainly never meant
to inscribe them to Moses, Joshua, &c.; they bore the names of books of
Moses, of Joshua, Judges, &c. because they treated of these personages.
What then do you infer from the quotation of books by the Bible authors,
except that they all wrote in very modern times, when they wanted the
corroboration of more ancient books, whose date and authority we are
equally strangers to? This book of the law, which you so triumphantly
mention as a book written and existing a few years after Moses, turns
out to be nothing more than what is contained in Exodus, chap. xx. to
chap. xxiv. to which Joshua added some detail about the third covenant
of God.

I beg the reader will observe, that the writer of the Book of Joshua
does not mention the second, third, or any other book of Moses, but
simply notices the book of the law of God. Now this great book
was written upon twelve stones, and in Exodus we find the precise
commandment of Moses to build the altar, and to read the commandments at
the feast of tabernacles; so that it contained not one line of history,
and could have no authority. It was a law written upon stones, which
Moses, in Exod. chap. xxiv. v. 7, is said to have read to the people:
"And he took the book of the covenant, and read it in the audience of
the people." This covenant, and particularly the repetition of it after
the disobedience of the Jews, is the only part of the Scriptures that
Moses ordered to be preserved with a religious care. Nothing of the most
important parts of Genesis or the other five books is ever mentioned in
the commandments of the law of God: the writer of the law certainly knew
not that the Pentateuch existed. Had Moses written such a work, would he
have failed to recommend to the Levites to keep the precious records of
mankind, the sublime account of the creation? Did not the whole of the
faith of the Jews depend on their being acquainted with the history of
their forefathers, who were under the immediate protection of God? The
ten commandments every person knows from the light of nature; no nation
has ever mistaken them; but the origin of mankind is a subject of great
darkness, and which the Jews ought to have preserved most carefully.
Certain, however, it is, that excepting a few rites, the Jews lost not
only their books, but even the recollection of their feasts, during
their captivity. The other books referred to in the Bible prove, that
those left are mere collections of borrowed stories, and pretended
abridgements of books of greater authority, which are unfortunately
lost, and leave a wide field for scepticism, particularly upon
improbable or contradictory accounts. As to the belief that the books of
the Old Testament are inspired, it is a tale, which, after what we have
stated, even a child would laugh at.

You next seriously endeavour to corroborate the ridiculous miracle of
the sun and moon standing still. You are as unsuccessful in historical
as in scientifical arguments. The story in question is so stupid, that
the bare mention of it marks a man's credulity, so as to render him the
object of compassion. That an ignorant fanatic should attempt to defend
such absurdities, would be a matter of no surprise; but to witness a
Regius Professor of Divinity, a natural philosopher, bring forward facts
from profane history to prove the truth of so bare-faced a lie, denotes
at least your want of prudence. I cannot persuade myself that you
seriously believed what you wrote; I cannot think you capable of falling
at once into the most gross astronomical and historical error. I shall
state the matter briefly. There was a tradition in all antiquity, and
particularly among the Egyptians, relating to that motion of the
earth's axis which has been observed by astronomers, and whose complete
revolution round the four cardinal points takes up no less than
9,160,000 years. In the course of this revolution, it necessarily
happens, that the sun will rise where it sets, that north will be south,
and so on. The Egyptian priests pretended that this revolution had
taken place in their country without changing the climate, while the
Babylonians maintained, in the time of Alexander, that 140,000 years had
elapsed since their first astronomical observations. This, no doubt, was
the time that must have elapsed since the earth moved north and south.
The Egyptian priests, long before Herodotus, had lost their knowledge
of astronomy, which accounts for their mistake. It is evident, that the
displacement of the earth's axis must be accompanied by the heaviest
gravitating matter, and, therefore, what is now land, has been and will,
in the course of ages, become sea. Now, my Lord, what has the Egyptian
tradition to do with the sun stopped by the robber Joshua? What
connection has the stoppage of the sun, or rather the earth's motion,
with the sun rising where it sets? Were the thing possible, the sun
would nevertheless rise in the east. Besides, does Joshua say the sun
changed its course? Had this been the case, (I am ashamed even of the
supposition), how could the earth change its axis in an hour, without
shattering the whole globe, without inundating vast tracts of country,
and tearing others asunder to reestablish the equilibrium of gravity?
Study and consider; do not attempt to ridicule the little learning of
Thomas Paine, when you fall into such absurdities. Read Chinese history,
and you will find that their careful astronomers did not perceive the
long day and night. It was probably the sun of Judea only that altered
its course; they did not seem to be enlightened by the same luminary.
Those who believed that heaven was made of crystal, could find no
difficulty in crediting this silly story. I have insisted so much upon
this, because you ought to know the common principles of astronomy, and
somewhat of history. Here again you appeal to the book of Jasher:
it deserves no more consideration. To deem an appeal to a lost book
evidence of a prodigy, because the author affirms it, is a degree of
credulity which may gain the kingdom of heaven; but, in the republic of
letters, such believer will pass for a very contemptible reasoner.

These are the miracles, and the histories, better attested than the
History of the Twelve Knights Of Charles the Great, and such other
foolish tales. Surely, none can believe that 19,000 men fought against
the Midianites, and murdered a prodigious number, without having lost a
man, and disbelieve the famous battles of the knights, in many of which
six men fought several thousands; the conversation of the devil with
Cromwell, or the miraculous appearance of God to almost all the knights
and warriors among the Catholics. The sacred phial of Rheims, and the
chapel of Loretto, were both conveyed in a manner you know well, and
which few men in the two countries dare controvert. They too appeal to
their books of Jasher. The tale of making the sun stand still has not
even the merit of novelty; this luminary had long before stopt his
career, out of respect to Bacchus. Neither is the shower of hail-stones
new, for Jupiter of old sent a shower of hail upon the rebellious sons
of Neptune.

As to Joshua having written the book that goes under his name, we
have, besides what has been stated, the strongest evidence against the
genuineness of this performance. The death of Joshua is recorded in
chap. xxiv. and it is related exactly in the same style as what precedes
it. The writer even mentions several events posterior to the death of
the son of Nun. You have passed over the arguments of Thomas Paine drawn
from this passage, "The Jebusites dwelt with the children of Judah at
Jerusalem unto this day." It was natural for you to overlook a passage,
which demonstrates that the book of Joshua was not written until after
David, when, and not before, the conquest of the Jebusites took place.
It is beyond a doubt, that they never dwelt with the Jews in the time of
Joshua, since, in the first part of the above quoted passage, he says,
"As for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of
Judah could not drive them out." How then did the Jews inhabit Jerusalem
in the days of Joshua? I refer the reader to the Age of Reason, and to
an answer to it by Mr. David Wilson, for further information, on this
head. In the latter, he will be amazed at the weak subterfuges used by
the author to evade the strength of the objection by Mr. Paine. But this
is not the only event related in Joshua, which did not take place till
some time after his death. Almost the whole of chap. xvii. contains
facts of this nature. Where the portion of Manasseh is described, it is
said, in ver. 12, "Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the
inhabitants of those cities, but the inhabitants would dwell in that
land." It is added, "And it came to pass, when the children of Israel
waxed strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute; but did not
utterly drive them out." Now this certainly did not take place during
the life of Joshua, for in the very same chapter, he promises those of
the tribe of Manasseh success against the Canaanites. In the preceding
chapter, v. 10, there is a passage of the same kind, "And they (the
Ephraimites) drove not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the
Canaanites dwelt among the Ephraimites unto this day, and some under
tribute." This needs no comment: let any person ask himself when this
came to pass, and they will at once find out the credit due to books
containing such shameful anachronisms and falsehoods. In chapter first
of Judges, purporting to contain the history of the Jews after Joshua,
the reader will find a faithful copy of the passages quoted, not
excepting the taking of Jerusalem. Let himc ompare ver. 8, 27, 28, 29,
and following, with the detail of distribution of lots to the tribes,
in chap. xvi. and xvii. of Joshua the same events are told in the very
words, and apply to two different periods. This is a strong instance of
the disorder that pervades the whole of these books, and how undeserving
of credit, even in the most probable events, is what you call sacred
writ. We are constantly reading over accounts of the same events,
sometimes said to be written by dead men, and never marking time; for
_it came to pass_, which is the Bible phrase, does not fix the period
when the event took place. These books bear all the marks of being the
productions of some persons at a very late period, and to have suffered
great interpolations. Joshua is, in the face of it, a continuation of
Deuteronomy, Judges of Joshua, and so on through the remainder.

You pass on to Judges. It requires neither great knowledge nor ingenuity
to discover, that this book is an unconnected farrago put together by
some unknown person. You do not attempt to say any thing in its favour.
Sad falling off from the paths of faith! Formerly it would have been
a heresy to assert that Judges was a book of no authority: now, even a
Bishop has nothing to say in its defence. You then proceed to Ruth,
and endeavour to blot out the apparent infamy of her conduct, with what
success, I leave the reader to judge, after he has perused her
history. Next follow your subtle distinctions between the inspired and
non-inspired part of the Bible, which may be very intelligible to an
inspired Bishop, but cannot fail to appear a mere dream to a man in his
senses. Notwithstanding Austin and your other brethren, this distinction
rests upon nothing but fancy. Your request is very moderate. "Receive
the Bible," you say, "as composed by upright and well-informed, though
in some points, fallible men, (for I exclude all fallibility _when they
profess to deliver_ the word of God), and you must receive it as a book
revealed to you in many parts by the express will of God, and, in other
parts, relating to you the ordinary history of the times." Bravo!
A Catholic is as reasonable in his demands. He only asks a little
credulity to believe the inspired when _they profess to be so_. It is
truly a childish request, begging the question at every word. To believe
the Bible to be inspired is the grand point. The reasoning you employ is
in perfect consonance with the absurdity of your wishes. You disbelieve
a history if you find it inconsistent, but revere it, and swear by the
author, if he wrote by inspiration. Swedenburgh could not wish more
faith in his adherents. You say _receive it_, as the inquisitors said
_imprimatur_; but philosophers weigh the ground of their belief; they
detect the Bible writers, prophets, and inspired men, in palpable
contradictions in history; and you will obstinately insist on our
believing the most improbable of all their stories, because their
absurdity persuades the faithful that they were revealed by their God in
dreams.----You have acknowledged yourself, in a subsequent letter, that
the history and mystery of the Bible are so interwoven, that if one
falls the other cannot be maintained. Why did God mingle his important
and sublime precepts with such ridiculous trash, so as to induce mankind
to disbelieve them both? Suppose I should meet a peasant coming from a
fair, pretending he had seen the king with his guards, and if I should
find this to be untrue, would I not deserve to be laughed at, if I
credited that he had wrestled with a spirit, or that he was carried up
to heaven? This, however, is the case with the Bible. Here we are told
that the sun stood Still to protract the bloodshed of that villain
Joshua, while, in another place, we read that a city was taken 370 years
before that event. Your vaunted prophets were soothsayers, psalmists,
and orators, who were generally employed in writing the public records.
It is a word applied in the Bible to holy men. These prophets, like the
augurs of the heathen, were often detected in falsehoods, and, in the
time of Samuel, it would appear, by the Bible itself, that to raise
ghosts was a trade as common as that of tailors in our days.

You now come to Samuel. You are candid enough to acknowledge with
Hartley, that he could not have been the author of the second book,
nor of most of the first that go under his name, yet this has been the
opinion of the church; and I know of no direct proofs that he wrote the
remainder: by what logic do you or Hartley conclude, that Samuel wrote
any part of the books ascribed to him? An author is proved not to have
written most part of a work ascribed to him, who then would, without
direct proofs, proclaim him the writer of some small passage, or any
particular part of the work? Who but a clergyman would build a system
upon a mutilated, spurious, and insignificant collection of absurdities
and wonders? It is, I allow, probable that Samuel wrote something: your
quotations prove no more; but what this was, we are, I presume, equally
unacquainted with. That the scribes also composed some records of the
lives of their kings, I will not deny. The question is, what degree of
credit does the mutilated, contradictory, and fabulous collection, said
to be made out of these records, deserve?

In the time of Charles the Great, some persons probably recorded his
actions. Is this a reason for any man to believe the fabulous legends we
have of him, written in the dark centuries? The legends of the Egyptian
and Greek gods, and their collection of oracles, were not only credited
by whole nations, but proclaimed true by councils much wiser than the
synagogue. The records of the saints were undoubtedly made few years
after their death, in ages far more enlightened, after the invention of
the press, written by the then most learned men of society, (the monks),
who certainly were not inferior to the Jewish scribes, yet these legends
contain often nothing but collections of absurdities and miracles. Read
the _Flores Sanctorum_ of the Romish church, and you there will find
miracles in every page, and the lives of saints a tissue of prodigies. I
need not add, that very few learned men among the Papists give credit to
the absurdities contained in these books. It is even the opinion of the
best informed men, that the monks have written lives of saints who never
existed.

You acknowledge the wickedness of the kings of Israel and Judah; but
you take care to observe, that this was not owing to their religion.
Impertinent assertion! Was not Saul dethroned because he was humane
enough not to cut Agag in pieces? Did not the Lord Jehovah love the man
after his own heart, who put the miserable inhabitants of Rabah
under saws, axes, and arrows of iron; who made them pass through the
brick-kiln? Did not this Jehovah approve the base murder of Adonias? Was
it the same Jehovah who said to Jonah, that he was not so unjust as to
sacrifice the whole city of Nineveh for their sins, because there were
thousands in it who did not know between good and evil; and who yet, the
Jews tell us, commanded the extermination of whole nations, without
even sparing the little children? Did not the plagues which he sent to
Pharaoh and David fall upon thousands of innocent individuals? At least,
do not the Jewish books affirm it? Such horrors could only be respected
by the Jews; such absurd miracles could only be credited by the most
ignorant of men. You pretend, that the partiality of God to the Jews
proceeded from their being the only nation that believed in the unity of
God, and who have preserved their belief on this head unshaken till
the present day. Are you in earnest, can you assert this before men of
common information? Do you take Englishmen for idiots to be deceived by
your assertions? Are you ignorant of the adoration of the Ethiopians? Do
you forget that the wise men among the heathens said, _Colitur forma
pro Jove?_ Did you never peruse any account, of the Chinese, or of the
Hindoos? Do they not admit one supreme agent, an all-wise, intelligent,
&c. being, and whose inferior agents they represent by symbols? The
Hindoos have even all the metaphysical refinement of our divines; and
their definition of God is fully as perspicuous as that given in our
Catechism. I have avoided to give long extracts in this pamphlet; but,
that the authority of an English Bishop may not be a presumption to many
that I am making false assertions, I shall transcribe a passage from
a commentary upon the Reig Beid, a book unquestionably of the remotest
antiquity.

"Glory be to Goneish! that which is exempt from all desires of the
senses, the same is the mighty Lord. He is simple, and than him there
is nothing greater. Brehm, (the spirit of God), is absorbed in
self-contemplation; the same is the mighty Lord who is present in every
part of space. Brehm is one, and to him there is no second; such is
truly Brehm. His omniscience is self-inspired, and its comprehension
includes all possible species," &c. It is true, we are not here told
that God is a jealous God, that he visiteth the iniquities of the father
even unto the fourth generation. I could adduce fifty passages from the
Greeks and others to prove my position, but it is needless. The point
is still to know whether these notions make men better, whether they are
founded on truth, and, indeed, whether all gods are not the work of the
fancy of man, nature allegorised. _Primus in orbe Deos fecit timor_,
says the philosopher; can you disprove it? I suspect not, and that all
the subtle reasoning of divines destroy themselves. The world is the
ultimate of human reason. We adore the idols either of our hands or
of the brain, and mistake them for existences. The region of chimeras
exists beyond the universe; our prattling upon it is but a play of
words. Jehovah himself, when he said, I am that I am, called himself
pretty plainly Pan, or the great whole.

But if the unity of God be the only gracious belief in the eyes of
the Creator, I do not see that Christians are entitled to his favour,
because they make him three. What was the belief of the Jews? Had
they any very refined ideas of their God? They thought him corporeal,
incessantly speaking and moving among men, jealous, revengeful,
powerful, whose angels ate with Abraham, who himself strove to kill
Moses in a public house; they imagined him repenting of his deeds; and,
in all respects, a poor contemptible being, the offspring of Jewish
fancy. He is throughout the Bible an Asiatic Sultan, who, like the
merciful God of Mahomet, puts to the sword, and smites with plagues
thousands, as a tribute to his infinite mercy. I refer the reader to
the collection of extracts from the Bible, in a subsequent letter, for
proofs of my assertions. The Jews admitted, besides other gods, such as
Chemosh, several beings subordinate to God, but superior to man, as
the serpent which tempted the mother of mankind. They had exterminating
angels and cherubims, the Elohim or Genii that made the world, &c.
But why dwell upon such topics, when it is evident that all the Jewish
mythology is of Chaldean origin, and our theology a copy of that of
Plato?

You proceed in your attempt to reconcile the justice of God with his
goodness, and, in the height of your reverie, you imagine that the
sufferings of the Jews were parts of a grand scheme for the general
good of mankind. What, and when are we to see the good effects of their
barbarities? We may see reason counteracting the evil of superstition,
rendering men humane; but I apprehend, that, if your reasoning was
generally adopted, every highwayman would be much inclined to think
himself sent by Providence for good and wise purposes, and if chance
should bring about a happy event at the end of his career, which he
thought the consequence of his deeds, he would triumph in his crimes,
and, like Moor in the Robbers, exclaim, "If for ten I have destroyed,
you make but one man blest, my soul may yet be saved!" This has been the
language of persecutors. They destroy mankind to make them happy in the
next world--tortures, burning, and beheading, are but purifications. The
worst is, that the famous divine scheme of general good, has never been
one jot more advanced than when the Jews were enduring the greatest
calamities, and committing atrocities. I count not the effects of
reason, for faith is alone the godly faculty; reason destroys it. I
close my observations upon this subject with repeating the old question
of Epicurus, which your brethren have as yet left unanswered; either
God can prevent evil and does not choose it, or he chooses it and wants
power to avert calamities from his creatures. In the first instance, he
is a malevolent despot, a character we ought to abhor; in the second,
we see him an impotent and secondary being, which raises our contempt.
Reconcile this with his infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, and show
us that he is not formed after the image of man, or else let unbelievers
hold their opinions in peace.




