LETTER III.

After what I have observed above, it will be useless to say much as to
your third letter, in which you examine minutely the passages Thomas
Paine has pointed out to prove the Pentateuch not genuine. First, As to
the objection taken from the name of Dan, I never thought it specious.
This is not the case with the very next one, which is of very great
weight. The writer, after enumerating a number of Arabian names,
concludes in these words, "These are the kings that reigned in Edom,
before there reigned any king over the children of Israel." Contrary
to my expectations, you acknowledge this to have been written after
the Jews had kings. Many of your brethren have attempted to deny it by
quibbles! but you say that this does not invalidate the authority of the
book: wonderful! if your _alma-mater_ taught you, that an evident lie
or contradiction in any book, particularly of remote antiquity, and
relating histories unsupported by impartial authors, does not create
a suspicion, which approaches to certainty, that the book is not
authentic; if you think so, I must give up arguing with you. It may be
an interpolation, you observe. How did you learn this? You will at least
leave, me the right to suppose, and you cannot deny that the presumption
is against you, an absurdity in a book is a reason for distrusting
the rest. I have probability on my side; for the Jew who forged this
passage, either from piety or ignorance, might have forged the whole
book, or so interpolated it, as to destroy its credibility. At any rate,
the detection of falsehood in a history, is not a motive to suppose it
true. It requires an excess of piety to break through all the rules of
logic and common sense. How does it happen, that the Lord Jahovah does
not provide better against such mistakes creeping into the book of
the law of his favourite people? It could seem as if he had done it
on purpose to create incredulity, and enjoy the pleasure of punishing
unbelievers, as of old, he hardened Pharaoh's heart, that he might have
a pretext to inflict calamities on him and his people.

My Lord, what credit would we give to a history of William the Conqueror
that had the following sentence, after naming different persons, _And
these were the names of the Kings of England before George the Third
came to the throne_; for what purpose could any person insert such a
passage? He must have been absolutely mad. It could only get into the
work from its being compiled during the reign of George the Third,
and arising from a forgetfulness of the writer, or ignorance of the
transcriber: in no case could it be inserted in a book, which you say
was kept in the public records, and over whose purity the whole Jewish
learned men would watch; you must either give up your argument from the
public records of this people, and no longer deem them great authority;
or, if you persist in it, I leave you to reconcile the most palpable
interpolations and forgeries with the scrupulous attention with which
you suppose the Jews preserved the word of God. But what is most curious
in this passage is, that we find it verbatim in 2 Chronicles, chap. i.
ver. 43, and you seem to glory in discovering this similarity of the
passages. "Why might not," you say at the end of your fourth letter,
"the author of the book of Chronicles have taken them, (meaning
the names of the kings of Edom, &c.), as he has taken many other
genealogies, supposing them to have been written in the book of Genesis
by Samuel?" Another acknowledgment of more interpolations in Genesis.

But, Sir, who gave you the right, you who exclaim so much against the
unsupported assertions of Thomas Paine, to suppose that the author of
Chronicles copied an interpolation from Genesis, knowing, as he must
have done, that it was interpolated by Samuel?

Would he not rather, to make the book consistent, expunge it? Could he
be so ignorant as not to see the contradiction? What is more strange,
how came Samuel to introduce such a passage? The tendency of it could
only be to weaken the authority of Genesis; but, allowing all your
groundless suppositions to be true, do you not see that they only prove
the ignorance of Samuel and of the Jewish history writers, and at once
destroy the superstructure you have in your following letters raised
upon the supposed accurate records of the Jews? The supposition of
Samuel being the author of the interpolation, is like an historian,
who, to the history of Charles the First, should add some accounts,
concluding with observing, that all this took place before George
the Second, or should even venture further, and instruct us in some
prominent features of the French revolution: yet this is the case with
the passage in question; for it is unquestionable that the Jews had
never a king till the time of Saul; that, under Moses and the Judges,
they held kings in detestation. The fact is very plain. In Chronicles,
the passage has an obvious and clear sense; for there an account of
the kings of Israel is given, and the sentence now under consideration
precedes it. Indeed, the whole chapter xxxvi. of Genesis is almost
literally the same with chapter first of Chronicles; and every unbiassed
man will conclude, that the former is copied from the latter. That
little concluding expression, before _there reigned any king over
Israel_, certainly marks its date; and there is nothing more probable,
than that when Esdras and the scribes compiled these books, they should
insert in Genesis the posterity of Esau, as far as the history of
Genesis went, and that this unlucky passage should by mistake be copied
too. I acknowledge, that an interpolation, when we can prove the period
of its insertion, does not destroy the validity of a book, if the rest
of the facts are consistent, and supported by collateral proofs; but the
Bible is an unconnected rhapsody, written by we know not whom, without
order, arrangement, or a shadow of method. Besides, it is the word of
God; and what, in a profane writer, would be a slight error, is here a
most material fault; if our future happiness depends, as you suppose, on
our believing this book, which certainly can never take place while such
reasons for scepticism remain. In proportion to the importance of an
event, so we must be careful in examining the grounds upon which it
stands, or else we must be like those whimsical men, who will require
the best evidence for the truth of a trifling report, but find no
repugnance in crediting the most marvellous events upon trust.

Mr. Paine properly concludes, that Genesis is a book of stories, fables,
traditions, or invented absurdities, or downright lies; and this I not
only affirm with him, but will prove to my readers, that it is in no
respect deserving of more credit than the fabulous and early history of
all nations. Next follows your rhapsody upon the beauty of the Bible and
the truth of it. Pardon me if I think it like a madman's reveries. Even
the men of your profession have long ago given up such a ridiculous
conceit. Whoever has read eastern literature, or the late translation
from the Shanscrit, will find that the same style with that of the Bible
pervades all eastern compositions. In all of them we find the frequent
use of allegory, and a quaint and formal manner of expression. Divest
the Bible of its Oriental garb, and put it into common language,
you will find, except the episode of Joseph, and two or three other
passages, it is absolutely illegible. I have already shown the
Pentateuch to have been a very modern work, and the Jews to have
borrowed every thing from other nations. No wonder then that the _Abram_
should resemble the _Brama_ of the Hindoos, or that a few names in the
supposed genealogies of the Jews should be like those of the Assyrians,
Medes, &c. Genesis gives a description of creation truly beautiful! We
did not spring from grasshoppers, nor the world from an egg; but the
wise Moses informs us, that we were made of clay and a little breath.
This may be sublime to you; but the philosopher is never elated by
fables so absurd. It is not true that Genesis is the oldest, nor a very
old book. Sanchoniato, the Hindoo books, those of the Egyptians and
Chinese, are of much higher antiquity than Moses. In vain has Mr.
Maurice struggled to dazzle our understandings with his incoherent
suppositions, to prove that the Hindoos borrowed their religion from the
Jews, from a set of Arabian hordes, from the slaves of the Egyptians,
from a petty nation, who, as Julian says, never produced a single work,
and whose credulity has ever been proverbial. The astronomical records
of the Chinese prove, that there were men and astronomers in that
country at the time when the wretched Jews would make us believe
the world was inundated from the windows of heaven, and no creatures
existing but Noah, his family, and the beasts in the ark. Further,
Souciet mentions an eclipse of the sun recorded in the Chinese history,
which happened 2155 years before Christ, which is but 236 years after
the Deluge; a time when, the Bible informs us, the earth was only
inhabited by the sons of Noah, while Egypt was then so peopled, that
90,000 cities could not contain the inhabitants, and China was not
less so. The Hindoo astronomical observations, as far as they have been
examined by the most learned astronomers of the age, such as Baillie,
Le Gentil, and others, carry their antiquity between four and five
thousands beyond our æra; for a proof of which, I refer you to Mr.
Playfair's excellent paper, in the second volume of the Edinburgh
Philosophical Transactions. The Hindoo religious books contain, besides,
a great many of the ideas afterwards adopted by the Jews. The long lives
of antedeluvians, in particular, are the exact copy of the Iogues of
the Indians. The Dwapaar Iogue, the latter part of which answers to the
period of Noah, was when men's lives were limited to a thousand years;
and Methuselah we know did not live so long. They have, too, their
mythological deluge, or the incarnation of Vishnu into a fish. For
an account of which I refer my readers to Volney, and to Mr. Maurice
himself. The former gentleman is a good judge of ancient literature;
he pretends that he can prove, that most of the chapters of Genesis,
supposed to contain names of persons, are mythological: the posterity of
Noah is, according to Volney, no more than a geography of the world
as known to the Jews. I have not read Mr. Volney's memoir which I
understand he has published on this subject; but, when I consider the
late period when Genesis and the other books were composed, and how
much the Jews borrowed from the Egyptians and Babylonians, how much the
deluge of Noah and his ark resemble the emblems of Osiris; in short,
when I reflect on the unintelligibility and apparent absurdity of
Genesis, on the impossibility of the Deluge, and of the not less
absurdity of the population of the world so soon after that calamity, I
confess I am much inclined to despise the whole performance. There have
been various suppositions upon the meaning of the names mentioned in
Genesis. Adam has been said to signify, in many parts of Asia, the first
day of the week; and Enoch, the seventh successor of Adam, to be the
same with Saturn, or the seventh day. Thus Assur, Elam, Lud, Madai,
Javan, and Tiras, which are said to be the founders of the Assyrians,
the Elamites, the Lydians, the Medes, the Ionians, and the Thracians,
may very probably be nothing else than the enunciation of the names of
these countries; for, between Assur and Assyria, or Lud and Lydia,
there is not a very great difference. We know that Egypt is by the Arabs
called _Masr_, which has the same consonants with the Hebrew _Misraim_,
whose plural termination implies properly the inhabitants of Egypt.
In the Bible, _Misraim_ is called the founder of that kingdom. We also
know, that Syria is called _Barr-el-sham_, or the country to the left.
The inhabitants of Thebaid are called the sons of Cush. Again, we
find several names of towns very much resembling those of the supposed
founders of these monarchies; Sur, or Tyre, is not unlike Assur. These
are conjectures; I pretend to found nothing upon them; but, at least,
they are probable. Your Genesis, on the contrary, as it is commonly
explained, contains palpable lies. It supposes a deluge, which neither
did nor could take place; it destroys the human race, when we know that
nations were then in existence. Lastly, it talks of the founders of
nations, which existed long before that period. But, even had Genesis
been written at the time of Moses, it might be worth while to
inquire into the import of his genealogies; but, being a very modern
compilation, collected by an ignorant people, partly from tradition,
partly from scattered and mutilated records, it does not deserve the
serious attention of the philosopher.

You next attempt to justify the conduct of God towards the Canaanites,
whose great crime was to defend their own country, and to adore their
own gods instead of the God of the Jews. When a man makes an apology for
such conduct, we only can answer by an appeal to the feelings of men,
from which alone we derive notions of humanity. It was natural for the
adorers of a Phenician Jehovah to be the enemies of the Babylonish Baal:
both these gods sprang from the wild fancies of men. The jealous God of
the Jews, the all-wise, omnipotent, and benevolent, could not convert
the worshippers of another god, without exterminating whole nations,
even to the little children; but this barbarous mandate came from the
priests, who have in all countries, and all systems of Religion, adopted
this method of conversion. You state, that Moses "gave an order that
the boys and women should be put to death; but, that the young maidens
should be kept alive for themselves;" and, that you "see nothing in the
proceeding, but good policy combined with mercy. The young men might
have become dangerous avengers of what they would esteem their country's
wrongs; the mothers might have again allured the Israelites to the
love of licentious pleasures, and the practice of idolatry, and brought
another plague upon the congregation; but the young maidens, not being
polluted by the flagitious habits of their mothers, not likely to create
disturbance by rebellion, were kept alive:" and you add, that "the
women children were not reserved for the purposes of debauchery, but
of slavery; a custom (you acknowledge) abhorrent from our manners, but
every where practised in former times, and still preserved in countries
where the benignity of the Christian religion has not softened the
ferocity of human nature." Is extermination an example of the mercy of
priests and their gods, "whose justice is subservient to mercy," "whose
punishments originate in his abhorrence to sin,"--and whose commands
to massacre, to butcher, and to exterminate, "are only benevolent
warnings?"--You dare Mr. Paine to prove, that the young women were kept
for debauchery; and you triumphantly add, "that if he does, you will
allow Moses to be the horrid monster he describes him, and the Bible a
book of lies, wickedness, and blasphemy." Do you think, that consigning
to slavery thirty-two thousand maids, is consistent with the benignity
of God? I do not hesitate to consider this worse than merely making them
the partners of licentious pleasures. But, in what consisted the wonted
wisdom of a God, whom you describe as ever solicitous to lessen the
influence of sin? Let me ask you, if the young women were not as liable
to incite the passions of the Jews as their mothers, and whether their
slavery would not increase the opportunities for debauchery? Could it
be consistent with humanity, much less with the mercy of an all powerful
God, to put to death all the boys of a nation, merely because they might
in time revenge the insolent invaders of their country? Were all the
male children already polluted from their birth? It would have been easy
for them to convert them to another religion, but to your God it was
impossible. The bloody invaders of America pursued not another plan,
even after "the benignity of the Christian religion softened the
ferocity of human nature." Have these Christian invaders any where
respected the chastity of women when they made them slaves? And have
the Jews, God's chosen nation, at any period, either while under his
protection, or since he abandoned them, shown themselves more virtuously
inclined than other people; were they ever prevented by the striking
manifestations of his mercy, his power, and his justice, from going away
to adore other gods, and falling into all sorts of wickedness? In
short, if the Bishop rests his defence of Moses and the Bible upon this
passage, I am willing to appeal to the judgement of all mankind. If any
person can believe it consistent with the benevolence of omnipotence, to
sacrifice whole nations to be massacred and plundered by a few hordes of
bloody Jews; if he can think this to be part of a grand scheme for
the good of mankind, he must give up all pretensions to reason, common
sense, and humanity. But it is time the world should see, that this holy
book the Bible, "which, in weight of authority, and extent of utility,
exceeds all the libraries of the philosophers," contains pretences for
all bad actions, and stifles the laws of humanity and morality. Upon
this book have inquisitors, crusaders, and religious men, founded
pretences for the most diabolical persecutions, avowedly undertaken for
the express purpose of unrooting infidelity, and for the glory of the
Lord. Every man who reads the word of God is warranted to reason thus:
God has ordered murder and robbery; he has instigated his favourite
people to exterminate whole nations; therefore I can do no better than
to imitate the Almighty; and every crusader may pretend to have the same
authority from God as Moses; and miracles are never wanting to prove it.
Because Abraham was a pimp, and his wife a prostitute, so may any person
be, without losing the patronage of the God of Abraham. Every man, in
short, may imitate the meek Moses, the humane David, without fearing
to incur the displeasure of the Almighty. Thus Ravaillac thought he was
doing as holy a deed, when he attempted the life of Henry; as Dominic,
or Torquemada, when butchering the wretched heretics, who had the
misfortune to fall a prey to their bloody zeal. The whole Old Testament
is so filled with barbarous stories, that if they did not excite
laughter by their improbability, they would freeze the blood in, the
veins of any man endowed with humanity. What an irksome task have those
undertaken, who have attempted to reconcile the horrible crimes of the
Jews with the mercy and wisdom of the Creator? Has ferocity forsaken
Christians as you insinuate? Have the modern religious fanatics yielded
in cruelty to the Jews? Those two religions have successively inundated
the earth with the blood of innocent victims. Have not the followers of
Christ constantly preached passive obedience to the church, have they
not frequently relieved the people of their oaths, and have they not
fomented most of the civil wars that laid waste all Europe? It is well
that priests have not been able to persuade mankind of late, that the
minister was the oracle of God. The pride and foolishness of science has
put this out of their power; they cannot lead nations as they did the
Jews; we are not so easily persuaded of the immediate manifestations of
God's commands to the priest. We know science too well to believe that
the pillar of fire that went before the Israelites was God himself. We
might have shown the people, that a pan with red-hot substances would
have the appearance of a fire by night, and a cloud of smoke by day, a
custom practised, from time immemorial, by the caravans. Although, my
Lord, the wisdom of God may be foolishness to man, I acknowledge I am
neither fond of crediting absurdities, nor have I so much faith as to
take the work of priests for supernatural mandates of Providence; when
they speak in their usual senseless and unintelligible language, I
conclude that it is either to dazzle the ignorant multitude, or I look
upon their dreams as the consequence of dire superstition, the first
effect of which is to make us unacquainted with ourselves, under the
imposing aspect of familiarising us with imaginary beings. At the
conclusion of my remarks upon the Old Testament, I shall give a few
extracts from those books, wherein my readers may see the character of
the Jews and their God in glaring colours, and judge whether any honest
man would not tremble at the thoughts of having done as much injustice,
and committed such atrocities as this Jehovah.




