CHAPTER LXXXVII.

The fifth hour had passed away, when Ayesha said to me, "Lo! the circle is
fading; the lamps grow dim.  Look now without fear on the space beyond;
the eyes that appalled thee are again lost in air, as lightnings that
fleet back into cloud."

I looked up, and the spectres had vanished.  The sky was tinged with
sulphurous hues, the red and the black intermixed.  I replenished the
lamps and the ring in front, thriftily, heedfully; but when I came to the
sixth lamp, not a drop in the vessel that fed them was left.  In a vague
dismay, I now looked round the half of the wide circle in rear of the two
bended figures intent on the caldron.  All along that disk the light was
already broken, here and there flickering up, here and there dying down;
the six lamps in that half of the circle still twinkled, but faintly, as
stars shrinking fast from the dawn of day.  But it was not the fading
shine in that half of the magical ring which daunted my eye and quickened
with terror the pulse of my heart; the Bushland beyond was on fire.  From
the background of the forest rose the flame and the smoke,--the smoke,
there, still half smothering the flame.  But along the width of the
grasses and herbage, between the verge of the forest and the bed of the
water-creek just below the raised platform from which I beheld the dread
conflagration, the fire was advancing,--wave upon wave, clear and red
against the columns of rock behind,--as the rush of a flood through the
mists of some Alp crowned with lightnings.

Roused from my stun at the first sight of a danger not foreseen by the
mind I had steeled against far rarer portents of Nature, I cared no more
for the lamps and the circle.  Hurrying back to Ayesha, I exclaimed:  "The
phantoms have gone from the spaces in front; but what incantation or spell
can arrest the red march of the foe, speeding on in the rear!  While we
gazed on the caldron of life, behind us, unheeded, behold the Destroyer!"

Ayesha looked, and made no reply; but, as by involuntary instinct, bowed
her majestic head, then rearing it erect, placed herself yet more
immediately before the wasted form of the young magician (he still bending
over the caldron, and hearing me not in the absorption and hope of his
watch),--placed herself before him, as the bird whose first care is her
fledgling.

As we two there stood, fronting the deluge of fire, we heard Margrave
behind us, murmuring low, "See the bubbles of light, how they sparkle and
dance!  I shall live, I shall live!"  And his words scarcely died in our
ears before, crash upon crash, came the fall of the age-long trees in the
forest; and nearer, all near us, through the blazing grasses, the hiss of
the serpents, the scream of-the birds, and the bellow and tramp of the
herds plunging wild through the billowy red of their pastures.

Ayesha now wound her arms around Margrave, and wrenched him, reluctant and
struggling, from his watch over the seething caldron.  In rebuke; of his
angry exclamations, she pointed to the march of the fire, spoke in
sorrowful tones a few words in her own language, and then, appealing to me
in English, said,--

"I tell him that here the Spirits who oppose us have summoned a foe that
is deaf to my voice, and--"

"And," exclaimed Margrave, no longer with gasp and effort, but with the
swell of a voice which drowned all the discords of terror and of agony
sent forth from the Phlegethon burning below,--"and this witch, whom I
trusted, is a vile slave and impostor, more desiring my death than my
life.  She thinks that in life I should scorn and forsake her, that in
death I should die in her arms!  Sorceress, avaunt!  Art thou useless and
powerless now when I need thee most?  Go!  Let the world be one funeral
pyre!  What to me is the world?  My world is my life!  Thou knowest that
my last hope is here,--that all the strength left me this night will die
down, like the lamps in the circle, unless the elixir restore it.  Bold
friend, spurn that sorceress away.  Hours yet ere those flames can assail
us!  A few minutes more, and life to your Lilian and me!"

Thus having said, Margrave turned from us, and cast into the caldron the
last essence yet left in his empty coffer.  Ayesha silently drew her black
veil over her face; and turned, with the being she loved, from the terror
he scorned, to share in the hope that he cherished.

Thus left alone, with my reason disenthralled, disenchanted, I surveyed
more calmly the extent of the actual peril with which we were threatened,
and the peril seemed less, so surveyed.

It is true all the Bush-land behind, almost up to the bed of the creek,
was on fire; but the grasses, through which the flame spread so rapidly,
ceased at the opposite marge of the creek.  Watery pools were still, at
intervals, left in the bed of the creek, shining tremulous, like waves of
fire, in the glare reflected from the burning land; and even where the
water failed, the stony course of the exhausted rivulet was a barrier
against the march of the conflagration.  Thus, unless the wind, now still,
should rise, and waft some sparks to the parched combustible herbage
immediately around us, we were saved from the fire, and our work might yet
be achieved.

I whispered to Ayesha the conclusion to which I came.  "Thinkest thou,"
she answered, without raising her mournful head, "that the Agencies of
Nature are the movements of chance?  The Spirits I invoked to his aid are
leagued with the hosts that assail.  A mightier than I am has doomed him!"

Scarcely had she uttered these words before Margrave exclaimed, "Behold
how the Rose of the alchemist's dream enlarges its blooms from the folds
of its petals!  I shall live, I shall live!"

I looked, and the liquid which glowed in the caldron had now taken a
splendour that mocked all comparisons borrowed from the lustre of gems.
In its prevalent colour it had, indeed, the dazzle and flash of the ruby;
but out from the mass of the molten red, broke coruscations of all prismal
hues, shooting, shifting, in a play that made the wavelets them selves
seem living things, sensible of their joy.  No longer was there scum or
film upon the surface; only ever and anon a light rosy vapour floating
up, and quick lost in the haggard, heavy, sulphurous air, hot with the
conflagration rushing towards us from behind.  And these coruscations
formed, on the surface of the molten ruby, literally the shape of a Rose,
its leaves made distinct in their outlines by sparks of emerald and
diamond and sapphire.

Even while gazing on this animated liquid lustre, a buoyant delight seemed
infused into my senses; all terrors conceived before were annulled; the
phantoms, whose armies had filled the wide spaces in front, were
forgotten; the crash of the forest behind was unheard.  In the reflection
of that glory, Margrave's wan cheek seemed already restored to the
radiance it wore when I saw it first in the framework of blooms.

As I gazed, thus enchanted, a cold hand touched my own.

"Hush!"  whispered Ayesha, from the black veil, against which the rays of
the caldron fell blunt, and absorbed into Dark.  "Behind us, the light of
the circle is extinct, but there we are guarded from all save the brutal
and soulless destroyers.  But before!--but before !--see, two of the lamps
have died out!--see the blank of the gap in the ring Guard that
breach,--there the demons will enter."

"Not a drop is there left in his vessel by which to replenish the lamps on
the ring."

"Advance, then; thou hast still the light of the soul, and the demons may
recoil before a soul that is dauntless and guiltless.  If not, Three are
lost!--as it is, One is doomed."

Thus adjured, silently, involuntarily, I passed from the Veiled Woman's
side, over the sere lines on the turf which had been traced by the
triangles of light long since extinguished, and towards the verge of the
circle.  As I advanced, overhead rushed a dark cloud of wings,--birds
dislodged from the forest on fire, and screaming, in dissonant terror, as
they flew towards the farthermost mountains; close by my feet hissed and
glided the snakes, driven forth from their blazing coverts, and glancing
through the ring, unscared by its waning lamps; all undulating by me,
bright-eyed and hissing, all made innocuous by fear,--even the terrible
Death-adder, which I trampled on as I halted at the verge of the circle,
did not turn to bite, but crept harmless away.  I halted at the gap
between the two dead lamps, and bowed my head to look again into the
crystal vessel.  Were there, indeed, no lingering drops yet left, if but
to recruit the lamps for some priceless minutes more?  As I thus stood,
right into the gap between the two dead lamps strode a gigantic Foot.  All
the rest of the form was unseen; only, as volume after volume of smoke
poured on from the burning land behind, it seemed as if one great column
of vapour, eddying round, settled itself aloft from the circle, and that
out from that column strode the giant Foot.  And, as strode the Foot, so
with it came, like the sound of its tread, a roll of muttered thunder.

I recoiled, with a cry that rang loud through the lurid air.

"Courage!" said the voice of Ayesha.  "Trembling soul, yield not an inch
to the demon!"

At the charm, the wonderful charm, in the tone of the Veiled Woman's
voice, my will seemed to take a force more sublime than its own.  I folded
my arms on my breast, and stood as if rooted to the spot, confronting the
column of smoke and the stride of the giant Foot.  And the Foot halted,
mute.

Again, in the momentary hush of that suspense, I heard a voice,--it was
Margrave's.

"The last hour expires, the work is accomplished!  Come! come!  Aid me to
take the caldron from the fire; and quick!--or a drop may be wasted in
vapour--the Elixir of Life from the caldron!"

At that cry I receded, and the Foot advanced.

And at that moment, suddenly, unawares, from behind, I was stricken down.
Over me, as I lay, swept a whirlwind of trampling hoofs and glancing
horns.  The herds, in their flight from the burning pastures, had rushed
over the bed of the watercourse, scaled the slopes of the banks.  Snorting
and bellowing, they plunged their blind way to the mountains.  One cry
alone, more wild than their own savage blare, pierced the reek through
which the Brute Hurricane swept.  At that cry of wrath and despair I
struggled to rise, again dashed to earth by the hoofs and the horns.  But
was it the dream-like deceit of my reeling senses, or did I see that giant
Foot stride past through the close-serried ranks of the maddening herds?
Did I hear, distinct through all the huge uproar of animal terror, the
roll of low thunder which followed the stride of that Foot?




