CHAPTER LXXXIII.

The gold has been gained with an easy labour.  I knew where to seek for
it, whether under the turf or in the bed of the creek.  But Margrave's
eyes, hungrily gazing round every spot from which the ore was disburied,
could not detect the substance of which he alone knew the outward
appearance.  I had begun to believe that, even in the description given to
him of this material, he had been credulously duped, and that no such
material existed, when, coming back from the bed of the watercourse, I saw
a faint yellow gleam amidst the roots of a giant parasite plant, the
leaves and blossoms of which climbed up the sides of the cave with its
antediluvian relics.  The gleam was the gleam of gold, and on removing the
loose earth round the roots of the plant, we came on--No, I will not, I
dare not, describe it.  The gold-digger would cast it aside, the
naturalist would pause not to heed it; and did I describe it, and
chemistry deign to subject it to analysis, could chemistry alone detach or
discover its boasted virtues?

Its particles, indeed, are very minute, not seeming readily to crystallize
with each other; each in itself of uniform shape and size, spherical as
the egg which contains the germ of life, and small as the egg from which
the life of an insect may quicken.

But Margrave's keen eye caught sight of the atoms upcast by the light of
the moon.  He exclaimed to me, "Found!  I shall live!"  And then, as he
gathered up the grains with tremulous hands, he called out to the Veiled
Woman, hitherto still seated motionless on the crag.  At his word she rose
and went to the place bard by, where the fuel was piled, busying herself
there.  I had no leisure to heed her.  I continued my search in the soft
and yielding soil that time and the decay of vegetable life had
accumulated over the Pre-Adamite strata on which the arch of the cave
rested its mighty keystone.


When we had collected of these particles about thrice as much as a man
might hold in his hand, we seemed to have exhausted their bed.  We
continued still to find gold, but no more of the delicate substance, to
which, in our sight, gold was as dross.

"Enough," then said Margrave, reluctantly desisting.  "What we have gained
already will suffice for a life thrice as long as legend attributes to
Haroun.  I shall live,--I shall live through the centuries."

"Forget not that I claim my share."

"Your share--yours!  True--your half of my life!  It is true."  He paused
with a low, ironical, malignant laugh; and then added, as he rose and
turned away, "But the work is yet to be done."




CHAPTER LXXXIV.

While we had thus laboured and found, Ayesha had placed the fuel where the
moonlight fell fullest on the sward of the tableland,--a part of it
already piled as for a fire, the rest of it heaped confusedly close at
hand; and by the pile she had placed the coffer.  And there she stood, her
arms folded under her mantle, her dark image seeming darker still as the
moonlight whitened all the ground from which the image rose motionless.
Margrave opened his coffer, the Veiled Woman did not aid him, and I
watched in silence, while he as silently made his weird and wizard-like
preparations.




CHAPTER LXXXV.

On the ground a wide circle was traced by a small rod, tipped apparently
with sponge saturated with some combustible naphtha-like fluid, so that a
pale lambent flame followed the course of the rod as Margrave guided it,
burning up the herbage over which it played, and leaving a distinct ring,
like that which, in our lovely native fable-talk, we call the "Fairy's
Ring," but yet more visible because marked in phosphorescent light.  On
the ring thus formed were placed twelve small lamps, fed with the fluid
from the same vessel, and lighted by the same rod.  The light emitted by
the lamps was more vivid and brilliant than that which circled round the
ring.

Within the circumference, and immediately round the woodpile, Margrave
traced certain geometrical figures, in which--not without a shudder, that
I overcame at once by a strong effort of will in murmuring to myself the
name of "Lilian"--I recognized the interlaced triangles which my own hand,
in the spell enforced on a sleep-walker, had described on the floor of the
wizard's pavilion.  The figures were traced, like the circle, in flame,
and at the point of each triangle (four in number) was placed a lamp,
brilliant as those on the ring.  This task performed, the caldron, based
on an iron tripod, was placed on the wood-pile.  And then the woman,
before inactive and unheeding, slowly advanced, knelt by the pile, and
lighted it.  The dry wood crackled and the flame burst forth, licking the
rims of the caldron with tongues of fire.

Margrave flung into the caldron the particles we had collected, poured
over them first a liquid, colourless as water, from the largest of the
vessels drawn from his coffer, and then, more sparingly, drops from small
crystal phials, like the phials I had seen in the hand of Philip Derval.

Having surmounted my first impulse of awe, I watched these proceedings,
curious yet disdainful, as one who watches the mummeries of an enchanter
on the stage.

"If," thought I, "these are but artful devices to inebriate and fool my
own imagination, my imagination is on its guard, and reason shall not,
this time, sleep at her post!"

"And now," said Margrave, "I consign to you the easy task by which you are
to merit your share of the elixir.  It is my task to feed and replenish
the caldron; it is Ayesha's to heed the fire, which must not for a moment
relax in its measured and steady heat.  Your task is the lightest of all
it is but to renew from this vessel the fluid that burns in the lamps, and
on the ring.  Observe, the contents of the vessel must be thriftily
husbanded; there is enough, but not more than enough, to sustain the light
in the lamps, on the lines traced round the caldron, and on the farther
ring, for six hours.  The compounds dissolved in this fluid are
scarce,--only obtainable in the East, and even in the East months might
have passed before I could have increased my supply.

"I had no months to waste.  Replenish, then, the light only when it begins
to flicker or fade.  Take heed, above all, that no part of the outer
ring--no, not an inch--and no lamp of the twelve, that are to its zodiac
like stars, fade for one moment in darkness."

I took the crystal vessel from his hand.

"The vessel is small," said I, "and what is yet left of its contents is
but scanty; whether its drops suffice to replenish the lights I cannot
guess,--I can but obey your instructions.  But, more important by far than
the light to the lamps and the circle, which in Asia or Africa might scare
away the wild beasts unknown to this land--more important than light to a
lamp, is the strength to your frame, weak magician!  What will support you
through six weary hours of night-watch?"

"Hope," answered Margrave, with a ray of his old dazzling style.  "Hope!
I shall live,--I shall live through the centuries!"




