CHAPTER II.

Half-way upon the road, where a stile opened into the adjacent fields, a
man suddenly appeared, and, coming forward, walked for some paces in
silence by her side, as though awaiting some recognition before he
ventured to address her. He was of middle stature--his figure was entirely
concealed in the thick and ample wrappings of a long, dark riding-coat,
(or _bang-up_, as it was called,) common to that country; his step was
firm, and its very sound, quick and decided, so different from the
shambling pace of the peasant, told that, whatever he might be, he did not
belong to that condition. As Miss Tyrrel showed no symptom of surprise or
alarm, it is possible his appearance was not entirely unlooked for. She
likewise, however, forbore to speak, and the stranger at length was
obliged to commence the conversation--turning back, at the same time, the
high collar by which his face was muffled, and exhibiting features so
extremely dark that they would have been deemed repulsive, had they not
been finely formed, and enlivened by the full light of manhood, which,
however, some feeling of deep interest, or passion, seemed at the present
to overcloud.

"The hour is come that we have so often talked of," he said, in a low
tone. "I have no time to waste, Katey--_are you ready?_"

"Then you were right in your conjecture," said Miss Tyrrel, with an
unembarrassed air; "your retreat is discovered?"

"At least it can no longer shelter me. News arrived to-day that the soul
of this ill-starred enterprize--Emmett--has perished by legal murder in
Dublin. The gibbet awaits all those of his followers who may be arrested.
Certain intelligence has reached me that my assumed name and character are
no longer of avail--the local authorities are aware of my real offences.
If I do not instantly escape, before the coming midnight I shall be a
prisoner."

"I expected this," said Katey, half musingly; "it could not be otherwise;
you yourself anticipated it. And yet I have been to Cahill's," she added,
looking down, "to--to--leave a book, for I was anxious, and _he_ seems to
know nothing of your danger."

"I have only just learned it myself, and have hastened to seek you; the
mine at our feet is about to be sprung, and"----

"So ends _your_ life of ignoble disguise and _mine_ of duplicity. We
should both be thankful."

"One of us at least--thankful as the wrecked seaman, when the plank he
clings to splits and sinks him within sight of shore. But time presses; I
have come to test the truth of your character. Once more--are you ready?"

"I am indeed--ready to part this instant. I knew it should be so; it was a
pleasure to have known you, but I am resigned--ready. Fly! O lose not a
single moment; the moon is rising. Farewell, and fly!"

"Not without _you_! Girl, you affect to misunderstand me; or have you
forgotten those promises of friendship and faith, even to death, that you
have made me so often and so lately?"

"Promises--faith?" cried his startled companion; "even admitting those
playful assurances of a wild, country girl's friendship, were a compact,
could you be cruel enough to insist upon my fulfilling it in this
desperate hour?"

"Then all the interest you have expressed hitherto in my fate," pursued
the stranger; "the sympathy you have led me to think you felt for one,
suffering as I have suffered in the cause of my unhappy country--the hopes
excited in this heart when, as I pictured a delighted life passed with
you, and love, and freedom, beyond the Atlantic, you listened on, with a
consenting smile--all this was but pastime for your vacant hours?"

"It was wrong, I know," replied Katey yieldingly; "yet Heaven knows it was
no pastime. I found you in concealment--a fugitive--hunted, you told me,
by the laws for your exertions in the cause of a country I have been
taught by you to deem misgoverned; I saw you superior to all those around
you; you complained of cheerlessness and solitude, of ill health--I
brought you books, music, all that I could judge likely to lighten your
hours, and dearly am I punished for it."

"But think"----

"_Think!_" cried the girl, passionately interrupting him, for the chord
had jarred, "I never _thought_--till now--when all my giddy, imprudent
conduct crowds on my mind as if to crush me. A few months back, and we
were ignorant of each other's existence."

"Would that it had continued so," he said, in a voice of sadness; "a few
months more, and my memory will be to you as the nameless gravestone,
telling alone that it hides the dead. Cruel, but beloved, farewell!" and
he turned to depart.

"Yet stay," said Katey, hurriedly. "Why not let me tell my father of this
business--I mean of your story--that I know it all, and entreat of him, as
I have often urged you to let me do, to interest himself with Government
and procure your pardon, which he can readily obtain? I will go this
instant."

"And give me up to justice--for such, I assure you, will be the result of
an appeal to your father."

"You wrong him, believe me. He is perhaps stern and vindictive in his
feelings towards those whom he considers instrumental in keeping alive a
spirit of animosity and disturbance among the people; but you know not,"
she said with a smile, "how all-powerful is my influence with him. Yes,
even at the risk of his displeasure--for he little dreams I am acquainted
with you, I will tell him your sad story--there is nothing in it a brave
or noble man should be afraid of. I will go to him this moment," and she
moved on.

"Impossible!-you are mad. The very fact of your having known and
befriended me in this clandestine way, will incense your friends. I shall
be arrested, and you will accuse yourself for life as my destroyer. No,
dear girl," he continued, in a softer yet not less eager tone, as he
placed his arm round her, "why not yield to the impulses of your own high,
disinterested spirit, and fly with me, as I have so often implored you? Be
mine first in the sight of man and heaven, and then plead for me
afterwards with your father?"

"I dare not--it would break his heart--my own is breaking fast already,"
and she trembled from head to foot in her attempts to subdue the sobbing
of her bosom.

"And this is the energy, the firm-mindedness, you have so often boasted
of! You have it in your power this instant to raise me to happiness,
wealth, and safety; and, forgetful it was the charm you threw across my
path which has kept me near you until the bloodhounds have run me to bay,
you doom me to despair and death. I see _you_ have made your
decision--hear _mine_. Life since I knew you has no value in my eyes if
unshared by you. Exile from you would be worse than death. Here, then, I
still await the pursuers. Never will I leave, with life, the mountains
that surround you."

"Oh--no--no! Heaven forbid your blood should be shed on my account! Fly, I
implore you, before it is too late."

"Never! I will sell my life dearly, but my grave at least shall be where
you can sometimes visit it and remember"----

"Unkind, dark, inhuman man! was it _all_ my fault? My poor father, what
will he say? give me at least a day or two to think"----

"It is now of no use, the night has half past, my doom is fixed."

"No! again no! you will drive me mad! Oh fly, fly, but this once, and I
will, at least I promise--I must see him--my father--before--fly now and
return, and I will do all you desire--only, only, save your life at once."

The man replied not for some minutes, he then resumed--"I have here that
copy of the Gospels you gave me--will you swear on that gift that when we
next meet you will be prepared to share life, be it happiness or horror,
with me?"

"Yes, I do--I will--any thing; but fly and save yourself."

"Swear then," he said, as with one arm around her he prepared with the
other to place the sacred Book upon her lips, when at that very moment an
aspersion of cold water was dashed with such ample profusion in the
impassioned faces of the pair as to cause them to spring asunder with a
start that had very nearly as much the character of discomfort as alarm.

"Hell and"----half-exclaimed the man, as he tore open his coat and grasped
one of several pistols it now appeared he was armed with.

"_Dhieu, a's Marudha, a's Phaidhrig, a's_"[23]----said a voice, following
up the lustration with a blessing, cut short, however, by the Stranger's
clutching the throat of the pious intruder, and dragging forward from
beneath the trees which had hitherto overshadowed their way a little
Bundle of some dark coloured cloth, surmounted by a straw bonnet, so
battered in its outlines that to fix it there it must have been flattened
down with no ordinary emphasis, and from beneath which guttural shrieks
now arose, whose extent of volume was out of all proportion to the
diminutive object from which they proceeded.

"Hold! let go, for goodness sake!" cried Miss Tyrrel, "it is only poor
Sally-the-tin, the Holy-Water woman."

"A--a--a! my windpipe!" cried the Bundle, as soon as that interesting
organ had been extricated. "A--a--Miss Katey, take the bushblunder out ov
his hand 'fore he blows my brains out," and the shrieks were renewed with
more vociferation than before.

"She will raise the country. I must stop her, were I to kill her," said
the stranger furiously.

"No, no, dear friend, she is a deaf harmless thing--hush! I hear steps.
Oh, in mercy fly!"

"Not without your promise," he said doggedly.

"I am ready, I promise--next time we meet; now farewell and away," said
Katey, while she waved one hand to the departing fugitive as he dashed
through the thicket, and placed the other on the roaring mouth of the
creature at her side, whose terrors seemed under considerable
self-control, for they at once subsided.

"Mother o' Grace, pray for us now an' at the hour ov our death, amen!"
mumbled the Bundle, as it righted itself, and assumed the appearance of a
withered and ancient little Woman, who, in flinging back her dark blue
cloak to adjust herself, exhibited a small scarecrow frame, round which
was hung, until its shape became orbicular, every variety of feminine
attire, from the petticoats, under, upper, and quilted, through the higher
gradations of gown, apron, spencer, jacket, pelerine, handkerchief, and
shawl. A broad leathern strap was buckled round her waist, from which on
one side hung a rosary or string of large beads, to the other was fastened
a _canteen_ or tin can without a cover, containing a large supply of holy
water, procured from the neighbouring chapels on Sundays. She bore in her
hand literally nothing but (as they would say in Ireland) her _fist_,
which was of immense size, and of whose convenience for the purposes of
aspergation Katey and her friend had just been afforded such convincing
proof.

Footsteps now approached rapidly, and Miss Tyrrel, holding Sally-the-tin
by the arm, turned towards home. She was shortly encountered by a
lively-voiced gentlemanly young man, who saluted her in an affectionate
tone with "Katey, pet, what on earth has kept you out so late. Hallo!
Sally, I bar that!" he exclaimed, adroitly slipping aside, and escaping
the showery blessing which, despite the lesson just bestowed on her, this
incorrigible lady of the Tin had (as was her wont with all she met)
discharged at him. "But did I not hear some one," he continued,
"screeching violently as I came up?"

"Yes, Lysaght," said Miss Tyrrel, "this stupid, deaf, old creature here,
who is a torment to all who meet her, with her benedictions and holy
water, suddenly threw some of the contents of her tin (as she always does
when saluting a person) on a Stranger, a man she happened to be passing
close to, which so irritated him that he has given her a proper fright."

"I could chide you soundly, dear Katey, for such late scampers as these;
but you take my hints----well, don't be cross, and have it all your own
way if you like," said the young man, interrupting himself, dejectedly.

"I _am_ very cross to-night, Lysaght, so don't talk. But here we are, and
I am glad of it," and Katey knocked impatiently and loudly at the door of
their home. "Now don't go away sulky, there's a good boy," she cried after
her cousin, who turned towards the stables; "and, Lysaght, I have done the
rosettes for Lightfoot's headstall, which you asked me to make, though I
said I wouldn't--you shall have them in the morning. And now to give this
silly old woman her supper and a night's lodging," and followed by
Sally-the-tin still groaning heavily, she entered the house.


