VIII

THIRD CHARACTERISTIC

_To work harmoniously with those in the same employment, and not
to cause any inconvenience to them_

WHY should we cling so obstinately to our own way of seeing and
doing? Do not many ways and means serve the same ends provided
they be employed wisely and perseveringly? Some have succeeded by
their methods, and I by mine--a proof that success is reached
through many ways, and that it is not by disputing it is obtained,
nor by giving scandal to those we should edify, nor, perhaps, by
compromising the good work in which we are employed. The four
animals mentioned by Ezekiel joined their wings, were moved by the
same spirit and animated by the same ardour, and so drew the
heavenly chariot with majesty and rapidity, giving us religious an
example of perfect union of efforts and thoughts.

Charity avoids haughty and contemptuous looks, forewarns itself
against fads and manias, and in the midst of most pressing
occupations carefully guards against rudeness and impatience.
Careful of wounding the susceptibility of others, it neither
blames nor despises those who act in an opposite way. Religious
animated by fraternal charity are not ticklish spirits who are
disturbed for nothing at all, and who do not know how to pass
unnoticed a little want of respect, etc.; nor punctilious spirits,
who find pleasure in contradicting and making irritating remarks;
nor self-opinionated spirits, who pose themselves as supreme
judges of talent and virtue as well as infallible dispensers of
praise and blame. Neither are they suspicious characters who are
constantly ruminating in their hearts, and who consider every
little insult as levelled at themselves; nor discontented beings,
who find fault with the places whither obedience sends them and
the persons with whom they live, and who could travel the entire
world without finding a single place or a single person to suit
them.

Charitable religious are not those imperious minds who endeavour
to impose their opinions on all and refuse to accept those of
others, however just they may be, simply because they did not
emanate from themselves, nor are they those ridiculing,
hard-to-be-pleased sort of people who do not spare even grey hairs.
Finally, they are not those great spouters who, instead of
accommodating themselves to circumstances as charity and
politeness require, monopolize the conversation, and thereby shut
up the mouths of others and make them feel weary when they should
be joyful and free.



IX

FOURTH CHARACTERISTIC

_To accommodate oneself to persons of different humour_

THEY who are animated by charity support patiently and in silence,
in sentiments of humility and sweetness, as if they had neither
eyes nor ears, the difficult, odd, and most inconstant humours of
others, although they may find it very difficult at times to do
so.

No matter how regular and perfect we may be, we have always need
of compassion and indulgence for others. To be borne with, we must
bear with others; to be loved, we must love; to be helped, we must
help; to be joyful ourselves, we must make others so. Surrounded
as we are by so many different minds, characters, and interests,
how can we live in peace for a single day if we are not
condescending, accommodating, yielding, self-denying, ready to
renounce even a good project, and to take no notice of those
faults and shortcomings which are beyond our power or duty to
correct?

Charity patiently listens to a bore, answers a useless question,
renders service even when the need is only imaginary, without ever
betraying the least signs of annoyance. It never asks for
exceptions or privileges for fear of exciting jealousy. It does
not multiply nor prolong conversations which in any way annoy
others. It fights antipathy and natural aversions so that they may
never appear, and seeks even the company of those who might be the
object of them. It does not assume the office of reprehending or
warning through a motive of bitter zeal. It seeks to find in
oneself the faults it notices in others, and perhaps greater ones,
and tries to correct them. "If thou canst not make thyself such a
one as thou wouldst, how canst thou expect to have another
according to thy liking? We would willingly have others perfect,
and yet we mend not our own defects. We would have others strictly
corrected, but are not fond of being corrected ourselves. The
large liberty of others displeases us, and yet we do not wish to
be denied anything we ask for. We are willing that others be bound
up by laws, and we suffer not ourselves to be restrained by any
means. Thus it is evident how seldom we weigh our neighbour in the
same balance with ourselves" ("Imitation," i. 16).



X

FIFTH CHARACTERISTIC

_To refuse no reasonable service, and to accept or refuse in an
affable manner_

CHARITY is generous; it does everything it can. When even it can
do little, it wishes to be able to do more. It never lets slip an
opportunity of comforting, helping, and taking the most painful
part, after the example of its Divine Model, Who came to serve,
not to be served. One religious, seemingly in pain, seeks comfort;
another desires some book, instrument, etc.; a third bends under a
burden; while a fourth is afflicted. In all these cases charity
comes to the aid by consoling the one, procuring little
gratifications for the other, and helping another. Without
complaining of the increased labour or the carelessness of others,
it finishes the work left undone by them, too happy to diminish
their trouble, while augmenting its own reward. "Does the hunter,"
says St. John Chrysostom, "who finds splendid game blame those who
beat the brushwood before him? Or does the traveller who finds a
purse of gold on the road neglect to pick it up because others who
preceded him took no notice of it?" It would be a strange thing to
find religious uselessly giving themselves to ardent desires of
works of charity abroad, such as nursing in a hospital or carrying
the Gospel into uncivilized lands, and at the same time in their
own house and among their own brethren showing coldness,
indifference, and want of condescension.

There is an art of giving as well as of refusing. Several offend
in giving because they do so with a bad grace; others in refusing
do not offend because they know how to temper their refusal by
sweetness of manner. Charity possesses this art in a high degree,
and, besides, raises a mere worldly art into a virtue and fruit of
the Holy Ghost.



