V

EGOTISM, OR SELF-SEEKING

EGOTISM, taking for its motto "Every one for himself," is very
much opposed to fraternal charity and the family spirit. It never
hesitates, when occasion offers, to sacrifice the common good to
its own. It isolates the individuals, makes them concentrated in
self, places them in the community, but not of it, makes them
strangers amongst their brethren, and tends to justify the words
of an impious writer, who calls monasteries "reunions of persons
who know not each other, who live without love, and die without
being regretted."

Egotism breeds distrust, jealousy, parties, aversions. It destroys
abnegation, humility, patience, and all other virtues. It
introduces a universal disgust and discontent, makes religious
lose their first fervour, presents an image of hell where one
expected to find a heaven on earth, saps the very foundation of
community life, and leads sooner or later to inevitable ruin.

As the family spirit causes the growth and prosperity of an order,
however feeble its beginning, so, on the other hand, egotism dries
the sap and renders it powerless, no matter what other advantages
it may enjoy. If the one, by uniting hearts, is a principle of
strength and duration, the other, by dividing, is a principle of
dissolution and decay. Sallust says that "the weakest things
become powerful by concord, and the greatest perish through
discord." Whilst the descendants of Noah spoke the same language
the building of the tower of Babel proceeded with rapidity. From
the moment they ceased to understand one another its destruction
commenced, and the monument which was to have immortalized their
name was left in ruin to tell their shame and pride.

On each of the four corners of the monastery religion or charity
personified ought to be placed, bearing on shields in large
characters the following words: (1) "Love one another"; (2) "He
who is not with Me is against Me, and he who gathers not with Me
scatters"; (3) "Every kingdom divided will become desolate"; (4)
"They had all but one heart and one soul."



VI

FIRST CHARACTERISTIC OF FRATERNAL CHARITY

_To esteem our brethren interiorly_

"CHARITY, the sister of humility," says St. Paul, "is not puffed
up." She cannot live with pride, the disease of a soul full of
itself. It willingly prefers others by considering their good
qualities and one's own defects, and shows this exteriorly when
occasion offers by many sincere proofs. It always looks on others
from the most favourable point. Instead of closing the eyes on
fifty virtues to find out one fault, without any other profit than
to satisfy a natural perverseness and to excuse one's own
failings, it closes the eyes on fifty faults to open them on one
virtue, with the double advantage of being edified and of blessing
God, the Author of all good. Since an unfavourable thought, or the
sight of an action apparently reprehensible, tends to cloud the
reputation of a religious, charity hastens before the cloud
thickens to drive it away, saying, "What am I doing? Should I
blacken in my mind the image of God, and seek deformities in the
member of Jesus Christ? Besides, cannot my brethren be eminently
holy and be subject to many faults, which God permits them to fall
into in order to keep them humble, to teach them to help others,
and to exercise their patience?"



VII

SECOND CHARACTERISTIC

_To treat brethren with respect, openness, and cordiality_

EXTERIOR honour being the effect and sign of interior esteem,
charity honours all those whom it esteems superiors, equals, the
young and the old. It carefully observes all propriety, and takes
into consideration the different circumstances of age, employment,
merit, character, birth, and education to make itself all to all.
Convinced that God is not unworthy to have well-bred persons in
His service, and that religious ought not to respect themselves
less than people in the world, it conforms to all the requirements
of politeness as far as religious simplicity will permit; not that
politeness which is feigned and hypocritical, and which is merely
a sham expression of deceitful respect, but that politeness, the
flower of charity, which, manifesting exteriorly the sentiments of
a sincere affection and a true devotion, is accompanied with a
graceful countenance, benign and affable regards, sweetness in
words, foresight, urbanity, and delicacy in business. In fine,
that politeness which is the fruit of self-denial and humility no
less than of charity and friendship; which is the art of
self-restraint and self-conquest, without restraining others;
which is the care of avoiding everything that might displease, and
doing all that can please, in order to make others content with
us and with themselves. In a word, a mixture of discretion and
complaisance, cordiality and respect, together with words and
manners full of mildness and benignity.



