XXVIII

NINTH PRESERVATIVE

_How to check uncharitable conversation in superiors, etc._

WHEN we see charity wounded by persons worthy of respect, keep
silent, in order to show your regret, or relate something to the
advantage of the absent. If necessary, withdraw.

It is related in the life of Sister Margaret, of the Blessed
Sacrament of the Carmelite Order, that when a discourse against
charity took place in the house she saw a smoke arise of such
suffocating odour that she nearly fainted, and fled immediately to
her Divine Master for pardon.

St. Jerome, writing to Nepotian on this subject, says: "Some
object that they cannot warn the speaker of his fault without
failing in the respect due to him. This excuse is vain, because
their eagerness to listen increases his itch for speaking. No one
wishes to relate calumnies and murmurs to ears closed with
disgust. Is there anyone so foolish as to shoot arrows against a
stone wall?" Let your strict silence be a significant and salutary
lesson for the detractor. "Have no commerce with those who bite,"
said Solomon, because perdition is on the eve of overtaking them;
and who can tell the disaster and ruin with which the rash
detractor and equally blamable listener are threatened?

If it be true, according to the testimony of a religious who was
visitor of the houses of his Order, that the virtue against which
one can most easily commit a grievous sin in religion is charity;
and, according to St. Francis de Sales, sins of the tongue number
three-fourths of all sins committed; cannot it be said with equal
truth that to refuse to listen to detractors is with one blow to
prevent the sin and safeguard charity?

In many cases one can adroitly make known the good qualities and
virtues which more than counterbalance the defects related by the
defamer. To act thus is to spread about the good odour of Christ.



XXIX

TENTH PRESERVATIVE

_Be cautious after hearing uncharitable conversation_

AFTER having heard uncharitable words, observe the following
precautions given by the Saints:

1. Repeat nothing.

2. Believe all the good you hear, but believe only the bad you
see. Malice does the contrary. It demands proofs for good reports,
but believes bad reports on the slightest grounds. Out of every
thousand reports one can scarcely be found accurate in all its
details. When, as a rule of prudence, Superiors are told to
believe only half of what they hear, to consider the other half,
and still suspect the remaining part, what rule should be
prescribed for inferiors?

When the act is evidently blameworthy, suppose a good intention,
or at least one not so bad as apparent, leaving to God what He
reserves to Himself the judgment of the heart; or consider it as
the result of surprise, inadvertence, human frailty, or the
violence of the temptation. Never come to hasty conclusions--
_e.g._, "He is incorrigible; as he is, so will he always be."
Expect everything from grace, efforts, and time.

3. Efface as much as possible the bad impression produced on the
mind, because calumny always produces such.

The recital of something bad about a fellow-religious based on
probabilities has sufficed to tarnish a reputation which ample
apologies cannot fully repair. The detractor's evil reports are
believed on account of the audacity with which he relates them,
but when he wants to relate something good he will not be believed
on oath. We know by experience that evil reports spread with
compound interest, while good ones are retailed at discount.



XXX

ELEVENTH PRESERVATIVE

_Not to judge or suspect rashly_

EXPEL every doubt, every thought, likely to diminish esteem. They
amuse themselves with a most dangerous game who always gather up
vague thoughts of the past, rumours without foundation,
conjectures in which passion has the greatest share, and thus form
in their minds characters of their brethren--adding always, never
subtracting--and by dint of the high idea they have of their own
ability conclude that all their judgments are true, and thus
become fixed in their bad habit. St. Bernard, comparing them to
painters, warns them that it is the devil who furnishes the
materials, and even the evil conceptions, necessary to depict such
bad impressions of their brethren. We read in the "Life of St.
Francis" that our Lord Himself called in a distinct voice a
certain young man to his Order. "O Lord," replied the young man,
"when I am once entered, what must I do to please You?" Pay
particular attention to our Lord's answer: "Lead thou a life in
common with the rest. Avoid particular friendships. Take no notice
of the defects of others, and form no unfavourable judgments about
them." What matter for consideration in these admirable words!

Thomas a Kempis says: "Turn thy eyes back upon thyself, and see
thou judge not the doing of others. In judging others a man
labours in vain, often errs, and easily sins; but in judging and
looking into himself he always labours with fruit. We frequently
judge of a thing according to the inclination of our hearts,
because self-love easily alters in us a true judgment."

Rodriguez tells us to turn on ourselves the sinister questions,
etc., we are tempted to refer to others _e.g._: "It is I who am
deceived. It is through jealousy that I condemn my brethren. It is
through malice that I find so much to blame in them. Finally, the
fault is mine, not theirs."

Even when reports more or less true might depreciate in your eyes
some of the community, may they not have, besides their faults,
some great but hidden virtues, and by these be entitled to a more
merciful judgment? St. Augustine says beautifully: "If you cast
your eye over a field where the corn has been trampled, you only
perceive the straw, not the grain. Lift up the straw, and you will
see plenty of golden sheaves full of grain." The simile is very
applicable to a poor religious beaten down by foul tongues. We
blame the defects of our brethren, and perhaps we have the same,
or others more shameful still. We usurp the right of judgment,
which God reserves to Himself, and forget that He will punish us
by leaving us to our own irregular passions. Ah! is it not already
a very great misfortune to have these contemptuous, slanderous,
distrustful thoughts, and many other sins, the result of malicious
suspicions and rash judgments, rooted in the soul?



