II

FIRST FUNDAMENTAL TRUTH

_We are all members of the great Christian family_

CHARITY towards our neighbour is charity towards God in our
neighbour, because, faith assuring us that God is our Father,
Jesus Christ our Head, the Holy Ghost our sanctifier, it follows
that to love our neighbour--inasmuch as he is the well-beloved
child of God, the member of Jesus Christ, and the sanctuary of the
Holy Ghost--is to love in a special manner our heavenly Father,
His only-begotten Son, together with the Holy Spirit. And because
it is scarcely possible for religious to behold their brethren in
this light without wishing them what the Most Holy Trinity so
lovingly desires to bestow on them, acts of fraternal charity
include--almost necessarily at least--implicit acts of faith and
hope; and the exercise of the noblest of the theological virtues
thus often becomes an exercise of the other two.

Thus it is that charity poured into our hearts by the Holy Spirit,
uniting Christians among themselves and with the adorable Trinity
whose images they are, is the vivid and perfect imitation of the
love of the Father for the Son, and of the Son for the Father--a
substantial love which is no other than the Holy Ghost, and makes
us all one in God by grace, as the Father and Son are only one God
with the Holy Ghost by nature, according to the words of our Lord:
"That they all may be one; as Thou, Father, in Me, and I in Thee:
that they also may be one in Us."

Such is the chain that unites and binds us--a chain of gold a
thousand times stronger than those of flesh and blood, interest or
friendship, because these permit the defects of body and the vices
of the soul to be seen, whilst charity covers all, hides all, to
offer exclusively to admiration and love the work of the hands of
God, the price of the blood of Jesus Christ and the masterpiece of
the Holy Spirit.



III

SECOND FUNDAMENTAL TRUTH

_We are members of the same religious family_

TO love our brethren as ourselves in relation to God, it suffices
without doubt to have with them the same faith, the same
Sacraments, the same head, the same life, the same immortal hopes,
etc. But, besides these, there exist other considerations which
lead friendship and fraternity to a higher degree among the
members of the same religious Order. All in the novitiate have
been cast in the same mould, or, rather, have imbibed the milk of
knowledge and piety from the breasts of the same mother. All
follow the same rules; all tend to the same end by the same means;
all from morning to night, and during their whole lives, perform
the same exercises, live under the same roof, work, sanctify
themselves, suffer and rejoice together. Like fellow-citizens,
they have the same interests; like soldiers, the same combats;
like children of a family, the same ancestors and heirlooms; and,
like friends, a communication of ideas and interchange of
sentiments.

If our Lord said to Christians in general, "This is My
commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you. By
this shall all men know that you are My disciples, if you have
love for one another" (John xiii.), can He not say to the members
of the same religious Order: "This is My own and special
recommendation: Before all and above all preserve amongst you a
mutual charity. Have but one soul in several different bodies. You
will be recognized as religious and brethren, not by the same
habit, vows, and virtues, nor by the particular work entrusted to
you by the Church, but by the love you have one for the other. Ah!
who will love you if you do not love one another? Love one another
fraternally, because as human beings you have only one heavenly
Father. Love one another holily, because as Christians you have
only one Head. Love one another tenderly, because as religious you
have only one mother--your Order"?

It is impossible for religious to love their brethren with a true,
sincere, pure, and constant love if they do not look at them in
this light.



IV

THE FAMILY SPIRIT

BASED on the foregoing principles, fraternal charity begets the
family spirit--that spirit which forgets itself in thinking only
of the common good; which makes particular give way to general
interests; which forces oneself to live with all without
exception, to live as all without singularity, and to live for all
without self-seeking; that spirit which, binding like a Divine
cement all parts of the mysterious edifice of religion, uniting
all hearts in one and all wills in one, permits the community to
proceed firmly and securely, and its members to work out
efficaciously and peacefully their personal sanctification and
perfection; in fine, that spirit which gives to all religious not
only an inexpressible family happiness, but a delicious foretaste
of heaven, which renders them invincible to their enemies, and
causes to be said of them with admiration: "See how they love one
another!"

Writing on these words of the Psalmist, "Behold how good and
pleasant it is for brethren to live together in union," St.
Augustine cries out: "Behold the words which make monasteries
spring up! Sweet, delightful, and delicious words which fill the
soul and ear with jubilation."

Yes, certainly the happiness of community life is great and its
advantages inappreciable; but without the family spirit there is
no community, as there would be no beauty in the human body
without harmony in its members. Oh, never forget this comparison,
you who wish to live happy in religion, and who wish to make
others happy.

A community is a body. Now, as the members of a body, each in its
proper place and functions, live in perfect harmony, mutually
comfort, defend, and love each other, without being jealous or
vengeful, and have only in view the well-being of that body of
which they are parts, so in the community of which you are members
and in the employment assigned to you. Remember you are parts of a
whole, and that it is necessary to refer to this whole your time,
labour, and strength; to have the same thoughts, sentiments,
designs, and language, without which there would no longer exist
either body, members, parts, or whole. If you wish, then, to
obtain and practise the family spirit, study what passes within
you. Your actions bespeak your sentiments.



