XI

SIXTH CHARACTERISTIC

_To share the joys and griefs of our brethren_

AS the soul in the human body establishes all its members as
sharers equally in joys and griefs, so charity in the religious
community places everything in common content, affliction,
material goods driving out of existence the words mine and thine.
It lavishes kind words and consolations on all who suffer in any
way through ill-humour, sickness, want of success, etc.; it
rejoices when they are successful, honoured, and trusted, or
endowed with gifts of nature or grace, felicitates them on their
good fortune, and thanks God for them. If, on the one hand,
compassion sweetens pains to the sufferer by sharing them, on the
other hand participation in a friend's joys doubles them by making
them personal to ourselves. Would to God that this touching and
edifying charity replaced the low and rampant vice of jealousy!

When David returned after he slew the Philistines, the women came
out of all the cities of Israel singing and dancing to meet King
Saul. And the women sang as they played, "Saul slew his thousands
and David his ten thousands." Saul was exceedingly angry, and this
word was displeasing in his eyes, and he said: "They have given
David ten thousand, and to me they have given but a thousand. . .
. And Saul did not look on David with a good eye from that day
forward. . . . And Saul held a spear in his hand and threw it,
thinking to nail David to the wall" (1 Kings). Thus it is that the
jealous complain of their brethren who are more successful,
learned, or praised; thus it is that they lance darts of calumny,
denunciation, and revenge.



XII

SEVENTH CHARACTERISTIC

_Not to be irritated when others wrong us_

WE must pardon and do good for evil, as God has pardoned us and
rendered good for evil in Jesus Christ. It is vain to trample the
violet, as it never resists, and he who crushes it only becomes
aware of the fact by the sweetness of its perfume. This is the
image of charity. It always strives to throw its mantle over the
evil doings of others, persuading itself that they were the
effects of surprise, inadvertence, or at most very slight malice.
If an explanation is necessary, it is the first to accuse itself.
Never does it permit the keeping of a painful thought against any
of the brethren, and does all in its power to hinder them from the
same; and, moreover, excuses all signs of contempt, ingratitude,
rudeness, peculiarities, etc.

Cassian makes mention of a religious who, having received a box on
the ear from his abbot in presence of more than two hundred
brethren, made no complaint, nor even changed colour. St. Gregory
praises another religious, who, having been struck several times
with a stool by his abbot, attributed it not to the passion of the
abbot, but to his own fault. He adds that the humility and
patience of the disciple was a lesson for the master. This charity
will have no small weight in the balance of Him Who weighs merit
so exactly.

Charity gives no occasion to others to suffer, but suffers all
patiently, not once, but all through life, every day and almost
every hour. It is most necessary for religious, as, not being able
to seek comfort abroad, they are obliged to live in the same
house, often in the same employment with characters less
sympathetic than their own. These little acts of charity count for
little here below, and they are rather exacted than admired. Hence
there is less danger of vainglory, and all their merit is
preserved in the sight of God.



XIII

EIGHTH CHARACTERISTIC

_To practise moderation and consideration_

TELL-TALES, nasty names, cold answers, lies, mockery, harsh words,
etc., are all contrary to charity. St. John Chrysostom says: "When
anyone loads you with injuries, close your mouth, because if you
open it you will only cause a tempest. When in a room between two
open doors through which a violent wind rushes and throws things
in disorder, if you close one door the violence of the wind is
checked and order is restored. So it is when you are attacked by
anyone with a bad tongue. Your mouth and his are open doors. Close
yours, and the storm ceases. If, unfortunately, you open yours,
the storm will become furious, and no one can tell what the damage
may be." If we have been guilty in this respect, let us humble
ourselves before God.

"The tongue," says St. Gertrude, "is privileged above the other
members of the body, as on it reposes the sacred body and precious
blood of Jesus Christ. Those, then, who receive the Holy of Holies
without doing penance for the sins of the tongue are like those
who would keep a heap of stones at their doors to stone a friend
on arrival."

In order to keep ourselves and others in a state of moderation, we
must remember that all persons have some fad, mania, or fixed
ideas which they permit no one to gainsay. If we touch them on
these points, it will be like playing an accompaniment to an
instrument with one string out of tune.



