XVII

TWELFTH CHARACTERISTIC

_Mutual Edification_

BE edified at the sight of your brethren's virtues, and edify them
by your own. In other words, be alternately disciple and master.

Profit by the labours of others, and make them profit by your own.
Receive from all, in order to be able to give to all. Borrow
humility from one, obedience from another, union with God, and the
practice of mortification from others.

By charity we store up in ourselves the gifts of grace enjoyed by
every member of the community, in order to dispense them to all by
a happy commerce and admirable exchange.

As the bee draws honey from the sweetest juices contained in each
flower; as the artist studies the masterpieces to reproduce their
marvellous tints in pictures which, in their turn, become models;
as a mirror placed in a focus receives the rays of brilliancy from
a thousand others placed around it to re-invest them with a
dazzling brilliancy, so happy is the community whose members
multiply themselves, so to say, by mutually esteeming, loving,
admiring, and imitating each other in what is good.

This spontaneity of virtues exercises on all the members a
constant and sublime ministry of mutual edification and reciprocal
sanctification.



XVIII

EXTENT AND DELICACY OF GOD'S CHARITY FOR MEN

IN order to excite ourselves to fraternal charity, let us try and
picture that of God for us. After having had us present in His
thoughts from all eternity, He has called us from nothingness to
life.

He Himself formed man's body, and, animating it with a breath,
enclosed in it an immortal soul, created to His own image.
Scarcely arrived on the threshold of life, we found an officer
from His court an angel deputed to protect, accompany, and conduct
us in triumph to our heavenly inheritance.

What a superb palace He has prepared for us in this world,
supplied with a prodigious variety of flowers, fruits, and animals
which He has placed at our disposal!

We were a fallen race, and He sent His Son to raise us and save us
from hell, which we merited. The Word was made flesh. He took a
body and soul like ours, thus ennobling and deifying, so to speak,
our human nature. Before ascending to His heavenly Father, after
having been immolated for us on the Cross, for fear of leaving us
orphans, He wished to remain amongst us in the Holy Eucharist, to
nourish us with His flesh, and to infuse into our hearts His
Divine Spirit as the living promise and the delicious foretaste of
the felicity and glory which He went to prepare for us in His
kingdom.

Truly, O God, You treat us not only with a paternal love, but with
an infinite respect and honour; and cannot I love and honour those
whom You have thus honoured and loved Yourself? Why do not these
thoughts inflame my charity in the fire of your Divine love? My
brethren and myself are children of God and members of Jesus
Christ. My brethren have their angels, who are companions of my
angel. One day my brethren will be my companions in glory,
chanting eternally the Divine praises. It is but a short time
since, with them, I partook of the heavenly banquet of the Most
Holy Sacrament, and to-morrow shall do so again.



XIX

EXTENT AND DELICACY OF THE CHARITY OF JESUS CHRIST DURING HIS
MORTAL LIFE

LET us now admire the charity of our Divine Saviour while on
earth.

If wine was wanting at a feast; if fishermen laboured in vain
during the night; if a vast crowd knew not where to procure food
in the desert; if unfortunate persons were possessed by devils or
deprived of the use of their limbs; if death deprived a father of
his daughter, or a widow of an only son, Jesus was there to supply
what was wanting, to give back what was lost, or to sweeten all
their griefs. Sometimes He forestalled the petition by curing
before being asked, or by exciting the wavering faith. He
generally went beyond the demands of the petitioners. He was
always ready to interrupt His meal, to go to a distance, or to
quit His solitude. Nicodemus, as yet trembling and timid, came to
find Jesus during the night, and He did not hesitate to sacrifice
His sleep by prolonging the conversation. The Samaritan woman was
not beneath His notice, although He was fatigued after a long
journey. He lavished with prodigality His caresses on the children
who pressed around Him. When the crowd was so great that the poor
woman with the flow of blood could not come within reach of His
hand, He caused an all-powerful virtue to set out from Him, and a
simple touch of the hem of His garment supplied instead.

With what charming grace His benefits were accompanied! "Zacheus,
come down quickly, for I will abide this day in thy house." Who
more than He excelled in the art of making agreeable surprises? In
His apparitions to Magdalen, to the holy women, to the disciples
at Emmaus, did He not pay well for the ointment, the tears, and
the perfumes, and the hospitality He received from them? Who is
not moved with emotion when he sees his Lord preparing a meal for
the Apostles on the lake-shore, or asking Peter thrice to give him
an opportunity of publicly repairing his triple denial, "Lovest
thou Me?"

Who would not be moved when he hears what St. Clement relates
having heard it from St. Peter that our Lord was accustomed to
watch like a mother with her children near His disciples during
their sleep to render them any little service?

O Jesus! the sweetest, the most amiable, the most charitable of
the children of men, make me a sharer in Your mildness, Your love,
and Your charity.



