XXII

THIRD PRESERVATIVE

_To guard the tongue_

THIS must be done especially in five circumstances: (1) At the
change of Superiors. Do not criticize the outgoing Superior nor
flatter the new one. (2) When you replace another religious. Never
by word or act cast any blame on him. Inexperience, or a desire to
introduce new customs, sometimes causes this to be done. (3) When
you are getting old. Because then we are apt to think--
erroneously, of course--that the young members growing up are
incapable of fulfilling duties once accomplished by ourselves. (4)
When religious come from another house do not ask questions which
they ought not to answer, and do not tell them anything which
might prejudice or disgust them with the house or anyone in it.
Lastly, in our interviews with our particular friends we must be
very cautious. There are some who, when anything goes amiss with
them, always seek the company of their confidants. These should
seriously examine before God whether it is a necessary comfort in
affliction or a support in weakness, or the too human satisfaction
of justifying themselves, giving vent to their feelings, or
getting blame and criticism for the Superior or some one else.
They should also examine whether on such occasions they speak the
exact truth, and whether they seek a friend, who knows how to take
the arrow sweetly from the wound rather than to bury it deeper.

The way to find out the gravity of the sin of detraction is--(1)
To consider the position of him who speaks and the weight which is
attached to his words; (2) the position of him who is spoken
about, and the need he has of his reputation; (3) the evil thing
said; (4) the number of the hearers; (5) the result of the
detraction; and, lastly, the intention of the speaker, and the
passion which was the cause of it.



XXIII

FOURTH PRESERVATIVE

_To be on our guard with certain persons_

THERE are six sorts of religious who wound fraternal charity more
or less fatally, (1) Those who say to you, "Such a one said
so-and-so about you." These are the sowers of discord, whom God
Almighty declares He has in abomination. Their tongues have three
fangs more terrible than a viper. "With one blow," says St.
Bernard, "they kill three persons--themselves, the listeners, and
the absent." (2) Those who, obscuring and perverting this amiable
virtue, possess the infernal secret of transforming it into vice.
Is not this to sin against the Holy Ghost? (3) Those who skilfully
turn the conversation on those brethren of whom they are jealous,
in order to have all put in a bad word. They thus double the fault
they apparently wish to avoid. (4) Those who constantly have their
ears cocked to hear domestic news, who are skilful in finding out
secrets and picking up stories, whose trade seems to be to take
note of all little bits of scandalous news going, and to take them
from ear to ear, or, worse, from house to house. Oh, what an
occupation! What a recreation for a spouse of Christ! (5) Those
who, under pretext of enlivening the conversation, sacrifice their
brethren to the vain and cruel wantonness of witticism by relating
something funny in order to give a lash of their tongue or to
expose some weakness. Alas! they forget that they ruin themselves
in the esteem and opinion of the hearers. (6) Critics of
intellectual work. On this point jealousy betrays itself very
easily on one side, and susceptibility is stirred on the other.
The heart is never insensible nor the mouth silent when we are
wounded in so delicate a part. It is evident, besides, that in
this case the blame supposes a desire of praise, and that in
proportion as we endeavour to lower our brethren we try to raise
ourselves. All these religious ought to be regarded as pests in
the community.

If we call those who maintain fraternal charity the children of
God, should not those who disturb it be called the children of
Satan? Do they not endeavour to turn the abode of peace into a den
of discord, and the sanctuary of prayer into a porch of hell?



XXIV

FIFTH PRESERVATIVE

_To be cautious in letter-writing and visiting_

GREAT care must be taken never to repeat anything at visits or in
letters which might compromise the honour of the community or any
of its members.

Never utter a word or write a syllable which might in the least
degree diminish the esteem or lower the merit of anyone. Every
well-reared person knows that little family secrets must be kept
under lock and key.

St. Jane Frances de Chantal writes: "To mention rashly outside the
community without great necessity the faults of religious would be
great impudence. Never relate outside, even to ecclesiastics,
frivolous complaints and lamentations without foundation, which
serve only to bring religion, and those who govern therein, into
disrepute. Certainly, we ought to be jealous of the honour and
good odour of religious houses, which are the family of God. Guard
this as an essential point which requires restitution."



