XXXI

MEANS TO SUPPORT THE EVIL THOUGHTS AND TONGUES OF OTHERS

WHAT must be done in those painful moments when, being the victim
of a painful calumny, the object of suspicion, the butt of
domestic persecution, we are tempted to believe that charity is
banished from the community, and so to banish it from our own
heart? Recall the words of St. John of the Cross. "Imagine," says
he, "that your brethren are so many sculptors armed with mallets
and chisels, and that you have been placed before them as a block
of marble destined in the mind of God to become a statue
representing the Man of Sorrows, Jesus crucified." Consider a
hasty word said to you as a thorn in the head; a mockery as a spit
in the face; an unkind act as a nail in the hand; a hatred which
takes the place of friendship as a lance in the side; all that
which hurts, contradicts, or humiliates us as the blows, stripes,
the gall and vinegar, the crown of thorns and the cross. The work
proceeds always, sometimes slowly, sometimes quickly. Let us not
complain. We will one day thank these workmen, who, without
intending it, give to our soul the most beautiful, the most
glorious, and the noblest traits. We ourselves are sculptors as
well as statues, and we will find that, on our part, we have
materially helped to form in them the same traits.

"If all were perfect," says the "Imitation," "what, then, should
we have to suffer from others for God's sake?"

It is not forbidden us to seek consolation. But from whom? Is it
from those discontented spirits whose ears are like public sewers,
the receptacle of every filth and dirt? They increase our pain by
pouring the poison of their own discontent instead of the oil of
the Good Samaritan. They will take our disease and give us theirs,
and, like Samson's foxes, spread destruction around by repeating
what we said to them. May God preserve us from this misfortune! If
we cannot carry our burden alone, and if we find it no relief to
lay our griefs in the Sacred Heart of Jesus, let us go to him whom
the rule appoints to be our friend and consoler, our confidant and
director, and who, as St. Augustine relates of St. Monica, after
having listened to us with patience, charity, and compassion,
after having at first appeared to share our sentiments, will
sweeten and explain all with prudence, will lift up and encourage
our oppressed heart, and by his counsel and prayers will restore
us to peace and charity.



XXXII

SECOND MEANS TO BEAR WITH OTHERS

RECALL the words of our Lord to Blessed Margaret Mary: "With the
intention of perfecting thee by patience I will increase thy
sensibility and repugnance, so that thou wilt find occasions of
humiliation and suffering even in the smallest and most
indifferent things."

What would be considered, when we were in the world, as the prick
of a needle, we look upon in religion as the blow of a sword. What
we looked upon in our own house as light as a feather, becomes in
community life as heavy as a rock. An insignificant word becomes
an outrage, and a little matter which formerly would escape our
notice now upsets us, and even deprives us of sleep and appetite.
Is not this increase of sensibility and repugnance found in the
religious state only to form in us the image of our crucified
Lord? If Christ alone has suffered interiorly more than all the
Saints and Martyrs together, was it not because of this extreme
repugnance of His soul, which multiplied to infinity for Him the
bitterness of the affronts and the rigour of His torments?
Religious may expect for a certainty that, like their Divine
Master, there are reserved for them moments of complete
abandonment, those agonies intended for the souls of the elect, in
which Nature seems on the point of succumbing. No consolation from
their families, which they have quitted; nor from their
companions, who are busy in their various employments; nor from
their Superiors, who do not understand the excess of their grief,
and whose words by Divine permission produce no effect.

The solemn moment of agony with our Divine Saviour was that in
which, abandoned, betrayed, and denied by His Apostles, and
perceiving in His Father only an irritated face, He exclaimed, "My
God! My God! why hast Thou forsaken Me?" Such will be for
religious the last touch which will complete in them the
resemblance of Jesus crucified, provided they will render
themselves worthy of it.

When will be the time of this complete abandonment? How long will
this agony be prolonged? This is a secret known only to God.



XXXIII

CONCLUSION

POVERTY, chastity, obedience, and charity--such are the virtues
suitable and characteristic of the religious. In this little
treatise we have endeavoured to trace the features of the last.

In every community we can distinguish two sorts of religious--
those who mount and those who descend--those whose face is towards
the path of perfection, and those who have turned their back to
it. Perhaps amongst these latter some have only one more step to
abandon it altogether. Now we mount or descend, proceed or retrace
our steps, in proportion as we practise these four virtues or
neglect them.

A religious Order is like a fire balloon, which requires four
conditions in order to rise into the clouds amidst the applause of
the spectators. First, the rarefaction of the air by fire. This
represents the vow of poverty, which empties the heart through the
hands, and substitutes the desire of heavenly goods for those of
earth. Second, release from the cords which bind it down. This
represents the effects of the vow of chastity, which, by breaking
human attachments, permits us to soar towards God with freedom and
rapidity. Third, a man who will feed the fire and moderate the
flight of the balloon upwards. This represents the right which the
vow of obedience places in the hands of the Superior, to nourish
the sacred fire, and direct the sublime movement of the soul and
foresee dangers. Fourth, the union of its component parts. This
represents the operations of charity, in causing all the members
of a community to have but one heart and one soul.

Possessing these four virtues, a religious Order soars in the
heights of perfection; but if one of these be wanting it falls
helplessly, and is no longer an object of edification, but of
scandal and ridicule.

When it happens that some members, losing the spirit of their
state, abandon their holy vocation, we may say with St. John:
"They went out from us; but they were not of us. For if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but that
they might be made manifest that they are not all of us" (1 John
ii.). They appeared to have the religious virtues, but in reality
one or all were wanting to them.

O God, do not permit that lukewarmness or an uncontrolled passion
will ever make me waver in my vocation. During life and at death I
wish to remain a faithful religious, so that I may find the
salvation which Thou hast promised by procuring Thy glory. As good
grain improves by pulling up the weeds, and the body becomes
healthy when purged of bad humours, pour into my soul the grace
and unction which others refuse, in order that, practising more
perfectly from day to day poverty, chastity, obedience, and
charity, and redoubling my ardour and zeal to my last hour, I may
obtain the priceless treasure promised to those who have quitted
all to follow Thee. Amen.



APPENDIX

THE PRACTICE OF FRATERNAL CHARITY (FATHER FABER)

1. OFTEN reflect on some good point in each of your brethren.

2. Reflect on the opposite faults in yourself.

3. Do this most in the case of those whom we are most inclined to
criticize.

4. Never claim rights or even let ourselves feel that we have
them, as this spirit is most fatal both to obedience and charity.

5. Charitable thoughts are the only security of charitable deeds
and words. They save us from surprises, especially from surprises
of temper.

6. Never have an aversion for another, much less manifest it.

7. Avoid particular friendships.

8. Never judge another. Always, if possible, excuse the faults we
see, and if we cannot excuse the action, excuse the intention. We
cannot all think alike, and we should, therefore, avoid
attributing bad motives to others.

CHARITABLE RELIGIOUS

They have a disregard of self and a desire to accommodate others.
They rejoice with their companions in their joys and recreations,
and grieve with them in their afflictions.

They try to bring all the good they can to the community and to
avert all the evil. They begin with themselves, by being as little
trouble as possible to others.

With great charity and affability they bear with the faults and
shortcomings of others, careful to fulfil the law of Christ, which
tells us to bear one another's burdens.

They dispense to others what they have for their own advantage;
more particularly do they give spiritual assistance by prayer and
the other spiritual works of mercy.

They never contradict anyone. They never speak against anyone.
They are convinced that charity, holy friendships, and concord
form the great solace of this life, and that no good ever came
from dissensions and disputes.

They consider that God is ever in the midst of those who live
united together by the bonds of holy love.

We will do likewise if we consider the image of God in the souls
of our brethren. As we form one body here and one spirit in the
same faith and charity, let us hope not to be separated hereafter,
but to belong for ever to that one body in heaven when faith and
hope shall disappear, but where charity alone shall remain, and
remain for ever.

---

_R. & T. Washbourne, Ltd., 1, 2 & 4 Paternoster Row_









