XXV

SIXTH PRESERVATIVE

_Caution in communication with superiors_

IN communications made to Superiors say the exact truth, and for a
good purpose. Do not speak into other ears that which, strictly
speaking, should only be told to the local Superior or
Superior-General. With the exception of extraordinary cases, or
when it refers to a bad habit or something otherwise irremediable,
there is generally little charity and less prudence in telling the
Superior-General of something blameable which has occurred. Do not
reveal, even before a Superior, confidences which conscience,
probity, or friendship requires to be guarded with an inviolable
seal of friendship. If we write a complaint about a personal
offence, lessen it rather than exaggerate, and endeavour to praise
the person for good qualities, because nothing is easier than to
blacken entirely another's reputation.

Pray and wait till your emotion be calmed. When passion holds the
pen, it is no longer the ink that flows, but spleen, and the pen
is transformed into a sword.

Before speaking or writing to the Superior it would be well to put
this question to ourselves: "Am I one of those proud spirits who
expose the faults of others in order to show off their own
pretended virtues? or jealous spirits who are offended at the
elevation of others? or vindictive spirits who like to give tit
for tat? or polite spirits who wish to appear important? or
ill-humoured, narrow-minded spirits, scandalized at trifles? or
credulous, inconsiderate spirits who believe and repeat
everything--the bad rather than the good? In fine, am I a
hypocrite who, clothing malice with the mantle of charity, and
hiding a cruel pleasure under the veil of compassion, weep with
the victim they intend to immolate, as though profoundly touched
by his misfortune, and seem to yield only to the imperative
demands of duty and zeal?"



XXVI

SEVENTH PRESERVATIVE

_Caution in doubtful cases_

ACT with the greatest reserve in doubtful cases where grave
suspicions, difficult to be cleared up, rest on a religious
superior or inferior, as the case may be.

The ears of the Superior are sacred, and it is unworthy
profanation to pour into them false or exaggerated reports. To
infect the Superior's ears is a greater crime than to poison the
drinking fountain or to steal a treasure, because the only
treasure of religious is the esteem of their Superior, and the
pure water which refreshes their souls is the encouraging and
benevolent words of the same Superior.

Some, by imprudence or under the influence of a highly coloured or
impressionable imagination which carries everything to extremes
(we would not say through malice), render themselves often guilty
of crying acts of injustice and ruin a religious. What is
uncertain they relate as certain, and what is mere conjecture they
take as the base of grave suspicions. Several facts which, taken
individually, constitute scarcely a fault, they group together,
and so make a mountain out of a few grains of sand. An act which,
seen in its entirety, would be worthy of praise, they mutilate in
such a fashion as to show it in an unfavourable light. Enemies of
the positive degree, they lavish with prodigality the words
_often, very much, exceedingly,_ etc. When they have only one or
two witnesses, they make use of the word _everybody_, thereby
leaving you under the impression that the rumour is scattered
broadcast. On such statements, how can a Superior pronounce
judgment?



XXVII

EIGHTH PRESERVATIVE

_To check uncharitable conversation in others_

WHEN you see charity wounded by an equal call him to order.

If to say or do anything scandalous is the first sin forbidden by
charity, not to stop, when you can, him who speaks or acts badly
ought to be considered the second.

When the discourse degenerates, represent Jesus Christ entering
suddenly into the midst of the company, and saying, as He did
formerly to the disciples of Emmaus: "What discourse hold you among
yourselves, and why are you sad?" Recall also these words of the
Psalmist: "You have preferred to say evil rather than good, and to
relate vices rather than virtues. O deceitful, inconsiderate, and
rash tongue! Dost thou think thou wilt remain unpunished? No; God
will punish thee in everlasting flames." After having thus
fortified ourselves against uncharitable conversation, we ought to
try and put a stop to it.

St. John Climacus tells us to address the following words to those
who calumniate in our presence: "For mercy's sake cease such
conversation! How would you wish me to stone my brethren--me,
whose faults are greater and more numerous?"

A holy religious replied to an uncharitable person: "We have to
render infinite thanks to God if we are not such as those of whom
you speak. Alas! what would become of us without Him?"

The philosopher Zeno, hearing a man relate a number of misdeeds
about Antisthenes, said to him: "Ah! Has he never done anything
good? Has he never done anything for which he merits praise?" "I
don't know," he replied. Then said Zeno, "How is that? You have
sufficient perception to remark, and sufficient memory to
remember, this long list of faults, and you have had no eyes to
see his many good qualities and virtuous actions."

St. John Chrysostom says: "To the calumniator I wish you to say
the following: If you can praise your neighbours, my ears are open
to receive your perfume. If you can only blacken them, my ears are
closed, as I do not wish them to be the receptacle of your filthy
words. What matters it to me to hear that such a one is wicked,
and has done some detestable act? Friend, think of the account
that must be rendered to the Sovereign Judge. What excuse can we
give, and what mercy will we deserve--we who have been so
keen-sighted to the faults of others, and so blind to our own? You
would consider it very rude for a person to look into your private
room; but I say it is far worse to pry into another's private life
and to expose it.

The calumniator should remember that, besides the fault he commits
and the wrong he does to his neighbours, he exposes himself, by a
just punishment of God, to be the victim of calumny himself.



