XIV

NINTH CHARACTERISTIC

_Care of the sick and infirm_

CHARITY lavishes care on the sick and infirm, on the old, on
guests and new-comers. It requires that we visit those who are
ill, to cheer and console them, to foresee their wants, and
thereby to spare them the pain or humiliation of asking for
anything.

Bossuet says: "Esteem the sick, love them, respect and honour
them, as being consecrated by the unction of the Cross and marked
with the character of a suffering Jesus."

Charity pays honour to the aged in every respect, coincides with
their sentiments, consults them, forestalls their desires, and
attempts not to reform in them what cannot be reformed. Charity
receives fraternally all guests and new-comers, and makes us treat
them as we would wish to be treated under similar circumstances.
It also causes us to lavish testimonies of affection on those who
are setting out, and warns us to be very careful of saying or
doing anything that may in the least degree offend even the most
susceptible.

Religious must ever feel that they can bless, love, and thank
religion as a good mother. But religion is not an abstract matter;
it is made up of individuals reciprocally bound together in and
for each other.

Alas! how many times are the sick and the old made to consider
themselves as an inconvenient burden, or like a useless piece of
furniture! In reality what are they doing? They pray and do
penance for the community, turn away the scourge of God, draw down
His graces and blessings, merit, perhaps, the grace of
perseverance for several whose vocation is shaking, hand down to
the younger members the traditions and spirit of the institute,
and finally practise, and cause to be practised, a thousand acts
of virtue.

Did our Divine Lord work less efficaciously for the Church when He
hung on the Cross than when He preached? We must, then, do for the
sick and the old who are now bearing their cross what we would
have wished to do for Jesus in His suffering.



XV

TENTH CHARACTERISTIC

_Prayer for living and deceased brethren_

"WE do not remember often enough our dear dead, our departed
brethren," says St. Francis de Sales, "and the proof of it is that
we speak so little of them. We try to change the discourse as if
it were hurtful. We let the dead bury their dead. Their memory
perishes with us like the sound of the funeral knell, without
thinking that a friendship which perishes with death is not true.
It is a sign of piety to speak of their virtues as it urges us to
imitate them."

In communities distinguished for fraternal charity and the family
spirit the conversation frequently turns on the dead. One talks of
their virtues, another of their services, a third quotes some of
their sayings, while a fourth adds some other edifying fact; and
who is the religious that will not on such occasions breathe a
silent prayer to God and apply some indulgence or other
satisfactory work for the happy repose of their souls?

Charity also prays for those who want help most, and who are often
known to God alone--those whose constancy is wavering, those who
are led by violent temptations to the edge of the precipice. It
expands pent-up souls by consolations or advice; it dissipates
prejudices which tend to weaken the spirit of obedience; it is, in
fine, a sort of instinct which embraces all those things suggested
by zeal and devotion. Can there be anything more agreeable to God,
more useful to the Church, or more meritorious, than to foster
thus amongst the well-beloved children of God peace, joy, love of
vocation, together with union amongst themselves and with their
superiors? It is one of the most substantial advantages we have in
religion to know that we are never forsaken in life or death; to
find always a heart that can compassionate our pains, a hand which
sustains us in danger and lifts us when we fall.



XVI

ELEVENTH CHARACTERISTIC

_To have a lively interest in the whole Order, in its works, its
success, and its failures_

RELIGIOUS who have the family spirit wish to know everything which
concerns the well-being of the different houses. They willingly
take their pens to contribute to the edification and satisfy the
lawful curiosity of their brethren. They bless God when they hear
good news, and grieve at bad news, losses by death, and, above
all, scandalous losses of vocation.

Those who would concentrate all their thoughts on their own work,
as if all other work counted for nothing or merited no attention,
who would speak feebly or perhaps jealously of it, as if they
alone wished to do good, or that others wished to deprive them of
some glory, would show that they only sought themselves, and that
to little love of the Church they joined much indifference for
their Order.

Charity, by uniting its good wishes and interest to the deeds of
others, becomes associated at the same time in the merit. It
shares in a certain manner in the gifts and labours of others. It
is, at the same time, the eye, the hand, the tongue, and the foot,
since it rejoices at what is done by the eye, the hand, the
tongue, etc., or, rather, it is as the soul which presides over
all, and to whom nothing is a stranger in the body over which it
presides.



