XX

FIRST PRESERVATIVE

_How to fortify ourselves against uncharitable conversations, the
principal danger to fraternal charity_

TO meditate on what the Holy Scripture says of it: "Place, O Lord,
a guard before my mouth" (Ps. cxl.)--a vigilant sentinel, well
armed, to watch, and, if necessary, to arrest in the passing out
any unbecoming word--"and a door before my lips," which, being
tightly closed, will never let an un charitable dart escape.

"Shut in your ears with a hedge of thorns," to counteract the
tongue, which would pour into them the poison of uncharitableness,
"and refuse to listen to the wicked tongue."

"Put before your mouth several doors and on your ears several
locks"--_i.e._, put doors upon doors and locks upon locks, because
the tongue is capable, in its fury, to force open the first door
and break the first lock. "Melt your gold and silver, and make for
your words a balance"--weighing them all before uttering
them--"and have for your mouth solid bridles which are tightly
held," for fear that the tongue, getting the better of your
vigilance, will break loose and do mischief in all directions.

Considering these many barriers and formidable checks, must we not
see the necessity of burying in a well-fortified prison that most
dangerous monster, the tongue? "Ah! truly death and life are in
the power of the tongue" (Prov. xviii.). "And although the sword
has been the instrument of innumerable murders, the tongue has at
all times beaten it in producing death" (Ecclus. xxviii.). "It
forms but a small part of the body, and has done mighty evil: as
the helm badly directed causes the wreck of a fine ship, and as a
spark may enkindle a forest. . . . Unquiet evil, inflamed
firebrand, source of deadly poison, world of iniquity" (St. James
iii.).



XXI

SECOND PRESERVATIVE

_To meditate on what the Saints say_

ST. BONAVENTURE relates that St. Francis of Assisi said to his
religious one day: "Uncharitable conversation is worse than the
assassin, because it kills souls and becomes intoxicated with
their blood. It is worse than the mad dog, because it tears out
and drags on all sides the living entrails of the neighbour. It is
worse than the unclean animal, because it wallows in the filth of
vices and makes its favourite pasture there. It is worse than
Cham, because it exposes everywhere the nasty spots which soil the
face of religion--its mother."

St. Bernard goes further: "Do not hesitate to regard the tongue of
the backbiter as more cruel than the iron of the lance which
pierced our Saviour's side, because it not only pierces His sacred
side, but one of His living members also, to whom by its wound it
gives death. It is more cruel than the thorns with which His
venerable head was crowned and torn, and even than the nails with
which the wicked Jews fastened His sacred hands and feet to the
Cross, because if our Divine Saviour did not esteem more highly
the member of His mystic body (which is pierced by the foul tongue
of the slanderer) than His own natural body formed by the
operation of the Holy Ghost in the chaste womb of the Virgin Mary,
He would never have consented to deliver the latter to ignominies
and outrages to spare the former."

Now St. Francis and St. Bernard are here speaking to religious. Is
it possible, then, for backbiting to glide into religious
communities? Yes, certainly. And it is by this snare that Satan
catches souls which have escaped all others.

St. Jerome says: "There are few who avoid this fault. Amongst
those even who pride themselves on leading an irreproachable life,
you will scarcely find any who do not criticize their brethren."

Rarely, without doubt, but too often, nevertheless, we calumniate
at first secretly or with one or two friends, afterwards openly
and in public. We speak of the mistakes, shortcomings, and
defects, great and small, and sometimes transmit them as a legacy.
Sometimes we use a moderate hypocrisy by purposely letting
ourselves be questioned, and sometimes brutally attack our victim
without shame.

"Have I, then," may the religious thus attacked say, "in making my
vows renounced my honour and delivered my character to pillage?
Has my position as religious, has the majesty of the King of
Kings, of whom I have become the intimate friend, in place of
ennobling me, degraded me? You call yourselves my brethren, and
yet there are none who esteem me less! You would not steal my
money, and yet you make no scruple of stealing my character, a
thousand times more precious. You pay court to your Saviour and
persecute His child! The same tongue on which reposes the Holy of
Holies spreads poison and death! Is this to be the result of your
study and practice of virtue? Has not Jesus Christ, by so many
Communions, placed a little sweetness on your tongue and a little
charity in your heart? By eating the Lamb have you become wolves?
as St. John Chrysostom reproached the clergy of Antioch. And you,
who fly so carefully the gross vices of the world, have you no
care or anxiety about damning yourself by slander?"



