CHAPTER II

THE MIDDLE AGE


Probably the appreciation of the Roman monetary standard culminated
during the invasion of the Huns toward the middle of the fifth century.
In the reign of Valentinian III. gold sold for eighteen times its
weight of silver, and Valentinian’s final catastrophe was the murder of
Aëtius in 454, with whose life the last spark of vitality at the heart
of Roman centralization died. The rise of Ricimer and the accession
of Odoacer, mark the successive steps by which Italy receded into
barbarism, and, in the time of Theoderic the Ostrogoth, she had become
a primitive, decentralized community, whose poverty and sluggishness
protected her from African and Asiatic competition. The Ostrogoths
subdued Italy in 493, and by that date the barbarians had overrun
the whole civilized world west of the Adriatic, causing the demand
for money to sustain a consolidated society to cease, the volume of
trade to shrink, the market for eastern wares to contract, and gold to
accumulate at the centre of exchanges. As gold accumulated, its value
fell, and during the first years of the sixth century it stood at a
ratio to silver of less than fifteen to one, a decline of eighteen per
cent.[69] As prices correspondingly rose, the pressure on the peasantry
relaxed, prosperity at Constantinople returned, and the collapse of the
Western Empire may have prolonged the life of the European population
of the Eastern for above one hundred and fifty years. The city which
Constantine planted in 324 on the shore of the Bosphorus, was in
reality a horde of Roman capitalists washed to the confines of Asia
by the current of foreign exchanges; and these emigrants carried with
them, to a land of mixed Greek and barbarian blood, their language and
their customs. For many years these monied potentates ruled their new
country absolutely. All that legislation could do for them was done.
They even annexed rations to their estates, to be supplied at the
public cost, to help their children maintain their palaces. As long as
prices fell, nothing availed; the aristocracy grew poorer day by day.
Their property lay generally in land, and the same stringency which
wasted Italy and Gaul operated, though perhaps less acutely, upon the
Danubian peasantry also. By the middle of the fifth century the country
was exhausted and at the mercy of the Huns.

Wealth is the weapon of a monied society; for, though itself lacking
the martial instinct, it can, with money, hire soldiers to defend it.
But to raise a revenue from the people, they must retain a certain
surplus of income after providing for subsistence, otherwise the
government must trench on the supply of daily food, and exhaustion must
supervene. Finlay has explained that chronic exhaustion was the normal
condition of Byzantium under the Romans.

“The whole surplus profits of society were annually drawn into the
coffers of the State, leaving the inhabitants only a bare sufficiency
for perpetuating the race of tax-payers. History, indeed, shows that
the agricultural classes, from the labourer to the landlord, were
unable to retain possession of the savings required to replace that
depreciation which time is constantly producing in all vested capital,
and that their numbers gradually diminished.”[70]

Under Theodosius II., when gold reached its maximum, complete
prostration prevailed. The Huns marched whither they would, and
one swarm “of barbarians followed another, as long as anything was
left to plunder.” The government could no longer keep armies in the
field. A single example will show how low the community had fallen.
In 446, Attila demanded of Theodosius six thousand pounds of gold
as a condition of peace, and certainly six thousand pounds of gold,
equalling perhaps $1,370,000, was a small sum, even when measured by
the standard of private wealth. The end of the third century was not a
prosperous period in Italy, and yet before his election as emperor in
275, the fortune of Tacitus reached 280,000,000 sesterces, or upwards
of $11,000,000.[71] Nevertheless Theodosius was unable to wring this
inconsiderable indemnity from the people, and he had to levy a private
assessment on the senators, who were themselves so poor that to pay
they sold at auction the jewels of their wives and the furniture of
their houses.

Almost immediately after the collapse of the Western Empire the tide
turned. With the fall in the price of gold the peasantry revived and
the Greek provinces flourished. In the reign of Justinian, Belisarius
and Narses marched from end to end of Africa and Europe, and Anastasius
rolled in wealth.

Anastasius, the contemporary of Theoderic, acceded to the throne in
491. He not only built the famous long wall from the Propontis to the
Euxine, and left behind him a treasure of three hundred and twenty
thousand pounds of gold, but he remitted to his subjects the most
oppressive of their taxes, and the reign of Justinian, who succeeded
him at an interval of only ten years, must always rank as the prime
of the Byzantine civilization. The observation is not new, it has been
made by all students of Byzantine history.

“The increased prosperity ... infused into society soon displayed its
effects; and the brilliant exploits of the reign of Justinian must
be traced back to the reinvigoration of the body politic of the Roman
Empire by Anastasius.”[72]

Justinian inherited the throne from his uncle Justin, a Dardanian
peasant, who could neither read nor write. But the barbarian shepherd
was a thorough soldier, and the army he left behind him was probably
not inferior to the legions of Titus or Trajan. At all events, had
Justinian’s funds sufficed, there seems reason to suppose he might
have restored the boundaries of the Empire. His difficulty lay not in
lack of physical force, but in dearth of opulent enemies; in the sixth
century conquest had ceased to be profitable. The territory open to
invasion had been harried for generations, and hardly a country was to
be found rich enough to repay the cost of a campaign by mercenaries.
Therefore, the more the emperor extended his dominions, the more they
languished; and finally to provide for wars, barbarian subsidies, and
building, Justinian had to resort to over-taxation. With renewed want
came renewed decay, and perhaps the completion of Saint Sophia, in
558, may be taken as the point whence the race which conceived this
masterpiece hastened to its extinction.

In the seventh century Asiatic competition devoured the Europeans
in the Levant, as three hundred years before it had devoured the
husbandmen of Italy; and this was a disease which isolation alone
could cure. But isolation of the centre of exchanges was impossible,
for the vital principle of an economic age is competition, and,
when the relief afforded by the collapse of Rome had been exhausted,
competition did its work with relentless rapidity. Under Heraclius
(610–640) the population sank fast, and by 717 the western blood
had run so low that an Asiatic dynasty reigned supreme. Everywhere
Greeks and Romans vanished before Armenians and Slavs, and for years
previous to the accession of Leo the Isaurian the great waste tracts
where they once lived were systematically repeopled by a more enduring
race. The colonists of Justinian II. furnished him an auxiliary army.
At Justinian’s death in 711 the revolution had been completed; the
population had been renovated, and Constantinople had become an Asiatic
city.[73] The new aristocracy was Armenian, as strong an economic
type as ever existed in western Asia; while the Slavic peasantry
which underlay them were among the most enduring of mankind. There
competition ended, for it could go no further; and, apparently, from
the accession of Leo in 717, to the rise of Florence and Venice, three
hundred and fifty years later, Byzantine society, in fixity, almost
resembled the Chinese. Such movement as occurred, like Iconoclasm, came
from the friction of the migrating races with the old population. As
Texier has observed of architecture: “From the time of Justinian until
the end of the Empire we cannot remark a single change in the modes of
construction.”[74]

Only long after, when the money which sustained it was diverted toward
Italy during the crusades, did the social fabric crumble; and Gibbon
has declared that the third quarter of the tenth century “forms the
most splendid period of the Byzantine annals.”[75]

The later Byzantine was an economic civilization, without aspiration
or imagination, and perhaps the most vivid description which has
survived of that ostentatious, sordid, cowardly, and stagnant race, is
the little sketch of the Jew, Benjamin of Tudela, who travelled to the
Levant in 1173.

Benjamin called the inhabitants of Constantinople Greeks, because
of their language, and he described the city as a vast commercial
metropolis, “common to all the world, without distinction of country
or religion.” Merchants from the East and West flocked thither--from
Babylon, Mesopotamia, Media, and Persia, as well as from Egypt,
Hungary, Russia, Lombardy, and Spain. The rabbi thought the people well
educated and social, liking to eat and drink, “every man under his vine
and under his fig tree.” They loved gold and jewels, pompous display,
and gorgeous ceremonial; and the Jew has dwelt with delight on the
palace, with its columns of gold and silver, and the wonderful crown so
studded with gems that it lighted the night without a lamp. The Greeks
also roused his enthusiasm for the splendour of their clothes and
of their horses’ trappings, for when they went abroad they resembled
princes; but on the other hand, he remarked with a certain scorn, that
they were utterly cowardly, and, like women, had to hire men to protect
them.

   “The Greeks who inhabit the country are extremely rich and
    possess great wealth of gold and precious stones. They dress
    in garments of silk, ornamented by gold and other valuable
    materials.... Nothing upon earth equals their wealth.”

   “The Greeks hire soldiers of all nations whom they call
    barbarians, for the purpose of carrying on ... wars with ...
    the Turks.” “They have no martial spirit themselves and like
    women are unfit for war.”[76]

The movement of races in the Eastern Empire proceeded with automatic
regularity. The cheaper organism exterminated the more costly, because
energy operated through money strongly enough to cause free economic
competition; nor is the evidence upon which this conclusion rests to
be drawn from books alone. Coinage and architecture, sculpture and
painting, tell the tale with equal precision.

When, in the fourth century, wealth, ebbing on the Tiber, floated to
the Bosphorus the core of the Latin aristocracy, it carried with it
also the Latin coinage. For several generations this coinage underwent
little apparent alteration, but after the final division of the Empire,
in 395, between the sons of Theodosius, a subtle change began in the
composition of the ruling class; a change reflected from generation
to generation in the issues of their mints. Sabatier has described the
transformation wrought in eight hundred years with the minuteness of an
antiquary.

If a set of Byzantine coins are arranged in chronological order, those
of Anastasius, about 500, show at a glance an influence which is not
Latin. Strange devices have appeared on the reverse, together with
Greek letters. A century later, when the great decline was in progress
under Heraclius, the type had become barbarous, and the prevalence of
Greek inscriptions proves the steady exhaustion of the Roman blood.
Another fifty years, and by 690, under Justinian II., the permanent
and conventional phase had been developed. Religious emblems were
used; the head of Christ was struck on the golden son, and fixity
of form presaged the Asiatic domination. The official costumes, the
portraits of the emperors, certain consecrated inscriptions, all were
changeless; and in 717, an Armenian dynasty ascended the throne in
the person of Leo the Isaurian.[77] This motionless period lasted for
full three hundred and fifty years, as long as the exchanges of the
world centred at Byzantium, and the monied race who dwelt there sucked
copious nutriment from the pool of wealth in which it lay. But even
before the crusades the tide of trade began to flow to the south, and
quitting Constantinople passed directly from Bagdad to the cities of
Italy. Then the sustenance of the money-changers gradually failed. From
the reign of Michael VI. effigies of the saints were engraved upon the
coin, and after the revolution led by Alexius Comnenus, in 1081, the
execution degenerated and debasement began. This revolution marked the
beginning of the end. Immediately preceding the crusades, and attended
by sharp distress, it was probably engendered by an alteration in the
drift of foreign exchanges. Certainly the currency contracted sharply,
and the gold money soon became so bad that Alexius had to stipulate to
pay his debts in the byzants of his predecessor Michael.[78] For the
next hundred years, as the Italian cities rose, the Empire languished,
and with the thirteenth century, when Venice established its permanent
silver standard by coining the “grosso,” Constantinople crumbled into
ruin.

In architecture the same phenomena appear, only differently clothed.
Though the Germans, who swarmed across the Danube, often surged against
the walls of Constantinople, they never became the ruling class of the
community, because they were of the imaginative type. Money retained
its supremacy, and while it did so energy expressed itself through the
economic mind. Though Justinian was of barbarian blood, the nephew
of a barbarian shepherd, the aristocracy about him, which formed
the core of society, was neither imaginative nor devotional. Hardly
Christian, it tended toward paganism or scepticism. The artists were
of the subject caste, and they earned their living by gratifying the
tastes of the nobles; but the nobles loved magnificence and gorgeous
functions; hence all Byzantine architecture favoured display, and
nowhere more so than in Saint Sophia. “Art delighted in representing
Christ in all the splendour of power.... To glorify him the more all
the magnificence of the imperial court was introduced into heaven....
Christ no longer appeared under the benevolent aspect of the good
shepherd, but in the superb guise of an oriental monarch: he is seated
on a throne glittering with gold and precious stones.”[79] Here then
lay the impassable gulf between Byzantium and Paris; while Byzantium
remained economic and materialistic, Paris passed into the glory of an
imaginative age.

The Germans who overran the Roman territory were of the same race
as the Greeks, the Latins, or the Gauls, but in a different stage
of development. They tilled farms and built villages and perhaps
fortresses, but they were not consolidated, and had neither nations
nor federations. They were substantially in the condition in which the
common family had been, when it divided many centuries before, and
their minds differed radically from the minds of the inhabitants of
the countries beyond the Danube and the Rhine. They were infinitely
more imaginative, and, as the flood of emigration poured down from the
north, the imagination came more and more to prevail.

Although the lowest of existing savages are relatively advanced, they
suggest that the strongest passion of primeval man must have been fear;
and fear, not so much of living things, as of nature, which seemed to
him resolutely hostile. Against wild beasts, or savages like himself,
he might prevail by cunning or by strength; but against drought and
famine, pestilence and earthquake, he was helpless, and he regarded
these scourges as malevolent beings, made like himself, only more
formidable. His first and most pressing task was to mollify them, and
above the warrior class rose the sacred caste, whose function was to
mediate between the visible and the invisible world.

Originally these intercessors appear to have been sorcerers, rather
than priests, for spirits were believed to be hostile to man; and
perhaps the first conception of a god may have been reached through
the victory of a clan of sorcerers in fight. As Statius said eighteen
hundred years ago, “Primus in orbe deos fecit timor.”[80] Probably the
early wizards won their power by the discovery of natural secrets,
which, though they could be transmitted to their descendants, might
also be discovered by strangers. The later discoverers would become
rival medicine men, and battle would be the only test by which the
orthodoxy of the competitors could be determined. The victors would
almost certainly stigmatize the beings the vanquished served, as
devils who tormented men. There is an example of this process in the
eighteenth chapter of 1 Kings:--

“And Elijah ... said, How long halt ye between two opinions? if the
Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. And the people
answered him not a word.”

Then Elijah proposed that each side should dress a bullock, and lay it
on wood, and call upon their spirit; and the one who sent down fire
should be God. And all the people answered that it was well spoken.
And Jezebel’s prophets took their bullock and dressed it, and called
on “Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us!” But
nothing came of it.

Then Elijah mocked them, “and said, Cry aloud: ... either he is
talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he
sleepeth, and must be awaked.”

And they cried aloud, and cut themselves with knives till “blood gushed
out upon them. And ... there was neither voice, nor any to answer.”
Then Elijah built his altar, and cut up his bullock and laid him on
wood, and poured twelve barrels of water over the whole, and filled a
trench with water.

And “the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and
the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that
was in the trench.

“And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they
said, The Lord, he is the God.

“And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of
them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down to the
brook Kishon, and slew them there.”

The Germans of the fourth century were a very simple race, who
comprehended little of natural laws, and who therefore referred
phenomena they did not understand to supernatural intervention.
This intervention could only be controlled by priests, and thus the
invasions caused a rapid rise in the influence of the sacred class.
The power of every ecclesiastical organization has always rested on
the miracle, and the clergy have always proved their divine commission
as did Elijah. This was eminently the case with the mediæval Church.
At the outset Christianity was socialistic, and its spread among the
poor was apparently caused by the pressure of competition; for the
sect only became of enough importance to be persecuted under Nero,
contemporaneously with the first signs of distress which appeared
through the debasement of the denarius. But socialism was only a
passing phase, and disappeared as the money value of the miracle rose,
and brought wealth to the Church. Under the Emperor Decius, about
250, the magistrates thought the Christians opulent enough to use gold
and silver vessels in their service, and, by the fourth century, the
supernatural so possessed the popular mind, that Constantine not only
allowed himself to be converted by a miracle, but used enchantment as
an engine of war.

In one of his marches, he encouraged the belief that he saw a luminous
cross in the sky, with the words “By this conquer.” The next night
Christ appeared to him, and directed him to construct a standard
bearing the same design, and, armed with this, to advance with
confidence against Maxentius.

The legend, preserved by Eusebius, grew up after the event; but, for
that very reason, it reflects the feeling of the age. The imagination
of his men had grown so vivid that, whether he believed or not,
Constantine found it expedient to use the Labarum as a charm to ensure
victory. The standard supported a cross and a mystic monogram; the
army believed its guards to be invulnerable, and in his last and most
critical campaign against Licinius, the sight of the talisman not only
excited his own troops to enthusiasm, but spread dismay through the
enemy.

The action of the Milvian Bridge, fought in 312, by which Constantine
established himself at Rome, was probably the point whence nature began
to discriminate decisively against the monied type in Western Europe.
Capital had already abandoned Italy; Christianity was soon after
officially recognized, and during the next century the priest began to
rank with the soldier as a force in war.

Meanwhile, as the population sank into exhaustion, it yielded less and
less revenue, the police deteriorated, and the guards became unable
to protect the frontier. In 376, the Goths, hard pressed by the Huns,
came to the Danube and implored to be taken as subjects by the emperor.
After mature deliberation, the Council of Valens granted the prayer,
and some five hundred thousand Germans were cantoned in Mœsia. The
intention of the government was to scatter this multitude through
the provinces as coloni, or to draft them into the legions; but the
detachment detailed to handle them was too feeble, the Goths mutinied,
cut the guard to pieces, and having ravaged Thrace for two years,
defeated and killed Valens at Hadrianople. In another generation the
disorganization of the Roman army had become complete, and Alaric gave
it its deathblow in his campaign of 410.

Alaric was not a Gothic king, but a barbarian deserter, who, in 392,
was in the service of Theodosius. Subsequently, he sometimes held
imperial commands, and sometimes led bands of marauders on his own
account, but was always in difficulty about his pay. Finally, in the
revolution in which Stilicho was murdered, a corps of auxiliaries
mutinied and chose him their general. Alleging that his arrears were
unpaid, Alaric accepted the command, and with this army sacked Rome.

During the campaign the attitude of the Christians was more interesting
than the strategy of the soldiers. Alaric was a robber, leading
mutineers, and yet the orthodox historians did not condemn him. They
did not condemn him because the sacred class instinctively loved the
barbarians whom they could overawe, whereas they could make little
impression on the materialistic intellect of the old centralized
society. Under the Empire the priests, like all other individuals, had
to obey the power which paid the police; and as long as a revenue could
be drawn from the provinces, the Christian hierarchy were subordinate
to the monied bureaucracy who had the means to coerce them.

   “It was long since established, as a fundamental maxim of the
    Roman constitution, that every rank of citizens were alike
    subject to the laws, and that the care of religion was the
    right as well as duty of the civil magistrate.”[81]

Their conversion made little change in the attitude of the emperors,
and Constantine and his successors continued to exercise a supreme
jurisdiction over the hierarchy. The sixteenth book of the Theodosian
Code sufficiently sets forth the plenitude of their authority. In
theory, bishops were elected by the clergy and the people, but in
practice the emperor could control the patronage if it were valuable;
and whether bishops were elected or appointed, as long as they were
created and paid by laymen, they were dependent. The priesthood could
only become autocratic when fear of the miracle exempted them from
arrest; and toward the middle of the fifth century this point was
approaching, as appears by the effect of the embassy of Leo the Great
to Attila.

In 452 the Huns had crossed the Alps and had sacked Aquileia. The Roman
army was demoralized; Aëtius could not make head against the barbarians
in the field; while Valentinian was so panic-stricken that he abandoned
Ravenna, which was thought impregnable, and retreated to the capital,
which was indefensible. At Rome, finding himself helpless in an open
city, the emperor conceived the idea of invoking the power of the
supernatural. He proposed to Leo to visit Attila and persuade him to
spare the town. The pope consented without hesitation, and with perfect
intrepidity caused himself to be carried to the Hun’s tent, where he
met with respect not unalloyed by fear. The legend probably reflects
pretty accurately the feeling of the time. As the bishop stood before
the king, Peter and Paul appeared on either side, menacing Attila
with flaming swords; and though this particular form of apparition may
be doubted, Attila seems beyond question to have been oppressed by a
belief that he would not long survive the capture of Rome. He therefore
readily agreed to accept a ransom and evacuate Italy.

From the scientific standpoint the saint and the sorcerer are akin;
for though the saint uses the supernatural for man’s benefit, and
the sorcerer for his hurt, both deal in magic. The mediæval saint was
a powerful necromancer. He healed the sick, cast out devils, raised
the dead, foretold the future, put out fires, found stolen property,
brought rain, saved from shipwreck, routed the enemy, cured headache,
was sovereign in child-birth, and, indeed, could do almost anything
that was asked of him, whether he were alive or dead. This power was
believed to lie in some occult property of the flesh, which passed by
contact. The woman in the Bible said, “If I may touch but his clothes,
I shall be whole.” Moreover, this fluid was a substance whose passage
could be felt, for “Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue
had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who
touched my clothes?”[82]

Anything which came in contact with the saint was likely to have been
impregnated with this magical quality, and thus became a charm, or
relic, whose value depended primarily on the power of the man himself,
and secondly, on the thoroughness with which the material had been
charged.

The tomb, which held the whole body, naturally stood highest; then
parts of the body, according to their importance--a head, an arm, a
leg, down to hairs of the beard. Then came hats, boots, girdles, cups,
anything indeed which had been used. The very ground on which a great
miracle-worker had stood might have high value.

The Holy Grail, which had held Christ’s blood, would cure wounds,
raise the dead, and fill itself with choice food, at the command of
the owner. The eucharist, though not properly a relic, and which only
became God through an incantation, would, in expert hands, stop fires,
cure disease, cast out devils, expound philosophy, and detect perjury
by choking the liar.

Every prize in life was to be obtained by this kind of magic. When the
kings of France made war, they carried with them the enchanted banner
of Saint Denis, and Froissart has told how even in the reign of Charles
VI. it decided the battle of Roosebeke.[83]

Disease was treated altogether by miracle, and the Church found
the business so profitable that she anathematized experimental
practitioners. In the thirteenth century Saint Thomas of Canterbury and
Saint James of Compostello were among the most renowned of healers,
and their shrines blazed with the gifts of the greatest and richest
persons of Europe. When Philip Augustus lay very ill, Louis the Pious
obtained leave to visit the tomb of Saint Thomas, then in the height of
the fashion, and left as part of his fee the famous regal of France, a
jewel so magnificent that three centuries and a half later Henry VIII.
seized it and set it in a thumb ring. Beside this wonderful gem, at
the pillage of the Reformation, “the king’s receiver confessed that the
gold and silver and precious stones and sacred vestments taken away ...
filled six-and-twenty carts.”[84] The old books of travel are filled
with accounts of this marvellous shrine.

   “But the magnificence of the tomb of Saint Thomas the Martyr,
    Archbishop of Canterbury, is that which surpasses all belief.
    This, notwithstanding its great size, is entirely covered with
    plates of pure gold; but the gold is scarcely visible from the
    variety of precious stones with which it is studded, such as
    sapphires, diamonds, rubies, balas-rubies, and emeralds ...
    and agates, jaspers and cornelians set in relievo, some of the
    cameos being of such a size, that I do not dare to mention it;
    but everything is left far behind by a ruby, not larger than
    a man’s thumb-nail, which is set to the right of the altar....
    They say that it was the gift of a king of France.”[85]

But beside these shrines of world-wide reputation, no hamlet was too
remote to possess its local fetish, which worked at cheap rates for the
peasantry. A curious list of these was sent to the Government by two of
Cromwell’s visitors in the reign of Henry VIII.

The nuns of Saint Mary, at Derby, had part of the shirt of Saint
Thomas, reverenced by pregnant women; so was the girdle of Saint
Francis at Grace Dieu. At Repton, a pilgrimage was made to Saint
Guthlac and his bell, which was put on the head for headache. The
wimple of Saint Audrede was used for sore breasts, and the rod of Aaron
for children with worms. At Bury Saint Edmund’s, the shrine of Saint
Botulph was carried in procession when rain was needed, “and Kentish
men ... carry thence ... wax candles, which they light at the end of
the field while the wheat is sown, and hope from this that neither
tares nor other weeds will grow in the wheat that year.”[86] Most
curious of all, perhaps, at Pontefract, Thomas, Duke of Lancaster’s
belt and hat were venerated. They were believed to aid women in
child-birth, and also to cure headache.

Saint Thomas Aquinas, a great venerator of the eucharist, used it to
help him in his lectures. When treating of the dogma of the Supper at
the University of Paris, many questions were asked him which he never
answered without meditating at the foot of the altar. One day, when
preparing an answer to a very difficult question, he placed it on the
altar, and cried, “Lord, who really and veritably dwells in the Holy
Sacrament, hear my prayer. If what I have written upon your divine
eucharist be true, let it be given me to teach and demonstrate it. If I
am deceived, stop me from proposing doctrines contrary to the truth of
your divine Sacrament.” Forthwith the Lord appeared upon the altar, and
said to him, “You have written well upon the Sacrament of My body, and
you have answered the question which has been proposed to you as well
as human intelligence can fathom these mysteries.”[87]

Primitive people argue directly from themselves to their divinities,
and throughout the Middle Ages men believed that envy, jealousy, and
vanity were as rampant in heaven as on earth, and behaved accordingly.
The root of the monastic movement was the hope of obtaining advantages
by adulation.

   “A certain clerk, who had more confidence in the Mother than
    the Son, continually repeated the Ave Maria as his only prayer.
    One day, while so engaged, Christ appeared to him and said, ‘My
    mother thanks you very much for your salutations, ... _tamen et
    me salutare memento_.’”[88]

To insure perpetual intercession it was necessary that the song
of praise and the smoke of incense should be perpetual, and
therefore monks and nuns worked day and night at their calling. As a
twelfth-century bishop of Metz observed, when wakened one freezing
morning by the bell of Saint Peter of Bouillon tolling for matins:
“Neither the drowsiness of the night nor the bitterness of a glacial
winter [kept them] from praising the Creator of the world.”[89]

Bequests to convents were in the nature of policies of insurance in
favour of the grantor and his heirs, not only against punishment in
the next world, but against accident in this. On this point doubt is
impossible, for the belief of the donor is set forth in numberless
charters. Cedric de Guillac, in a deed to la Grande-Sauve, said that he
gave because “as water extinguishes fire, so gifts extinguish sin.”[90]
And an anecdote preserved by Dugdale, shows how valuable an investment
against accident a convent was thought to be as late as the thirteenth
century.

When Ralph, Earl of Chester, the founder of the monastery of
Dieulacres, was returning by sea from the Holy Land, he was overtaken
one night by a sudden tempest. “How long is it till midnight?” he asked
of the sailors. They answered, “About two hours.” He said to them,
“Work on till midnight, and I trust in God that you may have help,
and that the storm will cease.” When it was near midnight the captain
said to the earl, “My lord, commend yourself to God, for the tempest
increases; we are worn out, and are in mortal peril.” Then Earl Ralph
came out of his cabin, and began to help with the ropes, and the rest
of the ship’s tackle; nor was it long before the storm subsided.

The next day, as they were sailing over a tranquil sea, the captain
said to the earl, “My lord, tell us, if you please, why you wished us
to work till the middle of the night, and then you worked harder than
all the rest.” To which he replied, “Because at midnight my monks, and
others, whom my ancestors and I have endowed in divers places, rise
and sing divine service, and then I have faith in their prayers, and
I believe that God, because of their prayers and intercessions, gave
me more fortitude than I had before, and made the storm cease as I
predicted.”[91]

Philip Augustus, when caught in a gale in the Straits of Messina,
showed equal confidence in the matins of Clairvaux, and was also
rewarded for his faith by good weather towards morning.

The power of the imagination, when stimulated by the mystery which,
in an age of decentralization, shrouds the operations of nature,
can be measured by its effect in creating an autocratic class of
miracle-workers. Between the sixth and the thirteenth centuries, about
one-third of the soil of Europe passed into the hands of religious
corporations, while the bulk of the highest talent of the age sought
its outlet through monastic life.

The force operated on all; for, beside religious ecstasy, ambition and
fear were at work, and led to results inconceivable when centralization
has begot materialism. Saint Bernard’s position was more conspicuous
and splendid than that of any monarch of his generation, and the agony
of terror which assailed the warriors was usually proportionate to the
freedom with which they had violated ecclesiastical commands. They fled
to the cloister for protection from the fiend, and took their wealth
with them.

Gérard le Blanc was even more noted for his cruelty than for his
courage. He was returning to his castle one day, after having committed
a murder, when he saw the demon whom he served appear to claim him.
Seized with horror, he galloped to where six penitents had just founded
the convent of Afflighem, and supplicated them to receive him. The news
spread, and the whole province gave thanks to God that a monster of
cruelty should have been so converted.

A few days after, his example was followed by another knight, equally a
murderer, who had visited the recluses, and, touched by their piety and
austerity, resolved to renounce his patrimony and live a penitent.[92]

Had the German migrations been wars of extermination, as they have
sometimes been described, the imagination, among the new barbaric
population, might have been so stimulated that a pure theocracy would
have been developed between the time of Saint Benedict and Saint
Bernard. But the barbarians were not animated by hate; on the contrary,
they readily amalgamated with the old population, amongst whom the
materialism of Rome lay like a rock in a rising tide, sometimes
submerged, but never obliterated.

The obstacle which the true emotionalists never overcame was the
inheritance of a secular clergy, who, down to the eleventh century,
were generally married, and in the higher grades were rather barons
than prelates. In France the Archbishop of Rheims, the Bishops of
Beauvais, Noyon, Langres, and others, were counts; while in Germany
the Archbishops of Mayence, of Treves, and of Cologne were princes
and electors, standing on the same footing as the Dukes of Saxony and
Bavaria.

As feudal nobles these ecclesiastics were retainers of the king, owed
feudal service, led their vassals in war, and some of the fiercest
soldiers of the Middle Ages were clerks. Milo of Treves was a famous
eighth-century bishop. Charles Martel gave the archbishopric of Rheims
to a warrior named Milo, who managed also to obtain the see of Treves.
This Milo was the son of Basinus, the last incumbent of the preferment.
He was a fierce and irreligious soldier, and was finally killed
hunting; but during the forty years in which he held his offices,
Boniface, with all the aid of the crown and the pope, was unable to
prevail against him, and in 752 Pope Zachary wrote advising that he
should be left to the divine vengeance.[93]

Such a system was incompatible with the supremacy of a theocracy.
The essence of a theocracy is freedom from secular control, and this
craving for freedom was the dominant instinct of monasticism. Saint
Anselm, perhaps the most perfect specimen of a monk, felt it in the
marrow of his bones; it was the master passion of his life, and he
insisted upon it with all the fire of his nature: “Nihil magis diligit
Deus in hoc mundo quam libertatem ecclesiæ suæ.... Liberam vult esse
Deus sponsam suam, non ancillam.”

Yet only very slowly, as the Empire disintegrated, did the theocratic
idea take shape. As late as the ninth century the pope prostrated
himself before Charlemagne, and did homage as to a Roman emperor.[94]

Saint Benedict founded Monte Cassino in 529, but centuries elapsed
before the Benedictine order rose to power. The early convents were
isolated and feeble, and much at the mercy of the laity, who invaded
and debauched them. Abbots, like bishops, were often soldiers, who
lived within the walls with their wives and children, their hawks,
their hounds, and their men-at-arms; and it has been said that, in all
France, Corbie and Fleury alone kept always something of their early
discipline.

Only in the early years of the most lurid century of the Middle
Ages, when decentralization culminated, and the imagination began to
gain its fullest intensity, did the period of monastic consolidation
open with the foundation of Cluny. In 910 William of Aquitaine drew
a charter[95] which, so far as possible, provided for the complete
independence of his new corporation. There was no episcopal visitation,
and no interference with the election of the abbot. The monks were
put directly under the protection of the pope, who was made their
sole superior. John XI. confirmed this charter by his bull of 932, and
authorized the affiliation of all convents who wished to share in the
reform.[96]

The growth of Cluny was marvellous; by the twelfth century two thousand
houses obeyed its rule, and its wealth was so great, and its buildings
so vast, that in 1245 Innocent IV., the Emperor Baldwin, and Saint
Louis were all lodged together within its walls, and with them all the
attendant trains of prelates and nobles with their servants.

In the eleventh century no other force of equal energy existed.
The monks were the most opulent, the ablest, and the best organized
society in Europe, and their effect upon mankind was proportioned
to their strength. They intuitively sought autocratic power, and
during the centuries when nature favoured them, they passed from
triumph to triumph. They first seized upon the papacy and made
it self-perpetuating; they then gave battle to the laity for the
possession of the secular hierarchy, which had been under temporal
control since the very foundation of the Church.

About the year 1000 Rome was in chaos. The Counts of Tusculum, who
had often disposed of the tiara, on the death of John XIX., bought it
for Benedict IX. Benedict was then a child of ten, but he grew worse
as he grew older, and finally he fell so low that he was expelled by
the people. He was succeeded by Sylvester; but, a few months after his
coronation, Benedict re-entered the city, and crowned John XX. with
his own hands. Shortly after, he assaulted the Vatican, and then three
popes reigned together in Rome. In this crisis Gregory VI. tried to
restore order by buying the papacy for himself; but the transaction
only added a fourth pope to the three already consecrated, and two
years later he was set aside by the Emperor Henry, who appointed his
own chancellor in his place.

It was a last triumph for the laity, but a triumph easier to win than
to sustain. When the soldier created the high priest of Christendom,
he did indeed inspire such terror that no man in the great assembly
dared protest; but in nine months Clement was dead, his successor lived
only twenty-four days, poisoned, as it was rumoured, by the perfidious
Italians; and when Henry sought a third pope among his prelates, he met
with general timidity to accept the post. Then the opportunity of the
monks came: they seized it, and with unerring instinct fixed themselves
upon the throne from which they have never been expelled. According to
the picturesque legend, Bruno, Bishop of Toul, seduced by the flattery
of courtiers and the allurements of ambition, accepted the tiara from
the emperor, and set out upon his journey to Italy with a splendid
retinue, and with his robe and crown. On his way he turned aside at
Cluny, where Hildebrand was prior. Hildebrand, filled with the spirit
of God, reproached him with having seized upon the seat of the vicar
of Christ by force, and accepted the holy office from the sacrilegious
hand of a layman. He exhorted Bruno to cast away his pomp, and to
cross the Alps humbly as a pilgrim, assuring him that the priests
and people of Rome would recognize him as their bishop, and elect him
according to canonical forms. Then he would taste the joys of a pure
conscience, having entered the fold of Christ as a shepherd and not as
a robber. Inspired by these words, Bruno dismissed his train, and left
the convent gate as a pilgrim. He walked barefoot, and when after two
months of pious meditations he stood before Saint Peter’s, he spoke to
the people and told them it was their privilege to elect the pope, and
since he had come unwillingly he would return again, were he not their
choice.

He was answered with acclamations, and on February 2, 1049, he was
enthroned as Leo IX. His first act was to make Hildebrand his minister.

The legend tells of the triumph of Cluny as no historical facts could
do. Ten years later, in the reign of Nicholas II., the theocracy made
itself self-perpetuating through the assumption of the election of
the pope by the college of cardinals, and in 1073 Hildebrand, the
incarnation of monasticism, was crowned under the name of Gregory VII.

With Hildebrand’s election, war began. The council of Rome, held
in 1075, decreed that holy orders should not be recognized where
investiture had been granted by a layman, and that princes guilty of
conferring investiture should be excommunicated. The council of the
next year, which excommunicated the emperor, also enunciated the famous
propositions of Baronius--the full expression of the theocratic idea:--

   “That the Roman pontiff alone can be called universal.

   “That he alone can depose or reconcile bishops.

   “That his legate, though of inferior rank, takes precedence
    of all bishops in council, and can pronounce sentence of
    deposition against them.

        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

   “That all princes should kiss the pope’s feet alone.

        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

   “That he may depose emperors.

        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

   “That his judgments can be overruled by none, and he alone can
    overrule the judgments of all.

   “That he can be judged by no one.

   “That the Roman Church never has, and never can err, as the
    Scriptures testify.

        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

   “That by his precept and permission it is lawful for subjects
    to accuse their princes.

        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

   “That he is able to absolve from their allegiance the subjects
    of the wicked.”[97]

The monks had won the papacy, but the emperor still held his secular
clergy, and, at the diet of Worms, where he undertook to depose
Hildebrand, he was sustained by his prelates. Without a moment of
hesitation the enchanter cast his spell, and it is interesting to
see, in the curse which he launched at the layman, how the head of
monasticism had become identified with the spirit which he served. The
priest had grown to be a god on earth.

   “So strong in this confidence, for the honour and defence
    of your Church, on behalf of the omnipotent God, the Father,
    the Son, and the Holy Ghost, by your power and authority, I
    forbid the government of the German and Italian kingdoms, to
    King Henry, the son of the Emperor Henry, who, with unheard-of
    arrogance, has rebelled against your Church. I absolve all
    Christians from the oaths they have made, or may make to him,
    and I forbid that any one should obey him as king.”[98]

Henry marched on Italy, but in all European history there has been
no drama more tremendous than the expiation of his sacrilege. To his
soldiers the world was a vast space, peopled by those fantastic beings
which are still seen on Gothic towers. These demons obeyed the monk of
Rome, and his army, melting from the emperor under a nameless horror,
left him helpless.

Gregory lay like a magician in the fortress of Canossa; but he had no
need of carnal weapons, for when the emperor reached the Alps he was
almost alone. Then his imagination also took fire, the panic seized
him, and he sued for mercy.

For three days long he stood barefoot in the snow at the castle gate;
and when at last he was admitted, half-naked and benumbed, he was
paralyzed rather by terror than by cold. Then the great miracle was
wrought, by which God was made to publicly judge between them.

Hildebrand took the consecrated wafer and broke it, saying to the
suppliant, “Man’s judgments are fallible, God’s are infallible; if I
am guilty of the crimes you charge me with, let Him strike me dead as I
eat.” He ate, and gave what remained to Henry; but though for him more
than life was at stake, he dared not taste the bread. From that hour
his fate was sealed. He underwent his penance and received absolution;
and when he had escaped from the terrible old man, he renewed the war.
But the spell was over him, the horror clung to him, even his sons
betrayed him, and at last his mind gave way under the strain and he
abdicated. In his own words, to save his life he “sent to Mayence the
crown, the sceptre, the cross, the sword, the lance.”

On August 7, 1106, Henry died at Liège, an outcast and a mendicant, and
for five long years his body lay at the church door, an accursed thing
which no man dared to bury.

Such was the evolution of the mediæval theocracy, the result of that
social disintegration which stimulates the human imagination, and
makes men cower before the unknown. The force which caused the rise
of an independent priesthood was the equivalent of magic, and it was
the waxing of this force through the dissolution of the Empire of the
West which made the schism which split Christendom in two. The Latin
Church divided from the Greek because it was the reflection of the
imaginative mind. While the West grew emotional, Constantinople stayed
the centre of exchanges, the seat of the monied class; and when Cluny
captured Rome, the antagonism between these irreconcilable instincts
precipitated a rupture. The schism dated from 1054, five years after
the coronation of Leo. Nor is the theory new; it was explained by
Gibbon long ago.

   “The rising majesty of Rome could no longer brook the insolence
    of a rebel; and Michael Cerularius was excommunicated in the
    heart of Constantinople by the pope’s legates....

   “From this thunderbolt we may date the consummation of the
    schism. It was enlarged by each ambitious step of the Roman
    pontiffs; the emperors blushed and trembled at the ignominious
    fate of their royal brethren of Germany; and the people were
    scandalized by the temporal power and military life of the
    Latin clergy.”[99]





