CHAPTER IV

     Candide etait etendu dans la rue et couvert de debris. Il disait a
     Pangloss: Helas! procure-moi un pen de vin et d'huile; je me meurs.
     Ce tremblement de terre n'est pas une chose nouvelle, repondit
     Pangloss; la ville de Lima eprouva les memes secousses en Amerique
     l'annee passee; memes causes, memes effets: il y a certainement une
     trainee de souphre sous terre depuis Lima jusqu'a Lisbonne. Rien
     n'est plus probable, dit Candide; mais, pour Dieu, un peu d'huile
     et de vin. Comment, probable? repliqua le philosophe; je soutiens
     que la chose est demontree.

     Candide perdit connaissance, ... et Pangloss lui apporta un peu
     d'eau d'une fontaine voisine.

     VOLTAIRE, _Candide_.


Sec. 1

Dialectics round the Death-bed

Philosophical aloofness is all very well in its way, but while we argue
about economic causes and attempt to induce a philosophy of earthquakes,
our bright young democracy lies bleeding under the ruins. The urgent
necessity is a little first aid, a little cessation of the killing. I
don't know how many young men in different parts of the world have been
deliberately and scientifically murdered during the writing of this
protest. England alone, who has been criticised for her delay in
exposing her youth to the slaughter, is having about half a million of
her best citizens stabbed or pierced or crushed or mutilated or poisoned
or torn to pieces in one year[64] of modern warfare. And life is not the
only instrument of vital progress that is being thrown away. Britannia
has beaten her trident into a shovel, and with it is shovelling gold;
and not only gold, but youth and love and happiness into the deep sea.
The belligerent nations are frantically engaged in destroying two
thousand years of education and all the accumulated capital of humanity.
Only the enemies of civilisation, the sellers of arms and the sowers of
hatred, are growing rich on its ruins. It is impossible to deny that the
longer the war continues the greater will be the subsequent sufferings,
spiritual and material, of every nation engaged. It is impossible to
maintain that any nation or class or individual will be any better in
any respect for the Great War, with the single exception of that
parasitic class who, as a class, and therefore perhaps not consciously,
are chiefly responsible for its inception. We must have Peace first and
congresses afterwards. The survivors of civilisation cannot discuss a
lasting settlement while they are still under fire.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 64: The total British casualties from the beginning of the war
till July 18, 1915, were given as 321,889, of whom 61,384 were killed.]


Sec. 2

German Responsibility for the War

Nor is it necessary to continue the slaughter while we argue about which
belligerent must bear the chief responsibility for the outbreak. The
dialectical exercises of the German Chancellor and Mr. Asquith are so
futile that they remind us only of two naughty children who drag out
their squabble with stubborn outcries of "He began it." The first
consideration is to stop fighting. Such academic discussions are
necessarily endless, for the simple reason that every nation has its
faults, to which criminal motives can always be attached: every nation
has its fools, whom its enemies can describe as typical representatives.
The question of responsibility for the Great War must be left to the
historians of the future. I am quite confident (though even Viscount
Grey or Professor Gilbert Murray cannot prove) that they will hold
Germany responsible: but I am equally confident that the blame they
throw on the nation responsible for the war will be less pronounced than
the praise they will reserve for the nation which first has the courage
to speak of peace. My belief in Germany's responsibility is based
largely on German apologetics and strengthened by the evidence of
commercial conditions in Germany before the outbreak. Professor
Millioud, for instance, has shown that "German industry was built up on
a top-heavy system of credit, unable to keep solvent without expansion,
and unable to expand sufficiently without war."[65] Or if a good
working test of German responsibility were needed it would be sufficient
to point out that no nation innocent of aggressive intentions would have
drafted such an ultimatum as that which Austria, with German connivance,
sent to Serbia; and that no nation anxious for war would have drafted
such a conciliatory reply as that which Serbia returned to Austria by
Russia's instructions. It is in fact clear that as long ago as 1913
Austria had determined to crush Serbia, and that in 1913 that
determination was only postponed; and postponed not, as we thought at
the time, by the tact of Lord Grey at the Conference of London, but only
by Italy's refusal to join in the adventure, as we now know from the
revelations of San Giuliano and Salandra. Similarly, knowing as we do
that England is no exception to the rule that no imperial nation can be
wholly compact of righteousness, we might hesitate to accept _The
Times'_ version of British innocence, and we might hesitate to accept
Lord Bryce's report on the German atrocities in Belgium, knowing as we
do that it is based almost entirely on the hearsay evidence of refugees
who would be anxious to distinguish themselves as witnesses from the
general ruck of destitution; but it happens that the general charges of
German aggressiveness and German brutality are fully corroborated by
German literature.[66] Unfortunately these distinctions between brutal
and chevaleresque methods of warfare remain only questions of method;
they concern manners rather than morals, and are as irrelevant to our
hopes for the abolition of war as the questions of diplomatic method
already mentioned.[67] Equally irrelevant, in any discussion of the
possibility of substituting "compulsory arbitration" for war, is the
attempt to distinguish between aggressive and defensive war, or to
throw all the blame of aggression on either of the two belligerents; for
the simple reason that each belligerent will perhaps never believe and
will quite certainly never admit that his own intentions were anything
but defensive or altruistic.[68] The _locus classicus_ for such
protestations of innocence occurs in the Italian Green Book, where
Austrian diplomats may be found declaring, _with every appearance of
sincerity_, that the invasion of Serbia was a purely defensive measure.
And in a sense, in such a well-armed continent, every aggression is
indeed a fore-arming against the future. It might also be suggested that
the crime of aggression is an offence not against an individual but
against the peace of the community: and until the European community is
constituted the guilt of such a crime cannot be brought home to either
of the belligerents.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 65: _The Ruling Caste and Frenzied Trade in Germany_, by
Maurice Millioud, Professor of Sociology in the University of Lausanne.
(1915.) Reviewed in the _Manchester Guardian_ by R. C. K. E.]

[Footnote 66: All that we need know, for instance, of German military
conduct in Belgium is contained in the following communication made to
the _Koelnische Zeitung_ by Captain Walter Brum, adjutant to the
Governor-General of Belgium, who may be presumed to know the inner
history of these appalling transactions:--

"The principle according to which the whole community must be punished
for the fault of a single individual is justified by the theory of
_terrorisation_. The innocent must suffer with the guilty; if the latter
are unknown the innocent must even be punished in their place, and note
that the punishment is applied not _because_ a misdeed has been
committed, but _in order that_ no more shall be committed. To burn a
neighbourhood, shoot hostages, decimate a population which has taken up
arms against the army--all this is far less a reprisal than the sounding
of a _note of warning_ for the territory not yet occupied. Do not doubt
it; it was as a note of warning that Baltin, Herve, Louvain, and Dinant
were burned. The burnings and bloodshed at the opening of the war showed
the great cities of Belgium how perilous it was for them ..." etc.]

[Footnote 67: Chapter I, Sec.Sec. 9-11.]

[Footnote 68: See below, note on p. 113; and compare Brailsford, _The
War of Steel and Gold_, p. 22, on "preparations which are always
supposed to be defensive," and p. 264, on the methods used to support
the plea that large navies are purely "defensive."]


Sec. 3

The Value of German Culture

The question whether Germany is actually attempting or would be
justified in attempting to impose her culture on the rest of Europe; or
whether England has good reasons for the limitation or suppression of
German culture, is another side-issue. German culture (in Matthew
Arnold's correct use of the word, meaning, that is, the average of
intellectual and social civilisation), has not on a general inspection
much to be proud of. The modern literature of Germany is largely a
transcription of Russian, French and English authors, and it is
significant that among foreign authors the widest success is reserved
for purveyors of _le faux bon_, writers whose work is distinguished by
its spirited failure quite to attain the first-class.[69] The most
promising of modern authors writing in the German language, Schnitzler,
is an Austrian Jew. Hauptmann, the most distinguished and original of
German dramatists, has for thirty years been writing plays which would
pass for imitations of Mr. John Galsworthy's failures. Sudermann's style
reminds one of a snail crawling over the Indian lilies which he
describes.... Germany, it is true, has reason to be proud of her
theatres, but that is a matter of State enterprise, rather than an
indication of national culture. The German State has been efficient
enough to perceive that good theatres are a fundamental necessity of
national education, and that good theatres, owing to the excessive rents
they have to pay, can never be kept going without a State subsidy. But
these admirable theatres can hardly be called the vehicles of a high
native culture. Their famous Reinhardts are more efficient only because
more acquisitive than our own Jewish impresarios. The ideas they have
acquired are chiefly Russian or English: and they have profited by the
ideas of Granville Barker and Gordon Craig in order to produce the plays
of Shakespeare and Shaw--(just as industrial Germany profited by the
ideas of Bessemer[70] and Perkins). Germany's claim to artistic
vitality, to genuinely original culture, can be supported only by a
certain distinct excellence in sculpture and caricature, two arts which
often seem to go hand in hand, perhaps because both are based on a
precise simplification of form. But for the activity of a small band of
sculptors and caricaturists centred for the most part in Munich,[71] we
might be content to regard Germany not as a fount of culture but rather
as one of the world's workshops, a well-organised _ergastulum_ for
dealing with the drudgery of modern civilisation, for manipulating
secondary products and extracting derivatives, a large factory for the
production of dictionaries, drugs and electrical machinery.[72]

The extraordinary efficiency of Germany, _as a workshop_, is not due to
any intellectual pre-eminence of the nation as a whole. It is most
clearly and emphatically due to the fact that the German autocracy,
whatever its political iniquity, has had the intelligence and the
national solidarity to choose its business men from among the brains of
the community. In Germany any man of conspicuous intellectual capacity
may be picked out, roughly speaking, and assigned to the direction of a
particular industry. In England we achieve inefficiency by the contrary
process, and are only willing to regard a man as capable and revere him
as an "expert" if he happens to have been occupied exclusively for a
certain number of years in the narrow routine of a particular subject.
This pernicious fallacy of the "Expert" is actually preached in England
as a means to the very Efficiency which in fact it almost invariably
excludes. It is commonly assumed that no man can write a good play
unless he has been a bad actor, or that a retired admiral, quite
incapable of grasping any general idea that was not popular in the Navy
twenty years ago or in the smoking-room of his club, would be better
able to direct the affairs of the Navy than Mr. Winston Churchill or Mr.
Balfour.[73] There is a similar outcry for a government of "Business
Men," although anyone who happens to have heard a couple of average
business men discuss a problem of their own business in one of their own
offices will hardly be able to deny that a capable poet and a capable
painter would have settled the question in a quarter of the time.
Instead of superstitiously believing that only "Business Men" can be
efficient, Germany picks out her business men (and her bureaucrats) for
their general efficiency. She has attained efficiency by abandoning the
fallacy of the Expert in favour of the maxim of Confucius--"the Higher
type of man is not like a vessel which is designed for some special
use."[74]

But from the fact that German industry and German theatres are better
managed than our own it does not follow that there is any natural or
national antagonism between England and Germany. The real hatred of
Germany if it exists in England at all should be found among what it is
becoming the fashion to call "the intelligentsia." Such a purely
intellectual hatred of the sentimental melodrama of _Faust_ and of the
semitic luxuriance of Wagner and Reinhardt is not likely to become a
democratic motive in England. Here brains are always unpopular, and Park
Lane will never be stormed by the mob until it is inhabited by the
Bernard Shaws, the Lowes Dickinsons and the Bertrand Russells, instead
of by German financiers.

There is no national hatred between England and Germany. The two peoples
are natural friends. Even the men in the trenches (or perhaps I should
say particularly the men in the trenches), fraternise with their
opponents whenever they get the chance.[75] Even now a press campaign of
a few months would suffice to make Germany popular in England; and if
that were ever to happen, which is not improbable, only the
"intellectuals," who are most strongly opposed to this war, would still
find much to dislike, but not to fight about, in the national culture
produced by the German character.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 69: E.g. Oscar Wilde and Artzibashev.]

[Footnote 70: "The whole industrial expansion of Germany dates from the
introduction of the Bessemer process in 1879, by which its supplies of
iron became possible to work at a profit."--_Bertrand Russell_.]

[Footnote 71: It is unnecessary to refer at length to the world-famous
caricaturists of _Simplicissimus_, although it may be noted that the
best of them, Gulbrannson, is a Norwegian, while his chief rival, Heine,
is a Jew. Munich sculptors whose names might be mentioned are
Hildebrand, Taschner, Hahn, and Wrba.]

[Footnote 72: Even such scientific achievements as those of Ehrlich and
Ostwald should be regarded as results of regulated industry and diligent
experiment.]

[Footnote 73: Another instance of the fallacy is the quite unjustified
prejudice in the Army in favour of "Regular" officers.]

[Footnote 74: The foundation of German business efficiency not on the
practical science of the specialist but on theoretic and general mental
exercise is further illustrated by the great and increasing prevalence
of Latin and Greek in German education ... while again our own "Business
Experts" are reversing the process. The passages that follow are quoted
from a letter of Dr. Rice Holmes in _The Times_ of August 11, 1916.

"In German schools not only are classics taught more systematically and
more thoroughly than in all but a few of our own, but they are learned
by a greater proportion of the population; and, moreover, the hours
devoted to natural science in those schools in which it is taught are
fewer than in our public schools.... Since 1903 the number of German
boys receiving a classical education has steadily increased. In 1904
there were 196,175 pupils in schools (_Gymnasien_ and _Realgymnasien_)
where Latin is compulsory, of whom 153,680 belonged to the classical
schools (_Gymnasien_), and therefore learned Greek as well (W. Lexis,
_Unterrichtswesen im Deutschen Reich_, ii. 218); in 1911, as Mr. R. W.
Livingstone has shown (_The Times Educational Supplement_, April 4, p.
49, col. 2), the corresponding figures were 240,000 and 170,000; and in
1908, 'out of a total of 31,622 students entering 18 out of 21 German
universities (Munich, Erlangen, and Wurzburg not reporting), ... only
7-1/2 per cent entered without Latin or Greek' (Professor Francis W.
Kelsey, _Latin and Greek in American Education_, 1911, p. 43). "Moege das
Studium der griechischen und roemischen Literatur immerfort die Basis der
hoeheren Bildung bleiben." So wrote the greatest of the Germans; and the
countrymen of Goethe, whose genius was scientific as well as poetical,
have not forgotten his words. On the other hand, in the modern schools
(_Realgymnasien_ and _Oberrealschulen_) only a small fraction of the
time-table--from two hours a week (out of twenty-five) to six (out of
thirty-one)--is devoted to natural science. To anyone who has read
Matthew Arnold's _Higher Schools and Universities in Germany_, or Dr. M.
E. Sadler's _The Realschulen in Berlin_, or who is acquainted with the
opinions expressed by Helmholtz, A. W. Hofmann, Bauer, and other
'eminent scientific professors,' it will not appear paradoxical that the
object of thus restricting the hours devoted to the teaching of natural
science in schools is to promote the scientific efficiency of the German
nation. It was with this object that by the regulations published in
1901 the time devoted to Latin in the _Realgymnasien_ was increased. And
those who do not learn natural science learn what for the nation is
equally important--the value of scientific method."]

[Footnote 75: The Daily News, October 20, 1915:--

"A pathetic story is told in the _Vorwaerts_ by Herr Adolf Koester (who
acts as war correspondent for the German Socialist Press) in connection
with the recent fighting at Hooge. A German soldier told him of a young
Scotsman whom he had killed with a hand-grenade in whose pocket he had
found a little pocket-book:--

"'We looked through the booklet. It contained postcards from the front,
from home, from a sister and from a sweetheart--photographs from the
battlefields of brave soldiers and from home. There was also a small
amateur photograph, rather badly made, of a young girl sitting at a
typewriter. She had blonde hair and on the back of the photo she had
written: "Look at the waves of my hair and note also how very diligent I
am" (English in the original). One of us asked the soldier to give him
this photograph. But he replied: "You can take the whole book, photos,
postcards, etc. But this picture I will keep in memory of my friend." By
"his friend" he meant the Scotsman whom he had killed by his
hand-grenade.'"]


Sec. 4

The Manufacture of Hatred

But if there is no natural hatred between the two belligerent
protagonists, there is a feverish production of the artificial variety.
Indeed this diligent manufacture of hatred is probably the most
demoralising result of warfare, particularly disastrous in its ethical
effect on the individual. It proceeds by the ordinary methods of deceit,
suppression of the true and suggestion of the untrue, and by means of
the newspapers this process of moral degeneration is sometimes actively
directed, sometimes only permitted or encouraged by the Governments
concerned. The London press is always ready to swallow the pathetic
fabrications of unscrupulous refugees, and publishes with joy any
Rotterdam rumour about German bestiality; but refuses to print any
report however authentic which ventures to suggest that the Germans are
as human as ourselves. There was, for instance, a Canadian woman, Dr.
Scarlett-Synge, who under the aegis of her medical diploma, returned
from Serbia through Germany, and discovered that some of the German
internment camps are not as bad as they are commonly believed to be.
Whatever her qualifications and opportunities for forming a correct
opinion, and they happen to have been particularly good, there is no
doubt that this woman's report was of the highest interest. Yet not a
single daily paper in England would consider its publication, on the
ground presumably that it might reduce the national inflammation and
thereby "prejudice recruiting." As if true patriotism, sane and lovely,
had anything to do with the pathological condition of hatred.
"Recruiting be damned," says the patriotic philosopher, "_odium nunquam
potest esse bonum_."[76] The method of distortion is also abundantly
used by journalists of both parties. German hatred of England has often
been stoked up by isolated mistranslations of sentences from _The
Times_, and English and French journalists have not been slow in
following the German example. It is said that after the fall of Antwerp
the _Koelnische Zeitung_ announced that "as soon as the fall of Antwerp
was known the church bells in Germany were rung," a harmless message
which was successively distorted by the _Matin_, the _Daily Mail_, and
the _Corriere della Sera_, until it finally reappeared in the _Matin_ in
the following form: "According to the information of the _Corriere della
Sera_ from London and Cologne it is confirmed that the barbaric
conquerors of Antwerp punished the unfortunate Belgian priests for their
heroic refusal to ring the church bells by hanging them as living
clappers to the bells with their heads downwards."[77]

The Manufacture of Hatred is unfortunately become a part of the
Nationalist Movement in nearly all modern European States. The spurious
Nationalism which is the result not of race but of education, depends
for its existence almost entirely on so-called ethnological propaganda
and continues to thrive by the cultivation of two propositions, neither
of which is true: that all the members of one national group are
racially different from all the members of the neighbouring group; and
that this racial difference naturally and necessarily and properly
implies the mutual hatred of the two nations. They proclaim, in fact,
that certain nations are the "natural enemies " of certain others, by
hating which they are only fulfilling the national function of
self-realisation. By such arguments, which have no genuine ethnological
foundation, the false prophets of nationalism are filling Europe with
the racial prejudice of artificial Kelts, artificial Poles, and
artificial Teutons. Of course race hatred between Slav and Teuton is no
more "natural" than family hatred between Jones and Robinson; and even
if it were, even that is if the cultures of two neighbouring races were
mutually exclusive, it could still be argued--as it must in any case be
argued--that no nation is racially pure. The last "Pole" I met proudly
professed that the hatred of Russia was _in his blood_. Yet he was born
in Bessarabia, and it was therefore not surprising that his facial type
was distinctly Roumanian; he came, that is, if race means anything at
all, of a Graeco-Latin stock, and his hatred of Russia, which seemed to
be the beginning and the end of his programme of "Polish nationalism,"
was the result of a few years of neglected education. Half the
conflicting "Nationalisms" of Europe are programmes of artificial
hatred, the propagandists of which may actually be of the same blood as
their opponents; a single generation suffices for the manufacture of the
racial enthusiast, which is often completed by a modification of the
family name. Even Greeks and Bulgars are frequently of common descent.
When a Macedonian village changes hands the Greek Karagiozes has been
known to develop into the Bulgarian Karagiozoff; and a Mazarakis will
boast a racial incompatibility with his second cousin Madjarieff. The
same process for the manufacture of nationalism may be detected at the
other end of Europe: at Mons of glorious memory there was a Walloon with
the good old Walloon name of Le Grand, whose grandfather had been an
equally enthusiastic Fleming with the good old Flemish name of De
Groodt.

True nationalism may indeed be differentiated by the absence of this
artificial element of ethnological hatred. True nationalism is simply
the feeling for the small independent community, a movement for the
autonomy of the local group. No true manifestation of the nationalist
movement in Europe is ever opposed to other nationalisms; but all alike
are involved in a desperate political conflict with their common enemy
Imperialism.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 76: Spinoza, _Ethica_, IV, 45.]

[Footnote 77: _Labour Leader_, March 30, 1916, quoting an address by Mr.
Arthur Ponsonby, M.P.--I have not been able to verify these references,
so I give the story only as an example of the method of progressive
distortion, and not as one that actually occurred, though it may have
done so.]


Sec. 5

Imperialism the Enemy

Imperialism, on the other hand, is the feeling for large dominions and
is very often only an unreasoning lust for the possession of
territory:[78] surviving perhaps from the time when the land of the
community was regarded as the reserved hunting-ground of the tribal
chief, or at least as the private estate of the national monarch. But in
so far as this passionate desire for extending the superficial territory
under the central government is a reasoning desire, in so far that is as
attempts have been made to justify by retrospective theories the almost
instinctive achievements of painting the map red, it is fairly clear
(although the issues have been confused by altruistic and Kiplingesque
but not by any means unfounded views about the White Man's Burden) that
Imperialism is based on the insatiable claims of over-productive
commerce. Commerce at any rate is the _ex post facto_ excuse for the
foundation of the British Empire, and if it can no longer be pleaded as
a reason for the maintenance of the British Empire, it is simply because
the British Empire is no longer an empire, but for the most part a
federation of autonomous states.[79] But Imperialism has only been
scotched by the unconscious wisdom of English political development. It
still unhappily survives not only in the intermittent demand for the
acquisition of fresh colonial territory, but also, in its crudest form,
without even the shadow of an excuse commercial or altruistic, in the
continued subjection of Ireland to English rule. We must not be
surprised if the imperialistic elements of the State receive after the
war a new lease of life from the mutual encouragement of commerce and
militarism.

The commercial classes of course support Imperialism because, with an
obtuseness permitted only to our "business men," they believe that the
acquisition of more colonies still means the discovery of new
markets.[80] They have not yet realised that nowadays all markets are
practically open markets, and that no tariff can effectively exclude
goods for which there is any demand, for the simple reason that an
effective demand cheerfully pays an increased price. All nations in fact
stand to share fairly the commercial advantage of each other's colonial
markets: and it might even be shown by a little simple book-keeping that
the particular balance any nation gains from trading with a colony of
its own must be debited with the expense of governing that colony. In
short, the commercial excuse for Imperialism is actually obsolete. Yet
commerce continues to support Imperialism, and although the original
reason for this support is no longer valid, it is still, unconsciously
perhaps but very methodically, serving its own interests by this
support, in so far as Imperialism involves militarism (or "navalism")
and so leads to the probability of war. But even if the commercial
reasons which constitute the only possible excuse for Imperialism were
still valid, it would still remain equally valid and much more important
that Imperialism is bad in itself, the enemy of liberty and the begetter
of arrogance.

Imperialism is bad on general grounds because it implies a
centralisation of authority which violates the natural rights of
nationalities. A nationality, as has already been suggested, means not
necessarily a pure racial enclave, but simply a small local group, in
the formation of which similarity of "race," religion, and culture will
not be ignored but will naturally be considered as modifications of
primarily geographical boundaries. The right of nationalities to local
autonomy, to deal again only with the simplest general reason, is based
on the idea of democracy, the exercise of a political voice being
regarded as a natural and inalienable right of the free citizen.
Democracy means representative government, and representative government
simply does not work in a large and mixed community of more than twenty
millions.[81] Hence the right of nationalities to local autonomy is
fundamental, and is inconsistent with Imperialism as such.

Imperialism is bad because it is based on conquest, implies a "subject
race," and sooner or later will have to be maintained by war. It breeds
a conquering and commercial spirit, which is never satisfied unless it
is carrying some one else's burden (at a high freight). The imperialist
plutocracy will then find itself so much occupied with other people's
affairs that it will be neglecting domestic politics altogether: and
this neglect will be the more disastrous in so far as poverty and
servitude will have increased at the same rate as luxury. The citizens
of an Imperialist state will be unable to control their commercial
masters, and, as Rousseau said of the English, will soon find themselves
a nation of slaves[82]: and that not only because a policy of conquest
is incompatible with democracy; but also because the lust of conquest
and the arrogance of

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 78: H. N. Brailsford (_The War of Steel and Gold_, p. 125)
speaks of an "indifferent democracy." Unhappily our democracy is not
indifferent to Imperialism, for it is misled to believe that mere
expansion is somehow grand and good; the only geography it learns at
school is miscalled "patriotic" because it is designed to encourage this
belief.]

[Footnote 79: I.e. as a real "Empire," the British Empire was a failure,
as all Empires must be. It has been a success since it ceased to be an
Empire about a hundred years ago. Cf. Professor H. E. Egerton's
remark:--

"The British Colonial Empire of to-day is not the Empire which was the
outcome of seventeenth-century methods. So far as the colonists
themselves were concerned, English colonisation (in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries) was a complete success, but from the point of view
of the mother country it was a failure, and the rock on which it
foundered was the same rock which lost America to Spain and caused
Canada to acquiesce in separation from France."]

[Footnote 80: I am ashamed to say that when I wrote these chapters I had
not read Mr. H. N. Brailsford's _War of Steel and Gold_. But Mr.
Brailsford's brilliant examination of the connection between War and
Finance is quite consistent with my supplementary theory of War and
Trade. "Trade supplies no explanation of Imperialism," says Mr.
Brailsford (p. 75). It does, in so far as Traders support Imperialism
because they think it is good for Trade: while financiers, as Mr.
Brailsford shows, support Imperialism because they know it is good for
investments.]

[Footnote 81: "What is vital to any real Democracy in a densely-peopled,
economically-complicated modern State, is that the Government should not
be one. The very concentration of authority which is essential in war
is, in peace, fatally destructive not of freedom alone, but also of that
maximum individual development which is the very end and purpose for
which society exists."--Sidney Webb, _Towards Social Democracy?_,
1916.]

militarism acquire strength with each fresh licence until the community
as a whole is quite unable to control its own baser passions--a
condition which more than any other merits the name of servitude.[83]
Imperialism is a form of political corruption in which a nation is
consoled for its own slavery by the pride of enslaving its neighbours.
The attainment of permanent peace connotes the abandonment of
Imperialism.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 82: "Les Anglais veulent etre conquerants; donc ils ne
tarderont pas d'etre esclaves."--_Political Writings_, C. E. Vaughan, I,
373.]


Sec. 6

Possible Objects of War

If the nations are prepared to abandon the claims of Imperialism there
will be very little else left to fight about. An examination of the
documents connected with any war of the last century shows that the
object of a belligerent in prolonging the agony is usually expressed in
vague language that can be dissolved by a little analysis. Sometimes a
government will propose, in the interests of peace and good government,
to crush the enemy's aggressiveness by a purely defensive aggression, an
excuse for bloodshed which only the most fanatical pacifist could
confuse with Mr. Asquith's blunt watchword of "crushing German
militarism." The logical fallacy of such an excuse which is almost
invariably pleaded by powerful belligerents,[84] a fallacy of which no
one could wish to accuse Mr. Asquith's solid intellect, lies (quite
apart from any question of the priority of aggression) in the fact that
any attempt to crush by force the Will to Conquer inevitably breeds
more militarism. The tag about taking a lesson from the enemy, _fas est
et ab hoste doceri_, is only one half of the unhappy truth that the
fighter is fatally bound to acquire his enemy's worst characteristics.
The object undertaken apparently in the interests of democracy can only
be accomplished by the wholesale suppression of democratic rights, and
involves an organised manufacture of imperialistic emotion which ends by
delegating the authority of the State to a reactionary triumvirate of
bureaucracy, jingoism and vulgarity (or Tory, Landowner and Journalist).
The guarantees of democracy, the rights of free thought and free speech,
every sort of civil liberty and every defence against the servile state,
will all have to be suppressed in the interests of the nation at war. It
is the old story of the conversion of Thais by Paphnutius: the preacher
snatches lovely Thais from the burning, but himself is damned--"si
hideux qu'en passant la main sur son visage, il sentit sa laideur." A is
white and finds it necessary to whitewash B, who is black: after several
years of hopeless grey, A finds that he has indeed put some very
satisfactory daubs of whitewash all over B, but that his own coat has
been blackened in the course of the struggle. It is as if a gardener,
having heard of the cannibalistic habit of earwigs, proposed to
exterminate the earwig in his rose-garden by importing a special army of
five million earwigs collected at great expense from the surrounding
country.

Other belligerent governments will raise the plea of checking the spread
of a hostile and dangerous culture; a plausible because apparently
philosophical justification of war as the only means of extirpating a
heresy that might pervert the whole future of European civilisation.
Unfortunately such a moral effect, such a "conversion by shock," could
only be accomplished by a very sudden, complete and shattering victory;
and it is now beginning to be recognised that spectacular triumphs are
not to be expected in modern warfare. But even if it were as possible by
violence as it might conceivably be desirable to extirpate or even to
limit the propagation of a particular form of mental culture, the
achievement would certainly not be worth the cost to the unhappy
survivors and their posterity. It would indeed be a crime against
humanity to eliminate the better part of the younger generation, the
flower of human brains, in the monstrous pedantry of attempting to
correct an intellectual error. For the risks of modern warfare are not
ordinary. It is not sufficiently realised that in six months of
offensive tactics under modern conditions no man in the front line has
more than one chance in a million of escaping death or mutilation.

There may remain the plea that a prolonged campaign is necessary in
order by exhaustion to compel the enemy to evacuate some territory that
he may have wrongfully occupied. The inevitable answer to such a plea
would be that if a war had arrived at a stage in which there was a clear
possibility of coercing the enemy by a process of exhaustion, that
possibility, if it were well-founded, would certainly not have escaped
the intelligence of the enemy, who would consequently be prepared to
save his face by coming to terms. The evacuation of the occupied
territory, or whatever it is that was to be achieved by the coercive
exhaustion of another year or two of battle, might then be obtained by
negotiation at once, and at the cost of a certain amount of paper and
ink, instead of being forced on a revengeful and embittered opponent by
the expensive process of killing young men, a process which has the
disadvantage of working both ways.

The conclusion of these general considerations seems to be that all the
arguments that are likely to be put forward in the course of a war in
order to excuse and ensure its continuation, are only excuses to gain
time, put forward in hope that the chances of a further campaign may
enable the government concerned to retrieve some apparent advantage out
of the disastrous muddle through which they drifted into the first
declaration of war. Having drawn the sword in a moment of embarrassment,
they have now jolly well got to pretend that it was the right thing to
do, and are not going to sheathe it till they see a chance of proving
that they are glad they drew it. In short, there comes a point in all
modern wars in which the belligerents are fighting for nothing at all,
except for a more or less advantageous position from which to discuss a
way to stop fighting.[85]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 83: Spinoza, _Ethica_, IV, _praefat. ad init._ Humanam
impotentiam in moderandis et coercendis affectibus servitutem voco.]

[Footnote 84: See above, Sec. 2, on "defensive" war, and compare a passage
from Mr. C. Grant Robertson's letter in _The Times_ of August 15,
1916:--

"Bismarck repeatedly and explicitly in the Reichstag justified the wars
of 1864, 1866, and 1870 as 'defensive'--i.e. as not 'willed' by Prussia.
On the contrary, they were wars 'forced' on a peace-loving State denied
its 'rights' by Denmark, Austria, and France. The argument, briefly, on
Bismarckian principles is this. Prussia's policy is an
'_Interessenpolitik_'--a policy of 'interests.' An 'interest' confers a
'right.' The satisfaction of 'national interest' is therefore the
achievement of 'national rights.' If these 'rights' can be achieved by a
compromise--i.e. by the complete surrender of Prussia's opponents to the
demands based on these 'rights'--that is a proof of her peace-loving
nature. But if her opponents refuse, then the war by which the 'rights'
are secured is a war 'forced' on Prussia. She has not 'willed' it. It is
a 'defensive' war to prevent the robbery of her 'rights' by others;
Bismarck, not without difficulty, converted his Sovereign to this
argument. In each case--1864, 1866, 1870--William I was ultimately
convinced that Denmark, Austria, and France were resisting the 'rights'
of Prussia, and that war to secure them was 'defensive,' 'forced' on the
King, and just. The successful issues confirmed William's conscience and
proved that Bismarckian principles had the Divine sanction."]

[Footnote 85: This attitude is well illustrated by the history of the
Crimean War. In January, 1855, "peace seemed impossible until some of
the disgrace was wiped away, and the pacificists, Cobden and Bright,
were burned in effigy.... The prolongation of the war called out no
protest from the public." Yet "the popular war produced an unpopular
peace." When after another year of fighting our French allies finally
insisted on peace, "'there was no indication,' said a Frenchman, 'as to
which was the victor and which the vanquished.' Reviews and
illuminations could not obscure the truth; Britain had sacrificed lives
and treasure and obtained little in return."--Alice Green's Epilogue to
J. R. Green's _Short History of the English People_.]


Sec. 7

Physical Force in a Moral World

The explanation of all this seems to lie in the simple fact that it is
for ever impossible to solve questions of moral or political principle
by the expenditure of physical force. Anyone at all conversant with
philosophical thought, if I may adopt a simile used by Mr. H. G. Wells,
"would as soon think of trying to kill the square root of 2 with a rook
rifle." Physical violence can only solve purely physical problems. But
as man no longer exists, if he ever did exist, in the completely
unsocial "state of nature,"[86] the relations of one individual with
another are no longer purely physical: their position as members of one
society has given them a moral relation, questions affecting which can
only be settled by reference to the judgment of the society as a whole.
Within the limits of the State this fact is already clearly recognised
by the common voice of public opinion. If Smith quarrels with his
neighbour Robinson, because Smith's old English sheep-dog is suspected
of having scratched up Robinson's lawn, and Smith says the poor dog
would never do such a thing, and anyhow Robinson had no business to
leave his back gate open, while Robinson declares that that brute is
becoming a damned nuisance, and so provokes Smith to express a hope that
now perhaps that grass of Robinson's won't want so much godless mowing
on Sunday morning: if two neighbours, in short, have a difference of
opinion they both know perfectly well that the rights of the argument
can never be decided by a free fight in the middle of the road, even if
one of them happens to be a heavy-weight champion. Moreover, if they do
come to blows it is perfectly certain that the opinion of the whole road
will be against them, and that the Law, to which they might have
appealed in the first instance, will intervene as the embodiment of that
opinion. The street fight is clearly recognised as not only futile but
immoral; it not only settles no questions of principle but it
constitutes a breach of the moral relation between two members of one
community; it is become merely a rather sordid exhibition of irrelevant
physical facts. The average citizen of England or Germany would never
think of encouraging a fight between two sides of a street: why does he
not recognise with equal directness the futility and immorality of a
fight between two sides of a continent?[87] It is only because public
opinion has not yet effectively realised that the moral sphere includes
not only the citizens of one city and the cities of one nation, but the
nations of a continent and the continents of the world. But it is a fact
that the moral sphere does include the whole of humanity, who are
colleagues in the task of civilisation, inspired by the
twentieth-century corollary of gloomy nineteenth-century religious
agnosticism, the cheerful corollary that it is Man's duty rather than
God's to improve the habitable earth. The truth of this fact is already
recognised by the better thought of all the nations concerned, and there
is no reason why it should be withheld any longer from the people who
suffer most by its suppression. As soon as public opinion is allowed to
grasp this truth--and it is only too willing to clutch at any
generalisation that is emotionally encouraged by its governors--there
need be no difficulty at all in embodying that opinion in some form of
international government: for, as Rousseau might have said, where
there's a General Will, there's a way. As a matter of fact the way has
already been admirably mapped by several parties of surveyors.[88]

On the constitution of an International Authority, even on the general
aspiration of Europe towards some form of supernational judicature, war
will cease to have any more attraction or justification than the street
brawl. For war is actually in the community of nations what the street
fight is between individual citizens. War is futile, because it can
settle no questions of principle; it is immoral, because it is an
offence against the membership of a moral community. There is abundant
evidence in Blue Books and in the overt acts of Germany that war
releases and encourages the elementary brutality of the individual which
is normally inhibited by the consciousness of social relations. I have
tried to show in a former chapter that war serves the lowest interests
of a parasitic commercial class at the expense of the better part of the
community. War fosters at the same time the basest elements in the
individual, and the basest individuals in the community. War is a crime
against the peace of the people.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 86: _Supra_, I, Sec. 5.]

[Footnote 87: Mr. Gilbert Cannan has noted somewhere that "a 'straight'
fight between Great Britain and Germany will be like a fight between two
drunken women in a slum."]

[Footnote 88: See, for example, the quite definite and complete report
on _International Government_, published by the Fabian Society (1916):
and compare Mr. J. A. Hobson's book _Towards International Government_,
and Mr. H. G. Wells' _The World Set Free_.]


Sec. 8

Imperialism and Capitalism through War and Trade the Enemies: Socialism
to the Rescue

It is the most remarkable fact in political bibliography that all the
Utopias worth mentioning have been written by Socialists. The fact is
not surprising to anyone who has considered that the Socialists are the
only political party in the State who ever attempt to look more than a
dozen years ahead. The ordinary politician steers the ship by keeping a
look-out for rocks and squalls, and does not trouble to make for any
distant landmark. Only the Socialist looks ahead to a harbour attainable
perhaps in a hundred years, from which a happier voyage may be begun.
Only the Socialist seems to realise that in the world conceived, as
modern thought must conceive it, as a continuous process, Government
rather than Trade, Science and Art rather than Industry are the chief
activities of the citizen. Government is nothing less than the
organisation of the State to take its place among the other States of
the world. It includes of course education, being itself a form of
education: for the State must be educated to fulfil its duty to other
States, just as the citizen must be (and more or less is) educated in
duty towards his neighbour. The first task of education is naturally to
eliminate violence, to inhibit, by inducing in the young citizen the
recognition of mutual rights, those acts of ferocity by which primitive
man instinctively expresses his solipsistic passions.

But where, it may well be asked, is the authority which is to begin the
neglected education of the nations of Europe? Where is what Mr. Boon (or
Mr. Bliss) would call "the Mind of the Race"? At present the only body
of doctrine with any conception of the nature of government for the
collective benefit of humanity is International Socialism. It is the
International Socialists who must lead the attack on War, if only
because the only instigators of war themselves form an international
body in so far as the only occasions for war are contrived by the
Imperialists and Capitalists who are to be found in every nation. To
Socialism belongs the duty of educating Europe against Imperialism, as
it has begun to educate the nation against Capitalism; for Imperialism
is only an allotropic form of Capitalism, manifesting itself in the
exploitation of fellow-nations instead of in the exploitation of
fellow-citizens. The first step in that education must be the fight not
only against "private" or profiteering Trade, but against "private" or
profiteering War: and "private war" is every war that is not authorised
by an International Authority and waged by an International army.

I seem to have heard it said before that there is only one way to break
the chains that bind us: and that Amalgamation is the mother of Liberty.
The need for the education of Europe is a call to the Trade Unionists
and Fabians and Collectivists and Guildsmen of every Nation:

       SOCIALISTS OF THE WORLD
                UNITE.


       *       *       *       *       *


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III




SOME TYPICAL WAR PROFITS


I. _The Manchester Guardian_, January 3, 1916:

BRITISH INDUSTRY IN WAR

The first full calendar year of war has been a period of unparalleled
industrial activity and, generally speaking, prosperity in this country.
Heavy losses and bad times have been encountered in a few important
industries, but these are balanced by unprecedented profits made by a
large variety of industries, whether directly or indirectly affected by
the war. One frequently finds that the neutral visitor carries away with
him an impression of industrial England as one great living arsenal.
That is not surprising, as since July last the Munitions Ministry has
erected (or improvised) and started a large number (it is not
permissible to say how many) of State munitions works, and it has also
mobilised the whole engineering resources of the nation to such an
extent that in the first week of December no fewer than 2026
manufacturing establishments had been declared "controlled firms."

But it would be a mistake to suppose that, while war manufactures
prospered, all other industry languished and decayed. To prove the
contrary and show that only here and there were there heavy losses, we
may quote some figures compiled by the _Economist_, which show that 720
industrial concerns publishing their reports during the first nine
months of 1915, and having a capital of L531,678,701, made profits
amounting to L52,881,300, or under 2-1/4 millions less than in the
previous year (which in the case of almost all the reports was a year
before the war).

Dissecting these figures, we find that not only iron, coal, steel, and
shipping companies report enormous profits, but that increased earnings
were shown by breweries, gas, rubber, oil, and trust companies, and
others. The large exceptions which depressed the total profits were
textile companies (other than those engaged on war contracts), catering,
and cement companies. Shipping leads the van of prosperity owing to
phenomenal freight rates, while iron and steel and shipbuilding, as
direct and established purveyors of armaments, are close behind. As
showing the industrial tendency of the year, one may quote the remarks
of a trust company chairman at a recent meeting. Of 150 home investments
possessed by his company, he remarked that a hundred had since the war
yielded the same as in the year before war, while thirty had paid less
and twenty more.

Into the circle of munition producers have been drawn cycle and motor,
machinery, electrical, and many other branches of manufacture. Of other
industries driven to fever heat by the war may be mentioned woollen and
leather factories. Secondary effects of the war also produced a boom in
several unexpected quarters. For instance, the high wages earned by war
workers, and too generously spent in a vast number of cases, led to a
strong demand for cheap furniture, pianos and many types of household
goods which in normal times are usually out of reach of the purse of
most wage-earners. But one trouble has beset all industries in common--a
shortage of labour, which cannot but grow with every increase to the
numbers of men drafted from the ranks of productive industry into the
army or the munitions works. From all quarters comes the tale of orders,
both from home and from abroad, that cannot be accepted. In the case of
foreign orders that have to be refused, the labour shortage has what one
fears may be lasting consequences. For custom once diverted to America
or elsewhere is not easily regained.


2. _The Manchester Guardian_, March 3, 1916:

MORE GREAT PROFITS

HOLT LINE'S ENORMOUS SURPLUS

The China Mutual Steam Navigation Company (Holt Line) has had a greater
year than ever. It has been supposed that regular liners were getting
little benefit from the boom in freights, but a profit of L591,005, as
against about L294,000 in 1914 and L386,418 in 1913, can only be
explained by a very large participation in special war-time gains. The
dividend and bonus on the ordinary shares make 106 per cent for the
fourth year in succession, and a still larger sum is being kept in hand,
L200,000 being put to the reserve, as against L50,000 for 1914 and
L100,000 for each of two years before that, and the balance forward is
raised from L81,014 to L201,367. Most of the Company's capital, however,
only bears 6 per cent interest. The ordinary shares (which we believe
are held privately) only amount to a little over L83,000.


3. _Pall Mall Gazette_, September 24, 1915:

WAR PROFITS

The other taxes are accepted by the public and traders alike as
inevitable, but special interest is being taken in the excess war
profits tax. That Mr. McKenna is likely to find his estimate of
L30,000,000 largely exceeded is admitted. The _Daily Chronicle_
publishes a table in which the City Editor compares the last profits
announced by some of our greatest undertakings, covering a
considerable portion of the war period in most and some portion of it in
all cases, with the average of the previous three years. It will be seen
that in every instance the war has brought greatly increased prosperity.

                                      Last     Average
                                      Profit.  Previous  Increase.
                                               3 years.
                                         L         L         L

  ARMSTRONG WHITWORTH                 802,000   624,000   178,000
  (Engineering, Shipb., etc.)

  WM. BEARDMORE                       219,000   185,000    34,000
  (Engineering, Shipb., etc.)

  JOHN BROWN                          586,000   347,000   239,000
  (Engineers, Shipbuilders, etc.)

  BEYER PEACOCK                        83,000    35,000    48,000
  (Locomotive Builders)

  BRUNNER MOND                        824,000   770,000    54,000
  (Alkali Manufacturers)

  CAMMELL, LAIRD                      238,000   147,000    91,000
  (Iron, Steel, and Shipb.)

  HAWTHORN LESLIE                     202,000   102,000   100,000
  (Sh'b. & Marine Engin'ring)

  KYNOCH'S                            153,000   114,000    39,000
  (Explosives)

  LAMBERT BROS.                       142,000    84,000    58,000
  (Coal Exporters, etc.)

  POWELL DUFFRYN                      422,000   279,000   143,000
  (Collieries)

  SAMUEL FOX                           66,000    39,000    27,000
  (Engineers)

  SPILLERS & BAKERS                   367,000   140,000   227,000
  (Millers)

  VICKERS, LTD.                     1,019,000   809,000   210,000
  (Eng. and Shipbuilding)

This table indicates that the Chancellor may expect to receive far more
than the sum he estimated from the war profits tax.


4. _The Manchester Guardian_, Feb. 28, 1916:

COAL PROFITS NEARLY DOUBLED

The tale of colliery war profits is continued by the report of North's
Navigation Collieries (Glamorganshire). The output for 1915 was actually
less by 87,810 tons (1,141,900 tons against 1,229,710), but the profit
was nearly doubled--L130,071 against L65,578. With the L10,496 brought
into the account the directors had their biggest total in recent years
available for distribution. The ordinary shareholders get 10 per cent
and a bonus of 2-1/2 per cent, which is the best payment since the 15
per cent paid for 1907. Advantage is taken of a prosperous year to place
L35,000 to the reserve fund, which has been rather overlooked recently,
only one allocation of L20,000 having been made in four years. It now
stands at L155,000, against L650,000 of share capital. For depreciation,
with regard to which item substantial provision is made each year,
L15,000 is written off. This leaves L10,567 to be carried forward. The
Company has the reputation of being well managed, and its coal
properties are regarded as being very valuable. The recently opened St.
John's pits are being developed satisfactorily, it appears, a further
increase in output being shown.

Despite a decrease in output of nearly 400,000 tons, the Powell Duffryn
Steam Coal Company is enabled to show a profit for 1915 of L438,799, as
compared with L422,204 for 1914 and L364,421 for 1913. The usual 20 per
cent is distributed on the ordinary shares, free of income tax, and last
year's allocation of L50,000 to the reserve fund is repeated. In
addition, the reserve for income tax benefits to the extent of L50,052,
and there remains L120,236 to carry forward. The decrease in output, it
should be noted, is due to the enlistment of the miners, and its
restoration to the normal and probable increase after the war should
balance the decline in profit that may be expected to attend the
decreased demand.


5. The Times, May 19, 1916:

SOAPMAKERS' "RECORD" PROFITS

Presiding yesterday at the annual meeting of Joseph Watson and Sons
(Limited), soapmakers, Leeds, Mr. Joseph Watson said that the company's
profits for the year amounted to L122,000, or L19,000 in excess of any
previous year's profits. Their turnover had largely increased because
they were now supplying soap to France, Belgium, Scandinavia, and a
small amount to Spain and Italy. It was not a question to-day of getting
orders; it was a question of refusing them. They had at the present time
three months' orders on the books.


6. _The New Witness_:

THE SCANDAL OF WAR PROFITS

It is a sinister and deplorable fact--one of the most ironical with
which the continuance of the War has yet confronted us--that there has
grown up in Great Britain a number of firms and businesses to whom a
successful prosecution of the campaign would mean ruin, and who have an
actual vested interest in the indecisive continuance of hostilities.
This is due entirely to the lack of grip and resolution which the
Government have displayed in dealing with the ugly phenomenon of War
Profits. We know, of course, what happens to those profits at present.
Half is taken by the State: half passes to the firms who are getting
"rich quick" out of its necessities. In theory, it is an anomalous
arrangement, indefensible in logic, and opposed to every canon alike of
justice and of taxation. In practice it works out in the way we have
indicated: that certain privileged firms and individuals are amassing
huge fortunes out of the gravest crisis through which the nation has
passed, and which will pinch us all before it is over.

Let us give some examples of the mammoth profits that some of these
concerns are making. There is first of all the famous old English firm
of Levinstein--Messrs. Levinstein of Manchester--to be considered. This
"all-British" concern has not done badly out of the terrible situation
through which we are slowly toiling. While mere vulgar English Tommies
have been dying in the trenches or have returned incapacitated to
England--to find that their country cannot afford them a
pension--Levinsteins have been pocketing several thousands of that
country's cash. Levinsteins' are dye-makers, and in 1914-15 they made a
profit of L80,000 _on a capital of_ L90,000: a profit large enough to
make the mouth of the deceased usurer Kirkwood dry with envy. But, while
our legislature passed laws to restrain the usurer in his exactions, the
"war profiteer" has no restriction placed on him. His workmen can, in
certain cases, be fined or sent to prison if they absent themselves from
work, and hundreds have been proceeded against under the Defence of the
Realm Act. But the profiteer himself is immune! It is childish to say
that the State can recover half of the profit he has wrung from the
country's necessity. What right has he to the other half? In the case of
Levinstein, this L80,000 profit enables the company to pay 14-1/2
years' preference dividend, to distribute a dividend of 30 per cent on
its ordinary shares, and to write off L21,000 for depreciation! It is
merely fatuous to pretend, or to endeavour to pretend, that the
appropriation of half these profits squares matters between the
community and the British firm in question.

As with Levinstein, so with other firms. Messrs. Cammell, Laird & Co.
averaged profits of L146,000 for the three years before the war. Since
last year those profits have risen to L237,000. Those profits, of
course, are subject to war profits taxation. But most manifestly that
taxation is utterly inadequate. So it is in the case of Messrs. W.
Beardmore, whose profits rose from L184,000 (three years' pre-war
average) to L219,000; of the British Westinghouse Co., which rose from
L56,000 to L151,000; and of Beyer Peacock's, which increased from
L57,000 to L109,000.

In all these cases the deduction of 50 per cent by the Government is
entirely inadequate and utterly misleading. It is at once an admission
that the firm in question has no right to amass huge profits out of the
welter and tragedy of the European War, and that the State is content to
stultify itself by surrendering the other half.

Many of these profits have been made by covering rises in raw material
far in excess of the actual increases. Many have been wrung from the
poor and the needy, who are now being enjoined by the Government to eat
less meat. Messrs. Spillers & Baker, of South Wales, increased their
profits from an average of L140,000 (three years' pre-war average) to
L367,000 in 1914-15. We do not blame them. The rise in price was beyond
their control. They could hardly help benefiting. But it is mere madness
for the Government to leave them in possession of these vast accretions
of wealth. Firms that paid 8 per cent before the war, now paying 22-1/2
per cent (such as Messrs. Richard Dickeson & Co., the Army contractors)
are able to pocket tens of thousands that ought to go to strengthen the
resources of the nation. Others, like the Mercantile Steamship Co.,
increase their dividend from 20 per cent to 35 per cent; and some are
able to pay dividends actually larger than the capital of the company
itself!

It is ludicrous for the Government to allow this condition of affairs to
continue. Their course is quite clear. They should limit profits to the
average of three years before the war, and add at the most 5 per cent.
Anything short of this is a betrayal of the national interests to
private firms.


7. _The New Statesman_, March 25, 1916:

An innocent person might think that when a manufacturing company is
faced with an enormous rise in the cost of the principal commodity it
consumes, its profits would be diminished. Some law must be in operation
which has escaped the attention of economists, for so far from this
being the case, what appears to happen is that the profits of
manufacturers rise in a greater degree than the price of the raw
material. Thus, so far from being hit by the enormous rise in the price
of flour, Peek, Frean & Co., the well-known biscuit manufacturers, made
a net profit of L107,478 last year, as compared with L99,578 in 1914,
and L98,607 in 1913. After paying the usual 5 per cent on the L300,000
of preference shares no less than 25 per cent is paid on the L230,000 of
ordinary share capital, which has been issued. This company raised its
money very cheaply from the public, which paid 102 per cent for its 4
per cent debenture stock and par for the 5 per cent preference shares.
The investing public does not benefit by the big dividend on the
ordinary shares. These were never offered to the public, but are
privately held.

Another shipping company, sister to the Court Line, mentioned in these
notes last week, has issued its report. This is the Cressington
Steamship Company, which owns two modern tramp steamers of slightly over
7,000 tons each. The company was very fortunate in that one of these
vessels was delivered in February, 1915, it having been contracted for
at pre-war prices. The profits for the year amounted to L50,015, as
compared with L6,861 in 1914 (when only one vessel was trading). The
dividend for the year is 15 per cent, L7,072 is allocated to
depreciation, L22,000 for special war profits and income-tax, whilst
about L3,000 is being carried forward. The financial position of the
company is such that if its ships were sold at L2 15s. per ton,
shareholders would receive the return of their capital in full. On
present prices, however, they would probably fetch over L15 per ton. The
shares are now quoted at 28s.

The Bengal Iron and Steel Company, whose report has also been issued
during the week, has had an interesting career; it works large iron ore
and coalmining areas in Bengal. At first the company did well, but then
it went in for an unfortunate steel venture and fell into arrears with
its preference dividend. This was overcome, and during the past few
years the company has done well, particularly from its coal business.
The report for the year ended September 30th, 1915, shows a working
profit of L144,913, as compared with L79,200 during the previous year.
This considerable improvement enables the company, after writing off
various old items, to place to a general reserve L20,000, and to declare
a dividend payable quarterly of 24 per cent on the L224,850 of ordinary
shares, which compares with 12 per cent a year ago. By way of a change,
the report states that the trading results would have been even better
had war conditions not prevailed.

  EMIL DAVIES.


8. _The New Statesman_, May 27, 1916:

Markets have displayed unwonted cheerfulness during the past week, and
all sorts of peace rumours are in circulation. It is more than likely,
however, that it is the firmness of the market which is responsible for
the rumours, and not _vice versa_. There is a steady stream of orders
from the Midlands and the North, where people are making money, and
these have the effect of putting up prices in several of the markets.
The Brazilian Funding Loan, which was recommended here on the 29th April
at 74, has been noticeably firm, and is now 77-1/4. It still appears to
be the cheapest Government Loan. Brazilian securities are attracting
more attention, and Brazil Traction Common, which a year ago was below
50, now stands at 64. There has been a large business in Castner Kellner
on the working agreement between that chemical company and Brunner, Mond
& Co., the shares having jumped four or five shillings to their present
price of 69s. 6d. Precisely a year ago they were recommended in these
notes at 66s. 10-1/2d. Shipping shares have been exceptionally firm;
Court Lines have risen another few shillings to 34s., the large business
in them being probably due to the fact that they are one of the few
shipping shares which can be obtained. Rubber shares are equally firm.
Nobel's Explosive Company has just issued its report for last year,
showing a profit of L529,738 _after_ providing for excess profits duty.
The dividend is 15 per cent, free of income-tax, or 5 per cent more than
last year. This increase in the dividend came as a surprise to the
market, and the price of the shares (which are a favourite investment in
Glasgow) jumped from 31s. to 38s. 3d.

The profits of the Oceanic Steam Navigation Company (the White Star
Line) for last year have attracted a good deal of attention. They were
stated as being L1,968,285, as compared with L887,548 in 1914 and
L1,121,268 in 1913, which was the Company's record year; but the figure
given for 1915 does not indicate the full profit, for it is arrived at
"after providing for excess profits taxation and contingent
liabilities." Replying to a question asked in the House of Commons by
Mr. W. C. Anderson, Captain Pretyman stated that the Company informed
him that the profit mentioned was before deduction of debenture interest
and depreciation. Captain Pretyman added that the sum divided as
dividend was L487,500, the same amount as in the year 1913 before the
war. Where people are protesting against large war profits it may, at
first sight, appear an adequate answer to point out that a Company is
not paying out more in dividends than it did in the year preceding the
war. As a statement of fact it is perfectly correct, but it has no
bearing upon the amount of profit that has been made, as the following
calculation will show. We now know that the 1915 profit shown in the
accounts is _after_ allowing for excess profits taxation, deferred
repairs, contingent liabilities, debenture interest and depreciation.
Since 1913 the Company has increased its debenture issue, and last year
had to pay in debenture interest L109,536, as compared with L65,211 in
1914. How much has been placed on one side for depreciation before
showing the profits can only be known to very few people, but the amount
the Company must have put on one side for excess profits taxation must
be at least half a million, and possibly a great deal more. The actual
profits for last year were therefore probably in the neighbourhood of
three millions, if not more. As indicated above, out of the L1,968,285
shown as profit, only L487,500 is paid out in dividends, the remainder
going to various reserves. The dividend works out at 65 per cent, but
all goes to the International Mercantile Marine Company, the
much-talked-of American shipping trust associated with the name of the
late J. Pierpont Morgan, which holds all the Ordinary Shares. The trust
was in a bankrupt condition prior to the war, but the present state of
affairs is radically altering its position. It must be annoying to the
American holders that a large slice of the profits of an American-owned
concern has to go to the British Government in the shape of war
taxation.


9. _The New Statesman_, June 24, 1916:

Another firm which has apparently benefited by the war is Ruston,
Proctor & Co., the well-known Lincoln manufacturers of agricultural
implements. A final dividend of 5-1/2 per cent is declared, plus a bonus
of 2 per cent, making 10 per cent for the year, which still allows the
Company to place L45,000 to reserve and to carry over L16,300. This
dividend is 3 per cent more than was paid last year, and is the highest
in the twenty-six years' history of the Company. Shipping shares remain
firm, and it is almost impossible to purchase any of the best shares. As
an illustration of the profits that are being made, the Nitrate
Producers' Steamship Company's accounts for the year ended April 30th
last show a gross profit of L404,022, as compared with L151,905 and
L135,986 in 1914 and 1913 respectively. The dividend is 25 per cent,
free of income tax, L100,000 is placed to reserve, L200,000 to a special
fund for excess profits tax, income tax, etc., L30,000 is added to the
insurance fund, and the carry forward is increased by some L7000. The
Company owned a fleet of ten steamers, which has, however, been reduced
to five by the sinking of one last September by an enemy submarine and
by the sale of four vessels. A new vessel is under construction, and
should be ready for delivery in August. The capital of the Company
consists of L200,000 in Ordinary Shares and L200,000 in 5 per cent
Cumulative Preference Shares.


10. _The New Witness_, June 15, 1916:

WAR PROFITS AND THE GOVERNMENT

It is essential that a determined effort should be made to rouse the
nation to a sense of the gross and scandalous injustice of the huge
profits that are at present being "earned" by certain firms piling up
wealth which is really amazing to contemplate. This is not mere empty
rhetoric; the figures support the description up to the hilt. Let us
take the case of five well-known companies, all engaged in "war work,"
and see to what account they have turned our soldiers' sacrifices:--

  FIRMS.                          PROFITS.

                          1913      1914      1915

                            L         L         L

  Cammell, Laird         171,700   235,500   301,500

  Curtis & Harvey         48,100    77,800   143,800

  Projectile              14,000    40,400   192,700

  Webley & Scott           9,500    16,400    61,300

  Thornycroft             13,000   107,640   267,333
                                            (6 mos.)

These figures can only be described as staggering--staggering, that is,
to anyone who cherishes a faint, lingering belief that "equality of
sacrifice" is to be a reality and not merely a bitter jest. Look for a
moment at the tale that these profits show! The Projectile Company has
multiplied its 1913 profit _thirteen times over_! Five or six years ago
its affairs were in so parlous a state that 19s. had to be written off
as lost from each 20s. share. Now, as Mr. Charles Duguid reminds us, "it
is paying a first dividend of 50 per cent and is returning to the
shareholders 3s. 6d. out of the 19s. they regarded as lost." The return
on the shares, according to the same financial authority, is 400 per
cent!!!

Look at the case of Thornycrofts. The profits for the first half of 1915
are twenty times as big as the profit for the whole of 1913--an
increase, as Mr. Duguid reminds us, _of 3800 per cent upon the year_, a
year that will spell blank financial ruin, impoverishment and
destitution to the families of thousands and tens of thousands of our
fighting men!

Thornycrofts are by no means peculiarly fortunate; Nobels, for instance,
have managed to earn quite a tidy little profit. Their net profit for
1915 comes out, we learn, at over half a million sterling (L529,800),
exclusive of L213,900 brought forward out of the large profit of the
preceding year, and this makes the total amount available for
distribution as much as L743,700. Even after paying a dividend of 10 per
cent and a bonus of 5 per cent, making 15 per cent, all free of income
tax, the Company has still L424,700 unallocated. In its most prosperous
year, 1913-1914, the net profit of the Nobel Dynamite Trust did not
amount to more than L381,300. We have, we need hardly say, no feeling
against Nobels or Thornycrofts or the Projectile Company. We only want
fair play in this matter. If this aggregation of profits is not stopped
the wealth of England will be in the hands of men who will regard the
triumphant conclusion of the War as spelling ruin to themselves and who
will see in victory only the cessation of profits that in normal times
they have never dared to contemplate.

The remedy for this is simple. The Government have refused to the
workman the right to extort unearned increment out of the country in its
dire necessity. The workman may not strike or cease work or even change
employment without the permission of the State. Assuredly the State has
the right to exact that obedience from him. But it is essential that it
should, and at no distant date, lay its restraining hands also upon the
employers who are earning these huge dividends, otherwise we shall have
enacted in England the tragedy that we have seen in Ireland. We shall
have a Government without moral authority, a Government which will,
therefore, be perpetually embarrassed in the conduct of war.


11. _The New Witness_, June 15, 1916:

WILLIAM CORY & SON

This famous coal company has taken every advantage of the demand for
coal, and can show a record profit. After providing for excess profits,
the balance of profit is L453,136, or L237,808 more than last year. As I
have again and again pointed out, I do not think the Government should
allow such huge profits to be made in war time. The coal trade is in a
few hands, and firms like Corys may be said to control it. The directors
content themselves with raising the dividend 5 per cent to 15 per cent;
but they place L100,000 to reserves, making them L500,000; L30,000 goes
to staff pensions and L25,000 to a war fund for employees. The carry
forward is raised L30,740 to L88,969. The steamers, tugs and barges are
now to be formed as separate companies; and the French business is also
to be transferred to a subsidiary. The balance-sheet shows creditors up
L204,971, presumably to meet the excess profits liability. Debit
balances have increased L509,840, and now include Treasury bills. War
loans have been increased L280,652, and the total assets are up
L451,183, at L4,541,601, and have earned 10 per cent. When all creditors
have been paid the quick assets amount to L930,654, and amply protect
the debentures, L900,000 which are an admirable security. I do not
suppose the present Ministry will do anything to control the profits
made out of the War by those who run the coal trade; and, therefore, we
may expect that 1916-17 will be as good a year as that just ended. But I
am not in agreement with a policy of _laissez-faire_ in war time unless
the policy is carried out stringently.


HOLBROOKS

Apparently the sauce trade has not been seriously injured by the War,
for Holbrooks have increased their trading profit L4,694 to L35,170; but
income tax is higher, and L5,000 has been used as a special reserve for
investments, so the available profit is only L23,046, as against L25,055
in the previous year. The dividend remains at 20 per cent, but L3,072
more is carried forward than was brought in, and the Board say that the
unsettled state of the world justifies them in doing this. I suspect
that they are building up a reserve for the purpose of attacking the
Yankee trade which for so many years has been in the hands of Lea &
Perrins. The business is well managed by the two managing directors, who
have been in the firm since it was promoted. The alterations in the
balance-sheet are not of any moment. Quick assets total L151,557 when
liabilities have been met, and the assets have earned 7-1/2 per cent on
their book value--not a very splendid profit for a sauce.


JAMES HINKS & SON

This famous firm of lamp makers should benefit largely by the complete
absence of German competition all over the world, and the eleven months
show the satisfactory profit of L13,595. The dividend for the previous
thirteen months was only 6 per cent, but the report now issued declares
10 per cent and a bonus of 1s. 6d., or 17-1/2 per cent--a record
distribution. Also L2,250 is placed to reserve and the carry forward is
raised from L3,603 to L6,399. As long as the War lasts we may expect
this remarkable prosperity to continue. The reserves are now in excess
of the capital. The company has earned 7-1/2 per cent on the book value
of its assets, which, in spite of goodwill and patents having been
written off, looks as though they were fully valued at L179,765. The
shares are a fair industrial speculation.


12. _The Manchester Guardian_, June 19, 1916:

While everybody knows that the immense disbursements on the War have led
to a greater demand for labour than it is possible to meet at present
and that employers have done well, in spite of their difficulties, it is
perhaps not generally known how greatly the profits of nearly all the
public companies have increased during the last year. They have had to
pay higher wages in many cases, though not in all, their materials have
been much more costly, and their foreign trade has been hampered by
restrictions, in furtherance of the policy of preventing the enemy from
getting goods which he requires and which it is in our power to control.
Many, however, have done a large business for Allied Governments as well
as our own, especially in army equipment, and the demand for coal has
been greater than our power of supplying it. All our production has
commanded high prices, and profit margins have in most cases been very
large. It is a way that chairmen of companies have to take big profits
as being in the natural order of things, and dwell mostly on the
difficulties which have prevented them from showing even better results.
If this has obscured the real state of affairs it is desirable that the
other side of the picture should be clearly presented, for it is
impossible to understand the economic side of the War without a thorough
comprehension of its industrial effects.

We give below a tabular statement of profits which have been declared
this year, with the figures for two preceding years added so as to show
their true significance. Some are gross and others net profits, but in
this we have simply followed the methods adopted by the directors in
their reports, that being in practice the only way of showing how the
comparison stands. In some cases the capital has been increased during
the three years, but the extent to which that has occurred does not
affect the tables if they are regarded comprehensively. Some did very
badly in the first few months of the war, and the profits they declared
in 1915 look very small in comparison with those in the first column of
the tables. In those cases the third column will act as a corrective,
for in the main it shows the companies' normal earnings. It will be
noticed that some of these were very small. Here and there the company
was in the development stage, but as a rule it may be taken that the
concern was not a very profitable one in peace times. Possibly it was
over-capitalised, or over-weighted with debentures, or its plant was out
of date, or it could not get sufficient business to make full use of its
productive capacity. We shall not attempt the invidious task of singling
out which come in these categories, but we call attention to the cases
in which small pre-war profits have been converted into large ones since
because they are really the most instructive of the whole series.

For very large increases upon profits which were already good the most
notable are the shipping companies. Our list is typical rather than
exhaustive. Some of the small concerns, with only one ship, or up to
half a dozen, have done better relatively than several of the big lines,
as they were more at liberty to take advantage of the big freight-rates
which were going. We have not set these out, however, because it does
not appear to be necessary. The dividends in virtually all cases have
been substantial, and in some cases very large indeed. It would be
useless, however, to show these in tables, as some of the leading
companies use reserves greatly exceeding their nominal capital, and
quite a number have devoted a larger proportion of their profits to
strengthening their position than to the payment of dividends. In the
case of the Moor line we are unable to give the amount of the profit
reported last year, as the balance-sheets are not issued publicly,
although we have been favoured with them occasionally.

Coal, iron, engineering companies and shipbuilding companies are
bracketed together because so many of them are concerned in at least two
of those fields of industry. As our table shows, they have had a great
revival, many having been used by the Government, while all have felt
the effect of the great demand for munitions. The miscellaneous list
offers an interesting field of study, and the rubber and tea companies'
results are in some respects more striking still. We have only given a
selection of these, but they suffice to show that rubber and tea have
been very profitable since the War began. An appeal was made some time
ago with a view to the "young" rubber companies being relieved of the
excess profits tax, but our list shows how unnecessary it was to make
any special concession to the industry they represent. In the last two
months a great many of the companies have indicated that they were
setting some thousands of pounds aside for the tax.

Among the other concerns which have announced their appropriations to
meet the excess profits tax the most notable one that we recall is the
British Oil and Cake Mills Company, which expected to have to pay
L225,000. The Nitrate Producers' Steamship Company is putting L200,000
to a reserve for the excess profits duty and income tax. Most of the big
companies have provided for the tax before striking the profit balance,
and as this is strictly correct it would hardly be fair to say that they
have concealed part of their profits. The figures would have been more
striking, however, if the gross sums had been given. As we read the
White Star line's figures they indicate that the company has had to pay
much more than the British Oil and Cake Mills Company, but the Cunard
line has probably had to pay much less.

The amount payable in any given case is the excess over the pre-war
standard, which is fixed by taking the best two of the three immediately
preceding years. Speaking generally, the companies do not appear to have
hurried in their payment of the tax. For the year ended March last the
total yield was estimated at L6,000,000, but the actual sum received was
only L140,000, and the L6,000,000 has not been got yet, the yield from
April 1 to June 10 being only L3,556,000. A sharp increase is bound to
come, however, in the course of the financial year. The Chancellor of
the Exchequer expects to get L86,000,000 in excess profits tax and
munitions levies by the end of March next, and he cannot possibly have
made so enormous a mistake as the receipts to date would suggest if we
did not know that thousands of firms have still to pay very considerable
sums.

In the tables appended the years at the tops of columns are those in
which the profits mentioned were announced. A large proportion of the
results shown in the 1916 columns are for the year ended December last.
Some, however, are for years which have ended since then, while a few,
relating to companies which carry on business abroad, are for years
which began soon after the outbreak of the War:--

  SHIPPING

                              1916        1915        1914

                                L           L           L

  British and African         94,388      64,464      41,357
  Booth Line                 328,127     225,267     154,828
  China Mutual               591,005     286,725     381,729
  Court                      137,446      25,034      23,890
  Cunard                   1,579,170   1,286,948   1,187,831
  Cairn                      152,152      85,988     102,318
  Elder, Dempster            349,444     326,122     307,605
  Eagle Oil Transport        325,928     302,897      92,866
  Elder                       66,266      55,305      38,975
  Field                       71,393      11,881        --
  France, Fenwick            179,100      64,900      76,800
  Gulf                       188,093      39,436      65,014
  Houlder Bros               118,802      95,587     102,893
  Indo-China                 109,089      16,020      45,364
  India Gen                   65,738      41,974     118,379
  King                       102,319      17,426      90,392
  Leyland (Fredk.)         1,441,690     620,839     589,810
  Lamport & Holt             332,897     149,108     200,691
  London & Northern          586,299     118,419     135,541
  Mercantile                 259,159      93,391     129,946
  Moor                       335,349        --       254,000
  Neptune                    146,718      73,310     112,563
  Nitrate Producers          381,599     134,826     125,990
  Pool                       601,338     118,000        --
  Pyman                      165,078     72,504       62,413
  Royal Mail                 808,731     98,232      436,470
  Redcroft                   117,953     13,125       21,396
  Sutherland                 295,220     74,841       41,779
  White Star               1,968,285    887,548    1,121,268


  COAL, IRON AND ENGINEERING

  Albion Steam Coal           44,536      36,820       24,094
  Arrol (Sir W.) & Co        119,060      49,756       51,096
  Brown, Bayley's Steel       32,017       1,578       29,758
  Barrow Hematite            119,377      51,518      104,664
  British Aluminium          180,057     156,066      154,488
  Beyer, Peacock              54,177     109,783       87,843
  British Westinghouse       176,752     151,627      106,494
  Brit.Ins. & Helsby         295,131     277,428      247,351
  Bell Bros                  145,360      45,969      128,736
  Bessemer (Hy.)              55,348      35,826       23,308
  Cammell, Laird             303,841     237,899      174,126
  Cory (W.) and Son          453,136     215,328      313,906
  Cargo Fleet                162,276     131,142      124,219
  Callender's Cable          113,266      98,692       91,861
  Carlton M. Colliery        188,545     128,413      177,025
  Clayton & Shuttleworth      72,787      44,643       53,496
  Consolidated Cambrian      185,139     140,097      147,648
  Crossley Bros               65,337      15,347       42,517
  D. Davis                   200,127     215,744      217,970
  Dorman, Long               404,524     237,579      257,863
  Edinburgh Collier's         64,807     17,420        63,969
  Fife Coal                  224,058      89,866         --
  Gt. West. Colliery         137,008     111,821      158,420
  Hadfields                  265,403     139,301      109,513
  Henley's Tel               153,224     112,898      106,380
  Howard & Bullough          136,152      32,766      163,066
  Jessop (W.) & Sons         103,726      60,354       87,343
  Knowles (A.) & Sons         47,199      18,329       29,140
  Leyland Motors             252,107       85,037        --
  Lysaght (John)             414,764      313,707     330,576
  Locket's Merthyr Colleries  45,635        6,229      22,238
  Met'n Carriage             372,140      321,091     365,739
  Newton, Chambers            60,669        4,182      89,523
  N. B. Locomotive           174,241      160,644     140,889
  North's Nav. Coal          130,071       65,578     100,144
  Parkgate Iron              107,344       66,643      85,169
  Projectile                 194,136       30,739      18,880
  Powell Duffryn             438,799      422,204     364,421
  Pease & Partners           435,772      248,216     385,975
  Rhymney Iron               127,733       52,488     131,901
  S. Durham Steel            239,868      150,257     302,955
  Shelton                    109,554       63,465      81,185
  Stewarts & Lloyds          256,308      233,420     246,065
  Swan, Hunter, etc          305,083      217,498     264,124
  United Collieries          216,065       57,600     100,503
  Wigan Coal, etc            143,288       44,829     138,118


  MISCELLANEOUS

  Angus (Geo.) & Co           54,461       43,574      32,123
  Burmah Oil               1,413,170    1,411,279   1,363,389
  Bradford Dyers             568,623      387,923     430,081
  Bleachers' Association     416,394      197,835     423,416
  Bryant and May             115,159      101,616      90,158
  Broxburn Oil                46,729       22,252      57,046
  British Cotton and Wool
    Dyers                     93,524       42,297       9,290
  Brunner, Mond            1,011,590      799,322     769,343
  Bovril                     168,796      137,584     119,813
  Buttons                     63,297       38,880      32,834
  Borax Consolidated         205,825      195,449     235,285
  Barlow & Jones              46,798       38,936      33,584
  British Oil, etc., Mills   243,110      111,203     116,541
  British and Argentine Meat 651,289       67,288        --
  Curtis's & Harvey          143,830       77,754      48,117
  Courtaulds                 741,668      520,349     474,154[89]
  Calico Prin. (half yr.)    176,521        --         55,495
  E. Velvet, etc., Dyers      70,833       61,161      72,467
  Fore St. Warehouse          48,957       28,597        --
  Forestal Land              900,947      234,065     383,362
  Fine Spinners              535,854      391,057     613,415
  Gas Light & Coke           604,314      449,510     522,710
  Hollins (W.) & Co          105,639       65,786      65,986
  Henry (A. and S.)          249,713      104,098     122,528
  Imperial Tobacco         3,699,891    3,533,360   3,354,476
  Lever Bros               1,265,933    1,152,107     988,238
  Linen Thread               257,418      188,773     189,142
  Lennards                    41,300       34,457      30,377
  Lister and Co              133,874       94,403     151,458
  Lyons (J.) & Co            278,293      276,403     353,303
  Maypole Dairy              528,274      488,026     489,643
  Mandleberg (J.)             74,506       52,049      57,964
  Pumpherston Oil            134,927       74,010     140,025
  Rylands & Sons (half yr.)  120,032       55,179        --
  Rotherham (Jer.)           104,925       74,638      59,692
  Salt Union                 140,524       89,443      82,791
  Sears (J.) & Co             82,070       65,032      57,061
  Stead & Simpson             59,898       32,762      30,357
  Samnuggur Jute             299,829       44,307      86,574
  Spillers & Bakers          217,416      367,866      89,351
  United Alkali              341,986      217,081     193,604
  Winterbottom Book Cloth    171,191      119,795     165,213
  Webley & Scott              61,277       16,376       9,511
  Whiteaway, Laidlaw         131,577      107,952     129,790
  Watson (Joseph)            122,001       89,290     103,999
  Young's Paraffin            47,953       24,139      80,152


  RUBBER, &c.
                            1916       1915       1914
                              L          L          L
  Anglo-Malay              121,224     76,931    104,583
  Assam-Dooars              51,674     22,269       --
  Amalgamated Tea          157,818     98,176     78,787
  Batu Tiga                 56,293     22,315     24,762
  Bukit Sembawang           33,989     14,344      6,090
  Consolidated Tea         479,815    289,262    247,633
  Chersonese                59,602     35,019     29,081
  Ceylon Tea               163,899    108,300     93,900
  Damansara                 48,680     30,580     29,081
  Eastern Produce          126,406     71,724     69,004
  Grand Central            248,201    132,019     87,554
  Highlands & Lowlands     108,343     75,425     79,079
  Jorehaut Tea,             64,508     43,204     34,088
  Jhanzie Tea               35,881     17,286     15,113
  Klanang                   37,918     20,458     24,257
  Kuala Selangor            47,748     42,013     32,798
  Kanan Devan              208,612    120,119    106,909
  Linggi                   125,739     78,899     83,746
  Lunuva                    32,994     12,599     12,602
  Malacca                  252,006    144,224    131,156
  Nuwara Eliya              49,915     21,921       --
  Nordanal                  39,658     36,686     49,344
  Panawatte Tea             38,167     23,833       --
  Rub. Est., Johore         42,703     22,541     10,931
  Rani Travancore           63,791     35,349     32,259
  Singlo Tea                68,857     36,166     31,449
  Sungei Way                38,532     36,533     25,624
  Straits                  157,678    164,750    185,426
  Sungei Kapar              59,966     39,426     42,364
  Selangor                  55,457     58,007     41,940
  Seremban                  43,410     24,198     22,471
  Sunnygama                 63,688     43,142     31,931


13. _The New Witness_, June 22, 1916:

The Tenth Ordinary General Meeting of the Forestal Land, Timber, and
Railways Co. (Ltd.) was held on Friday last, at Winchester House, E.C.,
Baron Emile B. d'Erlanger (chairman of the company), presiding.

The chairman said that the share capital remained unaltered, and the
debenture debt had only been decreased by the yearly amortisation. No
less than L143,600 had been added to the depreciation account, making it
L634,170. Credit balances had swollen by the sum of L175,589. The profit
on the year was L900,947, as against L234,064 last year. On the credit
side, properties stood at L4,405,917, and had increased by the new
properties acquired. The live stock stood at L34,000 less than last
year, due to a smaller stock of "Invernada" cattle. The stocks of
extract and felled timber had risen by L115,000, principally owing to a
larger stock of felled timber. Debit balances had risen to L156,000. In
the profit and loss account the trading profit was L1,281,299, as
compared with L614,879 last year, and, after deducting London charges,
debenture interest, depreciation, and legal reserve, there was left a
profit of L900,947.


14. _The Westminster Gazette_, July 15, 1916:

The accounts of the W. and C. T. Jones Steamship Company, Limited, of
Cardiff, for the year ended June 30, show that, with a fleet of thirteen
steamers, L524,855 profit has been earned, representing 187 per cent on
the capital of L280,000.

The previous year's earnings were L87,105.

A dividend of 15 per cent, making, with 10 per cent interim dividend, 25
per cent for the year, free of income tax, is declared.


15. _The New Statesman_, July 1, 1916:

The prolonged debate in the House of Commons on the Excess Profits Tax
ended on Monday in a vote which found Mr. McKenna's critics in a small
though substantial minority. The point actually at issue was not very
simple, and in spite of repeated explanations several of the most
persistent speakers never grasped it. The demand was that all
"controlled establishments" should be exempt from the excess profits tax
in consideration of the patriotic services they were rendering to their
country and of the "bargain" alleged to have been concluded with the
Ministry of Munitions whereby any profits they may make in excess of 20
per cent above their normal profits are in any event taken by the State.
This meant, of course, that a controlled firm which made a profit of
L50,000 in 1914, and of L60,000 (due to war contracts) in 1916, would
retain the whole of their excess profits without reduction. Mr. McKenna
argued that such firms, having the advantages of practically compulsory
labour and freedom from Trade Union restrictions, ought, at any rate,
not to be let off more lightly than uncontrolled firms. It is amazing
that such a proposition should have to be stated at all.

The point of view of the ordinary member of the public undoubtedly is
that excess profits on the making of munitions simply ought not to
exist. If engineering firms are permitted to maintain their old standard
of profit and dividend (with fair arrangements, of course, for new
capital and depreciation), they ought to be more than satisfied. Great
heat was developed on the debate by the representatives of various
capitalist interests, notably Sir Arthur Markham, Mr. J. M. Henderson,
Sir Croydon Marks, and Sir Alfred Mond; and some of them were not even
ashamed to hint that if their demands were not agreed to there might be
a diminution of output. At a moment when tens of thousands of men are
giving up their whole incomes as well as their savings, in order to
fight for their country, it is impossible to imagine any spectacle more
unedifying for the wage-earning class than that of these malcontent
capitalist legislators angrily fighting for their extra war-profits.
When one remembers that it was these same gentlemen who were so
enthusiastic for compelling younger and poorer men to sacrifice
everything they possess, it is hard to find words to say what ought to
be said of them. We hope, at all events, that the names of those who
voted against the Government on the division will not be allowed to be
forgotten in the constituencies.


16. _Pall Mall Gazette_, January 31, 1916:

_From Our Own Correspondent._

PARIS, _Saturday_.

The trouble that has been brewing for months past at the Central Markets
has now come to a head. A well-known dealer was suspended by the Prefect
of Police; the Home Office thought this insufficient and revoked his
licence; and there is now talk of a prosecution.

The Central Markets are not a place which the habitual Parisian cares to
venture into. Apart from its own peculiar and particularly pungent
odours, the markets are peopled with a class of stallkeeper who do not
exactly keep their tongue in their pocket, as the French say. They have,
in fact, a flow of language, and it requires a brave man to make a stand
against it--and all the brave men are at the front just now.

But the Central Markets not only have a language of their own; they have
ways and methods of dealing that require long years of acquaintance to
fathom, so only experts venture to make head or tail of them.

All this means that between the Central Markets, at the depository, and
most of all that Paris wants to eat, and the actual consumer as
represented by the ordinary housewife starting out on her daily round of
shopping, there move and live a host of intermediaries. Large as their
number is, they cannot compare with the middlemen who squeeze in between
the Central Markets and the actual grower, breeder, or producer.

With so many hands for produce to pass through, each one eager to grab
all that it can for itself before it passes the stuff along, it is small
wonder that prices grow, not taking into account the burden of taxes and
other charges the goods have to bear on their journey from the farm to
the household.


ARMY OF INSPECTORS

The police have an army of inspectors for watching and superintending
the work of the markets. The rules drawn up for their regulation would
more than fill an old-fashioned three-volume novel, and each one
provides for penalties severer and stricter than the other. Yet the
profitable game of rigging the market and everything connected with it
is in full swing, and no one is more fooled than the police, unless it
be the public.

Since the war broke out, the State, the city, and the public alike,
backed up by the small retail trader, have done their best to get even
with the Central Markets. The more they try to put things right the
worse they seem to get. Prices appear to ease for a brief space, but
they soon become inflated once more. Or, if they do not, the particular
commodity concerned simply disappears in some mysterious fashion until
the "powers that be" submit to the inevitable, and shut their eyes to
scheming they are helpless to prevent.


AS MUCH FOOD AS USUAL

The worst of it is that statistics can always be produced to show that
the rise in prices is purely and simply the outcome of a falling off in
supplies. Arrivals of fruits, vegetables, and fish in the last quarter
of the past year were exactly half the average supply of an ordinary
year; eggs were two-thirds below the proper figures, meat some 4,000
tons short, butter six tons, cheeses only a ton.

Of course, the population of the city has diminished also to a certain
extent, but not so much as might be expected considering that there is
practically no single family that has not one or more members at the
front.

They have been replaced by refugees, sick and wounded soldiers, huge war
administrations of one kind and another. Paris consequently wants almost
as much feeding as in ordinary times, not taking any account of the fact
that portions of both the British and French Armies still buy provisions
on the Paris markets.

Notwithstanding the legitimate reasons that can be put forward to
explain the upward trend of prices, the authorities know well enough
that all is not so innocent and above board as it appears. One or two
more glaring instances than usual of manipulation have put them on the
right track at last. Other steps may also be expected, for public
opinion has got to the point that either the "inside ring" must be
broken up or popular resentment will take a form that no Government can
afford to overlook or affect to ignore.


17. _The Daily News_, August 16, 1915:

A YEAR OF ECONOMIC WAR

The _Vorwaerts_, without boasting, as Dr. Helfferich has been doing, of
Germany's financial invincibility, yet sees cause for satisfaction in
the economic condition of the Empire after twelve months of war.

The upheaval of the first week of war was indeed serious, and the grim
spectre of unemployment was in the air. But it was soon laid.

The best results were obtained in the sphere of unemployment. At the
beginning of the war it was about 22-1/2 per cent, in October only 10.9
per cent, and in May it had further sunk to 2.9 per cent. The figures
for June were 2.6 per cent as against 2.5 per cent in the previous
June.... Similarly the daily output of coal of the Rhenish Westphalian
Coal Syndicate, which in July, 1914, reached 327,974 tons, sank in
August to 170,816 tons, in September rose again to 211,995, and in
October to 223,760, the figures for that month being 60 per cent of
those of the previous October.... In later months, in spite of the
calling up of more and more workers, it has only been 25 to 27 per cent
below the normal.

The writer tells the same story of the iron and textile industries, and
traces the good results to the fact that the supplies of raw materials
were far greater than had been thought. For instance, there were about
700,000 bales of cotton more than are needed in a normal year. Besides
which the stores of conquered countries were at the disposal of the
conquerors. The only trades which really suffered were those in
luxuries.

The article concludes thus:

     The German trade has survived the shocks of the first year of war
     better than the most convinced optimist could have hoped, and
     better than the organisation of other belligerents. All fears of
     immediate inevitable industrial collapse which haunted us at the
     beginning of the war have been dissipated. Instead of this we meet
     in all industrial circles with the consciousness [often much
     exaggerated] that "We can endure."

The words in brackets are significant.


18. _Pall Mall Gazette_, November 10, 1916:

  LIVING ON WAR

  KRUPPS' PROFIT JUMPS FROM 1-1/2 MILLIONS TO 4-1/2

  AMSTERDAM, _Tuesday Night_.

An Essen telegram states that the clear profit last year of Krupps
amounted to 86,400,000 marks (L4,320,000), as compared with a profit of
33,900,000 marks (L1,695,000) in the preceding year. A dividend of 12
per cent has been distributed.--Reuter.


_19. Pall Mall Gazette:_

GERMAN DIVIDENDS

ECONOMIC POSITION OF SOME OF HER COMPANIES

The 1914 dividends of over sixty limited companies, nearly all German,
and the remainder Austrian, show that in the case of sixteen companies
the dividends amounted to 20 per cent or over, the average being 25-3/16
per cent. These companies (says the _Morning Post_) are mainly engaged
in the production of leather, dynamite, explosives, india-rubber, arms,
ammunition, and powder. In one case, that of an explosives company in
Hamburg, the dividend attained 40 per cent.

Germany is still barring the Swiss frontier, and for the last five days
the German post arrived at Berne very late or not at all, thus pointing
to great activity in military matters beyond the German-Swiss frontier.

As further proof, if proof were needed, of the sufficiency of Germany's
food supplies, it is pointed out that she now offers to send to
Switzerland large quantities of potatoes.


20. _The Times_, July 5, 1916:

  WAR PROFIT-MONGERS IN RUSSIA

  _From our Correspondent._

  PETROGRAD, _July 2_.

The clergy will to-morrow publicly anathematise the "freebooters of the
rear," who are amassing huge fortunes at the expense of the public.

21. _The Westminster Gazette_, Aug. 28, 1916:

  GERMAN WAR SCANDALS

  700 PER CENT PROFIT FOR EAST PRUSSIAN LANDOWNERS

  ZURICH, _Sunday_.

Details of several recent corrupt affairs which have come to light in
Germany have reached Switzerland.

At Mainz a timber merchant was arrested for bribing army officers to
secure contracts for his firm. The official investigation revealed that
he had paid a total of L50,000 in bribes to army officers. Some of the
individual bribes were as high as L2,500. This timber merchant, who was
almost a poor man before the war, has accumulated in two years a fortune
which compelled him to pay income-tax on an income of L25,000 per annum.

Another scandalous affair was discovered in Herr von Batocki's new
Imperial Food Department. One of his officials, Bernot by name, was
bribed by numerous East Prussian landowners to have the crops from their
estates bought by the Government at exorbitant prices. Bernot pocketed
some L15,000, and the landowners in question sold their wheat at a
profit of 700 per cent.--Wireless Press.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 89: Net loss of L276,560 in first half 1914-15.]


       *       *       *       *       *


_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_

LETTERS FROM GREECE

F'cap 8vo. 2s. _net_

CASSANDRA IN TROY

Sm. 4to. 5s. _net_




_MARTIN SECKER_

_HIS COMPLETE CATALOGUE MCMXVII_

_The Books in this list should be obtainable from all Booksellers and
Libraries, and if any difficulty is experienced the Publisher will be
glad to be informed of the fact. He will also be glad if those
interested in receiving from time to time Announcement Lists,
Prospectuses, &c, of new and forthcoming books from Number Five John
Street will send their names and addresses to him for this purpose. Any
book in this list may be obtained on approval through the booksellers,
or direct from the Publisher, on remitting him the published price, plus
the postage.

All prices indicated in this Catalogue are NET.

MARTIN SECKER Publisher Number Five John Street Adelphi London

Telephone Gerrard 4779 Telegraphic Address: Psophidian London_



Martin Secker's Catalogue


PART ONE INDEX OF AUTHORS


  ABERCROMBIE, LASCELLES
    SPECULATIVE DIALOGUES.                   _Cr. 8vo. 5s._
    HARDY: A CRITICAL STUDY.             _Dy. 8vo. 7s. 6d._
    THE EPIC
       (_The Art and Craft of Letters_).   _F'cap 8vo. 1s._

  AFLALO, F. G.
    BEHIND THE RANGES.            _Wide Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d._
    REGILDING THE CRESCENT.            _Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d._
    BIRDS IN THE CALENDAR.             _Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._

  ALLSHORN, LIONEL
    STUPOR MUNDI.                     _Medium Octavo. 16s._

  APPERSON, G. L.
    THE SOCIAL HISTORY OF SMOKING.         _Post  8vo. 6s._

  ARMSTRONG, DONALD
    THE MARRIAGE OF QUIXOTE.               _Crown 8vo. 6s._

  ARTZIBASHEF, MICHAEL
    SANINE. _Preface by Gilbert Cannan._   _Crown 8vo. 6s._
    BREAKING-POINT.                        _Crown 8vo. 6s._
    THE MILLIONAIRE.
       _Intro. by the Author._             _Crown 8vo. 6s._
    TALES OF THE REVOLUTION.               _Crown 8vo. 6s._

  BARRINGTON, MICHAEL
    GRAHAME OF CLAVERHOUSE.            _Imperial 8vo. 30s._
    _Edition de Luxe                                 _63s._

  BENNETT, ARNOLD
    THOSE UNITED STATES.                _Post 8vo. 2s. 6d._

  BLACK, CLEMENTINA
    THE LINLEYS OF BATH.                 _Medium 8vo. 16s._
    THE CUMBERLAND LETTERS.                _Med. 8vo. 16s._

  BOULGER, D. C.
    THE BATTLE OF THE BOYNE.               _Med. 8vo. 21s._

  BROWN, IVOR
    YEARS OF PLENTY.                       _Crown 8vo. 6s._
    SECURITY.                              _Crown 8vo. 6s._

  BURROW, C. KENNETT
    CARMINA VARIA.                     _F'cap 8vo. 2s. 6d._

  CALDERON, GEORGE (With St. John Hankin)
    THOMPSON: A COMEDY.                  _Sq. Cr. 8vo. 2s._

  CANNAN, GILBERT
    BUTLER: A CRITICAL STUDY.            _Dy. 8vo. 7s. 6d._
    SATIRE
       (_Art and Craft of Letters_).       _F'cap 8vo. 1s._

  CHESTERTON, G. K.
    MAGIC: A FANTASTIC COMEDY.           _Sq. Cr. 8vo. 2s._

  COKE, DESMOND
    THE ART OF SILHOUETTE.             _Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d._

  CRAVEN, A. SCOTT
    THE FOOL'S TRAGEDY.                    _Crown 8vo. 6s._

  CROSLAND, T. W. H.
    THE ENGLISH SONNET.                 _Demy 8vo. 7s. 6d._
    COLLECTED POEMS.                   _Small 4vo. 7s. 6d._
    WAR POEMS.                            _Crown 8vo._ 1s._
    THE BOOK OF ENGLISH SONNETS.
      (_Edited with an Introduction._)      _Pott 8vo. 5s._

  DAWSON, WARRINGTON
    THE TRUE DIMENSION.                    _Crown 8vo. 6s._

  DE SELINCOURT, BASIL
    WHITMAN: A CRITICAL STUDY.           _Dy. 8vo. 7s. 6d._
    RHYME
      (_The Art and Craft of Letters_).    _F'cap 8vo. 1s._

  DOUGLAS, NORMAN
    FOUNTAINS IN THE SAND.          _Wide Dy. 8vo. 7s. 6d._
    OLD CALABRIA.                         _Demy. 8vo. 15s._
    SOUTH WIND.                            _Crown 8vo. 6s._
  DRAYCOTT, G. M.
    MAHOMET: FOUNDER OF ISLAM.          _Dy. 8vo. 12s. 6d._

  DRINKWATER, JOHN
    MORRIS: A CRITICAL STUDY.            _Dy. 8vo. 7s. 6d._
    ROSSETTI: A CRITICAL STUDY.          _Dy. 8vo. 7s. 6d._
    THE LYRIC
       (_The Art and Craft of Letters_).   _F'cap 8vo. 1s._

  FALLS, CYRIL
    KIPLING: A CRITICAL STUDY.           _Dy. 8vo. 7s. 6d._

  FEA, ALLAN
    OLD ENGLISH HOUSES.                _Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d._
    NOOKS AND CORNERS OF OLD ENGLAND.                 _5s._

  FLECKER, J. E.
    COLLECTED POEMS.                   _Small 4to. 7s. 6d._
    THE GOLDEN JOURNEY TO SAMARKAND.                  _5s._

  FRANCIS, RENE
    EGYPTIAN AESTHETICS.            _Wide Demy 8vo. 7s .6d._

  GRETTON, R. H.
    HISTORY
       (_The Art and Craft of Letters_).   _F'cap 8vo. 1s._

  HANKIN, ST. JOHN
    THE DRAMATIC WORKS, with an Introduction by John Drinkwater.
       _Small 4to. Definitive Limited Edition
                            in Three Volumes._       _25s._
    THE RETURN OF THE PRODIGAL.          _Sq. Cr. 8vo. 2s._
    THE CASSILIS ENGAGEMENT.             _Sq. Cr. 8vo. 2s._

  HANKIN, ST. JOHN (_continued_)
    THE CHARITY THAT BEGAN AT HOME.                   _2s._
    THE CONSTANT LOVER, ETC.            _Sq. Cr. 8vo.  2s._

  HAUPTMANN, GERHART
    THE COMPLETE DRAMATIC
        WORKS.        _6 vols. Crown 8vo.  5s. per volume._

  HEWLETT, WILLIAM
    TELLING THE TRUTH.                    _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    UNCLE'S ADVICE: A NOVEL IN LETTERS.     _Cr. 8vo.  6s._
    THE CHILD AT THE WINDOW.              _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    INTRODUCING WILLIAM ALLISON.          _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  HORSNELL, HORACE
    THE BANKRUPT.                         _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  HOWE, P. P.
    THE REPERTORY THEATRE.              _Cr. 8vo. 2s.  6d._
    DRAMATIC PORTRAITS.                   _Crown 8vo.  5s._
    SHAW: A CRITICAL STUDY.             _Dy. 8vo. 7s.  6d._
    SYNGE: A CRITICAL STUDY.            _Dy. 8vo. 7s.  6d._
    CRITICISM
       (_The Art and Craft of Letters_).  _F'cap 8vo.  1s._

  HUEFFER, FORD MADOX
    JAMES: A CRITICAL STUDY.            _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._
    COLLECTED POEMS.                       _Demy 8vo.  6s._

  IBSEN, HENRIK
    PEER GYNT. A New Translation
       by R. Ellis Roberts.          _Wide Crown 8vo.  5s._

  JACOB, HAROLD
    PERFUMES OF ARABY.            _Wide Demy 8vo.  7s. 6d._

  JAMES, HENRY
    THE TURN OF THE SCREW.
    THE LESSON OF THE MASTER.
    THE DEATH OF THE LION.
    THE ASPERN PAPERS.
    DAISY MILLER.
    THE COXON FUND.

  JAMES, HENRY (continued)
    THE REVERBERATOR.
    THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD.
    THE BEAST IN THE JUNGLE.
    THE FIGURE IN THE CARPET.
    GLASSES.
    THE PUPIL.                   _Each F'cap 8vo.  2s. 6d._

  JOHNSON, OWEN
    THE SALAMANDER.                       _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    MAKING MONEY.                         _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  LAMONT, L. M.
    A CORONAL: AN ANTHOLOGY.          _F'cap 8vo.  2s. 6d._

  LEWISOHN, L.
    THE MODERN DRAMA.                     _Crown 8vo.  5s._

  LLUELLYN, RICHARD
    THE IMPERFECT BRANCH.                 _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  LOW, IVY
    THE QUESTING BEAST.                   _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  LYNCH, BOHUN
    UNOFFICIAL.                           _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE COMPLETE GENTLEMAN.               _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  McFEE, WILLIAM
    CASUALS OF THE SEA.                   _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  MACHEN, ARTHUR
    HIEROGLYPHICS.                   _F'cap 8vo.  2s. 6d._

  MACKENZIE, COMPTON
    THE PASSIONATE ELOPEMENT.      _Cr. 8vo.  6s. and 2s._
    CARNIVAL.                    _Crown 8vo.  6s. and 2s._
    SINISTER STREET. Volume I.     _Cr. 8vo.  6s. and 2s._
    SINISTER STREET. Volume II.          _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    GUY AND PAULINE.                     _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    KENSINGTON RHYMES.                   _Crown 4to.  5s._

  MAVROGORDATO, JOHN
    LETTERS FROM GREECE.                  _F'cap 8vo.  2s._
    CASSANDRA IN TROY.                    _Small 4to.  5s._
    THE WORLD IN CHAINS                   _Crown 8vo.  2s._

  MELVILLE, LEWIS
    SOME ECCENTRICS AND A WOMAN.       _Dy. 8vo.  10s. 6d._

  METHLEY, VIOLET
    CAMILLE DESMOULINS: A Biography.       _Dy. 8vo.  15s._

  MEYNELL, VIOLA
    LOT BARROW.                           _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    MODERN LOVERS.                        _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    COLUMBINE.                            _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    NARCISSUS.                            _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  MURRY, J. MIDDLETON
    DOSTOEVSKY: A Critical Study.       _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._

  NORTH, LAURENCE
    IMPATIENT GRISELDA                    _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE GOLIGHTLYS: FATHER AND SON.         _Cr. 8vo.  6s._

  ONIONS, OLIVER
    WIDDERSHINS.                  _Crown 8vo.  6s. and 2s._
    IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE EVIDENCE.        _Cr. 8vo.  6s._
    THE DEBIT ACCOUNT.                    _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE STORY OF LOUIE.                   _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  PAIN, BARRY
    ONE KIND AND ANOTHER.           _Cr. 8vo.  6s. and 2s._
    COLLECTED TALES: Volume I.           _Medium 8vo.  5s._
    COLLECTED TALES: Volume II.          _Medium 8vo.  5s._
    THE SHORT STORY
     (_The Art and Craft of Letters_).    _F'cap 8vo.  1s._

  PALMER, JOHN
    PETER PARAGON.                        _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE KING'S MEN.                       _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    COMEDY
     (_The Art and Craft of Letters_).    _F'cap 8vo.  1s._

  PERUGINI, MARK E.
    THE ART OF BALLET.                    _Demy 8vo.  15s._

  PHILIPS, AUSTIN
    BATTLES OF LIFE.                      _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  PRESTON, ANNA
    THE RECORD OF A SILENT LIFE.          _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  REID, FORREST
    YEATS: A CRITICAL STUDY.            _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._

  ROBERTS, R. ELLIS
    IBSEN: A CRITICAL STUDY.            _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._
    PEER GYNT: A NEW TRANSLATION.            Cr. 8vo.  5s._

  SABATINI, RAFAEL
    THE SEA-HAWK.                   _Cr. 8vo.  6s. and 2s._
    THE LION'S SKIN.                      _Crown 8vo.  2s._
    THE BANNER OF THE BULL.               _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE SNARE.                            _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  SAND, MAURICE
    THE HISTORY OF THE HARLEQUINADE.
      _Two Volumes._             _Med. 8vo.  25s. the set._

  SCOTT-JAMES, R. A.
    PERSONALITY IN LITERATURE.          Demy 8vo.  7s. 6d._

  SIDGWICK, FRANK
    THE BALLAD (_Art and Craft of Letters_).          _1s._

  SIMMS, EVELYN
    A VISION OF CONSOLATION.              _Crown 8vo.  1s._
    THE CROWNING PURPOSE.                 _Crown 8vo.  1s._

  SOLOGUB, FEODOR
    THE OLD HOUSE.                        _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE LITTLE DEMON.                     _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE CREATED LEGEND.                   _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  SQUIRE, J. C.
    GEORGIAN POETS.                       _Crown 8vo.  5s._
    TRICKS OF THE TRADE.              _Crown 8vo. 2s.  6d._
    THE GOLD TREE.                      Demy 8vo.  7s. 6d._

  STONE, CHRISTOPHER
    THE BURNT HOUSE.                      _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    PARODY (_Art and Craft of Letters_).              _1s._

  STRAUS, RALPH
    CARRIAGES AND COACHES.                _Med. 8vo.  18s._

  SWINNERTON, FRANK
    GISSING: A CRITICAL STUDY.          _Dy. 8vo. 7s.  6d._
    STEVENSON: A CRITICAL STUDY.        _Dy. 8vo. 7s.  6d._

  SWINNERTON, FRANK (_continued_)
    NOCTURNE.
    THE CHASTE WIFE.                   _Each Cr. 8vo.  6s._

  TAYLOR, G. R. STIRLING
    _Mary Wollstonecraft._              Demy 8vo.  7s. 6d._

  TAYLOR, UNA
    MAETERLINCK: A CRITICAL STUDY.      _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._

  THOMAS EDWARD
    SWINBURNE: A CRITICAL STUDY.        _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._
    PATER: A CRITICAL STUDY.            _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._
    THE TENTH MUSE.                   _F'cap 8vo.  2s. 6d._

  VAUGHAN, H. M.
    MELEAGER.                             _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE DIAL OF AHAZ.                     _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    AN AUSTRALASIAN WANDER-YEAR.       _Dy. 8vo.  10s. 6d._

  WALPOLE, HUGH
    FORTITUDE.                            _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE DUCHESS OF WREXE.                 _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE DARK FOREST.                      _Crown 8vo.  6s._

  WEST, JULIUS
    CHESTERTON: A CRITICAL STUDY.       _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._

  WILLIAMS, ORLO
    VIE DE BOHEME.                        _Demy 8vo.  15s._
    MEREDITH: A CRITICAL STUDY.         _Dy. 8vo.  7s. 6d._
    THE ESSAY (_The Art and Craft of Letters_).       _1s._

  YOUNG, FILSON
    NEW LEAVES.                      _Wide Crown 8vo.  5s._
    A CHRISTMAS CARD.                     _Demy 16mo.  1s._

  YOUNG, FRANCIS BRETT
    DEEP SEA.                             _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE DARK TOWER.                       _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    THE IRON AGE.                         _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    FIVE DEGREES SOUTH                    _Crown 8vo.  1s._

  YOUNG, F. & E. BRETT
    UNDERGROWTH.                          _Crown 8vo.  6s._
    BRIDGES: A CRITICAL STUDY.           _Dy. 8vo  7s. 6d._


PART TWO: CLASSIFIED INDEX OF TITLES


_General Literature_

  ART OF BALLET, THE. _By Mark E. Perugini._

  ART OF SILHOUETTE, THE. _By Desmond Coke._

  BATTLE OF THE BOYNE, THE. _By D. C. Boulger._

  BEHIND THE RANGES, _By F. G. Aflalo._

  BIRDS IN THE CALENDAR. _By F. G. Aflalo._

  CAMILLE DESMOULINS. _By Violet Methley._

  CARRIAGES AND COACHES. _By Ralph Straus._

  CHRISTMAS CARD, A. _By Filson Young._

  CUMBERLAND LETTERS, THE. _By Clementina Black._

  DRAMATIC PORTRAITS. _By P. P. Howe._

  ENGLISH SONNET, THE. _By T. W. H. Crosland._

  GEORGIAN POETS. _By J. C. Squire._

  GOLD TREE, THE. _By J. C. Squire._

  GRAHAME OF CLAVERHOUSE. _By Michael Barrington._

  HIEROGLYPHICS. _By Arthur Machen._

  HISTORY OF THE HARLEQUINADE, THE. _By M. Sand._

  LETTERS FROM GREECE. _By John Mavrogordato._

  LINLEYS OF BATH, THE. _By Clementina Black._

  MAHOMET. _By G. M. Draycott._

  MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT. _By G. R. Stirling Taylor._

  NEW LEAVES. _By Filson Young._

  PERSONALITY IN LITERATURE. _By R. A. Scott-James._

  REGILDING THE CRESCENT. _By F. G. Aflalo._

  SOCIAL HISTORY OF SMOKING, THE. _By G. L. Apperson._

  SOME ECCENTRICS AND A WOMAN. _By Lewis Melville._

  SPECULATIVE DIALOGUES. _By Lascelles Abercrombie._

  STUPOR MUNDI. _By Lionel Allshorn._

  TENTH MUSE, THE. _By Edward Thomas._

  TRICKS OF THE TRADE. _By J. C Squire._

  THOSE UNITED STATES. _By Arnold Bennett._

  VIE DE BOHEME. _By Orlo Williams._

  WORLD IN CHAINS, THE. _By J. Mavrogordato._


  _Verse_

  BOOK OF ENGLISH SONNETS, THE.

  CARMINA VARIA. _By C. Kennett Burrow._

  COLLECTED POEMS OF T. W. H. CROSLAND.

  COLLECTED POEMS OF J. E. FLECKER.

  COLLECTED POEMS OF F. M. HUEFFER.

  CORONAL, A. A NEW ANTHOLOGY. _By L. M. Lamont._

  CROWNING PURPOSE, THE. _By Evelyn Simms._

  FIVE DEGREES SOUTH. _By F. Brett Young._

  GOLDEN JOURNEY TO SAMARKAND, THE. _By J. E. Flecker._

  KENSINGTON RHYMES. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  VISION OF CONSOLATION, A. _By Evelyn Simms._

  WAR POEMS BY 'X.'


  _Drama_

  DRAMATIC WORKS OF ST. JOHN HANKIN.    _3 vols._

  DRAMATIC WORKS OF GERHART HAUPTMANN.  _6 vols._

  CASSANDRA IN TROY. _By John Mavrogordato._

  MAGIC. _By G. K. Chesterton._

  MODERN DRAMA, THE. _By L. Lewisohn._

  PEER GYNT. _Translated by R. Ellis Roberts._

  REPERTORY THEATRE, THE. _By P. P. Howe._

  THOMPSON. _By St. John Hankin and G. Calderon._


  _Travel_

  AUSTRALASIAN WANDER-YEAR, AN. _By H. M. Vaughan._

  EGYPTIAN AESTHETICS. _By Rene Francis._

  FOUNTAINS IN THE SAND. _By Norman Douglas._

  NOOKS AND CORNERS OF OLD ENGLAND. _By Allan Fea._

  OLD CALABRIA. _By Norman Douglas._

  OLD ENGLISH HOUSES. _By Allan Fea._

  PERFUMES OF ARABY. _By Harold Jacob._


  _Martin Secker's Series of
  Critical Studies_

  ROBERT BRIDGES. _By F. & E. Brett Young._

  SAMUEL BUTLER. _By Gilbert Cannan._

  G. K. CHESTERTON. _By Julius West._

  FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY. _By J. Middleton Murry._

  GEORGE GISSING. _By Frank Swinnerton._

  THOMAS HARDY. _By Lascelles Abercrombie._

  HENRIK IBSEN. _By R. Ellis Roberts._

  HENRY JAMES. _By Ford Madox Hueffer._

  RUDYARD KIPLING. _By Cyril Falls._

  MAURICE MAETERLINCK. _By Una Taylor._

  GEORGE MEREDITH. _By Orlo Williams._

  WILLIAM MORRIS. _By John Drinkwater._

  WALTER PATER. _By Edward Thomas._

  D. G. ROSSETTI. _By John Drinkwater._

  BERNARD SHAW. _By P. P. Howe._

  R. L. STEVENSON. _By Frank Swinnerton._

  A. C. SWINBURNE. _By Edward Thomas._

  J. M. SYNGE. _By P. P. Howe._

  WALT WHITMAN. _By Basil de Selincourt._

  W. B. YEATS. _By Forrest Reid._


  _The Art and Craft of Letters_


  BALLAD, THE. _By Frank Sidgwick._

  COMEDY. _By John Palmer._

  CRITICISM. _By P. P. Howe._

  EPIC, THE. _By Lascelles Abercrombie._

  ESSAY, THE. _By Orlo Williams._

  HISTORY. _By R. H. Gretton._

  LYRIC, THE. _By John Drinkwater._

  PARODY. _By Christopher Stone._

  SATIRE. _By Gilbert Cannan._

  SHORT STORY, THE. _By Barry Pain._


  _The Tales of Henry James_

  ALTAR OF THE DEAD, THE.
  ASPERN PAPERS, THE.
  BEAST IN THE JUNGLE, THE.
  COXON FUND, THE.
  DAISY MILLER.
  DEATH OF THE LION, THE.
  FIGURE IN THE CARPET, THE.
  GLASSES.
  LESSON OF THE MASTER, THE.
  PUPIL, THE.
  REVERBERATOR, THE.
  TURN OF THE SCREW, THE.


  _Martin Secker's Series of
  Two-Shilling Novels_

  CARNIVAL. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  SINISTER STREET: VOL. I. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  THE PASSIONATE ELOPEMENT. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  THE SEA-HAWK. _By Rafael Sabatini._

  SANINE. _By Michael Artzibashef._

  FORTITUDE. _By Hugh Walpole._

  THE LION'S SKIN. _By Rafael Sabatini._

  WIDDERSHINS. _By Oliver Onions._

  ONE KIND AND ANOTHER. _By Barry Pain._


  _Fiction_

  BANKRUPT, THE. _By Horace Horsnell._

  BANNER OF THE BULL, THE. _By Rafael Sabatini._

  BATTLES OF LIFE. _By Austin Philips._

  BREAKING-POINT. _By Michael Artzibashef._

  BURNT HOUSE, THE. _By Christopher Stone._

  CARNIVAL. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  CASUALS OF THE SEA. _By William McFee._

  CHASTE WIFE, THE. _By Frank Swinnerton._

  COLLECTED TALES: VOL. I. _By Barry Pain._

  COLLECTED TALES: VOL. II. _By Barry Pain._

  COLUMBINE. _By Viola Meynell._

  COMPLETE GENTLEMAN, THE. _By Bohun Lynch._

  CREATED LEGEND, THE. _By Feodor Sologub._

  DARK FOREST, THE. _By Hugh Walpole._

  DARK TOWER, THE. _By F. Brett Young._

  DEBIT ACCOUNT, THE. _By Oliver Onions._

  DEEP SEA. _By F. Brett Young._

  DIAL OF AHAZ, THE. _By H. M. Vaughan._

  DUCHESS OF WREXE, THE. _By Hugh Walpole._

  FOOL'S TRAGEDY, THE. _By A. Scott Craven._

  FORTITUDE. _By Hugh Walpole._

  GOLIGHTLYS, THE. _By Laurence North._

  GUY AND PAULINE. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  IMPATIENT GRISELDA. _By Laurence North._

  IMPERFECT BRANCH, THE. _By Richard Lluellyn._

  IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE EVIDENCE. _By O. Onions._

  INTRODUCING WILLIAM ALLISON. _By William Hewlett._

  IRON AGE, THE. _By F. Brett Young._

  KING'S MEN, THE. _By John Palmer._

  LION'S SKIN, THE. _By Rafael Sabatini._

  LITTLE DEMON, THE. _By Feodor Sologub._

  LOT BARROW. _By Viola Meynell._

  MARRIAGE OF QUIXOTE, THE.  _By Donald Armstrong._

  MAKING MONEY. _By Owen Johnson._

  MELEAGER. _By H. M. Vaughan._

  MILLIONAIRE, THE. _By Michael Artzibashef._

  MODERN LOVERS. _By Viola Meynell._

  NARCISSUS. _By Viola Meynell._

  NOCTURNE. _By Frank Swinnerton._

  OLD HOUSE, THE. _By Feodor Sologub._

  ONE KIND AND ANOTHER. _By Barry Pain._

  PASSIONATE ELOPEMENT, THE. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  PETER PARAGON. _By John Palmer._

  QUESTING BEAST, THE. _By Ivy Low._

  RECORD OF A SILENT LIFE, THE. _By Anna Preston._

  SALAMANDER, THE. _By Owen Johnson._

  SANINE. _By Michael Artzibashef._

  SEA HAWK, THE. _By Rafael Sabatini._

  SECURITY. _By Ivor Brown._

  SINISTER STREET. I. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  SINISTER STREET. II. _By Compton Mackenzie._

  SNARE, THE. _By Rafael Sabatini._

  SOUTH WIND. _By Norman Douglas._

  STORY OF LOUIE, THE. _By Oliver Onions._

  TALES OF THE REVOLUTION. _By M. Artzibashef._

  TELLING THE TRUTH. _By William Hewlett._

  TRUE DIMENSION, THE. _By Warrington Dawson._

  UNCLE'S ADVICE. _By William Hewlett._

  UNDERGROWTH. _By F. & E. Brett Young._

  UNOFFICIAL. _By Bohun Lynch._

  WIDDERSHINS. _By Oliver Onions._

  YEARS OF PLENTY. _By Ivor Brown._


PRINTED BY
WM. BRENDON AND SON, LTD. PLYMOUTH, ENGLAND.





End of Project Gutenberg's The World in Chains, by John Mavrogordato



