CHAPTER I

EARLY HISTORIC SOCIETY FOUNDED ON THE GENS


The result of recent research into the early organization of society,
the growth of the governmental idea, and the development of the
family, among tribes in the ascending scale, serve to throw new and
unexpected light upon the customs, ideas, institutions, and legends
of early historic peoples. Upon investigation it is observed that the
construction of Greek and Roman society corresponds exactly with that
of existing tribes occupying a lower plane in the scale of development,
and that all the institutions of these nations, although in a higher
state of advancement, involve the same original principles and ideas.

That the Greek and Roman tribes before reaching civilization had
passed through exactly the same processes of development as have been
witnessed in the ascending scale among the North American Indians,
the Arabians, and all other extant peoples, is shown not alone by
the manner in which early society was organized and held together,
but by the similarity observed in their myths, legends, traditions,
institutions, and social usages.

Whether or not a more advanced stage of civilization had been attained
by the progenitors of the Greeks and Romans is a question that does not
here concern us; for, if at any time prior to the appearance of these
peoples in history, a higher plane of life had been reached, it is
reasonable to suppose that such a state was gained under gentile forms
of society, especially as their various institutions at the beginning
of the historic period represent them as still to a considerable extent
governed by the ideas peculiar to the gens.

The earliest authentic accounts which we have of the Greeks represent
them as composed of the Doric tribes, who were Hellenes, and the
Ionians, who were of Pelasgic origin. The Dorians were a conservative
people, exclusive in their tastes and intolerant of innovations, while
the Ionians, who occupied the seacoasts and the adjacent islands,
were restless, fond of novelty, and not averse to intercourse with
surrounding nations.

Of the original inhabitants of Rome, it is observed that they consisted
of wandering tribes, bands of outlaws, and refugees from various
countries. Concerning the true origin of these peoples, however, and
of the history of their earliest settlements, they themselves were
evidently ignorant, and the fragmentary accounts of them which have
been preserved to us, when viewed independently of the light reflected
upon them by recent investigation, furnish but a dim picture in the
outline of which the most prominent figures appear only as indistinct
shadows or as objects without definite shape. It is true there was no
lack of myths and traditions which had come down to the Greeks and
Romans as genuine history, and which were doubtless regarded by them
as trustworthy accounts of their ancestors. Theseus who united the
Attic tribes, and Romulus who founded Rome, were heroes in whom the
divine and human were so nicely adjusted and so evenly balanced that
the history of their earthly career presents no shade of error either
in public or in private life. Indeed, both had sprung from immortal
sources, and their exploits were such as might be expected from the
mythical heroes of a forgotten age.

Although Greek society when it first came under our observation was
under gentile organization, the gens had passed out of its archaic
stage. This ancient institution, which had carried humanity through
to civilization, was gradually losing its vitality; it had lost its
efficiency as a governing agency, and was about to give place to
political institutions.

With the facts at present accessible regarding peoples in the lower
and middle stages of barbarism, the various steps in the growth of
government as administered in the upper or latter stage of barbarism
are clearly observed; also by close attention to the conditions
surrounding extant peoples in the latter stage of barbarism and the
opening ages of civilization, the processes involved in the transfer
of society from gentile to political institutions are easily traced,
together with the principal ideas and motives underlying the growth of
all the institutions belonging to early historic nations.

Until civilization was reached the gens constituted the unit of
organized society. This fact, however, until a comparatively recent
time, seems to have been overlooked. Without attempting to explain
the origin of the gens and phratry as they existed in Greece, Mr.
Grote observes: “The legislator finds them pre-existing, and adapts or
modifies them to answer some national scheme.” Unacquainted as this
writer evidently was with the construction of primitive society, he
failed to observe that originally, in Greece, all the powers of the
legislator himself were derived from and circumscribed by the gens.
Indeed, that this organization upon which the superstructure of Grecian
society rested was the original source whence proceeded all social
privileges and all military rights and obligations, is a condition
which until a comparatively recent time has been overlooked. While
discussing the relations of the family to the gens, the gens to the
phratry, and the phratry to the tribe, Mr. Grote says: “The basis of
the whole was the house, hearth, or family—a number of which, greater
or less, composed the gens, or genos.”[147]

[147] _History of Greece_, vol. iii., p. 54.

Mr. Morgan has shown, however, that the family could not have
constituted the basis of the gens, for the reason that the heads of
families belonged to separate gentes. We are assured that the gens is
much older than the monogamic family, and therefore that the latter
could not have formed the basis of the gentile organization; but even
had the family preceded the gens in order of development, as its
members belonged to different gentes it could not have constituted the
unit of the social series.

In order to gain a clear understanding of the processes and principles
involved in the early Grecian form of government, it first becomes
necessary briefly to review the various steps in the growth of the
governmental functions through two ethnical periods.

The tribe is a community of related individuals possessed of equal
rights and privileges, and bound by equal duties and responsibilities.
It has been shown that in the Lower Status of barbarism the government
consisted of only one power—a council of chiefs elected by the people.
During the Middle Status of barbarism two powers appear,—the civil and
military functions have become separated, the duties of a military
commander being co-ordinated with those of a council of chiefs. The
military commander, however, has not succeeded in drawing to himself
the powers of a ruler or king. In the Second Status of barbarism
tribes have not begun to confederate. A single tribe, its members
bound together by the tie of kinship and united by common rights and
responsibilities, owning their lands in common, and each contributing
his share toward the common defence, so long as it was able to maintain
its independence, had little need for an elaborate form of government.
As yet no strifes engendered by envy and extreme selfishness had arisen
to disturb the simplicity of their lives, or to check the development
of those early principles of liberty and fraternity which were the
natural inheritance of the gens. A council of chiefs elected by the
gentes and receiving all its powers from the people had thus far
performed all the duties of government.

After the Upper Status of barbarism is reached we find confederated
tribes dwelling together in walled cities surrounded by embankments,
and a state of affairs existing which called for a further
differentiation of the functions of government, and a redistribution of
the powers and responsibilities of the people. In process of time, with
the accumulation of property in masses in the hands of the few, and
the consequent rise of an aristocracy, a government founded on wealth,
or on a territorial basis, rather than on the personal relations of an
individual to his gens, was demanded; and, finally, those principles,
rights, and privileges which constitute a pure democracy, and which
had always formed the basis of gentile institutions were gradually
ignored; that personal influence which was originally exercised by each
and every gentilis being transferred to a privileged class—a class
which controlled the wealth, and at the head of which was the military
commander or _basileus_. Such was the condition of Grecian society as
it first appears in history.

A comparison instituted by Mr. Morgan between the Iroquois gens and
that of the Greeks shows the former at the time when it first came
under European observation to have been in the archaic stage, with
descent and all the rights of succession traced in the female line;
while the latter, at the time designated as the heroic age, had not
only changed the manner of reckoning descent from the female to the
male line, but was evidently about to give place to political society
which, instead of being founded on kinship, was based on property and
territory, or upon a man’s relations to the township or deme in which
he resided.

While the Iroquois tribe of Indians represents the gens in its original
vitality, the Greeks appear to have reached a stage at which the
archaic form of government instituted on the basis of kin was found
inadequate to meet their necessities; hence the confusion arising
from disputed authority, at the almost interminable struggle between
the various classes which had arisen, and the evident disaffection
and unrest manifest among the entire Grecian people during the ages
intervening between Codrus, nearly eleven hundred years B.C., and
Clisthenes, five hundred years later.

That degree of jealousy with which individual liberty was guarded
during the earlier ages of historic Greece, that thirst for freedom,
and that restlessness under tyranny which characterized the Grecian
people throughout their entire career, are explained by the fact that
prior to the age of Clisthenes they were under gentile institutions,
the fundamental principles of which were liberty, equality, and
justice. From all the facts which may be gathered bearing upon this
subject, it is evident that although at the beginning of the historic
period the Greeks had lost much of that independence which belonged to
an earlier stage of human development, their institutions still partook
of the character of a democracy.

Of the similarity of the customs and institutions of early historic
Greece and those of a more primitive age we have ample evidence. In
ancient Greece, as among the Iroquois tribe of Indians, “property
was vested absolutely in the clan, and could not be willed away from
it.”[148] Not only did the members of a clan hold their property in
common, but they were obliged to help, defend, support, and even
avenge those of their number who required their assistance. Young
females bereft of near relations were either furnished with husbands or
provided with suitable portions. Descent must still have been reckoned
in the female line, for foreigners admitted to citizenship were not
members of any clan, neither were their descendants, unless born of
women who were citizens. Citizens were enrolled in the clan and phratry
of their mothers.[149]

[148] George Rawlinson, book v., essay ii.

[149] _Ibid._

In the administration of the government, however, are to be noted a
few important changes. The complications which had arisen as a result
of the individual ownership of property, the change in the reckoning
of descent from the female to the male line which followed, and the
growth of the aristocratic element, had produced a corresponding change
in the control and management of the government. Solicitude for the
common weal, although still felt by the great mass of the people, had
among the rulers given place to extreme egoism, and that association
and combination of interests, which since the dawn of organized society
had characterized the gens, was rapidly giving way before the love of
dominion, the thirst for power, and the greed of gain—characters which
in process of time came to represent the mainspring of human action.

With the changes which took place in the conditions of the people,
it is seen that the administrative functions became still further
differentiated. Co-ordinate with the Greek _basileus_ or war-chief are
to be observed not only a council of chiefs who were the heads of the
gentes, but also an assembly of the people, these three governmental
functions corresponding in a general way to our President, Senate, and
House of Representatives.

The Ecclesia or general assembly at Sparta was originally composed
of all the free males who dwelt within the city. Although this body
originated no measures, it was invested with authority to adopt or
reject any proposed legislation or plan of action devised by the
chiefs. “All changes in the constitution or laws, and all matters of
great public import, as questions of peace or war, of alliances, and
the like, had to be brought before it for decision.”[150] Thus may be
observed the precautions which during the latter stages of barbarism
had been taken to guard the rights of the people, and to insure them
against individual and class usurpation.

[150] George Rawlinson, book v., essay i.

Curtius assures us that the Dorian people

 did not feel as if they were placed in a foreign state, but they were
 the citizens of their own—not merely the objects of legislation, but
 also participants in it, for they only obeyed such statutes as they
 themselves had agreed to.[151]

[151] _History of Greece_, book ii., chap. i.

Although Mr. Grote would have us believe that the assembly of the
people was simply a “listening agora,”[152] it is plain that it was
originally invested with sufficient power to protect the people against
despotism. In the further differentiation of the administrative
functions the powers of the subordinate officers are all drawn from
the sum of the powers invested in the three principal branches of
the government, the ill-defined duties of each giving rise to those
unabated dissensions and fierce and unrelenting strifes which in course
of time became such a fruitful source of devastation and bloodshed.

[152] Vol. ii., p. 348.

From what is known at the present time regarding Greek society prior
to the age of Theseus, it is not at all likely that it was organized
on monarchial principles, or that any form of government prevailed in
Greece other than that of a military democracy. It is true that by most
of the writers who have dealt with the subject of the government of the
early Greeks, the _basileus_ has been designated as king, and that he
has been invested by them with all the insignia of a modern monarch.
In later times, however, with a better understanding of the principles
underlying early society, this view of the matter is seen to be false.
Mr. Morgan, a writer who as we have seen has given much attention to
the constitution of gentile society, informs us that in the Lower and
also in the Middle Status of barbarism the office of chief was elective
or during good behaviour, “for this limitation follows from the right
of the gens to depose from office.”[153]

[153] _Ancient Society_, p. 262.

When descent was in the female line this office descended either to a
brother of the deceased chief or to a sister’s son, but later, when
descent began to be traced in the male line, the eldest son was usually
elected to succeed his father. Upon this subject Mr. Morgan says
further:

 It cannot be claimed, on satisfactory proof, that the oldest son of
 the _basileus_ took the office, upon the demise of his father, by
 absolute hereditary right.... The fact that the oldest, or one of
 the sons, usually succeeded, which is admitted, does not establish
 the fact in question; because by usage he was in the probable line of
 succession by a free election from a constituency. The presumption on
 the face of Grecian institutions is against succession to the office
 of _basileus_ by hereditary right; and in favour either of a free
 election, or of a confirmation of the office by the people through
 their recognized organization, as in the case of the Roman rex. With
 the office of _basileus_ transmitted in the manner last named, the
 government would remain in the hands of the people. Because without an
 election or confirmation he could not assume the office; and because,
 further, the power to elect or confirm implies the reserved right to
 depose.[154]

[154] _Ancient Society_, p. 262.

There is no lack of evidence at the present time going to prove
that all these early tribes were originally organized on thoroughly
democratic principles, and that there never was any dignity conferred
on the leader of the early Grecian hosts answering to the present
definition of king; also that prior to the time of Romulus, no
chieftain of the Latin tribes was ever invested with sufficient
authority to have constituted him an imperial ruler. The term
_basileus_, as applied to a leader of a military democracy in the early
ages of Grecian history, doubtless implies simply the war-chief of the
primitive tribe, an officer chosen from among the chiefs of the gentes
as a leader of the hosts in battle, but as claiming no civil functions,
and as possessing no authority outside the office of military
chieftain.

The Homeric writings, which contain the earliest direct information
which we have of the Greeks, and in which are doubtless mirrored forth
a tolerably correct picture of the customs, institutions, and manners
of this people, when read by the light of more recently developed facts
relative to the early constitution of society, are invested with new
interest, and a fresh charm and a new significance are added to every
detail connected with the narrative. As to the extent of authority
attached to the office of military leader among the Greeks, Homer has
given us a fair illustration in the person of Agamemnon—“shepherd of
the people.” That the position of this chieftain differs widely from
that occupied by the king of succeeding ages is apparent. At the outset
we find the injured Achilles, after he has taunted the chieftain with
being the “greediest of men,” addressing him in the following language:

    Ha, thou mailed in impudence
    And bent on lucre! Who of all the Greeks
    Can willingly obey thee, on the march,
    Or bravely battling with the enemy![155]

[155] _The Iliad_, book i., Bryant’s translation.

Then Pelides takes up the strain and with opprobrious words thus
addresses the son of Atreus:

    Wine-bibber with the forehead of a dog
    And a deer’s heart. Thou never yet hast dared
    To arm thyself for battle with the rest,
    Nor join the other chiefs prepared to lie
    In ambush,—such thy craven fear of death.
    Better it suits thee, midst the mighty host
    Of Greeks, to rob some warrior of his prize
    Who dares withstand thee.[156]

[156] _The Iliad_, book i., Bryant’s translation.

Even the brawler Thersites,

    Squint-eyed, with one lame foot, and on his back
    A lump, and shoulders curving towards the chest,

dares to insult this chief—this king as he is represented by most
modern writers, and to his face taunt him with his injustice towards
Achilles. To Agamemnon he says:

    Of what dost thou complain; what wouldst thou more,
    Atrides? In thy tents are heaps of gold;
    Thy tents are full of chosen damsels, given
    To thee before all others, by the Greeks,
    Whene’er we take a city. Dost thou yet
    Hanker for gold, brought by some Trojan knight,
    A ransom for his son, whom I shall lead—
    I, or some other Greek—a captive bound?
    Or dost thou wish, for thy more idle hours,
    Some maiden, whom thou mayst detain apart?
    Ill it beseems a prince like thee to lead
    The sons of Greece, for such a cause as this,
    Into new perils. O ye coward race!
    Ye abject Greeklings, Greeks no longer, haste
    Homeward with all the fleet, and let us leave
    This man at Troy to win his trophies here,
    That he may learn whether the aid we give
    Avails him aught or not, since he insults
    Achilles, a far braver man than he.[157]

[157] Book ii.

It is true Ulysses smote Thersites as he upbraided him for this insult
to Agamemnon. It is plain, however, that the chastisement was of a
private nature. It seems not to have been a crime openly to berate
their chief. Indeed the position of “shepherd of the people” was not
one of such dignity that any warrior among the hosts might not with
impunity freely speak his mind concerning him, or to his face confront
him with improper behaviour. When Agamemnon compared unfavourably
the valour of Diomed with that of his father, Tydeus, Sthenelus, the
honoured son of Capaneus, hesitated not to remind the chief of his
folly, and to his face upbraid him. “Atrides, speak not falsely when
thou knowest the truth so well.”[158]

[158] Book iv.

Regarding the office of king, Mr. Morgan says:

 Modern writers, almost without exception, translate _basileus_ by
 the term _king_, and _basileia_ by the term _kingdom_, without
 qualification, and as exact equivalents. I wish to call attention
 to this office of _basileus_, as it existed in the Grecian tribes,
 and to question the correctness of this interpretation. There is no
 similarity whatever between the _basileia_ of the ancient Athenians
 and the modern kingdom or monarchy.... Constitutional monarchy is
 a modern development, and essentially different from the _basileia_
 of the Greeks. The _basileia_ was neither an absolute nor a
 constitutional monarchy; neither was it a tyranny nor a despotism. The
 question then is, what was it?

Mr. Morgan’s answer to the question is as follows:

 The primitive Grecian government was essentially democratical,
 reposing on gentes, phratries, and tribes organized as self-governing
 bodies, and on the principles of liberty, equality, and fraternity.

This writer says further:

 Our views upon Grecian and Roman questions have been moulded by
 writers accustomed to monarchical government and privileged classes,
 who were perhaps glad to appeal to the earliest known governments of
 the Grecian tribes for a sanction of this form of government, as at
 once natural, essential, and primitive.[159]

[159] _Ancient Society_, p. 247.

We have noted the precautions which during the second and latter
periods of barbarism were necessary to keep in check the increasing
thirst for power, and it may not be doubted that through the growth of
the aristocratic tendency during the latter ages of the existence of
the gens, the office of _basileus_ gave to its incumbent a degree of
distinction closely allied to that of king.

In the eleventh century B.C. upon the death of Codrus, so necessary
had it become to check the continually increasing power of the military
chieftains that the office was abolished and the archonship established
in its place; but as an election or confirmation was necessary before
the duties of either office could be entered upon, it is plain that at
the period referred to a democratic form of government still prevailed.

Now archon is the term which had been applied to the chief of the
early gentes at a time when fraternity, liberty, and equality were
the cardinal virtues of society; and the abolition of the office of
_basileus_, to which had become attached a considerable degree of
power, was doubtless an attempt on the part of the people to return
to the simpler and purer methods of government which had formerly
prevailed; but the institution known as the Agora, Ecclesia, or
Appella, which had proved the great bulwark of safety to early
democratic institutions, had, through the strengthening of the
aristocratic element, become gradually weakened, hence the nobles
were in a position to draw to themselves not only much of the power
originally exercised by the military commander, but that also which
had formerly belonged to the assembly of the people. We have observed
that not only among the Greeks of the heroic age, but among the
tribes and nations which preceded them, as far back in the history
of the past as the close of the second stage of barbarism, there had
always been an assembly of the people whose duty it was to guard the
rights of the tribe, to protect it against usurpation, and to keep
down the rising tendency toward imperialism. Of this institution, Mr.
Rawlinson says: “Thus at Athens, as elsewhere, in the heroic times,
there was undoubtedly the idea of a public assembly consisting of all
freemen.”[160]

[160] George Rawlinson, book v., essay ii.

Theseus, _basileus_, or military chieftain of the Athenian tribes,
a personage who belongs to the legendary period, was the first to
perceive the insufficiency of gentile institutions to meet the needs
of the people. Although the primary idea involved in the establishment
of political society was the transference of the original governmental
functions from the gens to a territorial limit, so deeply had the
instincts, ideas, and associations connected with the personal
government of the gens taken root that several centuries were required
to accomplish the change. To establish the deme or township, in which,
irrespective of kinship or personal ties, all its inhabitants (except
slaves) should be enrolled as citizens, with rights, privileges, and
duties adjusted according to the amount of property owned by each, and
which should be a unit of the larger and more important institution—the
State,—was an undertaking the mastery of which although seemingly
simple, nevertheless involved intricacies and obstacles of such
magnitude as to baffle all attempts of the Greeks from the time of
Theseus to that of Clisthenes, at which time political society was
established, and the gens, shorn of its utility and power, remained
only as the embodiment of certain social ideas, or survived as a
religious centre, over which their eponymous ancestor, as hero or god,
still presided.

The age of Theseus could not have been later than 1050 B.C., and the
final overthrow of gentile government did not, as we have seen, occur
until the age of Clisthenes, five hundred years later. Throughout the
intervening time between Theseus and Clisthenes little real advancement
is noted among the Greeks; none, perhaps, except that connected with
the growth of the idea of government as indicated by the change
from gentile to political institutions, and even this growth, when
we observe that nearly five centuries and a half were required to
establish it, or to substitute the deme or township in the place of the
gens as the unit in the governmental series, can scarcely be regarded
as evidence of remarkable genius, or as indicating a notable degree
of ingenuity. In the transference of society, however, from gentile
to political institutions may be observed a progressive principle,
inasmuch as by it the limits of the gens and tribe were gradually
broken down or obliterated, and the enlarged conception of the state
established in their stead. After the age of Clisthenes an isolated
community bound together by kinship, and with interests extending no
further than the tribe of which it was a part, no longer constituted
the fundamental basis upon which the superstructure of society was to
rest; but, on the contrary, the deme or township, with all its free
inhabitants, of whatsoever tribe or gens, was to become the recognized
unit in organized society.

Prior to the age of Theseus, Attica was divided into petty states,
each with a council-house of its own. According to the testimony of
Thucydides, from the time of Cecrops to Theseus

 the population of Athens had always inhabited independent cities, with
 their own guild-halls and magistrates; and at such times as they were
 not in fear of any danger they did not meet with the king to consult
 with him, but themselves severally conducted their own government, and
 took their own counsel.[161]

[161] Thucydides, _The History of Peloponnesian War_.

The _basileus_ or war-chief exercised no civil functions,[162] and his
services were never called into requisition except in times of danger.

[162] Morgan, _Ancient Society_, p. 250.

Theseus upon receiving the office of military chieftain “persuaded” the
people in the adjacent country to remove to the city.[163] According
to Plutarch he “settled all the inhabitants of Attica in Athens and
made them one people in one city.”[164] He persuaded them to abolish
their independent city governments and to establish in their stead,
at Athens, a council-house which would be common to all. Thus, under
his direction, the Attic peoples coalesced, or were united under
one government. Theseus, we are told, divided the people into three
classes, irrespective of gentes, on the basis of property and social
position. The chiefs of the several gentes with their families, and
the citizens who through their great wealth had become influential,
constituted the first class; the second class were the husbandmen,
and the third the mechanics. All the principal offices both of the
government and the priesthood were in the hands of the nobles or the
moneyed and aristocratic classes. Thucydides refers to the fact that
“when Greece was becoming more powerful, and acquiring possessions
of money still more than before, tyrannies were established in the
cities.”[165]

[163] Thucydides, book ii., 14.

[164] _Theseus._

[165] Book i., 13.

Upon this subject Mr. Rawlinson says:

 All important political privilege is engrossed by the Eupatrids, who
 consist of a certain number of “clans” claiming a special nobility,
 but not belonging to any single tribe, or distinguishable from the
 ignoble clans, otherwise than by the possession of superior rank and
 riches. The rest of the citizens constitute an unprivileged class,
 personally free, but with no atom of political power, and are roughly
 divided, according to their occupation, into yeoman-farmers and
 artisans. The union of the Eupatrids in the same tribes and phratries
 with the Geomori and Demiurgi, seems to show that the aristocracy of
 Athens was not original, like that of Rome, but grew out of an earlier
 and more democratical condition of things—such, in fact, as we find
 depicted in the Homeric poems.... Thus at Athens, as elsewhere, in the
 heroic times, there was undoubtedly the idea of a public assembly,
 consisting of all free-men; but this institution seems entirely to
 have disappeared during the centuries which intervened between Codrus
 and Solon.[166]

[166] Rawlinson, book v., essay ii.

During the three hundred years which followed the death of Codrus,
nothing of great importance is observed concerning the growth of
Grecian institutions. Doubtless their development was characterized
only by the strengthening of the aristocracy and the stimulation of
those egoistic principles which are essential in the establishment of
an oligarchy. That in course of time the power attached to the office
of archon also became a menace to the people’s liberties is shown in
the fact that in the first year of the seventh Olympiad, B.C., 752, the
life archonship was brought to a close and the term of office reduced
to ten years. Although the office was still limited to the family of
Codrus, the incumbent became amenable to the elders or chiefs for his
acts. However, that this movement was not wholly in the interest of the
masses of the people is shown in the fact that during the following
thirty years the Eupatrids, or members of the aristocratic party, had
drawn to themselves all the power belonging to the archonship. It
is observed that during the reign of the fourth decennial archon, a
pretext having been found to depose him, the reigning family or gens
was declared as having forfeited its right to rule and the office was
thrown open to all Eupatrids. Nine archons from among the aristocratic
party, with all the powers formerly belonging to the supreme archon,
conveyed to them, were chosen as a governing board,[167] and were
to continue in office for one year. Selected by and from among the
Eupatrids, their legislation was wholly in the interest of the wealthy
and privileged classes.

[167] Rawlinson, book v., essay ii.

From 684 B.C. to 624 B.C., the aristocratic party exercised unlimited
control over the Athenian state, and during the entire sixty years used
their great power to crush out even a semblance of free institutions.
The thirst for power among them was equalled only by their greed for
gain; hence while wielding the former, they gratified their cupidity
by gathering into their own coffers almost the entire wealth of the
nation. With the machinery of legislation turned against them, the
middle and lower classes were soon robbed even of their means of
support. Most of the land was mortgaged, and the persons of the owners
held by the Eupatrids for debt. Men sold their children and their
sisters to satisfy the demands of creditors,[168] and such was the
inequality existing between various classes that dissensions arose on
every hand, and a general state of confusion, disorder, and discontent
prevailed. Thus may be observed some of the processes by which the
early principles of fraternity, liberty, and justice were overthrown.

[168] _Ibid._

At length the sufferings of the people caused by the injustice and
rapacity of their rulers became unbearable, and by means of various
signs of discontent, notably that of a popular demand for written
laws, it became evident that a crisis had been reached. The Eupatrids,
pretending to heed the popular demand, elected Draco, one of their
number, to the office of archon, with the understanding that a code of
written laws defining the rights of the several classes be prepared.

As the Greeks of the Draconian and Solonic age were but a few
centuries removed from a time when individual liberty and equality had
constituted the cardinal principles upon which society was founded, we
may believe that that spirit of personal independence and self-respect
which had been inherited from gentile institutions, although it had
perhaps slumbered, had never been crushed; therefore, a condition
of subjection or slavery, although for a time endured, could not be
willingly accepted as a settled fact.

As the laws prepared by Draco tended only to aggravate the abuses
of which the people complained, it is quite evident that no reform
was intended; the Eupatrids, however, had mistaken the temper of the
people, and the fact soon became manifest, even to the members of the
governing classes themselves, that certain concessions must be made
to the popular demand for justice. An idea of the rapacity, greed,
dishonesty, and cupidity which prevailed at this stage of Greek life
may be obtained from the writings of Theognis, a poet of Grecian Mega,
who lived about five hundred and seventy years B.C. Among his Maxims
appear the following:

 Now at length a sense of shame hath perished among mankind, but
 shamelessness reigns over the earth. Everyone honours a rich man but
 dishonours a poor: And in all men there is the same mind.... No one of
 the present race of men doth the sun look down upon, being entirely
 good and moderate.... When I am flourishing, friends are many; but
 should any calamity have chanced upon me, few retain a faithful
 spirit. For the multitude of men there is this virtue only, namely, to
 be rich: But of the rest, I wot, there is no use.

The fact is obvious that already in the history of the Greeks the love
of property and the rise of the aristocratic spirit had gained such a
foothold that a democracy was no longer desired by the more influential
citizens, and that it was the moneyed classes and the aristocratic
party who were growing restless under institutions which acknowledged
the equality of all free-born citizens.

Doubtless the power which had been hitherto exercised by the gentes
had already been drawn to the moneyed classes; still, this attempt to
organize society into classes on the basis of property and station was
perhaps the first regulated movement openly to curtail the hitherto
recognized power of the individual members of the gens, and doubtless
constituted the first formulated step towards the subsequent removal of
this ancient institution from its original position as the unit in the
governmental series.

From accessible facts to be gathered relative to early Greek society,
it is plain that individual liberty perished with the gens, and that
monarchy, aristocracy, and slavery were the natural results of the
decline of the altruistic principles upon which early society was
founded.




