
                          Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and accents have been standardised but all other
spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

The precise location of footnote 256 is speculative since it is not
indicated in the original.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.




                         The Sexes in Science
                                  and
                                History

                 An Inquiry into the Dogma of Woman’s
                          Inferiority to Man

                                  By

                           Eliza Burt Gamble

            _A revised edition of “The Evolution of Woman”_


                          G. P. Putnam’s Sons
                          New York and London
                        The Knickerbocker Press
                                 1916




                            COPYRIGHT, 1893
             Under the title _The Evolution of Woman_, by
                          G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS

                            COPYRIGHT, 1916
                      for the revised edition, by
                          G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS

                   The Knickerbocker Press, New York




PREFACE TO NEW EDITION


This volume is a revised edition of _The Evolution of Woman_ published
by G. P. Putnam’s Sons in 1894.

In this later work much added evidence appears going to prove the
correctness of the theory advanced in the former work. In it the
subject of sex-development has been brought down to the present time
and in this later investigation it is found that each and every fact
connected with the biological and sociological development of the last
twenty years is in strict accord not only with the facts set forth in
_The Evolution of Woman_ but with the conclusions therein arrived at.

In the concluding chapters of this volume the results of the separate
development of the two diverging lines of sex demarcation are set
forth. I have endeavoured to show that present conditions are the
legitimate outcome of the ascendency gained during the later ages of
human history by the egoistic or destructive agencies over the higher
or constructive forces developed in human nature.

  E. B. G.




PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION


After a somewhat careful study of written history, and after an
investigation extending over several years of all the accessible facts
relative to extant tribes representing the various stages of human
development, I had reached the conclusion, as early as the year 1882,
that the female organism is in no wise inferior to that of the male.
For some time, however, I was unable to find any detailed proof that
could consistently be employed to substantiate the correctness of this
hypothesis.

In the year 1885, with no special object in view other than a desire
for information, I began a systematized investigation of the facts
which at that time had been established by naturalists relative to the
development of mankind from lower orders of life. It was not, however,
until the year 1886, after a careful reading of _The Descent of Man_,
by Mr. Darwin, that I first became impressed with the belief that
the theory of evolution, as enunciated by scientists, furnishes much
evidence going to show that the female among all the orders of life,
man included, represents a higher stage of development than the male.
Although at the time indicated, the belief that man has descended from
lower orders in the scale of being had been accepted by the leading
minds both in Europe and America, for reasons which have not been
explained, scientists, generally, seemed inclined to ignore certain
facts connected with this theory which tend to prove the superiority of
the female organism.

Scarcely considering at the outset whether my task would eventually
take the form of a magazine article, or whether it would be extended to
the dimensions of a book, I set myself to work to show that some of the
conclusions of the savants regarding the subject of sex-development are
not in accord with their premises.

While writing the first part of this volume, and while reasoning on the
facts established by scientists in connection with the observations
which have been made in these later years relative to the growth of
human society and the development of human institutions, it seemed
clear to me that the history of life on the earth presents an unbroken
chain of evidence going to prove the importance of the female; and,
so struck was I by the manner in which the facts of science and those
of history harmonize, that I decided to embrace within my work some
of the results of my former research. I therefore set about the task
of tracing, in a brief manner, the growth of the primary characters
observed in the two diverging sex-columns, according to the facts and
principles enunciated in the theory of natural development.

It is not perhaps singular, during an age dominated by theological
dogmatism, and in which no definite knowledge relative to the
development of life on the earth had been gained, that man should
have regarded himself as an infinitely superior being. Neither is it
remarkable that woman, who was supposed to have appeared later on the
scene of action than did her male mate, and who owed her existence to
a surgical operation performed upon him, should have been regarded
simply as an appendage, a creature brought forth in response to the
requirements of the masculine nature.

The above doctrines when enunciated by theologians need cause little
surprise, but with the dawn of a scientific age it might have been
expected that the prejudices resulting from those doctrines might
disappear. When, however, we turn to the most advanced scientific
writings of the present century, we find that the prejudices which
throughout thousands of years have been gathering strength are by no
means eradicated, and any discussion of the sex question is still
rare in which the effects of these prejudices may not be traced. Even
Mr. Darwin, notwithstanding his great breadth of mental vision and
the important work which he accomplished in the direction of original
inquiry, whenever he had occasion to touch on the mental capacities
of women, or more particularly on the relative capacities of the
sexes, manifested the same spirit which characterizes the efforts
of an earlier age; and throughout his entire investigation of the
human species, his ability to ignore certain facts which he himself
adduced, and which all along the line of development tend to prove the
superiority of the female, is truly remarkable.

We usually judge of a man’s fitness to assume the rôle of an original
investigator in any branch of human knowledge, by noting his powers
of observation and generalization, and by observing his capacity to
perceive connections between closely related facts; also, by tracing
the various processes by which he arrives at his conclusions. The
ability, however, to collect facts, and the power to generalize and
draw conclusions from them, avail little, when brought into direct
opposition to deeply rooted prejudices.

The indications are strong that the time has at length arrived when
the current opinions concerning sex capacity and endowment demand a
revision, and when nothing short of scientific deductions, untainted by
the prejudices and dogmatic assumptions of the past, will be accepted.

As has been stated, the object of this volume is to set forth the
principal data brought forward by naturalists bearing on the subject
of the origin and development of the two lines of sexual demarcation,
and by means of the facts observed by explorers among peoples in the
various stages of development, to trace, so far as possible, the
effect of such differentiation upon the individual, and upon the
subsequent growth of human society.

  E. B. G.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

  PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION                                          iii

  PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION                                             v


                                PART I

                       _THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION_

  CHAPTER

  I.—DEVELOPMENT OF THE ORGANISM                                       3

  II.—THE ORIGIN OF SEX DIFFERENCES                                   14

  III.—MALE ORGANIC DEFECTS                                           35

  IV.—THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIAL INSTINCTS AND THE MORAL SENSE     63

  V.—THE SUPREMACY OF THE MALE                                        74


                                PART II

                         _PREHISTORIC SOCIETY_

  I.—METHOD OF INVESTIGATION                                          95

  II.—THE RELATIONS OF THE SEXES AMONG EARLY MANKIND                 104

  III.—THE GENS WOMEN UNDER GENTILE INSTITUTIONS                     123

  IV.—THE ORIGIN OF MARRIAGE                                         159

  V.—THE MOTHER-RIGHT                                                203

  VI.—THEORIES TO EXPLAIN WIFE-CAPTURE                               215


                               PART III

                       _EARLY HISTORIC SOCIETY_

  I.—EARLY HISTORIC SOCIETY FOUNDED ON THE GENS                      243

  II.—WOMEN IN EARLY HISTORIC TIMES                                  269

  III.—ANCIENT SPARTA                                                285

  IV.—ATHENIAN WOMEN                                                 318

  V.—ROMAN LAW, ROMAN WOMEN, AND CHRISTIANITY                        347

  VI.—THE RENAISSANCE                                                367

  VII.—CONCLUSION                                                    380

  INDEX                                                              403




                   The Sexes in Science and History




                                PART I

                        The Theory of Evolution




CHAPTER I

DEVELOPMENT OF THE ORGANISM


Sex is not only the basic fact underlying physical life but it is also
the fundamental principle involved in the origin and development of
religion. Throughout the history of mankind, the God-idea has ever
been, male or female, according to the relative importance of the two
sex principles in human affairs.

Scientists declare that they are now able to trace the development
of the two diverging lines of sex-demarcation from the time of their
separation, or from the time when these principles were confined within
one and the same individual. In order to understand the origin of sex,
it becomes necessary to recall, briefly, the theory of the development
of life on the earth as set forth by the savants.

As science deals only with matter, a mechanical theory of the universe
is inevitable. As science is wholly materialistic, it is perfectly
consistent in its declaration that the senses and the intellect
constitute the only means whereby truth may be discovered. Modern
philosophy, on the other hand, which deals less with matter itself
than with the causes which underlie the development of matter, affirms
that a character has been developed in human beings which in its
capacity to discern truth, far transcends the intellect. That character
is intuition. But as we are dealing only with scientific observations,
philosophical speculations do not here concern us.

 The fundamental idea, which must necessarily lie at the bottom of all
 natural theories of development, is that of a gradual development of
 all (even the most perfect) organisms out of a single, or out of a
 very few, quite simple, and quite imperfect original beings, which
 came into existence, not by supernatural creation, but by spontaneous
 generation.[1]

[1] Haeckel, _History of Creation_, 1884, vol. i., p. 75.

According to the theory of evolution as elaborated by scientists, the
history of man begins with small animated particles, or Monera, which
appeared in the primeval sea. These marine specks were albuminous
compounds of carbon, generated by the sun’s heat, which made their
appearance as soon as the mists which enveloped the earth were
sufficiently cleared away to permit the rays of the sun to penetrate
them and reach the surface of the globe. Concerning the origin of
the principle of life which these particles contained, or regarding
the development of organic bodies from inorganic substances, the
more timid among naturalists declare that in the present state of
human knowledge it is impossible to know anything, while others of
them, more bold, or more confident of the latent powers of the human
intellect, after having elaborated a natural or mechanical explanation
for the development of all organic forms, are not disposed to accept
a supernatural theory for the beginning of life. For example, since
organic structures represent the development of matter according to
laws governing the chemical, molecular, and physical forces inherent
in it, it is believed that the gulf separating organic and inorganic
substances is not so difficult to span as has hitherto been supposed.
Among those who hold this view may be ranked the celebrated naturalist,
Ernst Haeckel.

Regarding the phenomena of life this writer observes: “We can
demonstrate the infinitely manifold and complicated physical and
chemical properties of the albuminous bodies to be the real cause
of organic or vital phenomena.”[2] Indeed, in whatever manner the
vital force within them originated, naturalists agree that from these
particles have been derived all the forms, both animal and vegetable,
which have ever existed upon the earth.

[2] _History of Creation_, vol. i., p. 331.

As speculations concerning the origin of matter lie without the
domain of natural or scientific inquiry, they form no part of the
investigations of the naturalist. So far as is known, matter is
eternal, and all that may be learned concerning it must be gleaned
by observing the changes, chemical and molecular, through which it
is manifested. By those who have observed the laws which govern the
manifold changes in matter, the fact is declared that the various
manifestations in form and substance constitute the only creation
of which we may have any knowledge; and, moreover, that the genesis
of existence is going on as actively in our time as at any previous
period in the history of matter. So far as human knowledge extends, no
particle of matter has ever been created and none ever destroyed. This
continuous process of transmutation of substance and change of form, in
other words the phenomena designated Life, may have been in operation
during all the past, and may continue forever.

As all speculations concerning the origin of matter have been
unavailing, so all attempts to solve the problem of the origin of
life have proved futile. The experiments recently carried on in
the Rockefeller Institute, in which by means of chemical processes
detached organs from the bodies of animals have been made to perform
their normal functions, are interesting and instructive, but these
experiments furnish no clue to the origin of the force which animates
living organic matter. Why the nucleated cells which we call a heart
should pulsate whilst those which we call a liver should secrete bile,
nobody knows.

That all life on the earth has been derived from one, or at most from a
few original forms, is said to be proved by ontogeny, or the history
of the germ, which in its development passes through a number of the
forms which mark the ascending scale of life.

Through the study of comparative anatomy, the fact has been discovered
that the individuals composing the various orders of the great
vertebrate series are all moulded “on the same general plan”; that up
to a certain stage in the development of the several germs—for instance
those of the man, the ape, the horse, the dog, etc.,—they are not
distinguishable the one from the other, and that it is only at a later
stage of development that they take on the peculiarities belonging to
their own special kind. The number and variety of forms which appear
in the animal and vegetable world make it difficult to conceive of the
idea that all have sprung from one, or at most from a few original
types, yet the chain of evidence in support of this theory seems quite
complete.

Natural Selection, by which it is demonstrated that organized matter
must move forward simply through the chemical and physical forces
inherent in it, furnishes a key to all the phenomena of life, both
animal and vegetable, which have ever appeared on the earth. Natural
Selection, we are told, depends for its operation on the interaction of
two processes or agencies, namely, Inheritance and Adaptation. Through
Inheritance germs receive from their parents a plastic form which, as
all development is a function of external physical conditions, is
itself nothing more than a “manifestation of the remains of antecedent
physical impressions.” This inherited form causes them to go forward
in a predestined course, while through Adaptation there is a constant
tendency to change that predestined form imposed upon them by their
parents to one better suited to their changing physical conditions.

According to the theory of Natural Selection, organic structures vary
to meet the requirements of changed conditions; or, when existing
circumstances are such that they are forced into new and unusual modes
of life, they branch off into different directions; thus new varieties
are formed, or possibly new species. Such portions of a group, however,
as remain sheltered from conditions unsuited to their present line
of development, retain their ancient forms. This change of structure
by which organisms or portions of organic bodies are modified so as
to perform more complicated functions, or those better suited to
their environment, is denominated differentiation; hence the degree
of differentiation attained by a structure determines the stage of
development which it has reached.

But to return to our single-celled animal—the simplest form of life
on the earth. Except that by the action of the surrounding forces its
surface has become somewhat hardened, this little animal is the same
throughout, in other words, it is homogeneous. The hardening of the
outer portion constitutes the first process of differentiation, and
therefore the first step in the order of progress.

Comparing the simplest form of life, the little carbon-sac found in the
sea, with the germ from which animals and plants are derived, Haeckel
says:

 Originally every organic cell is only a single globule of mucus, like
 a Moneron, but differing from it in the fact that the homogeneous
 albuminous substance has separated itself into two different parts, a
 firmer albuminous body, the cell-kernel (nucleus), and an external,
 softer albuminous body, the cell-substance or body (protoplasma).[3]

[3] _History of Creation_, 1884, vol. i., p. 187.

From its body, which, when at rest, is nearly spherical, it is almost
constantly casting forth certain “finger-like processes” which are
as quickly withdrawn, only to reappear on some other portion of its
surface. The small particles of albuminous matter with which it
comes in contact adhere to it, or are drawn into its semi-fluid body
by displacement of the several albuminous particles of which it is
composed, and are there digested, being “absorbed by simple diffusion.”
Its only activity consists in supplying itself with nourishment, and
even during this process it is said to display a negative or passive
quality rather than real action. The particles absorbed that are not
assimilated, are expelled through the surface of the body in the same
manner as they are taken into it.

At first, we are told, our animal is only a simple cell, in fact that
it is not a perfect cell, for as yet the cell-kernel or nucleus has
not been separated from the cell-substance or protoplasm. When its
limit of size has been reached it multiplies by self-division, or by
simply breaking into parts, each part performing the same functions
of nutrition and propagation as its predecessor. Later, however, when
a parent cell bursts, the newly developed cells no longer separate
from it, but, by cohering to it and to each other, form a cluster of
nucleated cells, while around this aggregation of units is formed a
wall. Still its food is absorbed. Subsequently, however, a mouth and
prehensile organs for seizing its food are developed, and the divisions
between the cells are converted into channels or pipes through which
nourishment is conveyed to every part of the body. In process of time,
limbs for locomotion appear, together with bones for levers, and
muscles for moving them. Finally, a brain and a heart are evolved, and
although at first the heart appears as only a simple pulsating vessel,
later this animal finds itself the possessor of a perfect system of
digestion, circulation, and excretion, by which food, after having been
changed into blood and aërated or purified by processes carried on in
the system, is pumped to every part of the body. With the formation
of different chemical combinations, and the development, through
increasing specialization of the various kinds of tissues, and finally
of the various organs, that intimate relationship observed between
the parts in homogeneous and less differentiated structures no longer
exists; hence, in response to the demand for communication between
the various organs, numberless threads or fibres begin to stretch
themselves through the muscles, and collecting in knots or centres in
the brain and spine, establish instantaneous communication between the
different parts, and convey sensation and feeling throughout the entire
organism.

A division of labour has now been established, and each organ, being
in working order and fashioned for its own special use, performs its
separate functions independently, although its activity is co-ordinated
with that of all other organs in the structure.

This far in the history of life on the earth sex has not been
developed, or, more correctly stated, as the two sexes have not been
separated, our animal is still androgynous or hermaphrodite—the
reproductive functions being confined in one and the same individual.
Within this little primeval animal, the progenitor of the human race,
lay not only all the possibilities which have thus far been realized by
mankind, but within it were embodied also the “promise and potency” of
all that progress which is yet to come, and of which man himself, in
his present undeveloped state, may have only a dim foreshadowing.

From the time of the appearance of life on the earth to that of the
separation of the sexes, myriads of centuries may have intervened.
Only when through a division of labour these elements became detached,
and the special functions of each were confided to two distinct and
separate individuals, did the independent history of the female and
male sexes begin.

No fact is more patent, at the present time, than that sex constitutes
the underlying principle throughout nature. Although it may not be
said of the simplest forms of life that sexual difference has been
established, yet we are assured that among the ciliated Infusorians
“male and female nuclear elements have been distinguished.” This
primitive condition, however, is supposed to be rather a state
antecedent to sex than a union of sexes in one organism. Among all the
higher orders of life, whether animal or vegetable, the sex elements,
female and male, are recognized as the two great factors in creation.

As, among all the animals in which there has been a separation of
sexes, there has been established a division of labour, the consequent
specialization of organs and the differentiation of parts form the
true line of demarcation in the march of the two diverging columns.
Doubtless in the future, when our knowledge of the history of life on
the earth has become more extended, it will be found that it is only
by tracing the processes of differentiation throughout the two entire
lines of development that we may hope to unravel all the mysteries
bound up in the problem of sex, or to understand the fundamental
differences in character and constitution caused by this early division
of labour.




