CHAPTER IV

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIAL INSTINCTS AND THE MORAL SENSE


Man is pre-eminently a social animal. He seeks companionship and
depends largely upon his fellows for security and happiness. Nor is
this dependence upon others confined to the human species. Association,
or combination of interests, is manifested throughout the entire
organic scale.

From Mr. Darwin’s reasoning it is evident that he regards association
as the basic principle underlying progress. He also thinks that
combination is impossible without sympathy or a desire for the welfare
of others outside of self. He is certain that associated animals have a
feeling of affection for the group and that “they sympathize with one
another in times of distress and danger.”[41]

[41] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 102.

This writer thinks that an animal like the gorilla, which possessing
great size and strength is able to defend itself against all its
enemies, would not become social and therefore would be unable to
advance. And this too, notwithstanding the fact that such an animal has
already developed pugnacity, courage, and perseverance, the characters
which are regarded as the source of the remarkable mental endowment of
man.

We have seen that the greater size of the male is the result of Sexual
Selection and is therefore a secondary sexual character. “All the
secondary sexual characters of man are highly variable.”[42] In dealing
with this subject we must not lose sight of the fact that variability
denotes low organization. It shows that the organs of the body have not
become specialized to perform their legitimate functions.

[42] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 559.

Among monogamous animals difference in size between the sexes is
slight, but among polygamous species the male is considerably larger
than the female, this difference being correlated with numerous
variations of structure.

Among early races males were considerably in excess of females so it
was customary for the former to fight desperately to win the favour
of the latter in much the same manner as their animal progenitors had
fought to secure their mates. These struggles were enacted in the
presence of the females, they always choosing the strongest and best
endowed leaving the weaker and uglier members of the group unmated
and therefore unable to propagate their misfortunes. This exercise of
choice by the female in pairing is the primary fact in the history of
human progress. The appalling effects of the withdrawal from women of
this fundamental prerogative will be referred to later in these pages.

That pugnacity, courage, and perseverance are the result of man’s
strong sexual nature is shown wherever this subject is touched upon in
_The Descent of Man_. Special attention is directed to the fact that
eunuchs are deficient in these qualities.

That the greater size and strength of the male, together with courage,
pugnacity, and perseverance, have been of great value to him in
deciding the contests between rivals in courtship is quite true. It is
clear, however, that these characters are in no wise responsible for
the origin and development of the higher faculties. Even Mr. Darwin’s
premises, when carried to their legitimate conclusions, furnish
sufficient evidence to prove that the social instincts and the moral
sense have been developed quite independently of these characters.

According to the reasoning of the savants it is only through that
specialization of organs which has resulted in the separation of the
sex elements, and the consequent division of functions, that the social
instincts have originated, and that it is to processes involved in such
specialization, or differentiation, that the higher faculties and the
moral sense have arisen. It is indeed plain from their reasoning that
matter, or perhaps I should say the force inherent in matter, had to be
raised to a certain dynamic order before the peculiar quality of brain
and nerve necessary for the development of these faculties could be
manifested through it.

 As there are different kinds of matter, so there are different modes
 of force, in the universe; and as we rise from the common physical
 matter in which physical laws hold sway up to chemical matter and
 chemical forces, and from chemical matter again up to living matter
 and its modes of force, so do we rise in the scale of life from
 the lowest kind of living matter with its corresponding force or
 energy, through different kinds of histological elements, with their
 corresponding energies or functions, up to the highest kind of living
 matter and corresponding mode of force with which we are acquainted,
 viz., nerve element and nerve force. But, when we have got to nerve
 element and nerve force, it behooves us not to rest content with the
 general idea, but to trace, with attentive discrimination, through
 the nervous system the different kinds of nervous cells, and their
 different manifestations of energy. So also shall we obtain the
 groundwork for a true conception of the relations of mind and the
 nervous system.[43]

[43] Maudsley, _Physiology and Pathology of the Mind_, p. 60.

We have seen that the nervous system not only regulates most of the
existing functions of the body, but that it has indirectly influenced
the development of various bodily structures and certain mental
qualities, and that these powers of mind depend on the development of
the brain.

By our guides in this matter, we are assured that the most important
difference observed between man and the lower animals is the
conscience; hence, if we would understand how it has been possible for
man to rise to his present position, we must know something of the
processes involved in the development of the social instincts, through
which have originated conscience and a desire for the welfare of others
outside of self. The importance of these instincts in the development
of conscience is thus set forth by Mr. Darwin:

 Any animal whatever, endowed with well-marked social instincts, the
 parental and filial affections being here included, would inevitably
 acquire a moral sense or conscience, as soon as its intellectual
 faculties had become as well, or nearly as well, developed as in man.

Sympathy, we are told, is the foundation-stone of the social instincts.
From facts which are everywhere presented among the forms of life
below man, it is evident that sympathy was developed at an early stage
of animal life. It is doubtless strongly manifested in our ape-like
progenitors, and it was probably this instinct which subsequently led
to a community of interest and the coherence of the tribe.

In a consideration, therefore, of this question of sex development
and the origin of the progressive principle, if, as we are assured,
sympathy constitutes the foundation-stone of the social instincts,
and if it is to these instincts that we are to look for the origin
of the moral sense, or conscience— a faculty which constitutes the
fundamental difference between the human species and the lower orders
of life—the question naturally arises: In which of the two diverging
lines of sexual demarcation has arisen sympathy, or an interest in
the well-being of others? For an answer to our question we must look
carefully to the facts connected with the development of the sexes
within one of which have been acquired characters tending toward the
welfare of society, or of individuals outside of self; within the
other, characters looking only toward selfish gratification. Within the
former, the maternal instinct predominates; within the latter, passion.

Mr. Darwin admits that “parental and filial affection lies at the base
of the social instincts,” and gives as his opinion that this quality is
the result of Natural Selection—that those individuals which bestowed
upon their offspring the greatest care and attention, would survive
and multiply at the expense of others in which this instinct was less
developed. Therefore, in pursuing the inquiry of sex-function and
sex-development, a question of considerable significance is at this
point suggested: Within which parent is observed the greater tendency
to bestow care and attention upon offspring?

We are assured that “the animal family is especially maternal.” So
soon as a female bird has laid her eggs, she is animated only by one
desire; neither the promise of abundant food nor the fear of bullets
is able to divert her purpose. Although the males among the more highly
developed birds assist in rearing the family, amongst various species
it is only the female which cares for the young. The male duck has
no interest in his progeny, neither has the male eider. Of the male
turkeys Mr. Letourneau says that they

 do much worse: they often devour the eggs of their females, and
 thus oblige the latter to hide them. Female turkeys join each other
 with their young ones for greater security, and thus form troops of
 from sixty to eighty individuals, led by the mothers, and carefully
 avoiding the old males, who rush on the young ones and kill them by
 violent blows on the head with their beaks.[44]

[44] _The Evolution of Marriage and the Family_, p. 29.

The males of various other species, jealous of the attentions of the
mothers during the time that their efforts are directed toward the
maintenance of their brood, often kill their young. Regarding the
subject of paternal care, Mr. Letourneau observes: “It is important to
notice that amongst birds, the fathers devoid of affection generally
belong to the less intelligent, and are most often polygamous.”

By observing the habits of cuckoos the fact has been ascertained
that among them the maternal instinct is almost entirely lacking.
Of the cuckoo it has been remarked that it is a “discontented,
ill-conditioned, passionate, in short, decidedly unamiable bird.” Its
note is typical of its habits and character.

 The same abruptness, insatiability, eagerness, the same rage,
 are noticeable in its whole conduct. The cuckoos are notoriously
 unsociable, even in migration individualistic. They jealously guard
 their territorial “preserves,” and verify in many ways the old myth
 that they are sparrow-hawks in disguise. The parasitic habit is
 consonant with their general character.

 The species consist predominantly of males. The preponderance is
 probably about five to one; though one observer makes it five times
 greater. In so male a species, it is not surprising to find degenerate
 maternal instincts.[45]

[45] Geddes and Thomson, _The Evolution of Sex_, p. 276.

Regarding spiders and the greater number of insects, we are told that
the males entirely neglect their young; it is

 in the female that the care for offspring first awakens. And this is
 natural, for the eggs have been formed in her body; she has laid them,
 and has been conscious of them; they form, in a way, an integral part
 of her individuality.... With insects maternal forethought sometimes
 amounts to a sort of divining prescience which the doctrine of
 evolution alone can explain.[46]

[46] Letourneau, _The Evolution of Marriage and the Family_, p. 22.

Among the males of mammals below man the love of offspring seems to be
almost entirely wanting.

 We must here remark, that whatever the form of sexual association
 among mammals, the male has always much less affection for his young
 than the female. Even in monogamous species, when the male keeps with
 the female, he does so more as chief than as father. At times he is
 inclined to commit infanticide and to destroy the offspring, which, by
 absorbing all the attention of his female, thwart his amours. Thus,
 among the large felines, the mother is obliged to hide her young ones
 from the male during the first few days after birth, to prevent his
 devouring them.[47]

[47] _The Evolution of Marriage and the Family_, p. 34.

The fact is obvious that among the orders of life below man but little
paternal affection has been developed, and with a more extended
knowledge of the past history of the human race comes the assurance
that under earlier conditions of society, and in fact, until a
comparatively recent time, little notice was taken of the paternal
relation—that kinship and all the rights of succession were reckoned
through the mother. In other words, motherhood was the primary bond by
which society was bound together.

Although under higher conditions of civilized life, males have at
length come to manifest much interest in the well-being of their
offspring, yet that paternal affection is not a primary instinct
is shown by the fact that such interest, even at the present time,
extends only to those individuals born in wedlock. Men are solicitous
only for the welfare of those who are to succeed to their names and
fortunes; hence, although in later times the paternal instinct has been
considerably re-enforced, it is plain that the interest of fathers for
their offspring has in the past been largely the result of custom,
association, pride, desire for self-perpetuation or duplication, or
some other form of self-aggrandizement.

Mr. Darwin says: “The feeling of pleasure from society is probably
an extension of the parental or filial affections, since the social
instinct seems to be developed by the young remaining for a long time
with their parents.”[48] Although Mr. Darwin does not admit it, from
his reasoning it is plain that the maternal instinct is the root
whence sympathy has sprung, and that it is the source whence the
cohesive quality in the tribe originated. Regarding the importance of
association or combination in early groups Mr. Darwin remarks:

[48] _The Descent of Man_, p. 105.

 When two tribes of primeval man, living in the same country, came
 into competition, if (other circumstances being equal) the one tribe
 included a great number of courageous, sympathetic, and faithful
 members, who were always ready to warn each other of danger, to aid
 and defend each other, this tribe would succeed better and conquer the
 other.... Selfish and contentious people will not cohere, and without
 coherence nothing can be effected. A tribe rich in the above qualities
 would spread and be victorious over other tribes.... Thus the social
 and moral qualities would tend slowly to advance and be diffused
 throughout the world.[49]

[49] _The Descent of Man_, p. 130.

Since, then, it has been proved by scientists that without an
association of interests and the coherence of the tribe the social
instincts must have remained weak, and since it has been shown by them
that without concerted action the higher faculties, including the moral
sense, could not have been developed; and since, furthermore, the
influences which have led to this development are those growing out of
the maternal instincts, may we not conclude that all of those qualities
which make man pre-eminently a social animal—his love of society, his
desire for the good-will of his kind, his perception of right and
wrong, and, finally, that sympathy which at last gradually extending
beyond the limits of race and country proclaims the brotherhood of man
and the unity of life on the earth—all these characteristics, are but
an extension of maternal affection, an outgrowth of that early bond
between mother and child, which, while affecting the entire line of
development, still remains unchanged and unchangeable.




