CHAPTER III

MALE ORGANIC DEFECTS


We have observed that through the great sexual ardour developed at
puberty within the male of the lower species, numberless variations
of structure have been acquired, characters which, as they are the
result of undeveloped atoms cast off from the varying parts in his
progenitors, denote low organization. We have seen also that these
characters require for their growth an immense amount of vital force,
which, had the development of the male been normal, would have been
expended in perfecting the organism, or would have been utilized in
fitting it to overcome the adverse conditions of his environment.
Secondary sexual characters, being so far as males are concerned,
wholly the result of eagerness in courtship, cannot appear before
the time for reproduction arrives, and as it is a law of heredity
that peculiarities of structure which are developed late in life,
when transmitted to offspring, appear only in the sex in which they
originated, these variations of structure are confined to males.

According to Mr. Darwin’s theory little difference exists between the
sexes until the age of reproduction arrives. It is at this time, the
time when the secondary sexual characters begin to assert themselves,
that the preponderating superiority of the male begins to manifest
itself.

Although, according to Mr. Darwin, variability denotes low organization
and shows that the various organs of the body have not become
specialized to perform properly their legitimate functions, it is to
characters correlated with and dependent upon these varying parts
that the male has ultimately become superior to the female. If these
characters, namely, pugnacity, perseverance, and courage have been
such important factors in establishing male superiority, too much care
may not be exercised in analyzing them and in tracing their origin and
subsequent development.

Sexual Selection resembles artificial selection save that the female
takes the part of the human breeder. She represents the intelligent
factor or cause in the operations involved. If this be true, if it is
through her will, or through some agency or tendency latent in her
constitution that Sexual Selection comes into play, then she is the
primary cause of the very characters through which man’s superiority
over woman has been gained. As a stream may not rise higher than its
source, or as the creature may not surpass its creator in excellence,
it is difficult to understand the processes by which man, through
Sexual Selection, has become superior to woman.

 He who admits the principle of Sexual Selection will be led to the
 remarkable conclusion that the nervous system not only regulates most
 of the existing functions of the body, but has indirectly influenced
 the progressive development of various bodily structures and certain
 mental qualities. Courage, pugnacity, perseverance, strength and
 size of body, weapons of all kinds, musical organs, both vocal and
 instrumental, bright colours, and ornamental appendages have all been
 indirectly gained by the one sex or the other, through the exertion of
 choice, the influence of love and jealousy, and the appreciation of
 the beautiful in sound, colour, or form; and these powers of the mind
 manifestly depend on the development of the brain.[22]

[22] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 617.

While the female has been performing the higher functions in the
processes of reproduction, through her force of will, or through her
power of choice, she has also been the directing and controlling agency
in the development of those characters in the male through which, when
the human species was reached, he was enabled to attain a limited
degree of progress.

Since the origin of secondary sexual characters is so clearly manifest,
perhaps it will be well for us at this point to examine also their
actual significance, that we may be enabled to note the foundation upon
which the dogma of male superiority rests.

Although the gay colouring of male birds and fishes has usually
been regarded as an indication of their superiority over their
sombre-coloured mates, later investigations are proving that these
pigments represent simply unspecialized material, and an effort of
the system to cast out the waste products which have accumulated as a
result of excessive ardour in courtship. The same is true of combs,
wattles, and other skin excrescences; they show a feverish condition of
the skin in the over-excited males, whose temperature is usually much
higher than is that of females. We are assured that the skin eruptions
of male fishes at the spawning season “seem more pathological than
decorative.”[23] In the processes of reproduction, the undeveloped
atoms given off from each varying part are reproduced only in the male
line.

[23] Geddes and Thomson, _The Evolution of Sex_, 1890, p. 24.

The beautiful colouring of male birds and fishes, and the various
appendages acquired by males throughout the various orders below
man, and which, so far as they themselves are concerned, serve no
other useful purpose than to aid them in securing the favours of the
females, have by the latter been turned to account in the processes of
reproduction. The female made the male beautiful that she might endure
his caresses.

From the facts elaborated by our guides in this matter, it would seem
that the female is the primary unit of creation, and that the male
functions are simply supplemental or complementary. Parthenogenesis
among many of the lower forms of life would seem to favour this view.
We are given to understand that under conditions favouring katabolism,
the males among Rotifera wear themselves out, under which conditions
the females become katabolic enough to do without them.

 Among the common Rotifera, the males are almost always very different
 from the females, and much smaller. Sometimes they seem to have
 dwindled out of existence altogether, for only the females are known.
 In other cases, though present, they entirely fail to accomplish their
 proper function of fertilization, and, as parthenogenesis obtains, are
 not only minute, but useless.[24]

[24] _The Evolution of Sex_, 1890, p. 20.

So long as food is plentiful, the females continue to raise
parthenogenetic offspring, but with the advent of hard times, when
food is scarce or of a poor quality, the parthenogenetic series is
interrupted by the appearance of males. Although, unaided by the male,
the female of certain species is able to reproduce, he has never been
able to propagate without her co-operation.

Concerning the conditions which underlie the production of females and
males we have the following from _The Evolution of Sex_, by Geddes and
Thomson:

 Such conditions as deficient or abnormal food, high temperature,
 deficient light, moisture, and the like, are obviously such as would
 tend to induce a preponderance of waste over repair—a katabolic habit
 of body,—and these conditions tend to result in the production of
 males. Similarly, the opposed set of factors, such as abundant and
 rich nutrition, abundant light and moisture, favour constructive
 processes, _i.e._, make for an anabolic habit, and these conditions
 result in the production of females.[25]

[25] _The Evolution of Sex_, p. 50.

Among the lower orders of animal life, notably insects, we are
assured that an excess of females denotes an excess of formative
force, and that an excess of males indicates a deficiency on the
part of the parents. In the case of bees, the queen, which is the
highest development, is produced only under the best circumstances of
nutrition, while the birth of the drone, which is the lowest result of
propagation, is preceded by extremely low conditions.

The working bee which, being an imperfect female, may not be
impregnated, will, however, give birth to parthenogenetic offspring,
such offspring always being male. In the case of Aphides, the sex
depends on the conditions of nutrition. During the summer months while
food is plentiful and nutritious, females are parthenogenetically
produced, but with the return of autumn and the attendant scarcity of
food, together with the low temperature, only males are brought forth.
In seasons in which food is abundant, Cladocera and Aphides lose the
power to copulate; they nevertheless multiply parthenogenetically at a
marvellous rate of increase,

 giving birth to generation after generation of parthenogenetic
 females, so long as the environment remains favourable, but giving
 birth, as soon as the conditions of life become less favourable, to
 males and to females which require fertilization.[26]

[26] Prof. W. K. Brooks, _Pop. Science Monthly_, vol. xxvi., p. 327.

It is stated also that if caterpillars are shut up and starved before
entering the chrysalis stage, the butterflies which make their
appearance are males, while the highly nourished caterpillars are sure
to come out females. In the case of moths unnutritious food produces
only males.

Experiments show that when tadpoles are left to themselves the average
number of females is about fifty-seven in the hundred, but that under
favourable conditions the percentage of females is greatly increased.
The following is the result of one series of observations by Yung.
In the first brood, by feeding one set with beef, the percentage of
females was raised from fifty-four to seventy-eight; in the second,
with fish, the percentage rose from sixty-one to eighty-one, which in
the third set, when the nutritious flesh of frogs was supplied, only
eight males were produced to ninety-two females.[27]

[27] Geddes and Thomson, _The Evolution of Sex_, 1890, p. 42.

It is stated that although scarcity of food is an important factor
in determining the appearance of males, temperature also plays an
important part in their production. Kurg having found a few males in
midsummer in pools which were nearly dried up was induced to attempt
their artificial production. So successful was he, that “he obtained
the males of forty species, in all of which the males had previously
been unknown.” He proved that

 any unfavourable change in the water causes the production of males,
 which appear as it dries up, as its chemical constitution changes,
 when it acquires an unfavourable temperature, or, in general, when
 there is a decrease in prosperity.

From which observations and many others quoted from Düring, Professor
Brooks concludes that “among animals and plants, as well as in mankind,
a favourable environment causes an excess of female births, and an
unfavourable environment an excess of male births.”[28] According to
Rolph, also, the percentage of females increases with the increase of
favourable conditions of temperature and food.

[28] _Popular Science Monthly_, vol. xxvi., p. 328.

Among insects the males appear first, thus showing that less time is
required to develop them from the larval state. Of this Mr. Darwin
says: “Throughout the great class of insects the males almost always
are the first to emerge from the pupal state, so that they generally
abound for a time before any female can be seen.”[29]

[29] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 212.

Recent observations show that among the human species nutrition
plays a significant part in determining sex. Statistics prove that in
towns and in well-to-do families there is a preponderance of girls,
while in the country, and among the poor, more boys are born; also,
that immediately following epidemics, wars, and famines, there is an
excess of male births. On examination, it was found that in Saxony “the
ratio of boy-births rose and fell with the price of food, and that the
variation was most marked in the country.”[30]

[30] W. K. Brooks, _Popular Science Monthly_, vol. xxvi., p. 326.

That the female represents a higher development than the male is
proved throughout all the various departments of nature. Among plants,
staminate flowers open before pistillate, and are much more abundant,
and less differentiated from the leaves, showing that they are less
developed, and that slighter effort, a less expenditure of force, is
necessary to form the male than the female. A male flower represents
an intermediate stage between a leaf and a perfect, or we might say, a
female flower, and the germ which produces the male would, in a higher
stage, produce the female.[31] In reference to the subject of the
relative positions of the female and male flowers in the Sedges, Mr.
Meehan observes:

[31] Thomas Meehan, _Native Flowers and Ferns_, vol. i., p. 47.

 In some cases the spike of the male flowers terminates the scape; in
 others the male flowers occupy the lower place; in others, again they
 have various places on the same spike. It will be generally noted that
 this is associated together with lines of nutrition,—those evidently
 favoured by comparative abundance sustaining the female flowers.

To this Mr. Meehan adds:

 And this is indeed a natural consequence, for, as vitality exists so
 much longer in the female than the male flowers, which generally die
 when the pollen has matured, it is essential that they should have
 every advantage in this respect.[32]

[32] _Native Flowers and Ferns_, vol. i., p. 39.

The most perfect and vigorous specimens of coniferous trees are of the
female kind. In its highest and most luxuriant stage the larch bears
only female blossoms, but so soon as its vigour is lost male flowers
appear, after which death soon ensues.

In _The Evolution of Sex_, by Geddes and Thomson, is the following:

 In phraseology which will presently become more intelligible and
 concrete, the males live at a loss, are more katabolic,—disruptive
 changes tending to preponderate in the sum of changes in their living
 matter or protoplasm. The females, on the other hand, live at a
 profit, are more anabolic,—constructive processes predominating in
 their life, whence indeed the capacity of bearing offspring.[33]

[33] _The Evolution of Sex_, 1890, p. 26.

Among the lower orders of animals, there appears an excess of males,
and among the higher forms of life, man included, the fact that the
male is the result of the cruder, less developed germ, has been clearly
shown, not alone by the facts brought forward by Mr. Darwin, but by
those enunciated by all reliable writers on this subject. As a result
of the excessive eagerness in males, and the consequent expenditure
of vital force among the lower orders of life to find the female and
secure her favours, they are generally smaller in size, with a higher
body temperature and shorter life. Among the higher orders, the human
species, for instance, although man is larger than woman, he is still
shorter lived, has less endurance, is more predisposed to organic
diseases, and is more given to reversion to former types, facts which
show that his greater size is not the result of higher development. It
is noted that the liability to assume characters proper to lower orders
belongs in a marked degree to males of all the higher species—man
included.

Doubtless man’s greater size (a modification which has been acquired
through Sexual Selection) has been of considerable value to him in
the struggle for existence to which he has been subjected, but the
indications are already strong that after a certain stage of progress
has been reached, even this modification of structure will prove
useless, if not an actual hindrance to him. On mechanical principles,
every increase of size requires more than a corresponding increase of
strength and endurance to balance the activities and carry on the vital
processes, yet such have been the conditions of man’s development, that
his excess of strength does not compensate for his greater size and
weight, while his powers of endurance fall below those of women.

Although the conditions of the past have required a vast expenditure
of physical energy, the activities of the future will make no such
demand. Nature’s forces directed by the human will and intellect are
already lessening the necessity for an excessive outlay of bodily
strength. It may be truly said that electricity and the innumerable
mechanical devices now in use have well nigh supplanted the necessity
for great physical exertion. Even war, should it be continued, which
is not likely, will be conducted without it. Destructive weapons based
upon high-power explosives require little physical effort for their
manipulation. The pugilist represents the departing glory of male
physical strength.

We are informed by Mr. Darwin that by a vast number of measurements
taken of various parts of the human body in different races, during
his Novara Expedition, it was found that the men in almost every case
presented a greater range of variations than women, and, as Mr. Wood
has carefully attended to the variations of the muscles of man, Mr.
Darwin quotes from him that “the greatest number of abnormalities
in each subject is found in males.” He adduces also the testimony of
several others who have practically investigated this subject, all of
whom agree in their statements that variations in the muscles are more
frequent in males than in females. These variations usually consist in
a reversion to lower types—a reversion in which muscles proper to lower
forms of life make their appearance.

In an examination of forty male subjects, there was in nineteen of them
a rudimentary muscle found which is designated as the ischio-pubic, and
in three others of the forty was observed a ligament which represents
this muscle; but, in an examination by the same person of thirty female
subjects, in only two of them was this muscle developed on both sides,
whilst in three others the rudimentary ligament was present. Thus while
we observe that about fifty-five per cent. of the males examined were
possessed of muscles proper to lower orders, in only about seventeen
per cent. of the females under observation did this reversion appear.
In a single male subject, seven muscular variations proper to apes were
indicated.

Numberless cases might be cited in which reversions and abnormalities
have been developed only in the male line. Of the porcupine men of the
Lambert family who lived in London last century, Haeckel says:

 Edward Lambert, born in 1717, was remarkable for a most unusual and
 monstrous formation of the skin. His whole body was covered with
 a horny substance, about an inch thick, which rose in the form of
 numerous thorn-shaped and scale-like processes, more than an inch
 long. This monstrous formation on the outer skin, or epidermis, was
 transmitted by Lambert to his sons and grandsons, but not to his
 granddaughters.[34]

[34] _History of Creation_, 1884, vol. i., p. 178.

According to the testimony of those who have made a study of the
various abnormalities in the human organism, the ears of men present
a greater range of variations than do those of women, and the cases
in which supernumerary digits appear in males are as two to one,
compared with females presenting the same structural defect. Of one
hundred and fifty-two cases of this kind tabulated by Burt Wilder,
eighty-six were males and thirty-nine females, the sex of the remaining
twenty-seven being unknown. Mr. Darwin wishes us to remember, however,
that “women would more frequently endeavour to conceal a deformity of
this kind than men.” Although it is quite natural for women to abhor
abnormalities and deformities, it is to be doubted if they would
succeed for any considerable length of time in concealing the deformity
of an organ which, like the hand, is usually uncovered, and which in
waking hours, is in almost constant use.

One of the principal characters which distinguishes the human animal
from the lower orders is the absence of a natural covering for the
skin. That mankind have descended from hair-covered progenitors is
the inevitable conclusion of all those who accept the theory of the
evolution of species, the straggling hairs which are scattered over the
body of man being the rudiments of a uniform hairy coat which enveloped
his ancestors.

We are informed that a hairy covering for the body, pointed ears which
were capable of movement, and a tail provided with the proper muscles,
were among the undoubted characters of the antecedents of the human
race. In addition to these, among the males, were developed great
canine teeth which were used as weapons against their rivals.

As the lack of a hairy coat for the body constitutes one of the
principal characteristics which distinguishes man from the lower
animals, it would seem that a knowledge of the order of time in which
the two sexes became divested of their natural covering would serve as
a hint to indicate their relative stages of development. In a paper
read some years ago at a meeting of the Anthropological Institute
in London, Miss Bird (Mrs. Bishop) the well-known traveller, gave a
description of the Ainos, a race of people found chiefly in the island
of Yezo, and who, it is thought probable, were the original inhabitants
of Japan. The peculiarity of this people is, that the men are covered
with a thick coat of black hair. The women, we are told, “are not
hairy like the men,” but “have soft brown skins.” Upon this subject of
hairiness, Mr. Darwin says:

 As the body of woman is less hairy than that of man, and as this
 character is common to all races, we may conclude that it was our
 female semi-human ancestors who were first divested of hair, and that
 this occurred at an extremely remote period before the several races
 had diverged from a common stock.

After our female ancestors had acquired the new character, nudity, they
must have transmitted it to their own sex, and by continually selecting
their mates from among the least hairy, in process of time males too
would become divested of their animal covering. Whether or not our
semi-human ancestors were subjected to the scorching heat of the torrid
zone, nudity must have been better suited to their improved condition,
not wholly, however, because of its greater beauty and comfort, but
because it was a condition better suited to cleanliness; and, as the
hairy coat had become a useless appendage, or was not necessary to
their changed conditions, it disappeared from the bodies of females,
while doubtless for ages it was retained upon the bodies of males. That
hairiness denotes a low stage of development, Mr. Darwin incautiously
admits, yet in dealing with this subject he is not disposed to
carry his admission to its legitimate conclusion by treating its
appearance on the body of man as a test in determining the comparative
development of the female and male organisms.

Idiots, who, by the way, are more numerous among males than among
females, are frequently covered with hair, and by the acquirement of
other characters more often revert to lower animal types. Mr. Darwin
assures us that around sores of long standing stiff hairs are liable to
appear, thus showing that hair on the body is indicative of undeveloped
tissues and low constitutional conditions. The same writer, however,
does not neglect to inform us that the loss of man’s hairy covering
was rather an injury to him than otherwise; but whether or not the
diminution in the quality of prehension in his toes, the loss of
his canines, and the disappearance of his tail have likewise proved
detrimental to him, Mr. Darwin fails to state.

The fact that throughout the vertebrate kingdom males possess
rudiments of the various parts appertaining to the reproductive system
which properly belong to females, is regarded as evidence that some
remote progenitor of this kingdom must have been hermaphrodite, or
androgynous, especially as it has been ascertained that at a very early
embryonic period both sexes possess true male and female glands. As
high in the scale of life as the mammalian class, males are said to
possess rudiments of a uterus, while at the same time mammary glands
are plainly manifest; which fact would seem to show that in the high
state of development indicated by this great class, male organs have
not through the processes of differentiation become specialized for the
performance of their legitimate functions. In reference to the subject
of atavism Mr. Darwin cites as a case of reversion to a former type, an
instance in which a man was the possessor of two pairs of mammæ.

It is true that instances have been observed in which characters
peculiar to males have been developed in females. This phenomenon,
however, seldom appears among individuals of the higher orders, and
among the lower forms of life where it occurs, it is always manifested
under low circumstances of nutrition or in cases of old age, disease,
or loss of vitality. Instances are cited in which hens, after they have
become old or diseased, have taken on characters peculiar to males.

In all “old-settled” countries women are in excess of men, and this
is true, notwithstanding the fact that more boys are born than girls.
Regarding the excess of the male over female births, Mr. Darwin quotes
from Professor Faye, who says:

 A still greater preponderance of males would be met with, if death
 struck both sexes in equal proportion in the womb and during birth.
 But the fact is, that for every one hundred still-born females, we
 have in several countries from 134.6 to 144.9 still-born males.[35] #/
 Statistics show that during the first four or five years of life, more
 male children die than female.

[35] _The Descent of Man_, 1887, p. 243.

Although whenever throughout Mr. Darwin’s _Descent of Man_ he has been
pleased to deal with the subject of structural variations, he has
given us to understand that they are injurious to the constitution,
and although he has shown that their appearance is much more frequent
in men than in women, yet he does not seem to realize whither his
admissions are leading him. He has proved by seemingly well-established
facts that the female organism is freer from imperfections than the
male, and therefore that it is less liable to derangements; also, that
being more highly specialized, it is less susceptible to injury under
unfavourable conditions; yet, in attempting to explain the reason
why so many more male than female infants succumb to the exigencies
of birth, he expresses the opinion that the size of the body and
“especially of the head” being greater in males, they would be “more
liable to be injured during parturition.”

Among the reasons urged by Mr. Darwin to account for the excess of
women over men in all “old-settled” countries, is that of the exposure
of grown men to various dangers, and their tendency to emigrate.
Doubtless there is more emigration among men than among women, still
men do not usually emigrate to a wilderness and rarely to sparsely
settled countries. When men emigrate from one civilized country, they
usually go to another civilized country; yet in all old-settled
countries women are in excess of men. While the dangers to which men
are exposed because of their greater physical activity have been many,
and the accidents liable to occur from their harder struggle for
existence more numerous than those to which women have been subjected,
still it would seem that the danger to female life, incident to the
artificial relations of the sexes under our present semi-civilized
conditions, is more than an offset for that to which men are liable.

The fact must be borne in mind, however, that the diseases and
physical disabilities of women, at the present time, although
dangerous to health and life, are not organic, and will therefore
disappear as soon as through higher conditions they are allowed the
free expression of their own will in matters pertaining to the sexual
relation. As the diseases peculiar to the female constitution are not
caused by structural defects, but, on the contrary, are due to the
overstimulation of the animal instincts in her male mate, or, to the
disparity between her stage of development and his, they have not
materially injured her constitution nor shortened her average duration
of life, neither have they lessened her capacity for improvement.

With reference to the women of Greenland, Cranz says that while they

 remain with their parents they are well off; but from twenty years of
 age till death, their life is one series of anxieties, wretchedness,
 and toil, yet, in spite of all their cares, toils, and vexations the
 women commonly arrive at a greater age than the men.[36]

[36] _History of Greenland_, vol. i., p. 152.

That the imperfections of the male organism are already beginning
to interpose themselves between man and many of the occupations and
activities of advancing civilization, is only too apparent.

Sight, far more than any other sense, is the most intellectual,
yet in the development of the visual organs it has been proved
that men are especially deficient. Dr. Andrew Willson assures us
that “colour-blindness is a condition which is certainly capable
of transmission to the progeny. In one family the males alone were
affected through seven generations.”

In an examination which was carried on some years ago under the
supervision of Dr. Jeffries, among the pupils of the Boston schools, in
which were 14,469 boys and young men, and 13,458 girls and young women,
it was found that about one male in every twenty-five was colour-blind,
while the same defect among the girls and young women was extremely
rare, only 0.066 per cent. of them being thus affected.[37]

[37] _Pop. Science Monthly_, vol. xix., p. 567.

At a convention held in the city of Chicago for the purpose of
organizing an association for educational reform, the teacher of
drawing in the St. Paul schools made a statement that “four per cent.
of all male pupils were colour-blind, while only one-tenth of one per
cent. of female pupils were so affected.” No explanation was offered
for this strange fact; indeed, it was pronounced a mystery, “even
oculists and surgeons having given it up as impenetrable.”

That defective vision is beginning to interfere with the activities
of men, is shown by the fact that in many instances, in later times,
colour tests have been required to determine fitness of applicants for
positions in various departments of commercial enterprise. In this
country, during the last fifty years, much attention has been given
to the subject of visual defects in seamen, railroadmen, and other
persons occupying positions of responsibility in which unimpaired
vision is an important qualification. In response to a request sent by
the German Government through its minister to the Surgeon-General of
the United States Army, for statistical and other information on the
subject of colour-blindness, Mr. Charles E. Pugh, General Manager of
the Pennsylvania Railroad, in September, 1884, sent to William Thomson,
M.D., surgical expert for the same company, the following statement:

  Total number examined on lines east of Erie  25,158
  Colour-blind                                    481
  Defective vision                                661

Of this report Dr. Thomson says:

 The apparently small percentage of colour-blind in this table may be
 ascribed to the non-application of men who knew their deficiency,
 and to the fact that men in the service, knowing their defect, would
 leave the road before examination, and thus escape detection, and be
 enabled to gain employment on other roads where no examinations are
 required.[38]

[38] _Pop. Science Monthly_, vol. xxxi., p. 796.

In several departments of the national government, attempts have been
made to guard against the dangers resulting from imperfect sight. In
the examination of recruits, the War Department at Washington, some
years ago, issued orders that bits of coloured pasteboard, or “test
cards” be used for determining the power of individuals to distinguish
objects at a distance, while worsteds of various hues were employed
to ascertain their ability to distinguish colour. In the Treasury and
Naval Departments were ordered similar examinations, in which the power
to distinguish colour was a necessary qualification in the case of all
persons seeking employment therein.

In the examinations ordered by navigation and railroad companies to
protect themselves and the public against disaster resulting from
imperfect vision in their employees, tests have been made. Among
the requirements imposed by law, applying to engineers, brakemen,
and firemen, in the State of Connecticut, are the following:
“Unobstructed visual field, normal visual acuteness, and freedom from
colour-blindness.”

If Dr. Jeffries’s investigation in the Boston public schools and the
report of the officers of the Pennsylvania Railroad are to serve
as a criterion in judging of the extent to which impaired vision
is developed in men, or if among them one in every twenty-five is
defective in the colour sense, the inference seems unavoidable that the
proportion of them unfitted for railroad and steamboat service, for
military duty, and for various important government positions, must be
large. Hence, by these tests alone may be observed something of the
extent to which, under the higher conditions which are approaching, the
imperfect development in men of this one organ (the eye) may cripple
their energies and check those activities which, in many instances, are
best suited to their tastes and inclinations.

Nor is this defective vision developed in men a peculiarity which
is confined within the limits of our own country. In Europe,
investigations analogous to those instituted in America have been
followed by the same or similar results. Until a comparatively recent
time this subject has received little or no attention, for the reason
that the processes of civilization and the various activities of life
have not, hitherto, demanded a correct or highly developed colour
sense; but with the requirements of more highly civilized conditions,
in vocations demanding more diversified and complicated physical
and mental activities, it is plain that man, because of this organic
imperfection, must labour under continuous disadvantages. Then add
to defective vision his lack of physical endurance, his liability
to various organic affections caused by structural defects, and
his abnormal appetites which are constantly demanding for their
gratification the things which are injurious to his mental and physical
constitution, and we are enabled to judge, to some extent, of the
obstacles against which, in the struggle for existence, the future man
will find himself obliged to contend.

Not only is man’s sense of sight less perfectly developed than is
woman’s, but his sense of touch is less acute. The hand, directed as it
is by the brain, is the most completely differentiated member of the
human structure. It may almost be said of the hand, that it assists the
brain in performing its functions. The female hand, however, is capable
of delicate distinctions which the male has no means of determining. A
dispatch from Washington says of the women of the Treasury Department:

 So superior is their skill in handling paper money that they
 accomplish results that would be utterly unattainable without them. It
 has been found by long experience that a counterfeit may go through
 half the banks in the country without being detected, until it comes
 back, often torn and mutilated, into the hands of the Treasury women.
 Then it is certain of detection. They shut their eyes and feel of a
 note if they suspect it. If it feels wrong, in half a minute they
 point out the incongruities of the counterfeit.

Although throughout the ascending scale of life, the female has
been expending all her energy in the performance of her legitimate
functions—functions which, as we have seen, are of a higher order than
those performed by the male, through causes which will be discussed
farther on in these pages, within the later centuries of human
existence—she has been temporarily overcome by the destructive forces
developed in the opposite sex, forces which are without the line of
true development, and which through overstimulation and encouragement
have overleaped the bounds of normal activity, and have therefore
become disruptive and injurious.

During the past five thousand years, woman’s reproductive functions
have been turned into means of subsistence, and under the peculiar
circumstances of her environment, her “struggle for existence” has
involved physical processes far more disastrous to life and health
than are those to which man has been subjected. Owing to the peculiar
condition of woman’s environment, there has been developed within her
more delicate and sensitive organism an alarming degree of functional
nervousness; yet, with the gradual broadening of her sphere of
activity, and the greater exercise of personal rights, this tendency
to nervous derangement is gradually becoming lessened. That there is
reserve force in woman sufficient to overcome the evil results of the
supremacy of the animal instincts during the last five thousand or six
thousand years of human existence, from present indications seems more
than likely.

Commenting on the subject of nervousness, and the degree in which it
is manifested in civilized countries, and especially among civilized
women, Dr. Beard says:

 Women, with all their nervousness—and, in civilized lands, women are
 more nervous, immeasurably, than men, and suffer more from general
 and special nervous diseases—yet live quite as long as men, if not
 somewhat longer; their greater nervousness and far greater liability
 to functional diseases of the nervous system being compensated for
 by their smaller liability to acute and inflammatory disorders, and
 various organic nervous diseases, likewise, such as the general
 paralysis of insanity.[39]

[39] _American Nervousness_, p. 207.

According to Maudsley women “seldom suffer from general paralysis.”
This disease is frequently inherited, and is sometimes the result of
alcoholic and other excesses.[40]

[40] Maudsley, _Physiology and Pathology of the Mind_, p. 360.

Regarding the dangers to which women are exposed by excessive and
useless maternity, Dr. Beard remarks:

 The large number of cases of laceration at childbirth and the
 prolonged and sometimes even life-enduring illness resulting
 from them, are good reasons for the terror which the processes of
 parturition inspires in the minds of American women today.

However, that the dangers incident to parturition, and the excessive
nervousness which characterizes civilized women, are not necessary
adjuncts of civilization, but, on the contrary, are a result of the
unchecked disruptive forces developed in man, and the consequent drain
on the vital energies of woman, will be seen, so soon as through the
cultivation of the higher faculties developed in and transmitted
through females, the lower nature of males has finally been brought
within its legitimate bounds.




