CHAPTER IV

THE ORIGIN OF MARRIAGE

    I will be master of what is mine own;
    She is my goods, my chattels; she’s my house,
    My household stuff, my field, my barn,
    My horse, my ox, my ass, my everything.

    _The Taming of the Shrew._


It is an obvious fact that so far as her sex relations are concerned
the position of civilized woman is lower than that of the female animal.

The question which presents itself at this stage of our inquiry is:
What were the causes which led to the overthrow of female supremacy or
what were the processes by which man gained the undisputed right to the
control of woman’s person? By contrasting the industrial position of
women under gentile institutions with that of later times, after they
had become the sexual slaves of men, it will be seen that the question
of economics is deeply involved in this change. Although the early
independence of women is now recognized, the fact of their industrial
supremacy is for the most part ignored. Indeed the part performed by
woman in originating and developing human industries is seldom referred
to by those dealing with this subject.

As the activities best suited to the tastes of primitive man were
confined to war and the chase, those occupations and pursuits which
were necessary for the preservation of the group were carried on by
women. The reason for this is obvious. Fathers were not regarded as
being related to their offspring. The mother was the only recognized
parent. As the land was held in common, women were economically free.
They were absolutely independent of men for their support. Under these
conditions the importance of women’s position may be easily perceived.

Not only did women establish the first industries, but they invented
and constructed the tools and implements by which these industries
were carried on. Women were the first tillers of the soil. It was they
who conceived the idea of preserving seeds whereby farinaceous food
might be produced. Corn was not only raised by them but by them it
was ground and further prepared for use. They built clay granaries in
which to store their food products and tamed the cat to protect them.
Implements for tilling the soil, and devices for grinding the grain
were invented by women. They were the first architects and the first
builders. They first conceived the idea of making cloth with which to
protect the body. They were the first spinners and the first weavers.
They invented the first spindles and the first looms. Their attempts
at decoration were the beginning of art.

As these pioneers in industry were without means of transportation
other than their backs, some of the difficulties which they encountered
may be readily perceived. It must be borne in mind that for primitive
women there was no accumulated store of knowledge and no previous
race-experiences; neither were there any established rules or
precedents to guide them. All methods and utilities had to be worked
out by woman’s unaided brain. When the conditions under which these
pioneers in industry laboured are considered, and when one reflects
on the obstacles which must have presented themselves at every step
along their untried pathway, it would almost seem that their early
achievements were quite as remarkable as are those which have since
been accomplished by men.

The fact is observed that woman assumed the rôle of protector and
provider, not as is commonly asserted because she was compelled by
man to become a beast of burden, but because she was the recognized
guardian not only of infant life but of the public welfare. Later,
after the primitive groups began to coalesce to form the tribe, after
wife-capture became prevalent and men thereby secured the right to the
control and ownership of individual women, a right which they still
claim, then and not till then did women become beasts of burden. Then
and not till then did man gain the right to the control of woman’s
person.

It is now known that wife-capture is the origin of our present form
of marriage, and that the establishment of the family with man at its
head rests on the same basis. It is also known that through forcible
marriage and the economic conditions which it entailed, woman became
a dependent, a mere appendage to her male mate. The dominion of man
and the assumed inferiority of woman are the direct results of the
authority which he was able to exercise over her in the marital
relation.

We have seen that prior to the decline of female influence women taken
prisoners in war were not regarded as the legitimate property of their
captors. On the contrary, female captives were adopted into the gens
and invested with the same status of personal independence enjoyed by
the original members of the group. Later, however, female prisoners
began to be regarded as the special booty of their captors, and as
belonging exclusively to them; and although in primitive times marriage
outside the limits of related groups was prohibited, owing to the
esteem in which military chieftains came to be held, this claim was at
length allowed them. Any courageous young warrior, conscious of his
popularity, might gather about him a band of his clansmen and march
against a neighbouring tribe, the women taken prisoners during such
expeditions being the special prizes of their captors.

These prisoners were entitled to none of the privileges of the
community into which they were taken; and as the hostility felt toward
unrelated tribes had become so strong as to be shared by women, the
captive woman could no longer look for pity even from her own sex.

From this time in the history of the race may be traced the decline
of woman’s power and the subjection of the natural female impulses.
As, at this stage, within the limits of their own tribe, women held
the balance of power in their own hands, and as they still exercised
unqualified control over their own persons, the acknowledged ownership
of one woman, who, being a “stranger,” was without power or influence,
would be an object much to be desired, and one for which a warrior
would not hesitate to brave the dangers of a hostile camp. Hence,
female captives were in demand, and the women of warring tribes were
sought after singly and in groups. In process of time wars for wives
became general and under the new regime women had the fear of captivity
constantly before their view as a condition more to be dreaded than
death.

In the _Mahabharata_ of India it is stated that formerly “women were
unconfined and roved about at their pleasure, independent.” Finally,
marriage was instituted and a woman was bound to a man for life. One
of the eight forms of legalized marriage in the code of Manu was that
of capture _de facto_ and was called _Racshasa_. This particular form
of conjugal union was practised exclusively by the military classes,
among which, the women taken in battle were the acknowledged booty of
their captors. A definition of this kind of marriage is as follows:
“The seizure of a maiden by force from her house while she weeps and
calls for assistance, after her kinsmen and friends have been slain in
battle or wounded, and their houses broken open, is the marriage called
_Racshasa_.”

Capture as the prescribed form of marriage for warriors may be traced
through thousands of years and among various peoples. Of the three
legalized forms of marital union in Rome, that by capture was the one
in use among the plebeians, the patricians at the same time practising
_Confarreatio_ and _Usus_. In Arabia, as late as Mohammed’s time, the
carrying off of women was recognized as a legal form of marriage.[109]

[109] W. Robertson Smith, _Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia_, p. 73.

That capture constituted a legal form of marriage among the Israelites,
or that women taken captives in war were appropriated as sexual slaves,
is shown by their religious history, in which the instructions given
to the Lord’s chosen people after they had taken a city was to “smite
every male thereof with the edge of the sword: But the women, and the
little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city” they were to
take unto themselves. This, it will be noticed, is to be done “unto
the cities which are very far off,” and which “are not of the cities of
these nations.”[110]

[110] Deuteronomy, chap. xx., 13, 14, 15.

When the Israelites 12,000 strong marched against the Midianites, they
were commanded by Moses to slay all the males, adults and children,
and all the women except the virgins. These virgins of whom there
were 32,000 were to be spared and utilized as wives by the victorious
Israelites. The fact will be noted that these women had been taken
from their own people, hence they were wholly without influence or
power. They were dependents and therefore subject to the will of their
masters. They were sexual slaves or wives.

In Australia, among the North American Indians, the tribes of the
Amazon and the Orinoco, in Hindustan and Afghanistan, marriage by
actual capture is still practised, and many of the details connected
with the _modus operandi_ have been given by various writers. The
following from Sir George Gray, relative to this form of marriage as it
exists at the present time among some of the native Australian tribes,
is quoted by Mr. J. F. McLennan.

Although a woman give no encouragement to her admirers,

 many plots are laid to carry her off, and in the encounters which
 result from these, she is almost certain to receive some violent
 injury, for each of the combatants orders her to follow him, and in
 the event of her refusing, throws a spear at her. The early life of a
 young woman at all celebrated for beauty is generally one continued
 series of captivity to different masters, of ghastly wounds, of
 wanderings in strange families, of rapid flights, of bad treatment
 from other females, amongst whom she is brought a stranger by her
 captor; and rarely do you see a form of unusual grace and elegance,
 but it is marked and scarred by the furrows of old wounds; and many
 a female thus wanders several hundred miles from the home of her
 infancy, being carried off successively to distant and more distant
 points.[111]

[111] _Studies in Ancient History_, p. 40.

In an account describing the search for wives by the natives of Sydney,
Collins says:

 The poor wretch is stolen upon in the absence of her protectors. Being
 first stupefied with blows, inflicted with clubs or wooden swords,
 on the head, back, and shoulders, every one of which is followed by
 a stream of blood, she is then dragged through the woods by one arm,
 with a perseverance and violence that it might be supposed would
 displace it from its socket. This outrage is not resented by the
 relations of the female, who only retaliate by a similar outrage when
 they find an opportunity. This is so constantly the practice among
 them that even the children make it a play game, or exercise.[112]

[112] Quoted by Sir J. Lubbock, _Origin of Civilization_, p. 108.

By various travellers and explorers, the fact has been observed that
certain symbols representing force in their marriage ceremonies are in
use among nearly if not all extant tribes which have reached a certain
stage of growth. To such an extent, in an earlier age, has the forcible
carrying-off of women prevailed, that among most of these tribes a
valid marriage may not be consummated without the appearance of force
in the nuptial ceremonies. In reference to these symbols, we have the
following passage from Mr. McLennan:

 Meantime, we observe that, whenever we discover symbolical forms,
 we are justified in inferring that in the past life of the people
 employing them, there were corresponding realities; and if, among the
 primitive races which we examine, we find such realities as might
 naturally pass into such forms on an advance taking place in civility,
 then we may safely conclude (keeping within the conditions of a sound
 inference) that what these now are, those employing the symbols once
 were.[113]

[113] _Studies in Ancient History_, p. 5.

Among primitive tribes, the area controlled by each was small,
therefore vigilance in maintaining their possessions was one of their
chief duties, and hostility to surrounding tribes a natural condition.
Subsequently, however, when friendly relations began to be established
with hitherto hostile tribes, they are found entering into negotiations
to furnish each other with wives. It was at this time that marriage by
sale or contract was instituted, an arrangement by which the elder men
in the tribe could be accommodated with foreign wives, at the same time
that their own daughters and sisters became to them a source of revenue.

In Uganda many men obtain wives by exchanging daughters and sisters
with each other. Of this practice C. Staniland Wake says:

 This is not an unusual mode of proceeding in different parts of
 the world. The perpetuation of the monopoly of women enjoyed to a
 great extent by the older men of the tribe among the Australians
 is, according to Mr. Howitt, encouraged by those having sisters or
 daughters to exchange with each other for wives.[114]

[114] _Marriage and Kinship_, p. 207.

Not unfrequently actual capture is practised side by side with
fiction—violent seizure being in active operation among the same tribes
at the same time with the symbol, the frequency of actual violence
depending partly on the extent to which hostility prevails between the
tribes, and partly on the degree of “uniformity established by usage in
the prices paid for wives.” Among certain tribes, when a dispute arises
concerning the price to be paid for a bride, if the man is able to
seize the woman and carry her off to his tent, the law recognizes her
as his wife and nothing is left for the relations to do in the matter
but to accept his terms as to the price.

The peoples among which actual capture is at present practised, and
those among which wives are procured by sale or contract, represent two
different stages in the development of the institution of marriage, and
it is owing to this fact that the symbols used among the latter may be
traced to the realities in which they originated.

Of the Bedouins of Mt. Sinai, Burckhardt says that marriage is a
matter of sale and purchase, in which the inclination of the girl is
disregarded.

 The young maid comes home in the evening with the cattle. At a short
 distance from the camp she is met by the future spouse and a couple
 of his young friends, and carried off by force to her father’s tent.
 If she entertains any suspicion of their designs she defends herself
 with stones, and often inflicts wounds on the young men, even though
 she does not dislike the lover, for, according to custom, the more she
 struggles, bites, kicks, cries, and shrieks, the more she is applauded
 ever after by her own companions.[115]

[115] Quoted by E. J. Wood, _The Wedding Day_, etc., p. 60.

In reference to the Mezeyne Arabs the same writer observes that a
similar custom prevailed within the limits of the Sinai Peninsula, but
not among the other tribes of that province.

 A girl having been wrapped in the Abba at night, is permitted to
 escape from her tent, and fly into the neighbouring mountains.
 The bridegroom goes in search of her next day, and remains often
 many days before he can find her out, while her female friends are
 apprised of her hiding-place, and furnish her with provisions. If
 the husband finds her at last (which is sooner or later, according to
 the impression that he has made upon the girl’s heart), he is bound
 to consummate the marriage in the open country, and to pass the night
 with her in the mountains. The next morning the bride goes home to her
 tent, that she may have some food; but again runs away in the evening
 and repeats these flights several times, till she finally returns to
 her tent. She does not go to live in her husband’s tent until she is
 far advanced in pregnancy; if she does not become pregnant, she may
 not join her husband till a full year from the wedding-day.[116]

[116] Quoted by E. J. Wood, _The Wedding Day_, etc., p. 60.

Cranz says that in Greenland “some females, when a husband is proposed
to them will fall into a swoon, elope to a desert place, or cut off
their hair.... In the latter case they are seldom troubled with further
addresses.” The refractory bride is dragged

 forcibly into her suitor’s house, where she sits for several days
 disconsolate, with dishevelled hair, and refuses nourishment. When
 friendly exhortations are unavailing, she is compelled by force and
 even with blows to receive her husband. Should she elope, she is
 brought back and treated more harshly than before.[117]

[117] _History of Greenland_, vol. i., p. 146.

Wherever friendly relations have been established between the tribe of
the wife and that of the husband, he pays a price to her relatives
for the privilege of removing her to his camp. This purchase price,
together with the simulated hatred of the woman’s friends, signifies a
sacrifice on the part of the wife and her family. In Nubia when a man
marries he presents his wife with a wedding-dress, and gives her also
a pledge for three or four hundred piastres, half of which sum is paid
her in case of a divorce. Divorces, however, are very rare.[118]

[118] Burckhardt, _Travels in Nubia_, p. 34.

Among the Circassians, after the preliminaries have been settled by
the parents, the lover meets his bride-elect by night in some secluded
spot, and with the assistance of two or three of his best friends
seizes her and carries her away. Sometimes the pretended capture takes
place in the midst of a noisy feast. The woman is usually conducted
into the presence of a mutual friend, where, on the following day,
her friends, simulating anger, seek her and demand a reason for her
abduction. Although the affair is usually settled at once by the
bridegroom paying the accustomed price for his bride, custom requires
that there shall be still further manifestations of anger on the part
of her friends; so, on the following day, all the relatives of the
bride, armed with sticks, proceed to the place where the bride is in
waiting, there to meet the bridegroom and his friends who have come to
carry off the bride. A sham fight ensues, in which the bridegroom and
his party are always victorious. Among certain of the Arabian tribes
the bridegroom must force his bride to enter his tent, and in France,
as late as the seventeenth century, a similar custom prevailed.

In describing a wedding dance in Abyssinia, Parkyns observes:

 This dance is performed by men armed with shields and lances, who
 with bounds, feints, and springs attack others armed with guns, so as
 to approach them, and at the same time avoid their fire, while the
 gunners make similar demonstrations, and at last fire off their guns
 either in the air or into the earth, and then, drawing their swords,
 flourish them about as a finish.

Finally the bridegroom fires off a gun and immediately rushes across to
where the bride and her female relations are stationed.[119]

[119] _Life in Abyssinia_, vol. ii., p. 49.

Tylor informs us that a Scandinavian warrior generally sought to gain
his bride by force, that he conceived it beneath his dignity to win
her by pacific means. That the affair might appear more heroic, he
waited until the object of his choice was about to wed another, and was
actually on her way to the nuptial ceremony, when with his friends he
would surprise the wedding cortege, seize the bride, and carry her off.
It has been said of Scandinavian marriages that they were matters of
deep anxiety to the friends both of the bride and groom, who, until the
wedding was over, remained at home in suspense fearing an attack of
the kind already mentioned. It was customary for a party of young men
to station themselves at the church door, and, as soon as the ceremony
was completed, to carry the news to the homes of the wedded pair.
“Within a few generations the same old practice was kept up in Wales,
where the bridegroom and his friends, mounted and armed as for war,
carried off the bride,” and in Ireland they used even to hurl spears at
the bride’s people, though at such a distance that no one was hurt.[120]

[120] _Anthropology_, p. 404.

In the Amazon valley the bride is always carried away by violence.
Among the Zulus, although a purchase price is paid for a woman, custom
requires that a wife, after having been captured, shall make three
attempts to return to her own home.

Of the marriage customs in ancient Sparta, Plutarch says: “In their
marriages the bridegroom carried off the bride by violence.”[121]
In Rome we have the familiar example of the Sabine women, who were
captured or carried off by force.

[121] _Lycurgus._

A notable fact in connection with the subject of capture is, that the
mother of the bride, or, in case the mother is dead, the nearest female
relative, is the individual who assumes the part of the principal
defender in this ceremony. She it is who attempts to rescue the bride,
and who more than any other mourns the fate of the captured wife. Among
primitive peoples, with the exception of the symbol of wife-capture
in marriage ceremonies, there is perhaps none more significant than
that typifying the hatred of the mother for the captor of her daughter.
Customs indicating estrangement or, actual aversion to sons-in-law,
usually, if not always, accompany marriage by capture.

The fact that the change in the relative positions of the sexes, as
indicated by the _sadica_ and _ba’al_ forms of marriage in Arabia,
was not easily or speedily accomplished, is apparent not only in the
symbols of wife-capture everywhere practised among peoples in a certain
stage of development, but is strongly suggested also by the aversion
found to exist among these same peoples between mothers-in-law and
sons-in-law, whether appearing as a reality or as a symbol.

 Among the Arawaks of South America, it is unlawful for the son-in-law
 to look upon the face of his mother-in-law. If they live in the same
 house a partition separates them, and if by chance they must enter the
 same boat, she must precede him so as to keep her back toward him.

Among the Caribs, all the women talk with whom they will, but the
husband dare not converse with his wife’s relations except on
extraordinary occasions.[122] Mr. Tylor refers to the fact that

[122] Quoted by Tylor, _Early History of Mankind_, p. 290.

 In the account of the Floridian expedition of Alvar Nuñez, commonly
 known as Cabeca de Vaca, or Cow’s Head, it is mentioned that the
 parents-in-law did not enter the son-in-law’s house, nor he theirs,
 nor his brother-in-law’s, and if they met by chance, they went a
 buckshot out of their way, with their heads down and eyes fixed on the
 ground, for they held it a bad thing to see or speak to one another.

It is observed by Richardson, an author quoted by Tylor, that among the
Crees, while an Indian lives with his wife’s family, his mother-in-law
must not speak to or look at him. In some portions of Australia, “the
mother-in-law does not allow the son-in-law to see her, but hides
herself if he is near, and if she has to pass him makes a circuit,
keeping carefully concealed within her cloak.”

Among some of the tribes in Central Africa, from the moment a marriage
is contracted, the lover may not behold the parents of his future
bride. When a young man wishes to marry a girl, he dispatches a
messenger to negotiate with her parents regarding the presents required
and the number of oxen demanded. This being arranged, he may not again
look upon the father and mother of his intended wife; “he takes the
greatest care to avoid them, and if by chance they perceive him they
cover their faces as if all ties of friendship were broken.” We are
told, however, that this indifference is only feigned, that they feel
the same friendship as before, and in conversation extol one another’s
merit. Mr. Caillie says that this custom extends beyond the relations;
if the lover is of a different camp, he must avoid all the inhabitants
of the lady’s camp, except a few intimate friends who are permitted
to assist him in his love-making. A little tent is set up for him in
the neighbourhood, under which he is to remain during the day. If he
has occasion to cross the camp he must cover his face. He may not see
the face of his intended throughout the day, but at nightfall he may
creep silently to her tent and remain with her until the dawn. These
clandestine visits are continued for a month or two when the marriage
is solemnized. At the wedding festival the women collect round the
bride singing her praises and extolling her virtues.[123]

[123] _Travels through Central Africa_, vol. i., p. 94.

Gubernatis is authority for the statement that, in many parts of
Italy the bride is compelled to go through the process of weeping on
her wedding-day, also for the fact that one of the marriage customs
prevalent in Sardinia is identical with that which appeared among the
plebeians at Rome, namely, the pretence of tearing the bride from the
arms of her mother.[124]

[124] See McLennan’s _Studies in Ancient History_, p. 189.

From the facts which have been obtained relative to the practice of
wife-capture, it is only natural to suppose that the mother of the
captured wife would be her chief ally and defender; that such has been
the case seems to be clearly shown by the symbols of distrust and
aversion everywhere manifested between mothers-in-law and sons-in-law
among the various existing uncivilized races. The practice of
wife-capture exists either as a reality or as a symbol entering into
the marriage ceremonies among the tribes of Central Africa, the Indians
of North and South America, in Australia, in New Zealand, in Arabia, in
the hill tracts of India, among the Fuegians, and in the islands of the
Pacific Ocean, and wherever this system is found the symbol of hatred
between mother-in-law and son-in-law also prevails.

The simulated anger and sham violence connected with marriage
ceremonies among friendly peoples, which are so far removed from a
time when actual capture was practised as to be ignorant of the true
significance of these symbols, show the extent to which marriage is
based on the idea of force on the one side and unwilling submission on
the other.

As the numerous Arabian clans in the time of Mohammed represented the
varying stages of advancement from the second period of barbarism to
civilization, the constitution of Arab society at that time affords an
excellent opportunity for observing the growth of the institution of
marriage, and the various processes by which the former supremacy of
women was overthrown.

One of the principal objects of war at the time of the Prophet is said
to have been the capture of women for wives, a practice which was
recognized as lawful. Under Islam the custom of forcibly carrying off
women for wives was universal and was carried on side by side with the
system of marriage by contract or sale. The position of the captured
woman, however, differed somewhat from that of the purchased wife.
The former, having been forcibly carried away from her home, lost the
protection of her friends, while the purchased wife, although she
relinquished the authority which had formerly been exercised by women
within the gens, and although she surrendered her person to her “lord,”
did not forfeit her right to the protection of her own family in case
of abuse.

Although in Arabia, under the form of marriage by sale or contract,
the wife lost the right to the control of property belonging to her
own gens, she did not, as in Rome, forfeit her claim to the protection
of her kindred. If she received ill treatment within the home of her
husband, her relatives, who were still her natural protectors, were
bound to redress her wrongs. In Rome, on the contrary, under a system
representing a later stage in the development of marriage, the wife
was adopted into the stock of her husband whose rights over her person
were supreme, at the same time that her kindred renounced the right to
interfere in her behalf.

It is to the fact, that in early Arabia the wife never relinquished her
hold upon her own relations, that we are to look for an explanation of
the high social position of Arabian women. We are assured that it is
“an old Arab sentiment, and not Moslem,” that women are entitled to
the highest respect, and that as mothers of the tribe they “are its
most sacred trust.”

According to Professor W. R. Smith in Mohammed’s time, in addition
to the two forms of marriage mentioned, namely, that by capture and
that by sale or contract, there existed also a more ancient form
known as the _sadica_—a form of conjugal union which was a remnant of
the matriarchal system. By observing the facts connected with this
last-named institution, we shall be enabled to understand something
of the position occupied by women during the earlier ages of human
existence before wife-capture became prevalent.

Among certain tribes just prior to Islam, upon the event of marriage,
the man presented the woman with a sum of money, which offering was
simply an acknowledgment of the favour which she was conferring upon
him. The husband went to live with the wife in her tent, and as the
contract was for no specified length of time, he was at liberty to go
whenever he tired of the conditions imposed on him by his wife and her
relations. Any children, however, that were born as a result of this
union belonged to the mother and became members of her _hayy_. If she
desired him to go, she simply turned the tent around, “so that if the
door had faced east it now faced west, and when the man saw this he
knew that he was dismissed and did not enter.” In relation to these
marriage customs Professor Smith says: “Here, therefore, we have the
proof of a well-established custom of that kind of marriage which
naturally goes with female kinship in the generation immediately before
Islam.” Of this kind of marriage the same writer observes:

 The _motă_ marriage was a purely personal contract, founded on consent
 between a man and a woman, without any intervention on the part of
 the woman’s kin.... Now the fact that there was no contract with the
 woman’s kin—such as was necessary when the wife left her own people
 and came under the authority of her husband—and that, indeed, her
 kin might know nothing about it, can have only one explanation: in
 _motă_ marriage the woman did not leave her home, her people gave up
 no rights which they had over her, and the children of the marriage
 did not belong to the husband. _Motă_ marriage, in short, is simply
 the last remains of that type of marriage which corresponds to a law
 of mother-kinship, and Islam condemns it, and makes it “the sister
 of harlotry,” because it does not give the husband a legitimate
 offspring, _i. e._, an offspring that is reckoned to his own tribe and
 has rights of inheritance within it.[125]

[125] Prof. W. R. Smith, _Kinship and Marriage_, p. 69.

Before the separation of the Hebrews and Aramæans, the wife remained
within her own tent where she received her husband, the children of
such unions taking her name and becoming her heirs. This kind of
conjugal union is known to have been in existence in many portions of
the world. In Ceylon it is designated as the _beena_ marriage.

In ancient Arabia, not only did women control their own homes, but
they owned flocks and herds, and were absolutely independent of male
relations. As late as the fourteenth century of our era, although the
women of certain Arabian tribes were willing to marry strangers, they
never followed them to their homes.

Among the Bedouins it is a rare thing for a woman at marriage to leave
her home and kindred. When a woman marries a man he settles among her
kinsmen, and, as she presents him with a spear and a tent by way of
dowry, it would seem that he is expected to join her relations and
assist in the common defence. The marks of authority under gentile
rule are the possession of a tent and a lance; yet we find that these
are the objects which, under matriarchal usages, the wife tenders her
husband when he enters her family; the first doubtless as a symbol of
her protection, the second as indicating her authority and the services
which he is expected to render her and her people. Until a late period
in Rome it was the custom, during the solemnities of marriage, to pass
a lance over the head of the wife in token of the power which the
husband was about to gain over her.[126]

[126] Ortolan, _History of Roman Law_, p. 80.

Under the two types of marriage—namely, _motă_ and _ba’al_—the
positions of women were so diametrically opposed that both could not
continue, hence when under the pressure brought to bear upon them,
women began to accept the _ba’al_ form of marriage within their own
_hayy_, _motă_ unions were doomed. Of the more ancient form of marriage
in Arabia, under which the woman chooses her mate, evidences of which
are still extant in that country, and that by capture under which she
becomes the slave of her lord, Professor Smith says:

 There is then abundant evidence that the ancient Arabs practised
 marriage by capture. And we see that the type of marriage so
 constituted is altogether different from those unions of which
 the _motă_ is a survival, and kinship through women the necessary
 accompaniment. In the one case the woman chooses and dismisses her
 husband at will, in the other she has lost the right to dispose of her
 person and so the right of divorce lies only with the husband; in the
 one case the woman receives the husband in her own tent, among her own
 people, in the other she is brought home to his tent and people; in
 the one case the children are brought up under the protection of the
 mother’s kin and are of her blood, in the other they remain with the
 father’s kindred and are of his blood.

 All later Arabic marriages under the system of male kinship, whether
 constituted by capture or by contract, belong to the same type; in all
 cases, as we shall presently see in detail, the wife who follows her
 husband and bears children who are of his blood has lost the right
 freely to dispose of her person; the husband has authority over her
 and he alone has the right of divorce. Accordingly the husband, in
 this kind of marriage, is called not in Arabia only, but also among
 the Hebrews and Aramæans, the woman’s “lord” or “owner,” and wherever
 this name for husband is found we may be sure that marriage is of the
 second type, with male kinship, and the wife bound to the husband and
 following him to his home.[127]

[127] _Kinship and Marriage_, p. 75.

Notwithstanding the humane enactments of Mohammed in the interest of
women, their position steadily declined, such enactments having been
overbalanced by the establishment of marriages of dominion, by the
growing idea that _sadica_ or _motă_ marriages were not respectable,
and that women could not depend upon their relations to take their
part against their husbands. The history of religion shows that
its growth has always followed the same course as have the ideas
concerning the relative importance of the sexes. The god-idea and the
fundamental doctrines of religion are always found to be in harmony
with the established principles and ideas relative to sex domination
and superiority. The religion of Mohammed was essentially masculine,
all its principles being in strict accord with male supremacy; it is
not, therefore, singular that when the weight of religion was added to
the already growing tendency toward _ba’al_ marriages that _sadica_
marriages were doomed.

In Arabia, as elsewhere, the duties of the purchased wife were
specific. The present which under the older form of marriage had been
given to the bride as a love-token, or as an acknowledgment of the
husband’s devotion to her, subsequently took the form of a purchase
price, and was claimed by her father and brothers as a compensation for
the loss sustained by the group through the removal of her offspring,
whose services belonged to their mother’s people. In other words, the
husband paid a price to the wife’s relations for the right to raise
children by her which should belong exclusively to his kin—children
which should she remain within her own home would belong to her
kindred. The wife was therefore removed to the husband’s _hayy_, where,
so far as the sexual relation was concerned, his rights over her were
supreme.

We have observed that wherever the possessions of the gens continued
to be the property of all its members, and were controlled by women,
the man at marriage went to live with the woman; so soon, however, as
men began to claim the soil, and property began to accumulate in their
hands, the wife went to reside with her husband and his family as a
dependent. Among various tribes, the form of marriage in use depends on
the means of the contracting parties; if the man is able to pay to the
woman’s father or brothers the full price charged for her, she goes to
him as his slave—she is his property as much as is his dog or his gun;
if, however, he is unable to pay the amount charged, he goes to live
with her and her family, and becomes their slave.

In Japan, among the higher classes, upon the marriage of the eldest
son, his bride accompanies him to his paternal home; but, on the other
hand, when the eldest daughter marries, her husband takes up his abode
with her parents. Eldest daughters always retain their own names, which
their husbands are obliged to assume. As the wife of an eldest son
becomes a member of her husband’s family, and the husband of an eldest
daughter joins the family of his wife and assumes her name, the eldest
son of a family may not marry the eldest daughter of another family.
Regarding the younger members of the household, if the husband’s family
provides the house, the wife takes his name, while if the bride’s
family furnishes the home the bridegroom assumes the name of the
wife.[128]

[128] Quoted by C. S. Wake from Morgan’s _System_, etc., p. 428.

In the marriage customs of various nations, and in their ideas relative
to the ownership and control of the home, may be observed something
more than a hint of the principal causes underlying the decline of
female power. Wherever women remain within their own homes, or with
their own relations, they are mistresses of the situation; but when
they follow the fathers of their children to their homes, they become
dependents and wholly subject to the will and pleasure of their
husbands.

It is plain, however, that under a system of marriage by sale or
contract, although a woman might exercise little influence in the home
of her husband, so long as her relations stood ready to defend her she
would enjoy an immunity from abuse. The fact that a woman can count
upon her relations for protection against her husband, shows plainly
that in a certain stage of marriage by contract or sale, women are not
the abject slaves which they have been represented to be. Although in
the Fiji Islands a man may seize a woman and take her to his home, she
does not remain with him unless agreeable to her inclinations.[129]

[129] Darwin, _The Descent of Man_, p. 598.

 Amongst the Abipones, a man, on choosing a wife bargains with her
 parents about the price. But it frequently happens that the girl
 rescinds what has been agreed upon between the parents and the
 bridegroom, obstinately rejecting the very mention of marriage.[130]

[130] _Ibid._, p. 598.

Among the Charruas of South America, divorce is quite optional. In
Sumatra, if a man carries off a virgin against her will, he incurs a
heavy fine, or if a man carries off a woman under pretence of marriage,
“he must lodge her immediately with some reputable family.”[131]

[131] Marsden, _History of Sumatra_, p. 193.

Although in the earlier ages of marriage by sale or contract, daughters
were regarded as the property of their fathers, still that stage had
not been reached at which women were accounted simply as sexual
slaves. The Arabs practised marriage by sale or contract, yet they
jealously watched over their women,—they “defended them with their
lives and eagerly redeemed them when they were taken captive.” They
thought it better to bury their daughters than to give them in marriage
to unworthy husbands.[132] According to the testimony of J. G. Wood,
Kaffir women are very tenacious about their relations, probably, it
is thought, for the reason that husbands are more respectful toward
wives who have friends near them, than they are to those who have no
relations at hand to take their part.[133] Usually among the Kaffirs,
according to Mr. Shooter, although a man pays a price to the parents of
the woman whom he wishes to marry, the affair is by no means settled;
on the contrary, he must undergo the closest scrutiny by her before she
will consent to accept him. Bidding him stand, she surveys first one
side of him, then the other, the relations in the meantime standing
about awaiting her decision. Upon this subject Mr. Wood remarks: “This
amusing ceremony has two meanings: the first that the contract of
marriage is a voluntary act on both sides; and the second, that the
intending bridegroom has as yet no authority over her.”[134]

[132] Professor Smith, _Kinship and Marriage_, p. 79.

[133] _Uncivilized Races_, etc., p. 78.

[134] _Ibid._, p. 79.

Although under the system of marriage by sale or contract a woman
has a voice in the selection of her husband, and although she can
count on her kinsmen to protect her against abuse, still, practically,
the contract brings the wife under the same condition as a captured
wife; she follows her husband to his home, where, as a dependent, he
exercises control over her person and her children. In Arabia prior
to the time of the Prophet the wife could claim the protection of her
kindred against her husband, yet the principle underlying marriage by
contract and that by capture was the same, except that under the former
the husband paid a price for the woman’s sexual subjection, while under
the latter, not only in sexual matters, but in all others as well, he
was her “lord” and master.

The Prophet says: “I charge you with your women, for they are with
you as captives (_awânî_).” Professor Smith informs us that according
to the lexicons _awânî_ is actually used in the same sense as married
women generally.[135] For long ages after _ba’al_ marriages had been
established, so degrading was the office of wife that women of rank
were considered too great to marry.

[135] _Kinship and Marriage_, p. 77.

After relating some interesting accounts of certain practices in common
with the custom of capture among the Brazilian tribes, Sir John Lubbock
says:

 This view also throws some light on the remarkable subordination of
 the wife to the husband, which is so characteristic of marriage,
 and so curiously inconsistent with all our avowed ideas; moreover it
 tends to explain those curious cases in which Hetairæ were held in
 greater estimation than those women who were, as we should consider,
 properly and respectably married to a single husband. The former were
 originally fellow-countrywomen and relations; the latter captives and
 slaves.[136]

[136] _Origin of Civilization_, p. 127.

With the development of the egoistic principle, or when selfishness
and the love of gain became the rule of action, the protection of
her kindred, which in an earlier age a woman could count on against
her husband, was withdrawn, and daughters came to be looked upon as
a legitimate source of gain to their families. On this subject C.
Staniland Wake remarks:

 Women by marriage became slaves, and it was the universal practice for
 a man who parted with his daughter to be a slave to require a valuable
 consideration for her. Moreover, as a man can purchase as many slaves
 as he likes, so he can take as many wives as he pleases.[137]

[137] C. Staniland Wake, _Marriage and Kinship_, p. 199.

Thus arose polygamy.

In Rome, in the Latter Status of barbarism and the opening ages
of civilization, woman, at marriage, forfeited all the privileges
belonging to her as a member of her own family, while within that
of her husband no compensatory advantages were granted her. Even a
proprietary right in her own children was denied her, and from a legal
point of view the wife became the daughter of her husband, and not
unfrequently the ward of her own son.

After the power gained by man over woman during the latter ages of
barbarism had reached its height, the family was based not on the
marriage of a woman and a man, but upon the power of a man over a woman
and her offspring, or upon the absolute authority of the male parent.
In Rome a man’s wife and children were members of his family not
because they were related to him but because they were subject to his
control. At this stage in the development of the family, the father had
the power of “uncontrolled corporal chastisement” and of life and death
over his children.[138] If it was his will to do so, he could even sell
them. Indeed, a son’s freedom from paternal tyranny could be gained
only by the actual sale of his person by his father. Relating to the
control exercised by the father over his children, it is observed that
he had the right “during their whole life to imprison, scourge, keep to
rustic labour in chains, to sell or slay, even though they may be in
the enjoyment of high state offices.”[139] If a father granted freedom
to his son, that son was no longer a member of his family.

[138] Maine, _Ancient Law_, p. 133.

[139] Ortolan, _History of Roman Law_, p. 107.

That, with the exception of force, there is no quality in the male
constitution capable of binding together the various individuals born
of the same father, is apparent from the past history of the human
race. Mr. Parkyns, referring to the character of the Abyssinians,
observes that the worst point in the constitution of their society is
the want of affection among relations, “even though they be children of
one father.” He says that the animosities which keep the tribes in a
constant state of warfare do not exist among the offspring of the same
mother and father, but, as the children of polygamous fathers are more
numerous than own brethren, fraternal affection is a rare thing.[140] A
comparison between the family group under archaic usages at a time when
woman’s influence was in the ascendency, and the Roman family under
the older Roman law, will serve to show the wide difference existing
between the altruistic and egoistic principles as controlling agencies
in the home and in society.

[140] _Life in Abyssinia_, p. 156.

A significant fact in connection with this subject is here suggested,
that, although for untold ages women were leaders of the gens, so long
as their will was supreme, no human right was ever invaded, and no
legitimate manly prerogative usurped; but, on the contrary, all were
equal, and the principles of a pure democracy were firmly grounded.
Liberty and justice had not at that time been throttled by the extreme
selfishness inherent in human nature.

Although the processes by which women at a certain stage of human
development lost their independence were gradual, they are by no means
difficult to trace. The history of human marriage as gathered from the
various tribes and races in the several stages of growth shows the
primary idea of the office of wife to have been that of sexual slavery,
and discloses the fact that it was the desire for foreign women who,
shorn of their natural independence, could be controlled, which caused
the overthrow of female supremacy.

As during the earlier ages of human existence the women of the group
were absolutely independent of men for the means of support, they were
able to so control their own movements. Only foreign women—captives
stolen from their homes and friends—taken singly or in groups could
be subjugated or brought into the wifely relation. Indeed, until
the systematic practice of capturing women from hostile tribes for
sexual purposes had been inaugurated, and the subsequent agency of
repression—namely, ownership of the soil by males, had followed as a
natural consequence, the usurpation by man of the natural rights and
privileges of woman was impossible. The male members of the group had
not at that time the power to sell their sisters and other female
relations, but, on the contrary, defended them manfully against the
assaults of hostile tribes. The foreign captor, the wife-catcher, was
an enemy who was both feared and hated, and upon him were showered the
maledictions of the entire group upon which the assault had been made.
In retaliation for his offence, the men who had been bereft of a sister
must in their turn commit a like depredation; thus, through the removal
of women, the men of early groups gradually gained control of the
common possessions at the same time that they were being supplied with
foreign wives over whom they exercised absolute control. In process of
time, when wealth began to accumulate in the hands of men, and when
friendly relations began to be established between neighbouring tribes,
foreign wives, without influence, were received in exchange for the
free-born women of a man’s own clan; henceforward a resort to capture
was unnecessary. Distant tribes, however, were still liable to attack.
Wars were waged against the men, who were sometimes slain, sometimes
taken prisoners, the invaders taking possession of the lands and
compelling the women to accept the position of wife to them. Finally,
negotiations were entered into whereby women were uniformly taken from
their homes to become wives in alien groups. Later, the _ba’al_ form
of marriage came to prevail within the tribe. Professor Smith, quoting
from the advice given by an Arab to his son, says: “Do not marry in
your own _hayy_, for that leads to ugly family quarrels,” to which he
adds,

 there was a real inconsistency in the position of a woman who was
 at once her husband’s free kinswoman and his purchased wife. It was
 better to have a wife who had no claims of kin and no brethren near to
 take her part.[141]

[141] _Kinship and Marriage_, p. 105.

Under earlier conditions of the human race women as bearers and
protectors of the young were regarded as the natural land-owners;
hence, they did not leave their own homes to follow the fathers of
their children. The woman who left her own relations for the _hayy_ of
her husband could no longer exercise control over the possessions of
her own gens, neither could she at a later period inherit property from
her kindred for the reason that her interests were identical with those
of her children and her children belonged to another clan. As property
could not be transferred from the group in which it originated, she was
disinherited. Through marriage women gave up their natural right to
the soil, and consequently to independence. A knowledge of the facts
connected with the origin of the institution of marriage, reveals the
fact that women lost their influence and power, not because of their
weakness, but because they were foreigners and dependents in the homes
of their husbands.

The statement was made at the beginning of this chapter that the origin
of marriage and the establishment of the family with man at its head
involve the subject of economies.

When property began to accumulate in the hands of men, when women
were forced to relinquish their right to the soil and thus to become
dependent on men for their support, their slavery was inevitable.
Later, when through the exigencies of the situation, woman went without
protest to the home of her master, there to become a pensioner upon his
bounty, her slavery was complete.

In process of time, women bound to foreign tribes by the children which
they had borne, began to accommodate themselves to the situation, and
even to claim an interest in the home of their adoption, whereupon
friendly relations began to be established between the tribe of the
mother and that of the father. Hence may be observed the fact that
the maternal instinct was the agency by which the barriers between
unrelated groups were gradually broken down, and by which a spirit
of friendliness was established between hitherto hostile tribes. As
the coherence of the group and the combination of the gentes to form
the tribe had been possible only by means of this instinct, so the
confederacy of tribes to form the nation was accomplished in the same
manner.

The change from female supremacy to male dominion is among the most
important of the evolutionary processes. From the facts underlying the
development of human society, and especially those underlying the two
diverging lines of sex-demarcation, it is evident that evolution does
not proceed in an undeviating line toward progress. It is perceived,
that seeming retrogressions always involve a gain—a gain which could
have been accomplished in no other way.

Among the benefits derived from this change in the positions of the
sexes was the development of altruism in man. When fathers began to
take an interest in their own offspring, to care for them and to become
responsible for their welfare, an important step had been taken toward
the establishment of the principle of brotherhood among mankind.
The evolutionary processes indicate a constant tendency toward the
solidarity of the race, they may be said to represent a resistless
force ever drawing the human family together in a closer bond of union
and sympathy. Under female supremacy, combination, or association of
interests, was confined to the gens. The extension of these interests
which resulted from the new order was necessary before humanity could
proceed on its onward course. These changes could not have taken place
under the early system based on the supremacy of women.

The facts brought out by scientists going to prove that the progressive
principle is confided to the female are accentuated by those
connected with the origin and subsequent development of marriage and
the family. That within the female lie the elements of progress is
clearly indicated, not only in the position which the female occupied
among the orders of life lower in the scale of being, and during the
earlier ages of human history, but also by her career as the slave of
man. Simply by means of the characters developed within the female
constitution, without material resources, and deprived of recognized
influence, women have been able to a certain extent, to dignify the
family and the home.

It is more than likely that in the not distant future, even the
institution of marriage, through which women have been degraded, will
become so purified and elevated that its results, instead of being a
menace to higher conditions will constitute a continuous source of
progress and a promise of still higher achievement. Before this may be
accomplished, mothers must be absolutely free and wholly independent
of the opposite sex for the means of support. Marriage must be a co
partnership in which neither sex has the right to control the other.

Although our present system of marriage took its rise in the practice
of forcing women into the marital relation, it must be borne in mind
that it was not inaugurated for the purpose of establishing monogamy.
On the contrary, the privileges of the captor remained the same within
his tribe as before the foreign woman was stolen. The theft was
committed for no other purpose than to augment the hitherto restricted
range of sexual liberties, and to give to the father absolute dominion
over the individuals born in his house.

The system of marriage in vogue at the present time has never
restricted men to the possession of a single woman. Monogamy, as
established under male supremacy, means one husband for one woman,
while a man may have as many women as he is able or willing to support.
As women are still dependent upon men for the necessities of life, the
supply of the former is regulated by the demands of the latter.

Marriage still retains its original meaning and significance, namely,
the ownership and control of women. With the exception of physical
force all the ceremonies, customs, ideas, and usages of primitive
marriage have been preserved. When a woman marries she is “given” to
her husband by her father or some other male relative. She promises
to obey her master and accepts a ring as a badge of her dependence
upon him. She relinquishes her own name and family, accepting as her
own the name and family of her husband. She follows him to his home
where, as she is supported by his bounty, she is subject to his will
and pleasure. Until women are economically free they will remain sexual
slaves.

Of all the forms of human slavery which have ever been devised there
has probably never been one so degrading as is that which has been
practiced within the marital relation, nor one in which the extrication
of the enslaved has been a matter of such utter hopelessness. The
present struggle of women for freedom shows how deeply rooted is the
instinct which demands their subjection.

The descent of woman has encompassed the lowest depths of human
degradation, but the end of the long and weary road which she has
traversed is nearly reached. Already the evolutionary processes which
are to release her from bondage are in operation.

From available facts relative to the development of early mankind,
it is certain that it must have required centuries upon centuries of
time to subjugate women and bring them into harmonious relations with
men while occupying a position of sexual slavery; first, physical
force, second, dependence, and third the substitution of masculine
opinions for the instincts and ideas which are peculiar to the female
constitution. This accomplished the processes were begun which were to
rivet the chains by which they were bound and by means of which women
themselves in their weakened condition were to acquiesce in their own
degradation. Religion was the means employed. Apollo, according to
Greek mythology, issued an edict declaring that man is superior to
woman and must rule, and Athene herself finally accepted the edict.
Through religion, women came to regard themselves simply as appendages
to men, as tools or instruments for their pleasure and gratification,
and as possessing no inherent right either to liberty or happiness.

Religion has its root in sex. As we have already seen the creative
force has ever been regarded as masculine or feminine according to
the relative importance of the two sexes in human society and in the
reproductive processes. So long as woman’s influence and power were in
the ascendency the mother was the only recognized parent. She was the
creator of offspring. Later, the abstract idea of female reproductive
power was manifested in the female deities. It required thousands upon
thousands of years to subdue women. It also required millenniums to
dethrone the female deities.

When, with the rise of male power, man began to assume the rôle of
parent, he assumed also all the functions which had formerly belonged
to woman. As has been noted in another portion of this work he even
went to bed when a child was born. With this change in the physical
relations of the sexes, the creative principle soon began to assume
a masculine aspect. Male deities began to appear associated with the
goddesses. In process of time, as male power increased, the god-idea
became wholly masculine. The Jewish god is a personified idea of male
power and reproductive energy. This subject will be referred to later
in these pages.

Thus the ancient plan of government which was the outgrowth of the free
maternal instinct, and which had guided humanity on its course for
thousands of years, finally succumbed to a system based on physical
force. When we remember the conditions surrounding early society we may
well believe that civilization was gained, not because of the fact that
male power succeeded in gaining the ascendency over female influence,
but in spite of it.

Given a combination of circumstances involving the supremacy of the
lower instincts in mankind, and the individual ownership of land, the
subjection of women, monarchy, and slavery, with all their attendant
evils, namely, poverty, disease, crime, and misery were sure to follow.

When we consider the fundamental bias of the two diverging lines of
sexual demarcation, it is not perhaps singular that the strong sexual
nature which has prompted males to vigorous physical action should for
a time have gained the ascendency over the higher qualities peculiar to
females; yet the material progress achieved under the inspiration and
direction of agencies like this will not, in a more enlightened stage
of existence, be regarded as embodying the results of the best efforts
of human activity, or as representing the highest capabilities of the
race.

Probably no one will deny that the accumulation of wealth by
individuals, and the subsequent change in the relative positions of
the sexes, were necessary steps toward the establishment of society
on a political or territorial basis, or toward the breaking up of
kindred groups and the acknowledgment of the idea of the unity of the
entire human family. Neither will the proposition be contradicted
that the evils attending these changes namely, monarchy, slavery,
and the inordinate love of gain have been unavoidable adjuncts to
the development of the race; yet, who will doubt that under higher
conditions, as the animal recedes in the distance, these blots on the
records of human history will be regarded not as regular steps in the
advancement of mankind, but as by-paths which, owing to the peculiar
bias which had been given to the male organism among the lower forms
of life, the human race has been obliged to take in order to reach
civilization?




