CHAPTER II

THE ORIGIN OF SEX DIFFERENCES


We have observed that, according to naturalists, the earliest forms of
life which appeared on the earth were androgynous or hermaphrodite,
that the two elements necessary for reproduction were originally
confined within one and the same individual within which were carried
on all the functions of reproduction. Later, however, a division of
labour arose, and these two original functions became detached, after
which time the reproductive processes were carried on only through the
commingling of elements prepared by, or developed within, two separate
and distinct individuals.

As the belief is entertained by our guides in this matter that
greater differentiation, or specialization of parts, denotes higher
organization, it is believed that the division of labour by which the
germ is prepared by one individual and the sperm by another individual,
as is the case at the present time with all the higher orders of life,
constitutes an important step in the line of progress. Here this line
of argument ceases, and, until very recent times, concerning the
course of development followed by each sex little has been heard. This
silence on a subject of such vital importance to the student of biology
is not perhaps difficult to understand; the conclusion, however,
is unavoidable that the individual which must nourish and protect
the germ, and by processes carried on within her own body provide
nourishment for the young during its prenatal existence, and sometimes
for years after birth, must have the more highly specialized organism,
and must, therefore, represent the higher stage of development. Indeed,
it is admitted by scientists that the advance from the egg-layers to
the milk-givers indicates one of the most important steps in the entire
line of development; and yet the peculiar specialization of structure
necessary for its accomplishment was for the most part carried on
within the female organism.

Concerning the origin of sex in the individual organism little seems
to be known; as a result, however, of observations on the development
of the reproductive organs in the higher vertebrates, and especially
in birds, it is believed that there exists a “strict parallelism
between the individual and the racial history,”—that the three main
stages in the development of the chick, viz.: (1) germi-parity, (2)
hermaphroditism, and (3) differentiated unisexuality, correspond to the
three great steps of historic evolution.

By a careful investigation of the facts connected with the development
of unisexual forms, we are enabled to discover the early beginnings of
the characteristics which distinguish the two sexes throughout their
entire course. We are told that with animals which have their sexes
separate, in addition to strictly sexual difference

 the male possesses certain organs of sense or locomotion, of which the
 female is quite destitute, or has them more highly developed, in order
 that he may readily find or reach her; or again the male has special
 organs of prehension for holding her securely. These latter organs, of
 infinitely diversified kinds, graduate into those which are commonly
 ranked as primary.[4]

[4] Darwin, _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 207.

The female, on the other hand, in addition to those sexual characters
which are strictly primary, has “organs for the nourishment or
protection of her young, such as the mammary glands of mammals, and
the abdominal sacks of the marsupials.” In addition to these she is
frequently provided with organs for the defence of the community;
for instance, “the females of most bees are provided with a special
apparatus for collecting and carrying pollen, and their ovipositor is
modified into a sting for the defence of the larvæ and the community.”
We are assured by Mr. Darwin that many similar cases could be given.[5]

[5] _Ibid._, p. 208.

Here, then, with almost the first or primary step toward sexual
differentiation, may be observed the establishment of that peculiar
bias which upon investigation will be seen to extend all along the two
lines of sexual demarcation, and which (to anticipate the conclusions
of our argument), as soon as mankind is reached, appears in the male as
extreme egoism or selfishness, and in the female as altruism or care
for other individuals outside of self.

We are assured, however, that it is not alone to the reproductive
organs and their functions that we are to look for the chief
differences in the constitution and character of the sexes. Neither is
it entirely to Natural Selection that we are to seek for the causes
which underlie the specialization peculiar to the two diverging lines
of sexual demarcation; in addition to primary sexual divergences, there
are also “secondary sexual characters” which are of great importance to
their possessor. Indeed, from the prominence given to Sexual Selection
by Mr. Darwin, it would seem that it played a part in the development
of males quite equal to that of Natural Selection itself.

Now the difference between Natural Selection and Sexual Selection is
that, whereas, in the former, characters are developed and preserved
which are of use to the individual in overcoming the unfavourable
conditions of environment, by the latter, only those characters are
acquired and preserved which assist the individual in overcoming the
obstacles to reproduction; or, to use Mr. Darwin’s own language:

 [Sexual Selection] depends on the advantage which certain individuals
 have over others of the same sex and species solely in respect of
 reproduction.... [Where] the males have acquired their present
 structure, not from being better fitted to survive in the struggle
 of existence, but from having gained an advantage over other males,
 and from having transmitted this advantage to their male offspring
 alone, sexual selection must here have come into action.... A slight
 degree of variability leading to some advantage, however slight,
 in reiterated deadly contests would suffice for the work of sexual
 selection; and it is certain that secondary sexual characters are
 eminently variable. Just as man can give beauty, according to his
 standard of taste, to his male poultry, or more strictly can modify
 the beauty originally acquired by the parent species, can give to
 the Sebright bantam a new and elegant plumage, an erect and peculiar
 carriage—so it appears the female birds in a state of nature, have by
 a long selection of the more attractive males, added to their beauty
 or other attractive qualities.[6]

[6] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, pp. 209-211.

Thus, according to Mr. Darwin, it is through a long selection by
females of the more attractive males that the present structure of the
latter has been acquired. If, in a short time, a man can give elegant
carriage and beauty to his bantams, according to his standard of
beauty, he can see no reason to doubt that female birds, by selecting
during thousands of generations the most melodious or beautiful males,
according to their standard of beauty, might produce a marked effect.
He says:

 To sum up on the means through which, as far as we can judge, sexual
 selection has led to the development of secondary sexual characters.
 It has been shown that the largest number of vigorous offspring will
 be reared from the pairing of the strongest and best armed males,
 victorious in contests over other males, with the most vigorous and
 best-nourished females, which are the first to breed in the spring. If
 such females select the more attractive, and at the same time vigorous
 males, they will rear a larger number of offspring than the retarded
 females, which must pair with the less vigorous and less attractive
 males.... The advantage thus gained by the more vigorous pairs in
 rearing a larger number of offspring has apparently sufficed to render
 sexual selection efficient.[7]

[7] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 220.

Although the belief is common among naturalists that the appearance of
secondary sexual characters belonging to males is greatly influenced
by female choice, a majority of writers upon this subject are not
in sympathy with Mr. Darwin’s theory concerning the origin of these
variations. It is believed by them that Sexual Selection “may account
for the perfecting, but not for the origin, of these characters.”

It is useless, however, to rehearse the opinions of the various writers
who have dealt with this subject. It is perhaps sufficient to state
that the great beauty of males has usually been accepted as evidence
of their superiority over the females.

In his chapter, “The Male generally more Modified than the Female,”
Mr. Darwin remarks: “Appearances would indicate that not the male
which is most attractive to the female is chosen, but the one which
is least distasteful.” He says that the aversion of female birds for
certain males renders the season of courtship one of great anxiety and
discomfiture, not only to many of the more poorly endowed aspirants,
but to those also which are more magnificently attired—that the pairing
ground becomes a field of battle, upon which, while parading their
charms to the best advantage, is sacrificed much of the gorgeous
plumage of the contestants. On the wooing ground are displayed
for the admiration and approval of the females, all the physical
attractions of the males, as well as the mental characters correlated
with them, namely, courage, and pugnacity or perseverance. According
to Mr. Darwin, with the exception of vanity, no other quality is in
any considerable degree manifested by male birds, but to such an
extent has love of display been developed in many of them, notably
the pea-fowl, that, “in the absence of females of his own species,
he will show off his finery before poultry and even pigs.” We are
assured that the higher we ascend in the animal kingdom the more
frequent and more violent become two desires in the male: “the desire
of appearing beautiful, and that of driving away rivals.” According
to Mr. Darwin’s theory of development, because of the indifference
of the female among the lower orders of life to the processes of
courtship, it has been necessary for the male to expend much energy
or vital force in searching for her—in contending with his rivals for
possession of her person, and in performing various acts to please
her and secure her favours. While excessive eagerness in courtship is
the one all-absorbing character of male fishes, birds, and mammals,
we are assured that with the females, pairing is not only a matter of
indifference, but that courtship is actually distasteful to them, and,
therefore, that the former must resort to the various means referred to
in order to induce the latter to submit to their advances.

We are informed that the female is sometimes charmed through the power
of song; that at other times she is captivated by the diversified
means which have been acquired by male insects and birds for producing
various sounds resembling those proceeding from certain kinds of
musical instruments; and not unfrequently she is won by means of
antics or love dances performed on the ground or in the air. On the
pairing-ground, combs, wattles, elongated plumes, top-knots, and
fancy-coloured feathers are paraded for the admiration and approval of
the females. Led by the all-absorbing instinct of desire,

 the males display their charms with elaborate care and to the best
 effect; and this is done in the presence of the females.... To suppose
 that the females do not appreciate the beauty of the males, is to
 admit that their splendid decorations, and all their pomp and display,
 are useless; and this is incredible.[8]

[8] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 496.

Topknots, gaudy feathers, elongated plumes among birds, huge tusks,
horns, etc., among mammals, the mane of the lion, and the beard of
man, may be noticed among the many characters which have been acquired
through Sexual Selection.

Although the immense teeth, tusks, horns, and various other weapons or
appendages which ornament the males of many species of mammals, have
all been developed through Sexual Selection for contending with their
rivals for the favours of the females, it is observed that the “most
pugnacious and best armed males seldom depend for success on their
ability to drive away or kill their rivals,” but that their special aim
is to “charm the female.” Mr. Darwin quotes from a “good observer,” who
believes that the battles of male birds “are all a sham, performed to
show themselves to the greatest advantage before the admiring females
who assemble around.”[9]

[9] _Ibid._, p. 367.

In _The Descent of Man_ is quoted the following from Mr. Belt, who,
after describing the beauty of the _Florisuga mellivora_, says:

 I have seen the female sitting on a branch, and two males displaying
 their charms in front of her. One would shoot up like a rocket, then
 suddenly expanding the snow-white tail, like an inverted parachute,
 slowly descend in front of her, turning round gradually to show off
 back and front.... The expanded white tail covered more space than
 all the rest of the bird, and was evidently the grand feature in the
 performance. Whilst one male was descending, the other would shoot up
 and come slowly down expanded. The entertainment would end in a fight
 between the two performers; but whether the most beautiful or the most
 pugnacious was the accepted suitor, I know not.[10]

[10] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 443.

Audubon, who spent a long life in observing birds, has no doubt that
the female deliberately chooses her mate. Of the woodpecker he says
the hen is followed by half a dozen suitors, who continue performing
strange antics “until a marked preference is shown for one.” Of the
red-winged starling it is said that she is pursued by several males
“until, becoming fatigued, she alights, receives their addresses, and
soon makes a choice.”[11] Mr. Darwin quotes further from Audubon, who
says that among the Virginia goat-suckers, no sooner has the female
“made her choice than her approved gives chase to all intruders, and
drives them beyond his dominions.”

[11] _Ibid._, p. 416.

It is said that among mammals the male depends almost entirely upon
his strength and courage to “charm the female.” With reference to the
struggles between animals for the possession of the females, Mr. Darwin
says:

 This fact is so notorious that it would be superfluous to give
 instances. Hence the females have the opportunity of selecting one
 out of several males, on the supposition that their mental capacity
 suffices for the exertion of a choice.[12]

[12] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 212.

We are assured that among nearly all the lower orders of life the
female exhibits a marked preference for certain individuals, and that
an equal degree of repugnance is manifested towards others, but that
the male, whose predominant character is desire, “is ready to pair
with any female.” On this subject Mr. Darwin remarks: “The general
impression seems to be that the male accepts any female.” He says it
frequently occurs that while two males are fighting together to win
the favours of a female, she goes away with a third for whom she has
a preference. Mr. Darwin quotes from Captain Bryant, who says of a
certain species of seals:

 Many of the females on their arrival at the island where they breed,
 appear desirous of returning to some particular male, and frequently
 climb the outlying rock to overlook the rookeries, calling out and
 listening as if for a familiar voice. Then changing to another place
 they do the same again.[13]

[13] _Ibid._, p. 523.

Little seems to be known of the courtship of animals in a state of
nature. Among domesticated species, however, many observations have
been made by breeders going to prove that the female exerts a choice
in pairing. Concerning dogs, Mr. Darwin quotes from Mr. Mayhew, who
says: “The females are able to bestow their affections; and tender
recollections are as potent over them as they are known to be in other
cases where higher animals are concerned.” Of the affection of female
dogs for certain males the same writer says it “becomes of more than
romantic endurance,” that they manifest a “devotion which no time can
afterwards subdue.”

On concluding his chapter on choice in pairing among quadrupeds, Mr.
Darwin remarks:

 It is improbable that the unions of quadrupeds in a state of nature
 should be left to mere chance. It is much more probable that the
 females are allured or excited by particular males, who possess
 certain characters in a higher degree than other males.[14]

[14] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 525.

As the female among birds selects her partner, he thinks it would be a
strange anomaly if among quadrupeds, which stand higher in the scale
and have higher mental powers, she did not also exert a choice.[15]

[15] It should be noted, in passing, that, according to this reasoning,
the female of the human species would also be likely to exercise her
will power in the selection of a mate. Evidences are indeed at hand
going to prove that until a comparatively recent time in the history
of the human race women controlled the sexual relation. As will be
shown in Part II., during the primitive ages of human existence the
position of woman was much higher than was that occupied by man. During
the earlier ages, and under more natural conditions, women selected
their mates, and among the human species, as among the lower orders, it
became necessary for the male to please the female if he would win her
favours; hence, through Sexual Selection, it is believed, was acquired
the greater size of man.

Because of the indifference of the female to the attentions of the
male, in order to carry on the processes of reproduction, it was
necessary among the lower orders that the male become eager in his
pursuit of her, and as a result of this eagerness excessive passion
was developed in him. As the most eager would be the most successful
in propagating, they would leave the greatest number of offspring
to inherit their characters—namely, in males, passion and pugnacity
correlated with the physical qualities acquired through Sexual
Selection.

On the subject of the acquirement of secondary sexual characters, Mr.
Darwin says: “The great eagerness of the males has thus indirectly led
to their much more frequently developing secondary sexual characters.”
Indeed, by all naturalists, the fact is recognized that the appearance
of these characters is closely connected with the reproductive function.

Later experiments have confirmed the observations of Mr. Darwin
concerning the intelligence of the female among the lower orders of
life. Among these experiments are those recently made by Professor
Harper, of the Department of Biology, in the Northwestern University.
Professor Harper announces that in all the experiments conducted by
him, the female animal showed a greater degree of perception, or
intelligence, than the male. He says: “In all my experiments, I found
that the female displayed a remarkable quickness in grasping ideas
which the male after numerous sluggish efforts finally accomplished.”
Professor Harper declared that these facts regarding animals apply with
equal force to human beings.

Regarding the power of the female to appreciate the beauty of the
males, Mr. Darwin says:

 No doubt this implies powers of discrimination and taste on the part
 of the female which will at first appear extremely improbable; but by
 the facts to be adduced hereafter, I hope to be able to show that the
 females actually have these powers.[16]

[16] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 211.

In commenting on the fact that the female Argus pheasant appreciates
the exquisite shading of the ball-and-socket ornaments, and the elegant
patterns on the wing-feathers of the male, Mr. Darwin writes:

 He who thinks that the male was created as he now exists, must admit
 that the great plumes which prevent the wings from being used for
 flight, and which are displayed at courtship and at no other time,
 in a manner quite peculiar to this species, were given to him as
 ornaments. If so he must likewise admit that the female was created
 and endowed with the capacity for appreciating such ornaments. Every
 one who admits the principle of evolution, and yet feels great
 difficulty in believing the high taste implied by the beauty of the
 males, and which generally coincides with our own standard, should
 reflect that the nerve cells of the brain in the highest as in the
 lowest members of the vertebrate series are derived from those of the
 common progenitor of this great kingdom.

In referring to the remarkable patterns displayed on the male Argus
pheasant, designs which have been developed through Sexual Selection,
Mr. Darwin says:

 Many will declare that it is utterly incredible that a female bird
 should be able to appreciate fine shading and exquisite patterns. It
 is undoubtedly a marvellous fact that she should possess this almost
 human degree of taste. He who thinks that he can safely gauge the
 discrimination and taste of the lower animals may deny that the female
 Argus pheasant can appreciate such refined beauty; but he will then
 be compelled to admit that the extraordinary attitudes assumed by the
 male during the act of courtship, by which the wonderful beauty of his
 plumage is fully displayed, are purposeless; and this is a conclusion
 which I, for one, will never admit.[17]

[17] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 400.

Here, then, in the female bird we see developed in a remarkable degree
the power of discrimination, the exercise of taste, a sense of beauty,
and the ability to choose—qualities which the facts brought forward by
scientists show conclusively to have been acquired by the female and by
her transmitted to her offspring. Regarding males, outside the instinct
for self-preservation, which, by the way, is often overshadowed by
their great sexual eagerness, no distinguishing characters have
been acquired and transmitted, other than those which have been the
result of passion, namely, pugnacity and perseverance. This excessive
eagerness which prompts them to parade their charms whenever such
display is likely to aid them in the gratification of their desires is
developed only in the male line.

According to the law of heredity, those modifications of the male
which have been the result of Sexual Selection appear only in the sex
in which they originated. It will be well for us to remember that
according to Mr. Darwin’s theory of pangenesis, sexes do not differ
much in constitution before the power of reproduction is reached, but
that after this time the undeveloped atoms or

 gemmules which are cast off from each varying part in the one sex
 would be much more likely to possess the proper affinities for uniting
 with the tissues of the same sex, and thus becoming developed, than
 with those of the opposite sex.[18]

[18] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 232.

We are given to understand that secondary sexual characters are
extremely variable, also that variability denotes low organization;
secondary sexual characters indicate that the various organs of the
structure have not become specialized for the performance of their
legitimate functions. Highly specialized forms are not variable.

To sum up the argument thus far: It has been observed that through
the separation of the sexes, and the consequent division of labour,
there have been established two diverging lines of development. While
the male pheasant has been inheriting from his male progenitors
fantastic ball-and-socket ornaments, and huge wings which are utterly
useless for their legitimate purpose, the female, in the meantime,
has been receiving as her inheritance only those peculiarities of
structure which tend toward uninterrupted development. Within her
have been stored or conserved all the gain which has been effected
through Natural Selection, and as a result of greater specialization
of parts, there have been developed certain peculiarities in her brain
nerve-cells, by which she is enabled to exercise functions requiring a
considerable degree of intelligence.

Although this power of choice, which we are given to understand
is exercised by the female throughout the various departments of
the vertebrate kingdom (evidences of it having been observed among
creatures even as low in the organic scale as fishes), implies a degree
of intelligence far in advance of that manifested by males, it is
admitted that the qualities which bespeak this superiority, namely, the
power to exercise taste and discrimination, constitute a “law almost as
general as the eagerness of the male.”[19]

[19] _The Descent of Man_, 1877, p. 222.

We are assured by Mr. Darwin that in the economy of nature those
ornaments of the male Argus pheasant which serve no other purpose
than to please the female and secure her favours, and which have
been acquired at great expense of vital force, are of the “highest
importance to him,” and that his success in captivating the female
“has more than compensated him for his greatly impeded power of
flight and his lessened capacity for running.” Yet it is plain that
his compensation for this immense expenditure of vital force has not
lain in the direction of higher specialization, but that while by the
acquirement of these characters the processes of reproduction have
doubtless been aided, the injury to the male constitution has been deep
and lasting.

Upon this subject Mr. Darwin himself says:

 The development, however, of certain structures—of the horns, for
 instance, in certain stags—has been carried to a wonderful extreme;
 and in some cases to an extreme which, as far as the general
 conditions of life are concerned, must be slightly injurious to the
 male.[20]

[20] _Ibid._, p. 227.

He thinks, however, that

 Natural Selection will determine that such characters shall not be
 acquired by the victorious males if they would be highly injurious,
 either by expending too much of their vital powers or by exposing them
 to any great danger.

According to Mr. Darwin, as these characters enable them to leave a
more numerous progeny, their advantages are in the long run greater
than those derived from more perfect adaptation to their conditions of
life. It is plain, however, that this advantage, although it enables
them to gratify their desires, and at the same time to perpetuate their
species, does not imply higher development for the male organism.

We have been assured by our guides in these matters that in the
processes of evolution there is no continuous or unbroken chain of
progress, that growth or change does not necessarily imply development,
but, on the contrary, only as a structure becomes better fitted for
its conditions, and only as its organs become more highly specialized
for the performance of all the duties involved in its environment, may
it be said to be in the line of progress. If this be true, particular
attention should be directed to the fact that as secondary sexual
characters do not assist their possessor in overcoming the unfavourable
conditions of his environment, they are not within the line of true
development, but, on the contrary, as their growth requires a great
expenditure of vital force, and, as is the case among birds, they often
hinder the free use of the legs in running and walking, and entirely
destroy the use of the wings for flight, they must be detrimental to
the entire structure. For the reason that females have managed to do
without them, the plea that the great tusks, horns, teeth, etc., of
mammals have been acquired for self-defence, is scarcely tenable.

On the subject of the relative expenditure of vital force in the two
lines of sexual demarcation, Mr. Darwin remarks:

 The female has to expend much organic matter in the formation of her
 ova, whereas the male expends much force in fierce contests with his
 rivals, in wandering about in search of the female, in exerting his
 voice, pouring out odoriferous secretions, etc.... In mankind, and
 even as low down in the organic scale as in the Lepidoptera, the
 temperature of the body is higher in the male than in the female,
 accompanied in the case of man by a slower pulse.[21]

Yet he concludes: “On the whole the expenditure of matter and force
by the two sexes is probably nearly equal, though effected in very
different ways and at different rates.”[21]

[21] _The Descent of Man_, p. 224.

However, as has been observed, the force expended by the male in fierce
contests with his rivals, in wandering about in search of the female,
and in his exertions to please her when found, does not constitute
the only outlay of vitality to which he is subjected; but in addition
to all this, there still remains to be considered that force which has
been expended in the acquirement of characters which, so far as his own
development is concerned, are useless and worse than useless; namely,
in birds, combs, wattles, elongated plumes, great wings, etc., and in
mammals great horns, tusks, and teeth—appendages which lie outside
the line of true development, and, as we have seen, are of no avail
except to aid in the processes of reproduction and to assist him in the
gratification of his desires; in fact, as these excrescences hinder
him in the performance of the ordinary functions of life, they may be
regarded in the light of actual hindrances to higher development.




