CHAPTER V

THE MOTHER-RIGHT


Among the most conspicuous of the writers who have dealt with the
subject of primitive society are Herr Bachofen, Mr. J. F. McLennan,
Sir John Lubbock, and Mr. L. H. Morgan. In 1861, the first-named of
these writers, a Swiss jurist, published an extensive work on the early
condition of society, entitled _Das Mutter-recht_ (The Motherright),
in which was first given to the world the fact that prior to the
establishment of a system of kinship through males, there everywhere
existed a system based on female supremacy, under which descent was
reckoned through women.

Bachofen was first led to a belief in a former state of society in
which women were the recognized leaders through the evidence which
everywhere underlies the traditions and mythologies of extant nations.
Upon investigation he found indisputable evidence going to prove that
every family of the human race had undergone the same processes of
development or growth, and that among all peoples female influence was
once supreme.

According to Bachofen’s theory, as there were at this early stage
of human existence no “laws” regulating the intercourse between the
sexes, human beings lived in a state of lawlessness, or hetairism.
Recognizing the difference in the reproductive instinct as manifested
in the two sexes, he says that becoming disgusted with their manner
of living women rebelled, and rising in arms, conquered their male
persecutors by sheer superiority in military skill; and that after they
had overthrown the degrading practices of communal or lawless marriage,
they established monogamy in its stead, under which system woman became
the recognized head of the family.

Children, although they had hitherto succeeded to the father’s name,
were now called after the mother, and all rights of inheritance were
thereafter established in the female line. Not only did women take upon
themselves the exercise of domestic authority and control, but, acting
under a strong religious impulse, they seized the reins of popular
government and completed their title to absolute dominion by wielding
the political sceptre as well, thus declaring themselves unconditional
masters of the situation.

At this juncture in human affairs, the belief began to be entertained
that motherhood was divine while the paternal office was regarded only
in the light of a human relation. Thus, through religion, women were
raised from a state of hetairism, or sexual slavery, to a position of
independence and self-respect. But that which was gained through a
supernatural impulse they were destined subsequently to lose through
the same source; for, when in Greece, the doctrine was promulgated that
the spirit of the child is derived from its father, paternity at once
assumed a divine character, and, as under the new order, the functions
of the mother were only to clothe the spirit, or simply to act as
“nurse” to the heaven-born production of the father, women lost their
supremacy, and under the new régime, maternity and womanhood again
trailed in the dust.

According to Bachofen, however, the cause of mothers did not at once
cease to be the subject of contention and conflict, but ever and
anon fresh battles and renewed struggles proclaimed the discontent
and uneasiness of women and heralded the fact that the contest for
supremacy had not yet ended. But, in process of time, as resistance
proved ineffectual, mothers themselves gradually succumbed to the
new idea of the divine character of the father, and, without further
murmuring or complaint, accepted gracefully the position of nurse to
his children.

The father now became the recognized head of the family, and men at
once seized the reins of government. Descent was henceforth traced in
the male line, and children took the father’s instead of the mother’s
name; in fact all relationships to which rights of succession were
attached were thereafter traced through fathers only. The complete
and final triumph of males having been established by the all-powerful
authority of Roman jurisprudence, the conflict between the sexes was
ended forever. Thus, according to Bachofen, was the supremacy of women
gained and lost.

Through a profound study of the traditions, legends, symbols, and
mythologies of antiquity, this writer was enabled to discover the fact
that at an earlier age in human history women were the recognized
leaders of mankind; that their influence and authority were supreme
over both the family and the community, and that all relationships to
which rights of succession were attached were traced through them.
In attempting to account for this early period of gynecocracy (the
existence of which to Bachofen’s mind no doubt presented a singular
and intricate problem) it first became necessary to set forth a theory
concerning a former condition of society out of which such a state
could have been evolved. But as at the time _Das Mutter-recht_ made its
appearance, the theory of the development of the human species from
pre-existing orders had not been adopted by scientists, and as many
of the various means at present employed for obtaining a knowledge of
primitive races had not been brought into requisition, even the vast
learning of Bachofen did not suffice to furnish a satisfactory solution
of the problem.

We have seen that in addition to the discovery that at an early age
in human experience female influence was supreme, he had arrived at
the conclusion that the natural instincts of women differ from those
of men; yet, notwithstanding this, so accustomed had he become to
the predominance of the masculine instincts in every branch of human
activity as to be unable to conceive of a state of society in which
the characters belonging to females could have controlled the sexual
relations. Evidently he was unable to connect these two facts, or to
perceive that that tendency or quality required for the protection of
the germ and the species, and which so early characterized the female
sex, had constituted the most primitive influence by which the human
race had been governed. As in the earliest ages of human existence no
arbitrary laws regulating marriage and the relations of the sexes had
been in operation, he could discern no condition under which society
could have existed other than that of “lawlessness” or “hetairism”—a
condition under which women were slaves, and men ruled supreme.

As Herr Bachofen was doubtless unaware of the fact that the human
animal is a descendant from creatures lower in the scale of life,
the idea of connecting his history with theirs had probably by him
never been thought of; therefore, judging primitive society, not by
the instincts and the natural laws governing them which mankind had
inherited from their progenitors, but, on the contrary, measuring them
by the standards of later ages when the grosser or disruptive elements
had gained dominion over the finer or constructive qualities in human
nature, he was unable to discern any way in which the conditions of
female supremacy everywhere indicated in the traditions and mythologies
of antiquity could have originated, except in an uprising of women, and
a resort to arms for the protection of their womanly dignity.

In referring to the military exploits of the women of Lycia, and,
in fact, of various portions of Africa and Asia, at a comparatively
late stage in human history, Bachofen says that the importance of
Amazonianism as opposed to Hetairism for the elevation of the feminine
sex, and through them of mankind, cannot be doubted.

There seems to be considerable evidence going to prove that there have
been times in the past history of the race in which women were brave
in war and valiant in defending their rights. Indeed, the accounts
given of the struggles of the Amazons in maintaining their independence
against surrounding nations—notably, the Greeks—are tolerably well
authenticated.[142]

[142] Concerning one of the encounters of this warlike people, the
following has been recounted by Plutarch (_Theseus_):

“And it appears to have been no slight or womanish enterprise; for they
could not have encamped in the town, or joined battle on the ground
about the Pynx and the Museum, or fallen in so intrepid a manner upon
the city of Athens, unless they had first reduced the country round
about. It is difficult, indeed, to believe (though Hellanicus has
related it) that they crossed the Cimmerian Bosphorus upon the ice; but
that they encamped almost in the heart of the city is confirmed by the
names of places, and by the tombs of those that fell.”

Although the fact seems to be well substantiated that in certain
portions of the earth, and at various periods in the history of the
race, women have maintained their independence and protected their
interests by force of arms, it seems quite as certain that actual
warfare carried on by them has been confined to peoples among which
male supremacy had but recently been gained, and among which a resort
to arms represented the last act of desperation to which they were
driven to maintain their dignity and honour. We have reason to believe,
however, that even these cases have been exceptional; at least, from
the facts at hand, we have no reason for thinking that at any stage in
the history of women’s career, armed resistance to masculine authority
has been uniform or protracted among them.

According to scientists, among the lower orders of life, males are
considerably in the excess of females, and among less developed
races men are more numerous than women. It has been shown in a
former portion of this work that the advancement of civilization is
characterized by a corresponding increase in the number of women
among the adult population; hence their evident lack of numbers among
primitive peoples, to say nothing of their probable aversion to war
and bloodshed, would at once preclude the idea that their dominion
was achieved through armed resistance to a foe so superior in numbers
and in fighting qualities. By a natural law governing propagation—
a law which determines the numerical proportion of the sexes, and
which creates an excess in the number of that sex best suited to its
environment, primitive women, had they relied on physical force, would
have had little chance to maintain their independence.

In a former portion of this work it has been observed that it was
neither to lack of numbers nor to their want of physical force that
women were divested of their power; that it was not through their
weakness, but through the peculiar course which the development or
growth of males had taken, that under certain conditions women became
enslaved.

Not merely from the facts laid down by naturalists regarding the
peculiar development of the male, but from later researches into the
conditions and causes which have influenced progress, it is plain that
no restrictions on the range of sexual liberties could have originated
in males. Hence the demand for a more refined state of society must
have begun with females. This fact seems to have been perceived by
Bachofen, but, as according to his reasoning, at an early period of
human existence, women were slaves, exercising none of the powers
necessary to personal control, it is difficult to conceive of any
manner in which it was possible for them to rise to the social position
and moral dignity ascribed to them in _Das Mutter-recht_.

According to the theory set forth by this writer, however, religion
was the cause of the important change which at this time took place
in the positions of the sexes. Although, according to him, the
religion which prevailed during the ages of “lawlessness” was of a low
“telluric chthonic” type, it was nevertheless the cause, or at least
one of the causes which led to the abandonment of promiscuity and the
establishment of the monogamic family. It will doubtless be remembered,
however, that this age of lawlessness or hetairism which Bachofen
has described, represents a very early stage of human existence, in
which, according to his reasoning, the baser instincts ruled supreme;
nevertheless, within it, he would have us believe that a religious
system had been evolved capable of lifting women from a state of
degradation to which they had been consigned by nature, or at least to
which they had always been committed, to a position of influence and
womanly dignity in which they were able to assume supreme control over
the forces by which they had been enslaved. With sexual desire as the
controlling influence in human affairs, and with women in bondage to
this power, it is difficult to conceive of any manner in which such a
religion could have arisen.

As all religious systems are believed to represent growths, and to
indicate a result of the degree of progress attained, it is evident
that had a religion appeared at this early age which was capable of
elevating women from a condition of degradation, as indicated by the
early state described by Bachofen it could not have been the result of
natural development, but, on the contrary, must have proceeded directly
from a divine source; in which event it would doubtless have remained
upon the earth still further to aid development and bless the race.
Such, however, was not the outcome of this remarkable but premature
religion; for it is asserted by this writer that what women gained by
religion they afterward lost through the same source—that in Greece,
the loss first came through the oracle of Apollo, which declared the
father to be the real parent of the child.

Bachofen assures us, also, that through the Bacchanalian excesses which
followed the dominion of males in Greece, hetairism was again restored,
and through this means gynecocracy reappeared. From this it would seem
that although under the earliest stage of hetairism women were without
power and wholly under the control of men, with the return, at a later
age, of a like state of society, the basis was at once laid for female
supremacy.

It is evident that Herr Bachofen’s confusion arises from a
misconception of the early importance of women. Although perhaps more
than any other writer upon this subject he has been able to recognize
the true bias of the female constitution, yet, as he has mistaken
the relative positions of women and men at the outset of the human
career, and as he has been unable to perceive the previously developed
influences which governed these relations, he has failed to furnish
a satisfactory solution of the problem of the early supremacy of
women, which from the evidence adduced, not only by the traditions and
mythologies of past ages, but by later developments in ethnology, may
not be doubted.

Prior to the appearance of mankind on the earth, had there been
developed within the female no higher element than that which
characterized the male, and had she appeared on the scene of human
action as the willing and natural tool of her less-developed male mate,
it is plain that she would have been unable to elevate herself to the
position of dignity which Bachofen assigns her, and which, until a
comparatively recent period in the human career, she had occupied.

As among the orders of creation below mankind the structural organism
of the male has been materially changed through his efforts to please
the female and secure her favours, it is evident that under earlier and
more natural conditions of human life, the appetites developed within
him were still largely controlled by her will. From logical conclusions
to be drawn from the hypotheses of naturalists, it is not likely that
at the outset of human life those restrictions on the nature of the
male imposed by the female throughout the animal kingdom were suddenly
withdrawn, or that the destructive elements which all along the line
of progress had been in abeyance to the higher powers developed in
organized matter, were immediately and without good cause put in
absolute command over the constructive forces of life.

With a better knowledge of the past history of mankind, comes the
assurance that such was not the case, but, on the contrary, that for
thousands of years women were the ruling spirits in human society; that
the cohesive quality—sympathy, which is the result of the maternal
instinct, and which conserves the highest interests of offspring, was
the underlying principle which governed human groups—in fact, that
it was the principle which made organization possible and progress
attainable.




