CHAPTER V

THE SUPREMACY OF THE MALE


An unprejudiced review of the facts relative to the differentiation
of the two sexes, as set forth by naturalists, reveals not only the
primary principles involved in human progress, but shows also the
source whence these principles originated. These facts serve also to
explain that “mental superiority” of man over woman observed by Mr.
Darwin and others in the present stage of human growth.

Notwithstanding the superior degree of development which, according
to the facts elaborated by scientists, must belong to the female in
all the orders of life below mankind, Mr. Darwin would have us believe
that so soon as the human species appeared on the earth the processes
which for untold ages had been in operation were reversed, and that
through courage and perseverance, or patience, qualities which were
the result of extreme selfishness, or which were acquired while in
pursuit of animal gratification, man finally became superior to woman.
The following furnishes an example of Mr. Darwin’s reasoning upon this
subject. He says:

 The chief distinction in the intellectual powers of the two sexes
 is shown by man’s attaining to a higher eminence, in whatever he
 takes up, than can woman—whether requiring deep thought, reason, or
 imagination, or merely the use of the senses and the hands. If two
 lists were made of the most eminent men and women in poetry, painting,
 sculpture, music (inclusive both of composition and performance),
 history, and philosophy, with half-a-dozen names under each subject,
 the two lists would not bear comparison....

 Now, when two men are put into competition, or a man with a woman,
 both possessed of every mental quality in equal perfection, save
 that one has higher energy, perseverance, and courage, the latter
 will generally become more eminent in every pursuit, and will gain
 the ascendency. He may be said to possess genius—for genius has been
 declared by a great authority to be patience; and patience, in this
 sense, means unflinching, undaunted perseverance.[50]

[50] _The Descent of Man_, p. 564.

Doubtless, for the purpose of strengthening his position, Mr. Darwin
quotes the following from John Stuart Mill: “The things in which man
most excels woman are those which require most plodding and long
hammering at single thoughts.” And in summing up the processes by which
man has finally gained the ascendency over woman he concludes:

 Thus man has ultimately become superior to woman. It is, indeed,
 fortunate that the law of the equal transmission of characters to both
 sexes prevails with mammals; otherwise it is probable that man would
 have become as superior in mental endowment to woman, as the peacock
 is in ornamental plumage to the peahen.[51]

[51] _The Descent of Man_, p. 565.

Notwithstanding this conclusion of Mr. Darwin, in view of the facts
elaborated by himself, we cannot help thinking that it is indeed
fortunate that the law of the equal transmission of characters to
both sexes prevails with mammals, otherwise it is probable that man
would never have had any higher ambition than the gratification of his
animal instincts, and would never have risen above those conditions in
which he struggled desperately for the possession of the female. All
the facts which have been observed relative to the acquirement of the
social instincts and the moral sense prove them to have originated in
the female constitution, and as progress is not possible without these
characters, it is not difficult to determine within which of the sexes
the progressive principle first arose. Even courage, perseverance,
and energy, characters which are denominated as thoroughly masculine,
since they are the result of Sexual Selection, have been and still are
largely dependent on the will or choice of the female.

In his zeal to prove the superiority of man over woman, and while
emphasizing energy, perseverance, and courage as factors in
development, Mr. Darwin seems to have overlooked the importance of
the distinctive characters belonging to the female organism, viz.,
perception and intuition, combined with greater powers of endurance,
the first two of which, under the low conditions occasioned by the
supremacy of the animal instincts, have thus far had little opportunity
to manifest themselves. A fairer statement relative to the capacities
of the two sexes and their ability to succeed might have been set forth
as follows:

When a man and a woman are put in competition, both possessed of
every mental quality in equal perfection, save that one has higher
energy, more patience, and a somewhat greater degree of physical
courage, while the other has superior powers of intuition, finer and
more rapid perceptions, and a greater degree of endurance (the result
of an organism freer from imperfections), the chances of the latter
for gaining the ascendency will doubtless be equal to those of the
former as soon as the animal conditions of life are outgrown, and the
characters peculiar to the female constitution are allowed expression.
Mr. Darwin’s quotation from J. Stuart Mill, that the things in which
man excels woman are those which require most plodding and long
hammering at single thoughts, is evidently true, and corresponds with
the fundamental premises in the theory of development as set forth
by all naturalists. The female organism is not a plodding machine,
neither is the telephone nor the telegraph, yet these latter devices
accomplish the work formerly done by the stagecoach much more rapidly,
and in a manner better suited to civilized conditions. So soon as women
are freed from the unnatural restrictions placed upon them through the
temporary predominance of the animal instincts in man, their greater
powers of endurance, together with a keener insight and an organism
comparatively free from imperfections, will doubtless give them a
decided advantage in the struggle for existence. While patience is
doubtless a virtue, and while during the past ages of human experience
it has been of incalculable value to man, it will not, under higher
conditions, be required in competing for the prizes of life.

Woman’s rapid perceptions, and her intuitions which in many instances
amount almost to second sight, indicate undeveloped genius, and
partake largely of the nature of deductive reasoning; it is reasonable
to suppose therefore that as soon as she is free, and has for a few
generations enjoyed the advantages of more natural methods of education
and training, and those better suited to the female constitution, she
will be able to trace the various processes of induction by which she
reaches her conclusions. She will then be able to reason inductively up
to her deductive conceptions.

The worthlessness of Mr. Darwin’s comparison between men and women in
performing the various activities of life is already clearly apparent.
Although less than half a century has elapsed since _The Descent
of Man_ was written women are already successfully competing with
men in nearly all the walks of life both high and low, and this too
notwithstanding the fact that these occupations have heretofore been
regarded as belonging exclusively to men. We have seen that Mr. Darwin
mentions music as a vocation in which man’s superiority over woman is
manifested, yet already in the United States, there is not one male
musician who would be willing to match his skill against that of any
one of the four best woman performers.

It is a well understood fact that neither individuals nor classes
which upon every hand have been thwarted and restrained, either by
unjust and oppressive laws, or by the tyranny of custom, prejudice, or
physical force, have ever made any considerable progress in the actual
acquirement of knowledge or in the arts of life. Mr. Darwin’s capacity
for collecting and formulating facts seems not to have materially aided
him in discerning the close connection existing at this stage of human
progress between the masculinized conditions of human society and the
necessary opportunities to succeed in the higher walks of life; in
fact, he seems to have forgotten that all the avenues to success have
for thousands of years been controlled and wholly manipulated by men,
while the activities of women have been distorted and repressed in
order that the “necessities” of the male nature might be provided for.
Besides, it seems never to have occurred to him that as man has still
not outgrown the animal in his nature, and as the intellectual and
moral age is only just beginning to dawn, the time is not yet ripe for
the direct expression of the more refined instincts and ideas peculiar
to the female organism, and, as thus far, only that advancement
has been made which is compatible with the supremacy of the lower
instincts, woman’s time has not yet come.

Although women are still in possession of their natural inheritance, a
finer and more complex organism comparatively free from imperfections,
and although, as a result of this inheritance, their intuitions
are still quicker, their perceptions keener, and their endurance
greater, the drain on their physical energies, caused by the abnormal
development of the reproductive energies in the opposite sex, has,
during the ages of man’s dominion over her, been sufficient to preclude
the idea of success in competing with men for the prizes of life.
Although an era of progress has begun, ages will doubtless be required
to eradicate abuses which are the result of constitutional defects, and
especially so as the prejudices and feelings of mankind are for the
most part in harmony with such abuses.

If we examine the subject of female apparel, at the present time, we
shall observe how difficult it is to uproot long-established prejudices
which are deeply rooted in sensuality and superstition; and this is
true notwithstanding the fact that such prejudices may involve the
comfort and even the health of half the people, and seriously affect
the welfare of unborn generations. An examination of the influences
which have determined the course of modern fashions in woman’s clothing
will show the truth of this observation.

Of all the senses which have been developed, that of sight is
undoubtedly the most refined, and when in the human species it is
cultivated to a degree which enables its possessor to appreciate the
beautiful in Nature and in Art, we are perhaps justified in designating
it as the intellectual sense. In point of refinement, the sense of
hearing comes next in order, yet among creatures as low in the scale of
being as birds, we find that females not only appreciate the beautiful,
but that they are charmed by pleasing and harmonious sounds, and that
if males would win their favour it must be accomplished by appeals
through these senses to the higher qualities developed within them.

Although the female of the human species, like the female among the
lower orders of life, is capable of appreciating fine colouring, and
to a considerable extent the beautiful in form, the style of dress
adopted by women is not an expression of their natural ideas of taste
and harmony. On the contrary, it is to Sexual Selection that we must
look for an explanation of the incongruities and absurdities presented
by the so-called female fashions of the past and present. The processes
of Sexual Selection, which, so long as the female was the controlling
agency in courtship, worked on the male, have in these later ages been
reversed. For the reason that the female of the human species has so
long been under subjection to the male, the styles of female dress and
adornment which have been adopted, and which are still in vogue, are
largely the result of masculine taste. Woman’s business in life has
been to marry, or, at least, it has been necessary for her, in order
to gain her support, to win the favour of the opposite sex. She must,
therefore, by her charms, captivate the male.

With the progress of civilization and since women as economic and
sexual slaves have become dependent upon men for their support, no male
biped has been too stupid, too ugly, or too vicious to take to himself
a mate and perpetuate his imperfections. This unchecked freedom of the
male to multiply his defects is responsible for present conditions.

As for thousands of years women have been dependent on men not only
for food and clothing but for the luxuries of life as well, it is
not singular that in the struggle for life to which they have been
subjected they should have adopted the styles of dress which would
be likely to secure to them the greatest amount of success. When we
remember that the present ideas of becomingness or propriety in woman’s
apparel are the result of ages of sensuality and servitude, it is not
remarkable that they are difficult to uproot, and especially so as many
of the most pernicious and health-destroying styles involve questions
of female decorum as understood by a sensualized age.

Mr. Darwin calls attention to the fact that women “all over the world”
adorn themselves with the gay feathers of male birds. Since the
beautiful plumage of male birds has been produced according to female
standards of taste, and since it is wholly the result of innate female
ideas of harmony in colour and design, it is not perhaps remarkable
that women, recognizing the original female standards of beauty, should
desire to utilize those effects which have been obtained at so great
an expenditure of vital force to the opposite sex, especially as men
are pleased with such display, and, as under present conditions of male
supremacy, the female of the human species is obliged to captivate the
male in order to secure her support.

Ever since the dominion of man over woman began a strict censorship
over her dress has been maintained. Although in very recent times women
are beginning to exercise a slight degree of independence in the matter
of clothes, still, because of existing prejudices and customs they have
not yet been able to adopt a style of dress which admits of the free
and unrestricted use of the body and limbs. It is believed that woman,
the natural tempter of man, if left to her own sinful devices, would
again as of old attempt to destroy that inherent purity of heart and
cleanliness of life which characterize the male constitution. Woman’s
ankles and throat seem to be the most formidable foes against which
innocent man has to contend, so the concealment of these offending
members is deemed absolutely necessary for his protection and safety.
Ecclesiastics, a class whose duty it has ever been to regulate and
control the movements of women, seem to think that the ankles and
throats of women were intended not for the use and convenience of their
possessors but as snares to entrap holy men.

It would thus appear that the present fashions for female apparel have
a deeper significance than we have been in the habit of ascribing
to them. We are still living under conditions peculiar to a sensual
age, and have not yet outgrown the requirements which condemn women
to a style of dress which hinders the free movements of the body and
which checks all the activities of life. In one way the woman of the
present time may be said to resemble the male Argus pheasant, whose
decorations, although they serve to please his mate, greatly hinder his
power of motion and the free use of his body and limbs.

When we consider that apparel is but one, and a minor one, of the
strictures under which women have laboured during the later era of
human existence and when we consider all the ignoble and degrading uses
to which womanhood has been subjected, the wonder is not that women
have failed in the past to distinguish themselves in the various fields
of intellectual labour in which men have achieved a limited degree of
success, but that they have had sufficient energy and courage left to
enable them even to attempt anything so far outside the boundary of
their prescribed “sphere,” or that they have been able to transmit to
their male offspring those powers through which they have gained their
present stage of progress.

With regard to Mr. Darwin’s comparison of the intellectual powers of
the two sexes, and his assertion that man attains to a higher eminence
in whatever he takes up than woman—that, for instance, he surpasses her
in the production of poetry, music, philosophy, etc., the facts at hand
suggest that if within mankind no higher motives and tastes had been
developed than those derived from selfishness and passion, there would
never have arisen a desire for poetry, music, philosophy, or science,
or, in fact, for any of the achievements which have been the result of
the more exalted activities of the human intellect. However, because
of the subjection of the higher faculties developed in mankind, the
poetry, music, and painting of the past betray their sensuous origin
and plainly reveal the stage of advancement which has been reached,
while history, philosophy, and even science, judging from Mr. Darwin’s
methods, have not yet wholly emerged from the murky atmosphere of a
sensuous age.

It will be well for us to remember that the doctrine of the Survival
of the Fittest does not imply that the best endowed, physically or
otherwise, have always succeeded in the struggle for existence.
By the term Survival of the Fittest we are to understand a natural
law by means of which those best able to overcome the unfavourable
conditions of their environment survive and are able to propagate their
successful qualities. We must bear in mind that neither the growth of
the individual nor that of society has proceeded in an unbroken or
uninterrupted line; on the contrary, during a certain portion of human
existence on the earth, the forces which tend toward degeneration have
been stronger than whose which lie along the line of true development.

We are assured that the principles of construction and destruction are
mutually employed in the reproductive processes, that continuous death
means continuous life,—the katabolic or disruptive tendencies of the
male being necessary to the anabolic or constructive habits of the
female. As it is in reproduction, so has it been through the entire
course of development. Side by side, all along the line, these two
tendencies have been in operation; the grinding, rending, and devouring
processes which we denominate Natural Selection, alongside those which
unite, assimilate, and protect. As a result of the separation of the
sexes there have been developed on the one side extreme egoism, or
the desire for selfish gratification; on the other, altruism, or a
desire for the welfare of others outside of self. Hence, throughout
the later ages of human existence, since the egoistic principles
have gained the ascendency, may be observed the unequal struggle for
liberty and justice, against tyranny, and the oppressors of the masses
of the human race. From present appearances it would seem, that the
disruptive or devouring forces have always been in the ascendency.
The philosophy of history however, teaches the contrary. With a
broader view of the origin and development of the human race, and the
unexpected light which within the last few years has been thrown upon
prehistoric society and the grandeur of past achievement, a close
student of the past is able to discern a faint glimmering of a more
natural age of human existence, and is able to observe in the present
intense struggles for freedom and equality, an attempt to return to
the earlier and more natural principles of justice and liberty, and so
to advance to a stage of society in which selfishness, sensuality, and
superstition no longer reign supreme.

The status of women always furnishes an index to the true condition
of society, one or two superficial writers to the contrary
notwithstanding. For this phenomenon there is a scientific reason,
namely: society advances just in proportion as women are able to
convey to their offspring the progressive tendencies transmissible
only through the female organism. It is plain, therefore, that mankind
will never advance to a higher plane of thinking and living until the
restrictions upon the liberties of women have been entirely removed,
and until within every department of human activity, their natural
instincts, and the methods of thought peculiar to them be allowed
free expression. The following is from Mr. Buckle’s lecture on “The
Influence of Women on the Progress of Knowledge”:

 I believe and I hope before we separate to convince you, that so far
 from women exercising little or no influence over the progress of
 knowledge, they are capable of exercising, and have actually exercised
 an enormous influence; that this influence, is, in fact, so great that
 it is hardly possible to assign limits to it; and that great as it is,
 it may with advantage be still further increased. I hope, moreover,
 to convince you that this influence has been exhibited not merely
 from time to time in rare, sudden, and transitory ebullitions, but
 that it acts by virtue of certain laws inherent in human nature; and
 that, although it works as an undercurrent below the surface, and is
 therefore invisible to hasty observers, it has already produced the
 most important results, and has affected the shape, the character, and
 the amount of our knowledge.

Through the processes involved in the differentiation of sex and the
consequent division of functions, it has been possible during the past
six thousand or seven thousand years (a mere tithe of the time spent
by mankind upon the earth) for women to become enslaved, or subjected
to the lower impulses of the male nature. Through the capture of women
for wives, through the exigencies of warfare, the individual ownership
of land, and the various changes incident to a certain stage of human
existence, the finer sensibilities which characterize women have been
overshadowed, and the higher forces which originated within them
and which are transmitted in the female line, have been temporarily
subdued by the great sexual ardour inherent in the opposite sex; it is
not, therefore, singular that the degree of progress attained should
appear to be wholly the result of male activity and acumen. Yet,
notwithstanding the degradation to which women in the position assigned
them by physical force have been obliged to submit, their capacity for
improvement has suffered less from the influences and circumstances of
their environment than has that of men. As the higher faculties are
transmitted through women equally to both sexes, in the impoverishment
of their inheritance on the female side, men have suffered equally
with women, while, through their male progenitors, they have inherited
appetites and habits (the result of a ruder and less developed
structure) which weaken and degrade the entire constitution.

Doubtless, so soon as women have gained sufficient strength to enable
them to maintain their independence, and after the higher faculties
rather than the animal propensities rule supreme, men, through the
imperfections in their organism, and the appetites acquired through
these imperfections, will, for a considerable length of time, find
themselves weighted in the struggle for supremacy, and this, too, by
the very characters which under lower conditions are now believed to
have determined their success.

It is not unlikely, however, that through Sexual Selection the
characters or qualities unfavourable to the higher development of man
will in time be eliminated. The mother is the natural guardian and
protector of offspring; therefore, so soon as women are free they will
doubtless select for husbands only those men who, by their mental,
moral, and physical endowments are fitted to become the fathers of
their children. Only those women will become mothers who hope to secure
to their offspring immunity from the giant evils with which society
is afflicted. In this way, and this way only, may these evils be
eradicated.

Under purer conditions of life, when by the higher powers developed
in the race the animal propensities have become somewhat subdued by
man, we may reasonably hope that the “struggle for existence,” which
is still so relentlessly waged, will cease, that man will no longer
struggle with man for place or power, and that the bounties of earth
will no longer be hoarded by the few, while the many are suffering for
the necessities of life; for are we not all members of one family, and
dependent for all that we have on the same beneficent parent—Nature?

Although the two principles, the constructive and destructive, are
closely allied, the higher faculties have been acquired only through
the former—the highest degree of progress is possible only through
union or co-operation, or, through the uniting and binding force,
maternal love from which has been developed, first, sympathy among
related groups, and later an interest which is capable of extending
itself not only to all members of the human race, but to every sentient
creature. There is, therefore, little wonder that for thousands of
years of human existence, the female principle was worshipped over the
entire habitable globe as the source of all light and life—the Creator
and Preserver of the Universe.

We are only on the threshold of civilization. Mankind may as yet have
no just conception of their possibilities, but so soon as, through
the agencies now in operation for the advancement of the race, the
“necessities” of the male nature no longer demand and secure the
subjection of women and the consequent drain on the very fountain
whence spring the higher faculties, a great and unexpected impetus will
be given to progress.

The fact that a majority of women have not yet gained that freedom of
action necessary to the absolute control of their own persons, nor
acquired a sufficient degree of independence to enable them to adopt
a course of action in their daily life which they know to be right,
shows the extent to which selfishness, twin brother to sensuality,
has clouded the conscience and warped the judgment in all matters
pertaining to human justice. So closely has women’s environment been
guarded that in addition to all the restrictions placed upon their
liberties, a majority of them are still dependent for food and clothing
on pleasing the men, who still hold the purse-strings. Yet Mr. Darwin,
the apostle of original scientific investigation, concludes:

“If men are capable of decided prominence over women in many subjects,
the average mental powers in men must be above those of women.”




                                PART II

                          Prehistoric Society




