CHAPTER VI

THEORIES TO EXPLAIN WIFE-CAPTURE


The prevalence of wife-capture and the extent to which the symbol of
force in marriage ceremonies appears among tribes and races in the
various stages of development, have given rise to numerous speculations
and theories relative to the origin of these “singular phenomena.”
Notable among the works dealing with this subject are _Primitive
Marriage_, by Mr. J. F. McLennan, and the _Origin of Civilization_, by
Sir John Lubbock, both of which works followed closely the publication
of _Das Mutter-recht_ by Herr Bachofen.

As at the time these works were published the fact of man’s descent
from the lower orders of life had not been established, and as nothing
was then known of the origin and development of organized society it
is not remarkable that theories concerning the early relations of the
sexes should prove worthless except perhaps to show the extent to which
established prejudices may warp the judgment and dwarf the intellectual
faculties even of those who are honestly seeking after truth.

The avowed object of Mr. McLennan’s volume was to trace the origin
of wife-capture which is found to exist either as a legal symbol in
marriage ceremonies, or as a stern reality among peoples which have not
yet reached civilized conditions. This writer declares: “In the whole
range of legal symbolism there is no symbol more remarkable than that
of capture in marriage ceremonies.”

After setting forth numerous examples to prove the prevalence of
wife-capture among uncivilized tribes and races, and after denouncing
as absurd the theories relative to the symbol of force entering into
the marriage ceremonies in Sparta and in Rome, Mr. McLennan observes:

 The question now arises, what is the meaning and what the origin of a
 ceremony so widely spread that already on the threshold of our inquiry
 the reader must be prepared to find it connected with some universal
 tendency of mankind?

Mr. McLennan’s answer to his own query is as follows:

 We believe the restriction on marriage to be connected with the
 practice in early times of female infanticide which rendering women
 scarce led at once to polyandry within the tribe and the capture of
 women from without.

In another portion of this work it has been shown that although
marriage was restricted within the gens, the earliest form of organized
society, this restriction did not extend to the tribe. Marriage was
forbidden among closely related groups. The gentes coalesced to form
the tribe. Although a man might not marry within his own gens, he was
not forbidden to marry within the tribe.

In Mr. Morgan’s work on _Primitive Society_, published in 1871, are
to be found the systems of consanguinity and affinity of 139 tribes
and races representing, numerically, four-fifths of the entire human
family. These systems show conclusively that the restrictions on
marriage observed in the gens did not extend to the tribe. The author
of _Primitive Marriage_ has evidently mistaken a rule of the gens for a
binding tribal decree.

Mr. McLennan’s theory relative to female infanticide is found to be
equally fallacious. Noting the numerical difference in the two sexes
among lower races, he says that as subsistence was scarce, and as war
was the natural and constant condition of primitive groups, only those
of their members would be spared who could contribute to the defence of
the tribe, or who would be able to aid in the supply of subsistence.
Males were possessed of strength, they were by organization and
inclination adapted to war and the chase, and could therefore be
depended upon to assist in defending the tribe against the assaults of
its enemies and in securing the necessary food for its requirements.
On the other hand, women being worthless in war and in the chase were
regarded as useless appendages, and as they constituted a source of
weakness to the tribe, large numbers of them were destroyed at birth.
Through this practice the balance of the sexes was greatly disturbed,
and wives could be obtained only by means of stealth or a resort
to force. Thus in process of time, the stealing of women became a
legitimate practice, and each warrior depended on his skill in this
particular direction to provide himself with a wife.

Finally the children of these alien women began to intermarry and thus
the necessity for wife-capture no longer existed, and the practice
of stealing women for wives was superseded by a system through which
wives from other tribes were habitually obtained either by gift or
sale. Thereafter the symbol of wife-capture was retained in marriage
ceremonies.

With a better understanding of peoples in a less developed state of
society, it is found that infanticide has been less prevalent among
them than was formerly supposed; that when through scarcity of food it
has been practised it has not been confined to females, neither has it
been carried on by tribes in the lowest stages of barbarism.

Regarding this custom in Arabia, Prof. W. R. Smith says that our
authorities “seem to represent the practice of infanticide as having
taken a new development not very long before the time of Mohammed.”
This writer declares that the chief motive for infanticide was
“scarcity of food which must always have been felt in the desert.”

Much has been written in the attempt to explain the practice of
infanticide which to some extent seems to have prevailed during a
certain stage of human development; but with the exception of those
cases in which children of both sexes were slain because of scarcity
of food, the one cause, namely, the dread of capture, is sufficient to
explain this unnatural practice.

Although to a considerable extent, men had come to depend on foreign
tribes for their wives, they nevertheless found little pleasure in
furnishing their quota of women in return, and as mothers doubtless
preferred the death of their female children to the degradation and
suffering which was inevitable in case of capture, female infanticide
no doubt seemed the wisest and in fact the only expedient.

The blood-tie of ancient society which bound together all those born
of the women of the group irrespective of their fathers, must have
emphasized the influence of mothers in the matter of infanticide. It is
not reasonable to suppose that the law of sympathy which had united the
members of a clan by a bond stronger than that which binds together the
members of a modern family was reversed without some deeper cause than
has thus far been assigned for it. It is indeed difficult to believe,
in opposition to all the facts before us, that a practice which
involved the destruction of the female members of the group would have
gained the sanction of the tribe to such an extent that it would have
become an established rule among them.

Regarding the destruction of female infants among early races, Mr.
Darwin remarks:

 They would not at that period have lost one of the strongest of all
 instincts common to all lower animals, namely the love of their young
 offspring, and consequently they would not have practised female
 infanticide.[143]

[143] _Descent of Man_, p. 594.

Another reason why female infanticide could not have prevailed to any
considerable extent is seen in the fact that any diminution in the
number of females, would have involved a scarcity of warriors, thus
weakening their means of defence. From available facts it is quite
evident that the practice of female infanticide throws no light on
wife-capture.

Mr. McLennan declares that women among rude tribes are usually depraved
and inured to scenes of depravity from their earliest infancy; hence
when property began to amass in the hands of men, in order to assure
paternity, it became necessary, that women be brought under subjection.

As the female, when free, is unwilling to pair with individuals for
whom she feels no affection, and as under earlier conditions of human
society women chose their mates, and so long as they remained together
were true to them, it is reasonable to suppose that paternity was
known, or at least that it might have been readily determined.

Mr. Morgan informs us that the “Turanian, Ganowánian, and Malayan
systems of consanguinity show conclusively that kinship through males
was recognized as constantly as kinship through females,” that a man
had brothers and sisters, grandfathers and grandmothers traced through
males as well as through females. Although under gentile institutions
descent and all rights of succession were traced through mothers,
kinship through fathers was easily ascertained.

Hence it is plain that Mr. McLennan’s assumption that women were
enslaved in order to assure paternity, that they became subject to the
dominion and control of men so that fathers might not be compelled to
support children not their own, is not supported by the evidence at
hand.

That it was through capture, the forcible carrying away of women at
first singly and later in groups to foreign tribes, in which as aliens
and dependents they were shorn of their right to the soil, that males
were first enabled to arrogate to themselves the individual right to
property is a fact which has been overlooked by Mr. McLennan.

From the facts at hand relative to the earliest social regulation
of mankind, that into classes on the basis of sex, it is evident
that it was inaugurated for no other purpose than the restriction
of the marital relation—a restriction to prevent the pairing of
near relations. Yet Mr. McLennan would have us believe that “the law
compelling marriage outside the recognized limit of near relationship
originated in no innate or primary feeling against marriage with
kinsfolk.”

The repugnance of females among the lower orders of life to pairing
with those individuals which were distasteful to them, or for which
they felt no genuine affection, has already been referred to in these
pages. At the earliest dawn of human life there probably existed within
woman a naturally acquired aversion to pairing with near relations,
yet doubtless many ages elapsed before an idea of kinship sufficiently
definite to be incorporated into an arbitrary law for the government of
the group was formulated; but in due course of time, with the further
development of the higher characters, the idea of relationship began
to take shape, whereupon was inaugurated a movement which doubtless
represents one of the most important steps ever taken toward human
advancement.

As the female among all the orders of life, when free, is unwilling
to pair with individuals for which she feels no affection, and as the
sex-instinct has ever been restricted or held in abeyance by her, and
as according to the savants, it was through the efforts of women that
from time to time during the earlier ages of human existence the range
of conjugal rights was abridged, it is reasonable to suppose that it
was woman who first objected to the pairing with near relations.

The statement of Mr. McLennan that the women of primitive races were
depraved, that they were inured to scenes of depravity from their
earliest infancy is not borne out by facts. It has been shown in
another portion of this work that the most trustworthy writers, those
who have personally investigated tribes and races in the various stages
of development, agree that chastity was an unvarying rule among them,
that before they were corrupted by civilization, a condition of morals
existed nowhere to be found among the so-called higher races.

After referring to a state of advanced social existence in which every
person knowing what is right would feel an irresistible impulse toward
right-living, Mr. Wallace remarks that among peoples low in the scale
of development “we find some approaches to such a perfect social
state.” He observes: “It is not too much to say that the mass of our
population have not at all advanced beyond the savage code of morals,
and have in many cases sunk below it.”

Most of the reports which come to us regarding the immorality of lower
races are brought by missionaries, who, although unacquainted with the
language, customs, and habits of thought of the peoples whose countries
they visit, nevertheless feel called upon to furnish lengthy reports
of those benighted races which are “utterly destitute of Christian
training.”

As the restrictions on marriage among early peoples were limited to
closely related groups, it is evident that the capture of wives was
not carried on because of any established law of exogamy, neither
was it practised because of the scarcity of women resulting from
female infanticide nor because of a desire for recognized paternity.
Wife-capture arose from a demand for foreign women, aliens, who, torn
from their homes and deprived of the protection of their own kinsfolk,
had no alternative but sexual slavery. These women were much more
desirable than the free-born women of a man’s own tribe.

After having created a false and wholly unwarrantable hypothesis, an
hypothesis in which exogamy and endogamy, two principles which as
applied to tribes never existed, play a conspicuous part, Mr. McLennan
has thrust nearly all the facts which he has observed relative to
primitive society into false positions and forced them to do duty in
bolstering up his thoroughly imaginative theory to account for the
origin of wife-capture. It is perhaps needless to say that the whole
subject, so far as his contribution is concerned, is as much a mystery
as before he attempted a solution of the problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir John Lubbock, like J. F. McLennan, assumes that the earliest
organization of society was that of the tribe, and that a man was first
regarded as belonging only to a group. Subsequently, as the maternal
bond is stronger than that which unites a father to his offspring,
kinship with his mother and her relations was established. In course of
time he was accounted as a descendant of his father only, and lastly he
became equally related to both parents.

Numerous illustrations are cited by this writer, going to show that
among certain peoples descent is still reckoned in the female line, and
that all the rights of succession, both as regards property and tribal
honours, are traced through women.

In his _Origin of Civilization_ the fact is noted that in Guinea,
when a wealthy man dies, his property passes by inheritance, not to
his sons, but to the children of his sister. He quotes also from
Pinkerton’s _Voyages_ to show that the town of Loango is governed by
four chiefs who are sons of the king’s sisters, and from Caillie who
observes that in Central Africa the sovereignty remains always in the
same family, but that the son never succeeds to his father’s position.
These and numerous other instances, similar in character, are cited
from various parts of the world, going to prove that a system of
descent and inheritance through women was once general throughout the
races of mankind.

With Herr Bachofen and Mr. McLennan, Sir John Lubbock is of the opinion
that the earliest conjugal unions of the human race were communal.
Communal marriage was founded on the supremacy of males, or, was based
on the undisputed right of men to the control of women. According to
this writer, communal marriage was succeeded by individual marriage
through capture.

Although Lubbock coincides with McLennan in the belief that under
certain circumstances infanticide has been practised by the lower
races, he does not agree with him as to the extent to which it has
prevailed among them; neither is he of the opinion that it was confined
to the female sex. On the contrary, he cites trustworthy authority to
prove that boys were as frequently disposed of as were girls.

Although with McLennan, Lubbock recognizes the prevalence of
wife-capture and the principle of exogamy, yet, according to the theory
of the former, marriage by capture arose from exogamy, while, according
to the latter, exogamy arose from marriage by capture.

Lubbock accounts for wife-capture by the following theory: As under the
communal system, women of the tribe were the “common property” of the
men of the group, no individual male among them would have attempted
to appropriate one of these women to himself, for the reason that
such appropriation would have been regarded as an infringement on the
rights of the remaining males in the community. A warrior, however,
upon capturing a woman from a hostile people, might claim her as his
rightful possession, and hold her as against all the other members of
the tribe. Since the women of the group were so emphatically the common
property of the men, the exclusive right to one of them in progressive
tribes which had reached a state of friendliness would involve a symbol
of capture to make valid such a claim. This symbol, according to
Lubbock, has no reference to those from whom the woman has been stolen,
but is intended to bar the rights of other members of the tribe into
which she is brought. He thinks that “the exclusive possession of a
wife could only be legally acquired by a temporary recognition of the
pre-existing communal rights,” and cites the account given by Herodotus
of the custom existing in Babylonia, where every woman once during
her lifetime must present herself at the temple, there to accept the
proposals of the first man who requests her to follow him.

Although Lubbock declares that the symbol of violence in marriage
ceremonies “can only be explained by the hypothesis that the capture
of wives was once a stern reality,” he claims not to believe that the
early conditions under which men were compelled to capture their wives
by violence, or do without them, were in any degree the result of
feminine will in the matter.

In referring to the fallacious theory of Mr. McLennan, that the capture
of women for wives arose from the practice of female infanticide,
which, by producing a scarcity of women, created a necessity for
marriage without the limits of the tribe, Sir John Lubbock, although
seemingly unable to recognize the actual force which was in operation
to prevent the “appropriation” of women by men, has nevertheless shown
himself able to perceive the reason why foreign women were captured,
and what the tendency in males was which demanded their presence.

After referring to the fact that no male could appropriate to himself a
female belonging to the tribe, he says:

 Women taken in war were, on the contrary, in a different position. The
 tribe, as a tribe, had no right to them, and men surely would reserve
 to themselves exclusively their own prizes. These captives then would
 naturally become wives in our own sense of the term.

Foreign women would become dependents, their captors having the
undisputed right to the control of their persons.

At the outset, Sir John Lubbock finds himself confronted with the
fact that a system of reckoning descent through women once prevailed
over the habitable globe. According to his own reasoning, this system
presupposes a condition of society under which property rights and
all rights of succession were traced through women, still we find
him offering the following belief concerning the matter. “I believe,
however, that communities in which women have exercised the supreme
power are rare and exceptional, if, indeed, they ever existed at all.”

Were we not already acquainted with the prejudices of most of the
writers who have thus far dealt with this subject, in view of the facts
everywhere represented going to prove that a system of gynecocracy once
prevailed over the entire earth, this “belief” of Mr. Lubbock would be
truly remarkable, especially when we learn the reason given by him for
his conclusion. He says:

 We do not find in history, as a matter of fact, that women do assert
 their rights, and savage women would, I think, be peculiarly unlikely
 to uphold their dignity in the manner supposed.[144]

[144] _Origin of Civilization_, p. 99.

It is quite true that it is not observed “in history” that women assert
their rights. It has been shown, however, that prior to the historic
age, through capture and the individual ownership of land, women had
become dependent upon men and wholly subject to their control. After
thousands of years of subjection to male influence, the movements of
women, who are still dependent upon men, furnish little satisfactory
information regarding the character of free women at a time before
they had succumbed to the exigencies of brute force, and the unbridled
appetites of their male masters. Slaves seldom assert their rights, or,
if they do, of what avail is it?

Were we in possession of no other facts in support of the theory of
an early age of female supremacy than that all relationships to which
rights of succession were attached were formerly traced through women,
the evidence in its favour would be sufficient to prove it true, but
this manner of reckoning descent represents only one of the many
indications of such an age which Lubbock himself has been constrained
to record; yet, because—during the historic age—an age throughout which
the masculine element has ruled supreme, women have not asserted their
rights, this writer feels inclined to ignore all the evidence bearing
upon the subject, at the same time declaring that women could not
have “upheld their dignity in the manner supposed”; that the female,
on gaining human conditions, could not have exercised the instincts
inherited by her from her dumb progenitors.

If the females among insects, birds, and many species of mammals are
able to control the relations between themselves and their male mates,
why should it not be inferred that the female of the human species
would still be able to uphold the natural dignity of the female sex?

As an argument in support of his theory that the influence of women
was never supreme, Sir John Lubbock alludes to the position of
Australian women as being one of “complete subjection,” and as the
native Australians represent perhaps the lowest existing stage of human
society, he doubtless thinks his argument unassailable. However, that
the position of Australian women cannot be taken as a reliable guide in
estimating primitive womanhood is shown by the writer’s own reasoning
when he says:

 It must not be assumed, however, that the condition of primitive
 man is correctly represented by even the lowest of existing races.
 The very fact that the latter have remained stationary, that their
 manners, habits, and mode of life have continued almost unaltered for
 generations, has created a strict, and often complicated, system of
 customs, from which the former was necessarily free, but which has in
 some cases gradually acquired even more than the force of law.[145]

[145] _Origin of Civilization_, p. 2.

Yet we find him comparing primitive women with this race which for
thousands upon thousands of years, because of its environment, or
through some cause which is not understood, has been unable to advance.

While this writer perceives clearly that foreign women were much more
desirable for wives than those belonging to a man’s own tribe, he has
not been able to discover the reason why this was so, but, continuing
to babble about the “rights” of the men of the group, overlooks the
fact that native-born women were free, and as only those women who had
first been torn from their friends and shorn of their independence
could at this stage of human existence be forced into the position of
wife, it became necessary to secure them by violence from surrounding
tribes. He is not blind to the fact that it was a desire to extend
the limit of conjugal liberties on the part of males which prompted
wife-capture; yet he would have us believe that although women were
absolutely independent of men, and although they were the recognized
heads of families, and the source whence originated all the privileges
of the gens, it was in no degree owing to their influence that the
conjugal liberties of males were restricted within the tribe, but, on
the contrary, that this restriction was enforced out of regard for
the “proprietary rights” of the men of the group. He says: “We must
remember that under the communal system the women of the tribe were
all common property. No one could appropriate one of them to himself
without infringing on the general rights of the tribe.”

As well might we say of the female bird for whose favours the male
fights until overcome by exhaustion and loss of blood, that she belongs
to him, or that he may appropriate her, as to say that the men of early
groups could “appropriate” women. From all the facts relative to the
condition of early society, it is plain that if either sex could with
propriety be designated as property it must have been the male. It is
evident that women were stolen from distant tribes for the express
purpose of sexual slavery, a position to which free, native-born women
could not be dragged; therefore, when Lubbock assures us that these
foreign women naturally “became wives in our own sense of the term,”
we may be sure that he is neither unmindful of the origin of our
present social system, nor of the true significance attached to the
position of wife. Indeed, he informs us that the “origin of marriage
was independent of all sacred and social conditions,” and proves
the same by actually producing the evidence. He has no hesitancy in
declaring that marriage is a masculine institution, established in the
interest (or supposed interest) of males; that it was “founded not on
the rights of the woman, but of the man,” and that there was not on
the woman’s part even the semblance of consent. In fact he declares
that he regards it as an illustration of the good old plan that “he
should take who has the power, and he should keep who can.” He says
also that it had nothing to do with mutual affection or sympathy,
that it was invalidated by no appearance of consent, and that it was
symbolized not by any demonstration of warm affection on the one side
and tender devotion on the other, but by brutal violence and unwilling
submission. To prove that the connection between force and marriage
is deeply rooted, Sir John Lubbock, like Mr. McLennan, has furnished
numerous examples of peoples among whom marriage by actual capture
still prevails, as well as many among which the system has passed into
a mere symbol. He is quite certain that the complete subjection of
the woman in marriage furnishes an explanation to those examples in
barbarous life in which women are looked upon as being too great to
marry—and cites the case of Sebituane, chief of the Bechuanas, who told
his daughter, Mamochisáne, that all the men were at her disposal—“she
might take any one, but ought to keep none.”

This instance, together with numberless others which might be cited,
proves that long after the practice of appropriating solitary women for
sexual purposes had become general, the position of wife was considered
too degrading to be occupied by women of rank.

Attention has been called to Lubbock’s idea concerning the “rights”
of the males of the group. We have seen that it is his opinion that
the exclusive possession of a woman could only be legally acquired by
a temporary recognition of the pre-existing communal rights, and that
the account in Herodotus of the debasement of Babylonian women was
cited by him as evidence to prove his position. He seems, however, to
forget that this custom, which was practised in various nations, is a
religious rite, and was inaugurated at a time when the adoration of the
sun, as the source of all life and light, had degenerated into the most
degrading phallic worship. To those who have given attention to the
growth of the god-idea, the supposed cases of “expiation for marriage,”
cited by Lubbock, are to be explained by the peculiar practices
inaugurated under fire and passion worship at a time long subsequent to
the establishment of _ba’al_ marriages.

In his chapter on “The Origin of Marriage by Capture,” this writer
says:

 That marriage by capture has not arisen from female modesty, is, I
 think, evident, not only because we have no reason to suppose that
 such a feeling prevails especially among the lower races of man; but
 also, firstly, because it cannot explain the mock resistance of the
 relatives; and, secondly, because the very question to be solved
 is why it became so generally the custom to win the female not by
 persuasion but by force.[146]

[146] _Origin of Civilization_, p. 106.

That female modesty may not account for marriage by capture will
scarcely be disputed; it is not impossible, however, that disgust, or
aversion, on the part of women, may, in a measure, serve to explain it.

Sir John Lubbock should bear in mind that “choice” in the matter of
pairing was an early prerogative of the female; that true affection, a
character differing widely from the sex instinct developed in the male
was necessary before she could be induced to accept the attentions of
the male. While the women among primitive peoples abhorred strangers or
foreigners, it may scarcely be said of them that they were too modest
to accept them as suitors. Evidently, modesty is not the term to be
employed in this connection.

In seeking a reason to explain why force rather than persuasion was
used in the consummation of early marriages, we have to remember the
wide difference existing between the position of free women and that
of those who were obliged to accept the _ba’al_ form of marriage. If,
as we have reason to believe, as late as the beginning of the second
or Middle Status of barbarism, instead of following the father of her
children to his house as his slave, a woman remained in a home owned,
or at least controlled jointly by herself, her mother, her sisters, and
her daughters, it is plain that a state of female independence existed
which was incompatible with female subjection. Add to this the fact
that a woman’s children belonged exclusively to herself, or to her
family, and that all hereditary honours and rights of succession were
traced through females, and we have a set of circumstances which would
seem sufficient to explain why force was necessary to bring women into
the marital relation.

That the capture of women for wives arose because the independence
of free women was a bar to the gratification of the lower instincts
in man, can, in the presence of all the facts at hand, scarcely be
doubted; and that women submitted to the position of wife only when
obliged to do so, or when deprived of liberty and dragged from home and
friends, is only too apparent. While modesty as a cause for capture
may not account for the resistance of the relations, the sacrifice of
a daughter may serve to explain even this knotty point. If the capture
of a free and independent girl from her mother by a band of marauders
from a hostile tribe for purposes of the most degrading slavery, cannot
account for the resistance of the mother-in-law, among most of the
so-called lower races, then indeed it is difficult to conjecture any
provocation or any set of circumstances which can account for it.

This writer’s assertion that it is “contrary to all experience that
female delicacy diminishes with civilization,” proves conclusively that
he regards the slight degree of reserve which he is pleased to accredit
to women in modern times, as a result of civilization—a civilization,
too, which he evidently considers as wholly the result of masculine
achievement; in other words, he doubtless thinks that the degree of
self-respect observed among women at the present time is the result not
of the innate tendencies in the female constitution, but of masculine
tuition and training, an assumption which, when viewed by the light
which in recent years has been thrown upon the development of the two
diverging sex columns, is as absurd as it is arrogant and false. Some
time will doubtless elapse before Sir John Lubbock and the class of
writers which he represents will be willing to admit that civilization
has been possible only because of the checks to the animal nature of
the male, which are the natural result of the maternal instinct.

With a system, however, under which for six thousand years every
womanly instinct has been smothered, and under which female activity
has been utilized in the service of the strong sex instinct developed
in males, the outward expression of female delicacy has doubtless
diminished; and, in their weakened mental and physical condition,
women, dependent not only for all the luxuries but the necessities
of life as well, upon pleasing the men, have doubtless given them,
blinded as they have become by the conditions of their own peculiar
development, some reason for believing that within the female as within
the male, passion has been the ruling characteristic.

Sir John Lubbock, as well as other writers who have dealt with this
subject, should bear in mind the fact that female delicacy is a subject
which can be satisfactorily discussed only in relation to free and
independent women; hence the degree of its manifestation at any time
during the past six thousand years may bear little testimony concerning
the natural tendencies of women, or the condition of society under a
system where female influence was in the ascendency.

To those individuals whose minds are not clouded by prejudice, the fact
will doubtless be apparent, that the valuable information which has
been presented by three of the foremost writers on the subject of the
early relations of the sexes and the origin of marriage, instead of
serving as evidence to substantiate the fallacious theories which they
have propounded, is found to lie in a direct line with the facts and
principles which have been put forward by scientists in the theory of
natural development.

A review of the theories set forth by these three writers shows
that about the only point on which they agree is the lawlessness, or
promiscuity, of early races. As they have all started out with a false
premise, it is not singular that none of them has succeeded in setting
forth a consistent and reasonable hypothesis to account either for the
symbol of wife-capture, or for the early supremacy of women.




                               PART III

                        Early Historic Society




