CHAPTER II

THE RELATIONS OF THE SEXES AMONG EARLY MANKIND


We have seen that an investigation of the instincts and habits of
creatures lower in the scale is necessary to an understanding of the
relations which must have existed between the sexes among primitive
races.

 Among birds and mammals, the greater differentiation of the nervous
 system and the higher pitch of the whole life is associated with
 the development of what pedantry alone can refuse to call love. Not
 only is there often partnership, co-operation, and evident affection
 beyond the limits of the breeding period, but there are abundant
 illustrations of a high standard of morality, of all the familiar
 sexual crimes of mankind, and every shade of flirtation, courtship,
 jealousy, and the like. There is no doubt that in the two highest
 classes of animals at least, the physical sympathies of sexuality have
 been enhanced by the emotional, if not also intellectual, sympathies
 of love.[52]

[52] Geddes and Thomson, _The Evolution of Sex_, p. 266.

It has been observed that among the orders of life below mankind,
except among polygamous species, the female chooses the individual
which is best endowed—the one whose beauty appeals to her æsthetic
taste, or which through his stronger development is best fitted to
assist her in the office of reproduction.

Among the more intelligent species of birds, genuine affection has been
observed, strict monogamy and life-long unions having been established
between mated pairs. Among others, although the conjugal bond is not
life-lasting, so long as the mother-bird is caring for her brood,
constancy to one another is the undeviating rule. We are assured that
with the female Illinois parrot, “widowhood and death are synonymous,”
and that “when a wheatear dies, his companion survives him scarcely a
month.”[53]

[53] Letourneau, _The Evolution of Marriage and the Family_, p. 27.

All eagles are monogamous. Golden eagles live in couples and remain
attached to one another for a hundred or more years, without even
changing their domicile.[54] The conjugal unions of bald-headed eagles,
although they are under no “legal restrictions,” last until the death
of one of the partners. Among birds, although incubation rests with
the mother, the father usually assists his companion. He not only
takes her place if she desires to leave the nest for a moment, but
also provides her with food.[55] So perfect is the bird family life
that Brehm declares that “real genuine marriage can only be found
among birds.”[56] Upon this subject we are informed that “examples
of wandering fancy are for the most part rare among the birds, the
majority of whom are monogamous, and even superior to most men in the
matter of conjugal fidelity.”[57]

[54] J. G. Wood, _Natural History_, p. 262.

[55] Westermarck, _The History of Human Marriage_, p. 11.

[56] Brehm, _Bird-Life_.

[57] Letourneau, _The Evolution of Marriage and the Family_, p. 27.

Concerning mammals, it is observed that although polygamy is frequent
“it is far from being the conjugal regime universally adopted; monogamy
is common, and is sometimes accompanied by so much devotion that it
would serve as an example to human monogamists.”[58] Bears, weasels,
whales, and many other animals choose their mates and go in pairs.
Several kinds of monkeys are strictly monogamous.[59] Chimpanzees are
sometimes polygamous and sometimes monogamous. It is stated what when a
strong male has succeeded in driving away the other males of the group,
the females, although in a position to subjugate him, are nevertheless
kind and even tender toward him. They are doubtless too much occupied
with their legitimate functions to rebel, but so soon as the young
of the horde are grown, the usurper is driven from their midst. A
little observation will show us that even among polygamous species,
it is affection rather than strength which keeps the members of a
group together. Although among most of the lower orders the female
exercises a choice in the selection of her mate, still among animals of
polygamous habits the female is said to manifest genuine affection for
the father of her offspring.

[58] _Ibid._, p. 35.

[59] Darwin, _The Descent of Man_, p. 590.

 The polygamic regime of animals is far from extinguishing affectionate
 sentiments in the females towards their husband and master. The
 females of the guanaco lamas, for example, are very faithful to
 their male. If the latter happens to be wounded or killed, instead
 of running away, they hasten to his side, bleating and offering
 themselves to the shots of the hunter in order to shield him, while,
 on the contrary, if a female is killed, the male makes off with all
 his troop; he only thinks of himself.[60]

[60] Letourneau, _The Evolution of Marriage and the Family_, p. 32.

Although among animals a stray male will sometimes drive away or kill
all the other males of the group, and himself become the common mate of
all the females, they peaceably accepting the situation, so far as I
can find, female insects, birds, and mammals, although they generally
control the sexual relation, have never been given to polyandry; the
reason for this can be explained only through a careful analysis of
the fundamental bias of the female constitution. We must bear in mind
that although among the orders of life below mankind the male is ready
to pair with any female, she, on the other hand, when free to choose,
can be induced to accept the attentions only of the one which by his
courage, bravery, or personal beauty has won her favours. We have noted
the fact that in the earliest ages of the human race this choice was
exercised by women, but we have no reason to believe that anything
resembling “promiscuity” ever prevailed among primitive races. It is
true that under earlier conditions the institution of marriage as it
exists at the present time had not appeared; yet the law which had
been impressed on the higher organism of the female, until overcome by
males through means which will be treated of later in these pages, had
sufficed to keep the animal instincts under subjection, or at least on
a level with those of the lower species which structurally had been
left behind.

From facts to be gathered, not alone from among the lower orders, but
from observations among human beings as well, it would seem that any
degree of affection for more than one individual at the same time is
contrary to the female nature. A female insect, or bird, which feels a
preference for a particular mate will pair with no other, hence, among
orders where the female instincts control the relations between the
sexes, “lawlessness” or promiscuity would not prevail.

A little observation and reflection, I think, will show us that the
affection of the female is a character differing widely from the sex
instinct of the male—that, while selfishness constitutes the underlying
principle of the latter, the former involves not only care for the
young and the unity of the group, but, when human conditions are
reached, it involves also country, civilization, and the ultimate
brotherhood of mankind.

If we bear in mind the conditions surrounding the orders of life from
which the human race has sprung, and if we remember the nature of
the characters inherited by mankind from these orders, together with
the important fact that the lower instincts among them were under
subjection to the higher faculties, we shall be enabled to see that
the more degraded of the extant savage tribes cannot represent the
primitive race as it emerged from the animal type.

Mr. Tylor must have been mindful of the altruistic character of early
races when he remarked: “Without some control beyond the mere right
of the stronger, the tribe would break up in a week, whereas in fact
savage tribes last on for ages.”[61]

[61] _Anthropology_, p. 405.

Concerning the relations of the sexes under unorganized society nothing
may be known from actual observation, as, at the present time, no tribe
or race is to be found under absolutely primitive conditions. Perhaps
from no extant people is there so little information in reference to
the earliest human state to be gleaned as from the lowest existing
races. Among many of these tribes the rules which it has been necessary
to establish for the regulation of the relations between the sexes
are rigorously enforced, while among others a laxity prevails which
would seem to indicate an almost total lack of those higher instincts
which are observed among nearly all the lower orders of beings. The
following fact, however, in regard to these races, has been observed:
the more primitive they are, or the less they have come in contact with
civilization, the more strictly do they observe the rules which have
been established for the governance of the sexual relation. On this
subject Mr. Parkyns says:

 I don’t believe that there exists a nation, however high in the scale
 of civilization, that can pick a hole in the character of the lowest,
 without being in danger of finding one nearly, if not quite, as big
 in its own. The vices of the savage are, like his person, very much
 exposed to view. Our own nakedness is not less unseemly than his,
 but is carefully concealed under the convenient cloak which we call
 “civilization,” but which I fear he, in his ignorance, poor fellow,
 might, on some occasions, be led to look upon as hypocrisy.[62]

[62] _Life in Abyssinia_, vol. ii., p. 152.

In the West Indian Islands where Columbus landed, lived tribes which
are represented as having been “the most gentle and benevolent of the
human race.” Regarding these Mr. Tylor remarks:

 Schomburgk, the traveller, who knew the warlike Caribs well in their
 home life, draws a paradise-like picture of their ways, where they
 have not been corrupted by the vices of the white men; he saw among
 them peace and cheerfulness and simple family affection, unvarnished
 friendship, and gratitude not less true for not being spoken in
 sounding words; the civilized world, he says, has not to teach them
 morality, for, though they do not talk about it, they live in it.[63]

[63] Tylor, _Anthropology_, p. 406.

The men who with Captain Cook first visited the Sandwich Islands
reported the natives as modest and chaste in their habits; but, later,
after coming in contact with the influences of civilization, modesty
and chastity among them were virtues almost entirely unknown. The same
is true of the people of Patagonia.

Barrow says of the Kaffir woman that she is “chaste and extremely
modest,” and we are told that among this people banishment is the
penalty for incontinence for both women and men. Of the reports which
from time to time come from the aborigines of certain portions of
Australia relative to the lewdness of the women, Mr. Brough Smyth says
that they are irreconcilable with the severe penalties imposed for
unchastity in former times amongst the natives of Victoria.[64] This
writer is of the opinion that the lewd practices reported are modern,
and that they are the result of communication with the poor whites. We
are assured that the women of Nubia are virtuous, that public women
are not tolerated in the country.[65] Also that in Fiji adultery is one
of the crimes generally punished with death.[66]

[64] Quoted by Westermarck, _History of Human Marriage_, p. 61.

[65] Burckhardt’s _Travels in Nubia_, p. 146.

[66] Seeman, _A Mission to Viti_, p. 191.

Marsden observes that in Sumatra “the old women are very attentive to
the conduct of the girls, and the male relations are highly jealous
of any insults that may be shown them.”[67] The same writer says that
prostitution for hire is unknown in the country; adultery is punishable
by fine, but the crime is rare. Regarding the conduct of men toward
women he remarks: “They preserve a degree of delicacy and respect
toward the sex which might justify their retorting on many of the
polished nations of antiquity the epithet of barbarism.”[68]

[67] _History of Sumatra_, p. 230.

[68] _Ibid._, p. 226.

Crantz says that among the Greenlanders single persons have rarely
any connection.[69] According to the testimony of St. Boniface, the
punishment for unchastity among the early Germans was death to the man,
while the woman was driven naked through the streets.[70]

[69] _History of Greenland_, vol. i., p. 145.

[70] _Epistle of St. Boniface to Ethelbald._

Among the Central Asian Turks we are assured that a fallen girl is
unknown. Mr. Westermarck, quoting from Klemm, states that although
among the Kalmucks and gypsies the girls take pride in having gallant
affairs, they are “dishonoured if they have children previous to
marriage.” The same writer quotes also from Winwood Reade, who says
that among the Equatorial Africans “a girl who disgraces her family by
wantonness is banished from her clan; and, in cases of seduction, the
man is severely flogged.”[71]

[71] _History of Human Marriage_, p. 62.

Mr. Westermarck adduces much testimony going to show that the
“lawlessness” of lower races is due not to inherent vicious tendencies,
but to the evil associations of civilized peoples. He is of the opinion
that the licentiousness among many of the South Sea Islanders owes its
origin to the intercourse of the natives with Europeans; and of the
tribes who once inhabited the Adelaide Plains, quoting from Mr. Edward
Stephens who went to Australia half a century ago, he says:

 Those who speak of the natives as a naturally degraded race, either do
 not speak from experience, or they judge them by what they have become
 when the abuse of intoxicants and contact with the most wicked of the
 white race have begun their deadly work. As a rule, to which there
 are no exceptions, if a tribe of blacks is found away from the white
 settlement, the more vicious of the white men are most anxious to make
 the acquaintance of the natives, and that, too, solely for purposes of
 immorality.... I saw the natives and was much with them before those
 deadly immoralities were well known ... and I say it fearlessly, that
 nearly all their evils they owed to the white man’s immorality and to
 the white man’s drink.[72]

[72] _The History of Human Marriage_, p. 68.

We are informed that wherever certain vices prevail among the lower
races in America, Africa, or Asia, they have been carried to them by
the whites. Were it necessary to do so, scores of examples could be
adduced going to show that among primitive tribes, until corrupted by
our later civilization, chastity is the universal rule.

Although many of the writers who have dealt with this subject have
discoursed freely on the laxity of the conjugal bond among so-called
primitive tribes, and the lawlessness which characterizes lower races
in their sexual relations, they have failed to account satisfactorily
for some of the customs and usages which appear connected with many
of the early forms of marriage,—forms which would seem to indicate a
degree of modest reserve on the part of these peoples which fail to
comport with the popular theory concerning their lawlessness and innate
indecency.

We have seen that although among the orders of life below mankind there
are no arbitrary laws governing the relations of the sexes, there
nevertheless exists a system of natural marriage which in no wise
resembles promiscuity. Now it was under this natural system controlled
by the higher instincts developed within the female organism, that the
extreme “lawlessness” indicated by the savants prevailed—lawlessness
seeming to denote that state of female independence in which women were
personally free, or in which they were not held in actual bondage as
captive wives. In the reasoning of many of our guides in this matter it
is implied, if not actually asserted, that the freedom of women which
is now known to have prevailed in earlier times denotes a state of
laxity in morals, a condition of society directly contrary to the facts
which they themselves have recorded relative to existing tribes under
less advanced conditions of life, and which would seem to argue for
these peoples a sense of decency which among the masses in civilized
countries is almost entirely wanting. At the dawn of human existence,
had no higher instincts been developed than passion, or the desire for
selfish gratification, whence could have arisen this reserve, and these
ideas of chastity and modesty which are observed among many of the less
developed peoples, notably those which have not come in contact with
the higher races? Upon this subject Mr. Tylor remarks: “Yet even among
the rudest clans of men, unless depraved by vice or misery and falling
to pieces, a standard of family morals is known and lived by.”[73]

[73] _Anthropology_, chap, xvi., p. 405.

Observing the habits of the lower animals, Mr. Darwin cannot believe
that promiscuous intercourse prevailed among the early races of
mankind.

 At a very early period, before man attained to his present rank in the
 scale, many of his conditions would be different from what now obtains
 amongst savages. Judging from the analogy of the lower animals he
 would then either live with a single female, or be a polygamist.[74]

[74] _The Descent of Man_, p. 594.

We have much evidence going to prove that the marriage contracts among
the lower races are well kept. According to Cook, in Tahiti, although
nothing more is necessary for the consummation of a valid marriage than
an agreement between the parties, these contracts are usually well
kept. In case of the disaffection of either party, a divorce is easily
obtained. We are assured, however, that although the Tahiti women have
the undisputed right to dissolve the marriage contract at will, they
are nevertheless “as faithful to their husbands as in any part of the
world.” The Veddahs, who are ranked among the most primitive races, are
a strictly monogamous people.[75] Of the extreme modesty of married
pairs among many of the lower races we have much proof. Among the
Fijians, husbands and wives do not usually spend the night together,
except as it were by stealth, and it is said to be contrary to their
ideas of delicacy that they should sleep under the same roof.[76]
Wholly from a sense of reserve or modesty, the Arab wife remains for
months, possibly for a whole year, with her mother before taking up
her abode in her husband’s tent. The extreme delicacy of the customs
regulating the behaviour of married pairs in ancient Sparta are well
understood. According to Xenophon and Strabo, it was the custom, not
only among the Spartans but among the Cretans also, for married pairs
to meet clandestinely. The same custom prevailed in ancient Lycia.
Lafitau says that among the North American Indians the husband visits
his wife only by stealth.[77]

[75] _Ibid._, p. 591.

[76] Seeman, _A Mission to Viti_, p. 191.

[77] Quoted by Sir John Lubbock, _Origin of Civilization_, p. 82.

It is stated by trustworthy authorities that among various tribes,
during the period of gestation and lactation, the person of the wife
is sacred; that the rule of chastity, or continence, between married
pairs, during this season, is absolutely inviolate. In Fiji, women
furnish natural nourishment to their children for three or four years,
during which time their persons are respected.

 The relatives of the women take it as a public insult if any child
 should be born before the customary three or four years have elapsed,
 and they consider themselves in duty bound to avenge it in an equally
 public manner.

Mr. Seeman says:

 I heard of a white man, who, being asked how many brothers and sisters
 he had, frankly replied, “ten.” “But that could not be,” was the
 rejoinder of the natives, “one mother could scarcely have so many
 children.”

When told that these children were born at annual intervals, and that
such occurrences were common in Europe, they were very much shocked,
and thought it explained sufficiently why so many white people were
“mere shrimps.” After childbirth, among the Fijians, husband and
wife separate and live apart for three and even four years, “so that
no other baby may interfere with the time considered necessary for
suckling the children, in order to make them strong and healthy.”[78]

[78] Seeman, _A Mission to Viti_, p. 191.

Through such wise regulations as these, governing the sexual relations,
the drain on the vital forces observed among the women of civilized
countries is avoided, and it was doubtless to these rules and others
of a similar character that women, throughout untold ages of human
existence, were enabled to maintain a position of independence and
supremacy. We are informed that among the Fijians the birth of a child
is cause for a perfect jubilee; that parental and filial affection
is among the manifest virtues of this people. After referring to the
truthfulness and honesty of the Dyaks of Borneo, Mr. Wallace says that
“in several matters of morality they rank above most uncivilized, and
even above many civilized, nations. They are temperate in food and
drink, and the gross sensuality of the Chinese and Malays is unknown
among them.”[79] Although the usual checks to population are absent
among the Dyaks—namely, starvation, disease, war, infanticide, and
vice,—still the women in the Dyak tribe rarely had more than three or
four children. In a village in which there were one hundred and fifty
families, in only one of them were there six children, and only six
with five children.

[79] _The Malay Archipelago._

In whatever direction we turn, evidences are abundant going to prove
that under simpler and more natural conditions, and before corrupted by
our later civilization, mankind were governed largely by the instincts
developed within the female constitution, and that long after her
supremacy over the male was lost, the effects of these purer conditions
were manifest in the customs, forms, and usages of the people.

From the evidence at hand it seems more than likely that many of the
extant tribes have at some remote period been civilized, and that
through some natural catastrophe, the unfavourable conditions of
climate and soil, or some other equally disadvantageous cause, they
have again sunk to a low plane of existence from which they have been
unable to rise. From available facts one is almost led to believe
that at a period in the remote past, and while living under purer
conditions, a high stage of civilization was reached, a civilization
which in many respects was equal if not superior to that of the
present. Be this as it may, whenever the environment of a people is
such that after having reached a certain stage it is unable to advance,
it does not remain stationary, but on the contrary follows a line of
retrogression; or, whenever the conditions of a race or tribe are such
that the higher faculties which tend towards progress lie dormant,
the lower forces which incline toward retrogression and which are
peculiarly active in low organisms still continue in operation.

Although the social arrangement of the native Australians seems to be
founded on classes based on sex—the earliest form of society—still we
find them practising polygamy and monogamy side by side, at the same
time securing their wives by capture in exactly the same fashion as did
the early Greeks and Romans. It is apparent, therefore, that although
this people have not been able to advance in the arts of life, as far
as the relations of the sexes are concerned they have taken about
the same course as have all the other tribes and races in which the
supremacy of the male has been gained. For unknown reasons, during
thousands of years, the developing agencies have been quiescent, hence
no check to the animal instincts has been interposed; the Australians
have therefore departed widely from the conditions which surrounded
early human society—conditions under which the maternal instincts
developed in the lower orders of life were still sufficiently strong
to guard the constructive processes and to continue the chain of
uninterrupted progress.

As among the lowest existing tribes—peoples which during countless
ages have been unable to advance—only the ruder elements in the human
composition have been developed, it is plain that from these tribes
little if any information concerning an earlier or more natural age,
when the animal instincts were controlled by the higher characters
developed in human nature, may be obtained; but from those peoples
within the several successive stages of development whose environment
has been such as to admit of some degree of improvement in the arts of
life, and in whom therefore the higher characters developed in their
mute progenitors have not been in a state of retrogression, may be
obtained a clue to many of the processes by which our present social
fabric has been raised. Among such peoples will be retained certain
symbols, habits, and traditions representing former modes of life,
from which may be reconstructed much of the previous history of the
race. For instance, by means of the symbol of wife-capture, a form
of marriage which is universal among tribes in a certain stage of
development, has been furnished much trustworthy information relative
to the institution of marriage and the development of the modern
family. It matters not that the origin of these symbols is so remote
that their true significance is lost by the peoples who practise them,
they nevertheless repeat with unerring fidelity the past experiences
of the race and reveal the origin of later institutions.

As the various tribes and races of mankind have probably sprung from a
common progenitor, and as the “nerve cells in the brain of all classes
and orders have had the same origin,” their development, although not
identical as to time and manner of detail, has been similar in outline
and in general results; so it is thought that a correct knowledge of
the development of any tribe or race from savagery to civilization must
necessarily involve the general history of all the tribes and races of
mankind.




