CHAPTER III

THE GENS—WOMEN UNDER GENTILE INSTITUTIONS


The earliest form of organized society was that into classes founded
on the basis of sex,[80] under which the right of individuals to
intermarry was restricted to one-fourth of the group. This division
of the early race, and the regulations prohibiting conjugal relations
with three-fourths the members of the related community, is thought
to represent the first coercive abridgment or formal restriction of
the then existing conjugal rights, and was inaugurated for the purpose
of averting the evil effects arising from intercourse between near
relations. Of this early form of society, however, and of the ages
during which no organized form existed, little may be known except that
which is suggested by the instincts and habits of the highest animals,
and that which may be inferred from an investigation of the next
higher organization, that into gentes on the basis of kin. Although
untold ages intervened between the ancient division of society into
classes founded on the basis of sex, and the higher and more important
organization into gentes on the basis of kin, this last-named plan for
the further development of mankind became universal at a comparatively
early stage of human history.

[80] Morgan, _Ancient Society_, p. 52.

By an investigation of the fundamental principles of the gens, we
shall be enabled to observe the similarity existing between the
instincts which governed early human action and those which controlled
the highest orders of life below mankind. All facts bearing on the
primitive conditions of the human race, which in these later times
have been brought to light through the investigations directed
toward peoples in the various stages of development, only serve to
emphasize the importance of the altruistic principle in the formation
of organized society and in the establishment of human institutions.
Although the gens is the earliest form of organized society of which we
have any accurate knowledge, still as within it were encysted the germs
of all the principles of justice and equality which our better human
nature is beginning again to recognize, and which must characterize a
higher stage of progress, a knowledge of its underlying principles is
necessary to a correct understanding, not only of the past development
of the race and all the existing human institutions, but of the course
to be pursued toward the future advancement of mankind. Of the gens,
Mr. Morgan says:

 The gentile organization opens to us one of the oldest and most widely
 prevalent institutions of mankind. It furnished the nearly universal
 plan of government of ancient society, Asiatic, European, African,
 American, and Australian. It was the instrumentality by means of which
 society was organized and held together. Commencing in savagery, and
 continuing through the three sub-periods of barbarism, it remained
 until the establishment of political society, which did not occur
 until after civilization had commenced. The Grecian gens, phratry,
 and tribe, the Roman gens, _curia_, and tribe find their analogues
 in the gens, phratry, and tribe of the American aborigines. In like
 manner, the Irish _sept_, the Scottish _clan_, the _phrara_ of the
 Albanians, and the Sanskrit _ganas_, without extending the comparison
 further are the same as the American-Indian gens, which has usually
 been called a clan. As far as our knowledge extends, this organization
 runs through the entire ancient world upon all the continents, and it
 was brought down to the historical period by such tribes as attained
 to civilization.... Gentile society wherever found is the same in
 structural organization and in principles of action; but changing from
 lower to higher forms with the progressive advancement of the people.
 These changes give the history of the development of the same original
 conceptions.[81]

[81] _Ancient Society_, pp. 62, 63.

Early society, as observed under gentile institutions, was established
on purely personal and social relations, or, on the basis of the
relations of the individual to the rest of the community, a community
in which each member could trace her or his origin back to the head of
the gens who was a woman. Under gentile institutions, or until the
latter stage of barbarism was reached, each individual, female and
male, constituted a unit in an aggregation or community whose interests
were identical, and as such, to a certain extent, was held responsible
for the safety and general welfare of every member composing the group.

Extreme egoism, as it is the outgrowth of a later age, was unknown;
and sympathy, the chief promoter of the well-being of mankind, a
sprout from the well-established root, maternal affection, was the
predominant characteristic of these primitive groups and the bond
which held society together. Although the manner of reckoning descent
had been changed from the female to the male line, the purely social
organization of the gens, on the basis of kin, was, as has been
observed, in operation at the beginning of our present civilization, at
which time political society supervened, and individuals were no longer
recognized through their relations to a gens or tribe, but through
their relations to the state, county, township, or deme, to which
institutions they must henceforward look for protection and for the
redress of injuries done either to person or property.

Although, until a comparatively recent time, the writers who have dealt
with the subject of primitive society have been of the opinion that the
tribe constituted the earliest organization of society, and that the
gens and the family followed, later investigations show conclusively
that the gens, next to the remote and obscure division into classes,
represents the oldest and most widely spread form of organized society,
and that it was through segmentation or division of this archaic group
that the tribe was formed.

 The natural way in which a tribe is formed is from a family or group,
 which in time increases and divides into many households, still
 recognizing one another as kindred, and this kinship is so thoroughly
 felt to be the tie of the whole tribe, that even when there has been
 a mixture of tribes, a common ancestor is often invented to make an
 imaginary bond of union.[82]

[82] Tylor, _Anthropology_, p. 405.

The gens, until a comparatively recent time in the history of the human
race, was composed of a female ancestor, all her children and all the
children of her daughters, but not of her sons. The sons’ children and
their descendants belonged to the gens of their respective mothers. The
family, as it appears at the present time, was unknown. The gens was
founded on thoroughly democratic principles, each individual composing
the group, both female and male, having a voice in the regulation and
management of all matters pertaining to the general government of the
community. Any injury done to a gentilis was a wrong committed against
the entire gens of which she or he was a member, hence to her or his
kinsmen each individual looked for protection and for redress of
personal wrongs.

The fundamental doctrine of tribal life is unity of blood. Although the
early groups, under the system of female descent, were united by the
actual bond of kinship as traced through mothers, later, when descent
came to be traced through fathers, kinship was to a considerable extent
feigned. Kinship, under the system of male descent, meant not that
the blood of the great father actually flowed in the veins of all the
members of the group, but that under a pretence of unity of blood, they
were bound together by common duties and responsibilities from which
no one of them could escape. By the terms of the compact, every member
must stand by her or his own clan. In fact, in all their movements,
they must act as one individual; their interests were identical and the
quarrel of any member of the group became the quarrel of all counted
within the bond of kinship. If homicide were committed, they judged
and punished the culprit, but if one of their number was slain by an
outsider, the law of blood-feud, which demanded blood in return, was
immediately put into execution. Of the gens Mr. Morgan says:

 Within its membership the bond of kin was a powerful element for
 mutual support. To wrong a person was to wrong his gens; and to
 support a person was to stand behind him with the entire array of this
 gentile kindred.[83]

[83] _Ancient Society_, p. 76.

Although in the later ages of gentile government, all the members of
a group were not necessarily bound by blood, from the nature of the
rights conferred, and the obligations imposed, the bond uniting them
was doubtless stronger than that which now unites mere kindred. Of this
tie uniting early groups J. G. Frazer says:

 All the members of a totem clan regard each other as kinsmen or
 brothers and sisters, and are bound to help and protect each other.
 The totem bond is stronger than the bond of blood or family in the
 modern sense.[84]

[84] _Totemism_, p. 57.

As Arabia, at the time of Mohammed, was still under gentile
organization, there is perhaps at the present day no country which
affords a better opportunity for the study of several of the successive
stages of human development. At the time indicated, the entire
Arabian peninsula was composed of a multitude of groups varying
in civilization, which were bound together by common privileges,
obligations, and responsibilities and by a real or pretended bond of
kinship traced through males.

In early Arabia a group bound together by a real or feigned unity of
blood was the type or unit of society. Sometimes a confederation of
these smaller groups was formed, but so strong was the bond between
the more closely related groups that they soon broke up into their
original units. The genealogists assert that these groups which were
patriarchal tribes founded on male descent are subdivisions of an
original stock.

At the time of the Prophet the Arabians claimed to trace their descent
from two brothers the sons of Wâil. Prof. W. Robertson Smith informs
us, however, that the name of one of these “brothers” is a feminine
appellation and that it is the designation of a tribe and not of a
person. He says: “The gender shows that the tribal name existed before
the mythical ancestor was invented,” and adds: “The older facts down
to the time of Al-Farazdac personify Taghlib as the daughter not the
son of Wâil. It is not unlikely that the mythical legend of Taghlib and
Bakr originated at a time when the female principle in human affairs
and in the Deity was beginning to give place to the male.”[85]

[85] _Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia_, p. 14.

Within the traditions of the oldest races of which we have any account,
are evidences of a desperate struggle between two races or between the
followers of two opposing principles. In all parts of Arabia “these two
races maintained their ancestral traditions of bitter and persistent
feud.”

Although in Arabia, in the time of the Prophet, descent was traced in
the male line, the evidence is almost unlimited, going to show that
it was not always so, but, on the contrary, that at an earlier age,
relationships were reckoned through women, mothers being the recognized
heads of families and tribal groups. In his work on _Kinship and
Marriage in Early Arabia_, Prof. W. R. Smith says:

 If a kinship tribe derives its origin from a great father, we may
 argue with confidence that it had the rule that children were of
 their father’s tribe and kin; while on the other hand if we find, in
 a nation organized on the principle of unity of tribal blood, tribes
 which trace their origin to a great mother instead of a great father,
 we can feel sure that at some time the tribe followed the rule that
 the children belong to the mother and are of her kin. Now among the
 Arabs the doctrine of the unity of tribal blood is universal, as
 appears from the universal prevalence of the blood-feud. And yet among
 the Arab tribes we find no small number that refer their origin to a
 female eponym. Hence it follows that in many parts of Arabia kinship
 was once reckoned not in the male but in the female line.

In reply to the suggestion that the several families of polygamous
fathers might be designated by the names of their several mothers,
Professor Smith observes:

 The point before us, however, is not the use of the mother’s name by
 individuals for purposes of distinction, but the existence of kindred
 groups whose members conceive that the tie of blood which unites them
 into a tribe is derived from and limited by descent from a common
 ancestress. That the existence of such a group proves kinship through
 women to have been once the rule is as certain as that the existence
 of patronymic groups is evidence of male kinship. In most cases of the
 kind the female eponym is mythical, no doubt, and the belief in her
 existence is a mere inference from the rule of female kinship within
 the tribe, just as mythical male ancestors are inferred from a rule of
 male kinship. But even if we suppose the ancestress to be historical,
 the argument is much the same, for where the bond of maternity is so
 strong that it binds together the children of the same mother as a
 distinct kindred group against the other children of their father,
 there also we may be sure that the children of one mother by different
 fathers will hold together and not follow their father. And this is
 the principle of female kinship.[86]

[86] _Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia_, pp. 26, 27.

It is stated that the designation of tribal unity by a feminine
appellation “is not an arbitrary fiction of later facts,” but that it
is “one of the old standing figures of Semitic speech.” In Hebrew,
_em_, which means mother, means also stock, race, or community.

The name for a tribal group in Arabia was _hayy_, a term which
indicates life. It is observed that in Hebrew and Arabic _hayy_ is used
in the same sense. “_Hawwa_ is simply a phonetic variation of _hayy_
with a feminine termination,” and “Eve, or _Hawwa_, is so called
because she is the mother of all living, or, more literally, of every
_hayy_.” We are given to understand that, originally, there was no rule
of reckoning kinship in Arabia except by the female line, and that the
change in descent from the female to the male line affected society to
its very roots.

There seems to be little, if any, doubt that a system of reckoning
descent through women once prevailed throughout all the tribes and
races of mankind. In Greece, as late as the beginning of the historic
period, traces of this early custom are to be observed, and, indeed, at
the present time, among many peoples, evidences of it are still extant.
The fact that throughout an earlier age of human existence descent
and all the rights of succession were traced through women, is at the
present time so well established as to require no detailed proofs to
substantiate it. Noting this custom among early races, and observing
also the natural conclusions to be drawn from such a state of society,
a few writers who have dealt with the subject of primitive races have
taken much pains to show that it does not naturally follow that under
these usages the influence of women was supreme; and their theories to
explain this (to them) no doubt singular phenomenon show the extent to
which prejudice and long-established habits of thought have influenced
their investigations. On this subject C. Staniland Wake remarks:

 There is strong reason for believing that the practice of tracing
 kinship in the female line was very widely observed from a very early
 period, but this is very different from the establishment of the
 supremacy of women. Where this was found it was due to the development
 of the gentile institution and the female kinship which accompanied
 it, on which, indeed, that institution was founded.[87]

[87] _Marriage and Kinship_, p. 16.

If, however, during the earlier ages of human existence a system of
kinship through women had been established which was able to produce
the gentile institution, or, if this institution, which was “founded”
on female kinship and dependent upon it, was able through untold ages
to direct all the processes of evolution, even though no other evidence
were at hand to prove it, then women’s influence must have been
well-nigh supreme.

So deeply intrenched has become the idea of woman’s subjection that it
is impossible for many male writers to contemplate a state of society
in which women are not dominated and controlled by men.

Mr. Herbert Spencer’s theory to explain the universal system of kinship
traced through woman involves the same idea of woman’s subserviency to
man, especially in the sexual relation, and is an illustration of the
reasoning usually employed in dealing with this subject.

Although “the very lowest races now existing, Fuegians, Australians,
and Andamanese, show us that, however informally they have originated,
sexual relations of a more or less enduring kind exist,” he is certain
that among the earliest races a state of “lawlessness” must have
prevailed and that “promiscuity” must have been the rule among them;
and this too notwithstanding the fact that among the lower orders
of life from which man has descended, and among the earliest races
of mankind the female chooses her mate and refuses to pair with any
individual except the one of her choice. To account for the universal
system of reckoning descent through the female, Mr. Spencer says that
as the connection between mother and child is more “obvious” than
that existing between the father and his offspring the custom arose
of reckoning descent through females.[88] The fact is observed that
maternal affection without which organized society would have been
impossible, and which alone can explain the system of kinship traced
through women, is entirely ignored by Mr. Spencer.

[88] _Sociology_ vol. i., p. 665.

Noting the reasoning employed by many writers to prove that in the
earliest ages of human existence, the maternal bond was ignored, and
that the child was accounted as being related only to the group, Mr.
Darwin remarks:

 But it seems almost incredible that the relationship of the child
 to its mother should ever be completely ignored, especially as the
 women in most savage tribes nurse their infants for a long time, and
 as the lines of descent are traced through the mother alone, to the
 exclusion of the father.[89]

[89] _Descent of Man_, p. 588.

We must bear in mind that under archaic usages not only did mothers
nurse their infants two, three, and even four years, but that maternity
was the bond which held together related groups and the source whence
proceeded all property rights and tribal honours; also, that under
the system of female kinship, male parentage was known but habitually
disregarded. Notwithstanding all this, Mr. Spencer can see no reason
for concluding that in the most primitive groups there were no
“individual possessions of women by men.”[90]

[90] _Sociology_, vol. i., p. 665.

The late Sir A. Smith, who had travelled widely in South Africa and was
acquainted with the habits of savages there and elsewhere, expressed
the strongest opinion that “no race exists in which woman is considered
as the property of the community.”[91] The reasoning employed by Mr.
Spencer to disprove the early supremacy of women seems scarcely to
justify his lofty pretensions to intellectual greatness.

[91] Quoted by Darwin, _Descent of Man_, p. 588.

In a state of society in which women were the recognized heads of
families and eponymous groups where children took the mother’s name,
and in which all rights of succession were traced through them, it is
reasonable to suppose that female influence was in the ascendency over
that of the male, and especially so as primitive human beings were
largely controlled by instincts inherited from the orders of life in
which the female chooses her mate and controls the sex-functions.

A knowledge of the customs and tribal usages of the Iroquois Indians
throws much light on the early position of women. When this tribe first
came under the observation of Europeans it was in the first stage of
barbarism, and as the manner and order of development of the various
races of mankind are said to be substantially the same, and as many of
the facts connected with the history of this truly interesting people
through nearly three ethnical periods are accessible, it is thought
that by it, as well as by the Arabians, is afforded an excellent
opportunity for the study of the general history of mankind during
these periods. To Mr. Morgan we are indebted for the results of a
thorough research into the customs, manners, and laws of this people.

Through a knowledge of the rights, privileges, and obligations which
were conferred and imposed on the members of the Iroquois gens while
in the second state of barbarism, we are enabled to perceive the
principles of true democracy upon which gentile institutions are based;
and this is important, for the reason that later in this work I intend
to trace the decline of those principles of liberty and equality
established under female influence and to show the reasons for the
subsequent rise of monarchy, aristocracy, and slavery.

The rights, privileges, and obligations of the Iroquois tribe of
Indians, as enunciated by Mr. Morgan, are as follows:

 The right of electing its sachem and chiefs. The right of deposing its
 sachem and chiefs. The obligation not to marry in the gens. Mutual
 rights of inheritance of the property of deceased members. Reciprocal
 obligations of help, defence, and redress of injuries. The right of
 bestowing names upon its members. The right of adopting strangers into
 the gens. Common religious rites. A common burial place. A council of
 the gens.[92]

[92] _Ancient Society_, p. 71.

As this writer truly remarks: “These functions and attributes gave
vitality as well as individuality to the organization, and protected
the personal rights of its members.”

Eligibility to the office of chief was based on personal merit, and
continuance in office depended on the acknowledged fitness of the
individual occupying it. The qualifications required for this office
were personal bravery, ability to lead, and eloquence in council.
The chief exercised no kingly authority over the tribe by which he
was appointed; on the contrary, his personality was respected and
his counsels heeded, not because of his official prerogatives, but
on account of the qualities by which his character was dignified;
therefore so soon as he proved himself unworthy of the trust confided
to him he was deposed by the same agency which had elected him. Hence
may be observed the truly democratic character of the gens.

Concerning the position occupied by women, and the influence which
they exerted in the management of the clan, Ashur Wright, who was for
many years missionary to the Senecas, in 1873, wrote to Mr. Morgan the
following:

 As to their family system when occupying the old long houses, it
 is probable that some one clan predominated, the women taking in
 husbands, however, from the other clans; and sometimes, for a novelty,
 some of their sons bringing in their young wives until they felt brave
 enough to leave their mothers. Usually the female portion ruled the
 house, and were doubtless clannish enough about it. The stores were in
 common; but woe to the luckless husband or lover who was too shiftless
 to do his share of the providing. No matter how many children or
 whatever goods he might have in the house, he might at any time be
 ordered to pick up his blanket and budge; and after such orders it
 would not be healthful for him to attempt to disobey. The house would
 be too hot for him; and, unless saved by intercession of some aunt or
 grandmother, he must retreat to his own clan; or, as was often done,
 go and start a new matrimonial alliance in some other. The women were
 the great power among the clans, as everywhere else. They did not
 hesitate, when occasion required, “to knock off the horns,” as it was
 technically called, from the head of a chief, and send him back to
 the ranks of the warriors. The original nomination of the chiefs also
 always rested with them.[93]

[93] _Ancient Society_, p. 455.

In the Lower Status of barbarism we find intermarriage within the gens
prohibited, and the obligation not to marry those accounted as kin as
strong as a religious duty.

Although during the latter ages of savagery the idea of property was
slightly developed, it is thought that it lay nascent until the latter
part of the first period of barbarism. Indeed, until the first stage
of barbarism was reached, the idea of personal possession had gained
only a slight foothold in the mental constitution of mankind. Egoism,
selfishness, or the desire to better one’s individual condition at the
expense of the rest of the gens was unknown. All lands were controlled
by the group, and as the property of early society consisted for the
most part of personal effects and proprietary rights in communal houses
and gardens, one of the most fruitful causes for dissensions in more
advanced stages of society was avoided. Under primitive conditions,
quarrels arising over disputed ownership within the gens were unknown,
and liberty, equality, and fraternity, the cardinal virtues and
principles of early society were able to flourish undisturbed by the as
yet unheard of vices inherent in the excessive desire for property.

In reference to some of the small uncivilized communities which he
visited, Mr. Wallace says that each man respects the rights of his
fellow,

 and any infraction of these rights rarely or never takes place. In
 such a community all are nearly equal. There are none of those wide
 distinctions of education and ignorance, wealth and poverty, master
 and servant, which are the product of our civilization; there is none
 of that widespread division of labour, which, while it increases
 wealth, produces also conflicting interests; there is not that severe
 competition and struggle for existence or for wealth which the dense
 population of civilized countries inevitably creates.[94]

[94] _The Malay Archipelago._

Under the archaic rule of the gens, at the death of a male, whether
married or single, his possessions descended to his sister’s children;
while at the death of a female, her property, including her personal
effects, was distributed among her sisters and her children and the
children of her daughters, but the children of her sons were not
included among her heirs. The sons’ children belonged to the gentes
of their respective mothers, and as descent and all the relationships
to which rights of succession were attached were traced only in the
female line, and as property until the middle of the Second Status of
barbarism was strictly confined to the gens in which it originated,
children could receive nothing from their fathers. Wives and husbands,
as they belonged to separate gentes, received nothing from one another.
In later times, when tribal honours were confined within certain
families or groups, as descent and property rights were all traced
in the female line, each male was dependent upon his female blood
relations, not only for his common inherited privileges in the gens,
but for any civil or military distinction to which he might attain.

Where female kinship prevails, a Rajah’s son may become a hodman,
taking the state of his mother—while the son of the Rajah’s sister
mounts the throne.[95]

[95] McLennan, _Studies in Ancient History_, p. 103.

Among the Rocch tribe, a people among which descent is traced in the
female line, a man goes on marriage to live with his wife and her
mother, of whose family he is a subordinate member.[96]

[96] C. Staniland Wake, _Marriage and Kinship_, p. 306.

 A Rocch man goes, on his marriage, like the _beena_ husband of Ceylon,
 to live with his wife and her mother; on his marriage, all his
 property is made over to his wife, and on her death her heirs are her
 daughters.[97]

[97] _Studies in Ancient History_, p. 103.

For the same reason that wives and husbands were debarred from sharing
in each other’s property, their bodies, or more properly speaking,
their bones, were separated at death, as were also the bones of father
and child. The bones of the children always rested beside those of the
mother. It was impious to mix the bones of unrelated persons. To such
an extent was the Motherright recognized under archaic usages that the
child belonged exclusively to the mother and her relations, the father
having no recognized proprietary right to his offspring. Indeed, so
lightly was the paternal relation regarded that the father was supposed
to have little if any interest in his own children.

Although the bond between a man and his offspring was weak, toward his
sister’s children, as they belonged to the same gens with himself, a
considerable degree of manly interest was manifested; indeed, it has
been stated that about the same solicitude was evinced by him for their
welfare, as was shown at a later time by fathers for the members of
their own household.

Observing the care manifested for a sister’s children among various
tribes, certain writers have declared that the relationship existing
between a child and its mother’s brother is more important than any
other—that the brother is practically the head of his sister’s family.
However, if we bear in mind the relative positions of the sexes in
primitive groups, that women controlled their homes, and that all the
rights of succession were traced through them, we shall doubtless be
led to the conclusion that mothers themselves were the real heads
of their own families, and that although they may have delegated to
their brothers, who until marriage were permitted to reside with them,
certain manly offices, they nevertheless reserved to themselves the
exclusive right to the control and management of their own households.
As the land belonged to the gens, and as the gentes were controlled by
women, mothers were absolutely independent.

Each child received a name soon after birth, but at the age of sixteen
or eighteen this name was discarded and another adopted. Special
rights were thus conferred and specified obligations were imposed. On
receipt of this name, the incumbent took upon himself all the duties
and responsibilities devolving upon a member of the group and by it was
entitled to all its rights and privileges. The greatest precautions
were taken with respect to the adoption of names. The office of naming
the different members belonged to the female relations and the chiefs.
We are informed that the mother might, if she chose, transfer her child
to another gens. This was accomplished by simply giving it the name of
the gens in which she desired its adoption. It is claimed that among
the Shawnees and Delawares the mother claimed the right to transfer
her child to another gens than her own.[98] It would seem from this,
that among certain tribes, the mother, if she desires, may transfer
her child to the gens of its father. It is observed, however, that the
transference of a child from its mother’s gens is a “wide departure
from archaic usages, and exceptional in practice.”

[98] Morgan, _Ancient Society_, p. 79.

It has been shown that under early usages wealth was never transferred
from the gens in which it originated; but later, when property began
to be claimed by individuals, and wealth was amassed in the hands of
males, it is not unlikely that mothers, considering only the future
welfare of their children, in case the father was rich and powerful,
would occasionally take advantage of their established privileges to
remove their children to his gens, in order that they might share in
his possessions.

Something of the humanity practised in early groups may be observed in
the custom of adoption, which, at a certain stage in their development,
prevailed among them. In the earlier ages of gentile institutions,
women and children taken prisoners in war, were usually adopted into
some gens. Adoption not only conferred gentile rights, but also the
nationality of the tribe. A person adopted into a gens was treated ever
afterwards as though born within the group. “Slavery which in the Upper
Status of barbarism became the fate of the captive, was unknown among
tribes in the Lower Status in the aboriginal period.”[99]

[99] Morgan, _Ancient Society_, p. 80.

According to Mariner:

 It is customary in the Tonga Islands for women to be what they call
 mothers to children or grown-up young persons who are not their own,
 for the purpose of providing them, or seeing that they are provided,
 with all the conveniences of life.[100]

[100] Quoted by Lubbock, _Origin of Civilization_, p. 96.

According to Mr. E. J. Wood, among the Kaffirs, although the men
inherit the property, their influences being in the ascendency, every
woman has someone who acts as her father whether her own father be
living or not. Kaffir law provides for the protection of all women,
and so long as a male relation lives a girl has a protector. It goes
even farther than this, and protects women who have been bereft of all
their male relations. For such as these provision is made for their
adoption into other groups, in which case, although they are received
as dependents, they are protected as daughters.[101]

[101] _Uncivilized Races of the World_, vol. i., p. 78.

This practice of adoption is observed among various peoples. Among
certain tribes in which descent is traced through women, a woman offers
her breast to the person she is adopting, this being the strongest
symbol of the unity of blood. Thus may be noted the fact that the
fundamental idea, or principle, of tribal life is maternity, or the
maternal instinct—that the uniting force which binds a child to its
mother is the one which is supposed to unite the various members of a
primitive group. So strongly has the maternal instinct as a binding
principle taken root, that among certain peoples even where the manner
of reckoning descent and the rights of succession have been changed
from the female to the male line, whenever an individual wishes to
be adopted into a gens he takes the hand of the leader of the group
and sucking one of his fingers, declares himself to be his child by
adoption; henceforth the new father is bound to assist him as far as he
can.[102] Adoption “by the imitation of nature” was practised by the
Romans down to the time of Augustus.

[102] Parkyns, _Life in Abyssinia_, vol. i., p. 174.

It has been observed that under the matriarchal system the mother was
the only recognized parent, hence, when the father began to assume
the rights and prerogatives which had hitherto belonged only to her,
in order to make valid his claim, it was thought proper for him to go
through various of the preliminaries attendant on childbirth.

Of all the forms practised among lower races there is none, perhaps,
which is more singular than is that of putting the father instead of
the mother to bed in the event of the birth of a child. Concerning this
custom, Mr. Tylor quotes from Klemm the following:

 Among the Arawaks of Surinam, for some time after the birth of his
 child the father must fell no tree, fire no gun, hunt no large game;
 he may stay near home, shoot little birds with a bow and arrow, and
 angle for little fish; but his time hanging heavy on his hands, the
 most comfortable thing he can do is to lounge in his hammock.[103]

[103] _Early History of Mankind_, p. 296.

Mr. Tylor quotes also from the Jesuit missionary, Dobrizhoffer, who
gives the following account of the Abipones:

 No sooner do you hear that the wife has borne a child, than you will
 see the Abipone husband lying in bed, huddled up with mats and skins,
 lest some ruder breath of air should touch him, fasting, kept in
 private, and for a number of days abstaining religiously from certain
 viands; you would swear it was he who had had the child.

The custom of putting the father to bed when a child is born is called
_la couvade_, and traces of it are yet to be found in France. It is
also practised among the Basques, and according to C. Staniland Wake,
was anciently observed in Corsica, among the Iberians of Spain, and in
the country south of the Black Sea. It is still practised in Southern
India, in Yunnan, in Borneo, in Kamchatka, and in Greenland. It is said
also to be in use among the various tribes in South America.[104] The
persistency of this practice shows the importance formerly attached
to the maternal functions, and, as has been suggested, was doubtless
inaugurated at a time when descent was being changed from the female to
the male line.

[104] _Marriage and Kinship_, p. 262.

It was perhaps in the latter part of the Middle Status of barbarism
that descent and the rights of succession began to be traced through
males. When, through causes which will be noticed later in this work,
property began to accumulate in the hands of men, children became the
recognized heirs of their fathers and the foundation for the present
form of the family was laid. However, long after descent began to
be reckoned through males, absolute paternity was not necessary to
fatherhood. During the earlier ages of male supremacy, fatherhood, like
brotherhood, was a loose term and signified simply the head of a house,
or the “lord” or owner of the mother. It mattered little whether a man
had previously lent his wife to a friend, or whether he had shared
her favours with several brothers, all the children “born on his bed”
belonged to him and were of his family.

Later in these pages will be observed the fact that the change in
reckoning descent, which occurred at a comparatively late period in
the history of the human race, is directly connected with the means of
subsistence. So long as land was held in common by the members of the
gens, and so long as women were able to manage the means of support,
their independence was secure, and they were able to exercise absolute
control over their own persons, their homes, and their offspring. Under
these conditions men were obliged to please the women if they would win
their favours.

From facts which have been demonstrated by various writers on the
subject of the early conditions of the human race, it is more than
probable that women were the original tillers of the soil, and that,
during the first period of barbarism, while the hunters and warriors
were engaged in war and the chase, occupations best suited to their
taste, women first discovered the art of producing farinaceous food
through cultivation, and through this discovery a hitherto exclusive
diet of fish and game was changed for a subsistence in part vegetable.

It is conjectured also that the first domestication of animals was
brought about through a probable “freak of fancy.” That individuals
among these animals were first caught by hunters, conveyed by them to
their homes, and there tamed through the tenderness and sympathy of
women, is considered more than likely. There are, however, so far as I
know, no actual facts upon which to base such a conclusion.

The increase of subsistence through horticulture and the domestication
of animals marks an important era in the history of mankind. By this
means the human race was enabled to spread itself over distant areas,
and through the improved condition of nutrition alone, by which the
physical conditions were improved and the mental energies strengthened,
the arts of life were multiplied and the course of human activities
directed into higher and more important channels. Indeed, through the
numerous benefits derived from the one source of increased and improved
subsistence, the entire mode of life was changed or materially modified.

The religious idea, which subsequently comprehended a complicated
system of mythology based on phallic worship, at this early age,
consisted simply of a recognition of the bounties of earth. The
principal office connected with the religious ceremonies of the
Iroquois tribe of Indians, at the stage of development in which it was
first known to Europeans, seems to have been “Keeper of the Faith,”
a position occupied alike by both sexes. The Keepers of the Faith
were chosen by the wise members of the group; they were censors of
the people, with power to report the evil deeds of persons to the
council. “With no official head, and none of the marks of a priesthood,
their functions were equal.”[105] For the most part, their religious
services consisted of festivals held at stated seasons to celebrate
the return of the bounties of Nature. A notable fact in connection
with this subject is, that during the earlier ages of barbarism the
religious idea was thoroughly monotheistic, and idolatry was unknown,
religious worship, for the most part, consisting of a ceremony of
thanksgiving, with invocations to the Great Mother-Nature to continue
to them the blessings of life. As altruism waned and egoism advanced,
however, supernaturalism, or a belief in unseen forces, became more
and more pronounced, until, in the Latter Status of barbarism, when
the supremacy of man had become complete, the gens became merely the
“centre of religious influence and the source of religious development.”

[105] Morgan, _Ancient Society_, p. 82.

The earlier governmental functions were administered through a council
of chiefs elected by the gentes. The thoroughly democratic character
of the gens may be observed in the fact that any member, female or
male, who desired to communicate with the council on matters of public
interest, might express her or his opinion either in person or through
an orator of her or his own selection.[106] Hence, we observe that
government originated in the gens, which was a pure democracy.

[106] Morgan, _Ancient Society_, p. 117.

Regarding the council of the gens, Mr. Morgan remarks:

 It was a democratic assembly because every adult male and female
 member had a voice upon all questions brought before it. It elected
 and deposed its sachem and chiefs, it elected Keepers of the Faith, it
 condoned or avenged the murder of a gentilis, and it adopted persons
 into the gens. It was the germ of the higher council of the tribe, and
 of that still higher of the confederacy, each of which was composed
 exclusively of chiefs as representatives of the gentes....

 All the members of an Iroquois gens were personally free, and they
 were bound to defend each other’s freedom; they were equal in
 privileges and in personal rights, the sachem and chiefs claiming no
 superiority; and they were a brotherhood bound together by the ties of
 kin. Liberty, equality, and fraternity, though never formulated, were
 cardinal principles of the gens. These facts are material because the
 gens was the unit of a social and governmental system, the foundation
 upon which Indian society was organized.... At the epoch of European
 discovery the American Indian tribes generally were organized in
 gentes with descent in the female line. The gens was the basis of the
 phratry, of the tribe, and of the confederacy of tribes.[107]

[107] Morgan, _Ancient Society_, p. 85.

From the foregoing it would seem that the gens—the earliest
organization of society of which we have any accurate knowledge—was
founded on the “mother-right” or on the supremacy of women. We are
assured that the gentile organization is not confined to the Latin,
Grecian, and Sanskrit-speaking tribes, but that it has been found “in
other branches of the Aryan family of nations, in the Semitic, Uralian,
and Turanian families, among the tribes of Africa and Australia, and of
the American aborigines.”[108]

[108] _Ibid._, p. 64.

A tribe was composed of several gentes, the chiefs of which formed the
council. This council was invested with the power to declare war and to
regulate terms of peace, to receive embassies and make alliances; it
was in fact authorized to perform all the governmental functions of the
tribe. The duties performed by the council of chiefs may be regarded
as the first attempt at representative government. In process of time,
as the affairs of the tribe became more complicated, a need arose for
a recognized head, one who when the council was not in session could
lead in the adjustment of matters pertaining to the general interest
of the group. In response to this demand, one of the sachems was
invested with a slight degree of authority over the other chiefs. Hence
arose the military chieftain of the Latter Status of barbarism. That
the powers delegated to the incumbent of this office differed widely
from those of a modern monarch, is shown in the fact that as he had
been elected by the members of the group he could by them be deposed.
We have seen that the powers exercised by sachem and chief were alike
transmitted through women. The mother is the natural guardian of the
family; so soon therefore as the actions of the leaders of the group
were not in accord with those principles of equality and justice which
had characterized society since its organization, they were deposed,
or, as in the case of the Senecas described by Ashur Wright, they had
their “horns knocked off” through the influence of women.

At the head of the family, or gens, producing and controlling the
principal means of subsistence, and forming the line of descent and
inheritance, women, until the closing ages of the Middle Status of
barbarism, were without doubt the leading spirits, and thus far the
progress of mankind had been in strict accord with those principles
which since the separation of the sexes had governed development.

In process of time, however, the simple form of government which
has been described was found inadequate to meet the demands arising
from the more complicated requirements of increasing numbers and
the general growth of society; therefore, during the opening ages
of the Latter Status of barbarism, a form of government was evolved
which was better suited to their changed conditions. When the idea
of a coalescence of tribes, or of a combination of forces for common
defence had taken root, and when under such confederation the council
of chiefs had become co-ordinated with a military leader for the
general management and defence of the community, it was thought that an
important step had been taken in progressive governmental functions.
Yet, along with the higher development of the governmental idea is to
be observed also a growing tendency toward the usurpation of power.
Scarcely was the office of military chieftain created, than we find the
people inaugurating measures with which to protect themselves against
encroachments upon their liberties, and devising means whereby they
might be enabled to check the personal ambition of their leaders.

The extreme egoism developed within the male constitution was already
manifesting itself in the excessive greed for gain, and in the
inordinate thirst for military glory; hence, as a safeguard against
usurpation, in the earliest stages of the Latter Status of barbarism,
we find the tribe electing two military chieftains instead of one,
two leaders invested with equal powers and responsibilities and
subjected to the same restrictions and limitations in the exercise
of authority. The Spartan government upon its first appearance in
history is characterized by the existence of two war-chieftains, who,
by historians of later ages, have been designated as kings; a closer
investigation, however, of the functions performed by them shows that
they were lacking in nearly all the prerogatives which characterize a
modern sovereign.

So jealously had the rights of the people been guarded that the
_basileus_ or war-chief of the Latter Status of barbarism, who is said
to represent the germ of our present king, emperor, and president, had
not succeeded in drawing to himself the powers exercised by a monarch
of modern times. The selection of a military leader, during the Latter
Status of barbarism, doubtless represents the first differentiation
of the civil from the military functions of government, and indicates
a virtual acknowledgment of the fact that society had outgrown the
primary and more simple form of government administered by the council
of chiefs.

The third stage in the development of the idea of government was
represented by a council of chiefs, a military commander, and an
assembly of the people. In this further growth of the administrative
functions may be discovered the same solicitude for individual liberty
and the rights of the community which had characterized the former
stage of development, and also the fact that still greater precautions
were deemed necessary to insure the people against tyranny and
the usurpation of their established rights. The council of chiefs,
although representing a pure democracy, and co-ordinated with two
military chieftains, between whom was an equal division of power and
responsibility, was found to be an insufficient safeguard against
despotism; hence the measures devised for the management of the
confederacy must henceforth be subjected to an Assembly of the People,
which, although of itself unable to originate or propound any plan
of government, was invested with the power to accept or reject any
measures offered for adoption by the council.

The gens was able to carry mankind through to the opening ages of
civilization, at which time the council of chiefs was transformed
into a senate, and the Assembly of the People assumed the form of the
popular assembly, from which have been derived our present Congress and
the two houses of the English Parliament.

By a careful study of the growth of government, it is discerned that
liberty, fraternity, and equality were the original and natural
inheritance of the human family, and that tyranny, injustice, and
oppression are excrescences which subsequently fastened themselves upon
human institutions through the gradual rise of the egoistic principle
developed in human nature. We have seen that until the beginning of the
Latter Status of barbarism, the gens constituted a sovereign power in
the tribe; women controlled the gens, and sachem and chief were alike
invested with the authority necessary for leadership because they could
trace their descent to some female ancestor who was the acknowledged
head of the people, and whose influence and patronage must have
extended over all the individuals included within the recognized bond
of kinship.

With the deposing power in the hands of women, and with the precautions
which were taken by them against injustice or usurpation of rights, it
is plain that unless some unusual or unprecedented circumstances had
come into play, they never could have lost that supremacy which, as the
natural result of their development, had been maintained by females
since the separation of the sexes.




