Chapter XI

Tom's Tank


"What was it?" gasped Mary, and, to her surprise, she found herself
close to Ned, clutching his arm.

"I have an idea, but I'd rather let Tom tell you," he answered.

"But where's it going?" asked Mr. Nestor. "What in the world does Tom
Swift mean by inviting us out here to witness a test, and then nearly
running us down under a Juggernaut?"

"Oh, there must be some mistake, I'm sure," returned his daughter. "Tom
didn't intend this."

"But, bless my insurance policy, look at that thing go!  What in the
world is it?" cried Mr. Damon.

The "thing" was certainly going. It had careened from the road, tilted
itself down into a ditch and gone on across the fields, lights shooting
from it in eccentric fashion.

"Maybe we'd better take after it," suggested Mr. Nestor.  "If Tom is--"

"There, it's stopping!" cried Ned. "Come on!"

He sprang from the automobile, helped Mary to get out, and then the
two, followed by Mr. Damon and Mr. Nestor, made their way across the
fields toward the big object where it had come to a stop, the rumbling
and roaring ceasing.

Before the little party reached the strange machine--the "runaway
giant," as they dubbed it in their excitement--a bright light flashed
from it, a light that illuminated their path right up to the monster.
And in the glare of this light they saw Tom Swift stepping out through
a steel door in the side of the affair.

"Are you all right?" he called to his friends, as they approached.

"All right, as nearly as we can be when we've been almost scared to
death, Tom," said Mr. Nestor.

"I'm surely sorry for what happened," Tom answered, with a relieved
laugh. "Part of the steering gear broke and I had to guide it by
operating the two motors alternately. It can be worked that way, but it
takes a little practice to become expert."

"I should say so!" cried Mr. Damon. "But what in the world does it all
mean, Tom Swift? You invite us out to see something--"

"And there she is!" interrupted the young inventor. "You saw her a
little before I meant you to, and not under exactly the circumstances I
had planned. But there she is!" And he turned as though introducing the
metallic monster to his friends.

"What is she, Tom?" asked Ned. "Name it!"

"My latest invention, or rather the invention of my father and myself,"
answered Tom, and his voice showed the love and reverence he felt for
his parent. "Perhaps I should say adaptation instead of invention," Tom
went on, "since that is what it is. But, at any rate, it's my
latest--dad's and mine--and it's the newest, biggest, most improved and
powerful fighting tank that's been turned out of any shop, as far as I
can learn.

"Ladies--I mean lady and gentlemen--allow me to present to you War Tank
A, and may she rumble till the pride of the Boche is brought low and
humble!" cried Tom.

"Hurray! That's what I say!" cheered Ned.

"That's what I have been at work on lately. I'll give you a little
history of it, and then you may come inside and have a ride home."

"In that?" cried Mr. Damon.

"Yes. I can't promise to move as speedily as your car, but I can make
better time than the British tanks. They go about six miles an hour, I
understand, and I've got mine geared to ten. That's one improvement dad
and I have made."

"Ride in that!" cried Mr. Nestor. "Tom, I like you, and I'm glad to see
I've been mistaken about you. You have been doing your bit, after all;
but--"

"Oh, I've only begun!" laughed Tom Swift.

"Well, no matter about that. However much I like you," went on Mr.
Nestor, "I'd as soon ride on the wings of a thunderbolt as in Tank A,
Tom Swift."

"Oh, it isn't as bad as that!" laughed the young scientist. "But
neither is it a limousine. However, come inside, anyhow, and I'll tell
you something about it. Then I guess we can guide it back. The men are
repairing the break."

The visitors entered the great craft through the door by which Tom had
emerged. At first all they saw was a small compartment, with walls of
heavy steel, some shelves of the same and a seat which folded up
against the wall made of like powerful material.

"This is supposed to be the captain's room, where he stays when he
directs matters." Tom explained. "The machinery is below and beyond
here."

"How'd you come to evolve this?" asked Ned. "I haven't seen half enough
of the outside, to say nothing of the inside."

"You'll have time enough," Tom said. "This is my first completed tank.
There are some improvements to be made before we send it to the other
side to be copied.

"Then they'll make them in England as well as here, and from here we'll
ship them in sections."

"I don't see how you ever thought of it!" exclaimed the girl, in wonder.

"Well, I didn't all at once," Tom answered, with a laugh.  "It came by
degrees. I first got the idea when I heard of the British tanks.

"When I had read how they went into action and what they accomplished
against the barbed wire entanglements, and how they crossed the
trenches, I concluded that a bigger tank, one capable of more speed,
say ten or twelve miles an hour, and one that could cross bigger
excavations--the English tanks up to this time can cross a ditch of
twelve feet--I thought that, with one made on such specifications, more
effective work could be done against the Germans."

"And will yours do that?" asked Ned. "I mean will it do ten miles an
hour, and straddle over a wider ditch than twelve feet?"

"It'll do both," promptly answered Tom. "We did a little better than
eleven miles an hour a while ago when I yelled to you to get out of the
way just now. It's true we weren't under good control, but the speed
had nothing to do with that. And as for going over a big ditch, I think
we straddled one about fourteen feet across back there, and we can do
better when I get my grippers to working."

"Grippers!" exclaimed Mary.

"What kind of trench slang is that, Tom Swift?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Well, that's a new idea I'm going to try out It's something like
this," and while from a distant part of the interior of Tank A came the
sound of hammering, the young inventor rapidly drew a rough pencil
sketch.

It showed the tank in outline, much as appear the pictures of tanks
already in service--the former simile of two wedge-shaped pieces of
metal put together broad end to broad end, still holding good. From one
end of the tank, as Tom drew it, there extended two long arms of
latticed steel construction.

"The idea is," said Tom, "to lay these down in front of the tank, by
means of cams and levers operated from inside.  If we get to a ditch
which we can't climb down into and out again, or bridge with the belt
caterpillar wheels, we'll use the grippers. They'll be laid down,
taking a grip on the far side of the trench, and we'll slide across on
them."

"And leave them there?" asked Mr. Damon.

"No, we won't leave them. We'll pick them up after we have passed over
them and use them in front again as we need them. A couple of extra
pairs of grippers may be carried for emergencies, but I plan to use the
same ones over and over again."

"But what makes it go?" asked Mary. "I don't want all the details,
Tom," she said, with a smile, "but I'd like to know what makes your
tank move."

"I'll be able to show you in a little while," he answered.  "But it may
be enough now if I tell you that the main power consists of two big
gasolene engines, one on either side.  They can be geared to operate
together or separately. And these engines turn the endless belts made
of broad, steel plates, on which the tank travels. The belts pass along
the outer edges of the tank longitudinally, and go around cogged wheels
at either end of the blunt noses.

"When both belts travel at the same rate of speed the tank goes in a
straight line, though it can be steered from side to side by means of a
trailer wheel in the rear. Making one belt--one set of caterpillar
wheels, you know--go faster than the other will make the tank travel to
one side or the other, the turn being in the direction of the slowest
moving belt. In this way we can steer when the trailer wheels are
broken."

"And what does your tank do except travel along, not minding a hail of
bullets?" asked Mr. Nestor.

"Well," answered Tom, "it can do anything any other tank can do, and
then some more. It can demolish a good-sized house or heavy wall, break
down big trees, and chew up barbed-wire fences as if they were
toothpicks. I'll show you all that in due time. Just now, if the
repairs are finished, we can get back on the road--"

At that moment a door leading into the compartment where Tom and his
friends were talking opened, and one of the workmen said:

"A man outside asking to see you, Mr. Swift."

"Pardon me, but I won't keep you a moment," interrupted a suave voice.
"I happened to observe your tank, and I took the liberty of entering to
see--"

"Simpson!" cried Ned Newton, as he recognized the man who had been up
the tree. "It's that spy, Simpson, Tom!"




