Chapter XVII

Veiled Threats


Like some prehistoric monster about to charge down upon another of its
kind, Tank A, under the guidance of Tom Swift, reeled and bumped her
way over the uneven fields toward the old barn. Within the monster of
steel and iron were raucous noises: the clang and clatter of the
powerful gasolene motors; the rattle of the wheels and gears; all
making so much noise that, in the engine room proper, not a word could
be heard. Every order had to be given by signs, and Tom sent his
electric signals from the conning tower in the same way. When running
at full speed, it was almost impossible, even in the tower, which was
some distance removed from the engine room, to hear voices unless the
words were shouted.

"Why don't you go at it?" cried Ned to his "friend, who was peering
through the observation slot in the tower."

"I'm getting in good position," Tom answered. "Or rather, the worst
position I can find. I want to give the tank a good try-out, and I'm
going at the barn on the assumption that this is in enemy country and
that I can't pick and choose my advance.

"So I want to come up through that gully, and go at the barn from the
long way. That will be the worst possible way I could do it, and if old
Tank A stands the gaff I'll know she's a little bit nearer all right."

"I think she's all right as she is!" asserted Ned in a yell, for just
then Tom signaled for more speed, and the consequent increase in the
rattling and banging noises made it correspondingly difficult for talk
to be heard.

The big machine now tipped into the little gully spoken of by Tom. This
meant a dip downward, and then a climb out again and an attack on the
barn going uphill and at an angle. But, as the young inventor had said,
it would make a severe test and that was what he wanted to give his
ponderous machine.

Ned grasped one of the safety rings, as, with a reel to one side,
almost as if it were going to capsize, the tank rumbled on. Tom cast a
half-amused smile at his chum, and then threw over the guiding lever.

The tank rolled down into the gully. It was rough and filled with
stones and boulders, some of considerable size.  But Tank A made less
than nothing even of the largest rocks.  Some she crushed beneath her
steel belts. Others she simply "walked" over, smashing them down into
the soil.

Now the big machine reached the bottom of the gulch and started up the
sides, which, though not as steep as the trench in which she had
capsized, still were not easy going.

"Now for it!" cried Tom, as he signaled for full speed.

Up climbed the tank. Now she was halfway. A moment later, and she was
at the top, and then a forward careening motion told that she had
passed over the summit and was ready for the attack proper.

Ned gave a quick glance through the slot nearest him. He had a glimpse
of the barn, and then he saw something else.  This was the sight of a
man running away from the dilapidated structure--a man who glanced
toward the tank with a face that showed great fright.

"Stop! Stop!" yelled Ned. "There may be folks in there, Tom! I just saw
a man run out!"

"All right!" Tom cried, though Ned could hardly hear him.  "Tell me
when we get on the other side! We're going through now!"

"But," shouted Ned, "don't you understand? I saw a man come out of
there! Maybe there's more inside! Wait, Tom, and--"

But it was too late. The next instant there was a smashing, grinding,
splintering crash, a noise as of a thunder-clap, and Tank A fairly ate
her way through the old barn as a rat might eat his way into a soft
cheese, only infinitely more quickly.

On and on and through and through went the tank, knocking beams,
boards, rafters and timbers hither and thither.  Minding not at all the
weight of great beams on her back, caring nothing for those that got in
the way of her steel belts, heeding not the wall of wood that reared
itself before her in a barrier of splinters and slivers, Tank A went on
and on until finally, with another grinding crash, as she smashed her
way through the farthermost wall, the great engine of war emerged on
the other side and came panting into the field, dragging with her a
part of the structure clinging to her steel sides.

"Well," cried Tom, with a laugh, as he signaled for the power to be
shut off, thereby making it possible for ordinary conversation to be
heard, "I guess we didn't do a thing to that barn!"

"Not much left of it, for a fact, Tom," agreed Ned, as he looked
through the after observation slots at the ruin in the rear. "But
didn't you hear what I was saying?"

"I heard you yelling something to me, but I was too anxious to go at it
as fast as I could. I didn't want to stop then. What was the trouble?"

"That's what I'm afraid of, Tom--there may be trouble.  Just before you
tackled the barn for a knockdown, instead of a touchdown, as we might
say, I saw a man running out of it.  I thought if there was one there,
perhaps there might be more. That's why I yelled to you."

"A man running from the old barn!" cried Tom. "Whew!" he whistled. "I
wish I had seen him. But, Ned, if one ran out of harm's way, any others
who might possibly be in there would do the same thing, wouldn't they?"

"I hope so," returned Ned doubtfully.

"Great Scott!" cried Tom, as the possibility was borne home to him. "If
anything has happened--"

He sprang for the door of the tower and threw over the catch, springing
out, followed by Ned. From the engine room of the armored tank the men
came, smiles of gratification on their faces.

"We certainly busted her wide open, Mr. Swift!" called the chief
mechanician.

"Yes," assented the young inventor; but there was not as much
gratification in his voice as there should have been.  "There isn't
much of a barn left, but Ned thinks he saw some one run out, and if
there was one man there may have been more. We'd better have a look
around, I guess."

The engineering force exchanged glances. Then Hank Baldwin, who was in
charge of the motors, said:

"Well, if there was anybody in that barn when we chewed her up I
wouldn't give much for his hide, German or not."

"Let us hope no one was in there," murmured Tom.

They turned to go back to the demolished structure, fear and worry in
their hearts. No more complete ruin could be imagined. If a cyclone had
swept over the barn it could not have more certainly leveled it. And,
not only was it leveled, crushed down in the center by the great weight
of the tank, but the boards and beams were broken into small pieces.
Parts of them clung in long, grotesque splinters to the endless steel
belts.

"I don't see how we're going to find anybody if he's in there,"
remarked Hank.

"We'll have to," insisted Tom. "We can look about and call. If any one
is there he may have been off to one side or to one end, and be
protected under the debris. I wish I had heard you call, Ned."

"I wish you had, Tom. I yelled for all I was worth."

"I know you did. I was too eager to go on, and, at the same time, I
really couldn't stop well on that hill. I had to keep on going. Well,
now to learn the worst!"

They walked back toward the demolished barn. But they had not reached
it when from around the corner swung a big automobile. In it were
several men, but chief, in vision at least, among them, was a burly
farmer who had a long, old-fashioned gun in his hands. On his bearded
face was a grim look as he leaped out before the machine had fairly
stopped, and called:

"Hold on, there! I guess you've done damage enough! Now you can pay for
it or take the consequences!" And he motioned to Tom, Ned, and the
others to halt.




