Chapter XIV

The Ruined Factory


Only too true were the words Ned Newton shouted to his chum. Tank A was
really capsizing. She had advanced to the edge of the gully and started
down it, moving slowly on the caterpillar bands of steel. Then had come
a sudden lurch, caused, as they learned afterward, by the slipping off
of a great quantity of shale from an underlying shelf of rock.

This made unstable footing for the tank. One side sank lower than the
other, and before Tom could neutralize this by speeding up one motor
and slowing down the other the tank slowly turned over on its side.

"But she isn't going to stop here!" cried Ned, as he found himself
thrown about like a pill in a box. "We're going all the way over!"

"Let her go over!" cried Tom, not that he could stop the tank now. "It
won't hurt her. She's built for just this sort of thing!"

And over Tank A did go. Over and over she rolled, sidewise, tumbling
and sliding down the shale sides of the great gully.

"Hold fast! Grab the rings!" cried Tom to his two companions in the
tower with him. "That's what they're for!"

Ned and Mr. Damon understood. In fact, the latter had already done as
Tom suggested. The young inventor had read that the British tanks
frequently turned turtle, and he had this in mind when he made
provision in his own for the safety of passengers and crew.

As soon as he felt the tank careening, Tom had pressed the signal
ordering the motors stopped, and now only the force of gravity was
operating. But that was sufficient to carry the big machine to the
bottom of the gulch, whither she slid with a great cloud of sand, shale
and dust.

"Bless my--bless my--" Mr. Damon was murmuring, but he was so flopped
about, tossed from one side to the other, and it took so much of his
attention and strength to hold on to the safety ring, that he could not
properly give vent; to one of his favorite expressions.

But there comes an end to all things, even to the descent of a tank,
and Tom's big machine soon stopped rolling, sliding, and turning
improvised somersaults, and rested in a pile of soft shale at the
bottom of the gully. And the tank was resting on her back!

"We've turned turtle!" cried Ned, as he noted that he was standing on
what, before, had been the ceiling of the observation tower. But as
everything was of steel, and as there was no movable furniture, no
great harm was done. In fact, one could as well walk on the ceiling of
the tank as on the floor.

"But how are you going to get her right side up?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Oh, turning upside down is only one of the stunts of the game. I can
right her," was the answer.

"How?" asked Ned.

"Well, she'll right herself if there's ground enough for the steel
belts to get a grip on.

"But can the motors work upside down?"

"They surely can!" responded Tom. "I made 'em that way on purpose. The
gasolene feeds by air pressure, and that works standing on its head, as
well as any other way. It's going to be a bit awkward for the men to
operate the controls, but we won't be this way long. Before I start to
right her, though, I want to make sure nothing is broken."

Tom signaled to the engine room, and, as the power was off and the
speaking tube could be used, he called through it:

"How are you down there?"

"Right-o!" came back the answer from a little Englishman Tom had hired
because he knew something about the British tanks. "'Twas a bit of
nastiness for a while, but it won't take us long to get up ag'in."

"That's good!" commented Tom. "I'll come down and have a look at you."

It was no easy matter, with the tank capsized, to get to the main
engine room, but Tom Swift managed it. To his delight, aside from a
small break in one of the minor machines, which would not interfere
with the operation or motive force of the monster war engine,
everything was in good shape. There was no leak from the gasolene
tanks, which was one of the contingencies Tom feared, and, as he had
said, the motors would work upside down as well as right side up, a
fact he had proved more than once in his Hawk.

"Well, we'll make a start," he told his chief engineer.  "Stand by when
I give the signal, and we'll try to crawl out of this right side up."

"How are you going to do it?" asked Ned, as his chum crawled back into
the observation tower.

"Well, I'm going to run her part way up the very steepest part of the
ravine I can find--the side of a house would do as well if it could
stand the strain. I'm going to stand the tank right up on her nose, so
to speak, and tip her over so she'll come right again."

Slowly the tank started off, while Tom and his friends in the
observation tower anxiously awaited the result of the novel progress.
Ned and Mr. Damon clung to the safety rings.  Tom put his arm through
one and hung on grimly, while he used both hands on the steering
apparatus and the controls.

Of course the trailer wheels were useless in a case of this kind, and
the tank had to be guided by the two belts run at varying speeds.

"Here we go!" cried Tom, and the tank started. It was a queer sensation
to be moving upside down, but it did not last very long. Tom steered
the tank straight at the opposite wall of the ravine, where it rose
steeply.  One of the broad belts ran up on that side. The other was
revolved in the opposite direction. Up and up, at a sickening angle,
went Tank A.

Slowly the tank careened, turning completely over on her longer axis,
until, as Tom shut off the power, he and his friends once more found
themselves standing where they belonged--on the floor of the
observation tower.

"Right side up with care!" quoted Ned, with a laugh. "Well, that was
some stunt--believe me!"

"Bless my corn plaster, I should say so!" cried Mr. Damon.

"Well, I'm glad it happened," commented Tom. "It showed what she can do
when she's put to it. Now we'll get out of this ditch."

Slowly the tank lumbered along, proper side up now, the men in the
motor room reporting that everything was all right, and that with the
exception of a slight unimportant break, no damage had been done.

Straight for the opposite steep side of the gully Tom directed his
strange craft, and at a point where the wall of the gulch gave a good
footing for the steel belts, Tank A pulled herself out and up to level
ground.

"Well, I'm glad that's over," remarked Ned, with a sigh of relief, as
the tank waddled along a straight stretch. "And to think of having to
do that same thing under heavy fire!"

"That's part of the game," remarked Tom. "And don't forget that we can
fire, too--or we'll be able to when I get the guns in place. They'll
help to balance the machine better, too, and render her less likely to
overturn."

Tom considered the test a satisfactory one and, a little later, guided
his tank back to the shop, where men were set to work repairing the
little damage done and making some adjustments.

"What's next on the program?" asked Ned of his chum one day about a
week later. "Any more tests in view?"

"Yes," answered Tom. "I've got the machine guns in place now. We are
going to try them out and also endeavor to demolish a building and some
barbed wire. Like to come along?"

"I would!" cried Ned.

A little later the tank was making her way over a field.  Tom pointed
toward a deserted factory, which had long been partly in ruins, but
some of the walls of which still stood.

"I'm going to bombard that," he announced, and then try to batter it
down and roll over it like a Juggernaut. Are you game?"

"Do your worst!" laughed Ned. "Let me man one of the machine guns!"

"All right," agreed Tom. "Concentrate your fire. Make believe you're
going against the Germans!"

Slowly, but with resistless energy, the tank approached the ruined
factory.

"Are you sure there's no one in it, Tom?"

"Sure! Blaze away!"




