Chapter VIII

Detective Rad


"Who's there?" came the demand from the unseen person in the tree.

"I might ask you the same thing," was Ned's sharp retort, as he nursed
his skinned and bruised fingers. "What are you doing up there?"

There was no answer, but a sound among the branches indicated that the
person up the tree was coming down. In another moment a man leaped to
the ground lightly and stood beside Ned. The lad observed that the
stranger was clean shaven, except for a small moustache which curled up
at the ends slightly.

"For all the world like a small edition of the Kaiser's," Ned described
it afterward.

"What are you doing here?" demanded the man, and his voice had in it
the ring of authority. It was this very quality that made Ned bristle
up and "get on his ear," as he said later. The young clerk did not
object to being spoken to authoritatively by those who had the right,
but from a stranger it was different.

"I might ask you the same thing," retorted Ned. "I have as much right
here as you, I fancy, and I can climb trees, too, but I don't care to
have my fingers stepped on," and he looked at the scarified members of
his left hand.

"I beg your pardon. I'm sorry if I hurt you. I didn't mean to. And of
course this is a public place, in a way, and you have a right here. I
was just climbing the tree to--er--to get a fishing pole!"

Ned had all he could do to keep from laughing. The idea of getting a
fishing pole from a gnarled and stunted pine struck him as being
altogether novel and absurd. Yet it was not time to make fun of the
man. The latter looked too serious for that.

"Rather a good view to be had from up where you were, eh?" asked Ned
suggestively.

"A good view?" exclaimed the other. "I don't know what you mean!"

"Oh, then you didn't see anything," Ned went on. "Perhaps it's just as
well. Are you fond of fishing?"

"Very. I have--But I forget, I do not know you nor you me.  Allow me to
introduce myself. I am Mr. Walter Simpson, and I am here on a visit I
just happened to walk out this way, and, seeing a small stream, thought
I should like to fish. I usually carry lines and hooks, and all I
needed was the pole. I was looking for it when I heard you, and--"

"I felt you!" interrupted Ned, with a short laugh. He told his own
name, but that was all, and seemed about to pass on.

"Are there any locomotive shops around here?" asked Mr. Simpson.

"Locomotive shops?" queried Ned. "None that I know of.  Why?"

"Well, I heard heavy machinery being used down there;" and he waved his
hand toward Tom's shops, "and I thought--"

"Oh, you mean Shopton!" exclaimed Ned. "That's the Swift plant. No,
they don't make locomotives, though they could if they wanted to, for
they turn out airships, submarines, tunnel diggers, and I don't know
what."

"Do they make munitions there--for the Allies?" asked Mr. Simpson, and
there was an eager look on his face.

"No, I don't believe so," Ned answered; "though, in fact, I don't know
enough of the place to be in a position to give you any information
about it," he told the man, not deeming it wise to go into particulars.

Perhaps the man felt this, as he did not press for an answer.

The two stood looking at one another for some little time, and then the
man, with a bow that had in it something of insolence, as well as
politeness, turned and went down the path up which Ned had come.

The young bank clerk waited a little while, and then turned his
attention to the tree which seemed to have suddenly assumed an
importance altogether out of proportion to its size.

"Well, since I'm here I'll have a look up that tree," decided Ned.

Favoring his bruised hand, Ned essayed the ascent of the tree more
successfully this time. As he rose up among the branches he found he
could look down directly into the yard with the high fence about it. He
Could see only a portion, good as his vantage point was, and that
portion had in it a few workmen--nothing else.

"No elephants there," said Ned, with a smile, as he remembered Harry's
excitement. "Still it's just as well for Tom to know that his place can
be looked down on. I'll go and tell him."

As Ned descended the tree he caught a glimpse, off to one side among
some bushes, of something moving.

"I wonder if that's my Simp friend, playing I spy?" mused Ned. "Guess
I'd better have a look."

He worked his way carefully close to the spot where he had seen the
movement. Proceeding then with more caution, watching each step and
parting the bushes with a careful hand, Ned beheld what he expected.

There was the late occupant of the pine tree the man who had stepped on
Ned's fingers, applying a small telescope to his eye and gazing in the
direction of Tom Swift's home.

The man stood concealed in a screen of bushes with his back toward Ned,
and seemed oblivious to his surroundings.  He moved the glass to and
fro, and seemed eagerly intent on discovering something.

"Though what he can see of Tom's place from there isn't much," mused
Ned. "I've tried it myself, and I know; you have to be on an elevation
to look down.  Still it shows he's after something, all right. Guess
I'll throw a little scare into him."

As yet, Ned believed himself unobserved, and that his presence was not
suspected was proved a moment later when he shouted:

"Hey! What are you doing there?"

He had his eye on the partially concealed man, and the latter, as Ned
said afterward, jumped fully two feet in the air, dropping his
telescope as he did so, and turning to face the lad.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" he faltered.

"No one else;" and Ned grinned. "Looking for a good place to fish, I
presume?"

Then, at least for once, the man's suave manner dropped from him as if
it had been a mask. He bared his teeth in a snarl as he answered:

"Mind your own business!"

"Something I'd advise you also to do," replied Ned smoothly. "You can't
see anything from there," he went on.  "Better go back to the tree
and--cut a fishing pole!"

With this parting shot Ned sauntered down the hill, and swung around to
make his way toward Tom's home. He paid no further attention to the
man, save to determine, by listening, that the fellow was searching
among the bushes for the dropped telescope.

The young inventor was at home, taking a hasty lunch which Mrs. Baggert
had set out for him, the while he poured over some blueprint drawings
that, to Ned's unaccustomed eyes, looked like the mazes of some
intricate puzzle.

"Well, where have you been keeping yourself, old man?" asked Tom Swift,
after he had greeted his friend.

"I might ask the same of you," retorted Ned, with a smile.  "I've been
trying to find you to give you some important information, and I made
up my mind, after what happened to-day, to write it and leave it for
you if I didn't see you."

"What happened to-day?" asked Tom, and there was a serious look on his
face.

"You are being spied upon--at least, that part of your works enclosed
in the new fence is," replied Ned.

"You don't mean it!" Cried Tom. "This accounts for some of it, then."

"For some of what?" asked Ned.

"For some of the actions of that Blakeson. He's been hanging around
here, I understand, asking too many questions about things that I'm
trying to keep secret--even from my best friends," and as Tom said this
Ned fancied there was a note of regret in his voice.

"Yes, you are keeping some things secret, Tom," said Ned, determined
"to take the bull by the horns," as it were.

"I'm sorry, but it has to be," went on Tom. "In a little while--"

"Oh, don't think that I'm at all anxious to know things!" broke in Ned.
"I was thinking of some one else, Tom--another of your friends."

"Do you mean Mary?"

Ned nodded.

"She feels rather keenly your lack of explanations," went on the young
bank clerk. "If you could only give her a hint--"

"I'm sorry, but it can't be done," and Tom spoke firmly.  "But you
haven't told me all that happened. You say I am being spied upon."

"Yes," and Ned related what had taken place in the tree.

"Whew!" whistled Tom. "That's going some with a vengeance!  I must have
that tree down in a jiffy. I didn't imagine there was a spot where the
yard could be overlooked. But I evidently skipped that tree.
Fortunately it's on land owned by a concern with which I have some
connection, and I can have it chopped down without any trouble. Much
obliged to you, Ned. I shan't forget this in a hurry. I'll go right
away and--"

Tom's further remark was interrupted by the hurried entrance of
Eradicate Sampson. The old man was smiling in pleased anticipation,
evidently, at the same time, trying hard not to give way to too much
emotion.

"I's done it, Massa Tom!" he cried exultingly.

"Done what?" asked the young inventor. "I hope you and Koku haven't had
another row."

"No, sah! I don't want nuffin t' do wif dat ornery, low-down white
trash! But I's gone an' done whut I said I'd do!"

"What's that, Rad? Come on, tell us! Don't keep us in suspense."

"I's done some deteckertiff wuk, lest laik I said I'd do, an' I's
cotched him! By golly, Massa Tom! I's cotched him black-handed, as it
says!"

"Caught him? Whom have you caught, Rad?" cried Tom. "Do you suppose he
means he's caught the man you saw up the tree, Ned? The man you think
is a German spy?"

"It couldn't be. I left him only a little while ago hunting for his
telescope."

"Then whom have you caught, Rad?" cried Tom. "Come on, I'll give you
credit for it. Tell us!"

"I's cotched dat Dutch Sauerkrauter, dat's who I's cotched, Massa Tom!
By golly, I's cotched him!"

"But who, Rad? Who is he?"

"I don't know his name, Massa Tom, but he's a Sauerkrauter, all right.
Dat's whut he eats for lunch, an' dat's why I calls him dat. I's
cotched him, an' he's locked up in de stable wif mah mule Boomerang.
An' ef he tries t' git out Boomerang'll jest natchully kick him into
little pieces--dat's whut Boomerang will do, by golly!"




