Chapter XVIII

Ready for France


Such was the reaction following the crashing through of the barn,
coupled with the sudden appearance of the men in the automobile and the
threat of the farmer, that, for the moment, Tom, Ned, or their
companions from the tank could say nothing. They just stood staring at
the farmer with the gun, while he grimly regarded them. It was Tom who
spoke first.

"What's the idea?" asked the young inventor. "Why don't you want us to
look through the ruins?"

"You'll learn soon enough!" was the grim answer.

But Tom was not to be put off with undecided talk.

"If there's been an accident," he said, "we're sorry for it. But delay
may be dangerous. If some one is hurt--"

"You'll be hurt, if I have my way about it!" snapped the farmer, "and
hurt in a place where it always tells. I mean your pocketbook! That's
the kind of a man I am--practical."

"He means if we've killed or injured any one we'll have to pay
damages," whispered Ned to Tom. "But don't agree to anything until you
see your lawyer. That's a hot one, though, trying to claim damages
before he knows who's hurt!"

"I've got to find out more about this," Tom answered. He started to
walk on.

"No you don't!" cried the farmer, with a snarl. "As I said, you folks
has done damage enough with your threshing machine, or whatever you
call it. Now you've got to pay!"

"We are willing to," said Tom, as courteously as he could.  "But first
we want to know who has been hurt, or possibly killed. Don't you think
it best to get them to a doctor, and then talk about money damages
later?"

"Doctor? Hurt?" cried the farmer, the other men in the auto saying
nothing. "Who said anything about that?"

"I thought," began Tom, "that you--"

"I'm talkin' about damages to my barn!" cried the farmer.  "You had no
right to go smashing it up this way, and you've got to pay for it, or
my name ain't Amos Kanker!"

"Oh!" and there was great relief in Tom's voice. "Then we haven't
killed any one?"

"I don't know what you've done," answered the farmer, and his voice was
not a pleasant one. "I'm sure I can't keep track of all your ructions.
All I know is that you've ruined my barn, and you've got to pay for it,
and pay good, too!"

"For that old ramshackle?" cried Ned.

"Hush!" begged Tom, in a low voice. "I'm willing to pay, Ned, for the
sake of having proved what my tank could do.  I'm only too glad to
learn no one was hurt. Was there?" he asked, turning to the farmer.

"Was there what?"

"Was there anybody in your barn?"

"Not as I knows on," was the grouchy answer. "A man who saw your
machine coming thought she was headed for my building, and he run and
told me. Then some friends of mine brought me here in their machine. I
tell you I've got all the evidence I need ag'in you, an' I'm going to
have damages! That barn was worth three thousand dollars if it was
worth a cent, and--"

"This matter can easily be settled," said Tom, trying to keep his
temper. "My name is Swift, and--"

"Don't get swift with me, that's all I ask!" and the farmer laughed
grimly at his clumsy joke.

"I'll do whatever is right," Tom said, with dignity. "I live over near
Shopton, and if you want to send your lawyer to see mine, why--"

"I don't believe in lawyers!" broke in the farmer. "All they think of
is to get what they can for theirselves. And I can do that myself. I'll
get it out of you before you leave, or, anyhow, before you take your
contraption away," and he glanced at the tank.

The same suspicion came at once to Tom and Ned, and the latter gave
voice to it when he murmured in a low voice to his chum:

"This is a frame-up--a scheme, Tom.  He doesn't care a rap for the
barn. It's some of that Blakeson's doing, to make trouble for you."

"I believe you!" agreed Tom. "Now I know what to do."

He looked toward the collapsed barn, as if making a mental computation
of its value, and then turned toward the farmer.

"I'm very sorry," said Tom, "if I have caused any trouble.  I wanted to
test my machine out on a wooden structure, and I picked your barn. I
suppose I should have come to you first, but I did not want to waste
time. I saw the barn was of practically no value."

"No value!" broke in the farmer. "Well, I'll show you, young man, that
you can't play fast and loose with other people's property and not
settle!"

"I'm perfectly willing to, Mr. Kanker. I could see that the barn was
almost ready to fall, and I had already determined, before sending my
tank through it, to pay the owner any reasonable sum. I am willing to
do that now."

"Well, of course if you're so ready to do that," replied the farmer,
and Ned thought he caught a glance pass between him and one of the men
in the auto, "if you're ready to do that, just hand over three thousand
dollars, and we'll call it a day's work. It's really worth more, but
I'll say three thousand for a quick settlement."

"Why, this barn," cried Ned, "isn't worth half that! I know something
about real estate values, for our bank makes loans on farms around
here--"

"Your bank ain't made me no loans, young man!" snapped Mr. Kanker. "I
don't need none. My place is free and clear! And three thousand dollars
is the price of my barn you've knocked to smithereens. If you don't
want to pay, I'll find a way to make you. And I'll hold you, or your
tank, as you call it, security for my damages! You can take your choice
about that."

"You can't hold us!" cried Tom. "Such things aren't done here!"

"Well, then, I'll hold your tank!" cried the farmer. "I guess it'll
sell for pretty nigh onto what you owe me, though what it's good for I
can't see. So you pay me three thousand dollars or leave your machine
here as security."

"That's the game!" whispered Ned. "There's some plot here.  They want
to get possession of your tank, Tom, and they've seized on this chance
to do it."

"I believe you," agreed the young inventor. "Well, they'll find that
two can play at that game. Mr. Kanker," he went on, "it is out of the
question to claim your barn is worth three thousand dollars."

"Oh, is it?" sneered the farmer. "Well, I didn't ask you to come here
and make kindling wood of it! That was your doings, and you've had your
fun out of it. Now you can pay the piper, and I'm here to make you
pay!" And he brought the gun around in a menacing manner.

"He's right, in a way," said Ned to his chum. "We should have secured
his permission first. He's got us in a corner, and almost any jury of
farmers around here, after they heard the story of the smashed barn,
would give him heavy damages.  It isn't so much that the barn is worth
that as it is his property rights that we've violated. A farmer's barn
is his castle, so to speak."

"I guess you're right," agreed Tom, with a rather rueful face. "But I'm
not going to hand him over three thousand dollars. In fact, I haven't
that much with me."

"Oh, well, I don't suppose he'd want it all in cash."

But, it appeared, that was just what the farmer wanted. He went over
all his arguments again, and it could not be denied that he had the law
on his side. As he rightly said, Tom could not expect to go about the
country, "smashing up barns and such like," without being willing to
pay.

"Well, what you going to do?" asked the farmer at last. "I can't stay
here all day. I've got work to do. I can't go around smashing barns. I
want three thousand dollars, or I'll hold your contraption for
security."

This last he announced with more conviction after he had had a talk
with one of the men in the automobile. And it was this consultation
that confirmed Tom and Ned in their belief that the whole thing was a
plot, growing out of Tom's rather reckless destruction of the barn; a
plot on the part of Blakeson and his gang. That they had so speedily
taken advantage of this situation carelessly given them was only
another evidence of how closely they were on Tom's trail.

"That man who ran out of the barn must have been the same one who was
in the factory," whispered Ned to his chum. "He probably saw us coming
this way and ran on ahead to have the farmer all primed in readiness.
Maybe he knew you had planned to ram the barn."

"Maybe he did. I've had it in mind for some time, and spoken to some of
my men about it."

"More traitors in camp, then, I'm afraid, Tom. We'll have to do some
more detective work. But let's get this thing settled. He only wants to
hold your tank, and that will give the man, into whose hands he's
playing, a chance to inspect her."

"I believe you. But if I have to leave her here I'll leave some men on
guard inside. It won't be any worse than being stalled in No Man's
Land. In fact, it won't be so bad. But I'll do that rather than be
gouged."

"No, Tom, you won't. If you did leave some one on guard, there'd be too
much chance of their getting the best of him.  You must take your tank
away with you."

"But how can I? I can't put up three thousand dollars in cash, and he
says he won't take a check for fear I'll stop payment. I see his game,
but I don't see how to block it."

"But I do!" cried Ned.

"What!" exclaimed Tom. "You don't mean to say, even if you do work in a
bank, that you've got three thousand in cash concealed about your
person, do you?"

"Pretty nearly, Tom, or what is just as good. I have that amount in
Liberty Bonds. I was going to deliver them to a customer who has
ordered them but not paid for them. They are charged up against me at
the bank, but I'm good for that, I guess. Now I'll loan you these
bonds, and you can give them to this cranky old farmer as security for
damages.  Mind, don't make them as a payment. They're simply
security--the same as when an autoist leaves his car as bail. Only we
don't want to leave our car, we'd rather have it with us," and he
looked over at the tank, bristling with splinters from the demolished
barn.

"Well, I guess that's the only way out," said Tom. "Lucky you had those
bonds with you. I'll take them, and give you a receipt for them. In
fact, I'll buy them from you and let the farmer hold them as security."

And this, eventually, was done. After much hemming and hawing and
consultation with the men in the automobile, Mr. Kanker said he would
accept the bonds. It was made clear that they were not in payment of
any damages, though Tom admitted he was liable for some, but that Uncle
Sam's war securities were only a sort of bail, given to indicate that,
some time later, when a jury had passed on the matter, the young
inventor would pay Mr. Kanker whatever sum was agreed upon as just.

"And now," said Tom, as politely as he could under the circumstances,
"I suppose we will be allowed to depart."

"Yes, take your old shebang offen my property!" ordered Mr. Kanker,
with no very good grace. "And if you go knocking down any more barns,
I'll double the price on you!"

"I guess he's a bit roiled because he couldn't hold the tank," observed
Ned to Tom, as they walked together to the big machine. "His
friends--our enemies--evidently hoped that was what could be done. They
want to get at some of the secrets."

"I suppose so," conceded Tom. "Well, we're out of that, and I've proved
all I want to."

"But I haven't--quite," said Ned.

"What's missing?" asked his chum, as they got back in the tank.

"Well, I'd like to make sure that the fellow who ran from the factory
was the same one I saw sneaking out of the barn.  I believe he was, and
I believe that Simpson's crowd engineered this whole thing."

"I believe so, too," Tom agreed. "The next thing is to prove it. But
that will keep until later. The main thing is we've got our tank, and
now I'm going to get her ready for France."

"Will she be in shape to ship soon?" asked Ned.

"Yes, if nothing more happens. I've got a few little changes and
adjustments to make, and then she'll be ready for the last test--one of
long distance endurance mainly.  After that, apart she comes to go to
the front, and we'll begin making 'em in quantities here and on the
other side."

"Good!" cried Ned. "Down with the Huns!"

Without further incident of moment they went back to the headquarters
of the tank, and soon the great machine was safe in the shop where she
had been made.

The next two weeks were busy ones for Tom, and in them he put the
finishing touches on his machine, gave it a long test over fields and
through woods, until finally he announced:

"She's as complete as I can make her!  She's ready for France!"




