Chapter XXIII

Gone


"Here, eat some of this," and Ned held something out to his chum.
"It'll bring you up quicker than anything else, except a cup of hot
tea, and we'll get that as soon as you can get away from here," went on
the young bank clerk.

"What is it?" Tom asked, and his voice was very weary.

"It's a mixture of chocolate and nuts," replied Ned. "It's a new form
of emergency ration issued to soldiers before they go over the top. Our
Y.M.C.A. is sending a lot to the boys from around here who are in
France. I was helping pack the boxes ready for shipment, and I kept out
some to show you. Lucky I had it with me. Eat it, and you'll feel a lot
better in a few minutes. You haven't had much to eat, have you?"

"Very little," answered Tom, as he nibbled half-heartedly at the
confection Ned gave him, while Mr. Damon went out to the automobile and
came back with a thermos bottle filled with cool water. He always
provided himself with this on taking an automobile trip.

Tom managed to eat some of the chocolate, and then took a drink of the
cool water. In a little while he declared that he felt better.

"Then come out of here!" exclaimed Ned. "You can tell us how it all
happened and what they did to you. But I can see that last--they
treated you like a dog, didn't they?"

"Pretty nearly," answered Tom; "but they didn't have things all their
own way. I think I made one or two of them remember me," and he glanced
at his swollen and bruised hands. Indeed, he bore the marks of having
been in a fierce fight.

"Are you sure the tank's all right?" he asked Ned again.  "That has
been worrying me more than my own condition. I could think of only one
reason why they got me here and held me prisoner, and that was to get
me out of the way while they captured my tank. Then they haven't got
her?" he asked eagerly.

"Not a look at her," Ned answered. "She was safe in the shop when we
set out this morning."

"And now it's late afternoon," murmured Tom. "Well, I hope nothing has
happened since," and there was vague alarm in his voice, an alarm at
which Ned and Mr. Damon wondered.

"Couldn't you stop at some farmhouse and get fixed up a little?" asked
Mr. Kimball, the farmer who had brought the note to Ned and Mr. Damon.

"I need to get fixed up somewhere," replied Tom, with a rueful look at
himself--his hands, his torn clothes, and his general dilapidated
appearance. "But I don't want to lose any time. I'm afraid something
has happened at home, Ned."

"Nonsense! How could there, with Koko on guard, to say nothing of
Eradicate!"

"Well, maybe you're right," agreed Tom; "but I'll feel better when I
see my tank in her shed. Let's have some more of that concentrated
porterhouse steak of yours, Ned. It is good, and it fills out my
stomach, which was getting more intimate with my backbone than I liked
to feel."

More of the really good confection and another drink of refreshing
water made Tom feel better, and he was soon able to walk along without
staggering from weakness.

"And now let's get out of here," advised Ned, "unless you've left
something back in that vault you want, Tom," and he motioned to his
chum's late prison.

"Nothing there but bad memories," was the reply, with a rueful smile.
"I'm as ready to go as you are, Ned. It was good of you and Mr. Damon
to come for me, and you"--and he looked questioningly at Mr. Kimball.

"If it hadn't been for Mr. Kimball and his boy, we wouldn't have found
you--at least so soon," said Ned, and he told of the finding of the
note and what had followed.

"That's the only way I could think of for getting help," said Tom.
"They took every scrap of paper from me, but I found some in the lining
of my hat--some I'd stuffed in after I had a hair cut and my hat was
too large. For a pencil I used burnt matches. Oh, but I'm glad to be
out!" and he breathed deep of the fresh air.

"How did you get in there?" asked Ned wonderingly.

"Those fellows--of course. The German plotters, I'm going to call them,
for I believe that Blakeson and his gang--though I didn't see him--are
really working in the interests of Germany to get the secret of my
tank."

"Well, they haven't got her yet," said Ned, "and they're not likely to
now. Go on, Tom, if you feel able tell us in a few words what happened.
We've been trying to think, but can't."

"Well, it all happened because I didn't think enough," said Tom, who
was rapidly recovering his strength and nerve.  "When I got that
message that seemed to come from you, Ned, I should have known better
than to take a chance. But it seemed genuine, and as I had no reason to
suspect a trap, I started off at once. I thought maybe Kanker had
repented and was going to make amends for all the trouble he caused.

"Anyhow, I started off in my machine, and I hadn't got more than to the
crossroads when I saw a fellow out tinkering with his auto. Of course I
stopped to ask if I could help, for I can't bear to see any machinery
out of order, and as I was stooping over the engine to see what was
wrong I was pounced on from behind, bound and tied, and before I could
do a thing I was bundled into the car--a big limousine, and taken away.

"The crossroads was as far as we could trace you," remarked Ned.

"Well, it wasn't as far as they took me, by any means," Tom said. "They
brought me here, took me out of the machine--and I noticed that they'd
brought mine along--and then they carted me into the vault.

"But they didn't have it all their own way," said Tom grimly. "I
managed to get the ropes loose, and I had a regular knock down and drag
out with them for a while. But they were too many for me, and locked me
up in that place after taking away everything I had in my pockets."

"Were they highwaymen?" asked Mr. Kimtall.

"No, for they tossed back my money, watch and some trifles like that,"
Tom answered. "I didn't recognize any of the men, though one of them
must have known me, for when they had me tied I heard one of them ask
if I was the right party, and another said I was. I know they must
belong to the same gang that Simpson, Blakeson, and Schwen are members
of--the German spies."

"But what was their object?" asked Ned. "Did they try to force you to
tell them the secrets of the tank?"

"No; and that's the funny part which makes me so suspicious," Tom
answered. "If they'd tried to force something out of me, I would
understand it better. But they just kept me a prisoner after taking
away what papers I had."

"Were they of any value?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Not as regards the tank. That is, there was nothing of my plans of
construction, control or anything like that, though there was some
foreign correspondence that I am sorry fell into their hands. However,
that can't be helped."

"And did they just keep you locked up?" asked Ned.

"That's about all they did. After the fight--and it was some fight!"
declared Tom, as he recalled it with a shake of his head--"they left me
here with the door shut. There must have been some one on guard, for I
could faintly hear somebody moving about.

"I tried to get out, of course, but I couldn't. That vault must have
been made to hold something very valuable, for it was almost as strong
and solid as one in your bank, Ned.  The only window was placed so high
that I couldn't reach it, and it was barred at that.

"They opened the door a little, several times, to toss in once some old
bags that I made into a bed, and next they gave me a little water and
some sandwiches--German bologna sausage sandwiches, Ned! What do you
think of that--adding insult to injury?"

"That was tough!" Ned admitted.

"Well, I had to put up with it, for I was half starved, and as sore as
a boil from the fight. I didn't know what to do. I knew that you'd miss
me sooner or later, and set out to find me, but I hardly thought you'd
think of this place.  They couldn't have picked out a much better
prison to hold me, for, naturally, you wouldn't suppose enough of it
was left standing, after my tank had walked through it, to make a
hiding place.

"However, there was, and here I've been kept. At last I thought of the
plan of sending out a message on the scrap of paper I could tear out of
my hat. So I wrote it, and after several trials I managed to toss it
out of the window. Then I just had to wait, and that was the hardest of
all. The last twelve hours I've been without food, and I haven't heard
any one around, so I guess they've skipped out and don't intend to come
back."

"We didn't see any one," Ned reported. "Maybe they became frightened,
Tom."

"I wish I could think that," was the answer. "What is more likely to be
the case is that they're up to some new tricks.  I must get back home
quickly."

And after a stop had been made at a farmhouse belonging to a business
acquaintance of Ned's, where Tom was able to wash and get a cup of hot
tea, which added to his recuperative powers, the young inventor, with
Ned and Mr. Damon, set out for Shopton.

Before Mr. Kimball started for his home, renewed thanks had been made
to the farmer and his son for the part they had played in the rescue,
and the young inventor, learning that the boy had a liking for things
mechanical, promised to aid him in his intention to become a machinist.

"But first get a good education," Tom advised. "Keep on with your
school work, and when the time comes I'll take you into my shop."

"And maybe he'll make a tank that will rival yours, Tom," said Ned.

"Maybe he will! I hope he does. If he comes along fast enough, he can
help with something else I'm going to start soon."

"Whats that?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Oh, it's something on the same order, designed to help batter down the
German lines," Tom answered. "I haven't quite made up my mind what to
call it yet. But let's get home. I want to see that my tank is safe.
The absence of the plotters from the factory makes me suspicious."

On the way back Tom told more of the details of the attack.

"But we'll forget about it all, now you're out," remarked Ned.

"And the sooner we get home, the better," added Tom. "Can't you get a
little more speed out of this machine?" he asked.

"Well, it isn't the Hawk," replied Ned, "but we'll see what we can do,"
and he made the runabout fairly fly.

Mrs. Baggert was the first to greet Tom as they arrived at his home.
She did not seem as surprised as either Tom, Ned or Mr. Damon expected
her to be.

"Well, I'm glad you're all right," she said. "And it's a good thing you
sent that note, for your father was so excited and worried I was
getting apprehensive about him."

"What note?" asked Tom, while a queer look came into his face.

"Why, the one you sent saying you were detained on business and would
probably not be home for a week, and to have Koku and the men bring the
tank to you."

"Bring the tank! A note from me!" exclaimed Tom. "The plotters again!
And they've got the tank!"

He ran to the big shop followed by the others. Throwing open the doors,
they went inside. A glance sufficed to disclose the worst.

The place where the great tank had stood was empty.

"Gone!" gasped Tom.




