II

THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION STATED


My first article upon Mr. Belloc’s _Companion to the Outline of
History_ dealt, much against my inclination and as charitably and
amiably as possible, with the oddities of Mr. Belloc’s manner and
method, and those remarkable non-existent “European authorities” to
whom he appeals habitually in moments of argumentative stress. I do
not propose to go on thus girding at Mr. Belloc. He is a Catholic
apologist, endorsed by Catholic authorities, and there is matter of
very great importance for our consideration in what he has to say about
the history of life and mankind.

After his second paper is finished his abuse of me becomes merely
incidental or indirect. He goes on to a staggering rush at Natural
Selection. Let us see to where Catholic thought has got--if Mr. Belloc
is to be trusted--in relation to this very fundamental matter.

It is Mr. Belloc’s brilliant careless way to begin most of his
arguments somewhere about the middle and put the end first. His
opening peroration, so to speak, is a proclamation that this “Natural
Selection”--whatever it is--is “an old and done-for theory of
Darwin and Wallace.” It is “a laughing-stock for half a generation
among competent men.” Mr. George Bernard Shaw does not believe in
it! G. B. S. among the Fathers! That wonderful non-existent “latest
European work” which plays so large a part in Mr. Belloc’s dialectic is
summoned briefly, its adverse testimony is noted, and it is dismissed
to the safe again. And then there is a brief statement of how these
two vile fellows, Darwin and Wallace, set out upon this reprehensible
theorising. What a ruthless exposé it is of the true motives of
scientific people!

    “The process of thought was as follows:

    “‘There is no Mind at work in the universe; therefore changes of
    this sort must come from blind chance or at least _mechanically_.
    At all costs we must get rid of the idea of design: of a desired
    end conceived in a Creative Mind. Here is a theory which will make
    the whole process entirely mechanical and dead, and get rid of the
    necessity for a Creator.’”

And so having invented and then as it were visited and spat upon the
derided and neglected tomb of Natural Selection and assured us that
God, Mr. Shaw, “European opinion,” and all good Catholics are upon his
side, Mr. Belloc plucks up courage and really begins to write about
Natural Selection.


NATURAL SELECTION IS PURE COMMON-SENSE

What is this Natural Selection which has been dead for half a century,
but which Mr. Belloc still exerts himself industriously through four
long papers to kill all over again? It is the purest common-sense, the
most obvious deduction from obvious facts. I have set out the idea as
plainly as I could in the _Outline of History_ Mr. Belloc is attacking.
It is put so plainly there that, before he can begin to argue against
it, he has to misstate it; he has to tell the story all over again
in his own words and get it suitably askew. It was quite open to
him to quote from my account, but he preferred to compile his own
misstatement. Indeed, in all this argument against Natural Selection
he never once quotes my actual words. He paraphrases throughout.
He has put some words between inverted commas in one place, so as
inadvertently to produce the impression that they are mine, but they
are not mine.

Now the facts upon which the idea of Natural Selection rests are
matters of universal knowledge. “Every species of living thing is
continually dying and being born again as a multitude of fresh
individuals”; that is the primary fact. No species seems to be
perfectly adapted to its conditions, and even the happiest species
tends to multiply until it is in a state of need and pressure. So
far surely we are dealing with things beyond dispute. And next comes
the fact of individuality. Every living unit is individual with
a difference of its own. Every individual has its own distinctive
differences, and each of these differences may or may not be an
advantage or a disadvantage. Individuals with advantageous differences
will generally get on better in life, prosper and so be able to breed
more freely, than those with disadvantageous differences. Offspring
have a tendency to repeat the distinctive differences of their parents.
Therefore, taking a species as a whole by the million or billion or
million billion--for few species of animals or plants are represented
by fewer individuals than a million--there will be in each successive
generation a greater number of individuals with the differences that
are advantageous relative to the number with disadvantages. In other
words, the average of the species will have moved more or less in the
direction of the advantageous differences, whatever they may be, and
however numerous they may be. If, for example, the species is chased
and has to climb or run for it, there will be rather more good climbers
and sprinters in the new generation. There may be other dangers and
other needs; they will not affect the premium set on quickness and the
fate of the slow. And if the circumstances of the species continue to
press in the same direction, the movement of the average will be in
the same direction in this respect for so long as they continue to
press. Over a few score or even a few hundred generations, and under
conditions not very strenuous, a species may not change very much.
It may seem to be _fixed_ in its general characteristics, just as the
continents seem to be fixed in their general outline. But, as the range
of time extends and the pressure of necessity continues, the change
becomes more striking.


NATURAL SELECTION HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH THE ORIGIN OF VARIATIONS

That is the process of Natural Selection, the “laughing-stock” of
Mr. Belloc’s mysterious conclave of “European” savants. Natural
Selection has nothing to do with the reason for the differences between
individuals. It has no more to do with those than gravitation has to
do with the differences in the heaviness of different substances. But
it is necessary to state as much here, because in some queer muddled
way Mr. Belloc seems to be persuaded that it has. These differences
may arise by pure chance; they may come about through the operation of
complex laws, they may come in shoals and have their seasons. These
things have nothing to do with Natural Selection.

Now, Wallace and Darwin were two excellent Europeans who happened to
be interested in natural history. In spite of the sinister motives
invented for them by Mr. Belloc, I doubt if any Catholic sufficiently
educated to have read their lives will agree that they had even a
latent animus against Catholic truth or even a subconscious desire to
“get rid of a Creator” in their minds. They no more thought of “getting
rid of a Creator” when humbly and industriously they gathered their
facts and put fact to fact than an honest bricklayer thinks of “getting
rid of a Creator” when he lays his bricks with care and builds a sound
piece of wall. They went about the world studying natural history.
They considered life with a patience and thoroughness and freedom
from preconceptions beyond the imagination of a man of Mr. Belloc’s
habits. They found no such “fixity of species” as he is inspired to
proclaim. They found much evidence of a progressive change in species,
and they saw no reason to explain it by a resort to miracles or magic.
A Catholic priest of the Anglican communion named Malthus had written
a very interesting and suggestive book upon over-population and the
consequent struggle for existence between individuals. It turned
the attention of both these diligent and gifted observers to just
that process of Natural Selection I have stated. Independently both
of them came to the conclusions that species changed age by age and
without any necessary limits, and mainly through the sieve of Natural
Selection, and that, given a sufficient separation to reduce or prevent
interbreeding and a sufficient difference in the selective conditions
at work, two parts of the same species might change in different
directions, so as at last to become distinct and separate species.

Darwin’s book upon the subject was called _The Origin of Species_.
It was a very modest and sufficient title. He did not even go to the
length of calling it the origin of genera or orders or classes. He did
not at first apply it to man.

This is the theory of the origin of species through Natural Selection.
It was not pretended by either of these pioneers that Natural Selection
was the sole way through which the differences of species came about.
For example, Darwin devoted a considerable part of his working life
to such collateral modes of differentiation as the hypothesis that
Sexual Selection also had its share. Criticism has whittled down that
share to practically negligible proportions, but I note the hypothesis
here because it absolutely disposes of the assertion which Mr. Belloc
hammers on the table, that the Theory of Natural Selection excludes any
other modes of specific differentiation.


TESTING THE THEORY

Very rapidly this conception of Natural Selection was extended by
naturalists until it came to be regarded as the general process of
life. They came to realise that all species, all genera, all classes of
life, whatever else may be happening to them, are and always have been
varying through the process of Natural Selection, some rapidly, some
slowly; some so slowly as hardly to change at all through vast ages. I
have stated the _a priori_ case by which, given birth and death and
individuality and changing conditions and sufficient time, it appears
logically inevitable that the change and differentiation of species
_must_ occur, and must be now going on. If we had no material evidence
at all it would still be possible to infer the evolution of species.

That _a priori_ case has never been answered, and it seems to me
unanswerable. But scientific men, with their obstinate preference for
observation and experiment over mere logical gymnastics, rarely rest
their convictions on _a priori_ cases. A sustaining scepticism is a
matter of conscience with them. To them an _a priori_ case is merely
a theory--that is to say, a generalisation under trial. For nearly
three-quarters of a century, therefore, biologists have been examining
whatever instances they could discover that seemed to contradict this
assumption that the process of specific change under Natural Selection
is the general condition of life. To this day this view is still called
the Theory of Natural Selection, though to a great number it has come
to have the substantial quality of an embracing fact.

It would have been amusing if Mr. Belloc had told us more of his ideas
of the scientific world. Apparently he knows scarcely anything of
museums or laboratories or the spirit and methods of research. And
manifestly he has not the faintest suspicion of the way in which the
whole world of vital phenomena has been ransacked and scrutinised to
test, correct, supplement, amplify, or alter this great generalisation
about life. He probably shares the delusion of most other men in the
street, that scientific theories are scientific finalities, that
they are supposed to be as ultimate as the dogmas of some infallible
religion. He imagines them put over chiefly by asseveration, just as
the assertions of a polemical journalist are put over. He has still to
learn that theories are trial material, testing targets, directives for
research. Shooting at established theories is the normal occupation
of the scientific investigator. Mr. Belloc’s figure of the scientific
investigator is probably a queer, frowsty, and often, alas! atheistical
individual, poking about almost aimlessly among facts in the hope of
hitting upon some “discovery” or “getting rid of a God.” He does not
understand the tense relevance of the vast amount of work in progress.
But for three-quarters of a century the thought and work of myriads
of people round and about the world have borne directly or almost
directly upon the probing, sounding, testing, of the theory of Natural
Selection. It stands clarified and, it would seem, impregnable to-day.


SOME IRRELEVANT QUESTIONS

Among questions bearing upon it but not directly attacking it has
been the discussion of the individual difference. For example, are
differences due to individual experiences ever inherited? Or are
only inherent differences transmissible? What rôle is played by what
one might call “normal,” relatively slight differences, and what
by the “sports” and abnormal births in specific change? Do species
under stress, and feeding on strange food or living in unaccustomed
climates, betray any exceptional tendency to produce abnormality? Have
there been, so to speak, storms and riots of variation in some cases?
Can differences establish themselves while outer necessity remains
neutral? Can variations amounting to specific differences in colour
and form arise as a sort of play of the germ plasm and be tolerated
rather than selected by nature? In what manner do normal differences
arise? What happens to differences in cases of hybridisation? Here are
sample questions that have been the seeds of splendid work and great
arguments. Some of them were already under discussion in Darwin’s time;
he was a pioneer in such explorations; many ideas of his have stood the
test of time, and many suggestions he threw out have been disproved.
When some casual “may be” of Darwin’s is examined and set aside, it
is the custom of polemical journalists to rush about and proclaim to
all who may be sufficiently ill-informed to listen that Darwin is
“exploded.” Such explosions of Darwin are constantly recurring like
gun-fire near a garrison town, and still he remains. None of these
subsidiary questions affect the stability of this main generalisation
of biology, the Theory of Natural Selection.

The actual attack and testing of the Theory of Natural Selection
have yielded negative results. The statement of the theory may have
been made finer and exacter, that is all. And yet the conditions of
its survival have been very exacting. If the theory is to stand, the
whole of plant and animal life in time and space must be arranged in
a certain order. It must be possible to replace classification by a
genealogical tree. Every form must fall without difficulty into its
proper place in that tree. If it is true that birds are descended
from reptiles or men from apes, then there must be no birds before
the reptiles appear, and no men before apes. The geological record is
manifestly a mere fragmentary history, still for the most part unread,
but, however fragmentary it is, it must be consistent. One human skull
in the coal measures blows the whole theory to atoms. The passage
from form to form must be explicable by intermediate types capable of
maintaining themselves; there may be gaps in the record, but there must
be no miraculous leaps in the story. If an animal living in the air is
to be considered as a lineal descendant of some animal living in the
water, then the structure of the former bit by bit and step by step
must be shown to be adapted, modified, changed about from that of the
latter; it must have ears for water-hearing modified for air-hearing,
and its heart and breathing arrangements must be shown to be similarly
changed over, and so on for all its structure. All these requirements
will follow naturally from the necessities of a process of Natural
Selection. They follow logically upon no other hypothesis. They are not
demanded, for example, by the idea of a Creator continually interfering
with and rectifying some stately, unaccountable process of “Evolution,”
which seems to be Mr. Belloc’s idea--so far as he ventures to display
any idea of his own--in the matter. Such things as vestigial structures
and a number of odd clumsinesses in living things--many still very
imperfect adaptations to an erect position, for example--become
grotesque in relation to such a view. A Creator who put needless or
inconvenient fish structures into the anatomy of a land animal and
made the whole fauna and flora of the land a patch-up of aquatic forms
of life must be not so much a Divinity as a Pedant. But it is the
burthen of the whole beautiful science of comparative anatomy that the
structure of animals and plants, and their succession in time, fall
exactly into the conditions defined by the Theory of Natural Selection.
In the most lovely and intricate detail, in a vast multitude of
examples, in plants and in animals alike, this theme of the adaptation
of pre-existing structure is worked out.

We should in accordance with the Theory of Natural Selection expect
to find traces of the ancestral form, not only in the lay-out of the
adult animal, but in every phase of its life history, and that, in
fact, is just what we do find. There is no more fascinating branch of
comparative anatomy than embryology. Each life cycle we discuss tends
to repeat the ancestral story, and only under the stress of necessity
does it undergo modification at any point. There is little toleration
in the life process for unnecessary divergencies. Economies are
effected by short cuts and reductions, and special fœtal structures are
granted reluctantly. So that even in man we find peeping through the
adaptations imposed upon the human type by its viviparous necessities,
and in spite of the advantage of every economy of force, memories,
for example, of the gill slits, of the fish heart and kidney, of the
reptilian skull, of the mammalian tail. I mention this fact in the
_Outline_, and upon it Mr. Belloc comments in a manner that leaves
one’s doubts poised between his honesty and his intelligence. He
declares, which is totally untrue, that I “repeat the old Victorian
tag”--I doubt if there ever was such a tag--that the embryo “climbs up
the family tree.” He puts these words in inverted commas as though I
have really adopted and used them, and for the life of me it is only by
straining my charity to the utmost that I can accept that this was an
accident. Of course every text-book of embryology for the last forty
years has made it perfectly plain, as I have stated here, that the life
cycle can be and is modified at any point, and that an embryo has much
more serious work in hand than reciting its family history. It betrays
its ancestral origins to analysis; but that is an altogether different
matter. Mr. Belloc, however, is so densely ignorant himself upon these
questions that he can imagine, or think it worth while to pretend to
imagine and attempt to persuade his readers by the expedient of these
inverted commas, that I entertain such a view. And then follow this,
which I quote that the reader may the better understand a certain
occasional acerbity in my allusions to Mr. Belloc:--

    “He doesn’t know that Vailleton of Montpellier has knocked the
    last nail into the coffin of that facile and superficial Victorian
    shortcut (and blind alley). He has probably never heard of
    Vailleton, and when he does he will suspect him for a foreigner.
    That is what I mean by being provincial and not abreast of one’s
    time.”

It is perfectly true that I have never heard of any Vailleton in
biological science. Nor has anyone else. There is “no sich person.”
Perhaps Mr. Belloc has not been able to read the manuscript of some
adviser, or his memory may have played a trick upon him. Possibly he
has in mind that eminent Victorian embryologist, Vialleton, who, so far
from being the very newest thing in “European” biology, must now be
getting on for seventy. He is half-way back to Haeckel, the originator
of the family-tree idea, a German embryologist and not, as a matter
of fact, the Victorian English Protestant Mr. Belloc supposes him to
be. Possibly years and years ago some French student may have run away
with the idea that embryos conscientiously repeat their phylogeny,
and Professor Vialleton may have thought it well to discuss this idea
in one of his books. It is not an idea I have ever entertained, much
less stated, and its only interest here is that it gives Mr. Belloc a
chance of showing how rudely he can set out his inaccuracies and his
misconceptions.

But this is an incidental comment. I will reserve for my next section
a consideration of the remarkable arguments--“crushing arguments” the
enthusiastic cross-heads of his editor declare them to be--that Mr.
Belloc produces against this view of life as being in a state of change
under the action of Natural Selection, that I have put here before the
reader.




