V

FIXITY OR PROGRESS


I am glad to say that we are emerging now from the worst of the
controversial stuff, irritating and offensive, in which Mr. Belloc
is so manifestly my master, and coming to matters of a more honest
interest.

I have stuck to my argument through the cut and slash, sneer and
innuendo of Mr. Belloc’s first twelve papers. I have done my best to
be kind and generous with him. I have made the best excuses I can for
him. I have shown how his oddities of bearing and style arise out of
the difficulties of his position, and how his absurd reasonings about
Natural Selection and his deliberate and tedious bemuddlement of the
early Palæolithic sub-men with the late Reindeer men and the Capsian
men are all conditioned by the necessity he is under to declare and
believe that “man” is, as he puts it, a “Fixed Type,” the same in the
past and now and always. He is under this necessity because he believes
that otherwise the Christian faith cannot be made to stand up as a
rational system, and because, as I have shown by a quotation of his own
words, he makes their compatibility with his idea of Catholic teaching
his criterion in the acceptance or rejection of facts.

I will confess I do not think that things are as bad as this with
Christianity. I believe a far better case could be made for Catholicism
by an insistence that its value and justification lie in the change and
in the direction of the human will, in giving comfort and consolation
and peace, in producing saints and beautiful living; and that the truth
of the history it tells of space and time is entirely in relation
to the development of these spiritual aspects, and has no necessary
connection whatever with scientific truth. This line of thought is
no novelty, and I do not see why Catholics should not keep to it and
leave the outline of history alone. I do not say that it is a line of
apologetics that would convince me altogether, but it is one that would
need far more arduous discussion and merit, far more respect than Mr.
Belloc’s _a priori_ exploits, his limping lizards and flying pigs.

But it is not my business to remind Catholics of their own neglected
philosophers, and clearly the publication of Mr. Belloc’s articles by
the _Universe_, the _Catholic Bulletin_, and the _Southern Cross_ shows
that the Catholic world of to-day is stoutly resolved to treat the fall
of man and his unalterable nature as matters of fact, even if they are
rather cloudy matters of fact, and to fight the realities of modern
biology and anthropology to the last ditch.

So the Catholics are pinned to this dogma of the fixity of man and
thereby to a denial of progress. This vale of tears, they maintain,
is as a whole a stagnant lake of tears, and there is no meaning to it
beyond the spiritual adventures of its individual lives. Go back in
time or forward, so long as man has been or will be, it is all the
same. You will find a world generally damned, with a select few, like
Mr. Belloc, on their way to eternal beatitude. That is all there is to
the spectacle. There is, in fact, no outline of history; there is just
a flow of individual lives; there is only birth and salvation or birth
and damnation. That, I extract from Mr. Belloc and other contemporary
writers, is the Catholic’s vision of life.


THE IDEA OF FIXED HUMANITY

And it is not only the Catholic vision of life. It is a vision far
more widely accepted. I would say that, if we leave out the ideas of
damning or beatitude, it is the “common-sense” vision of the world.
The individual life is, to common-sense, all that matters, the entire
drama. There is from this popular and natural point of view no large,
comprehensive drama in which the individual life is a subordinate
part. Just as to the untutored mind the world is flat, just as to Mr.
Belloc during his biological research work in Sussex the species of pig
remained a “fixed type,” so to the common intelligence life is nothing
more or less than “Me,” an unquestioned and unanalysed Me, against the
universe.

The universe may indeed be imagined as ruled over and pervaded by God,
and this world may be supposed to have extensions of hell and heaven;
all sorts of pre-natal dooms and debts may affect the career of the Me,
but nevertheless the Me remains in the popular mind, nobbily integral,
one and indivisible, and either it ends and the drama ends with it, or
it makes its distinct and special way to the Pit, or, with Belloc and
the Catholic community, to the beatitude he anticipates.

The individual self is primary to this natural, primitive, and
prevalent mode of thinking. But it is not the only way of thinking
about life. The gist of the _Outline of History_ is to contradict
this self-centred conception of life and show that this absolute
individualism of our thought and destinies is largely illusory. We
do not live in ourselves, as we so readily imagine we do; we are
contributory parts in the progress of a greater being which is life,
and which becomes now conscious of itself through human thought.


THE FUNDAMENTAL ISSUE

Now here I think we get down, beneath all the frothings and
bespatterings of controversy, to the fundamental difference between
Mr. Belloc and myself. It is this which gives our present controversy
whatever claim it can have to attention. Neither Mr. Belloc nor myself
is a very profound or exhaustive philosopher. In ourselves we are very
unimportant indeed. But we have this in common, that we can claim to
be very honestly expressive of the mental attitudes of clearly defined
types of mind, and that we are sharply antithetical types.

By nature and training and circumstances Mr. Belloc stands for the
stout sensible fellow who believes what he sees; who considers that
his sort always has been and always will be; who stands by accepted
morals and time-honoured ways of eating and drinking and amusement;
who loves--and grips as much as he can of--the good earth that gives
us food for our toil; who begets children honestly by one beloved wife
until she dies and then repeats the same wholesome process with the
next; who believes in immortality lest he should be sorry to grow old
and die; who trusts in the Church and its teaching because visibly the
Church is a great and impressive fact, close at hand and extremely
reassuring; who is a nationalist against all strangers because,
confound it! there are nations, and for Christendom against all pagans;
who finds even Chinamen and Indians remote and queer and funny. I do
not think that is an unfair picture of the ideals of Mr. Belloc and of
his close friend and ally, Mr. Chesterton, as they have spread them out
for us; and I admit they are warm and rosy ideals. But they are ideals
and not realities. The real human being upon this swift-spinning planet
is not that stalwart, entirely limited, fixed type resolved to keep
so, stamping about the flat world under God’s benevolent sky, eating,
drinking, disputing, and singing lustily, until he passes on to an
eternal individual beatitude with God and all the other blessed ones.
He is less like that every day, and more and more conscious of the
discrepancy.

I have read and admired and sympathised with the work of Mr. Belloc and
Mr. Chesterton since its very beginnings, but I find throughout it all
a curious defensive note. It may be I attribute distresses to them that
they do not feel. But it seems to me they are never quite sure in their
minds about this “fixed” human being of theirs--the same yesterday,
now, and for ever. Mr. Belloc must be puzzled not a little by that
vast parade of Evolution through the immeasurable ages which he admits
has occurred--a parade made by the Creative Force for no conceivable
reason, since a “fixed type” might just as well have been created
straight away. He must realise that if man is the beginning and end of
life, then his Creator has worked within fantastically disproportionate
margins both of space and time. And in his chapters upon animal and
human origins Mr. Belloc’s almost obstinate ignorance of biological
facts, his fantastic “logic,” his pathetic and indubitably honest
belief in his non-existent “European authorities,” his fumbling and
evasion about Palæolithic man, and above all his petty slights and
provocations to those whose views jar upon him, have nothing of the
serenity of a man assured of his convictions, and all the irritability
and snatching at any straw of advantage of a man terribly alarmed for
his dearest convictions. When Mr. Belloc gets to his beatitude he will
feel like a fish out of water. I believe Mr. Belloc and his friend Mr.
Chesterton are far too intelligent not to be subconsciously alive to
the immense and increasing difficulties of their positions, and that
they are fighting most desperately against any conscious realisation of
the true state of affairs.


THE IDEA OF PROGRESSIVE HUMANITY

It happens that my circumstances, and perhaps my mental temperament,
have brought my mind into almost dramatic opposition to that of Mr.
Belloc. While his training was mainly in written history, the core
of mine was the analytical exercises of comparative anatomy and
palæontology. I was brought up upon the spectacle of life in the
universe as a steadily changing system. My education was a modern one,
upon material and questionings impossible a hundred years ago. Things
that are fundamental and commonplaces to me have come, therefore,
as belated, hostile, and extremely distressing challenges to the
satisfactions and acceptances of Mr. Belloc.

Now, this picture of a fixed and unprogressive humanity working
out an enormous multitude of individual lives from birth to either
eternal beatitude or to something not beatitude, hell or destruction
or whatever else it may be that Mr. Belloc fails to make clear is the
alternative to beatitude--this picture, which seems to be necessary to
the Catholic and probably to every form of Christian faith, and which
is certainly necessary to the comfort of Mr. Belloc, has no validity
whatever for my mind. It is no more possible in my thought as a picture
of reality than that ancient cosmogony which made the round earth
rest upon an elephant, which stood upon a tortoise, which stood upon
God-knows-what.

I do not know how the universe originated, or what it is fundamentally;
I do not know how material substance is related to consciousness and
will; I doubt if any creature of my calibre is capable of knowing such
things; but at least I know enough to judge the elephant story and the
fixed humanity story absurd. I do not know any convincing proof that
Progress _must_ go on; I find no invincible imperative to progressive
change in my universe; but I remark that progressive change does go on,
and that it is the form into which life falls more and more manifestly
as our analysis penetrates and our knowledge increases. I set about
collecting what is known of life and the world in time and space, and I
find the broad outline falls steadily and persistently into a story of
life appearing and increasing in range, power, and co-operative unity
of activity. I see knowledge increasing and human power increasing, I
see ever-increasing possibilities before life, and I see no limits set
to it all. Existence impresses me as a perpetual dawn. Our lives, as
I apprehend them, swim in expectation. This is not an outline I have
thrust upon the facts; it is the outline that came naturally as the
facts were put in order.

And it seems to me that we are waking up to the realisation that the
individual life does not stand alone, as people in the past have seemed
to imagine it did, but that it is far truer to regard it as an episode
in a greater life, which progresses and which need not die. The episode
begins and ends, but life goes on.

Mr. Belloc is so far removed from me mentally that he is unable to
believe that this, clearly and honestly, is how I see things; he is
moved to explain it away by saying that I am trying to “get rid of a
God,” that I am a rotten Protestant, that this is what comes of being
born near London, that if I knew French and respected the Gentry all
this would be different, and so on, as the attentive student of his
great apology for Catholicism has been able to observe. But all the
while he is uncomfortably on the verge of being aware that I am a
mere reporter of a vast mass of gathered knowledge and lengthened
perspectives that towers up behind and above his neat and jolly
marionette show of the unchanging man and his sins and repentances and
mercies, his astonishing punishments, and his preposterous eternal
reward among the small eternities of the mediæval imagination. I
strut to no such personal beatitude. I have no such eternity of
individuation. The life to which I belong uses me and will pass on
beyond me, and I am content.


THE NEW THOUGHT AND THE OLD

Mr. Belloc is completely justified in devoting much more than half his
commentary to these fundamental issues and dealing with my account of
the appearance of Christianity and the story of the Church much more
compactly. It is this difference at the very roots of our minds which
matters to us, and it is the vital question we have to put before
the world. The rest is detail. I do believe and assert that a new
attitude to life, a new and different vision of the world, a new moral
atmosphere and a different spirit of conduct, is coming into human
affairs, as a result of the scientific analysis of the past hundred
years. It is only now reaching such a clearness of definition that it
can be recognised for what it is and pointed out.

The essential distinction of the newer thought in the world is in its
denial of the permanence of the self and in its realisation of the
self’s comparative unimportance. Even in our individual lives we are
increasingly interested in common and generalised things. The older
commoner life, the religious life just as much as the most worldly
life, seems to us excessively self-conscious. The religious life, its
perpetual self-examination for sin and sinful motives, its straining
search after personal perfection, appears in the new light as being
scarcely less egotistical than a dandy’s. And this new way of living
and thinking is directly linked on to the idea of progress, which
makes life in general far more interesting than any individual life
can be, just as the self-centred life, whether it be religious and
austere or vain or self-indulgent, is directly connected with the old
delusions of permanence which rob life in general of any sustained
interest. When one is really persuaded that there is nothing new under
the sun, then there is nothing worth living for whatever outside the
personal adventure, the dance between permanent individual beatitude or
permanent individual damnation.

As this modern conception of life as a process of progressive change
in which individuality of our order can be sometimes excessively
exaggerated as it has been in the past and sometimes minimised as is
happening now--as this conception establishes itself, it changes the
spirit of living and the values of our general ideas about living
profoundly. Lit only by a very bright light held low, an ordinary road
becomes a tangle of vivid surfaces and black shadows, and you cannot
tell a puddle or a gutter from a ditch or a precipice. But in diffused
daylight you can see the proportions of every irregularity. So too with
changing illumination our world alters its aspects, and things that
once seemed monstrous and final are seen to be mere undulations in a
practicable progress. We can realise now, as no one in the past was
ever able to realise it, that man is a creature changing very rapidly
from the life of a rare and solitary great ape to the life of a social
and economic animal. He has traversed most of this tremendous change
of phase in something in the nature of a million years. His whole
being, mind and body alike, betrays the transition. We can trace the
mitigations of his egotism through the development of religious and
customary restraints. The recent work of the psycho-analyst enables us
to understand something of the intricate system of suppressions and
inhibitions that this adaptation to a more and more complex social
life has involved. We begin to realise how man has symbolised and
personified his difficulties, and to comprehend the mechanisms of his
uncongenial but necessary self-restraint.


OLD WINE IN NEW BOTTLES

The disposition of those who apprehend this outline of history that
modern science has made plain to us, and who see all life as a system
of progressive change, is by no means antagonistic to religion. They
realise the immense importance and the profound necessity of religion
in this last great chapter of the story, the evolution of human
society. But they see religion within the frame of fact; they do not,
like Mr. Belloc, look through religion at fact. Man has accommodated
his originally fierce and narrow egotism to the needs of an ever wider
and more co-operative social life, very largely through the complex
self-subjugations that religion has made possible. Within the shell and
cover of religion the new less self-centred habits of mind have been
able to develop. An immense mass of imaginative work, of mythology,
of theology, that now seems tortuous, mystical, and fantastic, was
necessary for the casting of the new moral being of socialised man.
We seem to be entering upon a phase in which moral and intellectual
education may be able to free themselves from the last vestiges of
the mythology in which that new moral being was moulded; but it is
ungracious and false to the true outline of history to deny the
necessary part that the priest, the sacrifice, the magic ceremonial
for tribal welfare, the early tribal religions, have played in this
transfiguration of the sub-human into the modern human mind, upon which
all our community rests to-day.

It is because of our sense of this continuity of our present
dispositions with the religions upon which they are founded that so
many of us are loth to part with all the forms and phrases of the old
creeds and all the disciplines of time-honoured cults. Perhaps some of
us (the present writer in the crowd among others) have been over-eager
to read new significances into established phrases, and clothe new
ideas in the languages of the old scheme of salvation. It may be we
have been pouring new wine into old bottles. It may be better to admit
frankly that if man is not fixed Christianity is, and that mankind is
now growing out of Christianity; that indeed mankind is growing out of
the idea of Deity. This does not mean an end to religion, but it means
a fresh orientation of the religious life. It means a final severance
with those anthropomorphic conceptions of destiny, that interpretation
of all things in terms of personality and will with which religion
began. For many of us that still means a wrench and an effort. But the
emphatic assertions of Mr. Belloc, the stand that Catholicism, as he
expounds it, makes against any progressive adaptation to the new spirit
in human life, may render that effort easier.




In this examination of Mr. Belloc’s opening and more fundamental
attacks upon the _Outline of History_ I have shown sufficiently that
Mr. Belloc is incapable of evidence or discussion, that he imagines
his authorities, that he is careless and ignorant as to his facts and
slovenly and tricky in his logic. I have dealt kindly but adequately
with his atrocious bad manners and his insolence and impudence. I do
not think it is worth while to go on through the second half of his
outpourings with any particularity. It is exactly the same kind of
thing, but upon more familiar ground and less fundamental issues. Mr.
Belloc quibbles. He falsifies. For example, he imagines traditions to
reinforce the Gospel account of Christ’s teaching and to show that
the founder of Christianity was aware of his godhead and taught the
doctrine of the Trinity; he declares--just out of his head--that I
do not know it was the bull and not Mithra who was sacrificed in the
system of Mithraism, though I state that quite plainly in a passage
he has ventured to ignore. And so on. The wonderful methods of the
Palæolithic bow story repeat themselves with variations, time after
time. Why should I trouble to repeat the exposure in every case? I have
done enough to demonstrate the quality of this effort to bluff and
bawl away accepted knowledge and manifest fact, and that is all that I
set out to do.

And this apparently is the present state of Catholic teaching.
This stuff I have examined is the current utterance of organised
Christianity, so far as there is any utterance, upon the doctrines of
the Creation and the Fall--doctrines upon which rest the whole scheme
of Christian salvation and the entire fabric of a Christian’s faith.




Transcriber’s Notes


Punctuation, hyphenation, and spelling were made consistent when a
predominant preference was found in the original book; otherwise they
were not changed.

Simple typographical errors were corrected; unbalanced quotation
marks were remedied when the change was obvious, and otherwise left
unbalanced. Several apparent misspellings may be intentional, and
have not been changed.

Page 69: “Mr. Belloc will get if he says” probably is missing an “it”
after “get”.

Illustrations in this eBook have been positioned between paragraphs and
outside quotations.

Page 95: Part of the last paragraph was misprinted. Transcriber has
attempted to correct that error. The original text was:

  And this apparently is the present state of
  Catholic teaching. This stuff I have examined is
  ance of organised Christianity, so far as there is
  representative stuff. This is the current utter-
  ance of organised Christianity, so far as there is
  any utterance, upon the doctrines of the Creation
  and the Fall--doctrines upon which rest the whole
  scheme of Christian salvation and the entire fabric
  of a Christian’s faith.




