





  MR. BELLOC OBJECTS
  TO “THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY”


[Illustration: Hilaire Belloc]




                           MR. BELLOC OBJECTS
                      TO “THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY”

                                   BY
                              H. G. WELLS


                            _With Portraits_


                        NEW [Illustration] YORK
                        GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




                            COPYRIGHT, 1926,
                       BY GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

                             [Illustration]


             MR. BELLOC OBJECTS TO “THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY”
                                 --B--
                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




FOREWORD


In the autumn of 1925 and the spring and summer of 1926 there was
published a revised and illustrated version of the _Outline of
History_, by Mr. H. G. Wells. There followed a series of articles by
Mr. Belloc attacking this _Outline_ and Mr. Wells. These articles were
published in the Catholic _Universe_, in the _Southern Cross_ of Cape
Colony, in the American _Catholic Bulletin_, and possibly elsewhere.
Every fortnight, keeping pace with the issue of the _Outline_, these
attacks appeared; in all, twenty-four voluminous articles. They were
grossly personal and provocative in tone, and no doubt a great joy
and comfort to the faithful. Mr. Wells prepared a series of articles
in reply; and as no one outside the public of these Catholic journals
seemed to have heard of Mr. Belloc’s attacks, he offered them to the
editors concerned, proposing, if necessary, to give the use of this
interesting matter to them without payment. Six articles he asked to
have published--in reply to twenty-four. This offering was declined
very earnestly by these editors. To the editor of the Catholic
_Universe_ Mr. Wells protested in the terms of the following letter:--

    MY DEAR SIR,

    I am sorry to receive your letter of May 19th. May I point out to
    you that Mr. Belloc has been attacking my reputation as a thinker,
    a writer, an impartial historian, and an educated person for
    four-and-twenty fortnights in the _Universe_? He has misquoted; he
    has misstated. Will your Catholic public tolerate no reply?

Under the stimulus of this remonstrance, the editor of the _Universe_,
after a month’s delay and various consultations with Mr. Belloc and
the directors of his paper, offered Mr. Wells the “opportunity of
correcting definite points of fact upon which he might have been
misrepresented,” but declined to allow him to defend his views or
examine Mr. Belloc’s logic and imputations in his columns. Mr. Wells
was disinclined for a series of wrangles upon what might or might
not be a “point of fact.” He then offered his articles to various
non-Catholic papers, but, with one accord, they expressed their lack
of interest in either Mr. Belloc himself or in his exposition of
Catholic ideas about natural selection, the origin of man, and the
general course of history. Yet it seems to Mr. Wells that, regarded
as a mental sample, Mr. Belloc is not without significance, and that
the examination of the contemporary Catholic attitude towards the
fundamental facts of history is a matter of interest beyond Catholic
circles. Accordingly he has decided to issue these articles in the
form of a book, and he has urged the publishers to advertise them, as
freely as may be permitted, in the Catholic press. He has retained the
“cross-heads” customary in journalistic writing.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
    I  MR. BELLOC’S ARTS OF CONTROVERSY                               13

   II  THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION STATED                         29

  III  MR. BELLOC AS A SPECIMEN CRITIC OF NATURAL SELECTION           44

   IV  MR. BELLOC’S ADVENTURES AMONG THE SUB-MEN: MANIFEST TERROR
         OF THE NEANDERTHALER                                         64

    V FIXITY OR PROGRESS                                              80




  MR. BELLOC OBJECTS
  TO “THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY”




I

MR. BELLOC’S ARTS OF CONTROVERSY


I am the least controversial of men. Public disputations have rarely
attracted me. For years I have failed to respond to Mr. Henry Arthur
Jones, who long ago invented a set of opinions for me and invited me to
defend them with an enviable persistence and vigour. Occasionally I may
have corrected some too gross public misstatement about me--too often
I fear with the acerbity of the inexperienced. But now, in my sixtieth
year, I find myself drawn rather powerfully into a disputation with Mr.
Hilaire Belloc. I bring an unskilled pen to the task.

I am responsible for an _Outline of History_ which has had a certain
vogue. I will assume that it is known by name to the reader. It is a
careful summary of man’s knowledge of past time. It has recently been
reissued with considerable additions in an illustrated form, and Mr.
Belloc has made a great attack upon it. He declares that I am violently
antagonistic to the Catholic Church, an accusation I deny very
earnestly, and he has produced a “Companion” to this _Outline_ of mine,
following up the periodical issue, part by part, in the _Universe_ of
London, in the _Catholic Bulletin_ of St. Paul, Minnesota, in the
_Southern Cross_ of Cape Colony, and possibly elsewhere, in which my
alleged errors are exposed and confuted.

In the enthusiasm of advertisement before the “Companion” began to
appear, these newspapers announced a work that would put Mr. Belloc
among the great classical Catholic apologists, but I should imagine
that this was before the completed manuscript of Mr. Belloc’s work had
come to hand, and I will not hold Catholics at large responsible for
all Mr. Belloc says and does.

It is with this _Companion to the Outline of History_ that I am to deal
here. It raises a great number of very interesting questions, and there
is no need to discuss the validity of the charge of Heresy that is
levelled against me personally. I will merely note that I am conscious
of no animus against Catholicism, and that in my _Outline_ I accept the
gospels as historical documents of primary value, defend Christianity
against various aspersions of Gibbon’s, and insist very strongly upon
the rôle of the Church in preserving learning in Europe, consolidating
Christendom, and extending knowledge from a small privileged class to
the whole community. I do not profess to be a Christian. I am as little
disposed to take sides between a Roman Catholic and a Protestant. Mr.
Belloc will protest against that “Roman,” but he must forgive it; I
know no other way of distinguishing between his Church and Catholics
not in communion with it, as I am between a pterodactyl and a bird.


DISCONCERTING POSE OF MR. BELLOC

In this art of controversy it is evident that great importance attaches
to pose. This is plain from the very outset of Mr. Belloc’s apologia.
From the beginning I have to be put in my place, and my relationship
to Mr. Belloc has to be defined. Accustomed as I am to see Mr. Belloc
dodging about in my London club, and in Soho and thereabouts, and even
occasionally appearing at a dinner-party, compactly stout, rather
breathless and always insistently garrulous, I am more than a little
amazed at his opening. He has suddenly become aloof from me. A great
gulf of manner yawns between us. “Hullo, Belloc!” is frozen on my
lips, dies unuttered. He advances upon me in his Introduction with a
gravity of utterance, a dignity of gesture, rare in sober, God-fearing
men. There is a slow, formal compliment or so. I have, I learn, “a
deservedly popular talent in fiction.” I am sincere, an honest soul.
My intentions are worthy. But the note changes; he declares I am a
“Protestant writing for Protestants,” and there is danger that my
_Outline_ may fall into Catholic hands. Some Catholics may even be
infected with doubt. His style thickens with emotion at this thought,
and he declares: “One Catholic disturbed in his faith is more
important than twenty thousand or a hundred thousand or a million of
the average reading public of England and America.” That is why he
is giving me his attention, syndicating these articles and swelling
himself up so strongly against me. That is why he now proposes to
exhibit and explain and expose me in the sight of all mankind. It is
controversy, and everyday manners are in abeyance.

The controversial pose reveals itself further. The compliments and
civilities thin out and vanish. Mr. Belloc becomes more magisterial,
relatively larger, relatively graver, with every paragraph. He assumes
more definitely the quality of a great scholar of European culture
and European reputation, a trained, distinguished, universally
accepted historian. With what is evidently the dexterity of an expert
controversialist and with an impressiveness all his own, he seems to
look over and under and round the man he knows, and sketches in the man
he proposes to deal with, his limitations, his pitiful limitations, the
characteristics, the disagreeable characteristics, that disfigure him.
It is a new Wells, a most extraordinary person. I learn with amazement
the particulars with which it is necessary to instruct that Catholic
soul in danger before the matter of my book can be considered. I see
myself in the lurid illumination of Catholic truth.


REMARKABLE PORTRAIT OF MR. WELLS

To begin with, I am “an intense patriot.” This will surprise many
readers. I dread its effect on Mr. Henry Arthur Jones, whose favourite
tune upon the megaphone for years has been that I am the friend of
every country but my own. Will he intervene with a series of articles
to “My dear Belloc”? I hope not. I might plead that almost any chapter
of the _Outline of History_ could be quoted against this proposition.
But Mr. Belloc is ruthless; he offers no evidence for his statement,
no foothold for a counter-plea. He just says it, very clearly, very
emphatically several times over, and he says it, as I realise very
soon, because it is the necessary preliminary to his next still more
damaging exposures.

They are that I am an Englishman “of the Home Counties and London
Suburbs”--Mr. Belloc, it seems, was born all over Europe--that my
culture is entirely English, that I know nothing of any language or
literature or history or science but that of England. And from this
his creative invention sweeps on to a description of this new Wells
he is evoking to meet his controversial needs. My admiration grows. I
resist an impulse to go over at once to Mr. Belloc’s side. This, for
example, is splendid. This new Wells, this suburban English Protestant,
has written his _Outline of History_ because, says Mr. Belloc, “he
does not know that ‘foreigners’ (as he would call them) have general
histories.”

That “as he would call them” is the controversial Mr. Belloc rising to
his best.

Mr. Belloc, I may note in passing, does not cite any of these general
histories to which he refers. It would surely make an interesting
list and help the Catholic soul in danger to better reading. The
American reader, at whose prejudices this stuff about my patriotism
is presumably aimed, would surely welcome a competing Outline by a
“foreigner.” Mr. Belloc might do worse things than a little translation
work.

Then the Royal College of Science shrivels at his touch to a mechanics’
institute, and the new Wells, I learn, “does really believe from the
bottom of his heart all that he read in the text-books of his youth.”
The picture of this new Wells, credulous, uncritical devourer of the
text-books supplied by his suburban institute, inveterate Protestant,
grows under the pen of this expert controversialist. I have next to
be presented as a low-class fellow with a peculiar bias against the
“Gentry of my own country,” and this is accordingly done. “Gentlemen”
with whom I have quarrelled are hinted at darkly--a pretty touch of
fantasy. A profound and incurable illiteracy follows as a matter of
course.


GATHERING COURAGE OF MR. BELLOC

Mr. Belloc’s courage gathers with the elaboration of his sketch. He
is the type to acquiesce readily in his own statements, and one can
see him persuading himself as he goes along that this really is the
Wells he is up against. If so, what is there to be afraid of? If
there is a twinge of doubt, he can always go back and read what he
has written. The phraseology loses its earlier discretion, gets more
pluckily abusive. Presently words like “ignorance” and “blunders”
and “limited instruction” come spluttering from those ready nibs.
Follows “childish” and “pitiable” and “antiquated nonsense.” Nothing
to substantiate any of it--just saying it. So Mr. Belloc goes his way
along the primrose path of controversy. He takes a fresh sip or so from
his all too complaisant imagination. New inspirations come. I have
“copied” things from the “wrong” books. That “copied” is good! One
can see that base malignant Wells fellow, in his stuffy room all hung
with Union Jacks, with the “wrong,” the “_Protestant_” book flattened
out before him, copying, copying; his tongue following his laborious
pen. Presently I read: “It is perhaps asking too much of our author
to adopt a strictly scientific attitude.” This, from an adept in that
mixture of stale politics and gossip which passed for history in the
days of Mr. Belloc’s reading, to even the least of Huxley’s students,
is stupendous!

Still he swells and swells with self-importance and self-induced
contempt for his silent and invisible antagonist. The pen runs on, for
does not the Catholic press wait for its latest great apologist? The
thin film of oily politeness in the opening paragraphs is long since
gone and done with, and Mr. Hilaire Belloc is fully himself again and
remains himself, except for one or two returns to patronising praise
and the oil squirt, for the rest of these remarkable papers.

His are, I suppose, the accepted manners of controversy--and what
wonderful manners they are! I note them, but I cannot emulate them.

There is, however, one reference to the unlettered suburbanism of
this ideal Wells too good to lose. I had almost let it slip by. It
is an allusion to a certain publication in French. “There may be no
translation,” Mr. Belloc throws out superbly at the height of his form,
“but Mr. Wells ought to have heard of”--the out-of-date monograph
in question. “There may be no translation...”! How feeble sounds my
protest that for all practical purposes I read French as well as I do
English, and that in all probability if it came to using a German,
Spanish, Portuguese, or Italian scientific work I could give Mr. Belloc
points and a beating.


REFLECTIONS UPON THE REAL MR. BELLOC

But I have said enough to justify incidentally my habitual avoidance
of the arts of controversy. I cannot inflate myself in this fashion.
I cannot do the counter to this attitude. I was born and I shall die
“familiar.” What seems to make Mr. Belloc feel brave and happy would
make me feel sick. On this he has presumed overmuch. There are limits
to my notorious gentleness and modesty, and they have been reached
by Mr. Belloc in these articles. His skill is undeniable; no other
writer could better his unpremeditated condescension, his apparently
inadvertent insults. And yet the facts beneath all this insolent
posturing are quite well known and easily verifiable. I cannot imagine
whom it is intended to deceive for any length of time.

Mr. Belloc is a man four years my junior, and his academic career was
briefer and not more brilliant than mine. Since he came down from
Oxford to the world of London thirty years ago, he has done no original
historical work of any distinction. He has been a popular writer as
I have been a popular writer, and he is no more if no less a scholar
than I am. There has been much incidental and inconsequent brightness
in his discursive career--funny verses and stories, an amusing rather
than a serious period in Parliament, much pamphleteering, lecturing
and speaking; he has been active and erratic; now he would be
urging on an anti-Semitic campaign; now, in association with Horatio
Bottomley, attempting to hound Masterman, his old friend and rival,
out of politics; the war made him the most confident of military
“experts,” and he has done quite a number of clever revivifications
of this or that historical event. That is his record. It gives him
a respectable position in the republic of letters, in which also
my position is respectable. No doubt he has every right and very
considerable qualifications for the criticism of such a popular work
as my _Outline_. But there is nothing in his career and nothing in his
quality to justify this pose of erudition and insolent superiority
he assumes towards me, and which he has made an integral part of his
attack. He has assumed it entirely in relation to this controversy. He
has thrown ordinary courtesy and good manners to the winds because only
in that way can he hope for a controversial advantage over me.


THE CLUE TO MR. BELLOC’S DISCONCERTING POSE

This disconcerting pose is part of his attack. That is why I am obliged
to discuss it here. Upon many points the attack is almost pure pose;
there is no tangible argument at all. It is very important to note that
and bear that in mind. It has to be borne in mind when Mr. Belloc is
accused of inordinate vanity or of not knowing his place in the world.
I doubt even if he is really very vain. I realised long ago that his
apparent arrogance is largely the self-protection of a fundamentally
fearful man. He is a stout fellow in a funk. He is the sort of man
who talks loud and fast for fear of hearing the other side. There is
a frightened thing at the heart of all this burly insolence. He has a
faith to defend, and he is not sure of his defence. That mitigates much
of his offence, even if it mitigates little of his offensiveness.

Let me say a word or so more of excuse and explanation for him. These
personalities of his are, so to speak, not a personal matter. There is
more in them than that. Mr. Belloc’s attack upon my _Outline_ does not
stand alone among his activities; it is part of a larger controversy
he wages against the modern, the non-Catholic vision of the world. He
has carried on that controversy since his Balliol days. The exigencies
that oblige him to pretend, against his better knowledge and common
civility, that I am petty and provincial and patriotic and wilfully
ignorant and pitifully out-of-date, oblige him to pretend as much about
most of those who stand for modern science and a modern interpretation
of history. He would pretend as hard about Sir Ray Lankester, for
example, or about Professor Gilbert Murray or Sir Harry Johnston or
Professor Barker, as he does about me. It is a general system of
pretence. It is a necessary part of--I will not say of _the_ Catholic
attitude, but of _his_ Catholic attitude towards modern knowledge.

The necessity for a pose involving this pretence is not very difficult
to understand. Long before Mr. Belloc embarked upon the present dispute
he had become the slave of a tactical fiction, which reiteration had
made a reality for him. He evoked the fiction as early, I believe, as
his Oxford days. It may have been very effective at Oxford--among the
undergraduates. Then perhaps it was consciously a defensive bluff,
but certainly it is no longer that. He has come at last to believe
absolutely in this creature of his imagination. He has come to believe
this: that there is a vast “modern European” culture of which the
English-speaking world knows nothing, of which the non-Catholic world
knows nothing, and with which he is familiar. It is on his side.
It is always on his side. It is simply and purely Belloccian. He
certainly believes it is there. It sustains his faith. It assuages the
gnawing attacks of self-criticism that must come to him in the night.
Throughout these papers he is constantly referring to this imaginary
stuff--without ever coming to precisions. Again and again and again and
again--and again and again and again, he alludes to this marvellous
“European” science and literature, beyond our ken.

He does not quote it; it does not exist for him to quote; but he
believes that it exists. He waves his hand impressively in the
direction in which it is supposed to be. It is his stand-by, his
refuge, his abiding fortress. But, in order to believe in it, it is
necessary for him to believe that no other English-speaking men can
even read French, and that their scepticism about it is based on some
“provincial” prejudice or some hatred of Catholics, or southern people,
or “Dagoes,” or “foreigners,” or what you will. That is why _Nature_
wilfully ignores the wonderful science of this “Europe”; and why our
Royal Society has no correspondence with it. But he has to imagine it
is there and make his readers imagine it is there, and that there is
this conspiracy of prejudice to ignore it, before he can even begin
to put up any appearance of a case against such a résumé of current
knowledge as the _Outline of History_.


GRACEFUL CONCESSIONS TO MR. BELLOC

All this rough and apparently irrelevant stuff about his own great
breadth and learning and my profound ignorance and provincialism,
to which he has devoted his two introductory papers, is therefore
the necessary prelude to putting over this delusion. That stream of
depreciation is not the wanton personal onslaught one might suppose
it to be at the first blush. If he has appeared to glorify himself
and belittle me, it is for greater controversial ends than a mere
personal score. We are dealing with a controversialist here and a great
apologist, and for all I know these may be quite legitimate methods in
this, to me, unfamiliar field.

Few people will be found to deny Mr. Belloc a considerable amplitude of
mind in his undertaking, so soon as they get thus far in understanding
him. Before he could even set about syndicating this _Companion to the
Outline of History_ he had to incite a partisan receptivity in the
Catholic readers to whom he appeals, by declaring that a violent hatred
for their Church is the guiding motive of my life. He had to ignore
a considerable array of facts to do that, and he has ignored them
with great courage and steadfastness. He had to arouse an indifferent
Catholic public to a sense of urgent danger by imposing this figure of
a base, inveterate, and yet finally contemptible enemy upon it. His is
a greater task than mere dragon-slaying. He had to create the dragon
before he could become the champion. And then, with his syndication
arrangements complete, while abusing me industriously for ignorance,
backwardness, and general intellectual backwoodism, he had to write the
whole of these articles without once really opening that Humbert safe
of knowledge which is his sole capital in this controversy. Time after
time he refers to it. Never once does he quote it. At most he may give
us illusive peeps....

Now and then as we proceed I shall note these illusive peeps.

I can admire great effort even when it is ill-directed, and to show
how little I bear him a grudge for the unpleasant things he has induced
himself to write about me, and for the still more unpleasant things
he tempts me--though I resist with a success that gratifies me--to
write about him, I contemplate a graceful compliment to Mr. Belloc.
In spite of the incurable ignorance of French and that “dirty Dago”
attitude towards foreigners Mr. Belloc has so agreeably put upon me,
it is my habit to spend a large part of the winter in a house I lease
among the olive terraces of Provence. There is a placard in one corner
of my study which could be rather amusingly covered with the backs of
dummy books. I propose to devote that to a collection of Mr. Belloc’s
authorities. There shall be one whole row at least of the Bulletins of
the Madame Humbert Society, and all the later researches of the Belloc
Academy of Anonymous Europeans, bound in bluff leather. There will be
_Finis Darwinis_ by Hilario Belloccio, and _Hist. Eccles._ by Hilarius
Belloccius. I may have occasion to refer to other leading authorities
in the course of this controversy. I shall add to it as we proceed.

And so, having examined, explained, disposed of, and in part apologised
for, Mr. Belloc’s personalities and the pervading inelegance of his
manners, I shall turn with some relief from this unavoidably personal
retort to questions of a more general interest. I propose as my first
study of these modern Catholic apologetics, so valiantly produced by
Mr. Belloc and so magnificently published and displayed by the Catholic
press, to follow our hero’s courageous but unsteady progress through
the mysteries of Natural Selection. And after that we shall come to
Original Sin and Human Origins in the light of Mr. Belloc’s science and
the phantom science of those phantom naturalists and anthropologists he
calls to his assistance.




