III

MR. BELLOC AS A SPECIMEN CRITIC OF NATURAL SELECTION


The chief arguments against the Theory of Natural Selection with which
Mr. Belloc has favoured us are neatly set out by him in two triads.
His passion for orderly arrangement is greater than his logic, and we
shall find that the second and third arguments of his second triad
are substantially the same. He is rather exceptionally ignorant of
modern scientific literature, and his arguments do not cover all the
countervailing considerations upon which systematic observation and
research work have been based--the speculations of Dr. Fairfield Osborn
would have been a godsend for him--but the things he has to say are
conveniently simple; they embody some prevalent misconceptions, and
they will be useful in accentuating the more salient points in my
account of the theory given in my second paper.

He produces first certain remarkable _a priori_ arguments--his “three
_a prior_ arguments.” The first is beautifully absurd. It is difficult
to believe it is advanced in anything but a spirit of burlesque.
He says that an advantage is not an advantage. He says that an
advantage does not give an advantage unless it is combined with other
advantages. You will think I am misrepresenting him. Then please read
this:--

    “(1) The advantageous differences making for survival are not of
    one kind in any particular case, but of an indefinitely large
    number (_e.g._, climate getting colder needs not only warmer
    coat, but power to digest new food, protective colouring so
    as not to show dark against snow, etc., an indefinitely large
    number of qualities). Now the chance of _all_ being combined
    (and co-ordinated) in a single individual, _without design_,
    _accidentally_, let alone of their thus appearing in many
    individuals _accidentally and without design_, approximates to
    zero.”

This is, so to speak, the short uncompleted form of the first argument.
It is expanded later to a copiousness too great to admit of quotation.
This expansion carries the statement right to its conclusion, that
only an individual possessing all the possible differences that
are advantageous at any particular time can survive. Otherwise its
differences have no “survival value.” They may be advantages, but
not sufficient advantages to score an advantage. I know this sounds
tipsy, but there it is in black and white in Mr. Belloc’s wonderful
Article V for any one to consult. It follows plainly that, except for a
miracle, every species must be exterminated in every generation. I can
see no other way out of it. No individual, he declares, can survive
without the full set of advantageous differences, and the chance of any
individual having the full set of advantageous differences, he declares
after some abstruse verbal gestures, is zero. There is Mr. Belloc with
his unfailing logic, his clear mathematical demonstration, and all
the rest of it. There is the lucid Latin mind shining above my Nordic
fog! Yet the previous generation got along without any of the set! And
species do survive.

Did Mr. Belloc imagine he was saying something else? It is not for me
to speculate. Helping out an antagonist in a controversy is apt to be
resented. He has, I think, simply got into a muddle here, and he is
not sufficiently self-critical to get out of it again. So he tries
to muddle through. It is quite reasonable to say that when a species
is under stress of changing conditions it is usual for the need for
adaptation to be felt upon a number of points and not simply upon
one, and that, since every advantage counts, the individuals with the
greatest combination of advantageous differences have the best chances.
But that does not alter the fact that even a single advantage is an
advantage. What happens in nature is not an extermination of all who
are not completely in the fashion of the new differences. That seems
to be Mr. Belloc’s idea, but it is a wrong idea. What does happen is
a diminution in each generation of the number of the disadvantaged
in relation to the number of the advantaged. That is quite another
affair. Mr. Belloc has not grasped this. His third _a priori_ argument
shows as much even more plainly than his first, and to that I shall
presently come.


MR. BELLOC’S MENTAL INDIGESTION

I fancy this stuff he has written here is an outcome of an indigestion
of Samuel Butler by Mr. Belloc. I should not have thought Mr. Belloc
had read Samuel Butler, and I doubt if he has read him much. But there
is a decided echo of _Luck or Cunning_ in the one indistinct paragraph
in which, without committing himself too deeply, Mr. Belloc seems to
convey his own attitude towards the procedure of Evolution. “Design,”
whatever that is, is at work, and Natural Selection is not. “There
is an innate power possessed by the living thing to attempt its own
adaptation.” It is quite a delusion apparently that rabbits that cannot
run or sparrows that are not quick on the wing are killed off more
frequently than the smarter fellows. That never happens, though to the
atheistically minded it may seem to happen. If it happens, it would
“get rid of a God.” But there are rabbits which, unlike Mrs. Micawber,
do make an effort. You must understand that all creation, inspired by
design, is striving. The good fungus says to itself, “Redder and more
spots will benefit me greatly,” and tries and tries, and presently
there are redder hues and more spots. Or a happily inspired fish says:
“There is a lot of food on land and the life is more genteel there, so
let me get lungs.” And presently it gets lungs. Some day Mr. Belloc
must take a holiday in Sussex and flap about a bit and get himself some
wings and demonstrate all this. But perhaps this is caricature, and
Mr. Belloc when he talks about that “innate disposition” just means
nothing very much--just an attempt or something. I will not pretend to
understand Mr. Belloc fully upon this point.


MR. BELLOC’S BIRD-LIZARD

I will return to the essential misconception of the Theory of Natural
Selection betrayed in this first _a priori_ when I consider Mr.
Belloc’s third feat of logic. But first let me glance at his second. In
this he says, very correctly, that every stage in the evolution of a
living creature must be a type capable of maintaining itself and every
change must be an advantageous change. I have noted this very obvious
point already in my second paper. But then Mr. Belloc instructs us that
the chances of its being so are, for no earthly reason, zero--that
fatal zero again!--and goes on to a passage so supremely characteristic
that it must be read to be believed:--

    “A bird has wings with which it can escape its enemies. If it began
    as a reptile without wings--when, presumably, it had armour or some
    other aid to survival--what of the interval? Natural Selection
    sets out to change a reptile’s leg into a bird’s wing and the
    scales of its armour into feathers. It does so by making the leg
    less and less of a leg for countless ages, and by infinite minute
    gradations, gradually turning the scales into feathers.

    “By the very nature of the theory _each stage_ in all these
    millions is an advantage over the last towards survival! The thing
    has only to be stated for its absurdity to appear. Compare the ‘get
    away’ chances of a lizard at one end of the process or a sparrow at
    the other with some poor beast that had to try and scurry off on
    half-wings! or to fly with half-legs!

    “Postulate a design, say, ‘Here was something in the making,’ and
    the process is explicable, especially if fairly rapid so as to
    bridge over the dangerously weak stage of imperfection. Postulate
    Natural Selection and it is manifestly impossible.”

Let us note a few things of which Mr. Belloc shows himself to be
unaware in this amusing display of perplexity. In the first place he
does not know that the Mesozoic reptiles most closely resembling birds
were creatures walking on their hind-legs, with a bony structure of the
loins and a backbone already suggestive of the avian anatomy. Nor is
he aware that in the lowliest of living birds the fore-limbs are mere
flappers, that the feathers are simpler in structure than any other
bird’s feathers, and that the general development of a bird’s feather
points plainly to the elongation of a scale. He has never learnt that
feathers came before wings, and that at first they had to do, not with
flying, but with protection against cold. Yet all this was under his
nose in the _Outline of History_ in text and picture. The transition
from a quilled to a feathered dinosaur presents indeed no imaginative
difficulties, and the earliest birds ran and did not fly. One of the
earliest known extinct birds is _Hesperornis_, a wingless diving bird.
It is figured on page 30, and there is another bird on page 34 that Mr.
Belloc might ponder with advantage. A whole great section of living
birds, like the ostrich and the emu, have no trace in their structure
of any ancestral flying phase; their breast-bones are incapable of
carrying the necessary muscular attachments.

[Illustration: H. G. Wells.

Low]

But after the feather was fully developed it opened up great
possibilities of a strong and light extension of the flapper, helpful
in running or useful in leaps from tree to tree. _Archæopteryx_,
another early bird, which is also figured in the _Outline_, has a sort
of bat-wing fore-limb with feathers instead of membrane. It was a
woodland creature, and flew as a flying fox or a flying lemur or even
a bat flies. All these facts are widely known, and all that trouble
about the half-leg, half-wing, dissolves before them. But consider
what a hash they make of Mr. Belloc’s argument, and how pitifully it
scurries off before them on its nondescript stumps of pretentious
half-knowledge, half-impudence! So much for zero the second.


TROUBLES OF MR. BELLOC AS A MATRIMONIAL AGENT

The final of this wonderful trinity of _a prioris_ is a repetition of
an argument advanced ages ago by Queen Victoria’s Lord Salisbury, when
he was President of the British Association. Even then it struck people
that he had been poorly coached for the occasion. Assuming that one or
two individuals have got all these “survival value” differences in the
correct proportions--against which the chances are zero--how by any
theory of Natural Selection are we to suppose they will meet, breed,
and perpetuate them? So this argument runs. The chances are again
declared to be zero, the third zero, and Mr. Belloc, I gather, calls
in Design again here and makes his Creative Spirit, which has already
urged these two individuals, lions, or liver flukes or fleas or what
not, to make an effort and adapt themselves, lead them now to their
romantic and beneficial nuptials, while the Theory of Natural Selection
grinds its teeth in the background and mutters “Foiled again.”

But this third argument reinforces the first, in showing what is the
matter with Mr. Belloc’s ideas in this group of questions. He has got
the whole business upside down. I rather blame the early Darwinians in
this matter for using so inaccurate a phrase as the “Survival of the
Fittest.” It is to that phrase that most of Mr. Belloc’s blunderings
are due. Yet he ought not to have been misled. He had a summary of
modern views before him. He criticises my _Outline of History_, he
abuses it, and yet he has an extraordinary trick of getting out of its
way whenever it swings near his brain-case. I warn the readers of that
modest compendium expressly (and as early as page 16) that the juster
phrase to use is not the Survival of the Fittest, but the Survival of
the Fitter. I do what I can throughout to make them see this question
not in terms of an individual, but in terms of the species.

Yet Mr. Belloc insists upon writing of “the Fittest” as a sort of
conspicuously competitive prize boy, a favourable “sport,” who has to
meet his female equivalent and breed a new variety. That is all the
world away from the manner in which a biologist thinks of the process
of specific life. He sees a species as a vast multitude of individuals
in which those without individual advantages tend to fail and those
with them tend to be left to continue the race. The most important fact
is the general relative failure of the disadvantaged. The fact next in
order of importance is the general relative survival of the advantaged.
The most important consequence is that the average of the species
moves in the direction of advantageous differences, moving faster or
slower according to its rate of reproduction and the urgency of its
circumstances--that is to say, to the severity of its death-rate. Any
one particular individual may have any sort of luck; that does not
affect the general result.

I do not know what Mr. Belloc’s mathematical attainments are, or indeed
whether he has ever learnt to count beyond zero. There is no evidence
on that matter to go upon in these papers. But one may suppose him
able to understand what an average is, and he must face up to the fact
that the characteristics of a species are determined by its average
specimens. This dickering about with fancy stories of abnormal nuptials
has nothing to do with the Theory of Natural Selection. We are dealing
here with large processes and great numbers, secular changes and
realities broadly viewed.

I must apologise for pressing these points home. But I think it is
worth while to take this opportunity of clearing up a system of foggy
misconceptions about the Theory itself that may not be confined
altogether to Mr. Belloc.


MR. BELLOC COMES TO HIS EVIDENCE

And now let us come to Mr. Belloc’s second triad of arguments--his
arguments, as he calls them, “from Evidence.” The sole witness on
Evidence called is his own sturdy self. He calls himself into the box,
and I will admit he gives his testimony in a bluff, straightforward
manner--a good witness. He says very properly that the theory of
Natural Selection repudiates any absolute fixity of species. But we
have to remember that the rate of change in any species is dependent
upon the balance between that species and its conditions, and if this
remains fairly stable the species may remain for as long without
remarkable developments, or indulge in variations not conditioned
by external necessities. The classical _Lingula_ of the geological
text-books, a warm-water shell-fish, has remained much the same
creature throughout the entire record, for hundreds of millions of
years it may be. It was suited to its submarine life, and hardly any
variation was possible that was not a disadvantage. It swayed about
within narrow limits.

This admission of a practical stability annoys Mr. Belloc; it seems
to be a mean trick on the part of the Theory of Natural Selection. He
rather spoils his case by saying that “according to Natural Selection”
the swallow ought to go on flying “faster and faster with the process
of time.” Until it bursts into flames like a meteor and vanishes from
our world? And the _Lingula_ ought to become more and more quiescent
until it becomes a pebble? Yet plainly there is nothing in the Theory
of Natural Selection to make the swallow fly any faster than its needs
require. Excess of swiftness in a swallow may be as disadvantageous as
jumping to conclusions can be to a controversialist.

But here is a statement that is spirited and yet tolerably fair:--

    “If Natural Selection be true, then what we call a Pig is but a
    fleeting vision; all the past he has been becoming a Pig, and all
    the future he will spend evolving out of Pigdom, and Pig is but a
    moment’s phase in the eternal flux.”

This overlooks the melancholy possibility of an extinction of Pigs, but
it may be accepted on the whole as true. And against this Mr. Belloc
gives us his word, for that upon examination is what his “Evidence”
amounts to--that Types are Fixed. He jerks in capitals here in a rather
convincing way. It is restrained of him, considering how great a part
typography plays in his rhetoric, that he has not put it up in block
capitals or had the paper perforated with the words: Fixed Types.

    “We have the evidence of our senses that we are surrounded by fixed
    types.”

For weeks and months it would seem Mr. Belloc has walked about Sussex
accumulating first-hand material for these disputations, and all this
time the Pigs have remained Pigs. When he prodded them they squealed.
They remained pedestrian in spite of his investigatory pursuit. Not one
did he find “scuttling away” with a fore-limb, “half-leg, half-wing.”
He has the evidence of his senses also, I may remind him, that the
world is flat. And yet when we take a longer view we find the world is
round, and Pigs are changing, and _Sus Scrofa_ is not the beast it was
two thousand years ago.

Mr. Belloc is conscious of historical training, and I would suggest
to him that it might be an improving exercise to study the Pig
throughout history and to compare the Pigs of the past with the Pigs
of a contemporary agricultural show. He might inform himself upon the
bulk, longevity, appetites, kindliness, and general disposition of
the Pig to-day. He might realise then that the Pig to-day, viewed not
as the conservative occupant of a Sussex sty, but as a species, was
something just a little different as a whole, but different, definably
different, from the Pig of two thousand or five thousand years ago. He
might retort that the Pig has been the victim of selective breeding
and is not therefore a good instance of Natural Selection, but it was
he who brought Pigs into this discussion. Dogs again have been greatly
moulded by man in a relatively short time, and, again, horses. Almost
all species of animals and plants that have come into contact with
man in the last few thousand years have been greatly modified by his
exertions, and we have no records of any detailed observations of
structure or habits of creatures outside man’s range of interest before
the last three or four centuries. Even man himself, though he changes
with relative slowness because of the slowness with which he comes to
sexual maturity, has changed very perceptibly in the last five thousand
years.


MR. BELLOC A FIXED TYPE

Mr. Belloc says he has not (“Argument from Evidence”). He says it
very emphatically (“Crushing Argument from Evidence”--to adopt the
phraseology of his cross-heads). Let me refer him to a recent lecture
by Sir Arthur Keith (Royal Society of Medicine, Nov. 16, 1925) for a
first gleam of enlightenment. He will realise a certain rashness in his
statement. I will not fill these pages with an attempt to cover all
the changes in the average man that have gone on in the last two or
three thousand years. For example, in the face and skull, types with
an edge-to-edge bite of the teeth are giving place to those with an
overlapping bite; the palate is undergoing contraction, the physiognomy
changes. And so on throughout all man’s structure. No doubt one can
find plentiful instances to-day of people almost exactly like the
people of five thousand years ago in their general physique. But that
is not the point. The proportions and so forth that were exceptional
then are becoming prevalent now; the proportions that were prevalent
then, now become rare. The average type is changing. Considering that
man only gets through about four generations in a century, it is a
very impressive endorsement of the theory of Natural Selection that he
has undergone these palpable modifications in the course of a brief
score of centuries. Mr. Belloc’s delusion that no such modification has
occurred may be due to his presumption that any modification would have
to show equally in each and every individual. I think it is. He seems
quite capable of presuming that.


TRIUMPHANT DEMAND OF MR. BELLOC

Mr. Belloc’s next Argument from Evidence is a demand from the geologist
for a continuous “series of changing forms passing one into the other.”
He does not want merely “intermediate forms,” he says; he wants the
whole series--grandfather, father, and son. He does not say whether
he insists upon a pedigree with the bones and proper certificates of
birth, but I suppose it comes to that. This argument, I am afraid,
wins, hands down. Mr. Belloc may score the point. The reprehensible
negligence displayed by the lower animals in the burial of their dead,
or even the proper dating of their own remains, leaves the apologist
for the Theory of Natural Selection helpless before this simple
requisition. It is true that we now have, in the case of the camels,
the horses, and the elephants, an extraordinary display of fossil
types, exhibiting step by step the development and differentiation of
species and genera. But this, I take it, rather concerns his Third than
his Second Argument from Evidence.


A MAGNIFICENT GENERALISATION

The third argument is essentially a display of Mr. Belloc’s inability
to understand the nature of the record of the rocks. I will assume
that he knows what “strata” are, but it is clear that he does not
understand that any uniform stratum indicates the maintenance of
uniform conditions while it was deposited and an absence of selective
stresses, and that when it gives place to another different stratum,
that signifies a change in conditions, not only in the conditions of
the place where the stratum is found, but in the supply of material. An
estuary sinks and gives place to marine sands, or fresh water brings
down river gravels which cover over an accumulation of shingle. Now if
he will think what would happen to-day under such circumstances, he
will realise that the fauna and flora of the stratum first considered
will drift away and that another fauna and flora will come in with
the new conditions. Fresh things will come to feed and wade and drown
in the waters, and old types will no longer frequent them. The fossil
remains of one stratum are very rarely directly successive to those
below it or directly ancestral to those above it. A succession of
forms is much more difficult and elusive to follow up, therefore,
than Mr. Belloc imagines. And then if he will consider what happens to
the rabbits and rats and mice on his Sussex estate, and how they die
and what happens to their bodies, he may begin to realise just what
proportion of the remains of these creatures is ever likely to find its
way to fossilisation. Perhaps years pass without the bones of a single
rabbit from the whole of England finding their way to a resting-place
where they may become fossil. Nevertheless the rabbit is a very common
animal. And then if Mr. Belloc will think of palæontologists, millions
of years after this time, working at the strata that we are forming
to-day, working at a gravel or sand-pit here or a chance exposure
there, and prevented from any general excavation, and if he will ask
himself what proportion of the rare few rabbits actually fossilised are
likely to come to light, I think he will begin to realise for the first
time in his life the tremendous “gappiness” of the geological record
and how very childish and absurd is his demand for an unbroken series
of forms. The geological record is not like an array of hundreds of
volumes containing a complete history of the past. It is much more like
a few score crumpled pages from such an array, the rest of the volumes
having either never been printed, or having been destroyed or being
inaccessible.

In his Third Argument from Evidence Mr. Belloc obliges us with a
summary of this record of the rocks, about which he knows so little.
I need scarcely note here that the only evidence adduced is his own
inspired conviction. No “European” palæontologist or biologist is
brought out of the Humbert safe and quoted. Here was a chance to puzzle
me dreadfully with something “in French,” and it is scandalously thrown
away. Mr. Belloc tells us, just out of his head, that instead of there
being that succession of forms in the geological record the Theory
of Natural Selection requires, there are “enormously long periods of
stable type” and “(presumably) rapid periods of transition.” That
“presumably” is splendid; scientific caution and all the rest of
it--rapid periods when I suppose the Creative Spirit got busy and types
woke up and said, “Turn over; let’s change a bit.”

There is really nothing to be said about this magnificent
generalisation except that it is pure Bellocking. Wherever there is a
group of strata, sufficiently thick and sufficiently alike to witness
to a long-sustained period of slight alterations in conditions, there
we find the successive species approximating. This is not a statement à
la Belloc. In spite of the chances against such a thing occurring, and
in defiance of Mr. Belloc’s assertion that it does not occur, there are
several series of forms in time, giving a practically direct succession
of species. Mr. Belloc may read about it and at the same time exercise
this abnormal linguistic gift which sits upon him so gracefully, his
knowledge of the French language, in Deperet’s _Transformations du
Monde Animal_, where all these questions are conveniently summarised.
There he will get the results of Waagen with a succession of Ammonites
and also of Neumayr with _Paludina_, and there also he will get
information about the sequence of the species of _Mastodon_ throughout
the Tertiary age and read about the orderly progress of a pig group,
the _Brachyodus_ of the Eocene and Oligocene. There is a touch of irony
in the fact that his own special protégé, the Pig, should thus turn
upon him and rend his Third Argument from Evidence.

More recondite for Mr. Belloc is the work of Hilgendorf upon
_Planorbis_, because it is in German; but the drift of it is visible
in the Palæontology wing of the London Natural History Museum, Room
VIII. A species of these gasteropods was, during the slow processes of
secular change, caught in a big lake, fed by hot springs. It underwent
progressive modification into a series of successive new species as
conditions changed through the ages. Dr. Klähms’ specimens show this
beautifully. Rowe’s account of the evolutionary series in the genus
_Micraster_ (_Q.J.M.S._, 1899) is also accessible to Mr. Belloc, and
he will find other matter to ponder in Goodrich’s _Living Organisms_,
1924. The finest series of all, longer in range and completer in its
links, is that of the Horse. There is an excellent little pamphlet by
Matthew and Chubb, well illustrated, _The Evolution of the Horse_,
published by the American Museum of Natural History, New York, so
plain, so simple, so entirely and humiliatingly destructive of Mr.
Belloc’s nonsensical assertions, that I pray him to get it and read it
for the good of his really very unkempt and neglected soul.

Thus we observe that Mr. Belloc does not know the facts in this case
of Natural Selection, and that he argues very badly from such facts as
he misconceives. It is for the reader to decide which at the end is
more suitable as a laughing-stock--the Theory of Natural Selection or
Mr. Belloc. And having thus studied this great Catholic apologist as
an amateur biologist and arrived at the result, we will next go on to
consider what he has to say about the origins of mankind--and Original
Sin.




