IV

MR. BELLOC’S ADVENTURES AMONG THE SUB-MEN: MANIFEST TERROR OF THE
NEANDERTHALER


From Mr. Belloc’s feats with Natural Selection we come to his
adventures among his ancestors and the fall of man. These are, if
possible, even more valiant than his beautiful exposure of the
“half-educated assurance” of current biological knowledge. He rushes
about the arena, darting from point to point, talking of my ignorance
of the “main recent European work in Anthropology,” and avoiding
something with extraordinary skill and dexterity. What it is he is
avoiding I will presently explain. No one who has read my previous
articles need be told that not a single name, not a single paper, is
cited from that galaxy of “main recent European” anthropology. With
one small exception. There is a well-known savant, M. Marcellin Boule,
who wrote of the Grottes de Grimaldi in 1906. Some facetious person
seems to have written to Mr. Belloc and told him that M. Boule in 1906
“definitely proved the exact opposite” of the conclusions given by Mr.
Wright in his _Quaternary Ice Age_ (1914), and quoted in my _Outline_.
Mr. Belloc writes this down, elevates M. Boule to the magnificence of
“Boule” simply and follows up with the habitual insults. By counting
from his one fixed mathematical point, _zero_ in some dimension unknown
to me, he concludes that I must be twenty years out of date, though the
difference between 1906 and 1914, by ordinary ways of reckoning, is
really not minus twenty but plus eight.

The same ungracious humorist seems to have stuffed up Mr. Belloc
with a story that for the last twenty years the climate of the
earth has ceased to vary with the eccentricity of the earth’s
orbit, and that any natural consequences of the precession of the
equinoxes no longer occur; that climate has, in fact, cut loose from
astronomical considerations, and that you can find out all about it
in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_. You cannot. Mr. Belloc should have
tried. Some day he must find time to puzzle out M. Boule’s curve of
oscillation of the Mediterranean and correlate it with Penck’s, and go
into the mystery of certain Moustierian implements that M. Boule says
are not Moustierian; and after that he had better read over the little
discussion about changes of climate in the _Outline of History_--it is
really quite simply put--and see what it is I really said and what his
leg-pulling friend has been up to with him in that matter. It may be
kinder to Mr. Belloc to help him with a hint. Croll made an excellent
book in which he pointed out a number of astronomical processes which
must produce changes of climate. He suggested that these processes
were sufficient to account for the fluctuations of the glacial age.
They are not. But they remain perfectly valid causes of climatic
variation. Croll is no more done for than Darwin is done for. That is
where Mr. Belloc’s friend let Mr. Belloc down.

But Mr. Belloc does not always work on the information of facetious
friends, and sometimes one is clearly in the presence of the unassisted
expert controversialist. When, for example, I say that the Tasmanians
are not racially Neanderthalers, but that they are Neanderthaloid,
he can bring himself to alter the former word also to Neanderthaloid
in order to allege an inconsistency. And confident that most of his
Catholic readers will not check him back by my book, he can ascribe to
me views about race for which there is no shadow of justification. But
it is disagreeable to me to follow up such issues, they concern Mr.
Belloc much more than they do the living questions under discussion,
and I will not even catalogue what other such instances of unashamed
controversy occur.


MR. BELLOC AS ICONOCLAST

In the course of the darting to and fro amongst human and sub-human
pre-history, Mr. Belloc criticises me severely for quoting Sir Arthur
Keith’s opinion upon the Piltdown remains. I have followed English
authorities. All these remains are in England, and so they have been
studied at first hand mostly by English people. No one can regret this
insularity on the part of _Eoanthropus_ more than I do, but it leaves
Mr. Belloc’s “European opinion on the whole” rejecting Sir Arthur
Keith as a rather more than usually absurd instance of Mr. Belloc’s
distinctive method. “_What_ European opinion?” you ask. Mr. Belloc does
not say. Probably Belloking of Upsala and Bellokopoulos of Athens.
Mr. Belloc--forgetting that in an earlier edition of the _Outline_ I
give a full summary of the evidence in this case, up-to-date--informs
his Catholic audience that I have apparently read nothing about the
Piltdown vestige but an “English work.” And then he proceeds to fall
foul of the “restoration” of _Eoanthropus_. It is an imaginary picture
of the creature, and I myself think that the artist has erred on the
human side. Mr. Belloc objects to all such restorations.

Well, we have at least a saucerful of skull fragments and a doubtful
jawbone to go upon, and the picture does not pretend to be, and
no reader can possibly suppose it to be, anything but a tentative
restoration. But why a great Catholic apologist of all people, the
champion of a Church which has plastered the world with portraits
of the Virgin Mary, of the Holy Family, and with pictures of saints
and miracles in the utmost profusion, without any warning to the
simple-minded that these gracious and moving figures to which they
give their hearts may be totally unlike the beings they profess to
represent--why he should turn iconoclast and object to these modestly
propounded restorations passes my comprehension. At Cava di Tirrene
near Naples I have been privileged to see, in all reverence, a hair
of the Virgin, small particles of St. Peter, and other evidences of
Christianity; and they did not seem to me to be so considerable in
amount as even the _Eoanthropus_ fragments. And again, in this strange
outbreak of iconoclastic rage, he says:--

    “Again, we have the coloured picture of a dance of American Red
    Indians round a fire solemnly presented as a ‘reconstruction’ of
    Palæolithic society.”

He has not even observed that the chief figures in that picture are
copied directly from the actual rock paintings of Palæolithic men
although this is plainly stated.


MR. BELLOC DISCOVERS A MARE’S-NEST

And yet he must have looked at the reproductions of these rock
paintings given in the _Outline_. Because in his ninth paper he comes
out with the most wonderful of all the mare’s-nests he has discovered
in the _Outline of History_, and it concerns these very pictures. You
see there is an account of the Reindeer men who lived in France and
North Spain, and it is said of them that it is doubtful if they used
the bow. Mr. Belloc declares that it is my bitter hatred of religion
that makes me say this, but indeed it is not. It is still doubtful if
the Reindeer hunters had the bow. The fires of Smithfield would not
tempt me to say certainly either that they had it or that they did not
have it, until I know. But they seem to have killed the reindeer and
the horse and bison by spearing them. Mr. Belloc may have evidence
unknown to the rest of mankind in that Humbert safe of his, otherwise
that is the present state of our knowledge. But, as I explain on pages
56 and 57 in language that a child might understand, simultaneously
with that reindeer-hunting life in the north there were more advanced
(I know the word will disgust Mr. Belloc with its horrid suggestion of
progress, but I have to use it) Palæolithic people scattered over the
greater part of Spain and reaching into the South of France who had the
bow. It says so in the text: “Men carry bows” runs my text, describing
certain rock pictures reproduced in my book. I wrote it in the text;
and in the legends that are under these pictures, legends read and
approved by me, the statement is repeated. The matter is as plain as
daylight and as plainly stated. Mr. Belloc will get if he says over to
himself slowly: “Reindeer men, bows doubtful; Azilian, Capsian men to
the south, bows certainly.” And now consider Mr. Belloc, weaving his
mare’s-nest:--

    “Upon page 55 he writes, concerning the Palæolithic man of the cave
    drawings, this sentence: ‘_it is doubtful if they knew of the bow_.’

    “When I first read that sentence, I was so staggered, I could
    hardly believe I had read it right.

    “That a person pretending to teach popular prehistorical science in
    1925 should tell us of the cave painters that it was ‘_doubtful if
    they knew of the bow_’ seemed to me quite out of nature.

    “It was the more extraordinary because here before me, in Mr.
    Wells’s own book, were reproductions of these cave paintings, with
    the bow and the arrow appearing all over them! Even if he did not
    take the trouble to look at the pictures that were to illustrate
    his book, and left that department (as he probably did) to hack
    work, he ought, as an ordinary educated man, to have known the
    ultimate facts of the case.

    “Palæolithic man was an archer, and an archer with an efficient
    weapon.

    “The thing is a commonplace; only gross ignorance can have
    overlooked it; but, as I have said, there is a cause behind that
    ignorance. Mr. Wells would not have made this enormous error if he
    had not been possessed with the necessity of making facts fit in
    with his theology.”


THE CHASING OF MR. BELLOC BEGINS

There is a real splendour in these three almost consecutive passages.
And note incidentally how this facile controversialist bespatters
also my helpers and assistants. They do “hack work.” Palæolithic man,
speaking generally, was _not_ an archer. Only the later Palæolithic
men, dealing with a smaller quarry than the reindeer, seem to have
used the bow. Manifestly it is not I who am fitting my facts with
my theology here, but Mr. Belloc. He is inventing an error which is
incredible even to himself as he invents it, and he is filling up space
as hard as he can with indignation at my imaginary offence.

Why is he going on like this? In the interests of that Catholic soul
in danger? Possibly. But his pen is running so fast here, it seems to
me, not so much to get to something as to get away from something. The
Catholic soul most in danger in these papers of Mr. Belloc’s is Mr.
Belloc’s, and the thing he is running away from through these six long
disputations is a grisly beast, neither ape nor true man, called the
Neanderthaler, _Homo Neanderthalensis_. This _Homo Neanderthalensis_
is the real “palæolithic” man. For three-quarters of the “palæolithic”
age he was the only sort of man. The Reindeer men, the Capsian men, are
“modern” beside him. He was no more an archer than he was an electrical
engineer. He was no more an artist than Mr. Belloc is a man of science.

Instead of bothering with any more of the poor little bits of
argey-bargey about this or that detail in my account of the earlier
true men that Mr. Belloc sees fit to make--instead of discussing
whether these first human savages, who drew and painted like Bushmen
and hunted like Labrador Indians, did or did not progress in the arts
of life before they passed out of history, let me note now the far more
important matters that he refuses to look at.

Mr. Belloc makes a vast pother about _Eoanthropus_, which is no more
than a few bits of bone; he says nothing of the other creature to
whom I have devoted a whole chapter: the man that was not a man. Loud
headlines, challenging section headings, appeal in vain to Mr. Belloc’s
averted mind. Of this Neanderthal man we have plentiful evidence,
and the collection increases every year. Always in sufficiently old
deposits, and always with consistent characteristics. Here is a
creature which not only made implements but fires, which gathered
together ornamental stones, which buried its dead. Mr. Belloc says
burying the dead is a proof of a belief in immortality. And this
creature had strange teeth, differing widely from the human, more
elaborate and less bestial; it had a differently hung head; it was
chinless, it had a non-opposable thumb. Says M. Boule, the one
anthropologist known to Mr. Belloc: “In its absence of forehead the
Neanderthal type strikingly resembles the anthropoid apes.” And he adds
that it “must have possessed only a rudimentary psychic nature ...
markedly inferior to that of any modern race.” When I heard that Mr.
Belloc was going to explain and answer the _Outline of History_, my
thought went at once to this creature. What would Mr. Belloc say of it?
Would he put it before or after the Fall? Would he correct its anatomy
by wonderful new science out of his safe? Would he treat it like a
brother and say it held by the most exalted monotheism, or treat it as
a monster made to mislead wicked men?

He says nothing! He just walks away whenever it comes near him.

But I am sure it does not leave him. In the night, if not by day,
it must be asking him: “Have I a soul to save, Mr. Belloc? Is that
Heidelberg jawbone one of us, Mr. Belloc, or not? You’ve forgotten me,
Mr. Belloc. For four-fifths of the Palæolithic age I was ‘man.’ There
was no other. I shamble and I cannot walk erect and look up at heaven
as you do, Mr. Belloc, but dare you cast me to the dogs?”

No reply.

The poor Neanderthaler has to go to the dogs, I fear, by implication,
for Mr. Belloc puts it with all the convincing force of italics,
that “_Man is a fixed type._” We realise now why he wrote the four
wonderful chapters about Natural Selection that we have done our best
to appreciate. It was to seem to establish this idea of _fixed types_.
Man had to be shown as a “Fixed Type” for reasons that will soon be
apparent. Apart from Mr. Belloc’s assertion, there is no evidence that
man is any exception to the rest of living creatures. He changes. They
all change. All this remarkable discourse about bows or no bows and
about the high thinking and simple living of these wandering savages
of twenty or more thousand years ago, which runs through half a dozen
papers, seems to be an attempt to believe that these early men were
creatures exactly like ourselves; and an attempt to believe that the
more animal savages of the preceding hundred thousand years did not for
all practical purposes exist at all. An attempt to believe and induce
belief; not an attempt to demonstrate. Mr. Belloc emerges where he went
in, with much said and nothing proved, and the _Outline_ undamaged
by his attack. And emerging he makes a confession that he never was
really concerned with the facts of the case at all. “Sympathy or
antagonism with the Catholic faith is the only thing of real importance
in attempting to teach history”--and there you are! All these
argumentative gesticulations, all these tortured attempts to confute,
are acts of devotion to Mr. Belloc’s peculiar vision of the Catholic
faith.

I am afraid it is useless for me to suggest a pilgrimage to Mr.
Belloc, or I would ask him to visit a popular resort not two hours
by automobile from the little corner of France in which I am wont to
shelter my suburban Protestantism from the too bracing English winter.
That is the caves at Rochers Rouges, at which, as it happens, his one
quoted authority, M. Boule, worked for several years. There in an
atmosphere entirely “Latin” and “continental,” under the guidance of
Signor Alfredo Lorenzi, he can see for himself his Fixed Type Man at
successive levels of change. No northern man need be with him when
he faces the facts of these caves; no Protestant shadow need dog his
steps; his French, that rare distinguished gift, will be understood,
and he may even air such Provençal or Italian as he is master of.
The horrid Neanderthaler is not in evidence. But there, protected
by glass covers, he will be able to see the skeletons of Cro-Magnon
man and Grimaldi man lying in the very positions in which they were
discovered. He will see for himself the differences of level at
which they were found and have some help in imagining the ages that
separate the successive types. He will note massiveness of skull and
protrusion of jaw. He will see the stone implements they used, the
ashes of their fires, and have some material for imagining the quality
of their savagery. He can hunt about for arrow-heads to bear out his
valiant assertion that Palæolithic man was “an archer with an efficient
weapon.” He will hunt until stooping and the sunshine make him giddy,
in vain. And then, with these bones fresh in his mind, he should go to
the Museum at Monaco and see the skeleton of a modern human being. He
will find no end of loud talk and valiant singing and good red wine
necessary before he can get back to his faith in man as a _Fixed Type_.


WHERE WAS THE GARDEN OF EDEN?

It is extremely difficult to find out what Mr. Belloc, as a
representative Catholic, believes about human origins. I was extremely
curious to get the Catholic view of these matters, and I heard of the
advent of these articles with very great pleasure, because I thought
I should at last be able to grasp what I had hitherto failed to
understand in the Catholic position. But if Mr. Belloc has said all
that there is to say for Catholicism upon these points, Catholicism is
bankrupt. He assures me that to believe in the Biblical account of the
Creation is a stupid Protestant tendency, and that Catholics do not
do anything of the sort. His attitude towards the Bible throughout is
one almost of contempt. It is not for me to decide between Christians
upon this delicate issue. And Catholics, I gather, have always believed
in Evolution and are far above the intellectual level of the American
Fundamentalist. It is very important to Catholic self-respect to keep
that last point in mind. Catholic evolution is a queer process into
which “Design” makes occasional convulsive raids; between which raids
species remain “fixed”; but still it is a sort of Evolution. My peasant
neighbours in Provence, devout Catholics and very charming people, have
not the slightest suspicion that they are Evolutionists, though Mr.
Belloc assures me they are.

But, in spite of this smart Evolutionary town wear of the Church, it
has somehow to be believed by Catholics that “man” is and always has
been and will be the same creature, “fixed.” That much Mr. Belloc gives
us reiteratively. A contemporary writer, the Rev. Morris Morris, has
written an interesting book, _Man Created During Descent_, to show that
man’s immortal soul was injected into the universe at the beginning of
the Neolithic period, which makes those Azilians and Capsians, with
their bows and carvings, mere animals. The new Belloc-Catholic teaching
is similar, but it puts the human beginnings earlier. Somewhen after
the Chellean and Moustierian periods, and before the Reindeer men, I
gather that “man” appeared, according to Catholic doctrines, exactly
what he is now. Or rather better. He was clad in skins and feathers,
smeared with paint, a cave-hunting wanderer with not even a dog at his
heels; but he was, because Mr. Belloc says so, a devout monotheist
and had a lucid belief in personal immortality. His art was pure and
exalted--there were little bone figures of steatopygous women in
evidence. He had no connection with the Neanderthal predecessor--or
else he had jumped miraculously out of the Neanderthaler’s bestial
skin. Sometimes it seems to be one thing and sometimes the other. But
all that stuff about Adam and Eve and the Garden and the Tree and the
Serpent, so abundantly figured in Catholic painting and sculpture,
seems to have dropped out of this new version of Catholic truth.

Yet those pictures are still shown to the faithful! And what the Fall
becomes in these new revelations of Catholicism, or whether there
was a Fall, historically speaking, Mr. Belloc leaves in the densest
obscurity. I have read and re-read these articles of his, and I seek
those lucid Latin precisions he has promised me in vain. Was and is
that Eden story merely symbolical, and has the Church always taught
that it is merely symbolical? And if so, what in terms of current
knowledge do these symbols stand for? Is it symbolical of some series
of events in time or is it not? If it is, when and what were the
events in time? And if it is not, but if it is symbolical of some
experience or adventure or change in the life of each one of us, what
is the nature of that personal fall? What is the significance of the
Garden, the Innocence, the Tree, the Serpent? To get anything clear
and hard out of Mr. Belloc’s papers in reply to these questions is
like searching for a diamond in a lake of skilly. I am left with the
uncomfortable feeling that Mr. Belloc is as vague and unbelieving about
this fundamental Catholic idea as the foggiest of foggy Protestants
and Modernists, but that he has lacked the directness of mind to admit
as much even to himself. Yet surely the whole system of salvation, the
whole Christian scheme, rests upon the presumption of a fall. Without
a fall, what is the value of salvation? Why redeem what has never been
lost? Without a condemnation what is the struggle? What indeed, in that
case, is the Catholic Church about?

What modern thought is about is a thing easier to explain. In the
_Outline of History_, against which Mr. Belloc is rather carping
than levelling criticism, there is set out, as the main form of that
_Outline_, a progressive development of conscious will in life. It is
not a form thrust upon the massed facts by any fanatical prepossession;
it is a form they insisted upon assuming under my summarising hand.
What is going on in this dispute is not that I am beating and putting
over my ideas upon Mr. Belloc or that he is beating and putting over
his ideas upon me, but that the immense increase of light and knowledge
during the past century is imposing a new realisation of the quality
and depth and import of life upon us both, and that I am acquiescent
and he is recalcitrant. I judge his faith by the new history, and he
judges the new history by his faith.




