Chapter V.


    P. 172, lines 14-15.--Ignorance of the gist of the
    Darwinian theory, "natural selection," has been fruitful in
    misunderstandings.


It is very necessary to understand exactly what the theory of natural
selection is and is not; because champions of the Faith, even when
believing in Evolution, base some of their arguments on the alleged
collapse of the Darwinian theory. Thus, in Present-day Rationalism
Critically Examined, the Rev. Professor George Henslow affirms that,
while the theory of Evolution stands on an impregnable basis, Haeckel's
Monism and Rationalistic agnosticism are based on Darwin's doctrine of
natural selection, and he enters upon an elaborate argument--covering
sixty pages of his book--to show that the origin of species by means
of natural selection is false, and that the primary cause of Evolution
is the definite action of the environment, combined with the adaptive
powers of the living organism. Such arguments, coming from a clergyman
having scientific attainments, are likely to impress the average
Christian reader and confuse the main issue. Natural selection is "the
action of the environment" (see The Origin of Species, chap. iv.),
and even if it were not, and if natural selection (or elimination)
were not the primary cause, the doctrine of the action of environment
will suit the Monist just as well.

Regarding the minor, but not unimportant, part played by sexual
selection, Darwin writes: "For my own part, I conclude that of all
the causes which have led to the differences in external appearance
between the races of men, and to a certain extent between man and the
lower animals, sexual selection has been by far the most efficient"
(Descent of Man, ed. 1871, ii., 367).

Scientists who are advocates of the Christian cause are not always
as candid as one could wish. While the Church cited Sir Richard
Owen "as an authority against the Darwinian theory, especially in
its application to man's descent, there remained in the memory of
his brother savants his lack of candour in never withdrawing the
statement made by him, and demonstrated by Huxley as untrue, that
the hippocampus minor in the human brain is absent from the brain of
the ape." (See p. 172 of Mr. Clodd's Pioneers of Evolution. See also
remarks by Sir Charles Lyell, pp. 485 and 486 of his work, Antiquity of
Man. On p. 290 he further tells us that "we may consider the attempt
to distinguish the brain of man from that of the ape on the ground of
newly-discovered cerebral characters, presenting differences in kind,
as virtually abandoned by its originator.")


    P. 205, lines 18-20.--That there are not more links missing is
    due principally to the discovery of fossil remains.


The greatest importance has been attached to a discovery in Java,
made in 1894 by Eugene Dubois. The remains consisted of the crown
of the skull, two teeth, and a femur belonging to a creature for
which the name Pithecanthropus erectus has been invented. This
pithecanthropus excited the liveliest interest as the long-sought
transitional form between man and the ape. Professor Haeckel writes
concerning this in his book, The Evolution of Man, vol. ii., p. 633:
"There were very interesting scientific discussions on it at the last
three International Congresses of Zoology (Leyden, 1895; Cambridge,
1898; and Berlin, 1901). I took an active part in the discussion at
Cambridge, and may refer the reader to the paper I read there." (It has
been translated by Dr. Gadow, under the title of The Last Link.) Since
then we have Professor Keasbey writing in 1901 that the remains have
been "pronounced genuine," and Professor Packard, in 1902, that it
is now "generally recognised."

Again, to give a still more recent "find," Dr. Andrews, who accompanied
the Geological Survey of Egypt, has (as mentioned by Professor Ray
Lankester in his lecture at the London Institution on November 2nd,
1906) discovered a remarkable skull (now in the Natural History Museum)
which is the connecting link between elephants, ancient and modern,
and other mammals.

There have also been discoveries of missing links among the living. The
duck-bill, a four-footed animal which lays eggs, is an important link
between reptiles and mammals. Cuvier, the celebrated French naturalist,
a persistent opponent of the evolutionary doctrines advanced by
Lamarck and Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, did not believe it possible that
any four-footed animal could lay eggs, and it was not till long after
his time, and, indeed, only quite lately, that the statements of the
natives were verified, and the eggs of the duck-bill actually found.


    P. 208, lines 14-18.--Enough has been said, I hope, to convince
    the reader that ... there is overpowering evidence against
    separate acts of creation, and in favour of an animal origin of
    the human race.


This Family Tree of Life will enable him to form a brain-picture of
the various steps in the evolutionary process:--

[Note.--It is now generally admitted that man goes back at least
200,000 years.]

[Illustration: Protoplasm plus Chlorophyll]

This diagram of development is taken from Edwards Clodd's work,
The Story of Creation, by the kind permission of Mr. Clodd and
Messrs. Longmans.

Note by Mr. Clodd.--The ascent of the higher life-forms from the
lower is more lateral than the lines indicate, but the diagram is
only a rough attempt to show the relative places of the leading groups.


    P. 218, lines 14-15.--The dogmas of sin and its atonement.


"Astronomers tell us that there are some 500,000,000 suns visible
from our earth, many if not most of them larger than our sun, and all
of them presumably surrounded by planets at least as important as our
earth; and to maintain the old theological view of the supreme value of
this little insignificant planet in the eyes of the 'Almighty Ruler'
of such a universe, or to suppose that He would send His 'Only Son'
to die for us little cosmic microbes, is presumption which, when one
thinks of it, really seems to amount to insanity" (quoted from p. 108
of Richard Harte's Lay Religion).




