Chapter VI.


    P. 220, line 1.--Deism denies Christianity.


"God," says Canon Liddon, "is banished from the world by deism, which
puts nature in His place" (Some Elements of Religion, pp. 56-7). The
seventeenth and eighteenth-century deists, however, did not deny the
personality of God, but the fact of revelation. "In recent theology
deism has generally come to be regarded as, in common with theism,
holding in opposition to atheism that there is a God, and in opposition
to pantheism that God is distinct from the world, but as differing
from theism in maintaining that God is separate from the world,
having endowed it with self-sustaining and self-acting powers, and
then abandoned it to itself" (Enc. Brit., art. "Theism").


    P. 221, line 8.--"What it is to be a Christian."


Archdeacon Wilson avers that "We dare not deny the name of Christian
to such as live in Christ's spirit and do His will, though they
know not for certain how God manifested himself in Christ, and will
not profess a certainty they do not feel." Again, he argues that
"We rest on the broad ground of the vast experience of the world,
and the testimony of our own conscience, that Christ has lifted
mankind up, and shown man what is good; and this we may describe
as bringing man to God, and revealing God to man. This redemption,
salvation, we acknowledge as a fact. He who has this faith in Christ,
and lets it work its natural result in making him more like Christ,
deserves to be called a Christian." This does, indeed, give plenty of
latitude--far more, in fact, than the Church as a body seems likely
to give for some time to come. It, and the Rev. R. J. Campbell's "New
Theology," will certainly enable many who are in reality non-Christian
theists to continue calling themselves Christians.


    P. 224, note.--"Haeckel's Critics Answered."


In the chapter on "God" there is a striking exposition of the very
latest arguments for and against Theism. The opinions of Messrs. Ward,
Newman, Smythe, Le Conte, Fiske, W. N. Clarke, Croll, Aubrey Moore,
Iverach, Dallinger, Ballard, Rhondda Williams, Profeit, Kennedy,
W. James, and Royce are all considered. Many pious Christians may
have read the apologists' criticisms of Haeckel's well-known work, The
Riddle of the Universe, but few will have studied the work itself, and
still fewer these clear and convincing replies to the criticisms. It
cannot be on account of the cost, as a copy of the cheap edition of
either of these works can be obtained for 4 1/2d.


    P. 253, lines 25-6.--Some such psychical experiences largely
    account for religious superstitions.


With regard to phenomena at present popularly known as spiritualistic,
but for which scientists have now adopted the term "metapsychical,"
the following declaration by Professor Lombroso (appearing in the
review La Lettura, November, 1906) is of considerable interest. "As
the result," he writes, "of our researches, I have been bound to admit
the conviction that these phenomena are of colossal importance, and
that it is the plain duty of science to direct attention towards them
without delay." N.B.--The Professor, when interviewed subsequently by
the Turin correspondent of the Standard, repudiated any suggestion of
supernatural agency, and said: "All spiritualistic phenomena can be
understood and explained without any reference to the intervention of
the supernatural. Spiritualists affirm that the soul is an emanation
from God, while I contend that it is an emanation of the brain. This is
the whole thing in a nutshell. You therefore see how, from this point
of view, I cannot be called a spiritualist--at least, in the sense
in which the term is generally understood. Almost all spiritualistic
phenomena can be classed among those positive facts which science
can explain." However, in an article contributed by him to the Grand
Magazine for January, 1907, and entitled "Why I became a Spiritualist,"
Professor Lombroso admits that he has felt himself "compelled to
yield to the conviction that spiritualistic phenomena, if due in
great part to the influence of the medium, are likewise attributable
to the influence of extra-terrestrial existences, which may, perhaps,
be compared to the radio-activity which still persists in tubes after
the radium which originated them has disappeared." Professor Cesare
Lombroso, it may be mentioned, is Professor of Psychiatry at the
University of Turin, and the author of standard works on criminology,
hypnotism, and psychology, as well as of a number of valuable treatises
relating to cerebral study. Two of his publications, Man of Genius
(1891) and Female Offender (1895), have been issued in English.

The phenomena Professor Lombroso refers to are those which have induced
such eminent scientists as Wallace, Lodge, Hyslop, Barrett, and Crookes
to remain or to become supernaturalists. One, and to my mind the chief,
reason why these metapsychical phenomena are, as Professor Lombroso
tells us, of colossal importance--why science should direct attention
towards them without delay--is that, so soon as they are universally
acknowledged to be manifestations occurring in obedience to one of
Nature's laws--a law as yet not fully understood--the last excuse for
belief in the supernatural will have vanished. Supernaturalism will
receive its death-blow, and Rationalism be infused with fresh life.


    P. 254, line 28.--Professor James--an earnest champion of religion.


In defining his philosophic position he admits his own "inability
to accept either popular Christianity or scholastic Theism" (see
his Postscript, p. 521). He is of opinion that both the metaphysical
argument for God's existence and the arguments for a God with moral
attributes must be rejected, and "the man who is sincere with himself
and the facts, but who remains religious still," must soothe "his
perplexed and baffled intellect" with "a trustful sense of presence"
(ibid, pp. 445-8). A careful perusal of his book, however, makes it
tolerably clear that this feeling of the presence of Spiritual Beings
is simply a hallucination.


    P. 256, lines 22-26.--There has never yet been a case of a
    Mohammedan or a Hindoo, or any other non-Christian, who, without
    having heard of Christianity, has had a revelation of Christian
    "truth."


Chet Ram, the founder of a sect whose numbers, according to the
last Indian census, "are increasing day by day," began by being
a Hindu, and then became the disciple of a Mohammedan fakir in the
Punjab. After following him for some years he had what he described as
a vision of Christ, who revealed Himself as the author of salvation,
and commanded him (Chet Ram) to build a church and to place within
it the Bible. He was himself illiterate, but immediately began to
proclaim the divinity of Christ, and was soon followed by disciples
recruited alike from the Hindus and the Moslems. It is "religious"
experiences such as these which continue to deceive even educated
men and women, and hinder the growth of Rationalism.




