Chapter III.


    P. 77, lines 11-12.--Encyclopædia Biblica.


(My best thanks are due to Mr. C. T. Gorham for permitting me to make
a free use of his notes on the Enc. Bib.)

In case the reader may jump to the conclusion that this is a work
compiled by collecting the most heretical views from all parts of
the globe (as I was informed by the librarian when I inquired for
the book in a Cathedral library), let me call attention to the list
of contributors, among whom will be found many English ministers of
the Gospel. For instance:--


    The Rev. Archibald R. S. Kennedy, D.D., Professor of Hebrew and
    Semitic Languages, Edinburgh.

    The Rev. C. F. Burney, M.A., Lecturer in Hebrew, and Fellow of
    St. John's College, Oxford.

    The Rev. Claude Hermann Walter Johns, M.A., Hon. Sec. Camb. Pupil
    Teachers' Centre.

    The Rev. George Adam Smith, M.A., D.D., LL.D., Professor of Hebrew
    and Old Testament Exegesis, Free Church College, Glasgow.

    The Very Rev. J. A. Robinson, D.D., Dean of Westminster.

    The Rev. Owen Charles Whitehouse, M.A., Principal and Professor
    of Biblical Exegesis and Theology in the Countess of Huntingdon's
    College, Cheshunt, Herts.

    The Rev. R. H. Charles, M.A., D.D., Professor of Biblical Greek,
    Trinity College, Dublin.

    The Rev. Samuel Rolles Driver, D.D., Regius Professor of Hebrew,
    Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.

    The Rev. T. K. Cheyne, M.A., D.D., Oriel Professor of the
    Interpretation of Holy Scripture at Oxford, Canon of Rochester.

    The Rev. T. Witton Davies, B.A., Ph.D., Professor of Old Testament
    Literature, North Wales Baptist College, Bangor; Lecturer in
    Semitic Languages, University College.

    The Rev. William E. Addis, M.A., Lecturer in Old Testament
    Criticism, Manchester College, Oxford.

    The Rev. William Henry Bennett, Litt.D., D.D., Professor of
    Biblical Languages and Literature, Hackney College, London,
    and Professor of Old Testament Exegesis, New College, London.

    The Rev. William Sanday, D.D., LL.D., Lady Margaret Professor of
    Divinity, Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.

    The Rev. A. B. Davidson, D.D., Professor of Hebrew and Old
    Testament Exegesis, United Free Church New College, Edinburgh.

    The Rev. George Buchanan Gray, M.A., Professor of Hebrew, Mansfield
    College, Oxford.


The rapid advance of Bible criticism in late years is well seen by
comparing articles in Dr. W. Smith's Dictionary of the Bible (1860), in
the Encyclopædia Britannica, signed W. R. S. (between 1875 and 1888),
and in the Encyclopædia Biblica (1899 to 1903). Even the comparatively
conservative Hastings's Dictionary (1898-1902, with extra volume 1904)
contains articles which would have been condemned as heretical half
a century ago. Speaking of the Enc. Bib. and Hasting's Dictionary,
Mr. Benn remarks (in his History of Rationalism) that, "as regards the
Old Testament, their respective attitudes do not essentially differ,
Wellhausen's theory being accepted by both."


    P. 80, line 18.--We have note got the stone and read the
    inscriptions.


For a popular account of this interesting discovery (upon the site
of Susa, the ancient city of the Persian kings, in December, 1901)
see The Hammurabi Code, by Chilperic Edwards.


    P. 103, line 16-17.--A disputed passage in Tacitus.


The sceptical theory is that, had it been genuine, the passage would
not have been overlooked by all the early Christian writers in the
various disputations with objectors, and especially by Tertullian,
who quoted largely from his works, and the ecclesiastical historian
Eusebius, who was zealous in his defence of the Faith and greedy of
materials with which to support it. (An important French student
of Tacitus holds that the whole Annals is medieval!) On the other
hand, the style is thoroughly Tacitean, containing a number of
words and expressions elsewhere used by the author, and more or less
characteristic of him, yet without any such elaborate over-imitation
as we should expect to find even in a skilful forgery. Nor is the
subject-matter perhaps less characteristic, while the MS. evidence
is in favour of the passage being genuine. Taking it to be so,
what, after all, does it amount to? Merely this. Christ was put
to death by Pontius Pilate, and a very large number of Christians
were put to death in a horrible manner by Nero. The passage occurs
in Tacitus, Annals, XV., 44, and runs as follows: "Consequently,
to get rid of the accusation, Nero fastened the guilt and inflicted
the most exquisite tortures on a class hated for their abominations,
called by the populace 'Christians.' Christus, from whom the name
had its origin, suffered the extreme penalty during the reign of
Tiberius at the hands of one of our procurators, Pontius Pilate,
and a most mischievous superstition, thus checked for the moment,
again broke out not only in Judæa, the first source of the evil,
but even in Rome, where all things hideous and shameful from every
part of the world find their centre and become popular. Accordingly,
an arrest was first made of all who pleaded guilty; then, upon their
information, an immense multitude was convicted, not so much of the
crime of firing the city, as of hatred of mankind. Mockery of every
sort was added to their deaths. Covered with the skins of beasts,
they were torn by dogs and perished, or were nailed to crosses, or
were doomed to the flames and burnt to serve as a nightly illumination
when daylight had expired. Nero offered his gardens for the spectacle."


    P. 107, lines 19-20.--The true likeness of our Lord had been
    miraculously transmitted.


Presumably my informant was referring to the legend of St. Veronica,
since the equally absurd History of the Likeness of Christ (translated
by E. A. Wallis Budge) closes with these words: "And the angel took
the likeness from where it was standing, and he removed it; and no
man hath ever seen it since."




