Chapter VI.

THE FAILURE OF THEISTIC ARGUMENTS


§ 1. Preliminary Remarks.

Our next task is to study the arguments for theism. Under these may
be ranged--the cosmological argument, which concludes that there must
be one eternal, unconditioned, self-existent cause; the teleological
[190] argument, which concludes that nature's first cause must be an
intelligence; and the ethical argument--the proof from the moral order
and conscience--which concludes that the supreme intelligence must
be a moral, a beneficent being. To these may be added the argument
from religious experience.



THEISM, AND WHO ARE THEISTS.

First a word about theism. Theism is belief in the existence of a
God as the creator and ruler of the universe. It assumes a living
relation of God to his creatures, but does not define it. Although
Theos and Deus are equivalent, theism has come to be distinguished
from deism. The latter, according to some theologians, while equally
opposed to atheism, denies or ignores the personality of God,
and therefore denies [191] Christianity. Theism, on the contrary,
underlies Christianity. Accordingly, in considering the truth or
untruth of Christianity, we are concerned only with theism. However,
it should be borne in mind that, although a man cannot be a Christian
without being a Theist, he may be, and very often is in these days,
a Theist without being a Christian. Of the cultured men who think they
can still lay claim to the name of Christian, the bulk are, in point
of fact, non-Christian Theists. Some of these quiet their conscience
by the thought that they are still preserving a "reverent agnosticism"
with regard to Christian dogmas; while certain anti-Haeckelites of the
type of Professor E. Armitage (who urges scientific men to "remember
that we only know appearances, and that whenever we affirm anything
about what lies behind appearances we are making hazardous inferences"
[192]) do not seem to be aware that they are adherents of one of the
fundamental principles of agnosticism.

Theism in its modern Unitarian form is the creed of many of the most
cultured and most religious minds of our time, alike in Europe and
America; and it has also signally shown its power in contemporary
India. Before I left the latter country a few years ago, I had an
interesting discussion with one of the leading spirits of the Brahmo
Samaj movement, and, in answer to my queries, he replied that it
was with the Unitarians that he and his fellow thinkers were most in
sympathy, and that they were never likely to turn Christians. This
Unitarian theism, it may be remarked, is often seen to approximate
to, or become absorbed into, pantheism or agnosticism. But it is not
of Unitarians that I would speak so much as of the man who calls and
often thinks himself a Christian proper, notwithstanding the admission
that the Christian dogmas may be partially or wholly false. This
misconception of "What it is to be a Christian" [193] is one of the
many that tend to confuse and delay a straight reply to the question,
"Is Christianity true?" Having digested these prefatory remarks,
let us now proceed to consider the Theistic arguments.




§ 2. The Existence of a First Cause--An Uncaused Cause. [194]

The hypothesis of modern science is that everything as it now exists
in the universe is the result of an infinite series of causes and
effects; everything that happens is the result of something else that
happened previously, and so on backwards to all eternity. The agnostic
scientist says that we know nothing about this Infinite Cause, and
that the idea of a First Cause is absurd. The Theist affirms that
there is an Eternal Infinite Being who is the First Cause. He says
that it is absurd not to believe in a First Cause, that materialistic
theories are so absurd compared with his that for this reason alone he
would remain a Theist. He appears entirely to lose sight of the fact
that by predicating a First Cause he only removes the mystery a stage
further back. He tells us nothing about the origin of the First Cause
or the state of things that preceded it. The appearance of a First
Cause upon the scene only increases the great mystery. Certainly it
does not solve it. We are no forwarder. The creation of a mystery to
explain a mystery is a very ancient custom, but it is a custom that
has not met with the approbation of science.

The Theist apparently thinks, however, that he has science on his
side. Thus, in the Baird Lectures of 1876, Dr. Flint stated that "the
progress of science has not more convincingly and completely dispersed
the once prevalent notion that the universe was created about 6,000
years ago than it has convincingly and completely established that
everything of which our senses inform us has had a commencement in
time." [195] This opinion is still proclaimed by the Church to be the
opinion of science. But modern science does not point to a beginning
of the scheme of things. The consensus of opinion is entirely the
other way. So far as we know, the ultimate cause recedes for ever and
ever beyond the time when there was no distinction of earth and sea
and atmosphere, all being mingled together in nebulous matter. Where
would the Theist fix the "commencement"? The gaps on which theology
at one time relied are rapidly disappearing. The apparent chasm
between the organic and inorganic, between the lifeless and that
which lives, according to the latest conceptions of science, no
longer exists. Man may even succeed in manufacturing life, so that
yet another teleological argument may collapse.




§ 3. The First Cause an Intelligence.


DESIGN AND DIRECTIVITY.

The argument from design is one which appeals perhaps more than any
other to the average man. As he looks around and reflects, he feels
that there must be design, and, therefore, a Designer. He feels
also that God must be constantly present directing the carrying
out of His design. He is in accord with the Theist who maintains
that purpose and plan are manifest throughout the cosmos, and that,
although it might be conceded that every step of the process has been
achieved by the forces of Evolution, it is impossible to exclude
the presiding activity of a mind which has planned the whole and
predetermined the movements of every portion. We are to believe, then,
that the Designer Himself put the forces in motion for the first time,
that He knew exactly what would be the product of those forces down
to the minutest detail and for all time, and yet, in face of the
undeviating law-regulated cosmos which He has created, He in some
way continues to guide these forces. From the very first step, the
making of the electron and thence the atom, to the last, the making of
man's brain, the Theist sees the finger of God. The mystery of life
is thus taken to be explained or diminished by asserting that it is
produced and controlled by some other mystery. The only alternative
to this belief, so he maintains, is a universe of random chance and
capricious disorder. But "Haeckel and his colleagues hold that the
direction which the evolutionary agencies take is not 'fortuitous';
that they never could take but the one direction which they have
actually taken." [196] While "the Theist says the ultimate object
must have been foreseen and the forces must have been guided, or
they would never have worked steadily in this definite direction,
the Monist says that these forces no more needed guiding than does
a tramcar; there was only one direction possible for them." [197] To
refute this the apologist gravely replies that, "if you cast to the
ground an infinite (or a finite) number of letters, they might after
infinite gyrations make a word here and there; but we should think
the man an enthusiast who expected even a short sentence, and a fool
if he ever expected them to make a poem." We are expected, it seems,
to regard it as a miracle that natural forces should not lose their
uniform character, and act miraculously! Evidently, either the question
is begged or the analogy is absurd. An argument of this kind is worse
than useless, for it only serves to demonstrate the hopelessness of
the teleologist's position. Spinoza's position is more reasonable;
for he conceives that all is the outcome of inexorable necessity--that
neither chance nor purpose governs the eternal and the infinite.



DIRECTIVITY.

Directivity has hitherto been insisted upon by Theists. It would
not conform with our ideas of God that He should remain a passive
observer so soon as He had invented a machine that would never stop,
and had started it going. Yet interference with the machinery is
inconceivable, the universe being ruled by eternal, immutable, and
irrefragable laws. "The only possible conception of telic [purposeful]
action on a cosmic scale is that, from the start, the matter-force
reality was of such a nature that it would infallibly evolve into the
cosmos we form part of to-day. Any other conception of 'guidance' and
'control' is totally unthinkable. And, as a fact, Theists are settling
down to formulate their position in that way. The interference, as
Ward says, took place before the process began." [198] A Law Maker
can be postulated, but there is not a particle of evidence that He
is also a Law Breaker.

Attempts are still made, however, by clerical scientists to prove
that there is directivity. The Rev. Professor George Henslow, in
his book, Present-Day Rationalism Critically Examined, argues that
the tendency which living organisms show to develop in one direction
rather than another, and their capacity to respond to environment,
betoken a directing Mind. Granting, for the moment, that the doctrine
of Natural Selection is false or inadequate, it seems to me that the
acknowledged facts of the "struggle for existence" and "survival of the
fittest" sufficiently dispose of this new apology. Organisms do not
all adapt themselves to environment, and their fate, in consequence,
is first one of increasing misery, and finally of extinction. Only
those that do adapt themselves survive. It appears that a scientist
when he turns apologist is conveniently able to forget all but the
more fortunate organisms.



DESIGN.

If the evidence for a directing Mind has to be given up, the
difficulties of a Theist are certainly increased. There would be
difficulties, for instance, regarding the utility of prayer. Still,
he could think with Father Waggett that "the interaction of forces
inherent in the whole produces the infinite variety of living
beauty which we see." [199] And he can still join with Dr. Flint in
exclaiming: "Every atom, every molecule, must, even in what is ultimate
in it, bear the impress of a Supernatural Power and Wisdom; must
reflect the glory of God, and proclaim its dependence upon Him." [200]
To remain a Theist, however, one must have not only evidence of design,
but of the benevolent intention of the Designer. Before considering
the latter question, I venture to offer a few further remarks about
the former. Is there consistent evidence of design?

Beauty.--As a proof of design we are asked by the Theist to
contemplate the beauty and sublimity which the universe exhibits. Let
us contemplate, then, the beauty of the Bay of Naples. Is it not purely
accidental, purely the outcome of natural agencies, of effects produced
by position, distance, etc.? Again, "the beauty of the diatoms that
are brought from the lowest depths of the ocean, the beauty of the
radiolaria that swarm about the coast, and the beauty of a thousand
minute animal structures, are obviously not designed and purposed
beauties. They were unknown until the microscope was invented; the
polariscope reveals yet further beauties; the telescope yet more. The
idea of these being designed for our, or for God's, entertainment
belongs, as Mr. Mallock says, 'to a pre-scientific age.'" [201]
It is sometimes urged that the tendency of evolution is towards
greater beauty. Is it? That all depends upon what your idea of beauty
may be--whether you will consider the structure best suited to its
environment beautiful or otherwise. We are told that there are signs
that the human race will one day be toothless. At present we admire
pretty teeth; perhaps our descendants will go into raptures over a
toothless gum. That their sense of beauty may not be outraged, let
us hope it may be so. The hideous pigmies of Central Africa probably
think themselves beautiful, and in the distant future, when the
conditions of existence on this globe have radically changed, and when
its inhabitants have adapted themselves to those conditions, the new
"beauties" may possibly be quite as ugly as "missing links." After
all, beauty is a matter of taste. The sufficient objection to the
"beauty" argument is, to my mind, contained in a very few words:
"Look at the ugliness! Who designed that?"

Harmony.--But, it will be urged, if beauty is a poor argument, at least
you must grant that the general harmony in Nature still remains to
be accounted for. Beauty is only one of its countless harmonies. The
objection to this argument is a very simple one. Nature is full of
discords. Ugliness is by no means the only discord. It is because
this is so little realised that M. Elie Metchnikoff has devoted
nearly the whole of his book, The Nature of Man, to the discussion
of the disharmonies in man's nature alone. There are disharmonies
in the organisation of the digestive system, in the organisation
and activities of the reproductive apparatus, in the family and
social instincts, and in the instinct of self-preservation, etc. For
instance, in the human body there are disharmonies of the wisdom teeth,
the bête-noire of dentistry; of the useless vermiform appendage,
the seat of the disease appendicitis; of the large intestine, which
could very well be dispensed with, and is the seat of many grave
diseases, such as dysentery, and so on. The perversions of instinct
among human beings (another disharmony) are likely to be attributed by
the conservative Theist to the Devil, and by the liberal to Dr. Gore's
"Fall from Without," so it will be better to take an example from the
animal world. Darwin informs us that the "female of one of the emus
(Dromoeus irroratus), as soon as she catches sight of her progeny,
becomes violently agitated, and, notwithstanding the resistance of
the father, appears to use her utmost endeavours to destroy them"
(Descent of Man, vol. ii., chap, xvi., pp. 204-205). To those who
still hold by this argument I can only recommend a perusal of Professor
Metchnikoff's book of disharmonies, and would beg them to remember that
it has been written by a man whose profession and attainments entitle
his opinions on such a subject to the highest consideration. The
cruelty attending the process by which harmony is attained has already
been commented upon by me in § 2 of the previous chapter.



DIFFERENCES OF OPINION AMONG THEISTIC APOLOGISTS.

I have finally to call attention to the fact that even among the
apologists themselves there is considerable difference of opinion
as to the value of these arguments for Theism. Dr. Flint exclaims:
"Strange as it may seem, there are many Theists at the present day
who represent it [revelation of God in the whole of nature external to
us] as insufficient, or even worthless, and who join the Atheists in
denying that God's existence can be proved, and in affirming that all
the arguments for His existence are inconclusive and sophistical. Such
Theists seem to me not only the best allies of Atheists, but even
more effective labourers in the cause of unbelief than Atheists
themselves." [202] Since Dr. Flint wrote these words the number of
"such Theists" has vastly increased. It is owned on all sides by the
advanced school of apologists that God's existence cannot be proved
by an appeal to the reasoning faculties; and, among other arguments,
that from design is gradually being discarded.

Father Waggett offers us interesting information regarding this
argument in his little book, Religion and Science. [203] He considers
that Paley and others of the old teleologists were wrong in leaning
upon a narrow argument from design. "It need not here be repeated,"
he says, "that the evidence of such workmanship cannot prove God
in the true sense of an infinite and all-wise Cause; but only a
cause possessed of immense wisdom and immense though limited power,
a Demiurgus of the greatest force and the most minute care, but not
a Creator in the sense of theology." [204] Father Waggett, who is
a biologist, and, therefore, necessarily an Evolutionist, would not
be disconcerted if living things were manufactured in the laboratory
to-morrow. In his opinion, "If anywhere we catch nature in the making,
if we surprise the sequence by which even man himself gained his
difference from other things, we shall not by this find reverence
lowered.... It is a theological readjustment which is required,
and not one in 'natural science.'" [205] The position here taken up
is wise, and one that all who remain Theists will eventually have
to adopt. But for most of us these theological readjustments are
no easy matter. We reason that Paley's Evidences have in their time
assisted men to be Theists, and now his arguments are condemned by
the better informed. How do we know that the same fate may not await
the new arguments of the Christian evolutionist? How is it that God
allowed earnest and learned divines to commit themselves to arguments
in proof of His existence, the subsequent overthrow of which has been
a potent cause for unbelief?




§ 4. The First Cause a Beneficent Intelligence.


A PERSONAL GOD.

As ages roll on, God's attributes--or rather, we should say, the
attributes given Him by man--are continually altering. All that the
early gods demanded was fear and worship. Even the Jehovah of the Jews
asked at first little else than this. Anthropomorphic conceptions of
God are now admitted by the cultured to be a thing of the past. Do
they not, however, still survive when human emotions, such as love
and anger, happiness and sorrow, are attributed to the Deity? We
acknowledge God to be infinite, and, consequently, incomprehensible by
finite minds; yet we imagine and attempt to argue that He possesses
the same qualities--those we most admire--as ourselves! "How can
we believe in a personal God?" asks the Rationalist. "A person
must have limitations, or he ceases to be a person." However, we
must not forget that in philosophy and theology the word "person"
simply implies "a nature endowed with consciousness," and does not
involve limits. Demurring to this definition, there still remains
another difficulty. In all our experience and knowledge, emotions
and intelligence are connected with nerve structures; how, then,
can we attribute these qualities to a Being who is described to us
as devoid of any nerve structure? I know of no answer that could be
called satisfactory from a Theistic standpoint.

In the previous section we considered the doctrine of final
causes. This doctrine, as Spinoza points out, [206] "does away with
the perfection of God; for, if God acts for an object, He necessarily
desires something which He lacks." The Theist goes a step further than
the mere teleologist, and insists on a benevolent purpose throughout
nature. Is he, then, oblivious to Spinoza's objection? No, he is not;
and therefore it is that he struggles to save his personal God by an
infinite extension of the limits of His personality. In fine, Theism,
in the hands of its modern advocates, and in spite of the seeming
orthodoxy of the phrase, "Divine Immanence," is often nothing less
than another form of Pantheism.



DIVINE IMMANENCE IN NATURE.

The Church's great philosopher to-day, the Rev. J. R. Illingworth,
D.D., argues [207] that "Divine Immanence in Nature" excludes
Pantheism--the belief that God is merely immanent in nature--as well
as Deism and Monism, while it harmonises with Trinitarianism. We are to
"conceive of God as at once transcending and immanent in nature." [208]
He admits that "this relationship may be incomprehensible," [209] but
states that "we know it in our own case to be a fact." [210] Afterwards
he puts the question, "Is the universe His body or His work?" [211] and
proceeds to explain that the Trinitarian conception of God furnishes,
or helps to furnish, an answer to this question. "It is," he maintains,
"intellectually the most satisfactory." [212] It apparently is so to
certain subtle and biassed intellects; but the question is, Is it so,
will it ever be so, to the average mortal?



A FACT IN HISTORY.

In another place, [213] when speaking again of the doctrine of the
Trinity, he says: "Men forget that it supports and is supported by
the whole weight of a fact in history, with which nothing else in
the wide world can even for a moment be compared. That fact is the
age-long empire of Jesus Christ over the hearts of men." This, then,
is the final argument in support of the Christian dogmas, including
this the most incomprehensible of them all. Why should not the Buddhist
claim the same authority for the dogmas of his faith? The evidential
value is precisely the same. Turn to any well-known work bearing on
this phase of the question. Read, we will say, Edwin Arnold's poem,
The Light of Asia; or, better still, read Mr. Fielding's books,
The Soul of a People and The Hearts of Men, and hear the words of
one who has lived for years among Buddhists and studied their hearts.

That an ideal should reign over the hearts of men is no new thing;
much less is this a cause for marvel when "One has come, claiming to
be God made manifest--manifest in order to attract our love." [214]
Christian apologists urge that He has not only attracted the hearts
of men in the past, but still retains His hold upon their affections,
and that therein lies an essential difference between Christianity
and all other religions. Christianity, say they, in this respect
at least, stands pre-eminently alone. Is not Buddhism, then,
one of the great living religions of the present day? Has it not
existed during twenty-four centuries? Does it not at the present
time surpass, in the number of its followers and the area of its
prevalence, any other form of creed? Is not Gautama Buddha worthy
of men's love, if we are to credit the best authenticated records
of his life? "Discordant in frequent particulars," writes [215]
Sir Edwin Arnold, "and sorely overlaid by corruptions, inventions,
and misconceptions, the Buddhistical books yet agree in the one
point of recording nothing--no single act or word--which mars the
perfect purity and tenderness of this Indian teacher, who united
the truest princely qualities with the intellect of a sage and the
passionate devotion of a martyr." Loving disciples, living in an age
of ignorance and superstition, piously ascribed to him divine powers,
and, disobeying his mandate, gave him fervent worship. That worship,
that adoration, still persists. So likewise the adoration of Jesus
Christ still persists. This is certainly a fact in history; but can we
safely build upon it the metaphysical theories of the Christian Faith?



THE PAST AND PRESENT POSITION OF THE ETHICAL ARGUMENT.

In my comments upon Dr. Illingworth's views regarding "Divine
Immanence" I fear I have digressed somewhat from the subject at
present under consideration--the Theistic argument from a Beneficent
Intelligence. "The ethical argument held a very subordinate place in
the estimation of writers on natural theology until Kant rested on it
almost the whole weight of Theism. It has ever since been prominent,
and has been the argument most relied upon to produce practical
conviction." [216] What was once the weakest argument has now become
the strongest. Why? Not, I take it, because anything has occurred to
make the weaker any stronger, but because what was thought to be the
strongest is now found to be weaker than the weakest! How can the
ethical argument be maintained in face of objections which continue
to become ever graver as our knowledge increases? Theists contend
[217] that there must be a future life if only because the glaring
wrongs of this world have to be righted. What is this but a naïve
admission that the proofs of the Deity's benevolence are sadly wanting?



EVIL FOR WHICH MAN IS NOT HELD RESPONSIBLE.

The problem of pain, and of evil generally, has been partially
discussed in the chapter on "Evolution." The importance of this
problem is very great, for, by the universal consent of Christendom
(not of mankind, as we shall see later on), the very name of God
carries with it the sense of goodness, the highest and best that
we know of or can imagine. For this reason it is customary for the
pious to regard every calamity reverently as a punishment from God,
or as serving some good purpose. Thus the German Emperor, imbued from
childhood with this pious theory, warned his people that the Japanese
had been sent as a scourge from God, and Father Bernard Vaughan
(preaching at Lancaster on August 26th, 1906) declared that God had
uttered warnings to England by the eruption of Vesuvius and the San
Franciscan and Chilian earthquakes. Can this supposition be maintained
when the catastrophe occurs in the wrong place, when tornadoes and
earthquakes destroy God's own temples, and when the innocent suffer
for the guilty? With the opinion of the scientist we are, or ought to
be by now, familiar. "The fundamental axiom of scientific thought is
that there is not, never has been, and never will be, any disorder
in Nature. The admission of the occurrence of any event which was
not the logical consequence of the immediately antecedent events,
according to those definite, ascertained, or unascertained rules which
we call the 'laws of Nature,' would be an act of self-destruction on
the part of science" (Huxley on Catastrophes, p. 247 of his Essays
on Controverted Questions).

I remember, at the time of the terrible catastrophe in Martinique,
due to the eruption of Mont Pelée, asking a lady: "Do you think
this wholesale slaughter and awful suffering has any connection with
the wickedness of the afflicted people?" "Certainly," she replied;
"they must have been very wicked people." It just so happened that
the only man who escaped scatheless was a murderer who had been
imprisoned in a cell below ground. So the theory she and I had been
brought up to believe in would not work, whichever way you looked at
it. The apologist has usually a number of strings to his bow; and,
as the Old Testament teaching concerning bad men descending "quick
into the pit" would not suit, he might argue that the criminal was
given an opportunity for repentance. In that case, we must suppose
that all the others who perished had no need of repentance. Again,
with regard to the terrible tortures that many endured, it could be
argued that those "whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth"; but what
possible object could there be in this chastening during the last
moments of their life upon earth? The agony of the death-struggle,
suffered by the good and the bad alike, has yet to be shown to be in
accord with the theory of a benevolent Deity.

The old-fashioned idea that catastrophes, plagues, famines, etc.,
were sent as punishments for our misdoings is gradually being
modified. Dr. Flint says distinctly: "I cannot agree with those
who think there is no mystery in mere pain--that it is sufficiently
accounted for by moral evil." [218] It seems a pity that his advocacy
for benevolence in the Deity should lead him afterwards to qualify
this sensible statement by an amazing assertion which begs the
whole question. "The character of pain itself," he says, "is such
as to indicate that its author must be a benevolent being--one
who does not afflict for his own pleasure, but for his creatures'
profit." [219] The profit consists, we are told, in the fact that
we are prevented through fear of pain from running into danger. How
peculiarly appropriate and consolatory such a view of pain must be
to, let us say, a person crippled with rheumatoid arthritis! Man's
highly sensitive and delicate organisation inevitably entails pain
when no useful purpose of this kind can possibly be served; yet we
are to suppose that an Omnipotent Being devised this crude and cruel
method for teaching us to avoid the perils with which He Himself has
surrounded us! One of our greatest living surgeons, Sir Frederick
Treves, assures us [220] that "the symptoms of disease are marked by
purpose, and the purpose is beneficent." "The processes of disease,"
he goes on to explain, "aim not at the destruction of life, but at
the saving of it." Here, indeed, is more grist for the mill of the
apologist. But what does this special pleading amount to? To this:
Because through suffering we may survive a dangerous disease, we should
be grateful to the Supreme Intelligence who created the preservative as
well as the destructive microbes; we should be grateful to the Almighty
who has fashioned friend and foe, and who, much to our discomfort,
has selected our interior economy for the battlefield! Surely, if
the surmise of benevolence is to be entertained at all, it must be at
the sacrifice of the surmise of omnipotence. The Supreme Intelligence
cannot be an "Almighty God" if He be the "Father of all mercies."

There are Theists who candidly admit the perplexities of the
situation. On the horns of a dilemma they have no option but to fall
back upon the primitive theory: All unaccountable evil is the work
of a hostile and evil power which seeks continually to frustrate
the benevolent intentions of the Creator. "Speaking for myself,"
says the author of Pro Fide, [221] "I am unable to believe that
hideous and excruciating diseases, such as cancer, which affect
both men and animals, and which cannot, in the case of animals at
least, be explained as a moral discipline, are the work of a good and
benevolent God. I endorse absolutely the words of Dr. E. A. Abbott. 'I
cannot think,' he says, 'of diseases and pain, and the conflict
in the animal world for life and death, as being, so to speak,
part of God's first intention.'" Disease, suffering, the struggle
for existence, and the law of prey are then, after all, the Devil's
handiwork, and so is also, presumably, the law of the survival of
the fittest. (Christian evolutionists, take note! In exonerating and
extolling the evolutionary processes, you are exonerating and extolling
the works of the Devil!) "The Zoroastrian view," he continues,
"must be rejected because it postulates two first principles, which
is a plain metaphysical impossibility." The view which is not open
to this or any other objection, and which he calls the Theistic view,
"supposes that a large share of the government of the material universe
was committed, at the creation, to a personal spirit, of great, but not
unlimited, power and intelligence, who, having been originally created
good, subsequently fell, and introduced evil and disorder into the
world.... This hypothesis of a personal devil has many advantages. It
explains the whole of the facts; it avoids the postulation of two
first causes; it vindicates the moral perfection of the Deity; and
it allows the optimistic hope to be entertained that in the end good
will triumph over evil." All this is highly instructive. For it means
that, in the opinion of an erudite apologist of the Church of England,
flourishing a.d. 1906, the moral perfection of the Deity can only
be vindicated on the hypothesis of a personal devil! Doubtless this
hypothesis--and, remember, it is nothing more than a hypothesis,
and one that is now generally discredited--fits in admirably; but
the question is, Are we to accept it, however imaginary and opposed
to the facts of science, just because it is so suitable?

There remains the usual retort of the religionist when closely
cornered: "The finite mind cannot expect to understand the
Infinite." He appears to forget entirely that when he advances proofs
of the God of his heart he himself is using his finite mind, and
that his opponents therefore have an equal right to use theirs when
criticising his "proofs." This by the way. The particular point we have
to notice is that the appeal to this negative argument amounts to an
admission that the proofs do indeed appear all the other way. Thus
in the question now before us, "Is the First Cause a beneficent
intelligence?" we find that a statement confidently proclaimed by
the pious is not only unsupported by evidence, but in spite of it--a
mere assertion suggested by the emotions. With more modesty and (may
I add?) with more common sense, the agnostic disclaims any knowledge
of God, holding that human knowledge is limited to experience, and
that, since the absolute and unconditioned, if it exists at all,
cannot fall within experience, we have no right to assert anything
whatever with regard to it.



EVIL FOR WHICH MAN IS HELD RESPONSIBLE.

The very existence of the God of our hearts depends upon the proof
of His morality. The argument from moral order seems at first sight
a strong one. Morality, even adopting the naturalist's explanation
that it is only a social instinct, can be regarded as the result of
a divine spark. Its beneficial influence on the happiness of the
individual and the well-being of the race cannot be too strongly
insisted upon as a well-ascertained fact. "Virtue is self-rewarding,
and vice is self-punishing." [222] But the Rationalist asks: "Why
design man's nature so that he is more likely to go wrong, when he
gets the chance, than to go right; and this in despite of the moral
or social instinct?" The usual answer of the religionist is that,
if we could not do wrong, we should be mere machines. "No doubt,"
says the author of Pro Fide, "if God had made us what Mr. Huxley says
we are, conscious automata, we should have been incapable of sin;
but it is better to be men, with all the glorious possibilities of
freedom and virtue, than to be machines, however excellent." Now,
do we allow our children to choose for themselves when we know they
will choose wrongly? Do we not guard them against the inglorious
possibilities--the slavery of vice? If we fail in our duty to them
and they fall, should we add to our guilt by perpetrating on them
unimaginable cruelties? Again, do we not prefer the fellowship of the
good-natured? Yet these, according to the religionist, are the veriest
automata compared with those who have inherited vicious or disagreeable
characteristics, and do their best to fight against them. Be this as
it may, the fact remains that the less fortunately endowed are seldom
able to raise themselves up to the level of the more fortunately
endowed--environment may, of course, elevate the one, as it may also
degrade the other--and there is no doubt whose society we prefer. Why
should it be better for men to be capable of--or, rather, may we
not say prone to--sin? Why should their Maker grant them "glorious
possibilities" which He has denied to Himself? Why should He alone be
a machine that cannot go wrong? Surely there is something amiss in an
argument that furnishes such inadequate excuses in order to explain
why the Designer gave us natures infinitely inferior to His own.


        Oh, Thou who man from basest clay didst make,
        And e'en for Paradise devised the snake,
        For all the sin wherewith the face of man
        Is blackened, man's forgiveness give--and take!


Some of Nature's plans would appear to be specially designed to bring
out the worst side of the diverse nature implanted in man. The plan of
the struggle for existence is a palpable instance. Take another--take
the plan for the reproduction of life. Could any Omnipotent Being
be proud of it? Let alone the unfair division of pain, which the
discredited Eden story can now no longer account for, is it helpful to
man in his struggle to improve his nature? The plan being God's plan,
it is enjoined upon us that the procreation of children is a sacred
duty; but it is also plainly intimated that to abstain from marriage
altogether is yet more meritorious. Similarly in Mithraism, Buddhism,
the religions of ancient America and other pre-Christian cults, the
sanctity of the celibate life is upheld. If man is not doing his best
in obeying the behests of his Maker, how can he do right? Has he been
given a fair chance when an instinct so hurtful is implanted in him
that even its natural gratification in the divinely appointed manner
is likely to hinder him in the cultivation of his spiritual nature;
this although matrimony was ordained--so our prayer-book tells us--for
a remedy against sin? The truth is that this necessary instinct,
quite apart from its responsibility for much sorrow and strife and
quite apart from its terrible tendency to perversion, is innately
prejudicial to our moral elevation, and, in order to preserve a
healthy, happy mind, the less we allow our thoughts to dwell upon
its fulfilment the better.

Again, "a very little disorder in the organisation of the brain
suffices to cause hallucinations of the senses, to shake the intellect
from its throne, to paralyse the will, and to corrupt the sentiments
and affections." [223] "How precise and skilful," remarks Dr. Flint,
lost in admiration of the Designer, "must be the adjustment between
the sound brain and the sane mind!" "How fiend-like," says the
horrified Rationalist, "would be the Intellect which could have
exercised its ingenuity to devise a mechanism inherently liable to
get out of order, and thereby to transform its unhappy possessor into
a fool or villain." In the event of the latter result, moreover, man,
according to Christ's teaching (if honestly interpreted), is to suffer
eternal torment!



CONSCIENCE.

Regarding theories of the origin of conscience such as those
of J. S. Mill, Bain, Darwin, and Spencer, Dr. Flint remarks:
"It does not matter whether conscience be primary or derivative;
it exists." [224] That it does matter is shown by the fact that the
bulk of the apologists still stoutly maintain that conscience is a
special attribute of man--a divine instinct--and is not derived from
the lower animals. We have, I think, gone into this sufficiently
in the previous chapter, and I shall confine my remarks to another
aspect of the question--the fallibility of the moral consciousness.

"The existence," it is urged, "of a moral principle within us, of
a conscience which witnesses against sin and on behalf of holiness,
is of itself evidence that God must be a moral being, one who hates
sin and loves holiness." [225] Given the existence of a personal God,
this argument is plausible enough till we examine it more closely. The
liability of conscience to err is, or should be, a platitude. Its
two components--the reason and the emotions--both being fallible,
it necessarily follows that conscience must have the same quality. We
have only to think for a moment to discover innumerable examples in
proof of this. An illustration which occurs to me, and which will
hurt no one's susceptibilities, is that of the Wa Daruma. This is
an East African tribe practising a strict morality which is all the
more remarkable on account of the gross immorality of the neighbouring
tribes. Nevertheless, the conscience of the Wa Daruma bids them kill
their twin offspring. If conscience, then, be fallible, how is it
a Theistic proof? Because, though it may make a mistake through an
untutored reason, or through a reason clouded by deceptive emotions,
the consciousness that there is a right or wrong at all is sufficient
proof of a moral intelligence? So be it; but it is passing strange
that God should allow conscience to deceive us. John Locke well
said, many years ago: "Children are travellers newly arrived in a
strange country: we should therefore make conscience not to deceive
them." Are we not children of God in a strange country? We would not
deceive our children. The acquittal of conscience gives pleasure,
as the condemnation gives pain--remorse--and every man must obey his
conscience if he would be happy. What a thousand pities it seems that
it should ever lead him into error! Should it not be a divine intuition
of the right both in our religious beliefs and in our conduct?

It is an intuition of the right, the believer will say, when it
tells you to believe in Christ and God. I would gladly think so;
but every believer of every creed on the face of the earth says
the same about his belief, and hence the amazing persistence of
erroneous beliefs. When the voice of conscience is composed of a
blind reliance on intuition (i.e., on the emotions) and a distrust
of reason, how can the result be otherwise? The whole question of the
truth of beliefs hinges upon whether intuition can or cannot be relied
upon. We know that mistakes do occur through trusting to intuition,
especially in the matter of beliefs; how, then, can we assume that
it is infallible? Strange as the freaks of faith among cultured
persons may appear, they are perfectly intelligible. They are the
result of reliance on intuition rather than on reason. I will give
an example. Who more logical, apparently, than John Henry Newman,
the coadjutor of Whately in his popular work on logic? His illogical
conduct is, therefore, particularly instructive. In 1832, after a
visit to Rome, he wrote describing the Roman Catholic religion as
polytheistic, degrading, and idolatrous, [226] and then, after all,
entered the Roman Catholic Church in 1845. He did so because he found
that the difficulties of the creed and of the canon of Scripture were
insurmountable unless over-ridden by the authority of the Church. To
escape becoming an agnostic he elected to join a Church calling herself
infallible. He was able to come to this decision although, to his own
knowledge, her infallibility was belied by her conduct! Further, so
eloquent was his reasoning on the subject, so apparently logical, that
some hundreds of clergymen joined him in making their submission to
the Church of Rome. Underlying all this apparent inconsistency is the
assertion, so eloquently pleaded by Cardinal Newman, of the supremacy
of conscience and the correctness of intuition. So also have asserted
the followers of every religion from all time, and to what have their
consciences and intuitions led them--to truth, or to a pot-pourri of
absurd and conflicting beliefs? We have the testimony of all history
to prove the extreme fallibility of conscience. Conscience possesses no
divine spark to keep a man from acting wrongly through ignorance. Even
when knowledge is present we see, as in Cardinal Newman's case, that
the voice of conscience may still speak incorrectly; for reason is
swamped when emotion's flood-gate is left ajar.

Cardinal Newman's opinions have a special interest for us at the
present time. He held that, "apart from an interior and unreasoned
conviction, there is no cogent proof of the existence of God"; that
"the man who has not this interior conviction has no choice but to
remain an agnostic, while the man who has it is bound sooner or later
to become a Roman Catholic." [227]

So inexplicable did his motives appear that Charles Kingsley accused
him of saying that "truth for its own sake need not be, and, on
the whole, ought not to be, a virtue of the Roman clergy." Newman's
Apologia pro Vita Sua, however, leaves no doubt of the author's own
personal rectitude. His premises--the infallibility of conscience
and intuition--were false. But that is not an unusual feature of
Christian apologetics. The keen intellects of the two pious brothers,
John Henry and Francis William, were really buried beneath a mass of
preconceptions. That of the latter, however, being less submissive,
proceeded to a slow and sure upheaval, and finally Francis Newman
rejected Christianity altogether. [228] In the Apologia pro Vita
Sua we find, I think, the key to Cardinal Newman's convictions. He
was intensely superstitious, and inclined also to be timid. On the
opening page, where he gives the recollections of his boyhood, we read:
"I used to wish the Arabian tales were true." And again: "I was very
superstitious, and for some time previous to my conversion (when I
was fifteen) used constantly to cross myself on going into the dark."



FREEWILL.

In my remarks on the "evil for which man is held responsible,"
I have alluded to the Rationalist's contention that man cannot be
justly blamed for his actions, and that, if there be a God, He alone
is to blame. This opens up the question of Freewill v. Determinism--a
thorny question, which I should prefer, if only for considerations of
space and my readers' patience, to leave severely alone. A whole volume
would be necessary to present the case for Determinism adequately, and
I am fully aware that a few brief words will fail to convince; but,
if I can remove a single iota of the misconceptions on this subject,
I shall feel rewarded.

Kant defines an act of volition as an act which is determined by the
anticipatory idea of the result of the act. Although he maintains
that there must be a moral God, he fully admits that the forecast or
anticipatory idea is the inevitable effect of precedent conditions,
such as temperament (heredity), education (environment), and the
like; and in a well-known passage he says that, if the whole history
of the subject could be known, the voluntary acts of a man might be
predicted with the same certainty as an eclipse. The tendency of modern
psychology is in the same direction. All voluntary acts, we are told,
depend on the memory of involuntary acts of the same sort previously
performed. It is true that a few Christian psychologists leave room
for a "sheer heave" of the will by means of which an idea naturally
feeble is fortified and held in place; but when they speak in this wise
they speak as metaphysicians. No metaphysical argument, it seems to me,
can reconcile this inflexible causality with true freedom of will. How
can the will be at one and the same time fettered and free? There is,
I grant, every appearance of freewill; but it belongs to the category
of appearances which deceive.

If we accept the Christian contention, we have to believe that a
benevolent God gives us a free will, the power to choose between
Him and the Devil, knowing, as in His omniscience He must, that the
vast majority will make a sad use of their gift! The modern Christian
admits that heredity and environment have their say also. Thus there
are, in all, four forces struggling for the mastery--God, the Devil,
heredity and environment; and it is the duty of the divinely-implanted
free will to choose between them. Rather, is it not that there are
two forces, and two forces only--heredity and environment--acting upon
our brain, and our choice is the resultant of them? Undoubtedly man,
as a self-conscious and reflecting animal, has what may be called
the power of choice; but the way this power will be used would be
a foregone conclusion did we know the sum-total of the effect of
heredity and environment up to the moment of its use. "But," it
may be objected, "surely there is such a thing as will-power. We
can overcome our heredity and environment by the exercise of our
will. Temptations to which the weak-willed succumb do not affect the
strong-willed. Here, at least, we have a distinct instance in which
heredity and environment are overcome." Yes, it is true, of course,
that heredity and environment are continually being overcome by
the happy possessor of sufficient will-power; but what we have to
bear in mind is that it is not a portion, but the whole, of a man's
heredity and environment which must be taken into consideration. In
the case of the man with the strong will, it is still his heredity
and environment which have in the first instance settled the line of
conduct to which, once resolved upon, he adheres so tenaciously. And,
again, this particular quality of the mind which enables him to keep
to his resolution is, like all other qualities of the mind, itself
the product of heredity and environment.

The Determinism of science and the Freewill of metaphysics are
essentially antagonistic. Determinism is completely subversive
of Christian teaching. It is directly opposed to the Thirty-nine
Articles of religion. Not only does it imply that man is not to blame
for his actions, but that, if there be a God, He, and He alone, is to
blame. Christian theologists are therefore its strenuous opponents. In
their apologetic efforts one finds the strangest misconceptions
of what is meant in a broad sense by heredity and environment. The
best apology I have seen so far is by the Rev. P. N. Waggett, in a
tractate called Science and Conduct. [229] Father Waggett seems to
realise better than most of his fellow-clerics the enormous influence
of heredity and environment. Still he comes to the conclusion that
"when, under given circumstances," a man "does what, under those
circumstances, and with his given constitution, he usually does
not do," he is exercising "some inward spring." The fallacy in this
argument is the common one. The effect of environment up to the moment
of action has not been considered. The obscurity of the expression
"given constitution" is doubtless unintentional, but it is none
the less misleading. Father Waggett would be the first to admit that
something must have occurred meanwhile to account for the new frame of
mind. It is for him to show that an alteration in environment is not
all that has occurred, and that there is room for this "inward spring."

Will not the acceptance of this doctrine have a paralysing effect
upon us? On the contrary. We shall be better able to discern where
our salvation lies. We shall pay far more attention to the real
forces which determine conduct. We shall devote our energies to
combating bad heredity with good environment; and we shall do this
with the knowledge that not only ourselves and our associates, but our
descendants also, will reap the benefit. We shall fly from unhealthy
thoughts, and avoid the surroundings likely to give rise to them. We
shall welcome healthy thoughts and seek helpful surroundings.

The doctrine of determinism is thought likely to corrupt our moral
character, but, in reality, it compares favourably with religious
doctrines. The belief in God's omniscience leads the Mohammedan to
fatalism, and the Christian to the doctrine of predestination. If
a Christian really believed as he professes, if he could honestly
subscribe to the seventeenth article of his Creed--in which it is
stated that "before the foundations of the world were laid God hath
constantly decreed by His counsel secret to us, to deliver from curse
and damnation those whom He hath chosen [the italics are mine, of
course] in Christ out of mankind"--God's Predestination would indeed
be "a dangerous downfall," "thrusting men into desperation." The
doctrine of predestination, therefore, appears, without doubt, to
be ethically mischievous. The doctrine of Determinism, on the other
hand, teaches a man to fight pernicious hereditary instincts with the
weapon of environment, and to keep a tender place in his heart for
unfortunates who succumb. [230] Tout comprendre c'est tout pardonner.




§ 5. Religious Experience.


MYSTICISM AND CONVERSION.

Of late, the argument from "Religious Experience" has been much to
the front, and nothing written on the subject has created a deeper
impression, or been more cordially welcomed by the supernaturalist,
than Professor W. James's book, The Varieties of Religious
Experience. Professor James is a prominent member of the Society
for Psychical Research, and no one is better able than he to give
descriptions of psychic phenomena; but the conclusions he comes to as
to the spiritual signification of some of them will strike the normal
man as too absurd to be taken seriously. More than this. Indirectly he
furnishes one of the very best weapons for attacking supernaturalism
that has ever yet been put in the hands of the naturalist. I have
already given some examples of so-called religious experiences (in
Chap. II., pp. 59-61). These are still regarded by the superstitious
as spiritual manifestations; but Professor James discovers a spiritual
interpretation in still more palpable hallucinations. Unwittingly
he spoils the case for religious experience by trying to prove too
much. I will give an instance. He describes how an intimate friend
of his kept experiencing a "horrible sensation" of the presence of
something, which he "did not recognise as any individual being or
person." Professor James admits that "such an experience as this does
not connect itself with the religious sphere." [Why not? It might
have been the Devil that time.] Later on his friend had a pleasanter
experience. "There was not a mere consciousness of something there,
but, fused in the central happiness of it, a startling awareness of
some ineffable good. Not vague either--not like the emotional effect
of some poem or scent or blossom or music, but the sure knowledge of
the close presence of a sort of mighty person; and, after it went,
the memory persisted as the one perception of reality. Everything
else might be a dream, but not that." Professor James then remarks:
"My friend, as it oddly happens, does not interpret these later
experiences theistically, as signifying the presence of God." Why
oddly? The explanation seems simple enough. It was just because his
friend was not odd, but a normal individual of modern times. Perhaps,
after all, the secret lay in the well-known reply to the question,
"Is life worth living?"--It all depends on the liver. One may also
recall the words of the celebrated clerical wit who said: "They think
they are pious when they are only bilious."

Professor James then relates various experiences of other persons
who, unlike his friend, were positive they had felt "the presence
of God." And he tells us: "Nothing is more common in the pages of
religious biography than the way in which seasons of lively and
of difficult faith are described as alternating. Probably every
religious person has the recollection of particular crises in which
a direct vision of the truth, a direct perception, perhaps, of a
living God's existence, swept in and overwhelmed the languor of the
more ordinary belief." If this sort of thing accounts for the faith of
every religious person, the mystery (in these days) of the great faith
of the few and the little faith of the many is completely solved. So
few, relatively speaking, have this experience; so few are by nature
mystics. Also it helps to explain the prevalence of supernatural
belief in bygone ages. Thoughtful unbelievers have long ago come to
the conclusion that some such psychical experiences largely account
for religious superstitions, and now an eminent psychologist and
religious apologist confirms their theories.

Professor James argues that "the neurotic temperament naturally
introduces one to regions of religious truth which are hidden from
the robust Philistine type of nervous system, that thanks heaven it
hasn't a single morbid fibre in its composition." This kind of "robust
Philistine" is, one is glad to think, a very common type. I hope I am
a fairly robust Philistine myself. The Rationalist may, or may not, be
emotional, but he certainly prefers to be without morbid fibres. Why,
of all the most undesirable states of mind, should morbidity assist
the human being to have faith in God? Why should spirituality and
strong faith be possible only for a person of nervous instability
whose intellectual canon (unacknowledged no doubt) is "Credo quia
impossibile"? Why, in the name of all that is reasonable, should
spiritual experiences be the prerogative of exceptional temperaments
only? Why, in all fairness, if there be any spiritual meaning in
hallucinations, should not the Agnostic be at least vouchsafed the
consciousness of the Devil's presence to cure him of his unbelief?

Professor James thinks "there can be no doubt that as a matter of
fact a religious life, exclusively pursued, does tend to make the
person exceptional and eccentric." He refers to "geniuses in the
religious line," who, "like many other geniuses ... have often shown
symptoms of nervous instability." "Even more perhaps," he says, "than
other kinds of genius, religious leaders have been subject to abnormal
psychical visitations ... often, moreover, these pathological features
in their career have helped to give them their religious authority and
influence." All this is exceedingly instructive, coming as it does from
the mouth of an earnest champion of religion [231] specially suited,
by his researches in psychical phenomena, to speak with authority on
the psychology of religion. His belief in the interference in human
life of spiritual agencies, and the whole tenour of his book, render
it certain that he is not consciously bringing any arguments to bear
against supernaturalism, but, on the contrary, intends to adduce new
arguments in its favour.

Have we not here a satisfactory and perfectly natural explanation
of the phenomena of conversion? The religionist is apt, I think,
to lose sight of the fact that conversion is not confined to any one
particular creed; that it cannot witness to the truth of the one and
not of the other. "The mystical feeling," remarks Professor James
(pp. 425-6), "of enlargement, union, and emancipation ... is capable
of forming matrimonial alliances with material furnished by the most
diverse philosophies and theologies, provided only they can find
a place in their framework for its peculiar emotional mood." The
most striking examples of conversion are those of the instantaneous
kind, of which St. Paul's is held out to us as the most eminent. I
have already outlined the probable explanation in St. Paul's case,
and other cases may be similarly explained. The supernaturalist's
interpretation of conversion cannot be considered seriously until
proofs are forthcoming of an instance in which nothing was known
previously of the truth alleged to have been revealed. Like Mr. Lowes
Dickinson, I have never, for example, discovered a case in which a
Mohammedan or a Hindoo, without having heard of Christianity, has
had a revelation of Christian "truth."

Of all visions, those of the death-bed especially invite our
attention, for they are looked upon by many pious persons as sure
evidence in favour of the truth of their Faith. Will this argument
bear analysis? We know that good men and women have had heavenly
visions during their last moments. We know also that others of equally
blameless lives have been terrified at the last by the sight of some
supreme horror. How can any argument be based upon the phantasms of a
disordered brain? Do not these visions, too, usually take their form
from the teaching with which the mind has been imbued? The Mohammedan
sees a heaven peopled with houris; do we on that account accept the
Koran as our guide? A dying Hindoo may have a vision of a heathen
deity of questionable character, and derive comfort from it. I have
myself stood by the bedside of a dying Mahratta whose ravings during
the delirium of fever indicated such a vision. There are, it is true,
cases where the visions of the dying may seem utterly unlike those we
should expect. But the brain retains impressions of things of which the
conscious memory has long ago passed away, and, if the early history of
the ecstatic could be fully known, we should, as Proctor points out,
[232] find nearly every circumstance of his vision explained, or at
least an explanation suggested. It may be said again of death-bed
visions, as of visions generally, that there has never yet been a
case of a Mohammedan or a Hindoo or any other non-Christian who has
had a revelation of Christian "truth."

Professor James is not the only person having the curious notion that
an abnormal state of mind admits the nearer presence of God. To take a
people possessing a marvellous self-control over their emotions, and,
therefore, the last among whom you would expect to find such ideas,
I may mention that the more ignorant and superstitious among the
Japanese throw themselves into hypnotic trances, and then fondly
imagine that a god is present in their body, and is making use
of them as a mouthpiece. [233] Again, no superstition is commoner
among the ignorant natives of India, Mohammedan and Hindoo alike,
than that people of unsound mind have some sort of special means of
communication with God; but that educated persons, having fairly normal
minds themselves, should hold such an opinion is yet another example
of the hallucinations to which religious enthusiasts are liable.

The folly of attributing any spiritual significance to these
experiences will be better understood if we compare them with cases
where there is no religious element whatsoever. A lady, a friend of
mine, is continually subject to a curious experience, which may serve
to illustrate this point. I give the account of it in her own words:--


    As a child I was always a bad sleeper, and got into the habit of
    making up stories to amuse myself when lying awake in bed. This
    habit continued as I grew older; but, after a time, the stories
    ceased to be connected in any way with myself. Years ago I began
    a story which has grown gradually through three generations,
    and there are signs of the coming of a fourth. The old house
    has remained as the centre of the story for years; most of the
    characters are men, and no one of either sex bears any possible
    relationship to me. They have all become far more real to me
    than my own relations; at bed-time, on long railway journeys
    (sometimes), or when I am walking or doing needlework, they are
    there. If I get to the house at bed-time, I sleep well. If I
    am there when travelling, I don't get tired, and the characters
    grow and develop quite naturally. It is my inner life, and, if I
    were given that way, it might become a series of visions. I can
    quite understand men having ecstasies in which the ideals they
    have always before them become apparently materialised.



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PRAYER.

I cannot too strongly insist that all this is extremely instructive. It
explains so many things that still have to be explained, if religion be
untrue. The new science of psychology has already accounted for many
abnormal phenomena that were formerly considered miraculous--"faith
cures," [234] for instance. Does it not account for the effects
of prayer? We know nothing of the efficacy of prayer in securing
material benefits--there is no proof either way; but we do know that
it has often an ethical value, and is also a means of strengthening
faith. Does it necessarily follow that a Supernatural Being hears
and answers the suppliant's prayers? I think not. Suggestion, it is
now known, exercises an extraordinary influence over the subjective
mind. In prayer auto-suggestion undoubtedly plays its subtle rôle.

Let me give an example of the benign results that may be effected
by suggestion without any appeal to the supernatural. Often a moral
change for the worse in a most estimable person is distinctly traceable
to causes over which he or she had no control, and the physician or
surgeon, having diagnosed the case, proceeds to do his best to bring
about a cure. Where it is some nervous malady, mental therapeutics
or psychic healing is sometimes extremely efficacious. [235] Vices
and weaknesses are now looked upon by many in the light of diseases
and ailments--curable, ameliorable, or incurable, as the case may
be. Disease or Devil, the fact remains that medical treatment may
effect a cure even where the patient's disorder has been brought on
by, as we say, his own fault. Dipsomania, morphinomania, kleptomania,
nymphomania, satyriasis, and various moral perversions may yield to a
purely natural treatment, whether it be the method of a Milne Bramwell
(by suggestion) or of Keeley.

When denouncing Mariolatry (in his sermon at the opening of the
Church Congress, October, 1905), the Bishop of London said: "It is not
revealed that the cry to any saint or to the Virgin Mary ever reaches
them at all." Apparently, therefore, the Bishop admits that appeals
to the supernatural may be wasted, and this in spite of the suppliant
being very much in earnest. Yet who would be prepared to say that
the Roman Catholic who prays to the Virgin Mary and to innumerable
saints does not derive quite as much benefit from the process as the
Protestant who directs his worship solely to the Holy Trinity, or
the Shintoist who invokes the benign spirits of his ancestors? [236]
The effect of the suggestion is the same in each case, and has all
the appearance of an answer to prayer.

Again, putting aside abnormal phases of the mind, is it not, as
Ralph Waldo Trine puts it (in his little book, Character Building:
Thought Power), a simple psychological law that any type of thought,
if entertained for a sufficient length of time, will, by and by,
reach the motor tracts of the brain, and finally burst forth into
action? There seems no need for the introduction of a supernatural
hypothesis to explain the moral effect of prayer. So, also, with
regard to faith, it is only natural that the believer, racked with
doubt, should find reassurance in prayer.

The Theist who lays store by the evidence from "religious experience"
will do well to ponder over the following words of one of Professor
James's critics: "Instead of producing anything that would strengthen
the belief in extra-human spirit agents influencing human destinies,
psychology has made intelligible, conformably to the rest of our
organised knowledge, most, if not all, of the striking phenomena which
have been the empirical props of the popular faith in spiritism,
whether Christian or not. We refer to anæsthesias, analgesias,
hallucinations, monitions, trances, the sense of illumination in
ecstasy, etc., including the facts considered in Professor James'
lectures. In making this statement, I do not forget the work of the
Society for Psychical Research. Its achievements may be declared
to have been so far, and without prejudice of the future, absolutely
inconclusive with regard to spiritism." [237] In other words, psychical
research, if conducted by the experimental method and without bias,
may be pregnant with consequences hardly in accord with the hopes of
either the spiritist or spiritualist (in its religious sense). For,
should abnormal phenomena of all kinds admit of a natural explanation,
their present obscurity will no longer furnish grounds for supernatural
speculation.



THE RELIGIOUS (?) EXPERIENCES OF INTOXICATION.

According to Professor James's theory, it is the person who chances to
have a well-developed subliminal life who is predestined to be saved,
for then God will be able to reach him. As Professor James informs
us that "nitrous oxide and ether, especially nitrous oxide, when
sufficiently diluted with air, stimulate the mystical consciousness
in an extraordinary degree," so that "depth beyond depth of truth
seems revealed to the inhaler," the unbelieving Philistine ought
to be recommended to inhale this truth-revealing, and therefore
faith-producing, gas. Like music, it must be meant as an aid to
worship. The new beatitude will then be, as Mr. Leuba remarks,
"Blessed are the intoxicated, for to them the kingdom of spirits is
revealed!" I can quite understand the interest aroused by Professor
James's remarkable book; but that Theists and would-be Theists
should take its chief conclusion seriously is beyond me--or, rather,
I should say it is one more proof to me that the inherited capacity
for superstition is still strong within us. We can understand why
supernatural beliefs die hard.



MUSIC AND THE EMOTIONS. [238]

Are our emotions reliable guides, or are they not? Though the
motive-power in our nature, though they go to make up that heart
upon which Mr. Fielding so eloquently discourses in his Hearts of
Men, do they not need to be carefully controlled by reason? Are they
not the very same emotions which, in all but religious matters, are
admittedly a fruitful source of self-deception? Take the emotion
excited by music. I know many good people who think they possess
considerable religious feeling, and have had a religious experience,
because they are peculiarly affected by music, and especially by fine
sacred music. [239] Similarly, Dr. Torrey's "Glory Song" appeals to the
untrained ear of his emotional audiences, and the Salvation band, all
out of tune, elevates the soul of the Salvationist. Yet lower down the
scale of musical culture we find a clash of discordant sounds exciting
the religious emotions of the savage. Is it too much to say that these
"experiences" differ only in degree from those of the dog who howls as
certain notes affect him? Granted that music, suited to the taste of
the worshipper, is an aid to worship, we have to remember that there
are those whose temperaments are so constituted that they are more
or less unaffected by music--good, bad, or indifferent--and, if the
religious feeling evoked be from God, may we not ask in all reverence:
"Why should the unmusical be debarred from this means of feeling His
presence? Why should the man without a note of music in his composition
have this much less chance of eternal salvation?" Surely we are not to
take seriously and literally the words of our great philosopher-poet
when he says: "Let no such man be trusted"?



SEXUAL LOVE.

Again, there is the religious feeling evoked by that strongest emotion
of all--sexual love; the one excites the other, and the effect produced
may be beneficial or may be mischievous. But sexual love appears to me
a strange aid to the worship of God; and persons who really imagine
they are nearer Him when in this state of emotion most certainly
deceive themselves. The ascetic who is debarred from this particular
"religious" experience should agree with me.



REVIVALISM.

An examination of religious experiences, however brief, cannot well
omit all mention of the question of revivalism. Has it an ethical
value? Has it a spiritual meaning? To the latter question the answer of
the Church is for the most part in the affirmative. In his Pentecostal
message for Whitsuntide, 1905, the Archbishop of Canterbury refers,
without directly naming them, to the extraordinary movement of which
the young Evan Roberts has been the leader, and to the preaching
of Messrs. Torrey and Alexander in London. "To whatever cause or
combination of causes we may attribute it," he says, "the fact
appears to be certain that expression has this year been given in
an unusual degree to a desire for increased spiritual earnestness
in the Christian life." I shall not embark upon the question of the
spiritual signification of revivalism. My remarks on other religious
experiences may be taken to apply here also. Regarding its ethical
value, I fancy most thoughtful onlookers will be with me when I
say that it is unadvisable to stir up hysteria in hysterical people
just for the sake of effects, the usefulness of which is extremely
problematical--effects which, if they benefit a few, are harmful to
the majority, and, in any case, are unlikely to be of a permanent
nature. We have it on excellent authority that "emotional appeals and
revivals do not destroy carnal sin in schools, and it is well known
how often they seem to stimulate, to increase, immorality." [240]




§ 6. The Inevitable Conclusion.

A candid and unbiassed examination of the so-called theistic proofs
can but lead to the one conclusion: they are worthless. Even if the
cosmological and teleological arguments were satisfactory, and even
if "religious" experiences proved the existence of a spirit world,
the ethical argument undoubtedly breaks down, carrying along with
it all that fragile structure of which the theist's theories are
composed. Yes, the problem of evil is insoluble. "We have not,"
says John Stuart Mill, [241] "to attempt the impossible problem of
reconciling infinite benevolence and justice with infinite power in
the Creator of such a world as this. To attempt to do so not only
involves absolute contradiction in an intellectual point of view,
but exhibits to excess the revolting spectacle of a Jesuitical defence
of moral enormities." The latest defence by an approved apologist of
the Church of England will be found in chap. xiv. of Pro Fide. It
has been conducted with conspicuous candour, and such harsh terms
as "Jesuitical" and "revolting" are no longer applicable. Whether,
however, this is likely to prove any more successful than previous
attempts, and to serve as an antidote to scepticism, may be seen by a
glance at the following summary of the line of argument. The author
relies, to begin with, upon the theological assumption that moral
evil arises from the abuse of God's gift to man of a free will. He
also argues that the transmission of a tendency to sin is not unjust,
because a remedy for it has been provided. As for physical evil,
this, he maintains, subserves important moral purposes in the case
of man, and in the case of animals it is more than compensated for
by physical good. In the end, however, he is forced, as we have seen,
to fall back upon the hypothesis of a personal devil. In other words,
he presents us with those sophistical arguments of theistic apologists
which we have been investigating, and then, finding, as a perfectly
honest mind must find, that these are inadequate, he has, after all,
to rely upon those ancient theological dogmas which owe their origin
to the insolubility of the problem. Let those accept his special
pleading who can. There are many who read an apologetic work with
minds already made up to be persuaded by it, and where there is this
bias there cannot be straight thinking. For those who keep an open mind
the conclusion is inevitable: apart from the revelation which has been
called in question there is no proof, there never can be any proof, of
the existence of the God of the Christian. If there be a First Cause,
if there be a Supreme Intelligence, if there be a Deity at all, we know
nothing of His nature and nothing of His intentions with regard to us.



NOTE ON RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY.

An examination of the development of philosophy leads to conclusions
of considerable import. Our present inquiry can be only an exceedingly
rapid one; but anyone wishing to study the subject a little more fully
will find it concisely treated in a book called Science and Faith,
by Dr. Paul Topinard, late General Secretary of the Anthropological
Society of Paris. From Chapter VIII. I cull the following:--

"Animals, in the presence of phenomena which they do not understand,
retire confounded. Savage man does the same. But he, at least, hazards
the attempt of an explanation by investing the objects or phenomena in
question with life and sentiments similar to his own. Later this same
savage, discovering or believing to discover in himself a double being,
the one corporeal and the other spiritual, transfers the new notions
regarding himself to objects without himself, to stones, plants,
animals, or stars.... Religions, at first more or less elementary,
with their founders and priests, do not appear until later.... For
a long time the sorcerer--that is to say, a man less credulous than
the rest, and adroit in the sense of knowing how to reap personal
advantage from the beliefs of his fellows--stood alone in his
class. Sorcerer and medicine man at once, he distributed amulets,
drove out spirits from the bodies of the deceased, and caused the
rains to fall.... The sacerdotal caste arose, at times recruiting
itself from the outside and at times hereditary. More intelligent
than the others, more disposed to reflect, the priests were naturally
inclined to seek more satisfactory explanations from the phenomena
of nature, to distinguish general causes from particular causes,
to reduce the number of the spirits, to champion the most important
of these, and even to symbolise many of them. The cult of heroes,
of personages in the tribe who had rendered it valuable services,
and of ancestors, was mingled with the preceding beliefs. Having
to speak to simple people, for whom it was necessary to materialise
things, they were obliged to recast their ideas and to expound them
by the help of fables and myths, which soon essayed to explain in a
tangible form the origin of things, the existing phenomena of nature,
and often to guide the conduct of men. These were the first attempts
of philosophy, already as utilitarian as they were mystical."

"Religions consecrated a multitude of usages and ceremonies from which
the sacerdotal class lived, and which greatly augmented its power;
and they also exerted a strong political influence. Again, they
led up to genuine moral codes, such as those of Brahma and Buddha in
India, and Confucius in China.... The utilitarian idea appears to have
dominated among the Phoenician and Canaanite peoples. It gave rise to
the doctrine of a personal national God, who had created man and the
people whom he had chosen and whose destinies he directed. He exacted
from them blind and exclusive worship and obedience to the laws which
he promulgated. In return he protected them, reserving his right of
terrestrial punishment.... The Egyptians are related to the Hindus by
their belief in metempsychosis, or the transmigration of souls from
animal to animal.... The conception of a judgment after death passed
through these peoples [the Egyptians] to the polytheism of Greece and
Rome.... Greek philosophy rose audaciously to the loftiest and boldest
conceptions, not conceptions crowning an intellectual edifice, but
conceptions which dominate it in imaginary realms of space. Aristotle
belongs apart. He is at once scientist and philosopher. He observes
nature. He is the founder of natural history, of anthropology, of
political science, and of political economy. According to Graef,
he is also the founder of political philosophy, because he was the
first to introduce positive facts into philosophy.... In the general
run, they [the Greek philosophers] were dialecticians, sophists, and
intellectual gymnasts only. But, such as they were, they founded free
inquiry, disintegrated the national polytheistic beliefs, and prepared
the way for the revolution which was on the verge of accomplishment."

"In an unknown [?] corner of Judæa, on the banks of a lake, the glad
tidings burst forth of a coming regeneration, and a voice was heard
pleading the cause of the feeble, the humble, and the oppressed,
and saying: 'Love ye one another!' The doctrine, at first local
and inculcated by a small number of apostles, soon extended with
St. Paul to the Gentiles, and thenceforward its progress was rapid
[?]. Philosophy was not indifferent to it.... Christianity, in effect,
instead of conquering the pagan world, was conquered by it, as Huxley
has remarked.... During the Middle Ages science had disappeared from
the West. Philosophy, hemmed in between metaphysics and theology,
became scholasticism, which sought to reconcile Plato, Plotinus, and
Aristotle with the needs of orthodoxy, and split hairs over subtle
essences and entities.... Then a concourse of circumstances occurred
which, as fifteen centuries before, was to transform the Western world,
although differently, and which inaugurated modern times, to wit: The
return to the West of the knowledge that had taken refuge among the
Arabs; the discovery of printing, which spread everywhere trustworthy
texts; the discovery of the New World, which quadrupled the surface
of the earth to be observed and studied; the awakening of science,
with Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Rondelet, Vesalius, Harvey; and,
finally, the Reformation."

"On the downfall of scholasticism the first care of philosophy
was not the renouncing of what had been its essence, the search
for the absolute by intuition [italics are mine] and reason, but
the overhauling of its methods, which it sought to render more
precise.... The subsequent divergencies were rooted less in the
varying intellectual and logical make-up of each philosopher and in
their method of applying their faculties than in their individual ways
of feeling and conceiving. Philosophy in effect is simply a struggle
between these elements.... Nevertheless, the conquests of science began
to make themselves felt. There was now less insistence on God and more
on the world, man, morals, and the conditions of social life. The
over-hanging metaphysical cloud is still more or less heavy, but at
spots it suffers the light to pass through. There are two streams:
the one continues Descartes--in France with Pascal, Bossuet, Fénélon,
and Malebranche, in Germany with Spinoza and Leibnitz; the other, in
England, is represented by Bacon, Hobbes, and Locke.... Bacon, Hobbes,
and Locke are the inaugurators of a school which is characterised by
its practical spirit, its observation and analysis of psychological
facts, and by its disposition to refer the conduct of man to the
advantages which he draws therefrom. It led to Adam Smith, who
discovers the sanction of morality in the public approbation of what
is right; to Bentham, who sees it in interest rationally understood;
to Hume and the Scottish school; and finally to the existing school
of John Stuart Mill, Darwin, and Herbert Spencer. Locke, on the other
hand, is also the starting-point of the French school of the eighteenth
century, which is characterised by a tendency at once anti-clerical,
altruistic, and sentimental."

"We shall say nothing of the philosophy of the nineteenth century
of the German school, which represents speculative philosophy, and
the English, which is physiological in bent, and of which we have
the highest opinion. In France the most notable achievement is the
attempt which was made by Auguste Comte. For Comte metaphysics must
be entirely eliminated. The day of intuitions, à priori conceptions,
entities, innate ideas, is past. If a problem cannot be solved, it is
to be let alone. Psychology is only a branch of physiology, and the
latter a division of biology. Morals rest not upon any imperative
obligation, but upon the altruism which education developes. There
are no rights besides those which society confers. Human knowledge
has passed through three stages: one of faith or theology, one of
conceptions or metaphysics, and one of observation or science. These,
in turn, are the basal principles of science, and would be perfect
if the positivist school were faithful to them. But in its own bosom
even there are refractory spirits who suffer themselves unconsciously
to be ruled by their sentiments rather than by observation, and who
are constantly lapsing back into the old methods.... For me there
is but one method of knowing what is, and of inducing therefrom what
has been and what will be--and that is observation; all suggestions
which transgress this method are void."

From his examination of the evolution of philosophy Dr. Topinard draws,
by way of résumé, the following conclusions:--

a. Philosophy, like religion, is the outcome of the belief in the
supernatural held by man in his more or less primitive state.

b. The philosophic spirit and the spirit which created the arts and
letters have as common characters their subjectivity, their need of
imagining and of constructing, and their firm belief in the reality
of their conceptions.

c. Philosophy is opposed to science. It answers to the impatient need
of man to explain at once things which elude his comprehension.

d. At the present day philosophy still lives, but is losing its
initial character and sees itself obliged more and more to reckon
with science and practice.

e. We are obliged to admit that the group of human faculties which
has given birth to philosophy has a less prolonged future than the
group which has given rise to science.

f. Philosophy, although on the wane, and apparently in disaccord with
the end of the nineteenth century, has nevertheless a beautiful domain
to exploit.

These conclusions concerning the past and present of philosophy cannot
be disseminated too widely. So many refuse point-blank to inquire
into their belief, because they have been led to think that this
will entail their wading through a mass of philosophical writings,
and because they expect to find these either incomprehensible or
unconvincing. Properly speaking, Christians should be the first to
admit that apologists who attempt to defend their Faith by abstruse
arguments are sadly inconsistent. For it is written, Jesus rejoiced
in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and hast revealed them unto babes. Let the humble truth-seeker take
heart. Whatever the value or present tendency of philosophy may or
may not be, the truth about the Christian religion can be ascertained
without a knowledge of metaphysics.

Metaphysics does not, and never will, appeal to the average man. He
agrees with the scoffer, who says: "When the man who is speaking no
longer knows what he is talking about, and the man who is listening
never knew what he was talking about, that is metaphysics!" The
obscurity inherent in profound and abstract philosophy may well be
objected to, not only as painful and fatiguing, but as the inevitable
source of uncertainty and error. "Here, indeed," exclaims Hume,
in his essay on The Different Species of Philosophy, "lies the
justest and most plausible objection against a considerable part of
metaphysics, that they are not properly a science, but arise either
from the fruitless efforts of human vanity, which would penetrate
into subjects utterly inaccessible to the understanding, or from
the craft of popular superstitions, which, being unable to defend
themselves on fair ground, raise these intangling brambles to cover
and protect their weakness." It is accurate and just reasoning like
that of Hume, in his Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding, which,
to quote his words again, "is the only catholic remedy, fitted for
all persons and all dispositions; and is alone able to subvert that
abstruse philosophy and metaphysical jargon which, being mixed up
with popular superstition, renders it in a manner impenetrable to
careless reasoners, and gives it the air of science and wisdom."

It may be urged that the famous Scottish philosopher and historian
has been unduly severe in his sceptical views concerning speculative
philosophy, or that he would have been less severe upon the later
metaphysical thinking which was affected by his criticisms. There
still remains, in any case, one feature common to all philosophies:
their difficulty. Philosophy is only studied, and, indeed, can only be
thoroughly understood, by the few. Take, for example, that intellectual
phenomenon, Hegelianism, the spirit and method of which have leavened
the whole mass of philosophical thought in Germany. It is confessedly
one of the most difficult of all philosophies. One has heard what
Hegel himself is supposed to have said: "Only one man ever understood
me, and even he couldn't." This difficulty of comprehension has an
important bearing on the argument for Agnosticism. Granting that there
is such a God as Hegel would have us accept, how can anyone suppose
for a moment that a Deity wrapping Himself up in such obscurity
would be unreasonable enough to expect all mankind to believe in
Him? He must not only pardon, but approve of, Agnosticism. A God,
whose existence can only be proved, if it can be proved at all, by
the abstruse arguments of a Hegel, is not a God anxious to reveal
Himself to His creatures.







POPULAR ARGUMENTS

