Chapter IV.

THE GRAVE SUSPICIONS AROUSED BY THE STUDY OF ANCIENT BELIEFS


§ 1. The New Theological Theory of a Progressive Revelation.


The facts and truths established by Science are no longer made the
subject of attacks by Christian apologists in the manner that they
used to be; they are now considered by them to be the unfolding,
through God's Providence, of pieces of information hitherto concealed
from us. A scientific discovery (by men who are more often than not
Agnostics) simply means that God wills to reveal another detail of His
eternal methods. There must be, we are told, a frank modification,
or even the abandonment, of certain preconceived ideas which,
faulty as they were, had sufficed for man in an earlier stage of
his development, and had come to be regarded as integral parts of
his religious faith. This is the substance of the modern apologist's
argument which is intended to reconcile all outlying discrepancies
between our new knowledge and our old beliefs. The new explanation,
based upon the assumption that revelation is progressive, will
come as a surprise to the rank and file of Christendom, who have
hitherto been given to understand that the Bible contained the one,
only, and sufficient revelation of God to man. However, there is
no alternative. If accepted, many grave difficulties of faith are
swept away. Nay, more; the reasonableness of our faith is immensely
strengthened, and the facts of science and research become a valuable
adjunct to the armour of the Christian apologist. On the other hand,
a refusal to accept spells disaster to the Christian faith. The truth
of progressive revelation is, therefore, a matter of life or death
for the Christian religion; and, of all branches of modern research,
it is Comparative Mythology which absolutely demands the complete
establishment of this theory. If true, our belief is further verified
by the startling discoveries of the ethnologist; if untrue, it is
irrevocably shattered. Accordingly, in this chapter I am giving a
prominent place to the discussion of this theory.

I think I may safely say that there is no department of knowledge about
which so little is known by the ordinary man, and even, I regret to
say, by the majority of ecclesiastics, as Comparative Mythology. Yet
it is the study of this science perhaps more than of any other which is
causing well-informed men and women to lose faith in Christianity. Ask
Christian professors in our universities who are in touch with the
thought around them, and you will hear that their sceptical friends are
all telling them the same thing; they cannot get over anthropology,
and especially that branch of it which concerns itself with the
traditions and beliefs of primitive peoples. Recent ethnological
research has thrown an entirely new light upon old problems. The
discoveries of science, including the animal origin of man, may,
by a stretch of imagination and faith, be reconciled with belief;
so also the disclosures of the Higher Criticism; but the very origin
of Christianity is exposed by the study of Comparative Mythology. "It
is indeed a melancholy and in some respects thankless task to strike
at the foundations of beliefs in which, as in a strong tower, the
hopes and aspirations of humanity through long ages have sought a
refuge from the storm and stress of life. Yet sooner or later it is
inevitable that the battery of the comparative method should breach
these venerable walls, mantled over with the ivy and mosses and wild
flowers of a thousand tender and sacred associations." [88]

Some years ago there were ecclesiastics who took a lively interest
in Comparative Mythology. Students of Pagan religions as well as
Christian missionaries were bent on discovering more striking and
more startling coincidences in order to use them in confirmation
of their favourite theory that some rays of a primeval revelation,
or some reflection of the Jewish religion, had reached the uttermost
ends of the world. Subsequently the study of comparative mythology
seems to have lost much of its charm. Why?

"The theory that there was a primeval preternatural revelation granted
to the fathers of the human race, and that the grains of truth which
catch our eye when exploring the temples of heathen gods are the
scattered fragments of that sacred heirloom--the seeds that fell by the
wayside or upon stony places--would find but few supporters at present;
no more, in fact, than the theory that there was in the beginning
one complete and perfect primeval language, broken up in later times
into the numberless languages of the world." "The opinion," again,
"that the Pagan religions were mere corruptions of the religion of
the Old Testament, once supported by men of high authority and great
learning, is now as completely surrendered as the attempts to explain
Greek and Latin as corruptions of Hebrew." [89]

It will be as well, in the first place, to see exactly what the
Church herself now says on the matter; how far she recognises that
gigantic strides have been made in a study formerly pursued in a manner
necessarily elementary by the Alexandrian schools; how far she concedes
the conclusions of the modern ethnologist; and how far she approves
of progressive revelation as the explanation for the whole enigma of
the parallels between ancient beliefs and our own. For this purpose
I think I cannot do better than quote from two striking articles on
the subject in the Church Times. They were contributed by the editor
of The Treasury magazine. "The study," he says, "of folk-lore, of
anthropology, of primitive myth and ritual, has made enormous strides
within the last quarter of a century, and the fruits of that study
are now forced, for the first time, [90] upon the attention of the
general public. Presented in outline, the situation is as follows:
We have been accustomed to consider Christianity apart from all other
religions. We have recognised, indeed, the historical preparation
for it so far as that is described in the pages of the Old Testament;
but we have thought of that preparation as conducted among a single
people, and by means of a unique revelation. Of pagan religions we have
known practically nothing. The mythology of the Greeks and Romans,
which some of us had to learn at school, seemed to be a collection
of pointless fairy tales. And as regards other and more primitive
races, both ancient and modern, the statement that 'the heathen,
in his blindness, bows down to wood and stone' comprised accurately
the sum of our knowledge. That there could be any but the vaguest
likeness between them and our own beliefs was unimaginable. Possibly
there was a belief in the Fatherhood of some supreme being, some vague
conception of a future life; while sacrificial rites, as we knew,
were not peculiar to the Jews. But the other doctrines of our Creed
we regarded as exclusively our own. The ideas of a Triune God-head,
of an Incarnate Saviour, of the Virgin Birth, of the Second Advent,
of the Sacraments, of the Communion of Saints--these seemed to
be the distinctive possessions of Christianity; these were marks
clearly dividing it from any form of paganism. So, at least, we
imagined. [Had we not every reason thus to imagine on the authority of
Holy Scripture?] But it proves that we were completely mistaken. The
modern study of primitive religion shows that every one of these
beliefs is, or has been, held in some part or other of the pagan world
quite independently of Christian influence, and that, while we are
bound to speak of these beliefs as, in a sense, distinctly Christian,
to term them exclusively Christian is no longer possible.... In
these early mythologies we can discern the longing for a personal
God, capable of direct communication with man, and for some sort of
union between the divine and human natures. Whence did these instincts
themselves originate? The one tenable reply seems to be that they were
God-implanted.... The Zoroastrian anticipates the advent of a 'Saviour'
(Saoshyas), who will end the strife between good and evil, personified
as Ormuzd and Ahriman, by sweeping away evil from the earth. In the
ancient Vedic and Scandinavian religions, in the Old-World creeds of
Egypt and Babylon, in the legends of Mexico and Polynesia, is found,
in a variety of guises, the same fundamental idea. Always there
is a sense of a supremely righteous Power; of a world tainted with
evil, and out of harmony with the Power above it; of the coming of
some Deliverer, who will establish a kingdom of righteousness. Once
more, in many mythologies the idea of a Virgin Birth is associated
with that of a Divine Incarnation. Men felt instinctively that the
entrance of a Divine Being into the human race must take place in
a miraculous way. And thus the Spirit of God, working by means of
what we may term the instinctive feelings of mankind, prepared the
human race throughout the world for the coming of the Son of God, to
be born of a pure Virgin, to take our nature upon Him for evermore,
and to redeem us from the power of sin.... We find conceptions, such
as that of the Hindu Trimurti, which seem to remember the doctrine
of the Trinity. In the sacramental meals of totem-worship, when a
sacred animal is killed, and partaken of by the worshippers in order
that its power may be communicated to them [not to mention "sacred"
men killed with the same idea], there seems a dim anticipation of
the highest Christian rite. Baptism as a cleansing and symbolical
ceremony was known centuries before the Christian era.... These rites
and beliefs, obscured by superstition and insufficient to satisfy
the longing which brought them into existence, were designed to serve
as the schoolmasters who would lead the heathen at length to Christ"
(cf. Galatians iii. 24).

These remarks, by a clergyman of the Church of England, will enable
the ordinary person, who for the most part knows nothing whatever
about these things, to realise the immense importance of the questions
raised by Comparative Mythology.




§ 2. Parallels in Ancient Religions, and Some Remarks Upon Them.

Before proceeding any further, it will be advisable to consider some
concrete examples of the parallels between the beliefs and teachings
of ancient religions and those of the Christian religion.



KRISHNA AND BUDDHA.

Krishna.--Krishna was a miraculous incarnation of Vishnu in the
womb of Devaki. A chorus of angels exclaimed: "In the delivery of
this favoured woman nature shall have cause to exult." The birth
was indicated in the heavens by a star. On the morning of his birth
the spirits of heaven danced and sang, and the clouds emitted low,
pleasing sounds. Though royally descended, he was actually born in a
cave. [91] The divine child was recognised and adored by cowherds. He
was presented with gifts of sandalwood and perfumes. The holy Indian
prophet, Nared, paid him a visit, consulted the stars and declared
him to be of celestial descent. His birth was beset by peril, and his
foster father was warned by a heavenly voice to fly with the child,
as the reigning monarch, King Kansa, might take his life. The king
ordered the massacre in all his States of all the male children born
during the night of the birth of Krishna. One of the first miracles
performed by Krishna, when mature, was the curing of a leper. A lame
woman came with a vessel filled with spices and sweet oil, and anointed
his head. Krishna was slain. At his death a black circle surrounded the
moon, and the sun was darkened at noonday. Spirits were to be seen on
all sides. Krishna descended into hell, rose again from the dead, and
ascended bodily into heaven, many persons witnessing his ascent. He
is to come again on earth in the latter days. He will appear as an
armed warrior riding a white horse. At his approach the sun and moon
will be darkened, the earth will tremble, and the stars fall from the
firmament (compare Rev. vi. 2, 12, 13). He is to judge the dead at the
last day. Krishna is the Creator of all things visible and invisible,
and is the beginning, middle, and end of all things. Krishna was
transfigured before his beloved disciple, Arjuna. Krishna was the
meekest of beings. He preached sublimely. According to the purer
Vaishnava faith, he was pure and chaste in reality; any amorousness
related of him is to be explained allegorically, as symbolising
the longing of the human soul for the Supreme; just as the amorous
"Song of Solomon" is said to be allegorical, and to mean "Christ's
love for his Church." Krishna even condescended to wash the feet of
the Brahmins. He is the incarnation of Vishnu, the second person in
the Hindoo Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva; and Vishnu in his
incarnations is a saviour, protector, and friend. Krishna said: "Let
a man, if seeking God by deep abstraction, abandon his possessions and
his hopes, betake himself to some secluded spot, and fix his heart and
thoughts on God alone." And, again: "Then be not sorrowful; from all
thy sins I will deliver thee." Many other such remarkable passages
might be adduced from the Bhagavad-gita. Justice, humanity, good
faith, compassion, disinterestedness--in fact, all the virtues--are
said to have been taught by Krishna, both by precept and example;
but we must remember, as Monier Williams informs us in his Hinduism,
that Krishna, in the ancient epic poems, is simply a great hero, and
it is not until about the fourth century B.C. that he is deified and
declared to be an incarnation of Vishnu. In conclusion, the accounts
of Krishna's childhood agree very closely with the apocryphal accounts
of Christ's childhood.

Buddha.--If the similarity between the histories of Krishna and Jesus
is remarkable, what shall we say of that between the mythological
[92] portions of the history of Gautama Buddha and the history of
Jesus? Looked upon as a confirmation of Progressive Revelation, it
is nothing short of marvellous, whether we regard the similarity
in events, characters, actions, or sayings. From Buddha's divine
incarnation until his ascension into the celestial regions,
almost every important episode of the life of Christ appears to
be paralleled. Attendant miraculous events, spotless character,
wonderful doings, cherished sayings--all are here.

Buddha was miraculously [93] born of the pure and holy Maya. He
descended into her womb from heaven in a spiritual manner. There
was joy in heaven, the Devas singing: "To-day Bodhisatwa is born on
earth, to give joy and peace to men and Devas." He was recognised by
the aged and devout Asita as the perfect Buddha come to the world for
its salvation. His life was threatened by the King Bimbisara, who was
advised to destroy the child. He was presented in the temple. When
still a mere child he was found to be as proficient as his masters,
and he disputed with learned doctors. His ancestry was traced from
his father to Maha Sammata, the first monarch of the world. He bathed
in water, the spirits making their presence known as he did so. When
about to adopt a religious life, he fasted for a long time, and was
tempted by Mara, the author of Evil; but he heeded not the words
of the Evil One, and bade him depart from him. The heavens showed
their appreciation of this defeat by raining flowers. Towards the end
of his life he was transfigured when on a mountain in India called
Pandava. He performed great miracles. For instance, on one occasion he
floated through the air across a river; and, on another, he caused a
tempest to cease, and so saved a disciple, who was in imminent danger
of shipwreck. Shortly before his death a weeping woman embraced his
feet. When Buddha died many miracles occurred. The coffin was opened,
and the body uncovered, supernaturally. He promised that another
Buddha would be sent to them. He foretold his departure, and after
death entered Nirvana. He was very early regarded as omniscient and
absolutely sinless. Earth and heaven did homage to him at birth and
death. A great earthquake occurred at his Temptation. He is represented
as saying: "Let all the sins that are committed in the world fall
upon me, that the world may be delivered"; and again: "Hide your good
deeds, and confess before the world the sins you have committed";
and again: "Though the great world be swallowed up and pass away,
yet be assured the words of Buddha are true"; and again: "Beware of
fixing your eyes upon women"; "A wise man should avoid unchaste life,
as if it were a burning pit of live coals"; "One who is not able to
live in a state of celibacy should not commit adultery." According to
Buddha, the motives of all our actions should be pity, or love for our
neighbour. Those who became his disciples were told they must renounce
the world, give up their riches, and take the vow of poverty. Finally,
we should note that Buddha aimed to establish a "Kingdom of Heaven"
(Dharmachakra); that the account given by St. Peter (Ep. ii., ch. 3) of
the earth once destroyed by water, and about to be destroyed by fire,
is in agreement with the Buddhist story; and that the Jews believed
in the pre-existence of souls and a modified form of metempsychosis
(transmigration of the soul).

It is difficult to separate fiction from fact; but the generally
accepted records show that, together with superior natural endowments,
Gautama Buddha attained to an exceptional purity of life and integrity
of purpose. Probably he never arrogated to himself any higher authority
than that of a teacher; but his followers, turning for consolation
to the theory that he still lived, exalted him, within a quarter of
a century of his death, to a place among their deities. As already
mentioned, he was very early regarded as omniscient and absolutely
sinless. [94] All sorts of legends, borrowed from current myths,
attach themselves to the story of his life, while his teaching as a
simple-hearted, truth-seeking philanthropist became encrusted with
the superstitions and religious speculations that were current. As
with Krishna, so here there are stories of Buddha's childhood of
which the apocryphal stories of Christ's childhood are an almost
exact reproduction.



PARALLELS OTHER THAN KRISHNA AND BUDDHA.

In the case of Krishna and Buddha it is contended by some Christian
writers that the stories must have been borrowed from Christian
sources both canonical and apocryphal. This contention, founded on the
lateness of the mythical stories in literary form, will be considered
in due course; but first let us have clearly before our minds those
parallels concerning which there is no such contention, for the simple
reason that there is no getting away from the fact that the beliefs
existed long before the advent of Christ. In ancient religions other
than Hindooism and Buddhism, there are, among many others, distinct
parallels to--the Virgin Birth; the Heavenly Choir; the Epiphany;
the Slaughter of the Innocents; the Temptation and Forty Days' Fast;
the Miracles; the Crucifixion Darkness, and Descent into Hell; the
Resurrection and Ascension; the Second Coming and Day of Judgment.

The Virgin Birth.--According to Chinese legends, the sages Fohi
(? 3468 B.C.) and Lao-Kiun (about 600 B.C.) were born of virgins. Dean
Milman mentions in his History of Christianity that the first
Jesuit missionaries who went to China were appalled at finding in the
mythology of that country a counterpart of the story of the Virgin. In
Persia, Zoroaster, [95] the founder of the Perso-Iranian national
religion, was miraculously conceived. All attempts to connect him
with Hebrew influences are groundless. In Egypt, Horus, who had the
epithet of Saviour, was born of the virgin Isis. The Egyptian Bible,
remember, is the oldest in the world! Plutarch mentions the notion
of the Egyptians that a woman might conceive by the approach of some
divine spirit. Egyptian monuments represent the infant saviour in
the arms of his virgin mother, or sitting on her knee. The image
of the child was worshipped just as the Bambino is worshipped in
Rome to-day. Women then, as now, believed in its efficacy for their
relief in time of nature's sorrows. In Grecian and Roman mythology
the "Sons of Jove"--Hercules, Bacchus, Amphion, Perseus, Mercury,
Æolus, Apollo, and others--have mortal mothers. Speaking of this,
the Christian Father, Justin Martyr, declared that the myths regarding
the multitude of sons of gods, and especially the myth regarding the
virgin's son Perseus, had been invented by the demons in order to rob
the manifestation of Jesus, the true Son of God, of its importance. He
also insisted that, with their doctrine of the Virgin-birth of Jesus,
of His passion, and of His ascension, the Christians were affirming
nothing new as compared with what was alleged of the so-called
sons of Zeus. [96] Even regarding Plato there was a legend that his
mother, Perictione, had experienced a miraculous conception through
the influences of the God Apollo, and that the God had declared to
Aris, to whom she was betrothed, the parentage of the child (compare
St. Matthew i. 20). This was believed in by the disciples of Plato
centuries before the Christian era. Among northern nations the sons
of Odin take the place of the sons of Jove. Thus "Baldur the Good,"
the Beneficent Saviour, was the son of Odin and Friga. The worship of
Friga was continued until that of the Virgin Mary took its place. In
Mexico, the "Saviour" Quetzalcoatl was born of a pure virgin, who was
called the "Queen of Heaven." An ambassador from heaven announced
to the virgin Sochiquetzal, mother of Quetzalcoatl, that it was
the will of God that she should conceive a son without connection
with man. Here we have an exact parallel to the annunciation of the
Virgin Mary (St. Luke i. 26-35), in a part of the globe that was not
discovered by Christians till nearly 1,500 years after the birth of
Christ! Similar traditions of Saviours are found among various tribes
of North and South America.

Regarding the tendency to believe in incarnations, Dr. Illingworth
[97] explains that "a general tendency in the human mind to expect
a thing cannot possibly be twisted into a presumption against its
occurrence.... The fact of the expectation does not logically make
invention a likelier alternative than occurrence, except upon one
hypothesis--namely, that the occurrence is impossible." This argument
skims over--or, I might almost say, neglects--the real contention of
the Rationalist. Let us assume that incarnation is not ruled out of
court as being à priori impossible; the virgin-birth of Jesus was
subsequently invented by the Christian Church because its eminent
suitability necessitated its invention. Only thus could the divinity
and sinlessness of Jesus Christ be firmly established. More especially
would this be the case in an age when everyone was familiar with the
notion of virgin-born Saviours. The minds of men were deeply imbued
with the idea of miraculous birth in the case of anyone claiming to
be of divine origin. Only on this understanding would the heathen,
already believing in their own virgin-born Saviours, have accepted
Christianity.

The Heavenly Choir.--Even Confucius, the celebrated philosopher
(born 551 B.C.), was ushered into the world with dragons and angels
hovering about the couch, and with the sound of heavenly music in the
air. At the birth of Osiris, the father of Horus, another Egyptian
"Saviour," a voice was heard proclaiming that the "Ruler of all the
earth is born." There was joy in Olympus when Apollo was born, and at
the time of the birth of Hercules his father Zeus spake from heaven,
and said: "This day shall a child be born of the race of Perseus,
who shall be the mightiest of the sons of men."

The Epiphany.--Legends of the coming of wise men to see an infant
grew up in various places. Krishna was visited by sages who brought
perfumes. Confucius has a somewhat similar legend, and one occurs
even in connection with the birth of Plato.

The Slaughter of the Innocents.--The story of the "dangerous child"
is almost universal. Horus, Zoroaster, and Bacchus, for example, were
"dangerous" children.

The Forty Days' Fast and the Temptation.--According to Pliny,
Zoroaster lived for thirty years in the wilderness upon cheese. The
Devil made Zoroaster magnificent promises; but the temptations
were in vain. The ancient Persians had a religious festival, which
they annually celebrated, called the "Salutation of Mithras (the
sun-god)," and during it forty days were set apart for sacrifice
and thanksgiving. Among the ancient Egyptians the priest submitted to
abstinence of the most severe description. "The priests in Heliopolis,"
says Plutarch, "have many fasts, during which they meditate upon
divine things." Fasting and self-denial were observances required
of the Greeks who desired initiation into the mysteries. The same
practice was found among the ancient Mexicans and Peruvians. The
Mexicans had a forty days' fast, in memory of Quetzalcoatl, who was
tempted and fasted forty days on a mountain. Lord Kingsborough says:
"The temptation of Quetzalcoatl and the fast of forty days ... are very
curious and mysterious." [98] Mr. Bonwick says: "The Spaniards were
surprised to see the Mexicans keep the vernal forty days' fast." [99]

Turning to the Old Testament, we may remind ourselves that Moses
went up into a mountain to receive certain instructions from God,
and "was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights, and he did
neither eat bread nor drink water." On a second occasion, when he
received the Ten Commandments, he was again with the Lord forty days
and forty nights, and did neither eat bread nor drink water. Elijah
fled to the desert, where an angel gave him cake and water, and in
the strength of that meat he went for forty days without food. The
number "forty" occurs over and over again in that portion of the Old
Testament which the Higher Criticism has shown to be unhistorical. The
Rationalist avers that the number "forty" is mythological, and that
we have this story of the Forty Days' Fast and the Temptation in the
New Testament because the writer wishes to show that Jesus Christ was
proof against all temptation; that He, too, as well as other Christs,
could resist the powers of the Prince of Evil. It may be urged that
in all these cases the number is quite immaterial. Are we not, then,
to take the author of "The Acts" literally when he informs us that
Christ spent forty days on earth after His resurrection?

The Miracles.--Not only Krishna and Buddha, but all leaders
of religious movements, had the reputation of having performed
miracles. Religions were established as much by the miracles as by
the preachings. Miracles were needed in those days on all special
occasions. Many of them are attested in the gravest manner by
the gravest writers, and were firmly believed at the time by the
people. Healing miracles, such as those performed by Jesus, were the
commonest of all. The Gospel miracles are in no respect singular
or more wonderful. Horus, as well as Krishna, raised the dead to
life. Bacchus changed water into wine. Æsculapius not only cured the
sick, but raised the dead. Pausanias, the eminent Greek geographer
and historian, writes that in the temple of Æsculapius at Epidaurus
there was an old pillar dedicated to the memory of Hippolytus,
who had been raised from the dead. [100] Apollonius of Tyana was
celebrated for the wonderful miracles he performed. He caused a devil
to depart out of a youth, and he restored a dead maiden to life. The
Christian Fathers inform us that Simon Magus, with the Devil's aid,
could make his appearance wherever he pleased at any moment; could
poise himself in the air; produce trees from the earth suddenly
[the mango tree trick?]; fling himself from high precipices unhurt
[the very feat suggested by the Devil in the Temptation]; and walk
through the streets accompanied by spirits of the dead. Tacitus, the
celebrated Roman historian, tells us that the Emperor Vespasian (born
9 A.D.) performed wonderful miracles for the good of mankind, and among
others he describes the cure of a blind man with the emperor's spittle.

The Atonement.--In China the Holy One (Tien) dies to save the
world. "The sufferings and death of Osiris were the great mystery of
the Egyptian religion. His being the divine goodness, and the abstract
idea of 'good,' his manifestation upon earth (like an Indian god),
his death and resurrection, and his office as judge of the dead in a
future life, look like the early revelation of a future manifestation
of the deity converted into a mythological fable." [101] While Osiris
is the judge, Horus, his son, is the mediator. In the Judgment scene
in the Book of the Dead, Horus, the son of Isis, leads the deceased,
after his heart has been weighed, into the presence of Osiris (see
Papyrus of Ani, plates 3 & 4). Mithras, the sun-god of the Persians,
was a "Mediator" between God and men--the "Saviour," who, by his
laborious conflicts, worked their salvation. He was also called the
"Word." Attys, called the "Only Begotten Son" and the "Saviour," was
worshipped by the Phrygians, and represented by them as a man tied or
nailed to a tree. Adonis was another virgin-born "Saviour" who suffered
for mankind. The yearly festival of Adonis in the spring was a special
favourite with women. In the Old Testament reference is made to the
weeping of the women over Tammuz, the Babylonian equivalent of Adonis
(Ezekiel viii. 14). According to the Rev. Sir G. W. Cox, [102] he was
the crucified Tao (divine love personified). The Rev. Dr. Parkhurst,
in the chapter on the Resurrection in his Hebrew lexicon, says:
"I find myself obliged to refer Tammuz to that class of idols which
were originally designed to represent the promised Saviour, the
desire of all nations." Prometheus was a Saviour who suffered the
most fearful tortures as the friend of the human race. Æschylus's
tragedy, Prometheus Vinctus, was acted in Athens five hundred years
before the Christian era. Even Bacchus, whom most of us think of as
the rollicking wine-god of classical mythology, was a slain Saviour.

When we turn to the New World we find the worship of a crucified
Saviour among the ancient Mexicans and Peruvians. Lord Kingsborough
tells us that, according to the belief of the ancient Mexicans, "the
death of Quetzalcoatl upon the cross" was "an atonement for the sins of
mankind." [103] Dr. Daniel Brinton relates how the Aztecs had a feast
which they celebrated in the early spring, when "victims were nailed
to a cross and shot with an arrow." [104] Alexander von Humboldt, in
his American Researches, also speaks of a feast, at which the Mexicans
crucified a man and pierced him with an arrow. The Rev. J. P. Lundy,
speaking of this, says: "Here is the old story of Prometheus crucified
on the Caucasus, and of all other pagan crucifixions of the young
incarnate divinities of India, Persia, Asia Minor, and Egypt." [105]

Moral Teaching.--There is not only an extraordinary similarity in
beliefs, but also in moral teachings. The teachings of Confucius,
Mencius, and Wang Yang Ming might, as Professor Nitobe points
out, [106] just as well be considered plagiarisms from the Divine
library, for they furnish numerous remarkable parallels to the New
Testament teaching. Taoism, the philosophy of Laotze, for a long
time successfully rivalled the more utilitarian system of Confucius,
and its close agreement with many of the teachings of Christ is most
noticeable. The morals of the ancient Egyptians are clearly set forth
in the Book of the Dead, which came into use after 2000 B.C. They
indicate a far higher standard than existed in Israel in David's
time. "Yet," as Dr. Callaway remarks, [107] "in traditions which
still linger among us, the law under which David lived and reigned
was perfect and divine; while the name of Egypt stands for darkness
and sin."

With regard to the parallels in the moral teaching, Dean Farrar,
in his work, Seekers after God, has clearly shown that "to say that
pagan morality kindled its faded taper at the Gospel light, whether
furtively or unconsciously, that it dissembled the obligation and
made a boast of the splendour, as if it were originally her own,
is to make an assertion wholly untenable." He points out that the
attempts of the Christian Fathers to make out Pythagoras a debtor
to Hebraic wisdom, Plato an "Atticising Moses," Aristotle a learner
of ethics from a Jew, Seneca a correspondent of St. Paul, were due
"in some cases to ignorance, in some to a want of perfect honesty in
controversial dealing."

Apocryphal Gospels.--We are assured by Christian writers that the
parallels between the accounts of Krishna's and Buddha's childhood
and those in the apocryphal gospels of Christ's childhood are due
to the Hindoos having borrowed legends current among the early
Christians. Dr. Wallis Budge, the keeper of Egyptian and Assyrian
antiquities in the British Museum, informs us, however, that "several
of the incidents of the wanderings of the Virgin with the child
in Egypt, as recorded in the Apocryphal Gospels, reflect scenes in
the life of Isis as described in the texts found on the Metternich
Stele." [108] And, again, he says: "In the apocryphal literature of
the first six centuries which followed the evangelisation of Egypt,
several of the legends about Isis and her sorrowful wanderings were
made to centre round the mother of Christ." [109] The evidence is
conclusive that certain legends prevalent among the early Christians
were borrowed from the ancient Egyptian religion; yet we are to
believe that where the Krishna and Buddha parallels are concerned the
borrowing process was the other way! So be it. Let us suppose that
certain Egyptian superstitions reached the Hindoo through the medium
of the Christian; the fact remains that beliefs once held by devout
but unlettered Christians have a heathen origin. This is of serious
import, for it lends weight to the suspicion that the marvellous tales
in the canonical gospels have been similarly derived from heathen
legends--legends from which some of the more glaring absurdities and
all that would mar the ethical ideals of the Christian religion were
eclectically expunged.



ARE THE KRISHNA AND BUDDHA LEGENDS BORROWED FROM CHRISTIANITY?

I have indicated a few of the more striking parallels in other
religions besides Krishnaism and Buddhism. Did space permit, it
could be shown that there are also parallels to the teaching of
Christ, the darkness at the Crucifixion, the descent into Hell,
the Resurrection, the claim of Jesus Christ to be "Alpha and Omega"
(according to the Revelation of St. John), the prophecy of the
Second Coming, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the doctrine
of the Trinity, the worship of the Blessed Virgin, the Christian
symbols (cross, triangle, I.H.S., fish, serpent, dove, and lamb). I
cannot understand what the Christian cause can gain by ascribing the
parallels in Hindoo mythology to Christian sources, when there is all
this mass of evidence for parallels that are quite as extraordinary
(though less numerous) in those ancient religions where the priority
to Christianity cannot reasonably be denied. Certainly the Krishna
and Buddha parallels are extremely numerous and strikingly exact;
but a policy which seeks to explain them in a different manner from
that adopted in the case of the same phenomena in other religions,
while it serves to confirm the suspicions of the sceptic, is doomed
eventually to failure. This being so, it is unnecessary, I think,
to enter at any great length into the controversy.

In Mr. J. M. Robertson's book, Christianity and Mythology, there
is a scholarly investigation from which I extract the following
leading points [110]:--Hindoos, as Professor Tiele urges, could
perfectly well have borrowed, if they did borrow, from Egypt before
Christianity was heard of. There is hardly a leading detail in the
Krishna birth legend which is not variously paralleled in other early
non-Christian mythology. The more we collate the main Christian
myth-notions with those of Krishnaism, the more clearly does it
appear that, instead of the latter being borrowed from the former,
they are, not indeed the originals from which Christianity borrowed,
but always presumptively the more ancient, and in one or two cases they
do appear to be the actual sources of Gospel stories. The lateness
of the Purânic stories in literary form is no argument against their
antiquity. Scholars are agreed that late documents often preserve
extremely old myth-material. The leading elements in the Krishna myth
are inexplicable save on the view that the cultus is ancient. The
close coincidences in the legends of Krishna and Buddha are to be
explained in terms of borrowing by the latter from the former, and
not vice versa. I should add here that the denial of the "Christian
accretions" theory does not convey also the implication that the Bible
story was borrowed from the Krishna and Buddha myths. On the contrary,
the strong probability is that there has been little or no borrowing
either way--that there is a common source for both in earlier Aryan
and Semitic myths.

In the Introduction to his standard work, The Romantic History
of Buddha, [111] Mr. Beal refers to the legends concerning
the pre-existence of Buddha in heaven--his miraculous
incarnation--salutation by angels--recognition by Asita
(Simeon)--presentation in the Temple--baptism by fire and
water--disputation with doctors--temptation in the wilderness--life
passed in preaching and working miracles, etc.--and frankly admits
that, "if we could prove that they were unknown in the East for
some centuries after Christ, the explanation would be easy; but
all the evidence we have goes to prove the contrary." Regarding the
parallelisms with the Apocryphal Gospels, he says: "It would be a
natural inference that many of the events in the legend of Buddha
were borrowed from the Apocryphal Gospels (compare, for example, the
Gospel of the Infancy, chap. xx.: 'Our Lord learning his alphabet,'
with the account given in chap. xi. of this volume), if we were quite
certain that these Apocryphal Gospels had not borrowed from it." In
his later work, Buddhist Literature, Mr. Beal modifies his position.

Neither Max Müller in his Introduction to the Science of Religion, nor
Forlong in his Short Studies of the Science of Comparative Religions,
nor Senart in his learned work, La Légende du Buddha, nor Seydel in
his Evangelium von Jesu and his Buddha Legends, nor Pfleiderer in his
Urchristentum, supports the theory of Christian accretions. Bunsen, in
his Angel-Messiah, maintains (p. 18) "that, according to Sanscrit and
Chinese scriptures and the stone-cut edicts of Asoka and the Senchi
Tope, certain legends about Buddha circulated in India and China,
not only before the apostolic age, but more than three centuries
earlier," and that "among these legends the most ancient are those
which refer to the incarnation of Buddha as the Angel Messiah."

On page 10 of Rhys Davids' well-known little work, Buddhism (published
under the direction of the S.P.C.K.), we read: "There is every reason
to believe that the Pitakas now extant in Ceylon are substantially
identical with the books of the Orthodox Canon, as settled at the
Council of Patna about the year 250 B.C. As no works would have been
received into the canon which were not then believed to be very old,
the Pitakas may be approximately placed in the fourth century B.C.,
and parts of them possibly read back very nearly, if not quite,
to the time of Gautama himself." On page 15 it is explained that,
when the statements in the Sanscrit and Pali texts agree, the greatest
reliance may be placed upon them, "not indeed as to the actual facts of
Gautama's life, but as to the belief of the early Buddhists concerning
it." Professor Rhys Davids enumerates the more important of these
early beliefs, and they include many of the startling coincidences
which I have noticed. The later beliefs he passes over for the most
part in silence; but, speaking generally, he is of opinion that the
greater portion, if not all, of the legends could be explained by
hero-worship, mere poetical imagery, misapprehension, the desire
to edify, applications to Gautama of previously existing stories or
sun-myths, and so on. Nowhere does he state or imply that in any of
the legends, early or late, there can be any application to Gautama
of the Gospel stories of the life of Christ; while he considers
M. Senart's theory of the almost complete dependence of the Buddha
legends on solar myths "most interesting." Now, it is just those
very ideas of virgin-birth, resurrection, and ascension appearing
in the later legends which were nothing more nor less than solar
myths. In any case, whatever their origin, they were world-wide very
many centuries before the Christian era; so any argument from the
lateness of these legends is founded upon sand. In his Buddhism,
as also in his article on Buddhism in the Encyclopædia Britannica,
the Professor steers clear of the question of the parallels; but in
his Buddhist Suttas, translated by him from the Pali and appearing in
the "Sacred Books of the East" series, we read (in the Introduction,
p. 165) that while he "ventures to disagree with writers who argue that
the resemblances in the Pali Pitakas and passages in the New Testament
indicate that the New Testament as the later must be borrowed," he
holds that the resemblance is due not to any borrowing on the one
side or the other, but "solely to the similarity of the conditions
under which the two movements grew" [and, the Rationalist would add,
a similarity in the myths afloat is a part, and a very essential part,
of the similarity of the conditions].

So also with regard to the lateness of the Krishna legends in literary
form, it is futile to argue that they are, to use a familiar term,
cribbed from the canonical and apocryphal gospels, when most of them
are obviously plagiarisms of the ancient sun-myths. The Rev. Sir
G. W. Cox, speaking on this subject in his Aryan Mythology, says:
"There is no more room for inferring foreign influence in the growth
of any of these myths than, as Bunsen rightly insists, there is room
for tracing Christian influence in the early epical literature of the
Teutonic tribes. Practically the myths of Krishna seem to have been
fully developed in the days of Megasthenes (fourth century B.C.), who
identifies him with the Greek Hercules." [Megasthenes wrote a work
on India, which was the chief source of the later Greek information
on the subject.] Professor Monier Williams, the accepted authority
on Hinduism, writing for the S.P.G., in his book, Indian Wisdom,
and speaking of the Bhagavad-gita, says: "It may reasonably be
questioned whether there could have been any actual contact of the
Hindoo system with Christianity without a more satisfactory result
in the modification of Pantheistic and anti-Christian ideas." Again,
he says: "The religious creeds, rites, customs, and habits of thought
of the Hindoos generally had altered little since the days of Menu, 500
years B.C." In his Hinduism (p. 19) he shows that "we may be justified
in assuming that the hymns of the Veda were probably composed by a
succession of poets at different dates between 1500 and 1000 years
B.C." This is an important concession, because the ancient hymns of
the Veda furnish the germs of those sun-myths which tell of the death,
resurrection, and ascension of a virgin-born saviour.

Whatever may be thought of the conclusions of the highest authorities
regarding Krishnaistic and Buddhistic beliefs, I hope I may have so far
carried the reader with me that he will be prepared to admit that there
are very many striking resemblances to the Gospel stories in those
ancient beliefs whose priority to Christianity is not disputed. Now
that these resemblances are no longer attributed to a device of the
Evil One, an explanation for them is urgently required. The explanation
from the Christian side is the theory of a Progressive Revelation;
and, apparently, there can be no other, if Christianity be true. The
reader has been put in possession of a few details of the remarkable
parallels, and he should apply this theory for himself to each and
all of them, and see whether it furnishes a fair working hypothesis,
whether his mind can accept the explanation now offered to him, and,
I might almost add, whether he can honestly continue to call himself
a Christian believer. Let him ask himself which is the more probable,
that in the common mythos we have marvellous anticipations of the Bible
stories, or that in the latter we have reproductions of the former?




§ 3. Parallels in the Beliefs of Primitive Man, and some Remarks
Upon Them.

I must ask the reader's patience if I postpone my final remarks on
Progressive Revelation until I have adduced some illustrations of
the beliefs and customs of primitive man, as here also this same
theory has to apply. Thus far the pagan beliefs have appeared to
be of a comparatively harmless character; but this can by no means
be said of the beliefs of savage man. He does not confine himself,
like his more civilised brother, to mystical beliefs in Saviours who
once upon a time suffered for him, and whose body and blood are to be
symbolically assimilated; but, being of a realistic (or shall we say
materialistic?) turn of mind, he prefers (the inevitable result of a
restricted intellectual development) [112] to satisfy his religious
emotions with the spectacle of a real human-divine sufferer, and by a
sacrificial feast of real flesh and blood. Can this be God's method
of revealing Himself? True, the religious convictions of civilised
man have been a fruitful source of human agony, both physical and
mental, in many a bloody fight and massacre, in cruel and relentless
persecutions, in every refinement of excruciating torture and pitiable
distress to body and mind; but it is possible to gloze over all this
with various specious arguments. It is not so easy to do so with
examples drawn from the history of savage races. The only thing
is that so few have ever had these examples brought before them,
or, at least, have ever thought of connecting them with anything
that has to do with the truth of Christianity. I shall, therefore,
now give some illustrations of the beliefs and customs of primitive
man. A vivid description may succeed in convincing the reader of
the absurdity of the new theory, where mere vague ideas of savage
ritual would fail. "Of the human sacrifices of rude peoples, those
of the Mexicans are perhaps the most instructive, for in them the
theanthropic character of the victim comes out most clearly." [113]
"When we go to the records of the cultures and creeds of Mexico and
Peru, records wonderfully preserved in the teeth of the fanaticism
which would have destroyed them all if it could, we stand clear of
the frauds and prejudices alike of Jew and Christian.... We are faced
by a civilisation and a religion that reached wealth and complexity
by normal evolution from the stages of early savagery and barbarism
without ever coming in contact with those of Europe till the moment
of collision and destruction." [114] We shall begin, therefore,
with the ancient American.



THE RELIGIONS OF ANCIENT AMERICA.

"Terrible was the prestige of the priesthood of Mexico. The greater
the State grew, the larger were the hecatombs of human victims. Almost
every god had to be propitiated in the same way; but above all must
the war-god be for ever glutted with the smoking hearts of slain
captives. Scarcely any historian, says Prescott, estimates the number
of human beings sacrificed yearly throughout the Empire at less than
20,000, and some make it 50,000. The Franciscan monks computed that
2,500 victims were annually sacrificed in the town and district of
Mexico alone. Of this doomed host, Huitzilopochtli had the lion's
share; and it is recorded that at the dedication of his great new
temple A.D. 1486 [that is to say, nearly 1,500 years after God was
pleased to reveal Himself definitely to mankind] there were slain in
his honour 70,000 prisoners of war, who had been reserved for the
purpose for years throughout the Empire. They formed a train two
miles long, and the work of priestly butchery went on for several
days." [115]

"At every festival of the God there was a new hecatomb of victims,
and we may conceive how the chronic spectacle burnt itself in on the
imagination of the people.... And then the horror of the sacrificial
act! In the great majority of the sacrifices the victim was laid
living on the convex stone and held by the limbs, while the slayer
cut open his breast with the sacred flint (or rather obsidian)
knife--the ancient knife used before men had the use of metals, and
therefore most truly religious--and tore out the palpitating heart,
which was held on high to the all-seeing sun, before being set to
burn in incense in front of the idol, whose lips, and the walls of
whose shrines, were devoutly daubed with blood."

"In connection with one annual festival of Tezcatlipoca, the
Creator and 'soul of the world,' who combined the attributes of
perpetual youthful beauty with the function of the God of Justice and
Retribution, as the Winter Sun, there was selected for immolation a
young male captive of especial beauty, who was treated with great
reverence for a whole year before being sacrificed.... When all
was over the priests piously improved the occasion, preaching that
all this had been typical of human destiny, while the aristocracy
sacramentally ate the victim's roasted limbs."

"They [Christians] mystically eat the body of the slain God. Now,
this very act was performed by the Mexicans, not only literally as
we have seen, but in the symbolic way also; and they connected their
sacraments with the symbol of the cross."

"That the Mexicans were no longer cannibals by taste is shown by the
fact that in the great siege by Cortez they died of starvation by
thousands. They never ate fellow citizens: only the sacrificially
slain captive."

"The strangest thing of all is that their frightful system of sacrifice
was bound up not only with a strict and ascetic sexual morality,
but with an emphatic humanitarian doctrine. If asceticism be virtue,
they cultivated virtue zealously. There was a Mexican Goddess of
Love, and there was of course plenty of vice; but nowhere could men
win a higher reputation for sanctity by living in celibacy. Their
saints were numerous. They had nearly all the formulas of Christian
morality, so-called. The priests themselves mostly lived in strict
celibacy; and they educated children with the greatest vigilance in
their temple schools and higher colleges. They taught the people to
be peaceful, to bear injuries with meekness, to rely on God's mercy
and not on their own merits; they taught, like Jesus and the Pagans,
that adultery could be committed by the eyes and the heart; and, above
all, they exhorted men to feed the poor. The public hospitals were
carefully attended to, at a time when some Christian countries had
none. They had the practice of confession and absolution, and in the
regular exhortation of the confessor there was this formula: Clothe
the naked and feed the hungry, whatever privations it may cost thee;
for remember their flesh is like thine, and they are men like thee;
cherish the sick, for they are the image of God. And in this very
same exhortation there was further urged on the penitent the special
duty of instantly procuring a slave for sacrifice to the deity."

The Mexican believed in the resurrection of the Man-God. Dr. Frazer
relates how "the idea that the God thus slain in the person of
his representative comes to life again immediately was graphically
represented in the Mexican ritual by skinning the slain man-god,
and clothing in his skin a living man, who thus became the new
representative of the god-head." [116]

It is civilisation that determines the tone of religion. In Peru,
where the civilisation was higher and the priesthood less powerful,
the sacrificial system was less burdensome and less terrible. Thus
human sacrifices were practically extinct. The Peruvians had the
institution of a Holy Communion, in which they ate of a sacred bread,
sancu, sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed sheep, the priest
pronouncing this formula: "Take heed how ye eat this sancu; for he who
eats it in sin and with a double will and heart is seen by our Father,
the Sun, who will punish him with grievous troubles." The Spaniards
themselves recognised that the Mexicans ate the mystical body of
the God with every sign of devotion and contrition; and they were
so far from depreciating the Peruvian Communion that they supposed
St. Bartholomew had established it. [117]

With these facts confronting us, it is nothing short of marvellous to
find many learned divines completely ignoring them in their apologetic
efforts. I say marvellous, for I assume they possess honesty of purpose
and some acquaintance with ancient beliefs; but perhaps I am wrong in
the latter assumption. The continuance of the celebration of the Holy
Eucharist until the present day is held to be one of the evidences
for the Christian faith, and this on the ground that the rite could
not have survived if Christ had not founded it. For some reason,
best known to the apologist, the almost universal observance of
the same ceremony, ages before the Christian era, and its survival
among the nations who finally adopted Christianity, are entirely
overlooked. Thus Dr. Maclear, in his book, The Evidential Value of
the Holy Eucharist, says: "The singular rite has survived all the
vicissitudes of more than 1,000 years.... The early Christian would
inform a supposed questioner that the meal was a sacrificial feast,
instituted by Him from Whom we are called Christians, and Who died
for us on the Cross. Here, then, we are on solid ground. The rite,
so unique and so unprecedented, rests on an objective historical
fact." One would think that Dr. Maclear had entirely neglected the
study of ancient and even modern non-Christian [118] beliefs.



VEGETATION GODS.

There is another class of primitive sacrificial custom which claims
our careful attention, in order that we may see whether it manifests
the beginning of a revelation from God. Even if we could agree
that all these gruesome details represent a savage's glimmerings
of the truth, we must allow that the theory collapses when the
object of the custom can be shown to have little or nothing to do
with religion in any true sense of the word. Subtle intellects are
capable of maintaining that the worship of ancestors, or of the Sun,
or of imaginary devils, betokens a dim perception of God; but when it
comes to the propitiation of a vegetation-god solely for the sake of
the material benefits expected to be derived from his cult, surely
it is time to dismiss the theory as worthless. "All the world over,
savages and semi-civilised people are in the habit of sacrificing human
victims, whose bodies are buried in the field with the seed of corn,
or other bread stuffs. Often enough the victim's blood is mixed with
grain in order to fertilise it. The most famous instance is that of
the Khonds of Orissa, who chose special victims, known as Meriahs,
and offered them up to ensure good harvests. The Meriah was often kept
years before being sacrificed. He was regarded as a consecrated being,
and treated with extreme affection, mingled with deference." [119]
"The periodical sacrifices," says Dr. Frazer, in The Golden Bough,
"were generally so arranged by tribes and divisions of tribes that
each head of a family was enabled, at least once a year, to procure a
shred of flesh for his fields, generally about the time when his chief
crop was laid down." Khonds in distress often sold their children
as Meriahs, "considering the beatification of their souls certain,
and their death, for the benefit of mankind, the most honourable
possible." Their children were representatives of the Deity. With
advancing civilisation we have the substitution of an animal in
place of the human representative of the God. In some cases the
worshippers tore the living animal to pieces with their teeth. The
rending and devouring of live bulls, calves, and goats seems to have
been a regular feature of the Dionysiac rites, the participators in
the orgy fancying that they were devouring the actual body and blood of
the god. With the further advance of civilisation (or, according to the
latest Christian theory, with the further advance of God's revelation),
as in the Mediterranean region, the bodies of the gods of agriculture
were eaten by their votaries in the shape of cakes of bread, or other
food stuffs, and their blood was drunk in the form of wine. [120]

If Dr. Frazer be right as to the priority of the idea of a
vegetation-god in cults commonly associated with the Sun, then Krishna,
Osiris, Dionysus or Bacchus, Adonis, Attis, and other Saviours whose
deaths and resurrections were annually celebrated at the spring equinox
(our Easter), may have been primarily vegetation-victims, the abstract
ideas which identified the death and resurrection of the god with
the annual winter sleep and spring revival being finally fathered
upon the worship. Whatever explanation may be the correct one for the
phenomenon of a common mythos over the greater portion of the globe, it
is certainly not that of a Progressive Revelation. Such an explanation
has never been mooted by anyone but the Christian apologist. "Among
early men and savages every act of life has a sacred significance,
and agriculture especially is everywhere and always invested with
a special sanctity. To us it would seem natural that the act of
sowing seed should be regarded as purely practical and physiological;
that the seed should be looked upon merely as the part of the plant
intended for reproduction, and that its germination should be accepted
as a natural and normal process. Savages and early men, however, had
no such conceptions. To them the whole thing is a piece of natural
magic." [121] Are we, then, to regard this working of primitive
thought as the working of the Holy Spirit? Surely we may dismiss such
a preposterous theory? It will serve the Church no good purpose; for,
while thinking men will be further than ever estranged, it will furnish
the militant agnostic with a fresh weapon for his attacks upon her.



WHY MEN EAT THEIR GOD.

Whatever may have been the ultimate origin of the idea of God, and
of the belief in His expiatory death and subsequent resurrection,
the origin of the custom of eating Him sacramentally permits of
a very simple explanation. "Du Chaillu notes that some of his West
African followers, when going on an expedition, brought out the skulls
of their ancestors (which they religiously preserved) and scraped
off small portions of the bone, which they mixed with the water and
drank, giving as a reason for this conduct that their ancestors were
brave, and that by drinking a portion of them they too became brave
and fearless. Here we have a simple and early case of that habit of
'eating the god' to whose universality and importance Dr. Frazer has
called attention." [122] It is a common early belief, which may still
be met with, that by eating a certain animal the consumer will become
possessed of its qualities. It is notorious, for instance, that the
Miris of Northern India prize tiger's flesh for men, because it gives
them strength and courage. And apparently the same belief exists also
in Southern India, for I remember our Madrassi ayah--a Christian by
the bye--begging for the hind leg of a panther (shot by my wife),
and explaining that she wanted to eat it in order to make her muzbut
(strong). I may mention also that certain religious rites still in
vogue among the Hindoos--disgusting as they are, not only to our ideas,
but in fact--arise from a similar notion.

Herbert Spencer discusses this primitive idea in his Principles of
Sociology. He explains how "attributes or properties, as we understand
them, are not recognisable by the savage--are abstractions which
neither his faculties can grasp nor his language express. Hence
certain beliefs, everywhere conspicuous among the uncivilised. A
special potency which some object or part of an object displays
belongs to it in such a wise that it may be acquired by consuming or
possessing this object or part. The powers of a conquered antagonist
are supposed to be gained by devouring him. The Dakotah eats the
heart of a slain foe to increase his own courage; the New Zealander
swallows his dead enemy's eyes that he may see further; the Abipone
consumes tiger's flesh thinking so to gain the tiger's strength
and ferocity--cases which recall the legend about Zeus devouring
Metis that he might become possessed of her wisdom. Clearly the
implied mode of thought, shown even in the medical prescriptions
of past ages, is a mode of thought necessarily persisting until
analysis has disclosed the complexities of causal relations." [123]
"The belief that the qualities of any individual are appropriated by
eating him is illustrated by the statement of Stanbridge, that when
Australians kill an infant they feed an older child with it, believing
'that by its eating as much as possible of the roasted infant it will
possess the strength of both.' Elsewhere dead relations are consumed
in pursuance of an allied belief. We read of the Cucamas that, 'as
soon as a relation died, these people assembled and ate him roasted
or boiled, according as he was thin or fat!'" [124]

It is easy, then, to understand why a savage should desire to partake
of the flesh of an animal or man whom he regards as divine. By eating
the body of the god he shares in the god's attributes and powers. "And
when," as Dr. Frazer points out, [125] "the god is a corn-god, the
corn is his proper body; when he is a vine-god, the juice of the
grape is his blood; and so by eating the bread and drinking the wine
the worshipper partakes of the real body and blood of the god." If
the apologist, nothing daunted, maintains that there is a religious
germ in these primitive superstitions, it is practically tantamount to
saying that every superstition contains such a germ; that superstition
and religion are, in fact, often synonymous terms. I thought it
was only the sceptic who said that. Before committing himself any
further to a supernatural theory which is so obviously untenable,
I do entreat the average apologist to read carefully the works of
great thinkers who have made primitive man their especial study. Let
him read, for instance, Herbert Spencer's Principles of Sociology,
where he will find a natural and mind-satisfying explanation of
primitive ideas concerning supernatural agents, ghosts, spirits,
demons, gods, resurrection, another life, inspiration, divination,
sacrifices, fasting, propitiation, and prayer. He will learn, also,
much that he ought to know concerning ancestor-worship, idol-worship,
fetish-worship, animal-worship, plant-worship, nature-worship, and
the heathen deities generally. He should also read Frazer's Golden
Bough, J. M. Robertson's Pagan Christs and Christianity and Mythology,
and other scholarly and informing works of this description, instead
of confining his studies to works of an apologetic character, where
everything incompatible with existing Christian theories is carefully
omitted, or coloured out of all recognition.




§ 4. The Solar Myth.


JONAH AND THE WHALE.

The resemblances to ancient myths are not confined to the principal
incidents in the life of Christ. Many of the most noteworthy events
related in the Old Testament have their counterpart in widespread
legends. That the stories of the Creation, Fall, and Deluge are legends
is well known--a visit to the British Museum should convince the most
captious critic on this point--but it is not so well known that ancient
folk-lore contains stories similar to those of the Tower of Babel,
the trial of Abraham's faith, Jacob's vision of the ladder between
earth and heaven, the finding of Moses in an ark, the transformation
of Moses' rod into a serpent, the Israelites' passage through the
Red Sea on dry land, Moses smiting the rock and thus producing
water, the reception by Moses of the Ten Commandments from God,
Balaam's expostulating ass, Joshua's command to the sun and the sun's
obedience, Samson and his exploits, Elijah's ascent to heaven, and
Jonah's sojourn for three days and three nights in the belly of a fish.

This Jonah episode has an important bearing on the subject under
discussion, as it is a typical case of an absorption of the universal
mythos. Among other authorities, Godfrey Higgins tells us: "The story
of Jonas swallowed up by a whale is nothing but part of the fiction
of Hercules, described in the Heracleid or Labours of Hercules, of
whom the same story was told, and who was swallowed up at the very
same place, Joppa, and for the same period of time, three days." [126]
Again, with the exception of those who refuse to acknowledge anything
damaging to the literal truth of Holy Writ, all professors of theology
are agreed that the miracle recorded in the book of Jonah is not a
historical fact. This in spite of the alleged personal interviews with
God as there recounted; while the plea that we must make allowance for
oriental imagery serves only to throw discredit upon historians on
whom we are relying for facts upon which the scheme of Christianity
depends. Now, the story of the three days' sojourn of Hercules and
other heroes in the bowels of the earth, or the belly of a fish,
is only a different version of the myth concerning the death and
resurrection of a god which we find to be prevalent over nearly the
whole world. And, according to the new Christian theory, this shows
an intuition of Christ's death and resurrection!



ANTICIPATIONS OF CHRISTIANITY IN SOLAR MYTHS.

The advanced theologians, who are presenting us with this theory, have
to explain, among other things, how it was that Christ himself took the
"Jonah and whale" story seriously, treating it as sober history. He
spoke of no mere allegory when He said: "For as Jonas was three days
and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of Man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth." [127] Neither
Christ himself nor the Apostles spoke of any revelation embodied in
heathen beliefs. Very much the reverse. Yet the Bishop of Birmingham
(late of Worcester), speaking to the adversaries of Christianity,
informs them: "You say that we find in Christianity the relics of
paganism. On the contrary, we find in paganism, intermingled with
much that is false, superstitious, and horrible, the anticipations
of Christianity." Is that why we have paid them the compliment of
adopting their dates for the birth and death of their Saviours? [128]
Canon P. H. Robinson goes so far as to say that Christianity has
benefited by the addition of heathen thought [N.B. He owns there has
been this addition], and that it is yet to benefit by further contact
with heathen thought! His actual words are: "If Greek and Roman thought
were needed for a full appreciation of the meaning of the Incarnation,
why may we not say the same of Indian and Chinese thought? Surely we
are justified in believing that every country and every people have
something to contribute to Christianity and that the completion of
the Christian revelation awaits the contribution of each. We believe
that there are many important aspects of the Christian truth which
have never been understood, simply because Christianity has not yet
been reflected in the experience of those nations of the world which
are still heathen." [129]



THE CHRISTIAN THEORY IGNORED BY SCIENCE.

The earliest attempts at a crude science of mythology were efforts
to reconcile the legends of the gods and heroes with the religious
sentiment which recognised in these beings objects of worship and
respect. When the Christians first approached the problem of heathen
mythology, they agreed with St. Augustine that the gods were real
persons--but diabolical, not divine. "Some later philosophers,
especially of the seventeenth century, misled by the resemblance
between Biblical narratives and ancient myths, came to the conclusion
that the Bible contains a pure, the myths a distorted, form of an
original revelation." [130] Now, however, in tracing myths and legends
to their probable origins, the modern mythologist never dreams of
calling to his aid any supernatural theory.

Myths present, I take it, two main problems--first as to their origin,
and second as to their resemblances to Biblical narratives. Some
mythologists, while no longer allowing orthodox tradition to hamper
them, only profess to answer the first question. They disclaim the
obligation of entering the arena of theological controversy. It is
important that the Church should thoroughly realise this, and that
any disagreement there may be among mythologists as to the solution
of the first problem--the origin of myths--has little or no bearing
upon the solution of the second problem--the Bible parallels. What
does it matter whether the gods had a vegetable or a solar origin,
or arose, as Max Müller thought, from "a disease of language"? The
all-important question for Christians is: Can any of these possible
origins point to a Progressive Revelation, and, if not, how are we
to account for the Bible parallels?



THE SUN AS A SYMBOL.

Suppose that, whatever the ultimate origin may have been, certain
myths containing the parallels are, as we know them, solar myths
(and on this point mythologists are now in complete accord); how
can a belief be, at one and the same time, a solar myth and also
an allegory expressing a spiritual truth? The sun is the object of
worship, and its apparent movements give rise to myths concerning
the birth, death, and resurrection of a Saviour. [131] Can we call
this Progressive Revelation? "Certainly," the apologists may reply;
"is there no bright Sun of Righteousness--no personal and loving
Son of God, of whom the material sun has been the type or symbol, in
all ages and among all nations? What power is it that comes from the
sun to give light and heat to all created things? If the symbolical
sun leads such a great and heavenly flock, what must be said of the
true and only begotten Son of God? If Apollo was adopted by early
Christian art as a type of the Good Shepherd of the New Testament,
this interpretation of the sun-god among all nations must be the
solution of the universal mythos. What other solution can it have? To
what other historical personage but Christ can it apply? If this
mythos has no spiritual meaning, all religion becomes mere idolatry,
or the worship of material things." [132]

Will this sort of reasoning satisfy the average man? To begin with,
the sun-worshippers themselves had no idea that the sun was, as is now
alleged, the symbol of a great Truth. The sun, or their conception
of the sun as a divine person in a blazing car, was the object of
their worship. What a waste of worship for thousands upon thousands of
years!--worship that might have been centred upon the true God. Even
now, nigh on 2,000 years after God was pleased at last to reveal
Himself, as we are told, to all mankind, the greater portion do not
know Him, or they deny Him. If God intended the sun to be a symbol
of Christ, why have we never been told this before? Why even now
is it only put forward by a certain school of apologists in costly
books that few will ever set their eyes upon? It is noteworthy, too,
that the horrors that accompanied the worship of this same "bright
Sun" are discreetly kept in the background by these advocates of the
"symbol" theory.




§ 5. Concluding Remarks on Christian and Anti-Christian Theories.

If Progressive Revelation be true, it is the most marvellous proof of
the truth of Christianity--far the greatest proof that has ever yet
been presented to us. Far greater, for instance, than the prophecies of
those so-called prophets of the Old Testament, who, it now transpires,
were only anticipating or describing events of their own times. It is
such a proof as Christianity is in dire need of just now--a proof that
will save her from a peril which every hour brings nearer. Why, then,
do we hear so little of this great discovery from the pulpit? [133] How
comes it that it is discovered so many years after the fulfilment of
these unconscious prophecies of the pagans? Why is it produced merely
to confute the sceptic and restore confidence to that infinitesimally
small number who happen to have studied, and therefore to have
had their suspicions aroused by, Comparative Mythology? We are
to believe that God revealed Himself by an exceedingly slow and
painful process, extending over thousands upon thousands of years,
and entailing the most horrible customs among savages. This process,
mark you, not only led to the establishment of Christianity as the
world became more civilised, but to the establishment of those other
great religions which to this day are hostile to the reception of
Christianity! Simple-minded people will never be induced to agree
that revelation can be progressive in the manner now indicated to
us by the apologist. Rather they will agree with the nationalist,
who denies the originality of Christianity, contending that it is a
cult which adopted, step by step, the mysteries, the miracles, and
the myths of the popular Gentile religions. Some freethinkers, indeed,
go so far as to say that the whole Gospel story is nothing more than
a myth; but the greater number consider that there is a substratum of
truth, and that round this have slowly gathered the religious ideas
and doctrines that were current in the old pagan world. The precise
manner in which, they conjecture, the transformation actually took
place is a large subject, and there are differences of opinion--e.g.,
some are inclined to think that Essenism, others that Mithraism,
played a leading part; but the point to be borne in mind is that
there is no difficulty whatever in understanding how the absorption
of myths could have taken place, or how the Christian cult could have
arisen and prospered.

I especially mention this, as some apologists argue that there
was not sufficient time for heathen accretions between the death
of Jesus and the writing of the Gospels. I can only reiterate the
remark of the well-known professor of Church history, Dr. Harnack:
"We know that the Gospels come from a time in which the marvellous
may be said to have been something of almost daily occurrence. We now
know that eminent persons have not to wait until they have been long
dead, or even for several years, to have miracles reported of them;
they are reported at once, often the very next day." Also, I should
call attention to the notes on Essenism and Mithraism at the close of
this chapter, as they contain the answer to this final objection. But,
personally, I fail to see how the "time" objection can in any case
be maintained when we remember that the whole world had already
been conversant for ages past with stories of suffering Saviours,
similar in all essentials to the Gospel narratives. Besides, we know
that documents have been tampered with more or less (the sceptic says
"more," the apologist "less"), and that the composition of the Gospels
took place many years after the events they purport to describe;
while the age was one when men were extremely credulous, and when,
consciously and unconsciously, imposing upon this credulity was the
ordinary method of propagating a Faith.



ARGUMENT FROM ESSENISM.

Regarding the difficulty of supposing that Jesus or the Evangelists
could have been imbued with any sun-myth ideas, we must take into
consideration the existence at that time of the Jewish sect, the
Essenes. It seems quite possible that they considered Jesus of
Nazareth to be the Messiah they were expecting, and that they came
over to Christianity in a body. This monastic brotherhood, living in
settlements in the desert west of the Dead Sea--i.e., within a day's
journey of Bethlehem and Jerusalem--not only placed love of God, of
goodness, and of man as articles in their programme, but also sought
with wonderful energy, according to their lights, to realise them
in their life. Bunsen assures us (p. 158 of his Angel-Messiah), and
furnishes strong grounds for his opinion, that the Essenes introduced
the new doctrine of an Angel-Messiah, and with it the doctrine of the
atoning death of the Messiah, into Judaism and Christianity. Canon
Cheyne likewise places them among the number of those who prepared
the way for the new world-religion. This seems to have been the very
reason of their disappearance in the second century A.D.--Christianity
dissolved them. So much so that the Essenes (often called Therapeutæ
or healers) are identified by Eusebius with the Christian monks, and
this opinion was generally adopted by the Fathers (see chap, xvii.,
bk. ii., p. 117, of The Church History of Eusebius, translated by the
Rev. A. C. McGiffert, under the editorial supervision of Henry Wace,
D.D., and Philip Schaff, D.D.).

From a perusal of the article on the "Essenes" in the Encyclopædia
Biblica, it will be seen that Essenism is not a purely Jewish
product, but that "Persian and Babylonian influence may reasonably
be admitted." "Oriental influences were," Canon Cheyne informs us,
"so to speak, in the air, and it is probable that the belief in the
resurrection was not the only great debt which Jewish religionists
owed to Zoroastrians." Bishop Lightfoot describes the Essenes as
sun-worshippers. Is there, then, no likelihood of Jesus and His
disciples being familiar with the ideas of sun-worshippers?

But, it may be urged, the teaching of Jesus Christ was opposed to
Essenic doctrines in the matter of asceticism. True; but, in one
way, this makes the case for the absorption of Essenic ideas all the
stronger, for it would account for the strange fact that the Christians
approved of asceticism in spite of their own Master's example to the
contrary. I do not wish to press this anti-Christian theory further
than to say that it appears to me that, among others, it is one
deserving of consideration. Presuming that in Jesus the Apostles
were confronted with a personality of overwhelming attractiveness
and power of appeal to themselves, their language can be interpreted
throughout as their attempt to expound and pass on their experience
to the world. In this attempt they were naturally driven to employ
such conceptions as were current in their day, and notably those
of Messianic anticipations and Greek philosophy. Assuming that the
Gospels are without any important interpolations, and that the authors
are the Evangelists, even then the partial insertion of solar-myths
would not necessarily be tantamount to any conscious dishonesty on
the part of the Evangelists; it only points to their impregnation
with the Jewish beliefs, such as those of the Essenes, that were
around them. If this theory be correct, the difficulty arising from
the shortness of the time between the Resurrection and the writing
of the Gospels vanishes, since accretions of a later date would no
longer be the sole cause for the events recorded by the Evangelists
becoming inextricably entwined with mythical beliefs.



ARGUMENT FROM MITHRAISM.

This argument is fully developed in Part III. of Mr. J. M. Robertson's
book, Pagan Christs, from which the following are quotations:
"Mithraism was in point of range the most nearly universal religion
of the Western world in the early centuries of the Christian era. As
to this students are agreed. [Here Mr. Robertson gives in a footnote
a formidable array of authorities.] To the early Fathers, we shall
see. Mithraism was a most serious thorn in the flesh; and the
monumental remains of the Roman period, in almost all parts of the
empire, show its extraordinary extension." Mr. Robertson points out
that there are a number of monuments in honour of Mithra in England,
France, Italy, Germany, and in many Mediterranean ports. He then
proceeds to give us some exceedingly important information regarding
Mithraism, out of which I select the following extracts for the more
particular attention of Christians:--

"We have the culture of Mithra as the Sun-god, the deity of light
and truth, created by, and yet co-equal with, the Supreme Deity, and
fighting on the side of the good against the evil power, Angra-Mainyu
(Ahriman)--this at a period long before the Christian era.... Mithra
comes to occupy a singular position as between the two great powers of
good and evil, Ormuzd and Ahriman, being actually named the Mediator,
and figuring to the devout eye as a humane and beneficent God,
nearer to man than the Great Spirit of Good, a Saviour, a Redeemer,
eternally young, son of the Most High, and preserver of mankind from
the Evil One.... The first day of the week, Sunday, was apparently
from time immemorial consecrated to Mithra by the Mithraists; and as
the Sun-god was pre-eminently 'the Lord,' Sunday was the 'Lord's Day'
long before the Christian era.... We have some exact information as
to the two chief Mithraic ceremonies or festivals, those of Christmas
and Easter, the winter solstice and the vernal equinox, the birthday of
the Sun-god, and the period of his sacrifice and his triumph.... There
were in antiquity, we know from Porphyry, several elaborate treatises
setting forth the religion of Mithra; and every one of these has
been destroyed by the care of the Church.... Of course, we are told
that the Mithraic rites and mysteries are borrowed and imitated from
Christianity. The refutation of this notion, as has been pointed out
by M. Havet, lies in the language of those Christian fathers who spoke
of Mithraism. Three of them, as we have seen, speak of the Mithraic
resemblances to Christian rites as being the work of devils. Now,
if the Mithraists had simply imitated the historic Christians,
the obvious course for the latter would be simply to say so.... The
Mithraic mysteries, then, of the burial and resurrection of the Lord,
the Mediator, the Saviour; burial in a rock tomb and resurrection
from the tomb; the sacrament of bread and water, the marking on the
forehead with a mystic mark--all these were in practice before the
publication of the Christian Gospel.... Nor was this all. Firmicus
informs us that the devil, in order to leave nothing undone for the
destruction of souls, had beforehand resorted to deceptive imitations
of the Cross of Christ.... Still further does the parallel hold. It
is well known that, whereas in the Gospels Jesus is said to have been
born in an inn-stable, early Christian writers, as Justin Martyr and
Origen, explicitly say he was born in a cave. Now, in the Mithra myth,
Mithra is both rock-born and born in a cave; and the monuments show
the new-born babe adored by shepherds who offer first-fruits.... Now,
however, arises the great question. How came such a cultus to die
out of the Roman and Byzantine Empire after making its way so far,
and holding its ground so long? The answer to that question has never,
I think, been fully given, and is for the most part utterly evaded,
though part of it has been suggested often enough. The truth is
Mithraism was not overthrown; it was merely transformed.... Though
Mithraism had many attractions, Christianity had more, having
sedulously copied every one of its rivals and developed special
features of its own.... In the Christian legend the God was humanised
in the most literal way; and for the multitude the concrete deity
must needs replace the abstract. The Gospels gave a literal story:
The Divine Man was a carpenter, and ate and drank with the poorest
of the poor.... Gradually the very idea of allegory died out of
the Christian intelligence; and priests as well as people came to
take everything literally and concretely.... This was the religion
for the Dark Ages.... Byzantines and barbarians alike were held by
literalism, not by the unintelligible: for both alike the symbol had
to become a fetish; and for the Dark Ages the symbol of the cross
was much more plausibly appealing than that of the god slaying the
zodiacal bull.... A Mithraist could turn to the Christian worship
and find his main rites unimpaired, lightened only of the burden of
initiative austerities, stripped of the old obscure mysticism, and
with all things turned to the literal and the concrete, in sympathy
with the waning of knowledge and philosophy throughout the world."

But I must now close these quotations, apologising to Mr. Robertson
for making such a free use of his book, and advising my readers to
study it. They will find that his facts are reliable; they are all
backed by the highest authorities, however much the conclusions drawn
from them may, at present, be a matter of opinion. Suffice it to
say here that the coincidences between Mithraism and Christianity
are indescribably marvellous, and require further explanation,
if Mr. Robertson's theory of the absorption of the former by the
latter be not very largely true. Whatever the substratum of real
history may be, there is no doubt that there was every opportunity
for an early absorption of Mithraism, and every probability that it
took place to an extent which throws a new flood of light upon many
Christian doctrines. "The first six centuries were characterised
by fierce controversies as to the most fundamental verities of the
Christian faith, by the wholesale introduction of adult converts, who
brought with them heathen and Jewish habits of thought, and who were
in many cases of a low type of civilisation; and the adulteration of
the Gospel was further facilitated by the purely nominal adhesion of
persons anxious to stand well with the first Christian Emperors. The
period was one of incessant fermentation and of rapid and continuous
change." These are not the words of Mr. Robertson, nor of any other
freethinker, but are an extract from the resolution adopted by the
Church Association in connection with the appeal by Dean Wace and
others to the authority of the First Six Centuries. What a period to
appeal to! When we know what we do of the credulity and the methods
of those "Fathers" of the Church, how can any rational being place
in them any confidence whatsoever?

What steps do the Churches propose to take concerning these
disclosures? Will they proclaim from the pulpit their new theory of a
Progressive Revelation, or will they by their silence evince their own
want of faith in this precious theory, and allow the storm of unbelief
slowly to gather force until it bursts and overwhelms the Christian
belief? Knowledge of the facts, so ably discussed by Mr. Robertson,
will soon be widely disseminated. Let there be no mistake on this
point. Here, for instance, are some instructive passages appearing
on page 496 of the Nineteenth Century, September, 1905:--

"It has been truly observed that the recovery, only partial as it
is, of the history of this religion [the Mithraic] is one of the most
remarkable triumphs of historical and antiquarian research. Originating
in Persia, it was spread through the Roman Empire by poor and humble
converts, who were at first mainly soldiers; but gradually, like
Christianity, it permeated all ranks, and its temples are found
scattered over the whole civilised world, from Babylon to the
hills of Scotland. Just as the religion of Isis did, it resembled
that of Christ in being a religion of inward holiness, of austere
self-discipline and purity; but the details of its resemblance are
incomparably more close and curious. The briefest sketch of the
matter is all that can be attempted here. According to Mithraic
theology, God considered in His totality is a Being so infinite and
so transcendent that His direct connection with man and the universe
is inconceivable. In order to become the father of man and creator,
He manifested Himself in a second personality--namely, Mithra, who
was in his cosmic character identified with the 'unconquered sun,'
and, as a moral and intellectual Being, was the Divine Word or Reason,
and, in more senses than one, 'the mediator' between man and the Most
High. Life on earth, according to the Mithraic doctrine, is for man a
time of trial. The Spirit of Evil, his adversary, is always seeking to
destroy him--to crush him with pain and sorrow, or to stain his soul
with concupiscence; but in all his struggles Mithra is at hand to aid
him, and will at the last day be at once his judge and advocate, when
the graves give up their dead, when the just are separated from the
unjust, when the saved are welcomed like children into eternal bliss,
and the lost are consumed in the fire prepared for the Devil and his
angels. This Divine Saviour came into the world as an infant. His
first worshippers were shepherds; and the day of His nativity was
December 25th. His followers preached a severe and rigid morality,
chief among their virtues being temperance, chastity, renunciation,
and self-control. They kept the seventh day holy, and the middle day
of each month was a special feast of Mithra, which symbolised his
function of Mediator. They had seven sacraments, of which the most
important were baptism, confirmation, and a Eucharistic supper, at
which the communicants partook of the divine nature of Mithra under
the species of bread and wine."







EVOLUTION

