CHAPTER VIII.

Then Kangsa, the brother of Devaki, besought the demoness Putanā, mother
of evil, to give each child in arms the milk of her breast, that should
fill them with death at the sucking.

And forth she did go, and prayed to be taken into the palace of the
king, to behold the young Child v/hose face gave blessing to all who on
it looked.

On her coming, the Child stretched forth its arms to be taken to her
breast, but when her breast between His lips He took, she bent her face
to look at the Babe, and fear made her pale and faint, for in the beauty
of His eye the wisdom of all the world she beheld.

And releasing the Master she held at her breast, she pleaded and prayed
that He cease His sucking, but harder He drew and firmer His grip was,
till exhausted and lifeless she fell on the ground, while with a smile
the Babe played with the breast arid crept on the body that lay in
death.

And when they came from far and wide to look at her who brought
destruction and death to children, they beheld her swelled and stretched
to immensity.

For smiling evil seemeth not big, but rob it of the smile that hideth
its leer, and huge and misshapen it doth become.

So with Putanā it was. Forth she went to mother and suckle the young
children and thus bring death to the Child of Love. Clothed in sweet
motherhood and kindness of purpose, all hearts were opened to welcome
her freely, yet evil she brought wherever she walked.

But He who was All Love at once sighted her hatred for love, by that
which in her all unlike Himself was, and straightway in her poverty of
Love and nakedness of heart she stood revealed in His eyes.

And all saw her thus hideous and unsightly, and marvelled at the
blindness of their eyes.

But mark now the kindness and power of Love.

By the touch of His lips upon her breast, she, who never knew love, by
contact with Him became sanctified. And the effort Putanā put forth to
bring death to Krishna, under cover of Love, did make her for the moment
a mother in truth. And for that moment of concentrated love in Him the
honor of Divine Motherhood on her was bestowed in that realm where hate
is unknown. And all the world marvelled, when dead she lay, at the aroma
that rose from her huge body.

But the Child only smiled as He played on her breast.

Verily the aroma of great sweetness reached to all the skies. For Love
is ever the master of hate, and Love in its strength doth conquer all
hate, and hate is purified by the breath of Love, and sanctified it is
by its hand.

CHAPTER IX.

A year has passed since the coming of Krishna, a year of peace and
plenty to all.

And the earth was relieved of pressure, and the minds of men were
illumined by the light that shone in their midst.

And the hearts that were cramped and narrow with pain grew big into
bursting with the love that flowed from the Child that was God.

And Nanda prepared a great feast for the naming of Him and the Brother,
Devaki's seventh child who, at birth premature, had been despatched to
the land where Krishna now was. And the feast was attended by many
guests, who rejoiced on beholding the wondrous Child who on that day a
year had brought joy by His coming.

And the priest was called and the seer, and he who read the stars and
read the Vedas alike. And when the stars he contemplated, he saw the
wonder of His birth, and, prostrating at the feet of Him, spoke to them
who gathered to hear: "The oppressed He shall succor, the enslaved He
shall free, and those that in danger are He will protect, and bring all
blessings to the land where now He doth live. What and Who He is you
know not, but, crowned with living stars of Love and adorned with the
rainbow of promise on His breast, this Child shall bring glory and Bliss
wherever He breathes. Oh, blessed was the day I looked in His eyes and
touched my hand lo His Holy Feet, for in Him the virtues and powers and
might of Love do dwell that never before men with eyes have seen."

But the little Child smiled, then stretched forth Its arms and puckered
Its lips for the mother's sweet milk.

The mother in pride placed It at the side of the cart that held brass
vessels and articles of food, and turned to receive the congratulations
of her guests, when lo! the Child with Its baby foot upturned the cart,
and the cart and the vessels in pieces lay on the ground!

And more and more they marvelled at the Child, whose baby strength
upturned the cart.

Nor was this the only miracle of His babyhood. For one day the mother
sat with the Child in her lap, when lo and behold, so heavy He became
that she felt as if the world were resting on her knees!

The strength of her knees gave way and the Child sank to the ground,
when a whirlwind came, in the shape of a dust-storm, and raised the
Child to heights unseemable, but soon again lightly on His feet He
descended at the side of His mother.

Wildly she clasped Him in her arms and kissed Him again, but He opened
His baby mouth to her eyes, and lo, the universe she saw within!

And in that moment unto her it was revealed that He, whom she called her
son, was God—the Seed and Soul of the Universe; the One who all things
knew, yet who was unknowable to all.

She also knew that the shadow He cast by His great, universal Will was
Māyā, and the offsprings or attributes of that Māyā as demons were
known.

And she knew that a demon it was, urged on by Kangsa, that came in the
shape of a whirlwind to carry her Child away. And that He who was all
Love was mightier by far than the offspring of shadow could be.

And thus the power of darkness again by Love was overthrown! All this
she saw in the space of a moment, and salutations she made to her Lord.

But the Child only smiled and the mother again saw but her Child. For
how could the woman, who suckled the babe, dwell long on her Child and
know Him as her Lord?

