CHAPTER XI.

Now came a time when the oldest and wisest of the populace of the
kingdom where Krishna was reared bethought it best to take the wonderful
Child from the place where men marvelled at the wonder of Him and came
from far to look on His face.

And anxiety filled the hearts of the people, who loved Him best, for His
safety, as calamity upon calamity came nigh Him; and though no harm as
yet did betide Him, yet was it only a miracle that saved Him from the
child-killer, Putanā.

And again only the hand of Vishnoo had rescued Him from the fierce
whirling duststorm, and the turning of the cart at his side, and, last,
the two trees that crashed at His feet, yet touched not a hair of His
beautiful head.

Yes, best by far it was to take away the Child. So reasoned the elders,
and Nanda approved, and forth they went with attendants and friends and
all who lived in Gokula.

And a caravan they formed, the cowherds driving the cows and calves
before them, and carts bearing the women and children, and the men
beating the drums to the voices of the women that broke forth in glad
hopefulness.

And bright was the sky that spanned their heads, and rich the forests
through which they passed, and life-giving the sun was, and refreshing
the winds were that greeted them on the way to Brindāban.

And in the early days of their sojourn in these rich forests' depths,
tents they erected which soon were overspread with creepers that
abounded in that place, and birds came near and nested in the tendrils,
and the wild hare and shy deer nearer and nearer their new friends came,
till, all tamed they would feed from the hands of the Gopis and played
with the children; and thus in peace and serenity they lived in
Brindāban.

Brindāban, the Land of Love and Holiness, the land where Krishna laughed
and played, the land that the centre became of all spirituality, because
of His sojourn there.

An ordinary boy, he walked with the boys, as tender of cows and calves.

And in a little while the city of Brindāban thrived, and a city of
plenty it was to all who therein lived.

But as time went on, even here the dread calamities seemed to follow the
boy Krishna. For an Asura, sent by Kangsa, assumed the form of a calf,
and strayed among the calves, hoping thus to elude the eye of the Child
and perhaps take Him unawares.

But hardly had he mixed with the herds when Krishna pointed him out and
strode to where the calf was grazing. With easy grace He lifted him by
the hind legs and twirled him high in the air, till lifeless the Asura
was.

Then, 'midst the shouts of the cowherd boys and companions, He lifted
His face to the skies, which opened wide to His smiling eye.

CHAPTER XII.

In the morn of summer, early, even before the sun yet bathed the world
with its golden warmth, the companions of Krishna, aroused from their
slumber by the lowing of the cows, would gather about the house of Nanda
and wait for Krishna to come from His bed and go with them to the forest
to tend the cows and while away the sweet hours of long summer days with
sporting and tales and long rambles together.

And oft, as they waited about the gates of the palace, Yasodā would
speak to the waiting boys:

"Ye children! my Krishna has not yet opened His eyes to the light of the
day; His sleep is sound, nor will I wake Him, till of His own will He
comes from His bed; so go with the cows and leave Him to me."

But the boys would not stir, but would still wait His coming.

But the joy left their eyes, because of their longing to look at the Boy
who was Love.

And loud were the cries that came from the boys as they saw Him
approaching and then come in their midst, and He with the boys as a boy
would be.

And oft Yasodā, the mother, who reared Him, would take Him aside and
remonstrate with Him thus: "O my Krishna, my son, why wilt Thou thus
spend Thy time with the cows and the cowherds? A Son of the King art
Thou, O my boy, and Thy place is not there with the cows in the
pastures. Many servants have we to see to the herds. Come, take Thou Thy
flute, bedeck thyself with garments and ornaments as it doth behoove my
son and a prince."

Then Krishna, twining His arms round the neck of His mother, with a
world of glowing love in His visage, would gaze far away into the heart
of His people and reply to her who knew Him as son:

"O mother beloved! Well it is for Me, a son of a king, with the people
to be; though of the palace, yet is My place there where the people call
unto Me.

Tender am I of the Flock, O My mother, and to them I must go, with them
must I be to teach them Myself and the Power of Love.

"Even now must I go to the calling hearts, who madly seek Me and will
not be satisfied till again Me they see."

And Yasodā, the Mother, in amazement gazed on the face of her son and
understood not His prattle that such wisdom held, but the tears of fond
pride rose to her eyes, as she saw the love that came from the boy and
enveloped Him as a soft cloud of light.

And she kissed her son, seeing but in Him a merry little child bounding
and throbbing with victorious health.

Onward He ran to greet His companions, who were satisfied now as they
beheld His coming, and laughing the group went to the forest.

They played, burying their bare feet in the mosses, rolling in the sweet
grass, clapping their hands in the fulness of joy, and shouting in very
ecstasy of being.

Never saw they in Him the son of a King. They knew Him but as a cowherd
boy who, like them, tended the cows in pastures and forests.

