CHAPTER IV.

Now the time was ready for Hari (Krishna) to come to be born and dwell
upon earth.

His sweet will it was to be as a man and show man the beauty of Love. It
was then that Devaki again conceived and a mother unto the eighth child
would be.

But lo! fear now to her was unknown and glory shone around her like the
sun filling the darkened dungeon with light, for the Lord of all Light
in her mind did come, and Him as a child to the world she would bring.
She, who the mother many times of sorrow was, now the mother of joy had
become.

O blessed art thou, wife Devaki, that the sweet will of the Lord of all
Love and All Life was centred on thee when he willed as a child among
men to come! And thou, poor mother, whose heart was made to bleed for
the bearing of sons, henceforth an ocean of love shalt become, for
throbs not under thy heart the pulse of Him who, love-touched,
love-filled, and love-made, pervades all lives and all that ever will
live?

And in that hour barren women, as a gracious boon of the Lord's coming
into Devaki's womb, conceived to their own overjoyful surprise.

And when Kangsa beheld the glory of her who was his sister, he knew that
Hari, He who would quench his life, was within her.

But when he sought to strike her low, the glow of the light that came
from her overawed him quite and the steel refused to reach her flesh;
and many gaolers were sent unto her by the king to slay, but when they
looked upon her glory, lo! their hearts were quickened with love, and
holy they became, and, dropping their weapons, fled from her side and in
meditation and prayer sought the light that showed them their darkness.

And the seers and sages and gods and pundits and angels that see, with
illumined eyes of the spirit, the things that were and are and the
things that still will come, beheld the light that glorified the mother
even though distance and mortar hid her from fleshly view, for the eyes
that are quickened by spirit cognize not the sight of the senses.

And, prostrating low, salutations they gave to the Lord of the Universe
that became child in the mother:

"O Thou, the Eye of the Universe that sees all, the all-hearing Ear, the
Heart that draweth unto itself all that sprang from Thee!

"Thou, the Seed and Soul that hath in its centre the roots of all space
and all that space containeth!

"Thou, the Source of all Love, the Existence of all Life, the Dispenser
of all Light, the Mystery of all Wisdom, who, self-created, chose not to
dwell alone, but willed creation to be and from whose breath all living
creatures sprang!

"O Thou, who suffered darkness to be, that beauty of light may be known!
Thou, who by Thy own sweet will dost thrust Thy own children forth a
little but to draw them unto Thy heart again to heighten Thy pleasure
and theirs!

"We, Thy blinded children, illumined, were made to see the light of Thy
coming to earth. Thou, the Mystery and yet the Revelation of all things
art!

"Thou, that which hideth from man all things that he accounteth not to
Thy sweet will and revealeth all unto him who sifteth each act to Thy
source!

"Thou, who attunest the ear to the sound of all harmony and keepest Thy
Worlds and All Life in motion!

"Thou, who art the Immensity of All Things! We know that even as a man
Thou art come in our midst.

"O Thou the Source of all Energy that is, Thou the Vibrations of all joy
that thrilleth through all Life!

"Thou Maker of all, who by Thy coming dost lift us even unto Thyself,
again who by Thy coming will show the vileness of Self which unlike Thee
is, and how sin doth darken where virtue is!

"Thy power, O King of all Kingdoms, is boundless. Oh! why are we blessed
with the truth of Thy coming, we the blinded whom Thou hast chosen to
honor?"

Thus spoke the sages, the pundits and seers, the gods and Brahmā, the
Creator Himself, whom the Lord of Love had blessed with the power to
know of His coming.

CHAPTER V.

And the child was come, the child that was God, the God that became
child, and time itself stood still in its passing to mark the wonder of
that coming!

The clouds ceased their onward sailing and crowded in piles of white and
blue and gray softness, to marvel at the child's first smile. The
heavens rained down blossoms of white and red and golden and blue
lotuses.

The mountains gave forth a great cry of joy, as they in gladness met.

The rivers heaved their billowy crests and chanted hymns of praise to
Him, who was to make holy again their waters.

The earth throbbed and thrilled as the streams of holy Love shot through
all her body, swelling her breast with new life and feeding all that was
living and moving within the recesses of her bowels, and clothing with
great beauty that which lived upon her bosom.

The roots of growing things grasped with a firmer hold her sides, and
her loved creatures, those that walked and those that crept upon her
surface, nestled once more, as of yore, when all the world was holy,
against her freshened and strengthened body with new affection and
faithfulness, and her great heart uttered a mighty thanksgiving to Him
who had heard her appeal and succored her.

The seeds that were in her mouth burst into rooting, the roots into
sprouting, and the budding trees, that graced her brow, into glad
blossoms.

And the trees that were in blossom bore ripe fruit in the hour of His
coming.

And all those that hungered were fed.

The cows, big with young, dropped their calves, and their bags were full
unto bursting for all that came to take sustenance therefrom.

The motherless cubs of wild things fearlessly suckled from her udder,
and the cow lapped the soft, furred sides of the young stranger with her
long, rough tongue.

And all the wild things that hungered were fed in that hour.

The eagle left its nest on the mountain's rugged side, and sat on the
tree with quivering wing beside the dove, that cooed its inward shout of
love.

The snake forgot to charm the timid songster that thrilled its joy close
by, but, lifting up its hooded head, it madly danced between the
sunshine and the shadow that the exultant branches of swaying trees did
cast.

The huge elephant sportive became, and played with the deer and doe that
rubbed against its haunches.

The fierce lion, the leopard, and all the untamed creatures of the
forests, with yearning call of love, turned their faces towards the
place, all light, where Love, as a little child was cradled in the arms
of man.

And in the hour of His coming many rainbows of wondrous color and beauty
did span the skies. And the sun liquid as molten love became.

And in that hour man and beast, and bird and flower, and all that lives
upon the earth and underneath its surface and in the deep waters, did
look into the abode of Love.

And on the face of earth the smile of Love did rest, and sin vanished
from the heart of man, even as hunger disappeareth where plentiful food
is dished to the hungered.

The eye of the murderer looked for darkened places wherein to bide
himself, but, finding naught but light, did throw his blade into the
purified waters of the holy river and knelt at the feet of the holy
ones, who in ecstasy were wrapt.

The gray and shrunken face of avarice lifted itself toward the skies,
and lo! glorified the countenance became!

The face of bloated folly, the weakness of vanity, the vileness of
ingratitude, the stubbornness of unbelief in that hour were unknown to
man.

A joy, unfelt before, on all the earth did reign, a joy that even yet
doth thrill through hearts of life, for the child that was God, and the
God that was child, had come on earth to live with man.

