CHAPTER XXXII.

When the hour for the festivities of the Bow began, spectators
innumerable filled the galleries and platforms of the amphitheatre. By
every tongue the praise of Krishna's beauty was sung, and all awaited
with eager desire the arrival of the brothers Rāma and Krishna.

In the centre of the arena a platform was raised, where Kangsa, the
king, and his ministers were enthroned. His eyes were lurid with hate
and his heart quaking with fear, for his dreams had been full of evil
omens, and he knew that he of all that multitude was out of tune with
Nature.

For Krishna, the Youth, had scattered flowers of love in that city for
all who chose to partake of them, and all hearts had gathered them
eagerly. Only he alone had turned from the good and abided by his hate;
and he knew, in spite of the wrestlers and the wild elephant, and even
the guard that stood ready to slay at his command, that the Youth would
conquer, as He ever had, and that he would die by His hands sooner or
later.

For had it not been writ thus? And again had not every attempt of his to
put out the life of the eighth child of Devaki been baffled in marvelous
ways? And still the Youth lived and smiled. Surely he was Hari, the
Invincible!

His hate betrayed him and was hourly leading him into a trap. It charmed
him like a subtle snake, while it frightened him like a huge wild beast;
yet gladly would he have opened the valve that held his wrath and
flooded all with its poison, if by so doing he might have annihilated
that glorious Youth who stood ever before him by night and day and smote
his cruel heart as with a glowing rod.

So all his stolid self-possession was gone as he looked on, when
Krishna, the Beautiful, soft as a delicate woman, yet invincible as
unconquered strength, walked 'mid the hysterically joyous shouts of the
people to where the giant Bow was guarded by warriors bold.

A moment, and then He seized the Bow and held it aloft with one hand,
the Bow that twelve men of mighty strength alone could handle, and with
a twist of His wrist it fell at their feet, broken in twain.

The guards rushed forward, as if to strike Him low; but when near Him,
they stopped and looked at His glory; they crouched low on their
haunches and fell on their faces, unable to move, for the life had gone
out of their bodies by the first wave of His hand.

But blessed were they; for none died by the hand of Krishna, but by Him
was made pure and straightway to the realms of Bliss they were sent.

For where the hand of Krishna rested, whether to bring life or take life
away, that man forever holy was made by the touch.

So also with Kangsa it was. Dwelling constantly on Krishna, even though
in hate, he came closer to Love than he himself knew.

So the celebration of the Bow ended in triumph for Krishna and Rāma. And
though Kangsa sent a body of well-armed soldiers to apprehend them, lo!
the conquerors victorious walked from the arena, followed by the cheers
of the worshipping populace, who saw that in strength they were
invincible, even as in beauty they were incomparable. And they looked
forward eagerly to the morrow, when the brothers were to participate in
wrestlings and sports.

But Rāma and Krishna returned to spend the night with the Gopas; while
the people of Mathura neither ate nor slept, but sang of their beauty
and might.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

But Kangsa was troubled by the triumph of the brothers, and next morning
called the wrestlers who were to match the two brothers, and again put
to them the weight of the contest, and placed armed men at the gates of
the arena. He then proceeded with many forebodings to the amphitheatre,
where the sports were to take place. He took his seat amid the beating
of drums, the blaring of trumpets and the waving of banners.

Already many spectators had assembled, among them many crowned chiefs,
Brāhmans and Kshatriyas, all with expectancy overwhelming, as to the
outcome of the wrestling.

Forward the wrestlers came with a rush and stood in the centre of the
ring, wrestlers whose fame was known throughout all the land for their
brute strength and skill.

Few there were who dared to meet these men, and as Krishna and Rima came
forward to see the meeting of the first pair, they found a huge elephant
posted there at the entrance.

Krishna, seeing this, asked the driver to make way with the beast for
Him. At this the rider urged the infuriated beast towards Him.

With a smile, Krishna grasped with his soft little hand the nose of the
furious beast, who, with a bellow, fell to the ground lifeless, dragging
the driver down with him.

Krishna then tore the tusks from the brute's head; and Rāma and Krishna
entered the wrestling grounds with the tusks in their hands and
blood-stained from the slaying of the beast.

Kangsa's heart sank at the sight, and even the wrestlers recoiled in
terror at the blood-stained figures who gazed on them with supernatural
power in their youthful eyes.

Yet true to the command of Kangsa, Chānoor, the chief of the wrestlers,
cried: "Come, ye youngsters, good wrestlers are ye! The good king hath
invited you to participate in the contest, so come and wrestle and give
pleasure to King Kangsa, he who is the greatest of all kings and men.

With a smile all-wise Krishna looked at the wrestlers, then, with eye
aslant, he gazed on Kangsa, who trembled at the look; and answered
Chānoor thus: "Though subjects of King Kangsa, yet only boys of the
forest are we, unlearned in the art of wrestling. Therefore, we pray
you, match us with boys of our age and not with men whose muscles are
iron and whose hearts are bold as a lion's. If we are to meet men like
these, unfair is the game, and unjust, and we decline the arrangement."
Then Chānoor became insolent, because of the confession of Krishna which
he thought was made in weakness, and cried:

"O thou who hast killed the furious elephant as if in sport, thou askest
to be matched with one of thine own age! With me thou shalt wrestle, me
the most powerful, the strongest man of the age, and Rāma shall match
with Mushtik; and, be it just or unjust, fair or unfair, thee I will
fight and fight to kill." And so a combat began between the man that was
mortal and the youth that was God.

The man a giant was of colossal brute force, of stature great, with
muscles all knotted and crooked as the boughs of an oak-tree of many
years' growth.

And the Boy, smooth as a sweet maiden, all curved with grace, smilingly
awaited the onslaught.

Forward the wrestler came, with the snort of a wild bull, to meet the
Boy, who, calm and serene, smiled in his eye.

The people arose and sprang from their benches, and hissed, and threw
their head gear and staffs into the ring, as they shouted:

"Give up, the fight is unfair!"

"Oh, shame!" they cried, "coward and beast! put a stop to the
slaughter!" on seeing the seemingly unequal fight.

Several times Chānoor struck furious blows at the fair, slight body of
Krishna, the youth, but provoked naught but a smile from Him; while
beads of blood sprang to the brow and arms of Chānoor, and his huge legs
trembled and broke at the knee as he tried to reach the belt of Him,
who, after several circles about the ring, seized Chānoor by the arms,
and, lifting him high above His head, to the wonderment of the crowd,
dashed him down to the ground, as a playing child doth throw the
pebbles. And the wrestler breathed his last with a yearning look of love
in his eyes, as they rested on Him, whom a moment before he beheld with
hate.

And Rāma, too, victorious was.

But when Krishna stood and faced the mass of people there, they shouted
and cheered with mad delight and jumped on the railings in panic wild:
"He is more than human, He is God come down to earth! It is He, for whom
the world hath waited! He will free our land from oppression! Hari is
He, the Invincible! Oh, mighty art Thou and possessest in Thy frame the
forces of all the universe!"

But Kangsa, the King, full of terror and rage, cried: "Ho, guards! Seize
him and take him to the outskirts of my kingdom and drive him into
banishment Imprison Nanda and Yasodā, confiscate all their lands and
belongings, and take from the Gopas their wealth and goods and drive
them from Brindāban. Kill Devaki and Vāsudeva, who are now imprisoned in
my dungeon. Kill all who know and love this youth, 'tis my command."

A moment Krishna gazed on Kangsa, then with a bound he reached the
platform where Kangsa stood with sword unsheathed.

"O Kangsa. I am the eighth son of Devaki whom thou so long hast sought
to slay. It is writ that thou by my hand must die! O King, dost thou
think that human hand can turn aside the force of the Law?"

And hurling Kangsa down on the ground, He leaped over the prostrate
king, whereat his life departed.

But his glazed eyes were fixed on Him whose hand had blessed even him by
its touch and burned away every sin from his soul.

Then, hastening through the lines of guards, who prostrated low at His
approach. He went to where His father and mother were imprisoned in
dungeons dark and deep.

Low he bent to their feet, murmuring in accents sweet;

"O parents mine! Oh, much have ye suffered for my sake and all ye shall
gain through Me; for in Me is all there is to gain and outside of Me
there is naught. From thy womb. O Devaki, I was born, yet out of Me thou
didst come. I prostrate before thee."

Then saluting them both, 'mid deafening cheers, he led them forth to the
palace.

And the father of Kangsa, dethroned by his son, received and welcomed
them there.

And wild was the joy of the populace on that day that Krishna lifted the
yoke of bondage from them, and they blessed the hour that the sun had
ushered in that day, which brought a new ruler in their land.

And already Mathura felt the joy that was but a forerunner of a perfect
reign. For Krishna it was who placed on the throne the one who would
rule the land in goodness and plenty.

Messages and Revelations from Sree Krishna

MESSAGES AND REVELATIONS FROM SREE KRISHNA

Within my belly you do dwell, yet in every heart I sit. Know you this, O
my own, and you shall forget and fetter yourselves to Me. The wings of
your Self now are close clapped like a dripping feather all wet with
tears of pain and folded about your body, keeping it rolled like a ball,
unable to stand upon the feet of might and strength which I have endowed
you with. These wings, my own, I will spread for you, until the grand,
noble forehead of your Self shall rise above the realm where Time and
Space do reign.

* *

Deep have the waters of seeming failures dashed about thy feet and
threatened to drag you into the perturbed sea of despair, but still thy
head has been close to the clouds and thou hast caught the smile of my
radiance and heard the voice of my kindness. Dost thou think that I who
have numbered the grains of sand and have weighed the drops of water in
all the oceans, seas, lakes and rivers,—that I will allow one who is a
spark of Myself to be devoured by the wolf of famine or by the dread of
despair? Look up, it is light, look to thy right and a hand reaches out
to thee. And I have placed thee where those who know how to love what is
lovable can look at thee and love.

* *

The soul which has need of blessedness, to that soul do I answer at its
call! Let it feed the heart that is hungry for an answer.

* *

A lamp within your midst I place and those who would enjoy the radiance
which the lamp gives out, must cast their eyes to where the lamp does
stand and stir to reach unto its height. A shading tree upon the sandy
hill I place. The weary traveller, all hot, who of its cooling shade
would partake must come within the circle of its throwing shade. He, who
will not see the lamp or walk to where the shadows dark and cool do
fall, he cannot enjoy the blessing of the lamp as it casts its light or
the cooling shades of the slanting branches. So 'tis with Love: if you
will seek its warmth and glow, do thou seek it. Only those who seek Me
do I in return meet.

* *

Oh, the love that stoops low at every foot! Take thou that love in thy
hands and burdens will lighten. Put thou My Love in thy heart and thy
world will brighten. Oh, give with love to all who come within the
radius of thy glory. The heritage of My Love much more thou wilt know.
As immeasurable as space thy self shall become and heights in thy hearts
will appear, and splendours more splendid than all thou hast known, and
heights more sublime than the whited peaks where once thou hast stood
and looked into the calm tranquility of my Everlasting Eye.

* *

The man who seeketh to do good, oft doth lose his aim by becoming
desirous to reach high places through that same good.

* *

A man who hoards his gold, oft learns to love the smile of his golden
sweetheart and develops into an avaricious creature.

* *

The maid who plaits shining tresses, in so doing may be weaving a net of
vanity in her soul. This by ignorance of self may be brought about
though the original motive was pure and good. Hence Ignorance is sin!

* *

A sharp edged sword hung at the side will cut the baby's hand as it
plays with its sharpness. There again ignorance is punished like sin.

* *

Love now does mould you; love does enfold you; love does behold you, and
bind you, my children, I wear on my brow the great pearl of Love which
no god or saint or man or worm or beast or ant can resist. Even I who
All Love do look upon the beauty of my Love and love and love.

* *

Ye, O my children, that jewel shall wear on your brow. I who am All Love
ye may wear and I who am love-filled ye may hold. For love must ever fly
to love and love must ever draw from love, and love must ever live in
love, for life doth spring from love. And I do live in love.

* *

Oh, list! Plant not thy seed in fertile ground and wait for it to root
and blossom and fruit for thy own self alone. Rather do thou plant thy
seed for the heart of every heart that lives within My Great Heart. He
who waters, tends and sprouts his plant not for his own sweet taste
alone but for the taste of every man, he of that sweetness and freshness
shall taste even before the fruit is ripe. Know you, O my children, the
life which I have given you sprang from My Love. Oh, make thy life a
song sublime and not a groan.

* *

Evil availeth not when you my laws do know. List I fill your heart with
love, with sunshine which freely I scatter to you; and I will bring
there soft rains and the seed of love to life I will stir; and that
which to your senses of infants doth reek of the charnel-house, a
fertilizer shall become, for your love to grow and sprout, even as the
creeping vine that drops and takes root wherever it falls.

* *

I am the swiftness in the sailing cloud, the flame struck from the
flint. I am the fire housed in every star, the breath I am of every
living thing. All things that are, do love, for I am all that lives—I,
who am life and love— I, who am love and life, and naught is there
besides. The hearing ear I am, the seeing eye, the throbbing heart, I
waken in every man the love that reaches out.

* *

O Daughter! Rise in thy dignity and survey that which thou art master of
and look to the marble halls which beckon thee even now. Know this, that
love and wisdom is the mystery of all things and that Love when
understood is twin to Dominion. Do thou the work that lies at thy hand!
Remember each day is thy fulfilled world. It is thy Zion, it is thy life
complete. Such jewels as have crowned few are daily being laid at thy
feet! Spurn them not for the material seeming blessings which invite
thee.

* *

A HOLY MAN'S PRAYER.

There was a holy man who thought never of himself, but ever of those
among whom he lived and passed his days. So wondrous virtuous and holy
he was, that ofttimes the host of unseen ones who loved to remain near
him recognized the greatness of his goodness and spoke among themselves
thus: "Holy is this man in truth and strange to say he knows it not.
Surely few are like him. Let us who love him ask him how he would be
served by us, how we may bestow upon him gifts which to the blind
earthwalkers are called the supernatural or miraculous."

"So be it," in unison they replied. And one among the spirit-host who,
by the strength and beauty of holiness was superior, addressed him thus:
"O holy man, we who look upon you hourly and love you much, we would
bestow upon you some gift What shall if be? The miracle of making all
who look upon you—man, woman or child,—love you? Or would it be the
miracle of relieving all whom thou dost meet and love of the load of
poverty which thou seest and which makes thee sad at the look? Or shall
it be the power of relieving the sick of his burden of disease which
draggeth him to an early grave?"

The holy one looked at the gentle and lovely spirit with eyes in which
dwelt the very beauty of love and holiness and said: "Nay, dear spirit,
not for me are these miracles. To my Lord, who is the giver of all joy
and pain, doth belong the great power of removing what he giveth. But
this I ask, that I walk in humbleness and in my heart the prayer will
grow to love my Lord the more. That love I may be able to give to all
who come within my reach. This, O gentle spirit, is all I ask. Depart
and allow me to but see my Lord in humbleness and pray to love him."

The spirit departed and to the unseen host did say: "For such as he is
the Love of the Lord! Already hath he acquired what we in vain seek—Love
for the Lord!"

Glory to Gooroo who bringeth love and light wherever he walketh. Love
Love's own creation is, it is its own reward. No human law its force can
sway. No human force can stay its tide. Love is the source of living
things and all that it doth love. Naught that thine eyes can rest upon
but hath its root in Love. The heart that love denies is cold. It
sleepeth and it stagnant is; it is frozen o'er by snows of earth and
sinneth most against itself. Love giveth of itself to all, nor asketh it
return. It is a law unto itself, a law to man and beast and plant. The
snake doth glide Love's warmth to know the bird the air doth cleave its
force to feel; the flower upward turns its wondering gaze the kiss of
Love to meet The beast doth pant all eagerly the eye of Love to behold.
But man it is who makes the simple theme of Love a huge complexity. In
restlessness he struggles for that which he already hath, for that
without which he could not exist.

* *

O My jewels! lean on the altar of My all-creating Love and soon your
heart will be as a laughing child. Quick My all-responsive touch to
know, a bursting fount of gladness and generosity you will be, and the
hot desert of your heart, which dry and sandy now is, a garden of lily
and rose will become.

* *

Love was My natural gift to one and all of My creation. Who this doth
know a treasure hath in truth.

* *

O my children! ever outward looking, turn within your blinded eyes, and
there a world all, big with joy and love you will find, a world made
wise by My wisdom, a world of the Real. Then you will know what Love has
made of you; what Love doth bless you with; what Love doth will that you
should be.

* *

Poor and ignorant is the man who seeketh for that which he hath and
knoweth it not. Poor and ignorant is the man who knoweth not the
nobility of my Love that surroundeth him, with which I crowned him
withal.

* *

O my children! in your midst My well beloved one doth walk. Mark, freely
all his love he giveth, gladly of My Love receiveth, and the measure of
his sweetness doth he give to overflowing unto all that near him come.
Lo! he knoweth my Love is flowing into him that largely giveth of the
Love I do bestow. Within your midst in every heart I am, unknown, till
by a touch of pain in struggle great you brush against My wide white
wings. Then thrilled and amazed you look into Mine eyes and know that I
am and ever have been and ever must be.

* *

The hand of My Love has gone from My Abode and scattered into space,
giving unto all that will receive. Unto each child of Mine blessings I
have given; ofttimes in their blindness they saw it not. But few there
are who raise the gifts that He in great profusion at their feet. More
are those who turn their eyes in wilful waywardness from them and with
yearning cry do wail for that which I have crowned them withal. Most of
my own do amble on, defiantly denying that such gifts there are, denying
Me, the Giver of all gifts denying Me, the Author of their being.

* *

The few who raise My gifts and make them as their own and making them as
their own thus, do give them forth to those their hungering neighbors,
unto them do I scatter more than they in ease can carry, for he who
giveth forth receiveth ever largely of the store I hold for them. He who
hungers to feed the heart of those he meets along his way, unto him
shall be given the wherewithal to satisfy their hunger.

* *

O my child! what mattereth it who speaketh the word of love, of truth,
of courage and life unto thy heart? Whether thou dost catch it from the
song of birds, from the lips of a babe, from the glad tone in a maid or
the shout in a frolicsome boy? Whether it comes from the heart of him
who hath given all to know Me and to reflect Me in thine heart, or
whether it came from the spirit all bright as he hovered about to find
thee a way when thou didst grope in the wilderness of doubt and amaze of
worldly turmoil? Take thou the truth from wherever it comes, for truth
that is real finds its root in Me and no matter how slender and lean the
twig may be, it is the shoot that has sprung from My Root.

* *

Glory to Gooroo whose wisdom is as silver is! Glory to Gooroo! who by
his love and wisdom illumineth the hearts that seek after Me. His day
and his waking, his night and his slumber I with My Love will preserve.

* *

O my children, illumined you will be, yet you seek not the light that
sits in your midst! Its radiance I would throw in your midst and give to
the heart that is darkened with clouds the peace that it seeketh, the
joy that it owneth—the joy that is warming to the senses and that dances
like live streams of water that leap from the mountains and play with
the rivers.

* *

Oh, tarry awhile from the whirl and the strife of the world! Ye who seek
My light, the sons of my light shall be, and earth shall not soil nor
rob you of My glory, nor will your mind be darkened and dull. For I will
beautify and quicken it with love and with joy, for the light of the
mind is love. The light of life is love. Where love is, contentment and
peace are. Where contentment is, there My smile is too. Where
contentment reigneth, in satisfaction I dwell. Where contentment is,
there the fountain of peace too is playing.

* *

O ye who find perplexity above your rearing head and underneath your
lagging feet, at your right hand and your left hand! An enigma unto
yourselves you will be until lowly and glad as a child you become. Then
Me you will know, and knowing, yourselves you will know, and your worlds
you will rule. And looking out from the great world within to the
smaller world without, all things you will bless and find all is well
with time and you.

* *

You who give out much love dost multiply My Love unto yourself. But you
who nourish souring doubt and fill your heart with hate and bitterness
but subtract hourly from the gifts which are thine by the right of My
blessing and love. For thoughts of evil rise not beyond the earth. But
thoughts of love do mount to My Throne crowned with living stars, and
rebound again to the centre freighted with My Love and Light.

* *

Humility is the softened shadow that is cast by My Love. Lowly it lieth
on the ground; yet he that is weary and full of the hate of the world
doth seek it and rest in its shadow and strength he doth gather and
peace he doth draw from the nurse, all gentle, that gladdens his day.

* *

Humility is welcome unto Me. Hence all men do seek it, yet know it not.
The countenance of humility is restful and good to look upon, and he
that is fettered by flesh, senses its beauty even as a blind man senses
the rose that is near by its fragrance and sweetness, as My feathered
and furred creatures do sense the night by the darkness that precedeth
it. When humility in your midst doth sit, know that true worth is nigh
and rejoice in the blessing that ye behold, for true humility springeth
from My Love and with majesty pure and holy is crowned. It is the grace
of all grace that I on My children bestow.

* *

O ye, every step that you take I am with you and lead you to My Great
Heart and joy I bestow and obstacles remove and sorrows erase that you
wist not of!

* *

The beginning and the end of all I am, the sap in the tree, the
foundation of the rock whereon it leaneth, the force of the eagle that
round it saileth, the oil of the whale, the deeps wherein it sporteth, I
make the worm to crawl on its belly; from the clouds I flash in light
that blindeth; the nobleness in man am I; the gladness in beauty, the
spontaneous spring of the bounding beast on the earth, the star on high,
the rose at your feet. The jewels transparency my touch hath made.

* *

Glory to Gooroo who liveth close to the Heart of Love and giveth love to
the heart of man! Unto him I bestow My blessings, even as the early
fruit tree doth shower its blossoms on all that stand beneath its
fragrant glory.

* *

O my children! Drink of the cup that is in your midst that was deep in
My Ocean of Love, and strength and sweetness to you it will bring and
your hearts it will quicken, even as light doth feed the darkness and
make transparent the gloom.

* *

O you who sit in bondage and pant for freedom and seek the love that is
a world unto itself and with satisfaction is crowned I I am the key that
opens the portal that reaches to the rarely discovered land where
contentment alone is found.

* *

Let not the flickering flame from without urge you on to serving the
senses for the love of the flesh but vaporous is and falleth again to
the ground whence it was drawn.

* *

Walk in the sunshine, climb up to the mountains, stretch the pinions of
your soul to its summit, in cheerfulness sit clothed in courage, and
with My Love's completeness I will crown you withal.

* *

A chain of love around your loins I have cast; stretch not, nor pull,
nor fret, nor strain, lest it hurt; but you who walk laughing in its
reach, the wisdom of My every hour shall know. He who seeks Me, to him
understanding I will give that revealeth all things even unto a little
child, and My wisdom and truth from his heart shall flow as strong
streams of water flow from a fountain, and My hand of beauty I will
register in his heart, and all who look upon his countenance shall see
the glory of his coming and the joy of his awakening.

* *

Crowned on the snow-capped mountains I am, yet in the lowly blade of
grass am I too. Eternal space I fill, yet am I captured in every heart.
All men seek Me, yet are My arms entwined around every man; none can
exist without Me, yet in far off space am I enthroned.

* *

I am the One and All, the All in One, whom noises confuse not, nor
disturb, for above the roaring of the thunder claps, above the booming
of the rising waves, the first faint wail of the new-born infant I hear
and smile at its coming.

* *

I hold the reins of the winds in my hand and control their motion and
measure their distance.

* *

When darkness is, my eye doth light the nest where the young owlet
hooteth. The first green of the sapling I note, even as I see the
upheaval of the earth.

* *

O My children! No heights there are that you cannot mount, no depths
that you cannot sound, no boundaries that you cannot surround if you but
let the light shine in your soul–your soul that was born of light and
panteth to bathe again in that light.

* *

O My Beloved, thee I embrace and enfold, thee I hold and bless, to the
days everlasting!

* *

Glory to Gooroo who liveth the Truth and Love. Again, O My children, for
wisdom you call, but My words do not sink into the depth of your heart.
But few in your midst do My glory receive, but once it is applied, I
come. A light I place in your midst, but unheeding you are, wayward,
forgetful and fretful. You cling with strained hands to the chains of
bondage. The wisdom that comes from My Realm you would have, yet you
reach not your soul to that Realm.

* *

Each man receives a wisdom that is born in this Realm. You eat from the
table whereat you do sit, you munch of the fruit from the tree that you
pluck, but your pure hearts are hindered for want of satisfaction. Yet
you turn from My table of plentiful supply often from the crumbs that
fall from my feast. Would you know, O my children, how your hearts shall
be led? You yourself shall be fed with My Love. Quit the longing and
striving for that which is null and void. Cease from your ignorant ideas
of happiness, of wisdom, from your empty desires, your thoughts
insincere. Know this it is that hinders thy heart from knowing My Love.
It is this that prohibits thine eyes from seeing My face. Lo, O heart
that is empty and is shadowed by darkness! I bring thee now a light to
give peace, a peace that is buried and strives to be free, Lo! freely
from the streams of blessing that flows from My Love you may partake. It
is its own flavor and virtue. Its richness of charm it never can lose.
Its grace is unbounded, as far-reaching as the sky you see. And as you
quaff of its nectar your heart will grow, bursting with joy.

* *

As you look from the big world within to small world without, all this
shall be well in time with you.

* *

I beautify Nature with My breath, as the breeze that sweetens all space.
The silver of the wide-riding moon is My glory. The down on the breast
of the dove is My softness. Love-touched, love-made, love-filled, am I.
The Secret of Life, the Revelation of Death, the Beginning of All
Things, the End Everlasting am I.

* *

Of all the lights, the Light am I which you know by the shadow; the
Shadow am I which has cast all that light for you all My Face to behold.

* *

The rose lifts its petals My Love to unfold. I fan your hot hearts with
my breezes of love. I crystal and diamond the snow as it falls. As My
breath sweeps the earth to prepare for seed, so My breath sweeps your
hearts to prepare it for My Love. And the sap of your souls, like the
sap of the tree, will flow through your life and burst into budding.

* *

My Beloved, My son, from bondage is free. Thy heart I do clasp and
breathe there a blessing. I hold thee and bless thee and serve thee, My
son. A little while yet and thy mission is over. Come thou to the
innermost heart and list to My love.

* *

Greeting to Gooroo who by the sunlight of Love brought distinction to
ignorance.

* *

Love stoops to the feet of all and embraces life. Love is the source of
all. Love is a law unto itself. Love is law unto man and unto woman.
Spirit eyes to them by Love were given, to see the smiling world within,
to see what Love willeth them to be.

* *

Good to everyone, Love sways from self to selflessness. Love is the
lotus that sends its spirit, gives its sweetness and grace. It in equal
measure giveth its fairness and its fragrance to all who near it cometh.
Love is omnipotent.

* *

Ye are flowers, O My children, flowers of rarest splendour. Ye must give
my grace out in plenty, knowing that love holds on its fingers mountain
heights and specks of dust; knowing the love that is powerful in the man
as in the child that weepeth when Mine Eye it cannot see; knowing the
Love that is all in all.

* *

On the broad expanse of white the blackest dirt is easiest seen. Would
you know how Love does hold its own? A chain of love for all is made. If
you do but pull and dig and draw, the links do cut and sting. But if you
laugh and dance and sing, a lotus-leaf it does become. Draw nearer
still, scatter the petals to those that wait unknown till with a touch
of pain they breathe the white-winged thoughts from thee.

* *

You gaze into My Eyes and know that I am All in All.

* *

Then know you too, O listen all, that oft the eyes of earth-sense are
thickened with the gray of truth misundertood, why do ye not rise to
meet the love that stretches out to you? Why are the plumed wings not
outspread? Why the spirit-forehead stands on tip-toe?

* *

In the play ground of the forest, by the bank of the sportive river,
'neath the trees when the wing of songbirds stirs the leaves of sleeping
roses, and the perfume of the lotus calls languorous love, where the
sparkling stars are laughing and the moonbeams kills the darkness, in
the sweet divine embracing where the the Twain in Bliss do meet—there am
I.

* *

Therefore because thou art thus, not all the concentrated beauty of a
whole universe can take from thee that which is thine, nor can the
combined virtues of realm on realm hold to thee that which is not for
thee.

* *

Glory to Gooroo who by the law of wisdom taketh away ignorance! Glory
and salutation to Gooroo!

* *

When you do come to Me, let all your robes be white, your motives clean.
When a man is blind there is a veil before his eyes. I do not mix with
earth. Unless all clean and free from earth-nature, how can you
understand the words that are born in My Abode?

* *

One there is who long into My Eyes has looked. My Love is potent with
him now. Some are vain who call to Him who sitteth in the heart of every
man. He who reaches for My Love I touch with thrill unfelt before.

* *

I am revealed in every living thing, whose heart is knit in love. No
light there is wherein I do not live; no darkness is wherein I do not
peer. My seed perfected in you lives unknown, it grows and freeth you
from crooked ways. Unheard it thunders louder than the mountain claps
when they in gladness meet.

* *

You who ask, Love is best, it is the richest of all riches, it is the
gainer of all gains. Unbought, secure, once found, it never itself can
lose. Who knows not love, is blind; who knows not love is dead. Oh, you
weep because of the springing flowers, yet you cannot die. Look to the
flower-seed, deep planted in the soil itself, but watering it takes,
watering much, for it is good for you to give. So it is with Love. It is
stirred to life by My breath, but watching too it takes for it to
blossom and bear fruit. Bear love in your mind, when action you perform;
bear love in your mind in duties or tasks. With eyes of pure love in all
things look, even in yourselves. All things love-existence are. Do you
respect them as such. Even the beginnings of worlds, the whirling mote
of dust, the heart that is fertile and the heart that is barren, on all
look with eyes of pure love. In this you accomplish. Mounted on love's
white wings you will rise and obstructions will disappear as over them
you pass.

* *

Oh, arise to your true Self and there is naught to fear! Be not a
destroyer of yourself, and that you are, unless My beckoning hand of
Love you see that sets you laughing, laughing in My Law. The greatest
wisdom and self-knowledge is the immortal through the mortal to find.
When this you have done, then laws you will make and barriers break;
with the stars you will play and you will create. A man once prayed for
wisdom great, for knowledge proud, for gifts of wondrous rarity. For
these he prayed and saw not the flowers springing at his feet. O my
children! look to the flowers at your feet, the pearls of love in your
midst.

* *

Oh, seek not for happiness, nor for misery, for happiness is the seeking
of that which joys the senses. When once you know Love is the source of
all, from Love all things evolve, then in Love's embrace forever you are
locked.

* *

I am the Source, the Middle and the End of all things. I hold the
thunder in My hand; I am the winds that purify; I am the light
registered in the babe's eye, that dimples in the pure maid's smile; I
am the flowery season of all seasons, the immeasurable mountain heights
am I, the perfume of the lotus, the ice-clasped rain; I am the calmness
of serenity; I am the secret of all silence; the solitude in all
quietude am I; I am the destroyer of time and space. With Me time lives
and laughs and kicks and plays with the dust it has made, yet every mote
a whirling world becomes, when it My hand has touched. I am the knower
of all that is knowable, the wisdom of all that is wise. I am the
creator of all created, for I am Love and Love is the mother of all.

* *

My Beloved, thee I embrace and hold. Bring thou the light, while I do
shine thy way.

* *

Love maketh all things well and knoweth all things well. It is the rise
of man; it knoweth the fall of the beast; it toucheth the opening
flowers, its kiss falleth light on the lotus, it painteth the new East
rainbow hues and wingeth the eaglet as it flieth. There are no foes, for
I have made them all.

* *

Much wisdom I give to ye, which yet is unapplied. The drums of the ear
are stopped by the din of earth. Ye will not turn from the cup to drink
of My Ocean of Love that is near. List! Oh, wonderful beings ye are, all
potent in love I have made ye. Look to the spark of the spirit that
spreads from the crooked within you, that winds to My Perfect Abode.
There fixed are ye by Me, then all obstacles vanish, as over them you
mount. As the dawn of the morn throws its light through the branches so
My Love reaches ever to touch ye, My jewels. I caress ye and stand in
your midst. Ye are the branches of leaves that hide Me from your eyes.
Give of the radiance ye have of Me to the heart that is darkened. I am
the joy that bubbles and gurgles, that springs from the mountains, that
leaps from the heart, that spreads on the brow, that leaps from the
heart to light on the clouds. With this I bless you and stand in your
midst, but ye, all fretful, turn by, complaining like children all fed
with overmuch sweet.

* *

I am the force that shapes the rose leaf's curl, that cushions the
grassy mountain-side; the snake too I measure as it glides. I quicken
the dove as it mates. I breathe at the root of the springing flower. I
am the fresh surprise in the maid newly wooed; I am the glad wonder in
the new mother's breast. I am the wisdom in the babe's slow gaze as it
turns from the mother's breast to her love-lit eyes. I am the fire in
the warrior's eye. I dance behind the veil of the sun's scorching heat;
I clothe in bright armour the fish as it swims. I am the joy that leaps
from the heart and plays in the eye, that spreads over the brow and
tingles each member.

* *

Glory to Gooroo that knoweth that Love is the rock upon which all
permanancy is founded.

* *

Again, O My children, to Me ye have come for light and wisdom; but still
the doors of your souls unopened sire, or else you would partake of the
wisdom and light I drop at your feet. Do you take of its warmth and its
blessing, I ask it. The Love that you seek all-pervading is, of
wonderful might and beautiful. A conqueror it is too. The root of all
pleasure it is, the day of every soul. It teacheth the untutored heart,
it winneth and quickeneth the dead and dull conscience. But he who
knoweth my love remembereth the blessedness and blessings, and
recognizeth not evil and darkness. But he who knoweth it not, doth
forever dwell in the experience of darkness, and is a child of blindness
even in his infancy.

* *

O ye outward-gazers, grossen not the beauty which I have clothed ye
with, lest that which is noonday brightness become to thy blinded eyes
but a dab of gray! My love is of perfect flowering, My love is of rare
fragrance. My love is of wide expanding. A native plant of every soil it
is, for from the root of Love it is sprung.

* *

The man that cometh from out of the ocean doth drip with brine. So ye
who have come from out of My Belly of Love must forever hanker and pant
as again of that Love you partake and know once more of its potency.

* *

My love is a giant of strength; my love is a new mother in gentleness.
My love is all eloquent; my love is all lovely; my love is all wise. A
ruler it is and ye are all servants. A winner it is, yet lowly its head
is ever laid. All riches it is, yet it boasts not of gold, of silver or
of precious jewels. All highest nobility it is, yet it rarely sitteth on
the throne of kings or queens.

* *

Let not your outward-looking lure you aside to hunt wayward themes; but
see to My gracious shedding smile of love that illuminates your universe
within and brightens the world without, and those who look upon you
shall marvel at the wonder of your glowing. And they, too, shall partake
of that light.

* *

The rolling cloud is My breath; the frost and the feathery snow I jewel.
The laughing fields, the peaceful valleys, the sleeping lakes and the
dented hills are the throbs of My mighty breast. The beauty of the sun,
the softness of shade, the color of the flowers, the rose of a baby's
lips, the gold that lurks in the rich plumage of the swift-winged bird
are but the light touches of my hands.

* *

Ye, O My children, are the gifts of My Love unto Myself.

* *

O My daughter, take that which is placed in your hand. Hurl not back the
gift to the giver, lest you call it in vain,—you whose eyes do filmy
seem because of their dulness.

* *

O My son, thy path is blessed and bright, for love you have brought to
the heart that loved not.

* *

Oh thou My Beloved! About thee a halo I do create. Thy path is made
smooth of thy humility. Thy gratitude enricheth thy heart.

* *

Glory to Gooroo who knoweth Love as the sovereign of all creation and
therefore beholdeth its glory.

* *

O my children, you seek Me to know Me, you behold Me not as I stand in
your midst in all My radiance. My splendour more splendid is than all
the splendour of heaven and earth. My beauty is even like that which the
dawn first spies in a garden of rare flowers. My glory is like unto a
blazing casket of jewels, of jasper and crystalline pearls, that
standeth in the radiance of the sun at high noon.

* *

My softness is like unto the wondrous rose that lieth deep in the folds
of the new baby's curled palm, or the gold that clingeth to the heart of
the lotus in bloom.

* *

In all My rare lovliness in your midst I stand, in every heart I reign
with a crown of living stars upon My brow ensceptered. Quickened with
light and love am I; on My breast the sun of ecstasy; and all who once
have looked upon My glory have realized the rainbow of promise that has
spanned the sky of every human heart. From his eyes the shroud of flesh
has fallen, in his breast he carries a garden all fertile with blossoms
of delight and beareth fruits of peace.

* *

O My children, to know thyself, know Me. Those who once have looked upon
Me, upon his brow I have placed a crown that readeth in blazing letters
of light, a crown of love and wisdom and humbleness. He walketh even in
lowliness and reacheth away from the earth and commandeth sublimity
itself to kneel at his feet.

* *

O My jewels rare! Arise, survey the kingdom you may possess. Laws you
may make, barriers break, tread on the stars, and the comets themselves
will rush at your command. Know I have made you heir to all I have
created, I, your Maker's Self, once walk a man and as a man all men I
love. To know yourself, know Me. And having gained knowledge of Me, all
will be revealed unto you and the bitter waters of self-seeking shall
become holy and sweet as the waters of the Ganges. And you I will clothe
in My Truth sublime, My Truth that is devoid of changes of age and time.
In its shadow you will abide—My Truth that is permanent, the Root of all
Eternity.

* *

You, my son, whose young heart is grafted on the strength of Him who
bringeth illumination to you, in all humbleness walk and in thy young
humbleness thou shalt know the smile of Love.

* *

O Gooroo, My Beloved son I you who give forth words whose potency doth
bring healing to the heart of those who in swiftness do expand their
wings to catch your words in their passing, know thrice in the ages that
were, your words have travelled through the corridors of the hearts that
listened to you and now have sprung within their hearts to life again.
Even deeper in the days to come shall you drink of a fount of truth that
is life.

* *

The ripest grape without the seed of intoxication, the sweetest
fragrance that is robbed of its death-dealing heaviness, the sound minus
its discord. The temple wherein all glory playeth.

* *

Glory to Gooroo who is a grateful branch on the imperishable tree of
life.

* *

O ye my jewels, a throb of My Heart ye are, a word of My Wisdom, a grain
of My Hill of Faith, a drop of My Ocean of Love, a ray of My Light that
penetrateth all darkness.

* *

Heirs are ye of all I have created. Why will ye be fretful truants of
earth? Know, not all the crust of your earth-bound minds, nor the
stagnant waters of your hearts can crust the soul which is of Me, or
quench the spark ignited by My light of love. Lo, a joy unto yourselves
you are made, a vital joy unto yourselves! Why will ye be quaking slaves
of harmful hopes? Lo, My will it was that ye should be, My will that
willeth only good. My that is the sum of all bliss, the stock of all
creation, the links that join it together; the root of all Eternity. Lo!
the essence of all love am I. I scatter it to one and all freely, even
as herbage is scattered on all the land. My heritage to you it is. Do
you embrace it, and your life shall be as molten gold. With-' out its
embrace you drop into darkness. Lo, the mystery of all things am I and
the illuminated path that leadeth through mazes and maketh all
accessible simple and straight.

* *

Covered am I to him that is crooked, not to him that is straight, to him
that standeth forth in the flash of My light of love. Him do I draw to
My breast and place on his brow the sun of ecstasy, so that ail may
marvel at the awakening of his soul.

* *

O ye My children! in your midst a pearl I do cast. Tread not on its
fairness nor cover with dust its lustre lest you seek it again and find
it not. Take it up, treasure it, drop it into the innermost chamber of
your hearts and there it will glow even as the moon that breaketh
through a bank of storm-clouds and lighteth the heart of the jungle.

* *

O you who ask, know that wisdom ever in lowliness is found. It struteth
not, neither does it clamor aloud to be seen; it is calm and needs not
to be looked upon. It knoweth not the tread of clamorous feet, nor needs
it the strut and the swagger that are born of traitorous doubts in its
highness. The frontal of wisdom is ever made wide; it lifteth its brow
to the Eye of Love and leaneth thereon for sustenance. Poor and naked is
My child of love that knows not wisdom nor finds the path that leadeth
thereto. Naked is he indeed and mistaken in aim and intent who seeketh
with hungry eagerness that happiness, yet walketh through strange tracks
and climbeth hills of sand that have no foundation for his feet to rest
upon. He findeth but the roots of weeds that choke the flower of
gladness. The growth of wisdom is not grown there; its footfall is
light, it walketh abroad. Wisdom's countenance is fair and soft and good
to look upon. It is embraced by love; it is linked to bliss and ecstasy,
and he who hath found it thus will search ho more. He knoweth not
change, and time by him, even as the plunderer sneaketh away from the
king that is armed. In him the river of joy flows in wondrous majesty
forever. He walks in My footsteps; he knows not space, and beholds the
souls that tenant endless spheres. My smile he sees that is perpetual.
Evil forever hath fallen from him; the stars innumerable are his to
command, and the sun is the shining of his life. The beginning of all
things he knoweth and the end everlasting he seeth. He readeth the light
and the winds are his to understand.

* *

What am I? The smile of the new mother am I; the velvet corners of the
maid of pure soul. Beautiful time am I that sitteth in silver on the
brow of the aged one. Mercy's soft self am I that sweeteneth the eye
where on it sitteth. The life of the shrub am I, the spontaneous
outburst that bubbles from the heart and rings from the lips of the
clamorous, bounding, growing boy. The illumination am I that reigns in
the heart of the ascetic and makes light his dismal cell, even to
rivalling the glare of the palace in hours of festivities; the potency
of sympathy am I that meets in the handsclasp of high-hearted manhood.
Know that all I give I receive, most open am I to him who draweth most
deeply from My bounty. Oh, my tree of life shall reach from earth to
heaven.

* *

Greeting to thee. My jewel! I came to take thee on a journey. I came to
take thee with Me and show thee what it is to live. Until now thou hast
known but the mockery of life, the life that breathes but to live that
life, but to draw breath. Now, I will take thee where life is born,
where life is lived, where life is loved; not lived for the living, but
lived for the loving.

* *

Who am I? I am that which thou hast searched for since thy baby eyes
gazed wonderingly upon the world whose horizon but hides this real life
from thee. I am that which in thy heart thou hast clamoured for,
demanding it as thy birth-right, yet knowing not what it was or even
that thou didst clamour at all. I am that which has lain in thy soul
through ages and æons. Sometime a little sad I lay, because thou didst
not recognize Me; yet sometimes, standing with head high lifted and eyes
wide and crest aloft and arms outstretched, calling thee softly or even
harshly, bidding thee rebel against the hard iron chains of earth that
held thee bound to earth, to clay, to brass.

* *

I am that which oft hath set My heel upon that earthly desire which thou
didst pant for and with My heel I crushed it, before it lay temptingly
fulfilled before thine eye. I crushed it with My heel by My might of
love because I willed not that it should burn and sting thee, My lamb.

* *

I am that which hath laid thee low in pain and sorrow, rather than see
thee run with blinded eyes on a path that was full unto shimmering
softness with poisonous creeping things, that would have wound
themselves about thy feet and so caused thee to stumble and fall face
downward on their slippery bellies, so they might even devour thee and
crawl into thee and take from thy heart its gold and from thy eye its
beam and from thy brow its nobleness.

* *

I am that which hath had thee by the hand, when the smile of trust froze
on thy lips, when the jewel of faith seemed to melt into nothing in thy
heart, when the hand of unbelief in all humanity was near unto resting
forever on thy brow. I held thy hand then and for a little I saw thee
writhe and quiver and break and then My hand touched thy head and I
breathed in thy soul My fragrance and lo, thy smile of trust again broke
with tenfold beauty on thy moistened lips, the gem of faith lighted with
tenfold power thy softened heart and a belief in all humanity came forth
with a strength and radiance that could not have been, hadst thou not
known that short span of barrenness! From each tear which hath fallen
from thine eye, I have made a pearl and strung them on veins of gold and
placed them about thy neck even as a priceless necklet. From each drop
of blood that came from thine aching heart, I have made a bleeding ruby
and placed it even as a girdle about thy heart, and for each kind
thought, that hath gone out to those who have brought pain to thee I
have made a fire-hearted gem of crystal and in a coronet placed them on
thy brow which now gleam there in triple power.

* *

Now go forth and win thy sceptre and thy staff! They shall be
crystalized of clearest jewels, which shall be made of which command of
Mine which thou dost hear and obey.

* *

I am all these, My babe, and more. That am I which, when darkness seems
near, suddenly bursts upon thy soul with a wondrous, indescribable light
that illumines each crevice and crack of thy innermost understanding. I
am that indefinable line which divides thee and holds thee ever from
pain or grossness or misery.

* *

I am that path which is ever before thee, filled with rarest flowers and
creeping vines and world-large happiness where the beings which thou
canst feel, but not yet see, beckon thee ever and where thou too shalt
come and be of the brightest among them.

* *

I am that most golden star that lights thy heaven and throws forever
into thy awakening consciousness the glow of its scintillation.

* *

I am that fleeciest cloud of down that surrounds thee ever and keeps
thee from hurting thy sweet self on the stones and hard clay of the
world. I am that Being of Life, of Truth, of Wisdom, of Love, of Beauty,
of Joy, of Life, of Plenty that hovers ever about thee and sings to thy
soul.

* *

Come, My own, come with Me and I will show thee life, which now thou
knowest but in its littleness I Come, I sing and you dip in the Ocean of
Bliss with Me. Nay, run not before but calmly walk at My side.

* *

See yonder! It glistens and shimmers, a sheet of joy and bliss that
knoweth not a ripple nor a wave, but lieth with arms outstretched to
receive thee there. Faint not nor swoon but creep into its arms and lie
there, reaching out thine arms and spreading the wings of thy soul and
dip deep and drink thy fill. Now come and take thy bathed self among thy
sisters and brothers and give to them but a drop of that Ocean of Love,
which thou hast brought on the wings of thy soul. And each day, my
Adarini! thou shalt dip and drink and give, thou shalt shake from thy
plumed wings, which shall grow unto enormous bigness, the drops of love
which it is wetted withal and the heart-hungry shall come and receive
therefrom great blessings and great aid and shall go away strengthened
in soul and strong of body, because of the drop that has come from the
ocean of love and which thou hast brought to them on thy ever-growing
wings.

* *

Even now doth the incense of warm love envelop thee and thy heart is
expanded to the spanning of the sea.

* *

Question not, but believe in Me and Mine. Come to Me again and I will
fill thee with Bliss.

* *

Greeting to thee. My jewel! Dost thou know that I am even nearer unto
thee now? Dost thou feel the wings of thought spreading to great breadth
all within and without thee? Dost thou again feel the immensity of My
Love that passeth all that is? Dost thou feel that this Love is too
great for the world to hold, yet know that thy heart is big enough to
contain it? Dost thou know that the love which is this that now brings
the bowl of blue near to the breast of earth is the same love that
causes the cooing dove to hide its gray head under its wing at the
approaching homeward flight of its little mate, all unafraid and
undisturbed, because of its near protection? Dost thou not know it is
the same love that causes the mother to bare her warm, loving breast to
the blade to save even the little moment of pain to that being which
hath grown into a child under her breast? Dost thou not know it is that
love which causes noble manhood to stalk forth armed and bloodthirsty to
protect the altar whereon he hath burned the incense of faith and
belief? Dost thou not know that it is the same love which causes the
lioness to throw her huge, warm body upon her cub to crush it rather
than it should be cast into iron captivity by its pursuers? Dost thou
not know again that it is this love that hovers in golden silence about
thee even when thou wilt not see and beckons thee ever, even when thou
wilt not follow? It is the same love that leads thee over the paths of
flint and hard and rough roads unto those that are smiling and perfumed
and ever bordered with blooming flowers of purple and milk and rose.
Dost thou not know, my Adarini, that it is that love that points out the
gems that lie in thy path, partly covered, partly hidden by the dust,
while thy feet have kicked over them? Even though I have pointed them
out to thee often, thou dost not see. Thou but lookest to the right and
left for things of beauty which are for the eye, but for the moment, and
dost the rare jewels which if thou wouldst but take into thy heart,
would bring there the richest radiance which ever came from the diadem
that crowns a soul.

* *

It is this love that whispers to thee that the path to Me is not hard to
tread. It is this love that holds the garments white as wool and light
as air and beautiful with the beauty of My love for thee ever before
thine eye, even when thou dost in thy little understanding with the back
of thy palm thrust it aside. The garment that I hold for thee is the
robe that thou must wear even to enter the Heart of My Heart to step
within the flame of My light. Fear not it burneth not, neither doth it
scorch or blister; it doth but light thee with a fire that is the
glowing of holiness and when thou hast come within that radiance then
will the choir within the throat of the lark be like the sheet of clean
white paper, to thee and thou thyself will make their notes for singing.
And also thou shalt hear and even understand the pleadings that lie
hidden and covered by the piteous cries and wailings that issue from the
breast of the good beast-creatures that speed over the tracks of
sandland with the swiftness of the Eastern winds, bearing on huge backs
the burden too weighty for man to bear.

* *

And listen again, My suckling, thou shalt, when once thou hast entered
into My Heart of hearts clad in the beauty and purity of the garments
which I hold before thee even now, then shalt thou gather in thine arms
the prayers of many hearts and fulfilled even unto wondrous fulness thou
shalt return them again unto the empty hearts. For by the fire through
which thou hast learned holiness and because of the garments that come
from My hand thou shalt say unto My little ones that I, who am the All
in All, am the fulfillment of each desire that has ever found growth in
human hearts.

* *

Thou shalt say unto them that simple and clear, even like the smile that
lurketh in the soft eye of a milk-feeding babe, are the laws of My
Love-Eye and easy to grasp and smooth to hold and light to carry. And
because of the saying of thine, the prattle of the forward mouth shall
silence and the way-giving of the idle tongue shall cease and the
squirting of venom shall be no more. And lo, the lust of gossip and
rankness and rough spoil of envy shall be as naught! And clear, like
unto the water that catches in its heart the reflection of the moon and
holdeth it completely so, even so shall the centre of thine eye become
and thy brow shall shine My wisdom and thy mouth shall hold My words,
thy feet shall bear witness to My beauty and thine heart shall ever be
sportive as the lambkin that kicketh and playeth and knoweth not why, or
even like unto the open-lipped baby, who turneth its milk-filled,
dripping mouth away from the breast to croon and play with its fingers
and toes. And like unto the mother that kisseth the babe for that
playing, so shall My little ones steal joy from thy love.

* *

List! Because thou art now in the arms of Love I shall make for thee a
grove of palms and olive, bread and date, and where thou art, even in
the city of strife and turmoil and sin, yet thou shalt walk even in the
groves, that I have made for thee. And thou shalt hear the plaintive
call of the night bird and the heart-song of the winged creatures, whose
hearts burst with love and joy in their caroling.

* *

And the fruit which the trees of great bearing shall yield thee, shall
fill thee with satisfaction, thy hunger shall be stilled by their
richness and thy thirst shall be slaked by their lusciousness, and lo,
thou shalt contemplate the beauty and wonder of Me in the grove where I
have placed thee and thy heart shall be calmed unto marvelous peace and
many times thou shalt faint, because of the sweetness of that peace.

* *

Glory to Gooroo, he who carrieth in his heart and findeth Me in all that
surroundeth him; he has for his surrounding My Abode and knoweth it as
such. He needeth not a ground of tree or grass and flower to find a
roebuck, but findeth it even at his side. He striveth not to gain
possession of that which is far from his hand for he knoweth the rich
mines with nuggets of gold are his for the taking. He findeth not
solitude worse than death, nor is it amiss for him to breathe away from
the crowd of men, for at his side are the voices of love that are loud
even like the thunder or the roaring of the lion, or the screech of an
eaglet. This shall ever be thine blessing, my son, and a shield of love
shall cover thee and thy feet shall be swift and thou shall walk even
light like unto the wind. Let not the burden of the world and the
world's prattle come to thine ear and lie even heavy on thine heart, for
in the palm of my hand thou shalt rest and like a bird who has lately
become a mother and feeds her birdlets, so shall I feed thee, my son.

* *

Glory to Gooroo, who among men doth know Me and Me see in all things.

* *

O ye my children that fret and squirm underneath the load and scratches
of life! Do give it unto Him who by his wondrous love for all knoweth
not weight nor pain. That which to you a burdensome plight hath become,
is light even unto down to Me. The blight has been of thine own making,
O child of my heart!

* *

Oh! know ye not that I carry in the palm of my hand, in the Heart of my
Heart, all mankind—nay, all worldkind? Will ye not know that all I have
created is even like unto Me perfect and cannot be burdensome?

* *

Ye will not look upon Me as the pedestal upon which all things that are,
are founded. Arid because of your blindness, for blind ye are, having
eyes ye see not what I have given ye to see—because of your blindness,
small are your hearts and cramped and will not expand in height and
breadth, even to know the peace that dwells in My clear silence, nor the
illumination that lives on My horizon. Nor will ye hear the joy of My
greeting of wisdom that would sing to your souls of a love that
withereth not, neither fadeth away, neither becometh ashes nor crumbleth
to pieces.

* *

List, O my children! Dear unto My heart ye are, even as the ewe lamb, in
its waywardness and helplessness, is dear to the heart of the tried and
tender shepherd, or the babe, My gift of first love, is dear to the
eager heart of the prayerful father. Yet oft doth the ewe lamb bleating
stray away from the arm of the shepherd and the truant, rosy mouth of
the babe turns away from the breast of the eager young mother to cry
afar to the yonder world that heareth it not, nor answereth it.

* *

So ye, My little ones, see not the light on your way, nor partake of the
bread of life that I scatter to you, even as the waving yellow tree of
mustard doth scatter its seed in golden profusion on the fertile regions
around it.

* *

Hark, one and all! All careless have you been in the weeding of your
gardens, for in your beds I find the thistle thriving; in your vineyards
the grape I find that is hard and sour and bitter.

* *

Oh, alas for you who cast your net for fish and bring forth the slimy
reptile! Beware, my child, lest the best hopes of life cannot stir away
from harmful ones. Evil stalketh idly. Of nothing it is born, yet would
it squirm, like the insect, and buzz its cloud about thine ear, and
mote-like obscure thy sight, and throng through thy mind and heart even
leaving its imagery there.

* *

O My children! I have placed you in a dewy field, where like young
lambkins you might disport yourselves. I have bounded your dewy field
with heather-purpled hills, where like the young eagle and the hawk you
might soar and spread your wings and flap them to the music and measure
and time of My winds, which I hold from everlasting to everlasting even
in Mine own hand. But, alas! like the lily that from overmuch dew
falleth face down ward in the dirt, so many of you turn your hearts
earthwise.

* *

Hungering to be caught by Me and to know the beauty of My Being, because
you see and will not understand—even because of that I rebuke you in
love, in love I rebuke you: Nor will I come again to those who call,
unless in holiness the call will bring profit from My words.

* *

O thou My Beloved one! Thou who like saint and sage and prophet of old
has touched the harp of life that I attune for thee, do thou come to Me
singly and do thou say unto those that My promise is this: "Dear to Me
are ye, My children. List to the promise I give unto you! To those who
seek Me in holy earnestness, to those do I come even like the sweet
influence of young Spring. Like unto a giant am I in gentleness, yet
none can wrestle with My Love. Know, ye shall know My coming even by the
spontaneous growth that shall spring about your feet, and become even
fruit-bearing trees at My command."

* *

To the barren woman I shall look into her eye, and lo! the gush of young
motherhood shall she feel When My Love is yours, then shall the leopard
take between his forepaws even the young sheep, and that rough and long
tongue shall rub it between the eyes.

* *

Into the eye of the ascetic I shall look, he who for many moons hath
stood in cold silence, even he shall feel his heart reel with love like
unto the young bridegroom.

* *

Dulness shall glow. Thy slow tongue, my child, shall become eloquent.
Idleness shall become active, even bereavement shall be consoled and
despair shall flee at My coming.

* *

Am I not the magician of all time, who by the spell of My love do charm
a waiting, passive, alas!–a blinded world? Aye, even thy heart of hearts
shall be laid bare and those who seek shall come and feed of the peace
thereof. Lo, on the hilltop for thee my sun spreads cheer!

* *

Be thou he, who shall invest in courage, climbing the rocky hill, where
thou shalt embrace cheer and she shall bring forth the baby, that is thy
desire, and because of the baby which thou holdest in thy arms, because
of that thy path shall be light, for lo! the babe is what men call
success.

* *

O My young son! Do thou take to the young thy onward march, even thy
sunlight, which I for thee have created, so that thou mayest make the
poisonous and damp vapors, which will surround thee, even of great
warmth and of fragrance and golden hue. Take thou the Seed of My Name on
thy lips, aye, and the tree of thy affection shall bend its every leaf
to look in Mine Eye, and there shall behold the gladness and hope of My
life. There shalt thou read thy Beatitude.

* *

Do not allow the phantom fears crowd into thy heart and make a layer of
darkness in thy heart, even as the water doth drop its heaviness into
the bottom of a vessel and leave its heaviness there, for, if thou dost,
then will the waters of cleanness that fill thy heart by the least
ripple stir up the heaviness and rust that hath sunk to the bottom and
so color even that which was clear. Naught is there in thee to bring
shadow of that which is gruesome to thee, My child, for when thou comest
to Me there have I buried deep that which might have caused thee fear.
List I do thou even let the desires of thy heart lie dormant and do thou
even seek My Love in this hour. Then thou shalt know the fatness of My
love and when thou dost, then will the soul thou cravest to turn toward
thee in the splendour of light beam full upon thee, even as thou wouldst
have it Love, My own, the working of My love, is not always the working
of that which thou canst only see a little way—for far even unto
eternity do I lode and the links I rivet now are even the chain that
stretches to the end of time everlasting. Therefore do thou not look
only to the feet ahead of thee, but do thou find that in the time and
place of my action there alone perfection is—yea, even there perfection
is which to thee may seem even unfinished, but to My Eye it is the whole
complete.

* *

Out of the tumult of thy heart, out of the chaos of thy mind, out of the
depth of thy understanding thou dost call unto Me for rest and thus do I
answer thee, My little one!

* *

Seek not rest in the plane where the earthly gives birth to thoughts and
loves, for if thou dost, thou shalt but be dragged through the rough
wilderness of life, which is not of Me. Whenever thou dost feel thy feet
tangled in the interlaced roots of life, know thou hast strayed a little
from the path whereon I beckon thee, for I have placed thee in broad,
smooth paths, which are flower-strewn and perfumed with sweet smelling
vines and also have put before thee a light, which thou canst ever
follow and thus run without stumbling.

* *

Hear thou this! The bliss of action I have planted in thy spirit and if
for a span thy soul hath grown weary and thou longest to fold thy tired
wings and sleep awhile on the Island of White Silence, that dwells even
in the midst of the ocean of existence, if that thou wouldst do—call
upon Me and with My smile that which is unlike Me, shall drop from thy
soul, as the old garment falleth from the butterfly, when its wings are
strong to cleave the air. And after a sufficient slumber thou shalt be
quickened with deathless energy and shalt speed in eagle swiftness even
to the sun, which is the burning of the love in My Eye. But, list, my
jewel! Be not confounded by the shaking of thy timid heart, nor yet by
the yelling grisly shapes, that seem full of dread, hunting at thy back,
nor be allured by bright phantoms of false joys beckoning thee
ceaselessly. Like swarms of gnats about a dark and sullen river, they
crowd about the heart that harbours thoughts of fear and lo, their
stings do itch and burn and swell and bring fever to the blood and
bitterness to the taste and even death to the joy that dwelleth in the
heart. Lo, My child, hast thou not spied the serpent in the closed,
tight bud of the rose or even in the hollow of the rosy fruit? Eye saw
it not, but the rose became even as rust and the apple rotten. So beware
that an adder rest not in the bud of the heart and that adder fear be
opposed to hope which I have placed in goodly share upon thy brow.

* *

List, My own, and abide by My song that unto thy soul I sing: Bliss is
the perpetual motion of Love. As a running stream it is that cometh from
an inexhaustible source, the depth of which is even unmeasurable.

* *

To the unknowing and unloving the surface in unruffled, but he that
seeth underneath, he findeth there current 'neath current, whirlpool
within whirlpool and depth beneath depth and the sum of it all is Love,
which is Life and coupled together by the links of Bliss.

* *

I have a shore that is called the Island of Rest, here do the souls of
many hold sabbath. They lie in tranquil slumber for a little, much have
they to tell, but they fear to break the tranquility of their calm. Here
their dwelling is illumined with glory. The melody of sweet peace bathes
their soul; the mystery of their being is revealed unto them. For a
little here they wait but still this home is but a transient resting
place between earth and Me. Rest can be thine, my own, in slumber of
ecstasy, but Bliss can be thine through the perpetual action of Love.
Which wouldst thou have?

* *

Come to Me again and I will even sing to thy soul of my Love.

* *

Glory to Gooroo, he who seeketh Me and findeth Me, the ever refreshing,
even in the desert of sand and a day of drought! Greeting to thee. My
son, for I say unto thee, thou art a grateful twig on the bay-tree of
life. And because of My love for thee I have bestowed upon thee the
greatest gift of my hand; A largeness worthy of my devotee shall be
yours that the flattering tongue can but in feebleness express because
of its vastness. And this vastness of purpose shall be like unto
uncounted autumn leaves that number millions upon millions and like unto
the masses of clouds that pile in mountains upon worlds and the seas
that cover unlimited space and the numberless stars multiplied by worlds
of fire. Thus measureless and incomparable shall be My gift unto thee
for thou hast found Me and held Me even close to thee and because of it,
the river of joy shall flow within thee forever.

* *

My thumb I have placed upon you, so that free-footed you may stand in
the lightning of My Eye, whose brilliant fire doth even gladden all
communion with time and doth bid the stars to smile and darkness to flee
for ever, for when My Beautiful Necessity, Love, is once uncovered,
there is the veil behind veil lifted forever and even the Centre of All
Worlds are visible to the naked eye, for he who hath clad himself in the
garment of My Love, he even pierceth through all covering.

* *

Thus hath My Love blessed thee, My Beloved.

* *

O prisoner of earthly life! Take thou cheer and courage unto thyself,
for much is there that is of rare comfort to the spirit. Thrust not
thyself into the pit of earth and labor there and seek to carry on thy
shoulder and on thy back the burdens that are born of the clay and
therefore hurtful and of much weight. But do thou step out and bask in
the glow of the sun, do thou stretch forth thy limbs in languid and
truant ease and let its warmth play on the white of thy flesh so that
even the health of thy blood may bubble to the surface.

* *

Do thou fix thine eyes on the dome where stars are fixed, though they
are paled by the garish sun and hence dim; yet rear thy heart starward
and in the course of the sun see the greatness of ways and tracks that
are thine, My jewel! Do thou even now burst asunder the fetters that
rivetest thee even to the plank of anxiety and with a bound throw from
thee the shackles and walk thy star-ward path as a tenant of earth in
the way to finding a better abode.

* *

About thee lies the good that cometh from My strong right arm. Hold it,
that its countenance may remain with thee forever. Yea, seek not for a
change of thy good for that which is better, but hug rather the present
good to thy heart of heart that its strength may impart even strength
where thy weakness abideth. The load which I have placed upon thy
shoulder is not to thee a load earth-made, 'tis but a gathering of rare
herbage piped with beautiful coloring which is full of healing and sweet
of taste, but which you all, blinded, do see as burdensome.

* *

If thou but onward marchest, looking not at the phantom spies that seek
to distract thee in thy going and lurk in the clearness of thy light,
then shalt thou add wings unto them and they shall flee even as doth the
young chick before the hawk's approach. Let thy bold front even by its
courage chase forever the foes of man, stern unbelief and dull distrust,
which are ever eager to find lodging in the heart where a canopy of
white trust doth shelter the babe of Love that reclineth in playful
happiness on a rosy couch of hope. Even there would the enemy of man
steal and take from the garden of his soul the flowers that blossom in
rare loveliness, the beauty that hideth in sweet silence, the peace that
casteth its halo of calm over the spirit even as a wild dove.

* *

A SOUL AND ITS BELOVED.

A soul was all tired unto death because love, which once glowed warm and
red, had turned toward a face fairer and brighter than the one which
encased it.

Long it dwelt upon that departure, until the time had come when it was
all ready to leave the earth; but there was the beloved soul, which had
gone from the right path.

While contemplating on the possible way of calling unto itself the
beloved soul that had gone astray in its blindness, Death stood before
it and called it to make ready for a long journey beyond the boundaries
which it now knew.

Glad and willing the soul responded; but, casting its eyes behind for
one moment, it beheld its beloved mate, walking in the mire, in its
search after the will-o'-the-wisp for which it had left its home, and
the soul was grieved sorely unto death. One step backward it made; but
Death detained it, saying: "This way, sweet soul, you go wrong. See that
golden path? There await you those who want you to be with them in parts
beautiful and wonderful beyond that which you remember."

"Oh!" spake the soul, "What of her—my beloved? Where goes she?"

"Alone the path she now treads she has chosen, and it is pot in your
power to draw her back one inch from that chosen path!"

"But, O Death!" quoth the soul, "the way before her is black and full of
reptiles and evil creeping things, and she was so tender and beautiful.
May I not change places with her, and will you not take her and leave
me?"

"It is not so written," quoth Death. "Each soul chooses its own path and
she has chosen hers."

"When, O Death! will she come to where you lead me?"

"It is written, not for many aeons."

"How can I draw her to me to turn her from her dark way to myself?"

"It is written that one soul may draw another after it, if for many
births it is willing to wait at the door of death for all souls to pass.
See, here it is where these wailing, fainting, quivering ones suffer
agonies, greater than you have ever dreamed of in the many walks of your
earthly or space life."

A moment the soul gazed on the suffering ones; and as it looked it grew
cold and pinched, as if another death had come upon it. "I will wait,"
it said. "Joy it will be to me to wait for aeons until she whom I love
will pass this way!"

"Oh!" cried Death, "it was said among the unseen ones who throng space
that you were thus. See, the pang of pain which you in agony bore has
forced your beloved to turn and gaze towards you. She leaves her path of
mud and darkness and hurries after you. Come on, both of you, and walk
the path of gold that is thronged with such as you, the saviour and the
saved. Surely in one moment of such love you have unfettered the bonds
which bound yourself and your beloved to all that was of earth."

And they passed into the way that led to the higher place.

THE FAIR ONE AND HER SOUL.

The world had grown gray, the golden stars had fled from the skies, and
a silence deep yawned at the feet of one who, all hungry for that which
she knew not and starved for that which she could not name, moaned: "O
Soul! why am I tortured thus? Why dost thou lead me into paths I cannot
walk, and drag me into depths that I fear, and scale with me heights
whose atmosphere so rare and high is, that faint I grow and ill unto
perishing therein. What is the quest of thine? This struggle and this
reaching after that which I cannot see or feel? Weak is my flesh, though
thou, dear Soul, art strong. It is ever easier for me to fall than to
rise. I struggle to keep on with thee, but ever and anon thou mountest
to planes where my tired and clumsy feet cannot follow thee. Ofttimes
have I called unto thee and implored thee to cease the quest, to rest
awhile, to sleep. Thou hast heard my moan now and again and I ran
laughing into die garden that awaited me. But when I stood among the
blood-red roses and White-cupped lilies and sought to pluck the pretty
blossoms, ever in the heart a worm did lurk. So farther I ran to where
the fruits hung high. But when on tip-toe I stood to reach the luscious
ripe ones that beckoned me, lo! again the over softness of decay did
break upon my gaze, and I wanted them not. Then I made to climb some
steep hill whereon the clouds did seem to rest, and as I ascended, the
clouds did fade farther from me, and I stood with only the cold gray
mist about me, chilled and frightened, like a child lost from its
mother's side.

"And so it was, O Soul, the pleasures which the earth placed at my feet
palled upon me and dragged me down nigh unto the grave. Then I nestled
to thee, my beloved Soul, and called thee to save and direct me, and
pleaded to thee to save me from this fleshly self that keeps me
earth-bound. Then thou wouldst take my hand and with me soar to
mountain-heights, and we with outstretched wings would view the rosy
glow that the departing sun did cast about us as it waved its grand
adieu to the world we knew. Thus we stood, I trembling with gladness,
thou thrilling with joy, but, O Soul, my poor fleshly self could not
long abide such ecstasy nor drink the rarefied wine which the Heavens
vouchsafed us, and crying I clung to thee and dragged thee down, down,
until both again stood at the bottom of the heights where lately we had
spied the door that leads to broader worlds. Thou, my beloved, hadst
folded thy widespread wings, and thy feet were planted in the dank
grasses whose roots were deep in mire. O tell me, thou whose awakening
is so beautiful and whose stature is full of grace, tell me, O Soul,
why, though coupled together, are we yet divided; why, though one, are
we yet two?"

The Soul made answer meet: "O companion of my earthly Self's encasement
of soft flesh, I love thee even as thou lovest me, and I do draw thee
upward, even as thou dost drag me down. Dost thou not know that from
earth thou hast come, hence to earth must go again; that thy natural
tendencies are downward even unto the earth from which thou didst
spring? Yet dost thou love that in me which soars even upward to the
home from whence I came. A ray of eternal light am I, a glow of the warm
of a spark of the central flame; hence must I ever strive to reach that
perfect sphere from whence I came, more beautiful and entrancing than
thou canst know, nor can I anchored be until once again that safe haven
I reach wherefrom I lately came. Yet, list! sweet partner of my earthly
pilgrimage, dost know why thou lovest me, even though hither and thither
I draw thee? Tis that I am born of Love, and none can resist Love; and
the great tender earth, thy mother, is nourished by the great Love which
is the creator of thee and me. O fair and sweet companion, my earthly
armour that I love, thou and I together may reach beyond where we stand
reluctantly and defiantly! Gaze on me, thy soul, who giveth radiance to
thee and beauty to thine eye, and dost attend all that is lovable unto
thee I Gaze at me, and even that which is earthly will partake of me and
become more of heaven than of earth!

"And so we will wander in joy through life; and who knows but that even
the flowers may grow sweeter for our having dwelt here? If we but look
upward, thou following me, and I, though loving thee much, yet yielding
not to thy sweet persuasive pleadings and downward looking, who knows
but we may heal those who, even like thee, do cry out against the
non-adjustment of the body and the soul, who, even like thee, have known
soul-hunger and soul-starvation, which disease driveth out of the body
all its softness and smoothness, and even casteth a shadow on the soul
which should never he shadowed, lest it loseth the sight of the home
where light alone doth dwell and love alone doth reign."

The voice ceased. A great tenderness, an unbounded beauty shone on the
face of the fleshly one, and turning from the deep silence that rolled
at her feet, the woman gave a glad look at the stars, which once again
adorned her sky and flitted away with a ringing laugh.

The Soul echoed her joy, and the world looked on amazed—for naught is
there as rare in life as a happy, joyous woman.

[1] The color of the newest rain-cloud of India, color of the sapphire
or marine blue, are vain attempts to indicate Krishna's color and
complexion.

[2] Brahmā is the Creator of the details of the Universe. The Supreme
Creator is the Supreme Deity, Krishna. He creates by His Will. The
inequilibrium of the three Cardinal Attributes (Sattwa, Rāja, Tama, or
Illumination, Activity and Obscuration) embodies the Creative Will of
Krishna, as explained in the foregoing part of this book. This
inequilibrium starts the current and force of Creation. Vāsudeva, as the
manifestation and centre of the first flush of Creation, springing from
Krishna as a result of this loss of poise, is the Second Creator in whom
the seed of Creation (unpoise of Attributes) dwells as an Unknown
Feeling of differentiation. Sankarsana, who springs from Vāsudeva, is
the Third Creator, but acts only as the Unconscious Cause of Creation.
Pradyumna, who springs from Sankarsana, carrying the Abstract Idea of
Creation, is the Fourth Creator, the Semi-Conscious Cause of Creation.
Aniruddha, born of Pradyumna as the Full-Conscious Cause, is the Fifth
Creator. This Aniruddha is called Nārāyan and Vishnoo. From Him springs
Brahmā, the first sprout of Creation. He is the Sixth and the Operating
Creator, called in the Hindoo Books the "Father of Creation," the
"Grandfather of all God's creatures." Brahmā's Abode is the Brahmā Loka,
otherwise called the Satya Loka or the Seventh Heaven, the Seventh from
the Earth Sphere (First Heaven). Just over the Brahmā Loka is the
Vaikuntha Loka, the Abode of Vishnoo, the Abode of Salvation (Mukti),
where souls freed from the last bondage of matter and its influence go
for Rest and Reward. This Abode of Vishnoo is unapproachable even by the
gods and the illumined souls who dwell on earth or in the Four Upper
Heavens. Brahmā alone by mediation can communicate with Vishnoo on any
subject bearing on the welfare of Creation and receive a response from
Him who is the Outerward Form of Krishna.

[3] The first part of the Indian Autumn which comes after the Rainy
Season.

