CHAPTER XV.

In the glad land of Brindāban, the land where Love reigned supreme,
because of the presence of Him who was Love Personified, who was Love
Incarnate and who as a Boy did bless the world with His Being.

In that land, 'mid childish sport and gladsome frolic, Krishna grew into
beauty of youth.

Day by day the land became more beautiful in the joyous springtime, and
one day His brother Rāma, he whose growing was beautiful, and who, like
Krishna, was marvelled at for the wonder of his doings, said unto
Krishna:

"Does not the smell of the forest invite Thee, O brother? Even here the
air is heavy with ripeness of the fruit, that the sweet spring-air hath
brought us. Shall we not go and pluck from the trees and eat our fill of
the fruits that are dropping on the ground in luxuriousness but to
become rotten?"

"Gladly would we go," said the other boys, "but we fear Dhenuka, of the
demon family, who dwelleth close thereby. It is said that he hath taken
the form of an ass and though he seemeth harmless, yet hath he much
power for evil, which he wieldeth mightily, when he hath a chance to do
so. So, though we would gladly partake of the fallen fruit, yet do we
fear him. But what sayest Thou, Krishna? Thou canst, if Thou wilt,
destroy all who are filled with hate and evil. Wilt Thou and Rāma use
your strength to protect us?"

"Let us away," quoth Krishna, and in a few moments, heated and full of
laughter, the boys were shaking the trees for the golden-sided fruit,
which seemed to smile upon them in its beauty of ripeness.

But at the first sound of happiness that reached the ears of the ass, he
rushed in the midst of the youngsters and sought to destroy them, making
Rāma and Krishna the special objects upon which to vent his hatred and
strength.

For a time both boys dodged hither and thither, trying to turn aside the
anger of the ass; but seeing that it would not be appeased, Rāma caught
him by the hind legs and after swinging him over the heads of the boys a
few times, he dashed his head against the tree and proceeded to aid the
boys in picking the fruit.

The braying of the ass had brought forth the kith and kin of the Asura,
who dwelt in the forests with him; but they, too, in a brief struggle
were killed by Rāma and Krishna.

CHAPTER XVI.

In those days, when Love was predominant and held no place for that
which overcame and destroyed that which could not hold sway there,
because when love is strong and active, then doth evil become feeble and
weak and slinketh away into darkness and deep places, where the light of
love cannot reach in to reveal its blackness unto the light of the sky.

In the river, on whose bank Krishna, Rāma and the cowherd boys often sat
and sang the deeds of their hero, there dwelt a huge serpent monster
with a thousand hoods, who by the venom of his hideous body did permeate
the water of the lake with deadly poison and filled the air of the
vicinity with a pestilent atmosphere that was deadly in its influence.

Krishna one day led the boys and cows to this pool, and they, being
athirst, drank of the deadly water that lay still and without a ripple.
Ever is evil inviting in its outward calm.

But lo! in an instant, the thousand-headed monster lifted its hoods, and
the deadly poison having done its ghastly work, the boys and cows lay on
the bank lifeless, and motionless they fell at the feet of Krishna.

With a glance of life-giving Love cast upon the dead ones, Krishna
walked to a tree that was close by, while the boys, alive again, in
amazement and wonder gazed at each other, forgetting, in the joy of the
Love in the look that Krishna had cast upon them, the moment before.

On reaching the top of the tree, Krishna stood for an instant and gazed
at the boys, His world and the serpent, and a light as of molten gold
seemed to come from that body, more lovely than the sun to look upon.

Thus it was for a moment, then into the deadly pool he plunged, while
the thousand heads of the serpent darted their venomous tongues' and
struck the body till the boys fell into unconsciousness and the cows
groaned in pain, and the men and women, with eyes bulging with fear and
tearing their hair, almost swooned at the sight of the boy, who was God,
crushed in the poisonous embrace of the monster; yet, even as stricken
with horror, they gazed.

Krishna a glance like light on them cast, and breaking away from the
grasp of the monster, He lightly sprang upon its hooded head and danced
like the stars upon its hoods, till one by one low they were laid; and
vomiting blood that was thick and black, defeated and broken, the
monster sank beneath the waves.

And with a bound Krishna stood in the midst of His friends who knelt at,
His feet. Then they drew Him within their arms, in the madness of joy at
His safety.

CHAPTER XVII.

Oh, grand was the sight of Love, crushing out Hate from the land, and
the Gods sang and shouted and crowded together to see Sin conquered and
Virtue grow strong!

Yasodā and Nanda, with the Gopas and Gopis maddened with delight, took
Krishna home, while the heavens opened and scattered flowers to carpet
His path.

And forever the lake was free from the venom the serpent had cast, and
the near-by atmosphere purified was from the pestilent influence that
hovered about there. For the monster at Krishna's command had departed
and sought no more to injure the land.

But so great was the happiness that overflowed the heart of all, in
leading the boy triumphant through the forest, that they tarried awhile
in the glow of the moon, in their joy to behold the beauty that filled
the night.

But far in the distance a light was seen that spread wider and broader
its glow, and higher its flame leapt, and every second nearer and nearer
yet it came, like a living sheet of fire.

And so it was. A castor plantation a burning world had become and
quickly surrounded the merrymakers, who held in their midst the joy of
their hour, and they cried in a fright: "O Krishna, Thou Child—or God,
whatever Thou art, protect us from this death in this roaring flame. We
care not for our lives, O Krishna, for they are thine by our love for
Thee, but oh, the anguish the parting would mean—to die and not see Thy
face again! Oh Thou, who by Thy strength dost slay the Asuras and drive
from the land the serpent all powerful, save us from this, the parting
with Thee and Thy loved companion Rāma, he that is most like Thee. O
Most Lovely One, deliver us, we pray!"

Light as a leaf in the wind the Boy bounded to meet the coming flames.
For a moment He stood in the seething sea of fire and lifted His hand on
high, and lo, the fire was not—but the flames were seen to enter His
mouth!

And again, with dancing and singing praise to the Boy, they made for His
home with joy and delight.

