CHAPTER XXIX.

And the chariot, bearing Akrura, Rāma and Krishna, was followed close by
the carts bearing Nanda and the Gopas, who carried gifts for the king
Kangsa, to whom all must present the best of their store.

On reaching the banks of the Jumnā, Krishna and Rāma in sportiveness
descended from the chariot and dipped in the sacred waters of the river,
then ascended again to the chariot.

Whereat Akrura, the ambassador, had a dip in the water, too, reciting
the sacred texts in the meanwhile, when, lo, in the waters where he
stood he beheld the laughing Krishna and Rāma, sitting in the lap of the
god of water.

Amazed and bewildered, he gazed towards the chariot where last he had
seen the brothers, and there they sat talking, as when he had left them.

Again he dipped his head 'neath the waves of the water and again he saw
Rāma and Krishna, and knew that his senses were not deluded,

Krishna, though seemingly a youth with all a youth's sportiveness and
play, yet was the Lord Incarnate.

And near the cart, Akrura looked in the eyes of Krishna where the wisdom
that created the universe lay, and answered the questioning gaze thus:
"Lord! None is there as wonderful as Thou art! All hast Thou created and
in Thee is all Creation. All have I seen that there is to see."

And the chariot proceeded towards Mathura.

CHAPTER XXX.

Noon reigned in the city of Mathura when the chariot, bearing the two
sons of Vāsudeva, entered that city.

The fame of the deeds and the beauty of Rāma and Krishna was known in
all that kingdom, and their coming to partake of its celebrations and to
participate in the sports and wrestling at the command of Kangsa, the
king, had been heralded all over the land.

And the populace was glad and knew not why. And they said in their
hearts, "Krishna the Youth, the wonderful Youth of Brandaban, will grace
our land by His coming."

So the streets were crowded to welcome Him there, and the tops of the
houses were flowered with the bright faces of women who grazed from
there to catch the first glance of Him whom rumor had crowned the Most
Glorious Youth of the then known world.

O Beauty, how potent art thou! O conqueror of all, that winneth the
heart of the lowliest child and enslaveth the heart of the proud queen
of the world; that slaketh the thirst of the parched soul and tutoreth
the dullest mind never quickened by thought!

So, 'mid blare of trumpets and with banners unfurled, the Lord of Love
entered Mathura.

And above the roar of the celebrations and preparations rose the murmurs
and shouts of greetings, from the sea of upturned faces of men and from
the canopy of sweet, downcast eyes of women, that thronged to see His
coming.

And millions of tongues repeated His Name and sang His praises, and
millions of souls were flooded with love, because they had looked on His
face and said His Name, which was as potent as His Love. For His Name
contained Himself, and those who uttered His Name had Him in their
hearts, and lo, the world to them was complete!

Majestic and vast, He walked 'mid the worshipping people, who saw but a
youth of transcendent beauty, but felt the Unfathomable mystery, the
Unknowable Grandeur, worthy to receive their deepest obeisance.

Through the streets of Mathura He went, bringing light to all whereon
His smile fell.

And Kangsa, the tyrant, grew cold and gray, for he knew his doom was
drawing nigh. And his sleep was disturbed by evil dreams, for he knew
already the populace was welcoming Him whom none could look upon but to
love.

CHAPTER XXXI.

The next day Krishna and Rāma went forth to view the capital of Mathura
in all its holiday splendor.

They found the gates of the palace made of pure gold and studded with
jewels and crystal. The broad street of the city and the pretty parks
all luxuriant were with rare flowers and wondrous foliage. The splendid
houses all seemed clothed and beautified for the ceremonies of the Bow,
the symbol of the warrior's might, that were to take place that day.

It chanced that a washerman passed their way, balancing upon his head
the clothes and making way towards the palace with them. In a spirit of
mischief, Krishna said: "Give us the clothes that you carry to Kangsa,
good fellow, for in need of them are we. Give them, and more I will give
unto thee."

But the washerman in insolence replied:

"Upstarts, who are ye to dare to aspire to wear the clothes that belong
to Kangsa the Great? Never have ye seen such clothes, and unfit to even
touch them are ye. Be off and back to the country from whence ye came,
or I will call the guards, who by my word will throw you in chains."

Krishna, with a smile and a wave of his bare hand, severed the head from
the trunk of the washerman and proceeded to take the clothes.

And a weaver, who was passing their way, helped them put on the
garments; while a florist, who near by was weaving garlands for Kangsa,
came to Rāma and Krishna and bedecked them with garlands and flowers.

And thus clad for the festivities, onward they went; but first the
weaver and the florist were rewarded with great spiritual powers by
Krishna, the giver of all good things to those who give unto Him their
love.

As they proceeded on their way, a woman of great deformity came near. A
parcel she held in her hands, which she guarded carefully. As close she
came to Krishna, she lifted her head and gazed on His face.

For a moment she stood, a smile transforming her face. Then the bowl of
precious sandal-wood ointment, which to the King Kangsa she carried, to
Krishna she reached and said unto Him: "O Youth, more beautiful art Thou
than aught that mine eye has ever rested upon. To those who are sweet
should sweetness be given. I am a servant of King Kangsa. This fragrant
unguent for him I make, but more fitted by far is its richness for Thee.
Oh, allow me to lay it at Thy feet!"

Krishna looked at her deformity, then at her love-filled eyes, and
putting His feet on the tips of her toes and His two fingers under her
chin. He wrenched her form upward; and she, who was known as the
Tribakrā (she of three bends) was a hunchback no more, but tall and
straight was she; and her face never lost the beauty it bore when it
looked on the face of Krishna as she offered to anoint Him with zeal and
love.

And from that day forth she was known as the most surpassingly beautiful
woman in all that land.

Thus love for Krishna creates a charm that grows into beauty and
nevermore fades.

Thus all day long He wandered about, healing the sinful, the sick and
the dying by the very breath of His passing.

And to sorrowing fathers and mothers that clay long lost sons were
restored, and even the dead were brought to life and were seen with the
eye and felt with the heart and encircled with the arms of those whose
hearts were empty for them.

And thus the Lord with benign smile brought to all the gifts of life and
love, and none were there in all that land who felt not the power
thereof.

