CHAPTER VI.

And the child that was the Lord spoke to the mother in the hour of His
coming as the Sovereign of all Sovereignty would speak:

"Say unto him, Vāsudeva, thy husband, to transport me to where the wife
of the King Nanda doth lie, who but now giveth birth to a daughter.

"Pass through the gates; the chains shall be loosened, the keepers
asleep at their posts.

"The warring waters of the Jumnā a path shall make for him to pass with
Me in his arms. The gates of the palace on the banks of the river wide
open shall stand, and the mother asleep in her chamber shall be.

"Put Me on her breast, and bear away the daughter that to her is born.
And when the prince shall ask Vāsudeva for the eighth child that is born
unto thee, do thou deliver the daughter of Yasodā unto him."

Thus spake the Lord, and a helpless child He became.

Vāsudeva in wonder passed through the gates; the keepers all slept a
sleep as of death. The waters parted to make a way for him who carried
the Lord to pass.

Unseen, unheard, he entered the courtyard and palace and passed the
sounding halls and corridors, until the room of the sleeping queen he
spied, and taking the Lord from under his cloak, on the breast of the
sleeping queen he laid it, and took in his place the wide-eyed daughter,
that cooed and smiled in his bearded face.

And sleep still held the queen and the city and the gaolers embraced,
till he stood at the side of Devaki once more, who wept at the sight of
the smiling babe, who soon at the hand of her brother must perish.

At break of day, the prince entered the dungeon to seek the life of the
eighth child of his sister.

As he lifted the child on high to dash its head on the flagged floor,
lo! the child slipped from his hand and rose, the while speaking:
"Karma, that counteth all reckonings up, cannot be cheated by thee, O
prince! Tis written that thou must be slain by the eighth son of thy
sister, and so it shall be.

"That child I am not, O prince! But I came on earth for this hour, to
show thee thy folly. Dost thou think, O fool, that by human force, by
the slaying of innocence, by the destroying of hope and joy in the heart
of the mother, thou canst change the Will of Him who is the Maker of all
laws?

"Thinkest thou, O man, thou canst cross swords with Him that knoweth the
effect of each thought that man thinketh, even before the thinking is
done?

"He whom thou seekest thou shalt not find!"

She ceased, and a light never seen on earth or in heaven enveloped the
child as she vanished from view.

And the prince rushed forth in his frenzy and madness and sought not
again to bring harm to his sister, but unfettered the chains were of
husband and wife, and in freedom forth they went.

CHAPTER VII.

And the child that was God as Krishna was known.

And men drew love from the Name, for the Name the potency of Love
contained, even as the seed the tree doth hold, or the bud the fruit of
the tree enfolds.

And all who spoke the Name of Krishna felt the heart beat quick and
high, and all who looked upon His face felt at once that Love was nigh.

And it came about that all the people who lived in the kingdom where the
Child Krishna was reared as the son of the King of Braja, thronged daily
to get but a glimpse of the Child, who, though helpless like other babes
did seem, yet held the power to draw all men unto Him, even by the light
of love that made Him All Beauty.

As He sat on the arms of the queen, His foster-mother, bedecked with the
ornaments and finery which the king delighted to bedeck Him withal, lo,
the light that radiated from His flesh did put the glowing jewels to
shame, for love is the essence of Beauty and Light, and the Child was
the embodiment of Love itself!

So the light that flashed from the jewels was but as the light of
glow-worms that disappeareth when the radiance of the moon is about
them.

In despair the king sent messages to all the then known world to procure
such jewels as might enhance the loveliness of his Child, but ever when
on His body they rested, dull they seemed on the glow of His flesh.

But oft the Child would reach His baby hands for the flowers that the
populace brought in great profusion to lay at the feet of the Child that
was Love, and as He held them close to His baby mouth, behold, their
petals quivered and throbbed with love-life, and deeper the color dyed
their softness and brighter the gold of their hearts did flame, at the
touch of the hand and the breath of the Child that knew naught but Love.

And in the days when Love as a Child did dwell on earth, a great force
of spirituality through all the land went forth, and the heart of all
the world went up in praise for the mercies linked with ecstasy that
enriched the cup of all Life.

Gleams of kindness, and deeds of generosity, and miracles of patience,
and justice, and love, unheard of before, now naturally burst from the
heart of man, as water bursts forth from a spring 'neath the rock.

And the fields, that before were dried and burned by the sun's rays even
as stubble, gave forth rich harvests.

And the rivers and seas that were lost to man's eyes, again in beauty
before them rested.

And the Child that was the stalk and stem of Love in beauty did grow,
shedding His gracious smile on all the world.

And Kangsa, the King, now heard of the marvellous Child whose smile
brought a smile on all the world.

