CHAPTER XX.

When the days of fasting came, the Gopis, as the Scriptures commanded,
began their worship by taking their baths in the sacred river Jumnā.

O happy waves, more holy made by the maids, who stood in prayers in thy
beds and threw on thy bosom the sweetest lowers that grew where
Krishna's feet had fallen!

Thus they worshipped each day for a month in the early morn ere the sun
was seen, singing on their way the songs of love and praise for Krishna,
who was the first and the last and middle of all their day.

One morning whilst sporting and singing in the clear cooling waters,
they beheld on the limbs of a tree close by the youth Krishna, enthroned
in its branches and holding their wearing apparel in His hands.

Crowned as usual with flowers was He, but a look all majestic was in His
eye.

Affrighted with shame they begged for their garments, but Krishna
replied: "Come and get your garments either in a body or singly, O
damsels, and salute to the sun shining over My head as near you
approach."

For a moment they hesitated; then that which as a shadow had crossed
their heart, and is known as shame, departed from them, and saluting
forward they came in a body led by Rādhā, the loveliest and chiefest of
the milk-maids, and dripping and lovely before Him they stood.
Completely they had surrendered their human will to the will of Him who
was Divinity.

Selfless, unyoked from all that was worldly, before Him they stood.
Uncovered and free as they came from His Heart, again on that Heart they
gazed unashamed, for their souls were not covered with vice, or with
piety, or even with virtue, but were bare as the Love upon which they
looked.

They received the garments that He for them had. He, Krishna, the source
of pure Love was, and His garments to them were spiritual purity, and
clothing themselves with the clothes of His giving, they joyfully went
to the homes of their fathers.

While Krishna, surveying His world, was enthroned in His kingdom of
Love, and as the Gopis came to the feet of Him, who was the author of
all Love, so all must come empty and free from all earthly desires to
accept that Love for Love's sake.

For naught cared the Gopis but Krishna, desiring naught else beside! So
only can Love Absolute be gained in absolute self-surrender.

He who would have that Love that is its own enjoyment, that Love that a
universe unto itself is, doth not find it easy to obtain it by merit of
piety or even the fruition of highest spirituality.

The bounds of all spirituality it must pass to become the Absolute and
Causeless Love. Where spirituality ends, there causeless Love doth
begin!

All love that hath a cause is of earth! Love that hath even a high
spiritual cause is limited in scope, and such love may vanish when its
cause is removed.

But the Love that is Causeless, All Enduring is.

It fadeth not, neither doth it pass away, but by day and by night and
throughout all time it waketh and accumulateth ever, for it is the Love
Absolute!

From the souls of the Gopis the last trace of heaven and earth had
vanished, and being resplendent with the glory of this Love Absolute, of
the Love that was unto itself substance and satisfaction, was the
causeless cause for this Gift of all gifts from the hand of Him who
alone could bestow it and alone was that Love Itself.

CHAPTER XXI.

The summer sun beat down fiercely upon the Gopas and the cattle, when
Krishna turned to them, saying:

"See the wonder of these trees! Kind, beyond expression, are they. They
ask for naught, but what the earth, sky, and sun, the night and day give
unto them; yet in all loyalty they grow and give shade unto us, and unto
all that wish to partake of their shade.

"Their fruits also do they give and their bark and leaves and juices, to
all who desire it.

"So should man also be, but few are there among men that live but to
bestow blessings upon others.

"Yet unto you, I say: O my loved companions, only unto them that give of
their abundance to all that come within their radius, unto them alone is
life a blessing and not a curse.

"All men are placed here not of their own free will, not yet unto
themselves, but by the will of Love and for others.

"And only as the law of give and take is set in operation among men, is
man living a natural life.

"Ofttimes doth the man wonder why he is unto himself a huge perplexity.

"It is only when he forgets his relationship to all mankind that his
life a riddle is, and this being so, he comprehendeth not the Maker of
himself nor the universe, and failing to do so, how can he know life
aright?"

After sporting among themselves, the boys spoke to Krishna, saying:

"O Krishna! a-hungered are we; where, oh where shall we find food? Canst
Thou not assist us?"

And Krishna answered them, saying: "Go thou yonder where many Brāhmans
are performing religious ceremonies; go to them and in My name say unto
them to supply us with food. Say unto them that Krishna is wanting, and
ask them therefor."

The boys went; but when they delivered unto them the message of Krishna,
the Brāhmans answered not, neither gave them the food they wished, but
proceeded with the ceremonies that were to give them the taste of
Heaven, after the breath had left their bodies.

Tired and half famished the boys returned unto Krishna and told Him of
their failure to obtain food and also of the indifference with which the
Brāhmans had received His message.

Then Krishna smiled wisely and told them to hurry to the wives of the
Brāhmans. He knowing that women are ever devotional and have
illumination, while ofttimes men in darkness are.

And so it was. On hearing Krishna's request, they themselves hastened to
Him, in spite of the protestations and threats of the men of the
families, and brought food of the finest sorts unto Him, and prostrating
themselves before Him, spake: "O Krishna! Thou Maker of all there is!
Blessed are we and ours that Thou hast called upon us to serve Thee I We
know Thee, O Krishna, as one greater and nearer to us than our husbands,
brothers and fathers; and even at the risk of their displeasure to us,
we come to Thee to lay at Thy feet our poor offerings and our hearts."

Krishna answered: "O women! Noble and true are ye to Me. Ye in your
devotions have learned to know Me as your soul! Dearer to ye am I, even
than father, husband and friends, hence at the risk of even their
displeasure do yet seek to serve Me.

"I draw unto Me all that reach towards Me! Blessed are ye among men! Go
back to those who are performing the ceremonies and aid them in their
rituals. Kindly shall they receive ye, and unto them will ye take My
love even as unto ye all I bestow it."

When He saw the reluctance with which they departed from Him, He said:
"Know that in the Kingdom of Love separation cannot be, and whatever
heart doth meditate on Me, in that heart I dwell in all My glory.

"Again, oh know, that by deeds I reckon ever and not by words. Ye have
served Me by deeds, your husbands in their ignorance by words alone. But
do ye go unto them and they too shall know and love the Name of
Krishna."

And the women returned unto their husbands who received them with
demonstrations of pleasure, and they too worshipped Krishna in their
homes and hearts.

