CHAPTER II.

In the seat of Hari, the sacred city of Mathura on the Jumnā, Vāsudeva
in love and humbleness took unto himself Devaki as bride, who by all was
known as the most holy and virtuous maiden of that land.

Pear unto the heart of her brother, the Prince of Mathura, she was, and
beloved among his people and among all women because of the purity of
her heart and the sweetness of her face. To show to all the world his
love for her, the prince himself, in proud fondness, drove the
marriage-car of his little sister princess and the new brother-in-law,
who, by right of great wisdom, a Pundit of high standing among the
learned was.

Gentle was the new bridegroom, even as he was wise. Fond glances of love
he cast upon the radiant face of the young princess, and from all sides
the blessings fell from the lips of the populace on the sweet bride, the
learned bridegroom, and the gallant prince who held the reins because of
his love for them both.

But lo! in the span of a moment all was changed, for a voice there was
which seemed to come out of space: "O thou fool! Why, even he for whom
in pride and love thou dost hold the reins to her marriage-car, even she
shall bear the child in her womb who shall sweep thy life from off the
earth. Her son, the eighth, shall be the cause of thy death."

The reins dropped from the hands of the prince, and, springing to his
feet, he caught the young bride by the hair as if to slay her, but was
arrested by Vāsudeva, who cried, "O prince! Noble wast thou ever, and
ill would it be for thee to slay thy sister on the eve of her marriage.
It is not for thee to take life, O King, thou who canst not give it.
Death must come, but let it not be by thy hand, O prince, nor yet before
her time. Take not the life of her who is thy sister and thereby stain
the heritage of virtue such as has been ascribed unto thee.

"Listen to the words of wisdom that have come to us from the sages,
without whom all life a desert would be. Well thou knowest that a man's
actions do follow him from body to body even as in walking he leaveth
the imprint of each step behind the other, yet with each step doth he
carry the dust on his feet from the ground whereon he did walk.

"Man hath many existences, each one portraying a character which is the
outcome of his past self. As the present is the fulfilment of the
threatening past, so man is the unfoldment and fulfilment of his
previous existences.

"So seek not to blacken thy soul by the slaying of one of thine own
blood, but seek rather to add new glory to thy light by preserving her
who, all guiltless, thou dost seek to slay. Heap not thou upon thyself a
dark and evil Karma to confront thee and blight thee in thy other lives.

"It is but the chill breath of suspicion and the dread tremor of fear
that surges heavy and dark through thy mind. Be warned by me, O prince;
desist from thy unjust act and speedily thy heart shall glow again,
warmed by the embers of hope. A man too fearful of threatening danger,
in torment of that danger ever dwelleth. Even calamity may be turned
aside by the smile of distrust, and fatality may forget thee quite while
passing thy door.

"But when the soil of thy heart has been made fertile for fear, be sure
its seed therein will thrive, finding sustenance for sprouting and its
fruit it will bear.

"Stand valiant, O prince, and be not like the timorous woman who runneth
away from the shadow of danger but to flee into the arms of the foe. Thy
Karma that counteth up the reckonings cannot be cheated. So be not, O
prince, of timid heart; and each son that cometh from the womb of thy
sister, Devaki, shall be given to thee."

Listening to the wise counsels of Vāsudeva, the prince gave over his mad
desire to slay his sister with his own hand, and the newly wedded ones
proceeded to the home of Vāsudeva.

CHAPTER III.

True to his promise, Vāsudeva brought unto the prince his first-born, a
son.

The prince, on seeing that Vāsudeva was true to his compact to deliver
his son as it was born, gave it back, saying: "It is not this son that I
fear, but he who will be born thine eighth one it is ordained shall slay
me. So take back thy first-born, Vāsudeva. Of him there is naught to
fear."

Vāsudeva took the little one, and putting it in the glad arms of the
young mother, said: "O princess! It is with joy and yet with great
foreboding that I return to thee the babe, for there is that in my heart
which tells me that the prince, thy brother, spoke not the truth when
thy boy he gave back unto me, for fear lodged in his eye and anger
vibrated in his voice even as he said, 'From thy first-born no harm will
come unto me.' Yet clasp him to thy heart, young mother, and bathe him
in thy glad tears of love while he resteth on thy breast."

But even while the tender young mother crooned her love-songs to her
soft nestling, the cruel edict went forth that the babe was to be taken
from her, as also each new-born man-child that came into the land, for,
as a blighting flash from the clouds that strikes the healthy young
sapling at the root, there had come to Kangsa's fear-burdened mind the
knowledge that in his former birth he had been dethroned and slain by
one of his own kin, who was said to have come from on high even to still
the power of the wicked and exalt the lowly and virtuous.

This in all its weight had come into his heart, and louder than the
bolts of thunder the voice he had heard on Devaki's wedding-day seemed
to throb in his brain, as he saw Vāsudeva depart with his first-born
son. And great were the lamentations of the mothers who gave birth unto
sons in that land. Many departed from the kingdom where Kangsa, the
destroyer of the young, did rule.

But when the wailing of the new-born child was no longer heard in all
that kingdom, the prince in his madness deposed his father, Ugrasen, and
became himself the King and thrust Devaki, his sister, and Vāsudeva into
the dungeon of his palace, where the six sons that were born to them
were dashed to death on the flagged floor in the hour of their coming by
Kangsa himself.

And now again there was quickening in the womb of Devaki, and the joy of
natural motherhood was overshadowed by the terror of the fate of the new
life that was to be a babe. But groundless was the fear of the agonized
mother, for his coming was even before his time; for the earth sent a
mist thick as the garment of death to shroud the palace of the King, and
a deep sleep on the gaolers fell on the hour that the child of premature
birth felt the breath of earth, and drowned were its first weak wails by
the sound of the winds that shrieked without.

And the child that came to the world too soon, even before his time was
completed, was despatched in great haste to one who suckled him and
called him her own. The child that by the near hand of love was saved
from the hand of frenzied murder was the child that would walk with the
Lord of Love and play with the Soul of the Universe.

And when the mists were gone, the King marvelled that no child had come,
while the mother marvelled at the goodness of Him who was the Author of
Life.

