CHAPTER III.
LABOUR IN FACTORIES.


The two former chapters have been given to the consideration of the
relation between the employer of labour and the labouring man, and to
general reflections upon the duties arising from that relation.  Let us
now take a particular instance, the employment of labour in manufactures
for example, and go through some of the more obvious points to which the
master might in that case direct his attention beneficially.


1.  THE MILL.


It would seem an obvious thing enough, that when a man collects a number
of his fellow-men together to work for him, it would be right to provide
a sufficient supply of air for them.  But this does not appear to have
been considered as an axiom; and, in truth, we cannot much wonder at this
neglect, when we find that those who have to provide for the amusement of
men, and who would be likely, therefore to consult the health and
convenience of those whom they bring together, should sedulously shut out
the pure air, as if they disliked letting anything in that did not pay
for admission.  In most grievances, the people aggrieved are very
sensible at the time of the evil they are undergoing; which is not,
however, the case with those who suffer from an impure atmosphere.  They
are, in general, almost unconscious of what they are enduring.  This
makes it the more desirable, in the case we are considering, that the
manufacturer himself, or the government, or the community at large,
should be alive to the mischief arising from want of ventilation in these
crowded assemblages of men, and to the absolute necessity of providing
remedies for it.

This will not be an inappropriate place for saying something about the
non-interference principle.  There is no doubt that interference has
often been most tyrannous and absurd, that our ancestors, for instance,
sometimes interfered only to insist upon impossibilities, and that we may
occasionally do the same.  But, on the other hand, the let-alone
principle proceeds upon the supposition, not only that every body knows
his own interest best, or if not, that his freedom of action is of more
importance than his acting wisely, which is often true; but it also goes
on to assume that every body knows and will take just care of the welfare
of others.  Push either principle to any great length; and you will find
yourself in the land of confusion and absurdity.  In truth, I should
seldom like to say anything about the wisdom, or the folly, of
interference, until I knew exactly what it was about, and how far you
intended to interfere.  It is one of those matters in which it is
especially desirable to keep in mind those maxims of prudence, respecting
the application of general rules to moral questions, which Burke has
handled so admirably.  “Nothing universal,” he observes, “can be
rationally affirmed on any moral, or any political subject.  Pure
metaphysical abstraction does not belong to these matters.  The lines of
morality are not like ideal lines of mathematicks.  They are broad and
deep as well as long.  They admit of exceptions; they demand
modifications.  These exceptions and modifications are not made by the
process of logic, but by the rules of prudence.  Prudence is not only the
first in rank of the virtues political and moral, but she is the
director, the regulator, the standard of them all.”  To take a particular
instance of legislative interference, namely, the enactments about
building party-walls, can any one doubt that this interference has been
most beneficial?  Does any one suppose that, without it, the same good
results would have been gained?  Would the prudence of private
individuals ever have accomplished it?  Besides, I think it can hardly be
denied that a state should have a degree of providence for the general
body, not to be expected from private individuals, and which might compel
them to do things that would not consort with their interest even upon
the most enlarged views which they could take of it.  The financial
affairs of the nation are conducted with no slight apparatus of intrusion
and vexation.  We endure this patiently: indeed, in many cases, it is
difficult to see how it could be obviated.  Surely we may submit to some
simple sanitary regulations, especially of that kind which may be
compared to indirect taxation, requiring to be attended to only by a
certain class of persons of daily experience in the matter.  Such are
regulations with respect to building, which need to be looked to in the
first instance; and then the results of them remain for ever afterwards a
great gain to public health and morals.  I am speaking now rather of the
question of annoyance, than of loss, from legislative interference.  Of
course, in this matter of building, it is easy to perceive that limits
must carefully be put to the extent of interference with a view to
keeping down the expense.  If this is not done, the whole purpose of the
regulations may be defeated.  But even in this, it is possible to be too
nice with respect to interfering with what are called the rights of
property, or too much afraid of creating an artificial dearness by
regulations, many of which will in the end be found to be a great saving.

But to resume the subject of the Mill.  Each branch of manufactures has
its peculiar dangers and disadvantages; and it behoves the master to be
frequently directing his attention to remedy the peculiar evils of his
manufacture.  He is to be the pioneer to find out for his men ways of
avoiding these evils.  It cannot be his duty to study only how to make
his fabric cheaper, and not to take any pains to see how it can be made
to cost less of human life.  However, if a man has once got a just view
of his position as an employer of labour, he will not need to be urged in
this matter, but must see at once that the health of his men is one of
the first things for him to look to.  What would you think of a commander
who was careless of the health of his army, merely because he had an
indefinite power of recruiting?  In a thickly-peopled country like this,
an employer of labour, if his work does not require much skill, can
generally get any number of men to serve him, which would be a strange
reason, however, for making the health of anyone amongst those whom he
does employ less precious in his eyes.  Human labour may be ever so
abundant, but human life cannot be cheap.

While we are talking of the Mill, it may be well to observe that the
system of piecework, when it is done by a man with children under him, is
likely to be made too severe work for them.  It is a hard fate, indeed,
for children to be always under the eye of one whose interest it is to
get as much work out of them as possible.  The above remarks, however,
apply even more to piece-work done at home than at the mill.

The next thing to be mentioned in connexion with the Mill is the time of
labour.  This is a great question, embracing many considerations which it
would be quite foreign to my purpose to enter upon here.  But I may
observe that there is much in this matter which might be done by the
masters, individually, and collectively.  They have to consider how the
time that they may get for the recreation of their men is to be
apportioned.  For instance, whether it is better to give it in whole
days, or by half-days, or to spread it over the ordinary days of work.
These are questions that cannot be answered without much thought and
knowledge respecting the social habits of the labouring people.

All that we have addressed to the manufacturer on the subject of his
Mill, applies even more cogently to the minor superintendent of labour
and his workshop.  There, the evils complained of are often far greater.
Ventilation is less attended to; less pains are taken to diminish the
peculiar dangers of the craft; the hours of labour are more numerous; and
the children sometimes exposed to cruelties utterly unheard of in
factories.  Read the evidence respecting the employment of milliners, and
you will wish that dresses could be made up, as well as the materials
made for them, in factories.  Alas! what a striking instance the
treatment of these poor milliner girls is of the neglect of duty on the
part of employers: I mean of those who immediately superintend this
branch of labour, and of those who cause it.  Had the former been the
least aware of their responsibility, would they have hesitated to
remonstrate against the unreasonable orders of their customers?  And, as
for the latter, for the ladies who expect such orders to be complied
with, how sublimely inconsiderate of the comfort of those beneath them
they must have become.  I repeat it again: the careless cruelty in the
world almost outweighs the rest.


2.  THE SCHOOL-ROOM.


Some manufacturer may think that this branch of the matter does not
belong to him, as he does not employ children of the age which makes it
incumbent upon him by law to have anything to do with their schooling.
But I would venture to suggest that it is a matter which belongs to all
of us, and, especially, to those who are able to pay attention to the
habits of large masses of people, put, as it were, under their care.
Suppose that there had been no such thing in the world’s history as a
decline and fall of the Roman Empire.  In the course of time, though we
should probably have had our Domitians and our Neros, we might have
delighted in a modern Trajan or an Antonine.  Under such a man, the
progress of letters, having proceeded in any thing like the manner that
it has done, we should have had some general system of national
education, which, after the Roman fashion of completeness, would have
traversed the state, with iron step, doubtless even to the remote ends of
barbarian Britain.  To say that this would not have been a signal benefit
to mankind would be idle: what we have to say against the despotic system
is, that it absorbs private virtue, and suppresses private endeavour;
that though it may create better machines, it certainly makes worse men.
Now then to bring these imaginings home; for they do concern us closely.
My readers are, to a certain extent, educated; they will have gained by
living in a free state; but if they continue to neglect the welfare of
the great mass, in respect of education, can they say that this, the
first layer of the nation, the “turba Remi,” might not almost wish, if
they could comprehend the question, to live under a despot who would
educate them, rather than with free men who do not?  Are we to enjoy the
singular freedom of speech and action, which we do enjoy in this country,
and to expect to have no sacrifice to make for it?  Is liberty, the first
of possessions, to have no duties corresponding to its invaluable rights?
And, in fine, ought it not to be some drawback on the enjoyment of our
own freedom, if a doubt can come across our minds whether a vast mass of
our fellow citizens might not be the better for living under a despotic
government?  These are very serious questions; and the sooner we are
able, with a good conscience, to give a satisfactory answer to them, the
better.  Till that time, let no man in this country say that the
education of the people is nothing to him.

But how strange it is that men should require to be urged to this good
work of education.  The causing children to be taught is a thing so full
of joy, of love, of hope, that one wonders how such a gladsome path of
benevolence could ever have been unfrequented.  The delight of educating
is like that of cultivating near the fruitful Nile, where seed time and
harvest come so close together.  And when one looks forward to the
indefinite extension that any efforts in this direction may probably
enjoy, one is apt to feel as if nothing else were important, and to be
inclined to expend all one’s energies in this one course.  Indeed, it is
hard to estimate the enormous benefit of enabling a man to commune with
the most exalted minds of all time, to read the most significant records
of all ages, to find that others have felt and seen and suffered as
himself, to extend his sympathy with his brother-man, his insight into
nature, his knowledge of the ways of God.  Now the above is but a poor
description of what the humblest education offers.

Let us now consider the subject of “the school-room” more in detail.
And, the first remark I have to make, is, that we should perpetually
recal to mind the nature of our own thoughts, and sensations, at the
early periods of life in which those are whom we are trying to educate.
This will make us careful not to weary children with those things which
we long to impress most upon them.  The repetition of words, whatever
they may contain, is often like the succession of waves in a receding
tide, which makes less of an inroad at each pulsation.  It is different
when an idea, or state of feeling, is repeated by conduct of various
kinds: that is most impressive.  If a child, for instance, is brought up
where there is a pervading idea of any kind, manifested as it will be in
many ways, the idea is introduced again and again without wearisomeness,
and the child imbibes it unconsciously.  But mere maxims, embracing this
idea, would very likely have gained no additional influence with him from
being constantly repeated: that is, at the time; for, in after years, the
maxims may, perhaps, fasten upon his mind with a peculiar strength,
simply from their having been often repeated to him at an early period of
his life.  But at present this repetition may be of immense disservice.
You cannot continue to produce the same effect by words, that you did on
first using them; and often you go on hammering about a thing until you
loosen what was fast in the first instance.  It is well to keep such
reflections steadily in mind as regards religious instruction for the
young, and, especially, as regards religious services for them.  Go back
to your own youth, and recollect how little command of attention you had
yourself, how volatile you were, how anxious to escape all tedium, how
weary of words, how apt to dislike routine.  Then see whether you make
sufficient allowance for these feelings in dealing with the young; and
whether it might not be possible to give them the same holy precepts, to
communicate the same extent, or nearly so, of religious instruction, and
yet to ensure their love for the times, and places, and circumstances, of
this communication.  You must allow that you do a very dangerous thing
indeed, when you make that wearisome which you wish to be most loved.  I
must confess that it has often struck me, that we insist upon too much
religious attendance from children of a tender age; and, considering what
we know of the impatience of the human mind, I cannot but think that such
a system is often most prejudicial.  I say these things with much
hesitation, and some fear of being misunderstood; and I do not venture to
enter into details, or to presume to say what should be the exact course
in so difficult a question.  What I wish, is to draw the attention of
those engaged in instruction to a point of view which may sometimes
escape them, or which they may be tempted to neglect for the sake of
appearances, the household gods of this generation.

                                * * * * *

There is one maxim which those who superintend schools should ponder
well; and that is, that the best things to be learnt are those which the
children cannot be examined upon.  One cannot but fear that the masters
will be apt to think school-proficiency all in all; and that the founders
and supporters of schools will, occasionally, be tempted by vanity to
take most interest in those things which give most opportunity for
display.  Yet the slightest inferiority of moral tone in a school would
be ill compensated for by an expertness, almost marvellous, in dealing
with figures; or a knowledge of names, things, and places, which may well
confound the grown-up bystander.  That school would in reality be the one
to be proud of, where order was thoroughly maintained with the least
admixture of fear; where you would have most chance of meeting with
truthful replies from the children in a matter where such replies would
criminate themselves: and where you would find the most kindly feeling to
each other prevalent throughout.  Yet these are things not to be seen on
show days, that cannot be got up for exhibition, that require unwearied
supervision on the part of masters and benefactors, that will never be
attempted but by those who, themselves, feel deeply the superiority of
moral excellence to all else.  Such teachers will see how the kindness of
children to each other may be encouraged.  They will take more notice of
a good-natured thing than a clever one.  They will show, how much, even
in the minutest trifles, truth and fortitude weigh with them.  They will
be careful not to stimulate an unwholesome craving for praise in their
pupils.  They will look not only to the thing done, but also to the mode
and spirit of doing it.  That this spirit and mode may be the means of
generating and guiding future endeavour will be a main object with such
instructors.  The dignity of labour, the independence of thrift, the
greatness of contentment, will be themes dwelt upon by them, in their
loving foresight for the future welfare of the infant labourers entrusted
to their care.  To endear holy things to these little ones would delight
such teachers far more than to instil the utmost proficiency in any
critical or historical knowledge of the sacred writings.  Not that the
two things are in the least degree incompatible.  Far from it, indeed!
All I mean to insist on is, that such teachers will perceive what are the
great objects of culture: and how subservient even the best knowledge is
to the apprehension of duty.  They will see, too, more clearly the
necessity of bearing in mind the pre-eminence of moral and religious
culture, when they reflect that many of their pupils come from places
which cannot be called homes, where scarcely anything like parental love
sustains or informs them, and where, perhaps, confusion, discontent, and
domestic turbulence prevail.

We may remark, as bearing upon this subject, that singing lessons should
be greatly encouraged in schools.  There are several merits connected
with this mode of instruction.  It employs many together, and gives a
feeling of communion; it is not much mixed up with emulation; the
tenderest and highest sentiments may be unostentatiously impressed by its
means, for you can introduce in songs such things as you could not
lecture upon; then it gives somewhat of a cultivated taste, and an
additional topic of social interest, even to those who do not make much
proficiency; while to others, who have a natural ability for it, it may
form an innocent and engaging pursuit throughout their lives.

With respect to the intellectual part of teaching, I have not much to
say: and it is a branch of the subject which has engaged, and is
engaging, the attention of men who are much more capable of speaking
about it than I am.  The only thing which it occurs to me to mention is,
that one would like to see a great deal of manual teaching, with a view
not only to the future profit, but also to the future pleasure and
instruction of the children.  When you think that many of them will be
artisans, whose only occupation, perhaps, will be to perform some one
process of manufactures, requiring next to no thought or skill, it
becomes the more necessary to educate their hands as well as their heads.
Man is an animal very fond of construction of any sort; and a wise
teacher, knowing the happiness that flows from handiwork, will seize upon
opportunities for teaching even the most trivial accomplishments of a
manual kind.  They will come in, hereafter, to embellish a man’s home,
and to endear it to him.  They will occupy time that would, otherwise, be
ill spent.  And, besides, there are many persons whose cleverness lies
only in this way; and you have to teach them this or nothing.


3.  THE PLAYGROUND.


This is a place quite as important as the school-room.  Here it is, that
a large part of the moral cultivation may be carried on.  It is a great
object to humanize the conduct of children to each other at play times
without interfering with them, or controlling them, too much.  But we
have, before, gone over the motives which should actuate a teacher in his
moral guidance; and it needs only to remark, that the playground is a
place where that guidance is eminently required; and where the exigencies
for it are most easily discerned.

Those games should not be overlooked which are of a manly kind, and
likely to be continued in after life.  This brings us naturally to think
of the playgrounds for children of a larger growth.  Hitherto there has
been a sad deficiency in this matter in our manufacturing towns, and
almost everywhere else.  Can any thing be more lamentable to contemplate
than a dull, grim, and vicious population, whose only amusement is
sensuality?  Yet, what can we expect, if we provide no means whatever of
recreation; if we never share our own pleasures with our poorer brethren;
and if the public buildings which invite them in their brief hours of
leisure are chiefly gin palaces?  As for our cathedrals and great
churches, we mostly have them well locked up, for fear any one should
steal in and say a prayer, or contemplate a noble work of art, without
paying for it: and we shut people up by thousands in dense towns with no
outlets to the country, but those which are guarded on each side by dusty
hedges.  Now an open space near a town is one of nature’s churches: and
it is an imperative duty to provide such things.  Nor, indeed, should we
stop at giving breathing places to crowded multitudes in great towns.  To
provide cheap locomotion, as a means of social improvement, should be
ever in the minds of legislators and other influential persons.  Blunders
in legislating about railroads, and absurd expenditure in making them,
are a far greater public detriment than they may seem at first sight.
Again, without interfering too much, or attempting to force a “Book of
Sports” upon the people, who in that case, would be resolutely dull and
lugubrious, the benevolent employer of labour might exert himself in many
ways to encourage healthful and instructive amusements amongst his men.
He might give prizes for athletic excellence or skill.  He might aid in
establishing zoological gardens, or music-meetings, or exhibitions of
pictures, or mechanics’ institutes.  These are things in which some of
the great employers of labour have already set him the example.  Let him
remember how much his workpeople are deprived of by being almost confined
to one spot; and let him be the more anxious to enlarge their minds by
inducing them to take interest in any thing which may prevent the
“ignorant present,” and its low cares, from absorbing all their
attention.  He has very likely some pursuit, or some art, in which he
takes especial pleasure himself, and which gives to his leisure, perhaps,
its greatest charm: he may be sure that there are many of his people who
could be made to share in some degree that pleasure, or pursuit, with
him.  It is a large, a sure, and certainly a most pleasurable
beneficence, to provide for the poor such opportunities of recreation, or
means of amusement, as I have mentioned above.  Neither can it be set
down as at all a trifling matter.  Depend upon it, that man has not made
any great progress in humanity who does not care for the leisure hours
and amusements of his fellow-men.

While we are upon this matter, I will mention something which borders
closely upon it, though it applies to the consumer rather than the
manufacturer.  Most men would think it much, if it were brought home to
them, that from any carelessness of theirs, some person had suffered
unnecessary imprisonment, if only for a day.  And yet any one, who
encourages unreasonably late hours of business, does what he can to
uphold a system of needless confinement, depriving thousands of that
healthful change of pursuit which is one of the main aliments both for
body and soul, and leaving little time or opportunity for any thing to
grow up in their minds beyond the rudest and most trivial cares and
objects.


4.  THE WORKMAN’S HOME.


That the workman should have a home, which, however humble it may be,
should yet afford room and scope for the decencies, if not for some of
the comforts and refinements of civilized life, is manifestly essential,
if we wish to preserve the great body of the people from a state of
savageness.  There is an important and original remark on this subject in
the Hand Loom Weavers Report of 1841:

    “The man who dines for 6d. and clothes himself during the year for
    £5. is probably as healthily fed, and as healthily clad, as if his
    dinner cost two guineas a day, and his dress £200 a year.  But this
    is not the case with respect to habitation.  Every increase of
    accommodation, from the corner of a cellar to a mansion, renders the
    dwelling more healthy, and, to a considerable extent, the size and
    goodness of the dwelling tends to render its inmates more civilized.”

Indeed, if civilization does not show itself in a man’s home, where else
is it likely to take much root with him?  Make his home comfortable, and
you do more towards making him a steady and careful citizen, than you
could by any other means.  Now only look around, and see how entirely
this has been neglected, at least, until within a recent date.  Our
workers are toiling all day long, or, if they have leisure, it is mostly
accompanied by pecuniary distress: and can you expect in either case that
they will busy themselves about those primary structural arrangements
without which it is scarcely possible to have a comfortable home?  Many
of the things, too, which are needful for this end, require capital, or,
at least, such conjoint enterprise as can hardly be expected from the
poor.  Take any individual workman.  Suppose there is defective drainage
in his street, or, as often happens, no drainage at all, what can one
such man do, even if at all alive to the evil?  When you consider the
dependent condition of the labouring classes, and how little time they
have for domestic arrangements of any kind, does it not behove the
employer of labour to endeavour that his workmen should have
opportunities of getting places to live in, fit for human beings in a
civilized country?  I use the phrase “employer of labour,” in its widest
sense; and at once say, that there are many things bearing upon the
comfort of the habitations of the poor, which both the local authorities
and the imperial government ought to look to.  Is there not a strange
mockery in the fact, stated in the Sanitary Report, that “the annual
slaughter in England and Wales from preventible causes of typhus which
attacks persons in the vigour of life, appears to be double the amount of
what was suffered by the allied armies in the battle of Waterloo?”  Must
we not say again that the careless cruelty of the world almost outweighs
the rest?

I have hitherto abstained from vexing my readers with details; nor do I
wish now to do more than draw their attention to a few extracts from
public documents respecting the habitations of the poor.  I take the
following from the Hand Loom Weavers’ Report in 1841.

    “The First Annual Report of the Registrar-General, showed for the
    year 1838 a variation of the annual mortality in different districts
    of the metropolis, amounting to 100 per cent.; a difference nearly
    equal to that which exists between the most healthy and the least
    healthy portions of the world.  The inquiries instituted at the same
    time by the Poor Law Commissioners into the physical causes of fever
    in the metropolis, have traced the comparative mortality of the
    unhealthy districts principally to the presence of impurities, the
    want of ventilation, and the bad construction of houses.

    “The following extracts from Dr. Southwood Smith’s Report on Bethnal
    Green and Whitechapel, show both the causes and the intensity of the
    evil.

    ‘It appears,’ says Dr. Southwood Smith, ‘that in many parts of
    Bethnal Green and Whitechapel, fever of a malignant and fatal
    character is always more or less prevalent.  In some streets it has
    recently prevailed in almost every house; in some courts in every
    house; and in some few instances in every room in every house.  Cases
    are recorded in which every member of a family has been attacked in
    succession, of whom in every such case several have died; some whole
    families have been swept away.  Instances are detailed in which there
    have been found in one small room six persons lying ill of fever
    together; I have myself seen this, four in one bed, and two in
    another.

                                  * * * * *

    ‘The room of a fever patient in a small and heated apartment in
    London, with no perflation of fresh air, is perfectly analogous to a
    standing pool in Ethiopia full of bodies of dead locusts.  The poison
    generated in both cases is the same; the difference is merely in the
    degree of its potency.  Nature with her burning sun, her stilled and
    pent up wind, her stagnant and teeming marsh, manufactures plague on
    a large and fearful scale.  Poverty in her hut, covered with her
    rags, surrounded with her filth, striving with all her might to keep
    out the pure air and to increase the heat, imitates nature but too
    successfully: the process and the product are the same; the only
    difference is in the magnitude of the result.

    ‘But the magnitude of the result in London, if that magnitude be
    estimated by the numbers attacked, is not slight.  From returns
    received from the Bethnal Green and Whitechapel Unions it appears
    that during the last year there occurred of fever cases,

In the Bethnal Green Union       2,084

In the Whitechapel Union         2,557

                          Total  4,641

The state of things described above by Dr. Southwood Smith is by no means
confined to the metropolis; nor, even, is it to be seen in its worst form
there.  Mr. Chadwick says, “the most wretched of the stationary
population of which I have been able to obtain any account, or that I
have ever seen, was that which I saw in company with Dr. Arnott, and
others, in the wynds of Edinburgh and Glasgow.”  I forbear to add their
detailed report, which, as regards Glasgow especially, represents a
loathsome state of filth and wretchedness.  If we go now to the
manufacturing towns of England, the evidence is of a similar character.
“The following extract,” says the Sanitary Report, “is descriptive of the
condition of large classes of tenements in the manufacturing towns of
Lancashire.  It is from the report of Mr. Pearson, the medical officer of
the Wigan Union.”

    “From the few observations which I have been enabled to make
    respecting the causes of fever during the two months which I have
    held the situation of house-surgeon to the Dispensary, I am inclined
    to consider the filthy condition of the town as being the most
    prominent source.  Many of the streets are unpaved and almost covered
    with stagnant water, which lodges in numerous large holes which exist
    upon their surface, and into which the inhabitants throw all kinds of
    rejected animal and vegetable matters, which then undergo decay and
    emit the most poisonous exhalations.  These matters are often
    allowed, from the filthy habits of the inhabitants of these
    districts, many of whom, especially the poor Irish, are utterly
    regardless both of personal and domestic cleanliness, to accumulate
    to an immense extent, and thus become prolific sources of malaria,
    rendering the atmosphere an active poison.”

Dr. Edward Knight, speaking of some parts of the town of Stafford, says,

    “These parts of the town are without drainage, the houses, which are
    private property, are built without any regard to situation or
    ventilation, and constructed in a manner to ensure the greatest
    return at the least possible outlay.  The accommodation in them does
    not extend beyond two rooms; these are small, and, for the most part,
    the families work in the day-time in the same room in which they
    sleep, to save fuel.

    “There is not any provision made for refuse dirt, which, as the least
    trouble, is thrown down in front of the houses, and there left to
    putrefy.”

Mr. William Rayner, the medical officer of the Heaton Norris district of
the Stockport Union, thus describes a part of that town:

    “There are forty-four houses in the two rows, and twenty-two cellars,
    all of the same size.  The cellars are let off as separate dwellings;
    these are dark, damp, and very low, not more that six feet between
    the ceiling and floor.  The street between the two rows is seven
    yards wide, in the centre of which is the common gutter, or more
    properly sink, into which all sorts of refuse is thrown; it is a foot
    in depth.  Thus there is always a quantity of putrefying matter
    contaminating the air.  At the end of the rows is a pool of water
    very shallow and stagnant, and a few yards further, a part of the
    town’s gas works.  In many of these dwellings there are four persons
    in one bed.”

We might have hoped that country districts at least would have been free
from the evils occasioned by contracted building, want of ventilation,
want of drainage, and the like; but this is far indeed from being the
case.  The following is from the report of Mr. Aaron Little, the medical
officer of the Chippenham Union:

    “The parish of Colerne, which, upon a cursory view, any person
    (unacquainted with its peculiarities) would pronounce to be the most
    healthy village in England, is in fact the most unhealthy.  From its
    commanding position (being situated upon a high hill) it has an
    appearance of health and cheerfulness which delights the eye of the
    traveller, who commands a view of it from the Great Western road; but
    this impression is immediately removed on entering at any point of
    the town.  The filth, the dilapidated buildings, the squalid
    appearance of the majority of the lower orders, have a sickening
    effect upon the stranger who first visits this place.  During three
    years’ attendance on the poor of this district, I have never known
    the small pox, scarlatina, or the typhus fever to be absent.  The
    situation is damp, and the buildings unhealthy, and the inhabitants
    themselves inclined to be of dirty habits.  There is also a great
    want of drainage.”

Mr. John Fox, the medical officer of the Cerne Union, Dorsetshire, gives
the following evidence:

    “In many of the cottages, where synochus prevailed, the beds stood on
    the ground-floor, which was damp three parts of the year; scarcely
    one had a fire place in the bed-room, and one had a single small pane
    of glass stuck in the mud wall as its only window, with a large heap
    of wet and dirty potatoes in one corner.  Persons living in such
    cottages are generally very poor, very dirty, and usually in rags;
    living almost wholly on bread and potatoes, scarcely ever tasting
    animal food, and consequently highly susceptible of disease and very
    unable to contend with it.  I am quite sure if such persons were
    placed in good, comfortable, clean cottages, the improvement in
    themselves and children would soon be visible, and the exceptions
    would only be found in a few of the poorest and most wretched, who
    perhaps had been born in a mud hovel, and had lived in one the first
    thirty years of their lives.”

Mr. James Gane, the medical officer of the Uxbridge Union, says,

    “I attribute the prevalence of diseases of an epidemic character,
    which exists so much more among the poor than among the rich, to be,
    from the want of better accommodation as residence, (their dwellings
    instead of being built of solid materials are complete shells of mud
    on a spot of waste land the most swampy in the parish; this is to be
    met with almost everywhere in rural districts) to the want of better
    clothing, being better fed, more attention paid to the cleanliness of
    their dwellings, and less congregated together.”

Mr. Thomas H. Smith, the medical officer of the Bromley Union, states:

    “My attention was first directed to the sources of malaria in this
    district and neighbourhood when cholera became epidemic.  I then
    partially inspected the dwellings of the poor, and have recently
    completed the survey.  It is almost incredible that so many sources
    of malaria should exist in a rural district.  A total absence of all
    provisions for effectual drainage around cottages is the most
    prominent source of malaria; throughout the whole district there is
    scarcely an attempt at it.  The refuse vegetable and animal matters
    are also thrown by the cottagers in heaps near their dwellings to
    decompose; are sometimes not removed, except at very long intervals;
    and are always permitted to remain sufficiently long to accumulate in
    some quantity.  Pigsties are generally near the dwellings, and are
    always surrounded by decomposing matters.  These constitute some of
    the many sources of malaria, and peculiarly deserve attention as
    being easily remedied, and yet, as it were, cherished.  The effects
    of malaria are strikingly exemplified in parts of this district.
    There are localities from which fever is seldom long absent; and I
    find spots where the spasmodic cholera located itself are also the
    chosen resorts of continued fever.”

It appears from the Sanitary Report, from which I have made the above
extracts, and which was presented to Parliament in 1842, that there were
then 8000 inhabited cellars at Liverpool; and that the occupants were
estimated at from 35,000 to 40,000.  Liverpool is called a prosperous
town.  People point with admiration to its docks, and its warehouses, and
speak of its wealth and grandeur in high terms.  But such prosperity,
like the victory of Pyrrhus, is apt to suggest the idea of ruin.
Thirty-five thousand people living in cellars!  Surely such things as
these demonstrate the necessity there is for making great exertions to
provide fit habitations for the poor.  Each year there is required in
Great Britain, according to the Sanitary Report, an increase of 59,000
new tenements, “a number equal to that of two new towns such as
Manchester proper, which has 32,310 houses, and Birmingham, which has
27,268 houses.”  In these large increments of building, is it not
essential that there should be some care for the health and the morals of
the people?  Is it not a question which even in a selfish point of view
affects the whole empire?

                                * * * * *

I am aware that there are great difficulties in the way of any general
measure for regulating buildings.  The first difficulty which occurs, one
which, of itself, forms a limit to building regulations, is, that if you
carry them beyond a certain extent, the poorer classes are driven, by the
increased expense, from the occupation of cottages to that of rooms,
which would be anything but a gain.  Besides, it is obvious, on other
accounts, that any regulations with respect to building must be
introduced with great care, especially in an old country, and where the
buildings, which you would be most anxious to modify, are those which
will be erected in the immediate vicinity of ground already densely
covered with houses.  The Liverpool Improvement Act affords a curious
instance of, what appears to me, absurd and impatient legislation on the
subject of building.  By some of its provisions a certain description of
cellar in that town will be thrown out of occupation on a given day.
Now, where are the inhabitants of these cellars to go to?  You might as
well legislate that no food except of a certain quality should be sold;
but it does not seem likely that this would secure the maintenance of the
population so legislated upon.  Inconsiderate measures of this kind
occasionally put even wise interference out of countenance.  Still, I
must contend that much good may be done by some simple building
regulations of a sanitary nature.  Much may be done indirectly, all of
which is nearly sure to be good.  For instance, it is very desirable to
lower the taxation upon building materials.  Then, again, wherever the
window-tax can be modified, with a view to benefit the dwellings of the
poor, it should be done.  Mr. Biers, a witness examined before the Select
Committee in 1842 on Building Regulations, says,

    “The preamble of this Act (the Bill, I believe, then under
    consideration) sets out that it is for the purpose of preventing
    disease and giving better ventilation; now, it would much increase
    the advantages of poor people if a rider or addition was made to the
    17th section, for the purpose of giving a better ventilation without
    being liable to the tax-gatherer.  I have added to this section,
    ‘And, for the purpose of promoting health and better ventilation, it
    is provided, that all window-lights or casements, not being between
    the outside brick or stone reveals of greater dimensions than one
    foot wide and three feet high, shall not be assessed to the window
    duties, whether the same be glazed or not, provided the room or
    appurtenance is not used for a sleeping or dwelling apartment.’”

    _Viscount Sandon_.  This is not for inhabited cellars?  No, it is to
    promote the ventilation of any part that is not an inhabited room;
    larders and cellars and out-appurtenances of houses.  I used to put
    in the buildings I am now erecting what are termed lancet lights, for
    the ventilating the cellars, larders, &c.; and, previous to the late
    survey, these lancet lights were never taken; but so stringent were
    the orders from the tax-board on the late survey, that if they found
    a gimlet-hole they would take it.

    _Chairman_.  Were they glazed?—Yes.

    If they were not glazed, but made of wire, how would that be?—Then
    they can take them, unless the word ‘Dairy’ or ‘Cheese-room’ is
    written over them; I have now been obliged to reduce three of those
    lancet lights, and do not get the ventilation.  It is as much or more
    concern to the poor than it is to the rich, that they should have a
    proper ventilation; and there have been many windows stopped up
    (which ought not to have been taken) in consequence of the recent
    survey, and which I am sure the Legislature never intended should be
    taken.”

But, in addition to these indirect methods for improving buildings, it is
surely not beyond our legislative ability to devise some very simple
regulations, at least of that kind which are to have a prospective
application.  I do not like to speak confidently about the merits of the
Government Bill, introduced this session, because it requires so much
technical knowledge to judge of these matters; but the main provisions
for back-yards or open spaces attached to dwelling houses, and for the
areas to lowermost rooms, appear to me well considered.  This Bill
applies only to the metropolis.  The working, however, of local
improvement Acts may afford the best kind of evidence to prepare a
general measure upon.  When the subject was considered in Committee in
1842, the Corporation of London sent a witness who showed that if a
certain regulation, embodied in the Bill they were then considering, were
carried into effect, it would, in some instances, not only injure
property, but prevent improvement.  Partial objections of this nature,
which after all may be very slight things, often prevent most useful
measures from being carried.  But why should there not be a discretionary
power vested somewhere to relax any provision which, in particular cases,
might be found harsh or inapplicable?  This power might be given to a
central office, or to local boards of health.  Any suggestion of this
kind is liable to objections; and the truth is, that to introduce
sanitary provisions into a state of things not prepared for them, must at
first be a matter cumbered with difficulties; but, as Lord Lyndhurst has
said, “a difficulty is a thing to be overcome.”  Mr. Carlyle has pointed
out what a wonderful production a soldier is, still more a body of them,
and all the apparatus by which they are kept in working order.  And, as
he goes on to argue, governments could not exist if this human fighting
machine were not in good keeping, and, therefore, it is well cared for at
all times.  Now if governments did but perceive the importance of some
regulation for the dwellings of the poor, if they looked at it only as a
matter of finance (for, eventually, the state pays for all disease and
distress), it is probable they would put their shoulders to the wheel,
and get it out of the difficulty, at least as far as their fair share of
the matter goes.

Again, the more difficulty there is in legislating on this subject, and
especially if it can be shown that there is difficulty connected with it
of a kind almost insuperable by mere legislative efforts, the more there
remains for private individuals to do.  I cannot believe but that human
ingenuity, in some form or other, will be able to surmount the evil in
question.  The difference of expense in building a row of small cottages,
back to back, which it will be hard to ventilate, and which must be
without the most obvious household requisites, and that of building a row
of cottages each of which shall have a yard at the back, will be about 22
per cent. upon the outlay.  Where one would cost £100, which is a good
price for the lowest class cottages, the other would cost £122.  This
calculation is independent of the cost of the additional land which would
be required.  It is melancholy to think that this £22, and the price of
the additional land must, in thousands of cases, have determined the
health and morality of the inmates.  I do not mean to say that this
pecuniary difference is a slight matter, but still I do think it is
somehow or other to be provided for.  There is always this to be
considered, that the better the tenement, the more it will be cared for.
In the same Committee I have mentioned before, the Town Clerk of Leeds is
asked:

    “Would not the building of the better kind of cottages always secure
    the best tenants?—Unquestionably.

    “And the person who invested the property in buildings of that kind
    would rather take six per cent. of good tenants than seven per cent.
    of bad ones?—Yes; we have a number of instances in Leeds.  There is a
    gentleman named Croysdill, who has 200 or 300 cottages; he receives
    the lowest rents on an average of any large proprietor of cottages,
    and they are unquestionably the most comfortable dwellings, and the
    best occupied.”

It may be a strong thing to say, but I can conceive it possible, in a
Christian country, for a man to restrain himself from making the utmost
profit out of his possessions.  I can imagine, for instance, an owner of
land in a town being unwilling to demand such a price for it, as would
prevent the cottages of the labouring people from being built with those
comforts and conveniences upon which civilization may almost be said to
depend.  A man may think that there is some responsibility attached to
ownership; and he may not like to be in any way accessory to the building
of such habitations for the poor as he thoroughly disapproves of.  And if
the owner of land feels this, still more may the capitalist who
undertakes to build upon it.  It may be a satisfactory thing to collect
in any way much money; but I think, on the other hand, that most men have
a great pleasure in doing anything well, in a workmanlike and stable
manner.  And, strange as it may seem, it is very possible that motives of
profit and loss may not be the only ones which have led to such miserable
building, as is often to be seen in the houses of the poor.  People have
not thought about the matter.  If they had seen the merit of building
good houses of a small kind, I think that in many cases, the additional
money required would not have stood in the way.  In the Select Committee
of 1842, the following questions are asked of a witness from Liverpool:

    “Is Liverpool a town which has a considerable quantity of land which
    may be made available for the purpose of erecting houses?—There is a
    good deal of land in the suburbs.

    “The corporation possess a good deal of land?—They do.

                                * * * * *

    “Have you had under your consideration the provisions of what is
    called Lord Normanby’s Act, by which it is forbidden to build houses
    back to back?—Yes.

    “What were the reasons which induced the Corporation of Liverpool not
    to object to houses being so built?—If houses were not to be built
    back to back there would be a great sacrifice of land.”

I do not bring this evidence forward to censure that corporation, but
rather to excuse private persons in some measure, by showing the general
unconcern and ignorance about the subject.  It appears that even a
corporate body, who might be expected to discern the value of public
health and morals, and not to be subdued by the prospect of immediate and
apparent gain, have at least not made any endeavour to introduce a good
system of building cottages for the poor of their own town.  Not that
they, probably, were in the slightest degree, more mercenary than other
men; but it is only an instance to show how little attention has hitherto
been given to this subject.

There is at present in the metropolis, a Society for “improving the
dwellings of the industrious classes;” but what is one society?  This is
a matter which ought to interest the owners of property, and the
employers of labour, throughout the country.  Such a society as the one
named may do great good by building model houses, making scientific
investigations, and frequently laying before the public information on
the subject.  But the proper division of labour, as it seems to me, would
be that the state should give every legislative facility for contemplated
improvements in the way of building, should encourage all researches into
the subject, and be ready to enforce by law such regulations as, without
any great intrusion upon private property, might secure for small houses
those primary requisites without which it cannot be expected that they
will be anything but nests of disease.  In fact the state might,
eventually, so order the matter that builders should not merely build
such houses as the poor would take, for there is nothing in the way of a
shelter which they will refuse to occupy, but such as ought to be let to
them, with due care at least for the public health.  The local
authorities should take upon themselves, the lighting, cleansing, paving,
supplying with water, and the like.  For private individuals there
remains the most important part of the task, namely, the building of an
improved class of small houses.  In this good work the employers of
labour may be expected to come prominently forward.  Many a man will
speculate in all kinds of remote undertakings; and it will never occur to
him that one of the most admirable uses to which he might put his spare
capital, would be to provide fit dwelling places for the labouring
population around him.  He is not asked to build alms houses.  On the
contrary, let him take care to ensure, as far as he can, a good return
for the outlay, in order to avoid what may, possibly, be an unjust
interference with other men’s property; and also, and chiefly, that his
building for the poor may not end in an isolated act of benevolence, but
may indicate a mode of employing capital likely to be followed by others.
In the present state of things, the rents of small houses are
disproportionately high because of the difficulty and uncertainty of
collecting the rents for them; but by any improvement you introduce into
the habits of the occupiers of such houses, you make this difficulty and
uncertainty less; and thereby diminish rents.  And thus, in this case, as
in many others, physical and moral improvement go on acting and reacting
upon each other.  It is likely, too, that these poor people will pay with
readiness and punctuality even a higher rent, if it be for a really good
tenement, than a small one for a place which they must inhabit in the
midst of filth, discomfort, and disease, and therefore with carelessness
and penury.  Besides; the rents they pay now, will be found, I believe,
sufficient to reimburse the capitalist for an outlay which would suffice
to build tenements of a superior description to the present ones.

I do not mean to say that the beginners of such a system of employing
capital might not have a great deal to contend with: and it is to their
benevolence, and not to any money motives, that I would mainly appeal.
The devout feeling which in former days raised august cathedrals
throughout the land, might find an employment to the full as religious in
building a humble row of cottages, if they tell of honour to the great
Creator, in care for those whom he has bidden us to care for, and are
thus silently dedicated, as it were, to His name.

                                * * * * *

The allotment system has not hitherto, I believe, been tried to any
extent in the manufacturing districts.  Mr. James Marshall, and Mr. Gott,
of Leeds have begun to try it; but I think it is but recently; and that
there has not yet been time to ascertain the result of the system.  I
cannot but think, however, that it will be found more beneficial in
manufacturing, than even in rural, districts.  Let us enumerate some of
the probable advantages.  It would form an additional means of support—it
would tend to endear home to the working man—it would provide a pleasing
change of employment for him in good times—it would render him not so
listless when out of work—and it would give him knowledge, an additional
topic of conversation, and an interest in various things which he might
never, otherwise, have felt the least concern for.  Moreover, it amuses
and occupies the little ones in a family; and it leaves less temptation
for parents to employ children too early, in factories or workshops, when
they can find something else for them to do which may be profitable.  In
this respect, indeed, any improvement in domestic comfort, or any
additional domestic pursuit, is likely to be beneficial, as it enlarges
the sphere of household duties, and creates more reasons for the wife and
children being left at home.  Again, as there is hard labour to be done
in a garden, this allotment system might occasionally prevent the sense
of an almost unnatural dependence being so much exhibited, or felt, when
the children are employed in some factory, and the grown up people are
not.  This is one of the greatest evils that at present attend the state
of manufactures.  Some of the advantages which I have reckoned above, as
likely to be connected with the allotment system, are trifling things;
but small impulses, all tending one way, may lead to great results.  The
main objection which, I suppose, will be taken, is that to make
allotments in crowded districts is scarcely practicable.  Some beginning,
however, has been made at a place so crowded as Leeds, and at any rate,
in any future building arrangements, room might be left for allotments of
land, which would also secure many advantages with respect to the
sanitary condition of the people.  It may be remarked, too, that any
manufacturer, who possessed cottages with allotments to them, would have
an easy mode of rewarding good behaviour.  Such cottages would be eagerly
sought after by the men, and might be given, in preference, to those of
good character.

Is all this romantic?  Is it inevitable that the suburbs of a
manufacturing town must consist of dense masses of squalid habitations,
unblest by a proper supply of air, light, or water; undrained,
uncleansed, and unswept; enjoying only that portion of civilization which
the presence of the police declares; and presenting a scene which the
better orders hurry by with disgust?  Or, on the contrary may we not,
without giving ourselves up to Utopian dreams, imagine that we might
enter the busy resorts of traffic through extensive suburbs consisting of
cottages with their bits of land; and see, as we came along, symptoms
everywhere around of housewifely occupations, and of homes which their
humble owners might often think of with pleasure during their day’s
labour, looking forward to their return at evening with delight.  The
richer classes, even those low down in the scale of wealth, mostly
struggle to secure some portion of country air for themselves: surely
they might do their best to provide for the working man something like a
change from the atmosphere of the factory, or workshop, in which he must
pass the greatest part of his day throughout the whole year.

Against what I have said above, it may be urged that it would prevent the
workman from living near his work.  In many cases this may be an
inconvenience; but I do not imagine that, in general, it can be proved to
be an insurmountable, or even a very serious objection.  Turning again to
the evidence of the Town Clerk of Leeds before the Building Committee, I
find the following:

    “_Lord Ashley_.  I have been told by several builders in London, that
    in consequence of the improvements in the metropolis, great numbers
    of people have been driven to the out-skirts of the town; but they
    found in the out-skirts of the town an excellent house for less money
    than when they lived in miserable lodgings in the heart of the town;
    is this consistent with your experience in Leeds?—Quite consistent.

    “And no hardship to themselves?—The distance of going to work is the
    objection; but we find the poor people will for twenty years walk two
    or three miles in a morning to their work at six o’clock, and seem no
    worse for it.”



V.  THE TOWN.


It will not be a matter unworthy the attention of a great employer of
labour, to improve and embellish the town where his work is carried on.
It is his duty to have some care for its public buildings, and its
institutions.  They are means for improving, sometimes by manifest
benefits, sometimes by silent influence, the condition of his men.
Surely if the employers of labour felt any thing like a home affection
for the towns where they live, they could not leave them in the rude,
unadorned state in which so many of them are.  And where is a man’s home,
if not where he can do most good; where he spends the best part of his
life; where he directs the labour, perhaps, of thousands, and absolutely
by his own exertion may affect the condition of the rising generation?
If such a man could see the many links of duty done, or duty disregarded,
that connect him with the spot where he works, let it be ever so dark,
squalid, and repulsive, he would still say that it was a great part of
his home, and not indulge too fondly in the idea of sunny meadows and
beautiful villas, to be enjoyed in some secure, golden, retirement.  He
would take an interest in the erection of churches, hospitals, buildings
for the display of art, or indeed, in any institutions that would further
his great work by elevating the sentiments, or improving the physical
condition, of his men.  The establishment of public baths would be
another matter worthy of his attention.  At these baths the poor might be
admitted on payment of a small fee to cover the expense of attendants.
The Romans, induced by social or political motives, had their public
baths, to which citizens were admitted; who formed, however, but a small
part of their people: surely higher motives might prevail with us to have
similar baths, which should be open to all our population.  While we are
speaking of institutions of various kinds, we must not omit Monts de
Piété, or Loan Societies, which may enable the poor man to get small
advances on reasonable terms.  It will not be enough to establish such
things as we have spoken of: there is yet harder work to be done in the
management of them.  All charitable institutions require vigorous
attention; and the better kind of men must not shrink from the public
business which they are the fittest to transact.  If founders or
benefactors were the only people needed, one generation might monopolize
the beneficence of all time; but charitable institutions require for ever
duty to be done by living men.  And, as I have intimated before, it is in
giving thought and labour, that we may often make the greatest and the
most profitable sacrifices for the good of others.  But to go back to
mere embellishment—it is very apt to go hand in hand with material
improvements.  Besides, it raises a higher standard.  It declares that
there is something besides food and clothing.  It may create, perhaps,
the love of beauty and order in minds that now seem sunk in sense.  At
any rate it may do so in a coming generation.  And it is not a little
matter if it attach the wealthier classes to these towns.  This naturally
brings me to a subject of which I think the reader will, on
consideration, see the importance.  I have heard it said, and thought, it
a far-seeing remark, that one of the greatest benefits which could be
conferred on manufacturing towns, would be to purify them from smoke, on
the ground that the wealthier classes would then have less objection to
reside in their vicinity: and, especially, that those who constitute the
natural aristocracy of the place, would not be so much tempted to remove
themselves from the spot where their fortunes had grown up.

Dr. Cooke Taylor, in his letters to the Archbishop of Dublin, speaking of
the parts of Manchester which “have been abandoned to the poorest grade
of all,” says,

    “Your Grace is aware that to some extent Dublin is similarly divided
    into the city of the rich and the city of the poor; but I know that
    many respectable and wealthy manufacturers reside in the liberties of
    Dublin, while the smoke-nuisance drives every body from the township
    of Manchester who can possibly find means of renting a house
    elsewhere.”

Now is the doing away of this smoke a sort of chimerical and Quixotic
undertaking?  Not in the least.  The experiments appear to be decisive
upon this point; and had there been a reasonable care for the health,
beauty, and cleanliness of the towns where their work is carried on, the
manufacturers would long ago have contrived, I believe, that there should
be no such thing as opaque smoke issuing from their chimneys.  Count
Rumford says in his essays,

    “I never view from a distance, as I come into town, this black cloud
    which hangs over London without wishing to be able to compute the
    immense number of chaldrons of coals of which it is composed; for
    could this be ascertained, I am persuaded so striking a fact would
    awaken the curiosity, and excite the astonishment, of all ranks of
    the inhabitants, and _perhaps_ turn their minds to an object of
    economy to which they have hitherto paid little attention.”

The essay from which this extract is made was published in 1796: what
would the Count say now?  I believe the calculation which he was thinking
of has been made.  At any rate a near approximation might be; for I am
told, on scientific authority, that “the actual quantity of smoke hanging
any day over London is the fourth part of the fuel consumed on that day.”
Mr. Cubitt, the great builder, in an examination before the House of
Commons, quoted by the Sanitary Report, thus expresses himself on this
subject:

    “With respect to manufactories, here are a great number driven by
    competition to work in the cheapest way they can.  A man puts up a
    steam-engine, and sends out an immense quantity of smoke; perhaps he
    creates a great deal of foul and bad gas; that is all let loose.
    Where his returns are £1000 a month, if he would spend £5 a month
    more, he would make that completely harmless; but he says, ‘I am not
    bound to do that,’ and therefore he works as cheaply as he can, and
    the public suffer to an extent beyond all calculation.”

To show how little loss is to be apprehended from regulations abating
this nuisance, the Sanitary Report cites the authority of

    “Mr. Ewart, the Inspector of Machinery to the Admiralty, residing at
    Her Majesty’s Dockyard at Woolwich, where the chimney of the
    manufactory under his immediate superintendence, regulated according
    to his directions, offers an example of the little smoke that need be
    occasioned from steam-engine furnaces if care be exercised.  He
    states that no peculiar machinery is used; the stoker or fire-keeper
    is only required to exercise care in not throwing on too much coal at
    once, and to open the furnace door in such slight degree as to admit
    occasionally the small proportion of atmospheric air requisite to
    effect complete combustion.  Mr. Ewart also states that if the fire
    be properly managed, there will be a saving of fuel.  The extent of
    smoke denotes the extent to which the combustion is incomplete.  The
    chimney belonging to the manufactory of Mr. Peter Fairbairn, engineer
    at Leeds, also presents an example and a contrast to the chimneys of
    nearly all the other manufactories which overcast that town.  On each
    side of it is a chimney belonging to another manufactory, pouring out
    dense clouds of smoke; whilst the chimney at Mr. Fairbairn’s
    manufactory presents the appearance of no greater quantity of smoke
    than of some private houses.  Mr. Fairbairn stated, in answer to
    inquiries upon this subject, that he uses what is called Stanley’s
    feeding machinery, which graduates the supply of coal so as to
    produce nearly complete combustion.  After the fire is once lighted,
    little remains to the ignorance or the carelessness of the stoker.
    Mr. Fairbairn also states that his consumption of fuel in his
    steam-engine furnaces, in comparison with that of his immediate
    neighbours, is proportionately less.  The engine belonging to the
    cotton-mills of Mr. Thomas Ashton, of Hyde, near Stockport, affords
    to the people of that town an example of the extent to which, by a
    little care, they might be relieved of the thick cloud of smoke by
    which the district is oppressed.

    “At a meeting of manufacturers and others, held at Leeds, for the
    suppression of the nuisance of the smoke of furnaces, and to discuss
    the various plans for abating it, the resolution was unanimously
    adopted, ‘That in the opinion of this meeting the smoke arising from
    steam-engine fires and furnaces can be consumed, and that, too,
    without injury to the boilers, and with a saving of fuel.  Notice of
    legal proceedings being given against Messrs. Meux, the brewers in
    London, for a nuisance arising from the chimneys of two furnaces,
    they found that by using anthracite coal they abated the nuisance to
    the neighbourhood, and saved £200 per annum.  The West Middlesex
    Water Company, by diminishing the smoke of their furnaces saved 1000
    per annum.”

But, putting aside the consideration of any pecuniary benefit to be
gained, I think it would not be unreasonable to say that no considerate
owner of a factory would wait for public regulations in this matter, but
would, himself, be anxious to prevent his occupation from being injurious
to his neighbours.  In a manufacturing town, a man may find some excuse,
though a most futile one, in the consideration that it would be of no use
for him alone to consume his smoke, when there are hundreds of others
over whom he has no influence to persuade them to follow his example.
But you sometimes see one of these foul-mouthed chimneys blackening a
neighbourhood generally free from such things, and it does not seem to
occur to the owner of the chimney that he is doing any thing wrong,
provided he is legally secure.  Probably he gives away in the course of
the year such a sum as would put up an apparatus which would modify, if
not altogether remove, the smoke.  Let him not think that charity
consists only in giving away something: I doubt whether he can find any
work of benevolence more useful to his neighbourhood and to society in
general, than putting a stop to this nuisance of his own creation.  I am
not inclined to rest my case against it on the ground of health alone;
though I believe, with the Sanitary Commissioners, that it would be found
much more injurious than is generally imagined.  When you find that
flowers and shrubs will not endure a certain atmosphere, it is a very
significant hint to the human creature to remove out of that
neighbourhood.  But independently of the question of health, this
nuisance of smoke may be condemned simply on the ground of the waste and
injury which it occasions.  And what is to be said on the other side?
What can any man allege in its favour?  Our ancestors, who had
glimmerings occasionally, held that

    “Si homme fait candells deins un vill, per qui il cause un noysom
    sent al inhabitants, uncore ceo nest ascun nusans car le needfulness
    de eux dispensera ove le noisomness del smell.”  (2 Rolls Abr. 139.)

This is quoted in a grave public document (the Sanitary Report): had we
met with it elsewhere, we might have concluded that it came from that
chronicle in which Mr. Sidney Smith found the account which he gives of
the meeting of the clergy at Dordrecht.  I quote it, however, to show how
wisely our ancestors directed their attention in this instance.  If they
had been begrimed with smoke as we are, and, upon inquiry, had found that
there was no “needfulness” to back the “noisomeness,” it is probable they
would have dealt with it in their most summary manner.  Whereas I fear
that Mr. Mackinnon’s “Smoke Prohibition” Bill, amidst the hubbub of
legislation, has great difficulty in finding the attention which it
really deserves.  The truth is, this smoke nuisance is one of the most
curious instances how little pains men will take to rid themselves from
evils which attack them only indirectly.  If the pecuniary injury done to
the inhabitants of great towns by smoke could only be put in the form of
a smoke rate, what unwearied agitation there would be against it.  But
surely we ought not to view with less hostility, because of its silent
noxiousness, a thing which injures the health of our children, if not of
people of all ages, disfigures our public buildings, creates
uncleanliness and gives an excuse for it, affects in some degree the
spirits of all persons who live under it, renders manufacturing towns
less welcome places of residence for the higher classes (which is what
brings it in connexion with the subject of this Essay); and is, thereby,
peculiarly injurious to the labouring population.  If these pages should
survive to any future age, it will excite a smile in some curious reader
to see how urgent I have endeavoured to be about a matter which will then
be so obvious—“What strange barbarous times they must have been,” he will
say to himself: “wisdom of our ancestors, forsooth!”  “Far-off reader,”
if there be such an entity, “do not presume: thou hast thy smoke too.”

                                * * * * *

In connexion with the subject of “the town,” it may be well to go a
little into the matter of sewerage, which almost, above all things,
demands the attention of those who care for the health of the labouring
population, indeed, for the health of rich or poor.

This subject is admirably treated in a section of the Sanitary Report of
1842, under the head of “Arrangements for public health, external to the
residences.”  It is now almost a trite thing to show how closely
connected imperfect sewerage is with disease.  Scientific men will tell
you that you may track a fever along the windings of an open drain.  The
Sanitary Report mentions that,

    “In the evidence given before the Committee of the House of Commons,
    which received evidence on the subject in 1834, one medical witness
    stated, that of all cases of severe typhus that he had seen,
    eight-tenths were either in houses of which the drains from the
    sewers were untrapped, or which, being trapped, were situated
    opposite gully-holes; and he mentioned instances where servants
    sleeping in the lower rooms of houses were invariably attacked with
    fever.”

The above is a good instance to show how necessary it is to have some
general measures on these matters of building and drainage.  The expense
of trapping a gully-drain is about £3; at least that is what, I
understand, the Commissioners of Sewers are willing to do it for.  Now is
it likely that any poor man, having one of these nuisances before his
door, will go to such an expense to have it prevented.  It is probable
that it would be very good economy for him to do so, even if his whole
savings amounted only to £3.  But we all know that few men are
far-thinking enough to invest much of their capital in a thing which
makes so little show as pure air.  What do you find amongst the rich?  Go
through the great squares, where, in one night, a man will lavish on some
entertainment what would almost purify his neighbourhood, and you will
often find the same evils there, though in a different degree, that you
have met with in the most crowded parts of the town.  If the rich and
great have so little care about what comes

    “Betwixt the wind and their nobility”

you can hardly expect persons, whose perception in such matters is much
less nice, to have any care at all.  It is evident that the health of
towns requires to be watched by scientific men, and improvements
constantly urged on by persons who take an especial interest in the
subject.  If I were a despot, I would soon have a band of Arnotts,
Chadwicks, Southwood Smiths, Smiths of Deanston, Joneses, and the like;
and one should have gratified a wiser ambition than Augustus if one could
say of any great town, Sordidam inveni, purgatam reliqui.

The supply of water is of course one of the chief means for the
purification of a town.  It is at present, I fear, grievously neglected
throughout the country.  The Sanitary Report draws attention to the mode
of supplying water to Bath, and gas to Manchester: and adduces the latter
as an instance “of the practicability of obtaining supplies for the
common benefit of a town without the agency of private companies.”  And
Mr. Chadwick, after a lengthened investigation into the subject which
will well repay perusal, thus concludes:

    “I venture to add, as the expression of an opinion founded on
    communications from all parts of the kingdom, that as a highly
    important sanitary measure connected with any general building
    regulations, whether for villages or for any class of towns,
    arrangements should be made for all houses to be supplied with good
    water, and should be prescribed as being as essential to cleanliness
    and health as the possession of a roof or of due space; that for this
    purpose, and in places where the supplies are not at present
    satisfactory, power should be vested in the most eligible local
    administrative body, which will generally be found to be that having
    charge of cleansing and structural arrangements, to procure proper
    supplies for the cleansing of the streets, for sewerage, for
    protection against fires, as well as for domestic use.”

It is possible that some of my readers may think that the wretched state
of ventilation, drainage, and building, which I have been commenting
upon, is mainly to be accounted for by poverty.  It belongs, they may
say, to an old country; it is the long accumulated neglect of ages; it
embodies the many vicissitudes of trade which Great Britain has felt; it
is a thing which the people would remedy for themselves, if you could
only give them more employment and better wages.  In answer to this I
will refer to an authority quoted by Mr. Chadwick in his Essay on the
“Pressure and Progress of the Causes of Mortality,” read before the
Statistical Society in 1843.

    “In abundance of employment, in high wages, and the chief
    circumstances commonly reputed as elements of prosperity of the
    labouring classes, the city of New York is deemed pre-eminent.  I
    have been favoured with a copy of ‘_The Annual Report of the
    Interments in the City and County of New York for the Year_ 1842,’
    presented to the Common Council by Dr. John Griscom, the city
    inspector, in which it may be seen how little those circumstances
    have hitherto preserved large masses of people from physical
    depression.  He has stepped out of the routine to examine on the spot
    the circumstances attendant on the mortality which the figures
    represent.  He finds that upwards of 33,000 of the population of that
    city live in cellars, courts, and alleys, of which 6618 are dwellers
    in cellars.  ‘Many,’ he states, ‘of these back places are so
    constructed as to cut off all circulation of air, the line of houses
    being across the entrance, forming a _cul de sac_, while those in
    which the line is parallel with, and at one side of the entrance, are
    rather more favourably situated, but still excluded from any general
    visitation of air in currents.  As to the influence of these
    localities upon the health and lives of the inmates, there is, and
    can be, no dispute; but few are aware of the dreadful extent of the
    disease and suffering to be found in them.  In the damp, dark, and
    chilly cellars, fevers, rheumatism, contagious and inflammatory
    disorders, affections of the lungs, skin, and eyes, and numerous
    others, are rife, and too often successfully combat the skill of the
    physician and the benevolence of strangers.

    “‘I speak now of the influence of the locality merely.  The degraded
    habits of life, the degenerate morals, the confined and crowded
    apartments, and insufficient food, of those who live in more elevated
    rooms, comparatively beyond the reach of the exhalations of the soil,
    engender a different train of diseases, sufficiently distressing to
    contemplate; but the addition to all these causes of the foul
    influences of the incessant moisture and more confined air of
    under-ground rooms, is productive of evils which humanity cannot
    regard without shuddering.’

    “He gives instances where the cellar population had been ravaged by
    fever, whilst the population occupying the upper apartments of the
    same houses were untouched.  In respect to the condition of these
    places, he cites the testimony of a physician, who states that,
    ‘frequently in searching for a patient living in the same cellar, my
    attention has been attracted to the place by a peculiar and nauseous
    effluvium issuing from the door, indicative of the nature and
    condition of the inmates.’  A main cause of this is the filthy
    external state of the dwellings and defective street cleansing and
    defective supplies of water, which, except that no provision is made
    for laying it on the houses of the poorer classes, is about to be
    remedied by a superior public provision.”

After considering this account of the State of New York, it will hardly
do to say, that, even under favourable circumstances, you can leave the
great mass of the people to take care of those structural arrangements
with regard to their habitations, which only the scientific research of
modern times has taught any persons to regard with due attention.

                                * * * * *

We have now gone over some of the principal places where the employer of
labour may find scope for benevolent exertion.  It has been a most
inartificial division of the subject, but still one that may be retained
in the memory, which is a strange creature, not always to be bound by
logic, but led along by minute ties of association, among which those of
place are very strong and clinging.  I now venture to discuss a branch of
the subject which can hardly be referred to any particular spot, unless,
indeed, I were to name the manufacturer’s own house as the fit ground for
it: I mean the social intercourse between the employers and the employed.
Some persons will, perhaps, be startled at the phrase; hardly, however,
those who have come thus far with me.  By social intercourse I do not
merely mean that which will naturally take place in the ordinary
charities, such as visiting the sick, managing clothing societies, and
the like: but that intercourse which includes an interchange of thought,
an occasional community of pursuit, and an opportunity of indirect
instruction; which may be frequent and extensive enough to avoid the evil
effects of a sense of perpetual condescension on one side, and timidity
on the other; and which may give the employer some chance at least of
learning the general wants and wishes of his people, and also of
appreciating their individual characters.

This matter is not an easy one.  It requires tact, patience, discretion,
and the application of several of the maxims mentioned in the preceding
chapter.  I am not sure however, that it is any sacrifice whatever in the
way of pleasure.  The manufacturer’s family who occasionally give an
evening to social intercourse with their people, will not, perhaps, find
that evening less amusing than many that they may pass with their equals.

The advantage, to the rising generation of working people, of some
intercourse with their betters, would be very great.  I must here quote
the authority of one who has fully expressed in action the benevolent
views which he has indicated in the following words.  “No humble cottage
youth or maiden will ever acquire the charm of pleasing manners by rules,
or lectures, or sermons, or legislation, or any other of those abortive
means by which we from time to time endeavour to change poor human
nature, if they are not permitted to _see_ what they are taught they
should practise, and to hold intercourse with those whose manners are
superior to their own.”  This intercourse will probably lead to something
like accomplishments among the young people.  Some of them will profit
more than others from the manners and accomplishments which they will
observe.  And such differences will create a higher order of love among
the working people.  The manners of one sex will become different from
the manners of the other; and the difference of individuals in each sex
will be brought into play.  All this is favourable to morality.  When
people work at the same kind of work, have no different pursuits to call
out the different qualities of the two sexes, and have all of them
manners of the same rude stamp, you can hardly expect that there will be
much to ennoble them in their affections.

But, in themselves, the accomplishments and acquirements, which working
people may attain from social intercourse with their betters, are great
things.  The same kind-hearted employer, whom I have quoted before,
speaks thus upon the subject.  “Another point which has appeared to me of
great importance is to provide as many resources as possible of interest
and amusement for their leisure hours; something to which they may return
with renewed relish when their daily work is done; which may render their
homes cheerful and happy, and may afford subjects of thought,
conversation and pursuit among them.”  Moreover, a habit of attention,
and even scientific modes of thought, are often called out in young
people when they are learning some game.  Besides to do anything, or know
anything, which is harmless, is beneficial.  A man will not be a worse
workman because he can play at cricket, or at chess; or because he is a
good draughtsman, or can touch some musical instrument with skill.  He is
likely to have more self-respect, and to be a better citizen.  He cannot
succeed in anything without attention and endurance.  And these are the
qualities which will enable him to behave reasonably in the vicissitudes
of trade, or to prepare as much as possible against them.

In the Report on the condition of children and young persons employed in
Mines and Manufactures, there is some remarkable evidence given by a man
who had himself risen from the state of life which he describes.  It
leads us to perceive the great good which any improvement in the domestic
accomplishments of the women might be expected to produce.  He says,

    “Children during their childhood toil throughout the day, acquiring
    not the least domestic instruction to fit them for wives and mothers.
    I will name one instance; and this applies to the general condition
    of females doomed to, and brought up amongst, shop-work.  My mother
    worked in a manufactory from a very early age.  She was clever and
    industrious; and, moreover, she had the reputation of being virtuous.
    She was regarded as an excellent match for a working man.  She was
    married early.  She became the mother of eleven children: I am the
    eldest.  To the best of her ability she performed the important
    duties of a wife and mother.  She was lamentably deficient in
    domestic knowledge; in that most important of all human instruction,
    how to make the home and the fireside to possess a charm for her
    husband and children, she had never received one single lesson.  She
    had children apace.  As she recovered from her lying-in, so she went
    to work, the babe being brought to her at stated times to receive
    nourishment.  As the family increased, so any thing like comfort
    disappeared altogether.  The power to make home cheerful and
    comfortable was never given to her.  She knew not the value of
    cherishing in my father’s mind a love of domestic objects.  Not one
    moment’s happiness did I ever see under my father’s roof.  All this
    dismal state of things I can distinctly trace to the entire and
    perfect absence of all training and instruction to my mother.  He
    became intemperate; and his intemperance made her necessitous.  She
    made many efforts to abstain from shop-work; but her pecuniary
    necessities forced her back into the shop.  The family was large, and
    every moment was required at home.  I have known her, after the close
    of a hard day’s work, sit up nearly all night for several nights
    together washing and mending of clothes.  My father could have no
    comfort here.  These domestic obligations, which in a well-regulated
    house (even in that of a working man, where there are prudence and
    good management) would be done so as not to annoy the husband, to my
    father were a source of annoyance; and he, from an ignorant and
    mistaken notion, sought comfort in an alehouse.

    “My mother’s ignorance of household duties; my father’s consequent
    irritability and intemperance; the frightful poverty; the constant
    quarrelling; the pernicious example to my brothers and sisters; the
    bad effect upon the future conduct of my brothers; one and all of us
    being forced out to work so young that our feeble earnings would
    produce only 1_s._ a-week; cold and hunger, and the innumerable
    sufferings of my childhood, crowd upon my mind and overpower me.
    They keep alive a deep anxiety for the emancipation of the thousands
    of families in this great town and neighbourhood, who are in a
    similar state of horrible misery.  My own experience tells me that
    the instruction of the females in the work of a house, in teaching
    them to produce cheerfulness and comfort at the fireside, would
    prevent a great amount of misery and crime.  There would be fewer
    drunken husbands and disobedient children.  As a working man, within
    my own observation, female education is disgracefully neglected.  I
    attach more importance to it than to any thing else.”

This evidence is the more significant, because, one sees that the poor
woman had the material of character out of which the most engaging
qualities might have been formed.  Let her have seen better things in
early life, and even if her schooling had been somewhat deficient, had
she but enjoyed the advantage of such social intercourse with her betters
as we are now considering, that poor woman might have been a source of
joy and hope to her family, instead of a centre of repulsion.

Dr. Cooke Taylor, in his “Tour in the Manufacturing Districts,” has given
a table, which I subjoin, “showing the degree of instruction, age, and
sex; of the persons taken into custody, summarily convicted, or held to
bail, and tried and convicted, in Manchester, in the year 1841.”  The
table was formed on statistical details furnished by Sir Charles Shaw.
It shows a state of facts which has been deduced from other tables of a
like nature, but the facts are of such moment, that they can hardly be
kept too much in mind; especially when we consider that there are large
towns in which, as I have said before, half at least of the juvenile
population is growing up without education of any kind whatever. {147}
If such are the favourable results even of that small and superficial
education, which by the way I would rather call instruction than
education, described in the second and third headings of the table, what
may we not expect from a training where the youth or maiden finds in her
employers not only instructors, but friends and occasional companions?
What store of labour on the part of judges, jailors, and policemen, must
be saved by even a few of such employers.


                                  TOTAL IN THE YEAR 1841.                                         Degree of Instruction

                                                                1.  Neither Read nor     2.  Read only or      3.  Read and Write        4.  Superior
                                                                       Write.              Read & Write               well.              Instruction.
                                                                                           imperfectly.

                             M. & F.     Male.       Fem.       Male.       Fem.       Male.       Fem.       Male.       Fem.       Male.       Fem.

1st Class     Taken into          13345        9925       3420        4901       2070        3944       1218         873        119         207         13
              Custody

2nd Class     Summarily            2138        1661        447         795        265         660        198         193         14          13        . .
              Convicted or
              held to Bail

3rd Class     Tried and              24         645        179         277        100         276         72          82          7          10        . .
              Convicted





                                                                        AGES.

        Under 10        10 Years, &     15 Years, &     20 Years, &     25 Years, &     30 Years, &     40 Years, &     50 Years &      60 Years, &
        Years of age.   under 15.       under 20.       under 25.       under 30.       under 40.       under 50.       under 60.       upwards.

        Male.    Fem.   Male.    Fem.   Male.    Fem.   Male.    Fem.   Male.    Fem.   Male.    Fem.   Male.    Fem.   Male.    Fem.   Male.    Fem.

1st         62       6     681      83    1581     656    2425     909    1805     755    1775     582    1018     284     422      85     156      60
Class

2nd          4     . .     151      17     302      84     418     150     264      93     327      75     129      39      49      14      17       5
Class

3rd        . .     . .      30       2     150      54     196      61      97      21     109      25      43      11      15       3       5       2
Class


Some persons may object to encouraging anything like refinement amongst
the operatives; and others, who would hardly object in open terms, find
it difficult to reconcile themselves to the idea of it.  Whatever there
is in this repugnance that arises from any selfish motive should be
instantly cast aside.  Do not let us be meanly afraid that the classes
below us will tread too closely on our heels.  What a disgrace it is, if,
with our much larger opportunities of leisure, with professions that
demand a perpetual exercise of the intellectual faculties, we cannot
preserve, on the average, an intellectual superiority fully equivalent to
the difference of rank and station.  Let the vast tracts now left barren
smile with cultivation: the happier lands, which the rivers of
civilization have enriched for ages, will still maintain their supremacy.
And remember this, that every insight you give the humbler classes into
the vast expanse of knowledge, you give them the means of estimating with
a deference founded on reason, those persons who do possess knowledge of
any kind.  Let us have faith that knowledge must in the long run lead to
good; and let us not fancy that our prosperity as a class depends upon
the ignorance of those beneath us.  Has not our partial enlightenment
taught us in some measure to be reconciled to the fact of there being
classes above us?  And why should we fear that knowledge, which smoothes
so many of the rugged things in life, should be found unavailing to
soften the inequalities of social distinction?  It is the ignorant
barbarians who can pluck the Roman Senate by the beard; and who, in the
depth of savageness, can see nothing in sex, age, station, or office, to
demand their veneration.  Make the men around you more rational, more
instructed, more helpful, more hopeful creatures if you can; above all
things treat them justly: and I think you may put aside any apprehension
of disturbing the economy of the various orders of the state.  And if it
can be so disturbed, let it be.

What I have said above is not drawn from airy fancies of my own.  Such
things as I have suggested, have been done.  I could mention one man, who
might not, however, thank me for naming him, who has devoted himself to
the social improvement of his working people: and, without such an
example, I should never, perhaps, have thought of, or ventured to put
forward, the above suggestions with respect to the social intercourse
between masters and men.  It is the same benevolent manufacturer from
whose letters to Mr. Horner I have made extracts before.  The general
system on which he has acted may be best explained in his own words.  “In
all plans for the education of the labouring classes my object would be
_not to raise any individuals among them above their condition_, _but to
elevate the condition itself_.  For I am not one of those who think that
the highest ambition of a working man should be to rise above the station
in which Providence has placed him, or that he should be taught to
believe that because the humblest, it is therefore the least happy and
desirable condition of humanity.  This is, indeed, a very common notion
among the working classes of the people, and a very natural one; and it
has been encouraged by many of their superiors, who have interested
themselves in the cause of popular improvement, and have undertaken to
direct and stimulate their exertions.  Examples have constantly been held
up of men who by unusual ability and proficiency in some branch of
science had raised themselves above the condition of their birth, and
risen to eminence and wealth; and these instances have been dwelt upon
and repeated, in a manner, that, whether intentionally or not, produces
the impression that positive and scientific knowledge is the summum bonum
of human education, and that to rise above our station in life, should be
the great object of our exertion.  This is not my creed.  I am satisfied
that it is an erroneous one, in _any_ system of education for _any_ class
of men.  Our object ought to be, not to produce a few clever individuals,
distinguished above their fellows by their comparative superiority, but
to make the great mass of individuals on whom we are operating, virtuous,
sensible, well-informed, and well-bred men.”  And again he states that
his object is “to show to his people and to others, that there is nothing
in the nature of their employment, or in the condition of their humble
lot, that condemns them to be rough, vulgar, ignorant, miserable, or
poor:—that there is nothing in either that forbids them to be
well-bred—well-informed, well-mannered—and surrounded by every comfort
and enjoyment that can make life happy;—in short, to ascertain and to
prove what the condition of this class of people might be made—what _it
ought to be_ made—what is the interest of all parties that _it should be_
made.”

                                * * * * *

Before concluding this chapter, I must say a few more words on the
general subject of interference.  No one can be more averse than I am to
unnecessary interference, or more ready to perceive the many evils which
attend it.  There is, however, the danger of carrying non-interference
into inhumanity.  Mankind are so accustomed to the idea that government
mainly consists in coercion, that they sometimes find it difficult to
consider interference, even as applied to benevolent undertakings, and
for social government, in any other than a bad light.  But take the rule
of a father, which is the type of all good government, that under which
the divine jurisdiction has been graciously expressed to us.  Consider
how a wise father will act as regards interference.  His anxiety will not
be to drag his child along, undeviatingly, in the wake of his own
experience; but rather, to endue him with that knowledge of the chart and
compass, and that habitual observation of the stars, which will enable
the child, himself, to steer safely over the great waters.  Such a father
will not be unreasonably solicitous to assimilate his son’s character or
purposes to his own.  He will not fall into the error of supposing that
experience is altogether a transferable commodity.  The greatest good
which he designs for his son will, perhaps, be that which he can give him
indirectly, and which he may never speak to the youth about.  He will
seek to surround him with good opportunities and favourable means: and
even when he interferes more directly, he will endeavour, in the first
instance, to lead rather than to compel, so that some room for choice may
still be left.  Not thinking that his own power, his own dignity, his own
advantage are the chief objects for him to look to, his imagination will
often be with those whom he rules; and he will thus be able to look at
his own conduct with their eyes, not with his.  This, alone, will keep
him from a multiplicity of errors.  Now the same principles, actuated by
the same kind of love, should be at the bottom of all social government.
I believe that we shall be better able in practice to place wise limits
to interference by regulating and enlightening the animus which prompts
it, than by laying down rules for its action determined upon abstract
considerations.  The attempt to fix such rules is not to be despised; but
if the persons, or society, about to interfere on any occasion, desired a
good object from right motives, I think they would have the best chance
of keeping themselves from using wrong means.  In many cases, an unwise
interference takes place from a partial apprehension of the good to be
aimed at: enlarge and exalt the object; let it not be one-sided; and
probably the mode of attaining it will partake largely of the wisdom
shown in the choice of it.  If, for instance, a government saw that it
had to encourage, not only judicious physical arrangements, but mental
and moral development, amongst those whom it governs, it would be very
cautious of suppressing, or interfering with, any good thing which the
people would accomplish for themselves.  The same with a private
individual, an employer of labour for instance, if he values the
independence of character and action in those whom he employs, he will be
careful in all his benevolent measures, to leave room for their energy to
work.  What does he want to produce?  Something vital, not something
mechanical.  It is often a deficiency of benevolence, and not an
overflow, that makes people interfering in a bad sense.  Frequently the
same spirit which would make a man a tyrant in government, would make him
a busy-body, a meddler, or a pedantic formalist, in the relations of
ordinary life.  I have taken the instance of father and son, which might
be supposed by many as one in which extreme interference was not only
justifiable, but requisite.  In stating how necessary it is even there to
be very careful as regards the extent and mode of interference, I leave
my readers to estimate how essential it must be in all other cases where
the relation is not of that closely connected character.  I believe that
the parental relation will be found the best model on which to form the
duties of the employer to the employed; calling, as it does, for active
exertion, requiring the most watchful tenderness, and yet limited by the
strictest rules of prudence from intrenching on that freedom of thought
and action which is necessary for all spontaneous development.



