CHAPTER XXII

APPREHENSIONS


For a moment or two, after the ropes binding his hands were loosed, Tom
Swift did nothing. He was not only stunned mentally, but the bonds had
been pulled so tightly about his wrists that the circulation was
impeded, and his cramped muscles required a little time in which to
respond.

But presently he felt the tingle of the coursing blood, and he found he
could move his arms. He raised them to his head, and then his first
care was to remove the pad of cloth that formed a gag over his mouth.
Now he could talk.

"I--I'll loosen you all in just a second," he said, as he bent over to
pick at the knot of the rope around his legs. His own voice sounded
strange to him.

"I don't know what it's all about, any more than you do," he went on,
speaking to the others. "It's a fierce game we're up against, and we've
got to make the best of it. As soon as we can move, and talk, we'll
decide what's best to do. Whoever these fellows are, and I believe they
are the foreign spies I've been warned about, they are in complete
possession of the airship."

Tom found it no easy matter to loosen the bonds on his feet.  The ropes
were well tied, and Tom's fingers were stiff from the lack of
circulation of blood. But finally he managed to free himself. When he
stood up in the dim storeroom, that was now a prison for all save Koku,
he found that he could not walk. He almost toppled over, so weak were
his legs from the tightness of the ropes. He sat down and worked his
muscles until they felt normal again.

A few minutes later, weak and rather tottery, he managed to reach Mr.
Damon, whom he first unbound. He realized that Mr. Damon was the oldest
of his friends, and, consequently, would suffer most. And it was
characteristic of the eccentric gentleman that, as soon as his gag was
removed he burst out with:

"Bless my wristlets, Tom! What does it all mean?"

"That's more than I can say, Mr. Damon," replied Tom, with a mournful
shake of his head. "I'm very sorry it happened, for it looks as though
I hadn't taken proper care. The idea of those men stowing themselves
away on board here, and me not knowing it; and then coming out
unexpectedly and getting possession of the craft!  It doesn't speak
very well for my smartness."

"Oh, well, Tom, anyone might have been fooled by those plotting
foreigners," said Mr. Damon. "Now, we'll try to turn matters about and
get the best of them. Oh, but it feels good to be free once more!"

He stretched his benumbed and stiffened limbs and then helped Tom free
the others. They stood up, looking at each other in their dimly lighted
prison.

"Well, if this isn't the limit I don't know what is!" cried Ned Newton.

"They got the best of you, Tom," spoke Lieutenant Marbury.

"Are they really foreign spies?" asked Captain Warner.

"Yes," replied his assistant. "They managed to carry out the plot we
tried to frustrate. It was a good trick, too, hiding on board, and
coming out with a rush."

"Is that what they did?" asked Mr. Damon.

"It looks so," observed Tom. "The attack must have started in the
engine-room," he went on, with a look at Mound and Ventor.  "What
happened there?" he asked.

"Well, that's about the way it was," answered the engineer. "We were
working away, making some adjustments, oiling the parts and seeing that
everything was running smoothly, when, all at once, I heard Koku yell.
He had gone in the oil room. At first I thought something had gone
wrong with the ship, but, when I looked at the giant, I saw he was
being attacked by four strange men. And, before I, or any of the other
men, could do anything, they all swarmed down on us.

"There must have been a dozen of them, and they simply overwhelmed us.
One of them hit Koku on the head with an iron bar, and that took all
the fight out of the giant, or the story might have been a different
one. As it was, we were overpowered, and that's all I know until we
were carried in here, and saw you folks all tied up as we were."

"They burst in on us in the same way," Tom explained. "But where did
they come from? Where were they hiding?"

"In the oil and gasoline storeroom that opens out of the motor
compartment," answered Mound, the engineer. "It isn't half full, you
know, and there's room for more than a dozen men in it. They must have
gone in some time last night, when the airship was in the hangar, and
remained hidden among the boxes and barrels until they got ready to
come out and overpower us."

"That's it," decided Tom. "But I don't understand how they got in. The
hangar was well guarded all night."

"Some of your men might have been bribed," suggested Ned.

"Yes, that is so," admitted Tom, and, later, he learned that such had
been the case. The foreign spies, for such they were, had managed to
corrupt one of Tom's trusted employees, who had looked the other way
when La Foy and his fellow-conspirators sneaked into the airship shed
and secreted themselves.

"Well, discussing how they got on board isn't going to do us any good
now," Tom remarked ruefully. "The question is--what are we going to do?"

"Bless my fountain pen!" cried Mr. Damon. "There's only one thing to
do!"

"What is that?" asked Ned.

"Why, get out of here, call a policeman, and have these scoundrels
arrested. I'll prosecute them! I'll have my lawyer on hand to see that
they get the longest terms the statutes call for! Bless my pocketbook,
but I will!" and Mr. Damon waxed quite indignant.

"That's easier said than done," observed Tom Swift, quietly.  "In the
first place, it isn't going to be an easy matter to get out of here."

He looked around the storeroom, which was then their prison. It was
illuminated by a single electric light, which showed some boxes and
barrels piled in the rear.

"Nothing in them to help us get out," Tom went on, for he knew what the
contents were.

"Oh, we'll get out," declared Ned confidently, "but I don't believe
we'll find a policeman ready to take our complaint. The upper air isn't
very well patrolled as yet."

"That's so," agreed Mr. Damon. "I forgot that we were in an airship.
But what is to be done, Tom? We really are captives aboard our own
craft."

"Yes, worse luck," returned the young inventor. "I feel foolish when I
think how we let them take us prisoners."

"We couldn't help it," Ned commented. "They came on us too suddenly. We
didn't have a chance. And they outnumbered us two to one. If they could
take care of big Koku, what chance did we have?"

"Very little," said Engineer Mound. "They were desperate fellows. They
know something about aircraft, too. For, as soon as Koku, Ventor and I
were disposed of, some of them went at the machinery as if they had
been used to running it all their lives."

"Oh, the foreigners are experts when it comes to craft of the air,"
said Captain Warner.

"Well, they seem to be running her, all right," admitted the young
inventor, "and at good speed, too. They have increased our running
rate, if I am any judge."

"By several miles an hour," confirmed the assistant pilot.  "Though in
which direction they are heading, and what they are going to do with us
is more than I can guess."

"That's so!" agreed Mr. Damon. "What is to become of us? They may heave
us overboard into the ocean!"

"Into the ocean!" cried Ned apprehensively. "Are we near the sea?"

"We must be, by this time," spoke Tom. "We were headed in that
direction, and we have come almost far enough to put us somewhere over
the Atlantic, off the Jersey coast."

A look of apprehension was on the faces of all. But Tom's face did not
remain clouded long.

"We won't try to swim until we have to," he said. "Now, let's take an
account of stock, and see if we have any means of getting out of this
prison."




