II

MESSAGES FROM BEYOND THE GRAVE


1

Sir Oliver Lodge is one of the most distinguished men of learning in
our day. He is also one of the oldest, most active and most prominent
members of that well-known Society for Psychical Research which,
founded in 1882, has ever since striven to study with irreproachable
scientific precision all the wonderful, inexplicable, occult and
supernatural phenomena which have always baffled and still elude
the comprehension of mankind. In addition to his purely scientific
works, of which, not being qualified to judge, I do not speak, he is
the author of some extremely remarkable books, such as _Man and the
Universe_, _The Ether of Space_ and _The Survival of Man_, in which
the loftiest and most daring metaphysical speculations are constantly
controlled by the most prudent, wise and steadfast common sense.

Sir Oliver Lodge, therefore, is at the same time a philosopher and a
practical, working scientist, accustomed to scientific methods which
do not readily allow him to go astray; he has, in a word, one of the
best-balanced brains that we could hope to meet; and he is convinced
that the dead do not die and that they are able to communicate with
us. He has tried to make us share his conviction in _The Survival of
Man_. I am not sure that he has quite succeeded. True, he gives us
a certain number of extraordinary facts, but they are facts which,
in the last resort, can be explained by the unconscious intervention
of intelligences other than those of the dead. He does not bring us
the irrefutable proof, such as we should consider, for instance,
the revelation of an incident, a detail, a piece of information so
absolutely unknown to any living creature that it could come only from
a spirit no longer of this world. We must admit, however, that such a
proof is, as he says, as difficult to conceive as to provide.


2

Sir Oliver’s youngest son, Raymond, was born in 1889, became an
engineer and enlisted for the duration of the war in September, 1914.
He was sent out to Flanders early in the spring of 1915; and, on the
14th of September of the same year, before Ypres, while the company
under his command was leaving the front-line trench, he was hit in the
left side by a splinter of a shell; and he died a few hours later.

He was, as a photograph shows us, one of those admirable young British
soldiers who are the perfect type of a robust, fresh, joyous humanity,
clean and bright, and whose death seems the more cruel and the more
incredible as it annihilates a greater aggregate of strength, hope and
beauty.

His father has dedicated to his memory a volume entitled, _Raymond, or
Life and Death_; and we are at first somewhat bewildered at seeing
that it is not, as one might expect, a book of lamentation, regrets and
tears, but the accurate, deliberately impassive and at times almost
cheerful report of a man of learning who thrusts aside his sorrow so
that he may see clearly before him, wrestles with the thought of death
and beholds the rising dawn of an immense and very strange hope.


3

I will not linger over the first part of the volume, which aims at
making us acquainted with Raymond Lodge. It contains some forty letters
written in the trenches, the testimony of his brother-officers’
devotion to him, details of his death and so on. The letters, I may
say in passing, are charmingly vivid and marked by a delicate and
delightful humour whose only object is to reassure those who are not
themselves in danger. I have not time to dwell upon them; and they are
not what most interests us here.

But the second part, which Sir Oliver Lodge calls _Supernormal
Portion_, passes from the life that exists on the surface of our earth
and introduces us into a very different world.

In the very first lines, the author reminds us that he has “made no
secret of his conviction, not merely that personality persists, but
that its continued existence is more entwined with the life of every
day than has been generally imagined; that there is no real breach
of continuity between the dead and the living; and that methods of
intercommunion across what has seemed to be a gulf can be set going in
response to the urgent demand of affection; that in fact, as Diotima
told Socrates (_Symposium_, 202 and 203), ‘Love bridges the Chasm.’”

Sir Oliver Lodge, then, is persuaded that his son, though dead, has
not ceased to exist and that he has not gone far from those who love
him. Raymond, in fact, seeks to communicate with his father as early
as eleven days after his death. We know that these communications or
so-called communications from beyond the grave--let us not prejudge
the issue for the moment--are made through the agency of a medium who
is or believes himself to be inspired or possessed by the deceased or
by a familiar spirit speaking in his name and repeating what the latter
reveals to him. The medium conveys his information either orally or by
automatic writing, or again, although this is very rare in the present
instance, by table-turning. But I will pass over these preliminaries,
which would carry us too far, and come straight to the communication
which is, I think, the most astonishing of all and perhaps the only
one that cannot be explained, or at least is exceedingly difficult to
explain, by the intervention of the living.

About the end of August, 1915, that is to say, not many days before
his death, Raymond, who, as we have seen, was near Ypres, had been
photographed with the officers of his battalion by a travelling
photographer. On the 27th of September following, in the course of a
sitting with the medium Peters, the spirit speaking by Peters’ mouth
said, suddenly:

“You have several portraits of this boy. Before he went away you had
a good portrait of him--two, no, three. Two where he is alone and one
where he is in a group of other men. He is particular that I should
tell you of this. In one you see his walking-stick.”

Now at that time the members of Sir Oliver Lodge’s family did not know
of the existence of this group. They attached no great importance,
however, to the revelations but in subsequent sittings, notably on the
3rd of December, before the photographs had arrived, before they were
seen, more detailed information was received. According to the spirit’s
statements, the photograph was of a dozen officers or more, taken
out of doors, in front of a sort of shelter (the medium kept drawing
vertical lines in the air). Some were sitting down and some were
standing up at the back. Raymond was sitting; somebody was leaning on
him. There were several photographs taken.

On the 7th of December, the photographs arrived at Mariemont, Sir
Oliver’s house near Edgbaston. There were three copies, all differing
slightly, of the same group of twenty-one officers, those in the back
row standing up, the others seated. The group was taken outside a sort
of temporary wooden structure, such as might be a hospital shed, with
six conspicuous nearly vertical lines on the roof. Raymond was one of
those sitting on the ground in front; his walking-stick, mentioned
in the first revelation, was lying across his feet. And a striking
piece of evidence is that his is the only instance where one man is
leaning or resting his hand on the shoulder of another, in two of the
photographs, or, in the third, his leg.

This manifestation is one of the most remarkable that have hitherto
been obtained, because it eliminates almost entirely any telepathic
interference, that is to say, any subconscious intercommunication
between the persons present at the sitting, all of whom were absolutely
unaware of the existence of the photographs. If we refuse to admit
the intervention of the deceased--which should, I agree, be admitted
only in the last resort--we must, in order to explain the revelation,
suppose that the subconsciousness of the medium or of one of those
present entered into communication, through the vast mazes and deserts
of space and amid millions of strange souls, with the subconsciousness
of one of the officers or of one of the people who had seen these
photographs whose existence there was no reason for suspecting. This is
possible; but it is so fortuitous, so prodigious that the survival and
intervention of the deceased would, in the circumstances, seem almost
less supernatural and more probable.


4

I will not enter into the details of the numerous sittings which
preceded or followed this one; nor will I even undertake to summarize
them. To share the emotion aroused, we must read the reports which
faithfully reproduce these strange dialogues between the living and
the dead. We receive the impression that the departed son comes daily
closer and closer to life and converses more and more easily, more and
more familiarly with all those who loved him before he was overtaken
by the shadows of the grave. He recalls to each of them a thousand
little forgotten incidents. He remains among his own kindred as though
he had never left them. He is always present and prepared to answer.
He mingles so completely in their whole life that no one any longer
thinks of mourning his loss. They question him about his present
state, ask him where he is, what he is, what he is doing. He needs no
pressing; he at once declares himself astonished at the incredible
reality of that new world. He is very happy there, reforming himself,
condensing himself, so to speak, and gradually finding himself again.
The existence of the intelligence and of the will, disencumbered of
the body, is freer, lighter, of greater range and diffusion, but
continues very like what it was in the flesh. The environment is no
longer physical but spiritual; and there is a translation to another
plane rather than the break, the complete overthrow, the extraordinary
transitions which we are pleased to imagine. After all, is it not
fairly plausible? And are we not wrong in believing that death changes
everything, from one day to the next, and that there is a sudden and
inconceivable abyss between the hour which precedes decease and that
which follows it? Is it in conformity with the habits of nature? Is
the life-force which we carry within ourselves and which doubtless
cannot be extinguished, is that force to so great a degree crippled and
cramped by our body that, when it leaves this body, it becomes, then
and there, entirely different and unrecognizable?

But I must set a limit to speculation and, lest I exceed the limits of
this essay, I must pass by two or three revelations less striking than
that of the photograph, but pretty strange notwithstanding. Obviously,
it is not the first time that such manifestations have occurred; but
these are really of a higher quality than those which crowd several
volumes of the _Proceedings_. Do they furnish the proof for which we
ask? I do not think so; but will any one ever be able to supply us
with that compelling proof? What can the discarnate spirit do when
trying to establish that it continues to exist? If it speak to us of
the most secret, the most private incidents of a common past, we reply
that it is we who are reviving those memories within ourselves. If it
aim at convincing us by its description of the world beyond the grave,
not all the most glorious and unexpected pictures of that world which
it might trace are worth anything as evidence, for they cannot be
controlled. If we seek a proof by asking it to foretell the future, it
confesses that it does not know the future much better than we do,
which is likely enough, seeing that any knowledge of this kind implies
a sort of omniscience and consequently omnipotence which can hardly be
acquired in a moment. All that remains to it, therefore, is such little
snatches of evidence and uncertain attempts at proof as we find here.
It is not enough, I admit; for psychometry, that is to say, a similar
manifestation of clairvoyance between one living subconsciousness
and another, gives almost equally astonishing results. But here as
there these results show at least that we have around us wandering
intelligences, already enfranchised from the narrow and burdensome
laws of space and matter, that sometimes know things which we do not
know or no longer know. Do they emanate from ourselves, are they only
manifestations of faculties as yet unknown, or are they external,
objective and independent of ourselves? Are they merely alive in the
sense in which we speak of our bodies, or do they belong to bodies
which have ceased to exist? That is what we cannot yet decide; but it
must be acknowledged that, once we admit their existence, which at this
date is hardly contestable, it becomes much less difficult to agree
that they belong to the dead.

This at least may be said: if experiments such as these do not
demonstrate positively that the dead are able directly, manifestly
and almost materially to mingle with our existence and to remain in
touch with us, they prove that they continue to live in us much more
ardently, profoundly, personally and passionately than had hitherto
been believed; and that in itself is more than we dared hope.




BAD NEWS




