XI

THE RIDDLE OF PROGRESS


1

This war, which is one such as had never yet been waged upon this
earth of ours, leads us to consider the great problem of the future of
mankind.

Dare we hope that humanity will one day renounce these monstrous
follies and that they will become altogether impossible? To this
question, if we wish to meet it at its source, I see but one reply,
which I have already given elsewhere and which I will here recapitulate
and complete, namely, that we are engulfed in a universe which has no
more limit in time than it has in space, which had no beginning, as it
will have no end, and which has behind it as many myriads of myriads of
years as it discovers ahead of it. Yesterday’s eternity and to-morrow’s
are precisely identical. All that the universe is going to do it must
have already done, for it has had as many opportunities of doing so as
it will ever have. All the things that it has not done are things which
it will never be able to do, because nothing will be added, in space
or time, to what it has already possessed in space or time. It has
necessarily made in the past all the efforts and all the experiments
which it will make in the future; and all that has gone before, having
been subject to the same chances, is perforce the same as all that is
to follow.


2

It is probable, therefore, that there was once an infinity of worlds
similar to our own, even as it is likely that there is an infinity of
such similar worlds at present, the infinity of space being comparable
with that of time. These coincidences, however difficult for us to
picture, must inevitably occur and recur in the immeasurable and the
innumerous in which we are immersed, that is, unless the infinity of
possible combinations be less unlimited than those of time and space.

This is where our capacity of imagination halts, for it is easier for
us to conceive the infinities of space and time than the infinity of
combinations. To obtain some idea of the latter, we should have to
understand the substance and the nature, the laws and the forces, in a
word, the whole riddle of existence. None the less is it true that this
possible infinity of combinations is our only hope; without it there
would be nothing more to expect of a universe which obviously would
have tried and exhausted everything before our coming.

But, if this number of combinations is really infinite, it is open to
us to say that the earth is an experiment which had not yet been made
and an experiment which has failed, since suffering and evil have the
upper hand of happiness and goodness. If the experiment has failed,
we are its victims; but we are not forbidden to hope that our efforts
will in some way modify combinations which will be more fortunate in
other places or at another time. If the experiment has failed, it does
not follow that others have not succeeded and are not more fortunate,
at this very moment, in other worlds than ours. We may even suppose
that, in the infinity of these combinations and experiments, the most
successful tend to become fixed and crystallized and that, in view of
their infinite number, they will bring about successfully in the future
what they have not brought about successfully in the past. This is a
hazardous glimmer; but I doubt whether any others will be discovered to
keep us uplifted above despair.


3

Let us for a moment assume that the experiment of this world had not
miscarried as it has; that the mind of man, which, since the beginning,
has been struggling painfully against matter and winning but a few
brief, uncertain and precarious victories, were a million times more
powerful and better-armed. It would no doubt have triumphed over all
that weighs us down and keeps us where we are; it would have freed
itself from the apparently illusory fetters of space and time. It is
not unreasonable to admit that, among the myriads of worlds which
people the infinite, there are some in which these better conditions
are realized. Perhaps, after all, it would be impossible to imagine
anything that does not exist somewhere in reality, for we may very
rightly maintain that our imaginings can be nothing more than stray
reflections of things that already exist. Now, if we lived in one of
those worlds and if we could see, as we should perhaps be allowed
to see, all that is happening at this moment on the earth which we
now inhabit and on others which are perhaps even worse and more
unfortunate, it seems to us that we should know neither rest nor ease
until we had intervened and helped to make it better and wiser and more
habitable.


4

For that matter, no one can tell us that this is not so now and that
all our spiritual victories, all that seems, at certain moments, to
be leading us towards a future less hideous than the past, all the
mysterious currents of good that sometimes flow through our world, all
that awaits us after death, no one, I say, can tell us that all this is
not due to the intervention of one of those worlds. It is true that we
cannot perceive the act of intervention, that we are hardly sensible
of it; but it is also true that these creatures of a higher world,
being of necessity less encumbered with matter and more spiritual than
we, must necessarily remain invisible to us. In the infinity of the
firmament we discover myriads of worlds that are material worlds like
our own; and we are able to discover only these, because all that does
not more or less closely resemble our own world must needs escape us.
But the space lying between the stars, which to us appears void, is
infinitely wider than the space which they themselves occupy; and it
would be strange indeed if it were not filled with worlds which we
cannot perceive at all, or rather if it were not itself one vast world
which our eyes are incapable of taking in.

It is, moreover, thinkable that, if we do not see these other worlds,
they, not being material worlds, do not perceive matter and are
consequently as unaware of us as we are unaware of them; for we are
doubtless mistaken in believing that, because we are visible to one
another, we are necessarily visible to all other beings. On the
contrary, there is reason to presume that these spiritual beings pass
through us without suspecting our presence and that, as they are
conscious and sensible only of that which emanates from the spirit,
they do not suspect or discover our existence except in so far as we
approach the conditions in which they exist.


5

Consider the earth in its origin: at first, a shapeless nebula,
becoming gradually more and more condensed; next, a globe of fire, of
rocks in fusion, whirling for millions of years through space, with
no other object than that of forming into a mass and cooling: an
inconceivable incandescence, which none of our sources of heat can
enable us to picture; an essential, scientific, absolute barrenness
which may well have proclaimed itself irremediable and everlasting.
Who would have thought that from these torrents of matter in eruption,
which seemed to have destroyed for ever all life or the least germ of
life, there would emerge each and every form of life itself, from the
most enormous, the strongest, the most enduring, the most impetuous,
the most abundant, down to the slightest, the least visible, the most
precarious, the most ephemeral, the most exiguous? Who above all could
have dared foresee that they would give birth to what seems so utterly
alien to the liquefied or pasty rocks and metals that alone formed the
surface, the nucleus and the very entity of our globe, I mean our human
intelligence and consciousness?


6

Is it possible to imagine a more unexpected evolution and ending?
What could astonish us after so great an astonishment and what are
we not entitled to hope of a world which, after being what it was,
has produced what we see and what we are? Considering that it started
from a sort of negation of life, from integral barrenness and from
worse than nothing, in order to end in us, where will it not end after
starting from ourselves? If its birth and formation have elaborated
such prodigies, what prodigies may not its existence, its indefinite
prolongation and its dissolution hold in store for us? There are an
immeasurable distance and inconceivable transformations between the
one frightful material of the early days and the human thought of
this moment; and there will doubtless be a like distance and like
transformations as difficult to conceive between the thought of this
moment and that which will succeed it in the infinity of time.

It seems as if, in the beginning, our earth did not know what to do
with its material and with its force, which inter-devoured each other.
In the vast, flaming void in which it was being consumed, it had not
yet the shadow of an object or an idea; to-day, it has so many that
our scholars wear out their lives to no purpose in seeking them and
are overwhelmed by the number of its mysterious and inexhaustible
combinations.

At that time it disposed of but a single force, the most destructive
that we knew, fire. If everything was born of fire, which itself seemed
to be born only to destroy, what will not be born of that which seems
to be born only to produce, beget and multiply? If it was able to do so
much with the lava and the red-hot cinders which were the only elements
that it possessed, what will it not be able to do with all that it will
end by possessing?


7

It is well sometimes to tell ourselves that we are at least living in a
world which has not yet exhausted its future and which is much nearer
to its beginning than to its end. It was born only yesterday and has
but lately disentangled its original chaos. It is at the starting-point
of its hopes and its experiments. We believe that it is making for
death, whereas all its past, on the contrary, shows that it is much
more probably making for life. In any case, as its years pass by, the
quantity and still more the quality of the life which it engenders
and maintains tend to increase and to improve. It has given us only
the first-fruits of its miracles; and in all likelihood there is no
more connection between what it was and what it is than there will be
between what it is and what it will be. No doubt, when its greatest
marvels burst into being, we shall no longer possess the lives which
we possess to-day; but we shall still be there under another form, we
shall still be existing somewhere, on its surface or in its depths; and
it is not utterly improbable that one of its last prodigies will reach
us in our dust, awaken us and recall us to life, in order to impart to
us at last the share of happiness which we had not enjoyed and to teach
us that we were wrong not to interest ourselves, on the further side of
our graves, in the destiny of this earth of ours, of which we had never
ceased to be the immortal offspring.




THE TWO LOBES




