X

OF GAMBLING


1

_Paulo minora._ This essay, I need hardly say, consists of notes made
before the war and put in order now, at a time when victory allows our
thoughts to stray for a moment from the great tragedy in which the
destinies of mankind have been at stake. For the rest, the subject,
however frivolous it may at first sight appear, sometimes touches or
seems to touch problems which it is not unfitting to examine, were
it only to realize that they are perhaps illusive. Moreover it is
unfortunately probable that, when peace is restored, our allies will
visit in too numerous and confiding crowds the dubious havens of
delight which we are about to enter. I have no pretension to serve them
as a guide nor to teach them how to fight against the whims of fortune;
but a handful of them may find in these lines, if not useful hints or
profitable advice, at least some few reflections or observations which
will pave the way for their own experiments or render them easier.


2

Let us then pay a last visit to one of those green tables which spread
their length in the somewhat disreputable place of which I have written
elsewhere[2] as the “Temple of Chance.” To-day I would rather call
it the Factory of Chance, for it is here that, for more than half a
century, without respite or repose, on weekdays, Sundays and holidays
alike, daily from ten o’clock in the morning till twelve o’clock at
night, with croupiers unintermittently relieving one another, men have
obstinately manufactured Chance and doggedly consulted the formless and
featureless god that shrouds good luck and ill within his shadow.

We do not yet know what he is nor what he wants; we are not even sure
that he exists; but surely it would be astonishing if no result of any
kind, no clue to the tantalizing puzzle, had emerged from this endless
effort, the most gigantic, the most costly, the most methodical that
has ever been made on the brink of this gloomy abyss, if nothing had
been born of all this furious work, however trivial, however unhealthy
and useless it may appear.

In any case, at these tables, as at all places where passions become
intensified, we are able to make interesting observations and, among
other things, to behold at first hand, violently foreshortened and
harshly illuminated, certain aspects of man’s lifelong struggle with
the unknown. The drama, which as a rule is long drawn out, projecting
itself into space and time and breaking up amid circumstances that
escape our eyes, is here knit together, gathered into a ball, held,
so to speak, in the hollow of the hand. But, for all its speed, its
abruptness of movement and its extreme compression, it remains as
complex and mysterious as those which go on indefinitely. Until the
ivory ball that rolls and hops around the wheel falls into its red or
black compartment, the unknown veiling its choice or its destiny is as
impenetrable as that which hides from us the choice or the destiny of
the stars. The movements of the planets can be calculated almost to a
second; but no mathematical operation can measure or predict the course
of the little white ball.

Your most skilful players, indeed, have given up trying. Not one of
them any longer seriously relies on intuition, presentiment, second
sight, telepathy, psychic forces or the calculation of probabilities
in the attempt to foresee or determine the fall of a destiny no larger
than a hazel-nut. All the scientific part of human knowledge has
failed; and all the occult and magical side of that same knowledge has
been equally unsuccessful. The mathematicians, the prophets, the seers,
the sorcerers, the sensitives, the mediums, the psychometrists, the
spiritualists who call upon the dead for assistance, all alike are
blind, confounded and impotent before the wheel and before Destiny’s
thirty-seven compartments. Here Chance reigns supreme; and hitherto,
though it all happens before our eyes, though it is repeated to satiety
and may be held, let me say once more, in the hollow of our hand, no
one has yet been able to determine a single one of its laws.


3

Yet such laws seem to exist; and thousands of players have ruined
themselves in following their forms or their elusive and deceptive
traces. Let us take a bundle of those records or _permanences_,
published at Monte Carlo, which give day by day the list of
all the numbers that have come up at one of the roulette or
_trente-et-quarante_ tables. As everybody knows, these numbers are
arranged in long parallel columns, the black on the left and the red
on the right. When we look at one of these sheets, containing as a
rule ten columns of sixty-five numbers each--dead and harmless cyphers
now, though once so dangerous, once destructive of so many hopes and
perhaps inspiring more than one disaster--we observe a tendency towards
a fairly perceptible equilibrium between the red and the black. Most
often the two chances balance each other, singly or in little groups,
a black, a red, two blacks, three reds, three blacks, two reds and so
on. When we come upon a series of five, six, seven, eight, sometimes
eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve consecutive blacks, we are almost
certain of finding not far away a compensating series of five, six,
seven, eight or ten reds. There is a very real rhythm, a sort of
breathing or a cadenced movement to and fro of the mysterious creature
which we call Chance. This rhythm or balance is moreover confirmed by
the final statistics of the day, from which we learn that, in a total
of six hundred and so many spins of the ball, the difference between
the black and the red very seldom exceeds twenty or thirty; and this
difference is even smaller in the total for the week, that is to say,
in a total of nearly five thousand spins, when it is usually reduced to
a few units.


4

The monster has other strange habits. We see, for instance, that it is
not uncommon for a number to come up twice in succession; and it is
undeniable that, in each day’s play, two or three numbers are obviously
favoured, so much so that we may hurl out a challenge to logic and
declare that the more frequently a number occurs the more chances it
has of reappearing. This seems to conflict with the law of equilibrium
which we have remarked; but it must be observed that this equilibrium
will be recovered later, that by the end of the week the difference
will no longer be very great and that they will almost disappear when
the month is over. The equilibrium is more slowly restored because we
must multiply the number of series by eighteen and a half to reach the
proportions of the even chances.

Players note yet another law which, for that matter, is but a corollary
of the former habit, but which has something curiously human about it:
the chances which lag behind show a greater eagerness to regain their
lost ground at the moment that follows more or less closely upon a
halt, as though they had recovered their breath after a brief rest on
the landing of a staircase.

Let us add at once that it is wise to distrust these fluctuating habits
and these gropings after laws. For instance, red has been known to beat
black by seventy per cent. in the course of a day’s play. Black, on
the other hand, as people still remember at Monte Carlo, one day came
up twenty-nine times in succession and the second dozen twenty-eight
times without a break. Chance has not our nerves; it is not, like us,
impatient to make good its losses or to carry off its gains. It takes
its time, awaits its hour and does not trouble to keep step with our
ways of life.


5

Players as a rule attribute these habits or caprices to a trick of the
croupier’s hand. This is hardly tenable. After all, we know how the
thing is done. The ball drops into its compartment and the croupier
announces, for instance:

“13, black, _impair_ and manque.”

The losses are raked in, the winnings are paid out, the players renew
their stakes, there is sometimes a brief dispute, somebody asks for
change and so on. These operations vary a good deal in length; and
all this time the wheel carrying the ball is making hundreds of
revolutions. The croupier stops it at last, takes the ball, reverses
the wheel and sends the ball spinning in the opposite direction. It is
impossible under these conditions for his particular trick of the hand
to exercise any influence whatever. Besides, we can easily see from
the chart of the _permanences_ that the change of croupier does not
perceptibly affect the rhythm of the even chances. It is not the man
who controls the rhythm but the rhythm that controls the man.


6

These gropings after laws in what would seem a negation of all or any
law; these strivings on the part of Chance to quit its own domain
and to organize its chaos; this god who denies himself and seeks to
destroy himself by his own hand; these incomprehensible stammerings,
these awkward efforts to achieve utterance and assume consciousness are
rather curious, we must admit. For the rest, it is these efforts, these
hankerings after equilibrium, this embryonic rhythm that constitute
the gamblers’ good and bad luck. If Chance were simply Chance as we
conceive it on first principles, one would stake any sum anyhow and
at any moment. I am well aware that, according to the most learned
theorists on roulette, each _coup_ is independent of all the others
and begins as if nothing had happened before, as if nothing were to
happen afterwards, as if the table were fresh from the shop, the wheel
from the factory and the croupier from the hands of God. In theory
this is quite accurate; but we have just seen that in practice it does
not seem to be so. For that matter, it seems impossible to explain the
reason. Players are satisfied to observe the fact, while yielding to
a dangerous but very human tendency to exaggerate the scope and the
certainty of their observations.

They are too ready to see laws where there is only a mass of
coincidences as fleeting as clouds. It is of course necessary that
the reds and blacks, emerging successively from nowhere, should find
a place somewhere and form certain groups; and, if it is rather
surprising that at the end of the month their numbers are nearly equal,
it would be no less surprising if one of the colours were to prevail
largely over the other. It is perfectly true that, at first sight, the
reds and blacks seem to balance on the _permanence_ sheets; but it is
also true that, when we examine more closely, a series of five or six
reds, for instance, interrupted by one or two blacks, not infrequently
begins a fresh run; and ill-luck may well have it that, at this moment,
the player, in his search for equilibrium, will start punting on the
black and in a few _coups_ behold the disappearance of all the winnings
slowly and laboriously wrested from Chance, which is niggardly when one
is winning and extremely generous--to the bank--when one is losing. For
that matter, he will suffer the same disappointment if he bets on the
variation, in other words, against the equilibrium, and will too often
discover that these laws, when he puts his trust in them, are writ in
water, whereas they seem to be graven in bronze so soon as they betray
him.


7

In order to profit by these laws, which are perhaps fallacious and in
any case untrustworthy, and to secure himself against their treachery,
he has contrived a host of ingenious systems which sometimes enable him
to win but most often merely retard his ruin.

But, before speaking of these systems, let us begin by saying that
we shall concern ourselves here only with the even chances, red or
black, _pair_ or _impair_, _passe_ or _manque_. These are sufficiently
complicated in themselves and set us problems that would be enough
to exhaust all the shrewdness of a human life. As for any other than
the even chances, _en plein_, _à cheval_, _transversales_, _carrés_,
_douzaines_ and so forth, these, both in theory and in practice, escape
all control, calculation or explanation.

Whatever system he adopt, the gambler is always tossing heads or tails
against the bank. He has a chance and the bank has a chance; but zero
gives the bank odds against him; and, though zero is apparently a very
mild tax, since at _rouge-et-noir_ in thirty-six chances the bank has
only half a chance more than the player, it is bound to be ruinous in
the end. To escape the abruptness of a decision which, if he placed
all that he possessed on the red or the black, would end the game at a
single stroke, the player divides his stake, so as to be able to defy a
large number of chances, hoping that, thanks to a skilfully graduated
progression, he will end by lighting on a favourable series in which
the gains will exceed the losses. This is the underlying principle of
all the systems, which are never anything but more or less ingenious,
prudent and complicated martingales. There are not, there never will be
any others, in the absence of a miracle which has not yet occurred, of
an intuition which foresees what the ball will decide, or of an unknown
force which will oblige it to act as a player wishes.


8

I have no intention of reviewing all these systems, which are
innumerable and of unequal value: the _paroli_ pure and simple, that
artless, violent, doubled stake which leads straight to disaster;
the D’Alembert and all its variants; the descending progressions; the
differential methods; the _montant belge_; the _parolis intermittents_;
the snowball; the _photographie_; the staking of equal amounts on
certain groups of figures, which is a Chinese puzzle demanding days
of patient observation before it is attacked; and many others which I
forget, from the most clear-cut to the most mysterious, which are sold
at a high price, to credulous beginners, in sealed envelopes containing
what is everybody’s secret and with all or nearly all of which I
have become acquainted thanks to the kindness of an erudite player.
A detailed account of those most frequently used will be found in
D’Albigny’s treatise _Les Martingales modernes_, in Gaston Vessillier’s
_Théorie des systèmes géométriques_, in Hulmann’s _Traité des jeux
dits de hasard_, in Théo d’Alost’s _Théorie scientifique nouvelle des
jeux de la roulette, trente-et-quarante, etc._, and, above all, in the
_Revue de Monte Carlo_, which has given a system in every issue since
the day of its foundation some fifteen years ago.

Whether mystic or transparent, all these methods present more or less
the same dangers, being all founded on the quicksands of equilibrium
and temporary disturbance. If they are very cautious, the loss is
trifling, but the gain is still smaller; if they are bold, the gain is
great, but the loss is two or three times greater. The best of them,
in order to continue the defence of a moderate stake and of what has
already been sacrificed, involve the risking on the cloth, at a given
moment, of all the previous winnings, which are soon followed by the
sums held in reserve. This is the inevitable revenge of the bank, at
which you thought that you were nibbling with impunity, but which
suddenly opens wide its jaws, like a blind and drowsy crocodile, and
swallows profits and capital at a single gulp.


9

The players hearten themselves by maintaining that they have an
incontestable advantage over the bank. They begin to play, they “punt”
when they like and as they like and they withdraw when they please,
whereas the bank is compelled to play without stopping, to accept every
stake and to meet every _coup_ up to the limit of the maximum, which,
as we know, is six thousand francs on the even chances. This advantage
is a real one if the player, after winning a big sum, goes away and
does not come back again. But the lucky gambler, even more infallibly
than the one who has no luck, will return to the enchanted table and
in so doing loses the only elective weapon that he had against his
enemy. To choose your time for punting is but an illusory privilege,
because everything, at any moment, is equally shifting and uncertain;
and you never know beforehand when the precarious and deceptive law of
equilibrium will reassert itself. After a long sequence of blacks, you
wager on a fine series of reds, a certain run, you would say; but no
sooner have you staked your money than the series gives up the ghost
and remorseless black resumes its devastating course; or else you do
the opposite: you bet on black and it is red that settles down for a
run. At whatever moment you start punting, you are always fighting
red against black, that is to say, one to one. Once more, the only
real advantage is that you can go away when you like; but where is the
gambler, whether losing or winning, who is able to go away and not come
back?


10

After mature examination, all these systems merely carve the brutal
and crushing mass of luck into small pieces. They act as a defensive
padding against the blows of Chance, making them less grave. They
prolong the player’s life or his agony. They enable the owner of a
modest purse to stake as often as the multimillionaire, who would
confine himself to betting double or quits indefinitely, if he were
not stopped by the fatal barrier of the maximum. But all mathematical
operations, all combinations of figures flutter and struggle like
blind captives between bronze walls. They merely dash themselves
in vain against these walls, whether black or red: both remain
invulnerable and impregnable; and from their imprisoning embrace there
is no escape.


11

Does this mean that there is no such thing as a defensible method
and that the most skilful calculations have not revealed a means of
defeating Chance? In theory, I cannot bring myself to believe that
baseless calculations will ever do what they have not done up to the
present. It is none the less true that, in practice, we come upon
some which struggle with fair success against ill-luck. For instance,
a friend of mine, a British officer, has a system which he has been
using for a long time and which yields astonishing results. It is, of
course, a progression, the whole of whose virtue lies in an ingenious
and very simple key that seems to act as a sort of talisman. I have
not found this method in any of either the recognized or the catchpenny
treatises. It has its dangers, like the others; it has its difficult
moments, when, to save your anticipated profits and your earlier
losses, you have to risk a rather large amount. But, if you prudently
stop playing during runs which are too obstinately hostile, if you
allow the storm to pass as it spreads over a large number of chances,
you end by obtaining the necessary compensation. At any rate, it has
never seriously failed my friend so far.


12

Nevertheless it must not be supposed that we have only to use this
system blindly and automatically. As with other systems, a certain
science, a certain experience, a certain deftness are indispensable.
Though science and experience are evasive qualities here, fugitive and
at the mercy of Chance, they are by no means illusory. The careful and
experienced player understands how to approach and nurse his luck, or
at least how not to thwart it. He guesses the beginning and the end
of a favourable series. He foresees alternations and intermittences;
and, when he does not succeed in grasping their rhythm, he prefers
to abstain from playing, rather than encounter them inopportunely.
He makes more than one mistake, but makes far fewer than those who,
faithful to the very scientific theory of the absolute independence of
each _coup_, back either colour at any moment. He does not surrender
to the fixed rigidity of logic, he does not throw the gauntlet down to
fate, he does not defy the animosity of fortune. He is never obstinate.
He does not struggle on, sullenly, to his last coin, against an
iniquitous run, in order to gain the bitter satisfaction of learning
the utmost depths of his ill-luck and the injustice of fate. He has
no self-conceit, no prejudices, no inflexible opinions. He is docile,
plastic and accommodating. Devoid of all false shame, he cheerfully
abandons his pretensions and pays court to fortune. He retraces his
steps and retracts at fitting times. He stops, starts afresh, yields,
tacks about, allows himself to be borne upon the tide and comes safely
to harbour, while the arrogant, overbold and headstrong pilot founders
in deep water.

Beyond all else, he studies the character and temper of the table at
which he takes his seat, for each table has its psychology, its habits,
its history, which vary from day to day and yet by the end of the year
form a homogeneous whole wherein all temporary errors, all anomalies
and injustices are compensated. The question is to know on what page
of this history he should prepare to play his part. He will not learn
this at once. It is of little use for him to peep at the notes and
_permanences_ of the players who have come before him. What he wants is
the immediate contact, the very breath of the hidden god. But the god
is already thrilling into life, taking shape and countenance, giving
a whispered hint of his intentions, speaking words of approval or
condemnation; and the tragic struggle begins between the player, so
infinitely small, and Chance, so enormous and omnipotent.


13

Now that the battle is joined, now that the player has done what he
could to summon and welcome luck, there is nothing left for him to do
but wait; for luck, when all is said, will remain the supreme power
that pronounces the final verdict, the formidable and inevitable
unknown factor in every combination. The best of systems cannot
overcome an abnormal and pitiless run of bad luck which makes you stake
incessantly on the losing colour. A run like this, without favourable
intermittences, is extremely rare but always possible. It corresponds,
for that matter, with the extraordinary strokes of good luck, which
seem more frequent only because they attract more attention. From time
to time we see a man, or rather let me say a woman--for it is nearly
always female players who have these inspirations--walk up to the
table and with a high hand and not the least hesitation gamble _en
plein_ or _en cheval_, on a _transversale_ or _carré_, and win time
after time, as though she saw beforehand where the ball would fall.
These moments of intuition are always very brief; and, if the player
insists or grows stubborn, she will soon lose whatever she has won.
It is none the less true that, when we observe this very obvious and
striking phenomenon, we wonder whether there is not something more in
it than mere coincidence. When all is said, can luck be anything other
than a passing and dazzling intuition of what will flash into actuality
before everybody’s eyes a second later? Is not the compartment which
does not yet contain the little ball, but which in an instant will snap
it up and hold it, is not this compartment already, somewhere, a thing
of the present and even of the past? But these are questions which
would lead us too far afield in space and time.


14

Be this as it may, to return to the system of which we were speaking,
even if I were at liberty to divulge its secret I should not do so.
I am not a very austere moralist and I look upon gambling as one of
those profoundly human evils which we shall never be able to uproot
and which, for all our efforts, will always reappear in a new form.
Still, the least that we can do is not to encourage it. The gambler, I
mean the inveterate, almost professional gambler, is not interesting.
To begin with, he is an idler and nearly always a part of the world’s
flotsam, with no justification for his existence. If he be rich, he
is making the most foolish, the most dismal use of his money that can
be imagined. If he be poor, he is even less easily to be forgiven: he
should know better than to sacrifice his days and too often the welfare
and the peace of mind of those dependent on him to a will-o’-the-wisp.
Underlying the gambler we find too often a sluggard, an incompetent,
a boneless egoist, greedy of vulgar and unmerited pleasures, a
dissatisfied and inefficient individual. Gambling is the stay-at-home,
imaginary, squalid, mechanical, anæmic and unlovely adventure of those
who have never been able to encounter or create the real, necessary
and salutary adventures of life. It is the feverish and unhealthy
activity of the wastrel. It is the purposeless and desperate effort of
the debilitated, who no longer possess or never possessed the courage
and patience to make the honest, persevering effort, the unspasmodic,
unapplauded effort which every human life demands.

There is also a great deal of puerile vanity about the gambler. Taken
for all in all, he is a child still seeking his place in the universe.
He has not yet realized his position. He thinks himself peerless in the
face of destiny. In his self-infatuation he expects the unknown or the
unknowable to do for him what it does not do for any one whomsoever.
And he expects this for no reason, simply because he is himself and
because others have not that privilege. He must tempt fate incessantly,
hurriedly, anxiously, in I know not what idle and pretentious hope of
learning to know himself from without. Whatever fortune’s decision
may be, he will find cause for preening himself. If he have no luck,
he will feel flattered because he is specially persecuted by fortune;
if he be lucky, he will think all the more highly of himself because
of the exceptional gifts which she bestows upon him. For the rest, he
does not need to believe that he deserves these gifts; on the contrary,
the less right he has to them, the prouder he will be of them; and the
unjust and manifestly undeserved chance which makes them his will form
the best part of the vainglorious satisfaction which he will contrive
to extract from them.


15

It would be extremely surprising, I said when I began, if this
indefatigable and exhaustive enquiry into Chance, pursued for over
fifty years, had failed to yield some sort of result. I am wondering,
at the end of this investigation, what that result is. At the cost of
an insane waste of money, time, physical, nervous and moral energy and
spiritual forces perhaps more precious still, it has taught us that
Chance is in short Chance, that is to say, an aggregate of effects
whereof we do not know the causes. But we knew as much as this before;
and our new discovery is a little derisory. We have seen the shadowy
appearance of certain laws or habits from which a few players appear
to derive advantage, though this advantage is always precarious. But
these apparent laws, which tend obscurely and uncertainly to instil a
little order into Chance, are, like Chance itself, but inconsistent
and ephemeral summaries of results from unknown causes. Upon the whole
we have learnt nothing, unless perhaps it be that we were wrong to
attach greater importance to those manifestations of destiny than
they possess. If we look at them more closely, we find that there is
nothing more behind all these catastrophes and all these mysteries of
luck than the catastrophe and the mysteries which we put there. We link
our fate to the fate of a little ball which is not responsible for it;
and, because we entrust it for a moment with our fortune, we fondly
imagine that mysterious moral powers are bent on directing and ending
its course at the right or wrong moment. It knows nothing of all this;
and, though the lives of thousands of men depended on its fall to the
right or the left of the point at which it stops, it would not care. It
has laws of its own, which it must obey and which are so complex that
we do not even try to explain them. It is just a little ball, honestly
seeking the little red or black hole in which to go to sleep and having
nothing very much to tell us of the secrets of a luck or destiny which
exist only within ourselves.




THE RIDDLE OF PROGRESS




