III

BAD NEWS


1

For more than four years, evil tidings passed night and day over almost
half the world of men. Never since our earth came into being were they
known to spread in crowds so dense and busy and commanding. In the
happy days of peace, we would come upon the gloomy visitants here and
there, travelling over hill and dale, nearly always alone, sometimes in
couples, rarely in companies of three, timid and shy, seeking to pass
unnoticed and humbly undertaking the smallest messages of sorrow that
destiny confided to their charge. Now they go with heads erect; they
are almost arrogant; and swollen with their importance, they neglect
any misfortunes that are not deathly. They encumber the roads, cross
the seas and rivers, invade the streets, do not forget the by-ways and
climb the most rugged and stony tracks. There is not a hovel cowering
in the dingiest and most obscure suburb of a great city, not a cottage
hidden in the recesses of the poorest hamlet of the most inaccessible
mountain, which escapes their search and towards which one of them,
detached from the sinister band, does not hasten with its little
footstep, eager, pitiless and sure. Each has its goal whence nothing
can divert it. Through time and space, over rocks and walls they press
onward, swift and determined, blind and deaf to all that would retard
them, thinking only of fulfilling their duty, which is to announce as
soon as may be to the most sensitive and defenceless heart the greatest
sorrow that can fall upon it.


2

We watch them pass as emissaries of destiny. To us they seem as fatal
as the very misfortune of which they are but the heralds; and no one
dreams of barring the way before them. So soon as one of them arrives,
all unexpected, in our midst, we leave everything, we rush forward, we
gather round it. Almost a religious fear compasses it about; we whisper
reverently; and we should bow no lower in the presence of a messenger
of God. Not only would no one dare to contradict it, or advise it, or
beg it to be patient, to grant a few hours of respite, to hide in the
darkness or to arrive by a longer road; on the contrary, all compete in
offering it zealous if humble service. The most compassionate, the most
pitiful are the most assiduous and obsequious, as though there were no
duty more unmistakable, no act of charity more meritorious than to lead
the dark envoy by the shortest and the quickest way to the heart which
it is to strike.


3

Once again, we are here confounding that which belongs to destiny with
that which belongs to ourselves. The misfortune was perhaps not to be
avoided; but a great part of the sorrows that attend it remain in our
power. It is for us to be careful of them, to direct them, to subdue
them, disarm them, delay them, turn them aside and sometimes even to
stop them altogether.

In effect, we hardly yet know the psychology of sorrow, which is as
deep, as complex and as worthy of study as the passions to which
we devote so much of our time. In everyday life, it is true, great
sorrows, though not so rare as we could have wished, were nevertheless
too widely scattered for us to study them easily, step by step. To-day,
alas, they are the ground of all our thoughts; and we are learning
at last that, even as love or happiness or vanity, they have their
secrets, their habits, their illusions, their sophistries, their dark
corners, their baffling mazes and their unforeseen abysses; for man,
whether he love or rejoice or weep, remains ever constant to himself!

It is not true, as we too willingly agree, that, since unhappiness
must be known sooner or later, our only duty is to reveal it at the
earliest moment, for the sorrow that is yet green is very different
from the sorrow that is already fading. It is not true, as we admit
without question, that anything is better than ignorance or uncertainty
and that there is a sort of cowardice in not forthwith announcing the
bad news which we know to those whom it must prostrate in the dust. On
the contrary, cowardice lies in ridding ourselves of the bad news as
quickly as we may and in not bearing its whole burden, secretly and
alone, as long as we are able. When the bad news arrives, our first
duty is to set it apart, to prevent it from spreading, to master it as
we would a malefactor or a stalking pestilence, to close all means of
escape, to mount guard over it, so that it cannot break forth and do
harm. Our duty is not merely, as the best of us and the most prudent
seem to believe, to usher in the bad news with a thousand precautions,
with short and muffled, sidelong and measured steps, by the back-door,
into the dwelling which it is to devastate; rather is it our duty
definitely to forbid its entrance and to have the courage to chain it
in our own dwelling, which it will fill with unjust and insupportable
reproaches and upbraidings. Instead of making ourselves the easy echo
of its cries, we should think only of stifling its voice. Each hour
that we thus pass in restless and painful intimacy with the hateful
prisoner is an hour of suffering which we accept for ourselves and
which we spare the victim of fate. It is almost certain that the
malignant recluse will end by escaping our vigilance; but here the very
minutes have their value and there is no gain, however small, that we
are entitled to neglect. The hour-glass that measures the phases of
sorrow is much finer and truer than that which marks the stages of
pleasure. The time that passes between the death of one whom we love
and the moment when we hear of his death is as full of pain as it is
of days. Most to be feared of all is the first blow of misfortune;
it is then that the heart is smitten and torn with a wound that will
never heal. But this blow has not its shattering and sometimes mortal
force unless it strike its victim at once and, so to speak, fresh from
the event. Every hour that is interposed deadens the sting and lessens
its virulence. A death already some weeks old no longer wears the
same face as that which is made known on the very day when it occurs;
and, if a few months have covered it, it is no longer a death, it has
become a memory. The days that divide us from it have almost the same
value whether they pass before we hear of it or afterwards. They remove
beforehand from the eyes and heart the blinding horror of the loss;
they step forward and draw it out of the clutch of madness into a past
like that which softens regret. They weave a sort of retrospective
memory which stretches into the past and grants straightway all that
true memory would have given little by little, hour by hour, during
the long months that part the first despair from the sorrow which grows
wise and reconciled and ready to hope anew.




THE SOUL OF NATIONS




