VII

WASTED BEAUTIES


1

Under the grey skies and the disheartening rains of this autumnal July,
I think of the light which I have left behind me. I have left it down
there, on the now empty shores of the Mediterranean, and I ask myself
in vain why I parted from it. Yet I was one of the last to tear myself
away. All the others leave in the early days of April, recalled by
legendary memories of the deceitful spring-tides of the north, nor do
they realize that they are losing a great happiness.

It is good, it is wise to escape, amid the blue of sea and sky, the
icy months of our winters, dismal as punishment; but, although in the
south these months are warmer and above all more luminous than ours,
they do not quite make up to us for the darkness and the frost of our
native climes. The brightest and warmest hours, in spite of all,
retain an after-taste of cloud and snow; they are beautiful, but timid;
swiftly and fearfully they hasten towards the night. Now man, who is
born of the sun, like all things, has need of his hereditary portion of
primitive heat and all-pervading light. He has within him numberless
deep-seated cells which retain the memory of the resplendent days of
the prime and become unhappy when they cannot reap their harvest of
rays. Man can live in the gloom, but at long last he loses the smile
and the confidence that are so essential. Because of our twilit summers
it becomes indispensable to restore the balance between darkness and
light and sometimes to drive away, by superb excesses of sunshine, the
cold and the dark that invade our very souls.


2

It reigns at a few hours’ distance from us, the incomparable steady sun
which we no longer see. Those who leave before mid-June do not know
what happens when they are gone. Lo and behold, the real actors in this
wonderful fairyland spring up on every side as though they had been
awaiting the departure of intruding and mocking witnesses. During the
winter, in the presence of the official visitors, they have played but
a tempered prologue, a little colourless, a little slow, a little timid
and restrained. But now of a sudden the great lyrical acts blaze forth
upon the intoxicated earth.

The heavens open their vistas to the uttermost limits of the blue, to
the supreme heights where the glory and rapture of God are outspread;
and all the flowers rend the gardens, the rocks and the heaths, to
uplift themselves and leap towards the gulf of gladness which draws
them into space. The camomiles have gone mad; for six weeks they
hold outstretched, to invisible lovers, their great round clusters
like shields of glowing snow. The scarlet, tumultuous mantle of the
Bougainvilleas blinds the houses whose dazzled windows blink amid
the flames. The yellow roses cover the hills with a saffron-coloured
cloak; the pink roses, of the lovely, innocent pink of maiden blushes,
flood the valleys, as though the divine well-springs of the dawn, which
elaborate the ideal flesh of women and angels, had overflowed the
earth. Others climb the trees, scale pillars, columns, house-fronts,
porches, leap up and fall, rise again and multiply, jostle one
another, lie one on top of the other, forming so many bunches of
effervescing delight, so many silent swarms of impassioned petals.
And the innumerable, diverse and imperious scents that flow through
this ocean of mirth, like rivers which do not mingle, rivers whose
source we recognize at every breath! Here is the cold, green torrent
of the rose-geranium, the trickle of clove-carnations, the bright,
limpid stream of lavender, the resinous eddy of the pine-barren and
the wide, still, luscious lake, of an all but dizzy sweetness, of the
orange-blossom, which drowns the country-side in the vast, unmeasured
fragrance of the azure heavens, recognized at last.


3

I do not believe that the world contains anything more beautiful
than those gardens and valleys of the Provençal coast during the six
or seven weeks when departing spring still mingles its verdure with
the first warmth of advancing summer. But what gives this wonderful
exultation of nature a melancholy which we do not find in any other
spot is the inhuman and almost painful solitude in which it is
revealed. Here, amid this desert, this silence, this emptiness, from
the vine-arbours to the terraces and from the terraces to the porches
of a thousand abandoned villas, reigns a rivalry of beauty which
reaches a poignant agony of intensity, exhausting every energy, form
and colour. There is here a sort of magic password, as though all the
powers of grace and splendour that nature holds concealed had united
to give at the same moment, to a spectator unknown to men, one great,
decisive proof of the blessings and the glories of the earth. There is
here a sort of unparalleled expectation, awful and unendurable, which
over the hedges, the gates and the walls watches for the coming of a
mighty god; an ecstatic silence which demands a supernatural presence;
a wild, exasperated impatience pouring from every side over the roads
where nothing now passes save the mute and diaphanous procession of the
hours.


4

Alas, how many beauties are wasted in this world! Here is enough to
feed our eyes till death! Here is the wherewithal to gather memories
which would support our souls even to the tomb! Here is that which
would provide thousands of hearts with the supreme sustenance of life!

In the main, when we come to think of it, all that is best in us, all
that is pure, happy and limpid in our intelligence and our feelings,
has its origin in a few beautiful spectacles. If we had never seen
beautiful things, we should possess only poor and ugly images
wherewith to clothe our ideas and emotions, which would perish of cold
and wretchedness like those of the blind. The great highway which
climbs from the plains of existence to the radiant heights of human
consciousness would be so gloomy, so bare and so deserted that our
thoughts would very soon lack the strength and courage to tread it; and
where our thoughts no longer pass it is not long before the briars and
the cruel horrors of the forest return. A beautiful spectacle which we
might have seen, which was ours, which seemed to call us and from which
we fled can never be replaced. Nothing more can grow in the spot where
it awaited us. It leaves in our soul a great barren area, in which we
shall find naught but thorns on the day when we most need roses. Our
thoughts and our actions derive their energy and their shape from the
things which our eyes have beheld. Between the heroic deed, the duty
accomplished, the sacrifice generously accepted and the beautiful
landscape which we have seen in the past there is very often a closer
and more vital connection than that which our memory has retained. The
more we see of beautiful things the better fitted we become to perform
good actions. If our inner life is to thrive, we need a magnificent
store of wonderful spoils.




THE INSECT WORLD




