XV

HEREDITY AND PREEXISTENCE


1

The law of heredity which insists that the descendants shall suffer
by the faults and profit by the virtues of their ancestors comprises
truths that are no longer disputed. They shine forth, visible to the
eyes of all. The child of a drunkard will bear the burden of his
father’s vice all his life long, from the day of his birth to that of
his death, in body and in mind. One might say that by this irrefutable
example nature had intended ostentatiously to affirm and manifest
the implacable character of her law, as though to make us understand
that she takes no account whatever of our conceptions of justice and
injustice and that she acts on an unvarying principle in all the
obscure circumstances in which we cannot follow the inextricable
windings of her will. This example, if we had no other, would be enough
to brand that inhuman will with infamy. There is no law more repugnant
to our reason, to our sense of responsibility, nor one which does a
deeper injury to our trust in the universe and the unknown spirit
that rules it. Of all life’s injustices, this is the most glaring and
the least comprehensible. For most of the others we find excuses or
explanations; but, when we remember that a new-born child, a child
which did not ask to be born, is, from the moment of inhaling its first
breath of air, smitten with irremediable insolvency, with a ferocious,
irrevocable sentence and with evils which it will drag to the grave, it
seems to us that not one of the most hateful tyrants that history has
cursed would have dared to do what nature does quietly every day.

But do we really bear the burden of the errors of the dead? In the
first place, is it quite certain that the dead are really dead and no
longer dwell within us? It is a fact that we continue them, that we
are the durable part of what they were. We cannot deny that we are
still subject to their influence, that we reproduce their features and
their characters, that we represent them almost entirely, that they
continue to live and to act in us; it is therefore very natural that
they also should continue to bear the consequences of an action or a
way of living which their departure has not interrupted.

“But,” you may say, “I had no part in this action, this habit, this
vice for which I am paying to-day. I was not consulted; I had no
opportunity of uttering a protest, of checking my father, or my
grandfather, as he went to his ruin down the fatal precipice. I was not
born; I did not yet exist!”

How do you know? May there not be a fundamental mistake in the idea
of heredity as we conceive it? At one end of the beam of those scales
which we accuse of injustice hangs heredity, but the other is borne
down by something different, which we have never taken into account,
for it has not yet a name, something which is the antithesis of
heredity, which cleaves into the future instead of emerging from the
past and which we might call preexistence or prenatality.

Even as our dead still live in us, so we have already lived in them.
There is no reason to believe that the future, which is full of life,
is less active and less potent than the past, which is full of the
dead. Instead of descending, should we not rather ascend the course of
the years to discover the source of our actions?

We know not in what fashion those already dwell in us who shall be
born of us, down to the last generation; but that they do dwell in us
is certain. Whatever the number of our descendants, in the sequence of
the ages, whatever the transformations which the elements, climates,
countries and centuries may cause them to undergo, they will keep
intact, through all vicissitudes, the principle of life which they have
derived from us. They have not obtained it elsewhere or they could not
be what they are. They have really issued from us; and, if they have
issued from us, it is because they were in us from the first. What were
they doing within us, all these innumerable, accumulated lives? Is it
permissible to suppose that they were absolutely inactive? Then what
were their functions, what their power? What divided them from us? When
did we begin, where did they end? At what point did their thoughts and
their desires mingle with ours?

“How could they think and act in us,” you ask, “having as yet no brain?”

True; but they had ours. The dead too are without a brain; nevertheless
no one will deny that they continue to think and act in us. This brain
of which we are so proud is not the source but the condenser of thought
and will. Like the Leyden jar or the Ruhmkorff coil, it exists, it is
animated only so long as the electric fluid of life passes through it
or resides in it. It does not produce this fluid, it collects it;
what matters is not its convolutions, which may be compared with the
windings of an induction-coil, but the life that flows through it; and
what can this life be, if it be not the sum of all the existences which
are accumulated within us, which are not extinguished at our death,
which begin before our birth and which continue us, forwards, and
backwards, into the infinity of time?


2

Writers of essays and novels have at times endeavoured to represent
these diverse lives which we harbour within us; and each of us, if he
question himself sincerely and profoundly, will discover in himself
two or three clearly-defined types, which have nothing in common but
the body in which they reside, which rarely agree among themselves,
which are incessantly striving to gain the upper hand and which put up
with one another as best they can, in order to go through an existence
whose aggregate forms our ego. This ego will be good or bad, remarkable
or insignificant, more or less generous or selfish, calm or uneasy,
pacific or pugnacious, heroic or pusillanimous, hesitating or decided
and enterprising, brutal or refined, crafty or loyal, active or idle,
chaste or lascivious, modest or vainglorious, proud or obsequious,
unreliable or steadfast, according to the authority which the type
that captures the best positions of the heart or brain is able to
assume over the others. But, even in the life that appears the most
stable, the most homogeneous, the best-balanced, this authority will
never be final or undisputed. The dominant type will find itself for
ever disputed, attacked, thwarted, disturbed, circumvented, harassed,
tempted, deceived, betrayed and sometimes cunningly dethroned by one
of the rival or subordinate types which it failed to distrust or which
it did not watch narrowly enough. We behold unexpected coalitions,
fantastic compromises, regrettable defections, fierce competitions,
incessant intrigues and positive revolutions, especially at the
critical periods and at each moment of important happenings; and all
this prodigious inward tragedy does not cease for an instant until the
hour of death.


3

But, once again, why seek only in the past and among our ancestors for
the actors in this drama which is the essential drama of humanity? What
justification have we for supposing that the dead alone play all the
parts? Why should those from whom we have issued possess more influence
than those who will issue from us? The first are remote from our bodily
selves, they are separated from us by unfathomable mysteries and their
survival may perhaps be called in question; the others inhabit our
flesh and their existence is incontestable. We have just seen that the
argument deduced from the absence of any brain is not invincible.

“But,” you will perhaps go on to say, “how do you suppose that, when
they have not yet lived, they can possess habits, virtues and vices,
preferences and experience, in a word, all that constitutes a character
and cannot be acquired save by contact with life?”

But the same objection could be raised, in most cases, with regard
to our ancestors. Generally speaking, when we issued from them, they
were still young; they were not yet what they became and what we shall
become after them. They had not yet adopted the habits, the ways of
thinking or feeling, or cultivated the virtues or the vices which are
reproduced in us. The stubborn little mediocrity whom we all feel
within us, frugal, cautious and shabby in his dealings, was still
perhaps a prodigal, high-spirited and reckless youth; the rake was
still perhaps chaste, the thief had never stolen and the murderer may
have had a horror of bloodshed. All this is almost equally immaterial
and equally potential in both cases; the only present points at issue
are the amorphous tendencies and forces whereon the brain which we
receive from these and pass on to those bestows a form.

It is therefore very possible that the little mediocrity, the rake,
the thief or the murderer, far from being dead, are not yet born and
are taking as active a part as our ancestors in the agitations and
sometimes in the conduct of our existence. This is what the most
ancient and the most venerable religions of humanity always foresaw
or revealed, receiving it perhaps on the authority of an unknown and
loftier source; and of these religions Christianity, with its dogma
of original sin, is but an imperfect echo. Even to-day, more than six
hundred millions of human beings believe in the preexistence of the
soul, in successive lives and in reincarnation. In the eyes of these
religions, the little mediocrity who begot us several centuries ago
is the same who, a little less paltry, a little less narrow, improved
by his previous life and his passage through the mysteries of death,
is awaiting within us the moment of rebirth and who, while waiting,
shares our instincts, our feelings and our thoughts. He does not
wait in solitude; he is but one life in the host of lives which have
preceded us and which come back to live in us again; and all these past
and future lives form the sum total of our own.


4

We will not here discuss this doctrine of successive lives and of the
expiatory and purifying reincarnation, which is the noblest and, up
to now, the only acceptable explanation of nature’s injustices that
has been discovered. In the present state of our knowledge, it can be
only a magnificent theory or a statement impossible of proof. Let us
not forsake the indisputable ground on which heredity and preexistence
have their being. Heredity is an acquired fact, an experimental truth;
preexistence is a logical necessity. It is not indeed possible to
conceive that what will be born of us does not already exist within us
in fact, in principle, in the germ, in essence or in potentiality;
and, from the moment of its existence in a fashion probably more
spiritual than material, it is far less surprising that it should be
more or less responsible for thoughts and actions to which it could not
be wholly a stranger.

In any case, heredity, which is incontestable, and preexistence,
which is necessary, remind us yet once again that each of us is not a
single being, isolated, permanent, hermetically sealed, independent of
others and separated from all things in time and space, but a porous
vase dipping into the infinite; a sort of cross-roads, where all the
paths of the past, the present and the future meet; an inn beside the
eternal highways, where all the lives which make up our own foregather
for a few days’ sojourn. We believe ourselves dead when they leave the
inn; and we fancy that they too have perished. It is more likely that
this is not so at all. They are merely quitting the ruined hostel to
install themselves in a new and more habitable house. They carry with
them their debts and their obligations; they remove to their new abode
their instincts, their habits, their ideals, their passions also, their
merits and their faults, their acquisitions and their memories. The
house is different, but the guests are the same; and the old life will
resume its course in the new dwelling and will be perhaps a little
nobler, perhaps a little fairer, perhaps filled with a little brighter
light.




THE GREAT REVELATION




