IV

THE SOUL OF NATIONS


1

In the admirable and touching pages in which Octave Mirbeau bequeaths
his last thoughts to us, the great friend whose loss is mourned by
all who in this world hunger and thirst after justice expresses
his surprise at finding how in the supreme moments of its life the
collective soul of the French nation differs from the soul of each of
the individuals of which it is composed.

He had devoted the best part of his work to examining, dissecting,
presenting in a blinding and sometimes unbearable light and
stigmatizing with unequalled eloquence and bitterness the weaknesses
and selfishness, the folly and meannesses, the vanity and sordid
money-sense, the lack of conscience, honesty, charity, dignity, the
shameful stains on the life of his fellow-countrymen. And behold,
in the hour of insistent duty, there arises suddenly, as in a fairy
scene, out of the quagmire which he had so long stirred with rough and
generous disgust, the purest, noblest, most patient, fraternal and
whole-hearted spirit of heroism and sacrifice that the world has ever
known, not only in the most glorious days of its history, but even in
the time of its most romantic legends, which were but glorious dreams
which it never hoped to realize.

I could say as much of another nation, which I know well, since it
lives in the land where I was born. The Belgians, in the guise in which
we saw them daily, appeared to give us no promise of a noble soul.
They seemed to us narrow and limited, a little commonplace, honest
in a mean, inglorious way, without ideals or generous aspirations,
wholly absorbed by their petty material welfare, their petty local
wrangles. Yet, when the same hour of duty sounded for them, more
menacing and formidable than those of the other nations, because it
preceded all of them in a terrible mystery; while there was everything
to gain and nothing to lose, save honour, if they proved faithless to
a plighted word; at the first call of their conscience aroused as by a
thunderbolt, without hesitating or glancing at what they had to meet or
undergo, with an unanimous and irresistible impulse, they astonished
mankind by a decision such as no other people had ever taken and saved
the world, well knowing that themselves could not be saved. And this
assuredly is the noblest sacrifice that the heroes and martyrs who have
hitherto appeared to be the professed exponents of sublime courage are
able to achieve upon this earth of ours.

On the other hand, to those of us who had had occasion to mix with
Germans, who had lived in Germany and believed that they knew German
manners and letters, it seemed beyond doubt that the Bavarians,
Saxons, Hanoverians and Rhinelanders, notwithstanding some defects of
education rather than character which grated upon us a little, also
possessed certain qualities, notably a genial kindness, a gravity, a
laboriousness, a steadiness, an uncomplaining temper, a simplicity
in their domestic life, a sense of duty and a habit of taking life
conscientiously, which we had never known or had succeeded in losing.
So, despite the warnings of history, we were struck dumb with amazement
and at first refused to believe the early tales of atrocities which
were not incidental, as in every war, but deliberate, premeditated,
systematic and perpetrated with a light heart by an entire people
setting itself of sober purpose and with a sort of perverse pride
outside the pale of humanity, transforming itself of a sudden into a
pack of devils more formidable and destructive than all those which
Hell had hitherto belched forth into our world.


2

We knew already and Dr. Gustave Le Bon had demonstrated to us in a
curious way that the soul of a crowd does not resemble the soul
of any of its component members. According to the leaders and the
circumstances that control it, the collective soul is sometimes
loftier, juster, more generous and most often more impulsive, more
credulous, more cruel, more barbarous and blind. But a crowd has only
a provisional, momentary soul, which does not survive the short-lived
and nearly always violent event that calls it into being; and its
contingent and transitory psychology is hardly able to tell us how the
profound, lasting and, so to speak, immortal soul of a nation takes
shape.


3

It is quite natural that a nation should not know itself at all and
that its acts should plunge it into a state of bewilderment from which
it does not recover until history has explained them to a greater or
lesser degree. None of the men who make up a nation knows himself;
still less does any of them know his fellows. Not one of us really
knows who or what he is; not one of us can say what he will do in
unexpected circumstances which are a trifle more serious than those
which form the customary tissue of life. We spend our existence in
questioning and exploring ourselves; our acts are as much a revelation
to ourselves as to others; and, the nearer we draw to our end, the
farther stretches the vista of that which still remains for us to
discover. We own but the smallest part of ourselves; the rest, which is
almost the whole, does not belong to us at all, but merges in the past
and the future and in other mysteries more unknown than the future or
the past.

What is true of each one of us is very much more true of a great nation
composed of millions of men. That represents a future and a past
stretching incomparably farther than those of a single human life. We
admit and constantly repeat that a nation is guided by its dead. It is
certain that the dead continue to live in it a far more active life
than is generally believed and that they control it unknown to itself,
even as, at the other end of the ages, the men of the future, that
is to say, all those who are not yet born, all those whom it carries
within itself as it does its dead, play no less important a part in a
nation’s decisions. But in its very present, at the moment when it is
living and putting forth its activity on this earth, in addition to
the power of those who no longer are and those who are not yet, there
is outside the nation, outside the aggregate of bodies and brains that
make it up, a host of forces and faculties which have not found or have
not wished to take their place, or which do not abide in the nation
consistently, and which nevertheless belong to it as essentially and
direct it as effectively as those which are comprised within it. What
our body contains when we believe ourselves circumscribed is little in
comparison with what it does not contain; and it is in what the body
does not contain that the highest and most powerful part of our being
seems to dwell. We must not forget that it grows stronger each day
that we neither die nor come into being, in a word, that we are not
wholly incarnate, and that, on the other hand, our flesh comprises
much more than ourselves. It is this that constitutes all the floating
forces which make up the real soul of a people, forces very much deeper
and more numerous than those which seem fixed in the body and the
spirit. They do not show themselves in the petty incidents of daily
life, which concern only the mean and narrow covering in which a nation
goes sheltered; but they unite, join forces and reveal their passionate
ardour at the grave and tragic hours when everlasting destiny is at
stake. They then lay down decisions which history inscribes on her
records, decisions whose grandeur, generosity and heroism astonish even
those who have taken them more or less unknown to themselves and often
in spite of themselves, decisions which are manifested in their own
eyes as an unexpected, magnificent and incomprehensible revelation of
themselves.




THE MOTHERS




