VI

THREE UNKNOWN HEROES


1

The Belgian government published last year a _Reply to the German White
Book of 10 May 1915_.

This reply gives peremptory and categorical denials to all the
allegations in the White Book on the subject of _francs-tireurs_, of
attacks by civilians and of the Belgian women’s cruelty to the German
prisoners and wounded. It contains a body of authentic and overwhelming
evidence upon the massacres at Andenne, Dinant, Louvain and Aerschot
which enables history here and now to pronounce its verdict with even
greater certainty than the most scrupulous jury of a criminal court.

Among the most frightful incidents reported in these accounts by
eye-witnesses, I would linger to-day upon only two of those which
marked the sack of Aerschot; not that they are more odious or cruel
than the others--on the contrary, beside the unprovoked murders and
wholesale executions at Andenne, Dinant and Louvain, which are of
unsurpassable horror, they seem almost kindly--but I select them for
the very reason that they display more clearly than in its most violent
excesses what we may call the normal mentality of the German army and
the abominable things which it did when it believed itself to be acting
with justice, moderation and humanity. I select them above all because
they show us the admirable and touching state of mind, as displayed
amidst a terrible ordeal, of a little Belgian city, the most innocent
of all the victims of this war, and offer for our contemplation
instances of simple and heroic self-sacrifice which have escaped notice
and which it is well to bring to light, for they are as beautiful as
the most splendid examples in the fairest pages of Plutarch.


2

Aerschot is a humble and happy little town in Flemish Brabant, one of
those modest unknown clusters of habitations which, like Dinant, for
ever to be regretted and buried in the past, nobody used to visit,
because they contained no buildings of note, but which retained and
represented all the more, in the depths of their silence and their
placid isolation, Flemish life in its most special, intimate, intense,
traditional, suave and peaceable aspect. In these half-rustic little
cities we find hardly any industries, at most a malt-kiln or two,
a corn-mill, an oil-works, a chicory-factory. Their life is almost
agricultural; and the well-to-do inhabitants live on the produce or
the rents of their fields, their meadows and their woods. The houses
in the church-square are substantial-looking, more or less cubical in
shape and painted virgin white; their carriage-gates are adorned with
glittering brasses. All through the week the square is almost deserted
and wakens into life only on market-days and on Sunday mornings, at
the hour of high mass. In a word, it is a picture of tranquillity,
of placid waiting for meals and repose, of drowsy, easy existence
and perhaps of happiness, if happiness consists in being happy in
a half-slumber free of remote ambitions, exaggerated passions or
over-eager dreams.

It was here, in this peaceful sojourn of immemorial restfulness, which
not even the war had hitherto disturbed below the surface, that, on
the 19th of August, 1914, at nine o’clock in the morning, after the
retreat of the last Belgian soldiers, the square was suddenly invaded
by a dense and endless stream of German troops. The burgomaster’s
son, a lad of fifteen, hurried to close the Venetian shutters of his
father’s house and was wounded in the leg by one of the bullets which
the victors fired at random through the windows.

At ten o’clock, the German officer in command sent for the burgomaster,
M. Tielemans, to appear at the Town-hall. He was received with
insults, hustled and abused for a _Schweinhund_, or pig-dog, a species
of animal which appears to be indigenous to Germany.

Next, Colonel Stenger, commanding the 8th infantry brigade, and his
two aides-de-camp took up their quarters in the burgomaster’s house in
the church-square and, I may add in passing, forthwith broke open all
the drawers in their rooms, after which they went to the balcony and
watched the march-past of their troops.

At four o’clock in the afternoon, obsessed by the delusion of
_francs-tireurs_, some soldiers, seized with panic, began to fire
shots in the streets. The colonel, standing on the balcony, was hit by
a German bullet and fell. One of the aides-de-camp rushed downstairs
shouting:

“The colonel is dead! I want the burgomaster!”

M. Tielemans felt that his time was come:

“This is a serious matter for me,” he said to his wife.

She squeezed his hand and urged him to keep courage. The burgomaster
was arrested and ill-treated by the soldiers. In vain his wife remarked
to the captain that her husband and son could not have fired, since
they possessed no weapons.

“That makes no difference,” replied the bully in uniform; “he’s
responsible. Also,” he added, “I want your son.”

This son was the boy of fifteen who had been wounded in the leg. As
he had a difficulty in walking, because of his wound, he was brutally
jostled before his mother’s eyes and escorted with kicks to the
Town-hall, there to join his father.

Meanwhile this same captain, persisting in his contention that his
men had been fired upon, compelled Madame Tielemans to go through
the house with him, from cellar to attic. He was obliged to observe
that all the rooms were empty and all the windows closed. Throughout
this inspection, he threatened the poor woman with his revolver. Her
daughter placed herself between her mother and their sinister visitor,
who did not understand. When they returned to the hall downstairs, the
mother asked him:

“What is to become of us?”

Coldly, he replied:

“You will be shot; so will your daughter and your servants.”

The pillage and the methodical setting on fire of the town now began.
All the houses on the right-hand side of the square were in flames.
From time to time, the soldiers apostrophized the women, shouting:

“You’re going to be shot, you’re going to be shot!”

       *       *       *       *       *

“At that moment,” says Madame Tielemans, in her sworn deposition,
“the soldiers were leaving our house, their arms filled with bottles
of wine. They opened the windows and removed all the contents of our
rooms. I turned away so as not to behold the pillage. By the lurid
light of the burning houses, my eyes fell upon my husband, my son and
my brother-in-law, accompanied by some other gentlemen who were being
led to execution. Never shall I forget the sight nor the look on the
face of my husband seeking his house for the last time and asking
himself what had befallen his wife and daughter, while I, lest I should
sap his courage, could not call out, ‘I am here!’”

       *       *       *       *       *

The hours passed. The women were driven out of the town and led like a
herd of cattle, along a road strewn with corpses, to a distant meadow,
where they were penned until morning. The men were arrested and their
hands tied behind their backs with copper wire so cruelly tightened as
to draw blood. They were gathered into groups and made to lie down so
that their heads touched the ground and they were unable to make any
movement. The night was spent in this way, with the town burning and
the pillage and orgy continuing.

Between five and six in the morning, the military authorities decided
that the executions should begin and that one of the largest groups
of prisoners, composed of about a hundred civilians, should be present
at the death of the burgomaster, his son and his brother. An officer
informed the burgomaster that his hour had come. On hearing these
words, a citizen of Aerschot, Claes van Nuffel by name, went up to the
officer, begged him to spare the chief magistrate’s life and offered
to die in his stead. He added that he was the burgomaster’s political
adversary, but that he considered that, at this moment, M. Tielemans
was essential to the town.

“No,” replied the officer, harshly, “we must have the burgomaster.”

M. Tielemans stood up, thanked M. van Nuffel and said that he would
die with an easy mind, as he had spent his existence doing all the
good in his power, and that he would not beg for mercy. He entreated,
however, that the lives of his fellow-citizens and of his son, a boy of
fifteen and his mother’s last consolation, might be spared. The officer
grinned and made no reply. The burgomaster’s brother next asked for
mercy, not for himself but for his brother and his nephew. His request
fell on deaf ears. The lad then got up and took his place between his
father and his uncle. Six soldiers took aim at ten yards’ distance; the
officer lowered his sword; and, as the widow of the heroic burgomaster
says, “the best man in this world had ceased to exist.”


3

I will now quote from the evidence of M. Gustave Nys, an eye-witness of
the horrible drama which nearly numbered him among its victims:

  “The other civilians were thereupon placed in rows of three. The
  third in each row was to leave it and fall out behind the dead
  bodies, in order to be shot. All the civilians had their hands tied
  behind their backs. My brother and I stood next to each other: I was
  number two; my brother Omer, twenty years of age, was number three.
  I asked the officer, ‘May I change places with my brother? It makes
  no difference to you who falls under your bullets; but it does to my
  mother, who is a widow, for my brother has finished his studies and
  is more useful to her than I am.’ Once again he refused to listen
  to my prayer. ‘Fall out, number three!’ My brother and I embraced;
  and he joined the others. There were thirty of them, drawn up in
  line. Then a horrible scene took place: the German soldiers, walking
  slowly along the row, killed three at each discharge of their rifles,
  waiting between the volleys for the officer’s word of command.”


4

Incidents such as these would pass unperceived if one did not take the
trouble to seek them out and to collect them piously amid the huge
mass of tragedies which for more than four years upset and ravaged
the unhappy country tortured by its invaders. Had they occurred in
the history of Greece or Rome, they would have found a place among
the great deeds that honour our earth and deserve to live for ever
in the memory of man. It is our duty to make them known for a moment
and to engrave in our recollection the names of those who were their
heroes. Thus set down, simply and plainly, as befits historic truth,
in depositions sworn under oath before a nameless registrar who has
stripped them of any literary or sentimental embellishment, they give
at first but a very faint idea of the intensity of the tragedy and
the value of the sacrifice. There is here no question of a glorious
death faced amid the excitement of the fighting, on a vast field of
battle. Nor are we considering an indefinite or overhanging menace, or
an uncertain, remote and perhaps avoidable danger. We have to do with
an obscure, solitary, horrible and imminent death in a ditch; and the
six rifle-barrels are there, aimed almost point-blank, ready, upon a
sign of the officer who accepts your offer, to change you, in a second,
into a heap of bleeding flesh and to send you to the unknown, terrible
region which man dreads all the more when he is still full of strength
and life. There is not a moment’s interval nor a gleam of hope between
question and answer, between existence with all its joys and death
with all its horrors. There is no encouragement, no word or gesture
of stimulation or support, no reward; in an instant, all is given in
exchange for nothing; it is sheer self-sacrifice standing naked and so
pure that we are surprised that not even Germans were conquered by its
beauty.

There was but one manner in which they could have extricated themselves
without dishonour and that was to pardon the two victims; or else,
supposing the thing which was not, which never is the case, that a
death was absolutely necessary, there was a second solution, which was
to accept the offer and to kill the martyr whom they ought to have
worshipped on their knees. In this way they would only have acted as
the worst of savages. But they discovered a third, which doubtless,
before them, the Carthaginians alone would have invented and adopted.
For that matter, they exceeded the fiercest savagery and equalled the
abominable Punic morality in another case which brings to mind that of
Regulus and which will be the third instance of heroism that I intend
to recall.


5

A few days after the events which I have narrated, on the 23rd of
August, 1914, Dinant became the scene of wholesale massacres which
involved exactly six hundred and six victims, including eleven children
under five years old, twenty-eight of ages between ten and fifteen and
seventy-one women.

Nothing can give an idea of the horror and infamy of these massacres,
which form one of the most disgraceful and terrible pages in the long
and monstrous history of Teuton shame. But it is not my purpose to
speak of this for the moment. There would be too much to tell. I wish
to-day only to separate from the mass an episode in which the hero
of Dinant-la-Wallone is worthy of a place beside his two brethren of
Aerschot in Flanders.

Just outside Dinant, near the famous Roche à Bayard, the legendary
glory of the fair and smiling little township, the Germans occupied the
right bank of the Meuse and were beginning to build a bridge of boats.
The French, hidden in the bushes and the windings of the left bank,
were firing on the engineers. Their fire was not very well-sustained;
and the Germans, without the least justification, drew the conclusion
that it was due to _francs-tireurs_, who, for that matter, throughout
this Belgian campaign, never existed except in their imagination. At
that moment, eighty hostages, taken from among the inhabitants of
Dinant, were collected and kept in sight at the foot of the rock. The
German officer sent one of them, M. Bourdon, a clerk attached to the
law-courts, to the left bank, to inform the enemy that, if the firing
continued, all the hostages would be instantly shot. M. Bourdon
crossed the Meuse, fulfilled his mission and pluckily returned to
reconstitute himself a prisoner. He assured the officer that he had
convinced himself that there were no _francs-tireurs_ and that only
French soldiers of the regular army were taking part in the defence of
the other bank. A few more bullets fell; and the officer caused the
eighty hostages to be shot, beginning, that he might be punished as he
deserved for his heroic faithfulness to his pledged word, with the poor
clerk, his wife, his daughter and his two sons, one of whom was a mere
child of fifteen.




WASTED BEAUTIES




