V

THE MOTHERS


1

It was they who bore the main burden of suffering in this war.

In our streets and open spaces and all along the roads, in our
churches, in our towns and villages, in every house, we come into
contact with mothers who have lost their son or are living in an
anguish more cruel than the certainty of death.

Let us try to understand their loss. They know what it means, but they
do not tell the men.

Their son is taken from them at the fairest moment of his life, when
their own is in its decline. When a child dies in infancy, it is as
though his soul had hardly gone, as though it were lingering near the
mother who brought it into the world, awaiting the time when it may
return in a new form. The death which visits the cradle is not the
same as that which spreads terror over the earth; but a son who dies
at the age of twenty does not come back again and leaves not a gleam
of hope behind him. He carries away with him all the future that his
mother had remaining to her, all that she gave to him and all his
promise: the pangs, anguish and smiles of birth and childhood, the joys
of youth, the reward and the harvest of maturity, the comfort and the
peace of old age.

He carries away with him something much more than himself: it is not
his life only that comes to an end, it is numberless days that finish
suddenly, a whole generation that becomes extinct, a long series of
faces, of little fondling hands, of play and laughter, all of which
fall at one blow on the battle-field, bidding farewell to the sunshine
and reentering the earth which they will not have known. All this the
eyes of our mothers perceive without understanding; and this is why, at
certain times, the weight and sadness of their glance are more than any
of us can bear.


2

And yet they do not weep as the mothers wept in former wars. All their
sons disappear one by one; and we do not hear them complain or moan
as in days gone by, when great sufferings, great massacres and great
catastrophes were surrounded by the clamours and lamentations of the
mothers.

They do not gather in the public places, they do not utter
recriminations, they rail at no one, they do not rebel. They swallow
their sobs and stifle their tears, as though obeying a command which
they have passed from one to the other, unknown to the men.

We do not know what it is that sustains them and gives them the
strength to endure the remnant of their lives. Some of them have other
children; and we can understand that they transfer to these the love
and the future which death has shattered. Many of them have never lost
or are striving to recover their faith in the eternal promises; and
here again we can understand that they do not despair, for the mothers
of the martyrs did not despair either. But thousands of others, whose
home is for ever deserted and whose sky is peopled by none but pale
phantoms, retain the same hope as those who keep on hoping. What gives
them this courage which astonishes whenever we behold it?

When the best, the most compassionate, the wisest among us meet one of
these mothers who has just stealthily wiped her eyes, so that the sight
of her unhappiness may not offend others who are happier, when we seek
for words which, uttered amid the glaring directness of the most awful
sorrow that can strike a human heart, shall not sound like odious or
ridiculous lies, we can hardly find anything to say to her. We speak
to her of the justice and the beauty of the cause for which her hero
fell, of the immense and necessary sacrifice, of the remembrance and
gratitude of mankind, of the irreality of life, which is measured not
by the length of days but by the lofty height of duty and glory. We
add perhaps that the dead do not die, that there are no dead, that
those who are no more live nearer to our souls than when they were in
the flesh and that all that we loved in them lingers in our hearts so
long as it is visited by our memory and revived by our love.

But, even while we speak, we feel the emptiness of what we say. We
are conscious that all this is true only for those whom death has
not hurled into the abyss where words are nothing more than childish
babble; that the most ardent memory cannot take the place of a dear
reality which we touch with our hands or lips; and that the most
exalted thought is as nothing compared with the daily going out and
coming in, the familiar presence at meals, the morning and evening
kiss, the fond embrace at the departure and the intoxicating delight
at the return. The mothers know and feel this better than we do; and
that is why they do not answer our attempts at consolation and why
they listen to them in silence, finding within themselves other
reasons for living and hoping than those which we, vainly searching the
whole horizon of human certainty and thought, try to bring them from
the outside. They resume the burden of their days without telling us
whence they derive their strength or teaching us the secret of their
self-sacrifice, their resignation and their heroism.




THREE UNKNOWN HEROES




