XII

THE TWO LOBES


1

A soldier writes me the following letter from the front:

  “There are quagmires and skeletons in the forest. I have discovered
  and admired the ruined gods under the still living and wonderful
  vegetation: their spirit has evaporated. The odour of Christ has
  little charm for me; I prefer that of Buddha. What I adore in him
  is the fundamental contradiction that seeks to assure us of our
  immortality by proving our inevitable annihilation. He taught,
  in the same breath, the illusion of the Ego and its periodical
  reincarnation, an obvious absurdity which implies a knowledge of the
  profoundest truth, of the very nature of being, at the same time and
  alternately collective and individual. This discovery, which he did
  not formulate, should have led him elsewhere than to Nirvana, that
  paradise of unripe fruits....

  “Man is so fashioned as to perceive only one half of the universe;
  and the mind of ordinary texture sees barely a hemisphere of truth.
  Afflicted with a congenital ‘nervous headache,’ humanity thinks with
  only one half of its brain, with the eastern lobe or the western, the
  ancient or the modern; its mind nibbles its own tail; the antinomies
  pursue one another in an endless circle, which Kant believed that he
  had discovered, but which Buddha had striven to open. He possessed
  the complementary virtues; he was religious and rational; while he
  summed up within himself the mysticism of the east, his was the most
  scientific of the minds of antiquity, at a time when science did not
  exist but was merged in philosophy. The moderns who have sought to
  condense into a system the collective and hardly initiated effort
  of science have pitiably failed, for they have thought only as
  westerners, entangled in the contradiction of idealistic aspirations
  and materialistic arguments, whereas Buddha’s formula might still
  and almost without breaking down contain this gigantic effort and
  yet not hamper it. From the death of the prince-philosopher, down to
  the flights of contemporary science, true thought has not advanced
  one step; Arab or Christian spiritualism and its reagent, positivist
  or scientific materialism, are recoils in contrary directions, false
  monisms which, taking the extreme for the supreme, seek to fix the
  centre of gravity on the circumference of the wheel. The explorers of
  the Beyond must set out from the cross-roads of religious synthesis
  and scientific analysis and drag these rival sisters by the hand.

  “Truth shines at the centre of a circle of onlookers and we must pass
  through its flame to recognize a brother in the adversary opposite.
  We must reach the centre of space to discern the identity of its
  cardinal points: ‘_Totum et Nihil, Alter et Ego_.’ The longing to
  convert others must yield to the need of completing and balancing
  our own point of view. In the sacred forest, which pioneers have
  penetrated on all sides and in all ages, the more greatly daring must
  necessarily draw nearer one to the other. Even if they cannot meet,
  they can hear one another and give one another mutual encouragement.
  The most modest cry of discovery may be welcome in the solitude and
  silence in which the truth of the future is ripening....”


2

I thought it well to preserve this page. It sets forth, in a
remarkable, though perhaps too rapid summary, two or three of the
great problems which in reality are only one and to which, unless we
give up everything, we are bound to attempt the answer: the problems
of immortality or annihilation, of flux and reflux, of existence
alternatively collective and individual, of exteriorization and
interiorization, which make up the mighty cosmic rhythm whereof our
life and death are but infinitesimal pulsations.


3

But let us begin by observing that the fundamental contradiction
which seeks to assure us of our immortality by proving our inevitable
annihilation is not to be found in Buddha and that it is not true to
say that he teaches in the same breath the illusion of the Ego and
its periodical reincarnation. The doctrine of reincarnation is not
Buddha’s. He found it ready-made; it existed before him and was so
deeply rooted in his people that he does not even dream of disputing
it. From the exoteric point of view, he tries only to disarm it, to
deprive it of its sting, to render it harmless. He tries to reduce
life to the point where it can find nothing wherewith to reincarnate
itself. According to the exoteric doctrine, which is but a preparation
for esoteric truth, life is naught but suffering; and its only aim is
the redemption or the extinction of suffering. This extinction is
to be found in Nirvana, which is not annihilation but the absorption
of the individual into the universe. Ordinary death, by reason of
the perpetual reincarnation of the same individual, cannot suppress
suffering. We must therefore find a sort of superdeath, which makes
any reincarnation impossible; and this superdeath can be obtained
only by the man who has been striving to die all his life long and
who has deliberately cut off all the ties that bind him to existence:
all love, all hope, all desire, all possession. When, at the end of
this systematic and voluntary superdeath, the actual death arrives, it
will no longer find a living germ capable of achieving reincarnation.
This superdeath, thus obtained, will precede by many centuries or
millenaries purification, final redemption and the absorption into the
absolute One.

It has been said that this is exactly the reverse of the doctrine of
Christ. With Buddha, life is only the gate of death; with Christ, death
is the gate of life. In reality, it is the same thing and everything
ends by the absorption into the divine, for the doctrine of Christ is
nothing more than a mutilated branch of the great trunk of the mother
religion.

Here we have the solution offered to us by the most wonderful mind,
the greatest sage that humanity has ever known; by one who knew things
which we no longer know and which, it may be, we shall never recover.
It is the foundation of the religion of five hundred millions of men.
There is nothing nearer to the ultimate truth.


4

Let us observe, however, that the problem of immortality or
annihilation ought not to be set in these terms, since the word
annihilation cannot be employed, save in a metaphorical sense, to
denote a life which we no longer comprehend, seeing that Nihil or
nothingness is the one thing whose existence is utterly impossible and
whose non-existence is absolutely certain.

As for immortality, here again there is ambiguity, for, as
annihilation cannot exist, immortality is inevitable; and the only
question that remains to be solved is whether this immortality will
or will not be accompanied by some sort of continuance of our present
consciousness.

But, while it is probable that the problem of immortality, more or
less accompanied by consciousness, will long remain in suspense,
the answer to the problem of the “nervous headache,” or rather of
congenital hemiphlegia, is doubtless easier to find. In any case,
it occupies a domain which our direct investigations are able to
explore. It is, after all, an historical and geographical question.
It seems that there are in fact in the human brain an eastern lobe
and a western lobe, which have never acted at the same time. The one
produces, here, reason, science and consciousness; the other secretes,
yonder, intuition, religion and subconsciousness. One reflects only
the infinite and the unknowable; the other is interested only in
what it is able to delimit, in what it may hope to understand. They
represent, employing a perhaps imaginary image, the conflict between
the material and the moral ideal of humanity. They have more than
once endeavoured to penetrate each other, to mingle and to work in
concert; but the western lobe, at least over the most active part of
the world, has hitherto paralysed and almost annihilated the efforts of
the other. We are indebted to it for extraordinary progress in all the
material sciences, but also for such catastrophes as those which we are
undergoing to-day, catastrophes which, if we are not careful, will not
be the last nor the worst. The time would seem to have come to awaken
the paralysed lobe; but we have neglected it so greatly that we no
longer quite know what it is capable of doing.




HOPE AND DESPAIR




