XVI

THE GREAT REVELATION


1

We despair of ever knowing the origin of the universe, its aim, its
laws, or its intentions; and we end by doubting whether there be any.
It were wiser very humbly to confess that we are not able to conceive
them. It is probable that, if the universe to-morrow were to yield us
the key of its riddle, we should be as incapable of understanding how
to use it as is a dog to whom we show the key of a clock. In revealing
its great secret to us, it would teach us hardly anything; or at least
the revelation would have but an insignificant influence upon our
life, our happiness, our ethics, our efforts, and our hopes. It would
soar at such heights that no one would perceive it; at most it would
disencumber the sky of our religious illusions, leaving only the
infinite void of the ether in their place.


2

For that matter, there is no saying but that we once possessed this
revelation. It is highly possible that the religions of nations which
have disappeared, such as the Lemurians, the Atlanteans and many
others, were aware of it and that we have discovered its remains in the
esoteric traditions that have come down to us. It must not indeed be
forgotten that there exists, side by side with the outward, scientific
history, a secret history of mankind which derives its substance
of legends, myths, hieroglyphics, strange monuments and mysterious
writings from the hidden meaning of the primitive books. One thing
is certain, that, though the imagination of those who interpret this
occult history is often venturesome, all that they declare is not to be
despised and deserves to be examined more seriously one day than has
hitherto been done.

The essence of this esoteric revelation is very well summed up by M.
Marc Saunier, a disciple of Fabre d’Olivet and Saint-Yves d’Alveydre,
in his book, _La Légende des symboles_.

  “The Initiates,” he says, “have always regarded each continent as
  a being subject to the same laws as man. For them, the minerals
  constitute its skeleton, the flora its flesh, the fauna its
  nerve-cells and the human races the grey matter of its brain. This
  continent itself is but an organ of the earth, wherein each man is
  treated as a thinking cell and whereof the thought is represented by
  the sum of human thoughts. The earth itself is but an organ of the
  solar system, which in turn is considered as an individual; and our
  solar system thus becomes merely an organ of another being of the
  infinite, whose heart would appear in the star Alpha in Aries. And
  lastly, by a final synthesis, we come to the Cosmos, which expresses
  the general sum of all things, in a being whose body is the world
  and whose thought is the universal intelligence, exalted by the
  religions to the rank of a deity.”

The basis of their doctrine is plainly evolutionistic. Each continent
has merely transformed, in its own time and according to its own ideal,
the seeds which came from the Hyperborean tracts; and man is but the
result of an animal evolution. For the rest, they borrow it in part
from the Hindus, thus anticipating by many thousands of years the
latest hypotheses of our modern science.


3

But, without loitering in these shifting sands, let us go direct to
clear and reliable sources. We possess, in the sacred and secret books
of India, of which we know only an infinitesimal part, a cosmogony
which no European conception has ever surpassed. It would not be
correct to say that it attained, at the first endeavour, the ultimate
limits beyond which the mind of man could not venture without
dissolving in the infinite, for it was the work of centuries of which
we do not know the tale; but it indisputably preceded all the others,
its birth was earlier than anything that we know and, at the beginning
of all things, it exceeded in grandeur all that we have learnt and all
that we can imagine.

It was the first, for instance, long before our historic periods, to
give us a dizzy yet concrete idea of the infinity of time. The Book of
Manu teaches us that twelve thousand years of mortals are but a day and
a night to the gods; their year, therefore, consisting of three hundred
and sixty days, numbers 4,320,000 years. A thousand years of the gods
make but one of Brahma’s days, that is to say, 4,320,000,000 human
years, representing the total life of our globe; and Brahma’s night is
of equal duration. Three hundred and sixty of these days and nights
make one of this god’s years; and a hundred of these years constitute
one of his lives, that is to say, the duration of the universe, which
is represented by the formidable figure of 311,090,000,000,000
years. After this he begins a new life. At present we have not yet
attained the noon of Brahma’s actual day nor half the life-time of our
terrestrial globe.

To complete this outline of the stupendous chronology of the Vedas,
I continue to profit by some notes received from my war-time godson,
who has a thorough knowledge of this unduly neglected science. For
the rest, it will be seen that chronology and cosmogony are here in
intimate connection:

  “The day of Brahma (4,320,000,000 years) is divided into fourteen
  lives of Manu, consisting alternately of seven Manvantaras and seven
  Pralayas. The word Manvantara signifies the interval between two
  Manus: one of these appears in the dawn and the other in the twilight
  of this period of terrestrial activity. The morning Manu gives the
  Manvantara its name and the evening Manu presides over the Pralaya,
  that is to say, the period of dissolution, or negative _status quo_,
  death, sleep, or inertia, as the case may be, which divides two waves
  of life.

  “Universal evolution is a chain without beginning or end, each
  link of which in turn appears and disappears in our field of
  consciousness. Brahma himself dies only to be reborn. But for the
  sovereign of the worlds, as for a random star or the least of
  organized creatures, there is death and dissolution only from the
  individual point of view. Darkness is the ransom to be paid for
  light, the evening balances the morning, age is the price of youth
  and death the reverse of life. In reality, however, all evolution is
  at the same time continuous and discontinuous; the Manvantaras and
  Pralayas are at once simultaneous and successive; each individual
  life is engendered by its elemental double and engenders its residual
  double. Every decline of life in a given place coincides with an
  increase of being in a corresponding place and proceeds by means of
  a rebirth in a fresh place. Fundamentally, there is no individual
  life. We are at once ourselves and another, ourselves and several
  others, ourselves and all others, ourselves and the Universe,
  ourselves and infinity.

  “The evolution of our terrestrial globe is an infinitesimal cycle of
  this universal evolution, corresponding merely with a day and a night
  of Brahma, and is divided into fourteen cycles, each consisting of
  a Manvantara and a Pralaya. The cycle of organic evolution upon our
  solidified globe represents only one of these subdivisions, that is
  to say, the radius of the organic sphere is only a fourteenth part
  of the radius of the mineral sphere. Mineral evolution is manifestly
  continuous from the formation of the globe to its dissolution. If,
  between the periods of geological activity, there exists a Pralaya
  of any kind, this latter, despite the etymology of the word, must
  be not a dissolution, which would be perfectly inconceivable from
  the logical and scientific point of view, but a period of inertia
  or abatement, of which the hypothesis is readily admissible
  and of which the glacial periods, occurring in the very course
  of the present Manvantara, afford us an example. In the earlier
  cycles of Manu, the earth passed in succession through the various
  stages of condensation which science regards as igneous and which
  correspond with the ethereal, gaseous and liquid evolution of the
  elements. During these long periods, the life of the present existed
  potentially in the soul of the earth and actually on other globes
  than ours.”


4

But we will proceed no further with this outline, which would become
so complicated as to be inextricable. Let us remember simply the
magnificent doctrine of the reincarnation, which is the most ancient
reply, the only decisive and, no doubt, the most plausible reply, to
all the problems of justice and injustice, the immortal torture of
mortals, and its corollary, the law of Karma, which, as my godson
so truly says, “is the most wonderful of ethical discoveries: it
represents abstract liberty and is enough to enfranchise the human
will from any superior or even infinite being. We are our own creators
and the sole captains of our fate; no other than ourselves rewards
or punishes us; there is no sin, but only consequences; there is no
morality, but only responsibilities. Now Buddha taught that, merely by
virtue of this sovran law, the individual must be reborn to reap what
he has sowed; and this certainty of rebirth was enough to neutralize
the horror of death.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Is all this nothing more than imagination, than the dreams of brains
more ardent than our own, the hallucinations of ascetics which amaze
the young and the immobility or the echo of immemorial traditions
bequeathed by other races, or by races anterior to man and more
spiritual? It is impossible to decide; but, whatever its origin, it is
certain that the monument whereof we have seen but a corner of the
pedestal is prodigious and that it has not a human aspect. All that we
can say is that our modern sciences, notably archæology, geology and
biology, confirm rather than invalidate either of these revelations.


5

But this is not the question for the moment. Let us suppose that one
of these revelations, for instance, that of the sacred books of India,
were true, incontestable and scientifically proved by our researches;
or that an interplanetary communication or a declaration of some
superhuman being no longer permitted us to doubt its authenticity: what
influence would such a revelation have upon our life? What would it
transform in our life, what novel element would it add to our morality
or our happiness? No doubt it would work but a very slight change. It
would pass too high above us; it would not descend to our level; it
would not touch us; we should lose ourselves in its immensity; and upon
the whole, knowing everything, we should be neither happier nor wiser
than when we knew nothing.

Not to know what he has come upon this earth to do: that is man’s great
and everlasting torment. Now we must perforce admit that the actual
truth of the universe, if some day we learn it, will probably be very
similar to one or other of those revelations which, while appearing to
teach us everything, teach us nothing at all. It will at least possess
the same inhuman character. It will necessarily be as unlimited in both
space and time, as abysmal, as foreign to our senses and our brain.
The more tremendous, the more majestic the revelation, the greater
chance will it have of being true; but also, the more remote from us
it is, the less will it interest us. We can hardly hope to escape
from this discouraging dilemma: those revelations, explanations or
interpretations which are too petty will not satisfy us, because we
shall instinctively feel them to be insufficient; while those which are
too great will pass us by too far to affect us.


6

It nevertheless seems desirable that this revelation of the sacred
books of India should be authentic and that our knowledge, still so
slight, so unimportant, so timid and so incoherent, should gradually
confirm, as indeed it unwittingly does daily, certain points scattered
through the boundless immensity of this immemorial truth.

It would in any case, even if it did not succeed in affecting us
directly, possess the advantage of enlarging our horizon, which is
narrower than we suppose, until it embraces infinity; of studding
this infinity with magnificent landmarks; of animating it, peopling
it, filling it with wonderful faces, making it a living, perceptible,
almost comprehensible thing.

We all know that we dwell in infinity; but this infinity is, for us,
only a bare and barren word, a black and uninhabitable void, a formless
abstraction, a lifeless expression, to which our imagination can
give only a momentary vitality, at the cost of a tiring, solitary,
unskilful, unassisted, ungrateful and unfruitful effort. We hold
ourselves, in fact, pent in this terrestrial world of ours and in our
brief historic ages; and at the most we raise our eyes, from time to
time, towards the other planets of our solar system and project our
thoughts, which are discouraged from the beginning, as far as the
nebulous periods that preceded man’s advent on our globe. More and more
deliberately we are directing the whole activity of our intelligence
upon ourselves; and, by a regrettable optical illusion, the more it
restricts its field of action, the deeper we believe it to be probing.
Our thinkers and philosophers, fearing lest they should stray as their
predecessors did before them, no longer concern themselves with any
but the least disputable aspects, problems and secrets; but, if these
are the least disputable, they are also the least sublime; and man, in
his quality as a terrestrial animal, becomes the sole object of their
investigations. The scientists, on the other hand, are accumulating
minor data and observations whose weight is stifling them; yet they no
longer dare to thrust them aside or open them out, so as to ventilate
them by some general law, some salutary hypothesis, for those which
they have hitherto ventured to advance have been pitiably contradicted,
one after the other, and scouted by experience.

Nevertheless, they are right to act as they do and to continue their
investigations according to their narrow and restricted methods; but
we are entitled to observe that, the closer they believe that they
have drawn to a fugitive truth, the greater are their uncertainty and
confusion, the more precarious, imaginary and insufficient seem the
foundations upon which they based their confidence and the more fully
do they perceive the immense distance that still divides them from the
least of life’s secrets. As one of the most illustrious of them, Sir
William Grove, prophetically remarked:

  “The day is fast approaching when it will be confessed that the
  Forces we know are but the phenomenal manifestations of Realities we
  know nothing about, but which were known to the Ancients and by them
  worshipped.”


7

This, indeed, is what we are bound to think if we study slightly this
primitive revelation, this ancient wisdom and what has grown out of it.
Man once knew more than he now knows. He was ignorant perhaps of the
enormous mass of petty details which we have observed and classified
and which have enabled us to subdue certain forces which he never
thought of turning to account: but it is probable that he understood
better than we do their nature, their essence and their origin.

The higher civilization of humanity, which history traces back
tentatively to five or six thousand years before Christ, is perhaps far
more ancient; and, without admitting, as has been asserted, that the
Egyptians kept astronomical records through a period of six hundred and
thirty thousand years, we may consider it as established that their
observations embraced two precessional cycles, two sidereal years, or
fifty-one thousand, seven hundred and thirty-six solar years. Now they
themselves were not initiators but initiates, who derived all that they
knew from a more ancient source. It was the same with the Semites,
in the matter of their primitive books and their Kabbalah; and the
Greeks, among whom all those who really taught us something about the
origin and constitution of the world and its elements, about nature and
divinity, mind and matter, men such as Hesiod, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras,
Plato and the Neo-Platonists, were likewise initiates, that is to say,
they were men who, having travelled in Egypt or India, had drunk of the
same one and immemorial spring. Our prehistoric religions, Scandinavian
or Germanic and the Druidism of the Celts, those of China and Japan, of
Mexico and Peru, despite numerous deformations, were also derived from
the same source, even as our great western metaphysics, which preceded
our modern materialism, with its somewhat sordid outlook, and notably
the metaphysics of Leibnitz, Kant, Schelling, Fichte and Hegel have
approached it and, more or less unconsciously, slaked their thirst at
it.

It is therefore certain that through the Greeks, through the Bible,
through Christianity, which is its last echo, for the author of the
Apocalypse and St. Paul were initiates, we are all steeped in this
revelation; that there is not and never has been any other; that it
is the great human or superhuman revelation; and that consequently
it would be right and salutary to study it more attentively and more
profoundly than we have hitherto done.


8

Where does the source of this revelation lie? We place it in the
east because nearly everything that we know about it is found in
the sacred books of India. But it is almost certainly of western or
rather Hyperborean origin and dates back to those wonderful vanished
Atlanteans, whose last Protoscythian colonies flourished over eleven
thousand years ago and whose existence can no longer be denied.

Remember that famous passage in Plato:

  “One day, when Solon was conversing with the priests of Saïs on the
  history of the remote ages, one of them said:

  “‘O Solon, Solon, you Greeks are always children!... There is not
  an opinion, not a tradition of knowledge among you that is old....
  You know nothing of that noble race of heroes of whom you are a
  remnant.... Nine thousand years, as our annals record, have elapsed
  since what I am about to tell you.... The most famous of your actions
  was the overthrow of the island of Atlantis, which lay over against
  the Pillars of Hercules, was greater than Libya and Asia put together
  and was the passage to other islands and to a great ocean whereof
  the Mediterranean Sea was but a harbour; and within the Pillars the
  empire of Atlantis reached in Europe to Tyrrhenia and in Libya to
  Egypt. This mighty power was arrayed against Egypt and Greece and
  all the Mediterranean countries. Then your city did bravely and won
  renown throughout the earth. For, risking her own existence, she
  repelled the invader and gave liberty to all the nations within the
  Pillars. Soon after, earthquakes arose and floods; and your warlike
  race was swallowed up by the earth; and the island of Atlantis also
  disappeared in the sea.’”

This page in the _Timæus_ is the first glimpse that history properly
so-called affords of the immense chaos of the antediluvian period.
Modern researches and discoveries have confirmed it step by step. To
quote Roisel, who devoted a remarkable book to the Atlanteans, a work
less well-known than those of Scott Elliott and Rudolf Steiner, but one
that does not admit of the slightest doubt:

  “It is proved that, long before the historic ages, the Atlanticans
  had acquired a marvellous science whose elements mankind is hardly
  beginning to reconstitute and whose mighty relics are found in
  ancient Gaul, Egypt, Persia, India and the central portion of the
  American continent. More than ten thousand years before our era, they
  knew the precession of the equinoxes, the slow changes which many
  stars experience in their courses and the thousand secrets of nature.
  They had processes of which modern industry has not yet fathomed the
  mysteries.”


9

The outcome of these studies is that humanity never underwent a
disaster to be compared with the disappearance of Atlantis. It will
perhaps need thousands of years to repair that loss and to reascend
to the level of a civilization which had certainties of which we
laboriously glean the scattered remnants, regarding the origin and
movements of the universe, the energy of matter, the unknown forces
of this and other worlds, the life beyond the grave and a social
organization and political economy similar to those of the bees.
Nothing could better prove the uselessness of man’s effort than this
unparalleled loss, if we did not strive to hope in spite of all.

A nation of wonderful metallurgists, who had discovered the means of
tempering copper for which we are still seeking, a nation of fabulous
engineers, whose geometry, as Professor Smyth tells us, began where
Euclid’s ends, they lifted and transported to enormous distances, by
mysterious methods, rocks weighing fifteen hundred tons and strewed
the world with those fantastic moving stones known as “mad stones”
and “stones of truth,” stones weighing five hundred tons and so
ingeniously poised on one of their corners that a child can move them
with its finger, whereas the united impetus of two hundred men would
be incapable of overturning them, stones which, from the geological
point of view, never belong to the spot where they are found. A nation
of explorers who had traversed and colonized the whole surface of
the earth, a nation of scholars, mathematicians and astronomers,
they appear to have been above all things ruthless rationalists and
logicians, endowed with, so to speak, a metallic brain, the lateral
lobes of which were much more highly developed than ours. They applied
their incomparable faculties exclusively to the study of the exact
sciences; and the sole object of their energies was the conquest of
truth. But the study of the invisible and the infinite, under their
powerful scrutiny, itself becomes an exact science; and the main idea
of their cosmogony, by virtue of which everything issues from the ocean
of cosmic matter or from the boundless waves of the eternal ether, soon
to return and to reemerge, disfigured and overladen with numberless
myths by the imagination of their degenerate descendants or settlers:
this main idea forms the base of every religion. It is improbable that
man will ever discover one to equal it or replace it.


10

It is in the sacred books of India that we find the surest and most
plentiful traces of this cosmogony or of this revelation. Less than a
century ago, men were almost wholly unaware of the existence of these
sacred books. Their interpreters have taken two different paths. On
the one hand, scholars whom we may describe as official have supplied
translations of a certain number of texts, which might also be called
official, texts which they do not always understand and which their
readers understand even less. On the other hand, initiates, genuine
or pretended, with the assistance of adepts of an occult fraternity,
have suggested a new and more impressive interpretation of these same
texts or of others still more secret. They still, rightly or wrongly,
inspire a certain distrust. We are obliged to admit the authenticity
and the antiquity of certain traditions, of certain primitive and
essential writings, though it is impossible to assign an approximate
date to them, so completely are they merged in the mists of the
prehistoric ages. But they are almost incomprehensible without keys and
commentaries; and it is here that our doubts and hesitations begin. A
large number of those commentaries are likewise very ancient and in
their turn need keys; others appear to be more recent; lastly, others
seem to be contemporary; and it is often difficult to draw a dividing
line between that which may well exist in the original and that which
the interpreters believe to exist in the original or which they more or
less deliberately add to it. Now the most striking, the most impressive
and in any case the most lucid part of the doctrine is often contained
in the commentaries.

Next, as I have observed, comes the question of the keys, which
is intimately connected with the foregoing. These keys are more
or less workable and command more or less respect; sometimes they
seem fanciful or arbitrary; they are delivered only with curious
precautions, singly and grudgingly; and they are apt to unlock several
superimposed meanings. And all this is accompanied by fantastic
reticences, by so-called dangerous or terrible secrets, withheld at
the decisive moment, and by revelations which, it is contended, cannot
be communicated until many centuries have elapsed. Doors through which
we were about to pass are slammed in our faces just as we were at last
catching a glimpse of a long-promised horizon; and behind each of them
hides a supreme initiate, a still living master, the sacred guardian
of the ultimate mysteries, who knows all things, but can or will say
nothing.

Observe, moreover, that a host of more or less intelligent
_illuminati_, of elderly women and unbalanced spinsters, of
simple-minded people who accept, blindly and off-hand, that which
they do not understand, of discontented, unsuccessful, vain or crafty
persons who fish in troubled waters, in a word, all the usual suspect
mob that gathers round any more or less mysterious doctrine, science
or phenomenon, has discredited these first esoteric interpretations,
of which the very source is none too dear. Lastly, let us add that the
burning of the famous library of Alexandria, in which all the knowledge
of the east was amassed, the destruction in the sixteenth century,
under the Mogul Akbar, of thousands of Sanskrit volumes, the systematic
and merciless demolition, especially during the first few centuries
of the Church and in the Middle Ages, of all that referred or alluded
to this dreaded and embarrassing revelation, have deprived us of our
best means of control. The adepts, it is true, assert on the other hand
that the true texts, as well as the ancient commentaries which alone
enable them to be understood, still exist in the secret crypts and
subterranean libraries of Thibet or the Himalayas, libraries of books
more innumerable than any which we possess in the west, and that they
will reappear in a more enlightened age. It is possible, but in the
meanwhile they are of no help to us.


11

Be this as it may, what we have is enough to perplex us greatly;
and the control allowed by the fragments which have been saved from
historic antiquity absolutely removes all suspicion of more or less
recent fraud or deception in respect of the essentials. Moreover, any
fraud or deception of this nature seems hardly possible and would be
so ingenious that we should be obliged to marvel at it as a phenomenon
almost as remarkable as that whereof it would be seeking to give the
illusion; and we should have to admit that the mind of man has never
insinuated itself so far into the infinity of time and space, or
into the origin of things, and has never risen to such heights. Had
this revelation profited by all the attainments of our latter-day
science and thought, it could not have furnished us with theories
more satisfactory, more logical, more coherent, more plausible, more
synthetic, or worthier of the infinity which they strive to embrace
and often seem to attain, on the rhythm of the eternities, the ebb
and flow of the eternal Becoming, the never-ending cycle and the
periodic existences of the ego, the birth, movement and evolution of
the worlds, the divine breath and the intelligence that animate it, on
Maya, the eternal illusion of ignorance, the struggle for life, natural
selection, the gradual development and transformation of stars and
men, the functions and energies of the ether, immortal and infallible
justice, the intermolecular and fantastic activity of matter, on the
nature of the soul and the existence of the vast, nameless power that
governs the universe, in a word, on all the riddles that assail and all
the mysteries that overwhelm us.

But, let us hasten to repeat it, there could not seriously be any
question of fraud, because the texts or traditions that might be
regarded with suspicion are corroborated by other texts, such as the
sacred inscriptions of Egypt, which no one thinks of contesting. At
most we may come upon a few passages antedated by the imprudent
zeal of adepts or commentators, a few interpolations which merely
embroider the majestic lines. Taking it as a whole, we have to do with
a revelation which dates back infinitely farther than all that we
have called the prehistoric ages, wherefore it is legitimate that our
astonishment should be unbounded.


12

Very good, it will be said, this interpretation of the universe, this
anthropocosmogenesis is the loftiest, the most spacious, the most
wonderful, the most unassailable that has ever been conceived; it
teems in every part with human thought and imagination; but what is
it all based upon? When all is said, we have here only magnificent
hypotheses, boldly disguised as authoritative, dogmatic and peremptory
declarations, but every one incapable of verification. This is the
objection which I myself put forward, a little hastily, in one of the
early chapters of _Our Eternity_.

It is indeed undeniable that we shall not for some time to come, that
perhaps we shall never know the truth about the origin and the end of
the universe or any of the other problems which these declarations
profess to solve. But it is curious to note that science, despite
itself, is daily drawing nearer to one or other of these declarations
and that it is unable to set aside or to contradict any of them. There
is for example, a certain study of the genesis of the elements, by the
well-known chemist, Sir William Crookes, which unconsciously becomes
plainly occultist, while the discovery of the radioactivity of matter
reproduces precisely the theory of vortices of the initiate Anaxagoras.
It is the same, _mutatis mutandis_, with the function attributed to
the ether, the latest, indispensable postulate of our scientists. It
is the same with the supreme and essential functions of certain minute
glands of which modern medicine is only now beginning to rediscover
the importance and which probably hold hidden the primordial secrets
of life: the thyroid gland, which directs growth and intelligence;
the suprarenal gland, which governs the unconscious muscle that is the
heart; and the pineal gland, the most mysterious of all, which brings
us into relation with the unknown worlds. It is the same again with
astronomy, when the manifest insufficiency of our so-called cosmic
laws, notably that of gravitation, propounds a host of questions which
only the cosmogony of the east is able to answer. But this would
require a long enquiry, which I am not qualified to undertake.

For the rest, nothing obliges us to accept these declarations as
dogmas. There is no question here of a religion which imposes upon us
its blind faith, its _Credo quia absurdum_. We are quite entitled to
regard them as mere hypotheses, as immense, incomparable antediluvian
poems, of which the Mosaic Genesis is but a disfigured fragment.
But, even as hypotheses or poems, it must be admitted that they are
prodigious, that we have nothing better, nothing more probable to set
against them and that, in view of their incontestable antiquity, of
their prehistoric origin, they seem really superhuman.

Must we admit, as the occultists contend, that they come to us from
beings superior to man, from more spiritual entities, living under
unknown conditions, who occupied our earth or the neighbouring planets
before our coming; from a Lemuro-Atlantean civilization which, in
its megalithic monuments, has left indelible traces in the memory of
the peoples and on the face of our earth? It is quite possible; but
here again we are free to await the confirmations of Hindu, Egyptian,
Chaldean, Assyrian and Persian archæology, which on this point, as on
so many others, has not spoken its last word.


13

I am well aware that this revelation, as apparently all those which
may be made in the course of time, dates back to and ends in the
unknowable, the insoluble mystery of divinity, of being, or existence;
and it necessarily stops short before the barrier of this unknowable,
which is as impenetrable and impregnable as a cliff that is infinite in
every dimension and formed of a single block of black diamond. There is
nothing to be done; we can but halt; we cannot even seek to outflank
it, to approach it from the other side, for the other side, if we could
reach it, would necessarily be like the side in front of us, seeing
that the non-existence of everything would be just as inexplicable,
just as incomprehensible as its existence. It is true that, in the
secret recesses of the doctrine, the universe and all that it contains
is known as Maya, that is to say, the eternal illusion, so that the two
irreconcilable mysteries unite in a still greater mystery which man’s
intelligence can no longer approach.

Fundamentally, the primitive riddle, the primordial mystery not
being elucidated, all the rest illumines only the steps that lead
from comparative knowledge to absolute ignorance. It will probably
be the same with all the revelations that may address themselves to
man’s intelligence so long as he continues on this planet, for this
intelligence doubtless has limits which no effort can enlarge. But in
the meantime it is certain that these steps, which lead to nothing,
nevertheless, at the first onset and from the earliest days led him
to the highest point which his intelligence has attained or can hope
to attain. The most ancient explanation embraces straightway all the
attempts at explanation that have hitherto been offered. It harmonizes
the positivism of science with the most transcendental idealism; it
accepts matter and spirit; it reconciles the mechanical impulsion
of atoms and worlds with their intelligent guidance. It gives us
an unconditioned divinity, “a causeless cause of all the causes,”
worthy of the universe which is this divinity itself and of which all
the divinities that have succeeded it in all our religions are but
scattered, mutilated and unrecognizable members. It offers us, lastly,
in its law of Karma, by virtue of which each being undergoes in his
successive lives the consequences of his actions and gradually purifies
himself, the loftiest, justest and most unassailable, the most fertile,
consoling and hopeful moral principle that could ever be proposed to
man. Because of all this it appears worthy of investigation, respect
and admiration.


14

This respect and admiration, however, do not militate against our
liberty to choose or reject many things, or to reserve them while we
wait for further light. When we are told, for instance, that the Cosmos
is guided by an infinite series of hierarchies of sensient beings, each
having a mission to fulfil, which are the agents of the Karmic and
Cosmic laws; when it is added that each of these beings was a man in
an earlier Manvantara, or is preparing to become one in the present or
in a future Manvantara, that they are perfected men, or nascent men,
and that, in their higher and less material spheres, they do not differ
morally from terrestrial human beings save in that they do not possess
the sense of personality and of emotional nature; when, lastly, we are
assured that what we call unconscious Nature is in reality a complex of
forces manipulated by semi-intelligent beings (Elementals) directed by
the High Planetary Spirits (Dhyani-Shohans), whose total forms the Word
Manifest of the non-manifest Logos and constitutes at the same time
both the intelligence of the universe and its immutable law, we can do
homage to the ingenuity of these speculations, as to that of thousands
of others which perhaps embrace the truth more closely than our best
and most recent scientific hypotheses; we are free to take what we
please from them and to leave what we please. All this, I grant, is
by no means proved, is not verified, or cannot be verified, save in
certain details, whereas the great fundamental outlines will probably
always escape the control of our unequipped intelligence. But what we
must, I repeat, admire without reserve is the prodigious spiritual
edifice offered by the sum total of this revelation, the immense
intellectual effort which, since the dawn of humanity, has attempted
to unravel the unfathomable chaos of the origin, structure, progress,
direction and end of the universe and which appears to have succeeded
to this extent, that hitherto nothing has been found that equals it, or
is not inspired by it or, often unconsciously, returns to it.


15

I said in the first part of this essay that too lofty a revelation,
even were it incontestable, would have hardly any influence upon our
life, that it would change little in it, that it would occur too far
from us in the immensity of space and that it would not sink into our
hearts and minds. Was it thus with that of which we are now speaking,
which is the only truly superhuman and yet acceptable and almost
unassailable revelation that we have had? Yes and no, according to the
point of view which we take up. All that it contains of too great a
character, except its notion of eternity, has not really modified our
ideas, has not permeated into our habits. It has not even profoundly
affected the peoples who have handed it down to us and who, abandoning
any endeavour to understand it, have transformed it into a barbarous
and monstrous anthropomorphic polytheism. It is more or less the same
everywhere. All the religions, from the pagan religions of China and
Japan, Gaul and ancient Germany, Mexico and Peru, down to Christianity
with its variants and its offshoots, have issued from it; but all
have not been able to live and govern men, save by disfiguring and
mutilating it, by dwarfing it to the lowest stature of the souls of
their time, by altering it beyond recognition. It is therefore highly
probable that matters would be the same with any other and greater
revelation, if such were possible, even though this had all the signs
of a divine, direct, authentic, indubitable, irrefutable, irrecusable
revelation, in a word, with that which we are still awaiting without
daring to hope for it.




THE NECESSARY SILENCE




