Chapter III

Polly and Bingo always made the audience “sit up” when they swept into
the ring. She was so young, so gaily clad, so light and joyous in all
her poses. She seemed scarcely to touch the back of the white horse, as
they dashed round the ring in the glare of the tent lights. The other
performers went through their work mechanically while Polly rode, for
they knew the audience was watching her only.

As for Polly, her work had never lost its first interest. Jim may have
been right when he said that the spirit of the dead mother had got into
her; but it must have been an unsatisfied spirit, unable to fulfil its
ambition in the body that once held it, for it sometimes played strange
pranks with Polly. To-night, her eyes shone and her lips were parted in
anticipation, as she leaped lightly over the many coloured streamers of
the wheel of silken ribbons held by Barker in the centre of the ring,
and by Toby and the “tumblers” on the edge of the bank.

With each change of her act, the audience cheered and frantically
applauded. The band played faster; Bingo's pace increased; the end of
her turn was coming. The “tumblers” arranged themselves around the ring
with paper hoops; Bingo was fairly racing. She went through the first
hoop with a crash of tearing paper and cheers from the audience.

“Heigh, Bingo!” she shouted, as she bent her knees to make ready for the
final leap.

Bingo's neck was stretched. He had never gone so fast before. Barker
looked uneasy. Toby forgot to go on with his accustomed tricks. Jim
watched anxiously from the entrance.

The paper of one hoop was still left unbroken. The attendant turned his
eyes to glance at the oncoming girl; the hoop shifted slightly in his
clumsy hand as Polly leapt straight up from Bingo's back, trusting to
her first calculation. Her forehead struck the edge of the hoop. She
clutched wildly at the air. Bingo galloped on, and she fell to the
ground, striking her head against the iron-bound stake at the edge of
the ring.

Everything stopped. There was a gasp of horror; the musicians dropped
their instruments; Bingo halted and looked back uneasily; she lay
unconscious and seemingly lifeless.

A great cry went up in the tent. Panic-stricken, men, women and children
began to clamber down from their seats, while others nearest the ground
attempted to jump into the ring. Barker, still grasping his long whip,
rushed to the girl's side, and shouted wildly to Toby:

“Say something, you. Get 'em back!”

Old Toby turned his white face to the crowd, his features worked
convulsively, but he could not speak. His grief was so grotesque, that
the few who saw him laughed hysterically. He could not even go to Polly,
his feet seemed pinned to the earth.

Jim rushed into the tent at the first cry of the audience. He lifted the
limp form tenderly, and kneeling in the ring held her bruised head in
his hands.

“Can't you get a doctor!” he shouted desperately to Barker.

“Here's the doctor!” some one called; and a stranger came toward them.
He bent over the seemingly lifeless form, his fingers on the tiny wrist,
his ear to the heart.

“Well, sir?” Jim faltered, for he had caught the puzzled look in the
doctor's eyes as his deft hand pressed the cruelly wounded head.

“I can't tell just yet,” said the doctor. “She must be taken away.”

“Where can we take her?” asked Jim, a look of terror in his great,
troubled eyes.

“The parsonage is the nearest house,” said the doctor. “I am sure the
pastor will be glad to have her there until we can find out how badly
she is hurt.”

In an instant Barker was back in the centre of the ring. He announced
that Polly's injuries were slight, called the attention of the audience
to the wonderful concert to take place, and bade them make ready for the
thrilling chariot race which would end the show.

Jim, blind with despair, lifted the light burden and staggered out of
the tent, while the band played furiously and the people fell back
into their seats. The Roman chariots thundered and clattered around the
outside of the ring, the audience cheered the winner of the race, and
for the moment Polly was forgotten.



Chapter IV

THE blare of the circus band had been a sore temptation to Mandy Jones
all afternoon and evening. Again and again it had dragged her from
her work to the study window, from which she could see the wonders so
tantalisingly near. Mandy was housekeeper for the Rev. John Douglas,
but the unwashed supper dishes did not trouble her, as she watched the
lumbering elephants, the restless lions, the long-necked giraffes and
the striped zebras, that came and went in the nearby circus lot. And
yet, in spite of her own curiosity, she could not forgive her vagrant
“worse half,” Hasty, who had been lured from duty early in the day. She
had once dubbed him Hasty, in a spirit of derision, and the name had
clung to him. The sarcasm seemed doubly appropriate to-night, for he had
been away since ten that morning, and it was now past nine.

The young pastor for a time had enjoyed Mandy's tirades against her
husband, but when she began calling shrilly out of the window to chance
acquaintances for news of him, he slipped quietly into the next room to
finish to-morrow's sermon. Mandy renewed her operations at the window
with increased vigour when the pastor had gone. She was barely saved
from pitching head foremost into the lot, by the timely arrival of
Deacon Strong's daughter, who managed, with difficulty, to connect the
excited woman's feet with the floor.

“Foh de Lor' sake!” Mandy gasped, as she stood panting for breath and
blinking at the pretty, young, apple-faced Julia; “I was suah most gone
dat time.” Then followed another outburst against the delinquent Hasty.

But the deacon's daughter did not hear; her eyes were already wandering
anxiously to the lights and the tinsel of the little world beyond the
window.

This was not the first time to-day that Mandy had found herself talking
to space. There had been a steady stream of callers at the parsonage
since eleven that morning, but she had long ago confided to the pastor
that she suspected their reasons.

“Dey comes in here a-trackin' up my floors,” she said, “and a-askin'
why you don' stop de circus from a-showin' nex' to de church and den
a-cranin' afar necks out de winder, till I can't get no housework done.”

“That's only human nature,” Douglas had answered with a laugh; but
Mandy had declared that she knew another name for it, and had mumbled
something about “hypocritters,” as she seized her broom and began to
sweep imaginary tracks from in front of the door.

Many times she had made up her mind to let the next caller know just
what she thought of “hypocritters,” but her determination was usually
weakened by her still greater desire to excite increased wonder in the
faces of her visitors.

Divided between these two inclinations, she gazed at Julia now; the
shining eyes of the deacon's daughter conquered, and she launched forth
into an eager description of how she had just seen a “wondeful striped
anamule” with a “pow'ful long neck walk right out of the tent,” and how
he had “come apart afore her very eyes,” and two men had slipped “right
out a' his insides.” Mandy was so carried away by her own eloquence and
so busy showing Julia the sights beyond the window, that she did not
hear Miss Perkins, the thin-lipped spinster, who entered, followed by
the Widow Willoughby dragging her seven-year-old son Willie by the hand.

The women were protesting because their choir practice of “What
Shall the Harvest Be?” had been interrupted by the unrequested
acompaniment{sic} of the “hoochie coochie” from the nearby circus band.

“It's scandalous!” Miss Perkins snapped. “Scandalous! And SOMEBODY ought
to stop it.” She glanced about with an unmistakable air of grievance at
the closed doors, feeling that the pastor was undoubtedly behind one of
them, when he ought to be out taking action against the things that her
soul abominated.

“Well, I'm sure I'VE done all that _I_ could,” piped the widow, with
a meek, martyred air. She was always martyred. She considered it an
appropriate attitude for a widow. “He can't blame ME if the choir is out
of key to-morrow.” “Mercy me!” interrupted the spinster, “if there isn't
Julia Strong a-leaning right out of that window a-looking at the circus,
and her pa a deacon of the church, and this the house of the pastor.
It's shocking! I must go to her.”

“Ma, let me see, too,” begged Willie, as he tugged at his mother's
skirts.

Mrs. Willoughby hesitated. Miss Perkins was certainly taking a long
while for her argument with Julia. The glow from the red powder outside
the window was positively alarming.

“Dear me!” she said, “I wonder if there can be a fire.” And with this
pretext for investigation, she, too, joined the little group at the
window.

A few moments later when Douglas entered for a fresh supply of paper,
the backs of the company were toward him. He crossed to the study table
without disturbing his visitors, and smiled to himself at the eager way
in which they were hanging out of the window.

Douglas was a sturdy young man of eight and twenty, frank and boyish in
manner, confident and light-hearted in spirit. He had seemed too young
to the deacons when he was appointed to their church, and his keen
enjoyment of outdoor games and other healthful sports robbed him of a
certain dignity in their eyes. Some of the women of the congregation had
been inclined to side with the deacons, for it hurt their vanity that
the pastor found so many other interests when he might have been sitting
in dark, stuffy rooms discussing theology with them; but Douglas had
been either unconscious of or indifferent to their resentment, and had
gone on his way with a cheery nod and an unconquerable conviction of
right, that had only left them floundering. He intended to quit the room
now unnoticed, but was unfortunate enough to upset a chair as he turned
from the table. This brought a chorus of exclamations from the women,
who chattering rushed quickly toward him.

“What do you think of my naughty boy, Willie?” simpered the widow. “He
dragged me quite to the window.”

Douglas glanced amusedly first at the five-foot-six widow and then at
the helpless, red-haired urchin by her side, but he made no comment
beyond offering a chair to each of the women.

“Our choir practice had to be entirely discontinued,” declared Miss
Perkins sourly, as she accepted the proffered chair, adjusted her skirts
for a stay, and glanced defiantly at the parson, who had dutifully
seated himself near the table.

“I am sure _I_ have as true an ear as anybody,” whimpered the widow,
with an injured air; “but I defy ANY ONE to lead 'What Shall the
Harvest Be?' to an accompaniment like THAT.” She jerked her hand in
the direction of the window. The band was again playing the “hoochie
coochie.”

“Never mind about the choir practice,” said Douglas, with a smile. “It
is SOUL not SKILL that our congregation needs in its music. As for that
music out there, it is NOT without its compensations. Why, the small
boys would rather hear that band than the finest church organ in the
world.”

“And the SMALL BOYS would rather see the circus than to hear you preach,
most likely,” snapped Miss Perkins. It was adding insult to injury for
him to try to CONSOLE her.

“Of course they would; and so would some of the grown-ups if they'd only
tell the truth about it,” said Douglas, laughing.

“What!” exclaimed Miss Perkins.

“Why not?” asked Douglas. “I am sure I don't know what they do inside
the tents, but the parade looked very promising.”

“The PARADE!” the two women echoed in one breath. “Did YOU see the
parade?”

“Yes, indeed,” said Douglas, enthusiastically. “But it didn't compare
with the one I saw at the age of eight.” He turned his head to one side
and looked into space with a reminiscent smile. The widow's red-haired
boy crept close to him.

“The Shetland ponies seemed as small as mice,” he continued, dreamily,
“the elephants huge as mountains, the great calliope wafted my soul to
the very skies, and I followed that parade right into the circus lot.”

“Did you seed inside de tent?” Willie asked, eagerly.

“I didn't have enough money for that,” Douglas answered, frankly.
He turned to the small boy and pinched his ear. There was sad
disappointment in the youngster's face, but he brightened again, when
the parson confessed that he “peeped.”

“A parson peeping!” cried the thin-lipped Miss Perkins.

“I was not a parson then,” corrected Douglas, good-naturedly.

“You were GOING to be,” persisted the spinster.

“I had to be a boy first, in spite of that fact.”

The sudden appearance of Hasty proved a diversion. He was looking very
sheepish.

“Hyar he is, Mars John; look at him!” said Mandy.

“Hasty, where have you been all day?” demanded Douglas, severely.

Hasty fumbled with his hat and sparred for time. “Did yo' say whar's I
been, sah?”

“Dat's what he done ast yo',” Mandy prompted, threateningly.

“I bin 'ceived, Mars John,” declared Hasty, solemnly. Mandy snorted
incredulously. Douglas waited.

“A gemmen in de circus done tole me dis mawnin' dat ef I carry water
fo' de el'phants, he'll let me in de circus fo' nuffin', an' I make a
'greement wid him. Mars John, did yo' ebber seed an' el'phant drink?” he
asked, rolling his eyes. John shook his head.

“Well, sah, he jes' put dat trunk a'his'n into de pail, jes' once
an--swish--water gone.”

Douglas laughed; and Mandy muttered, sullenly.

“Well, sah,” continued Hasty, “I tote water fo' dem el'phants all day
long, an' when I cum roun' to see de circus, de gemmen won't let me in.
An' when I try to crawl under de tent, dey pulls me out by de laigs an'
beats me.” He looked from one to the other expecting sympathy.

“Serves you right,” was Mandy's unfeeling reply. “If yo's so anxious to
be a-totin' water, jes' yo' come along outside and tote some fo' Mandy.”

“I can't do no mo' carryin', Mandy,” protested Hasty. “I'se hurted in
mah arm.”

“What hurt yo'?”

“Tiger.”

“A tiger?” exclaimed the women in unison.

“Done chawed it mos' off,” he declared, solemnly. “Deacon Elverson, he
seed it, an' he says I's hurt bad.”

“Deacon Elverson?” cried the spinster. “Was Deacon Elverson at the
circus?”

“He was in de lot, a-tryin' to look in, same as me,” Hasty answered,
innocently.

“You'd better take Hasty into the kitchen,” said Douglas to Mandy, with
a dry smile; “he's talking too much for a wounded man.”

Mandy disappeared with the disgraced Hasty, advising him with fine scorn
“to get de tiger to chew off his laigs, so's he wouldn't have to walk no
mo'.”

The women gazed at each other with lips closed tightly. Elverson's
behaviour was beyond their power of expression. Miss Perkins turned
to the pastor, as though he were somehow to blame for the deacon's
backsliding, but before she could find words to argue the point, the
timid little deacon appeared in the doorway, utterly unconscious of the
hostile reception that Hasty had prepared for him. He glanced nervously
from one set face to the other, then coughed behind his hat.

“We're all very much interested in the circus,” said Douglas. “Can't you
tell us about it?”

“I just went into the lot to look for my son,” stammered the deacon. “I
feared Peter had strayed.”

“Why, deacon,” said Mrs. Willoughby. “I just stopped by your house and
saw Mrs. Elverson putting Peter to bed.”

The deacon was saved from further embarrassment by an exclamation from
Julia, who had stayed at the window. “Oh, look; something has happened!”
 she cried. “There's a crowd. They are coming this way.”

Douglas crossed quickly to Julia's side, and saw an excited mob
collecting before the entrance to the main tent. He had time to discover
no more before Mandy burst in at the door, panting with excitement and
rolling her large, white-rimmed eyeballs.

“Mars John, a little circus girl done fall off her hoss!” she cried.
“Dr. Hartley say can dey bring her in heah?”

“Of course,” said Douglas, hurrying outside.

There were horrified exclamations from the women, who were aghast at the
idea of a circus rider in the parsonage. In their helpless indignation,
they turned upon the little deacon, feeling intuitively that he was
enjoying the drama. Elverson was retreating toward the door when he was
suddenly thrust aside by Douglas.

In the young pastor's arms was a white, spangled burden of humanity, her
slender arm hung lifeless over his shoulder. The silk stocking was torn
from one bruised ankle; her hair fell across her face, veiling it from
the unfriendly glances of the women. Douglas passed out of sight up the
stairway without looking to the right or left, followed by the doctor.

Mandy reached the front door in time to push back a crowd of intruders.
She had barely closed the door when it was thrust open by Jim.

“Where is she?” he demanded.

“Go 'way f'um here!” cried Mandy, as her eyes unconsciously sought the
stairs.

Jim followed the direction of her glance, and cleared the steps at a
bound. Mandy pursued him, muttering angrily. Deacon Elverson, too, was
about to follow, when a grim reminder from Miss Perkins brought him
around and he made for the door instead. He started back on opening it,
for standing on the threshold was a clown in his grotesque “make-up”;
his white clothes were partially concealed by a large, travelling
ulster, held together by one button. In one hand he carried a small
leather satchel; in the other a girl's sailor hat; a little tan coat was
thrown across his arm. The giggles of the boy hiding behind his mother's
skirt were the only greetings received by the trembling old man in the
doorway.

He glanced uncertainly from one unfriendly face to the other, waiting
for a word of invitation to enter; but none came.

“Excuse me,” he said; “I just brought some of her little things. She'd
better put on her coat when she goes out. It's gettin' kinder chilly.”

He looked again into the blank faces; still no one spoke. He stepped
forward, trembling with anxiety. A sudden fear clutched at his heart,
the muscles of his face worked pitifully, the red painted lips began to
quiver.

“It ain't--It ain't that, is it?” he faltered, unable to utter the word
that filled him with horror.

Even Miss Perkins was momentarily touched by the anguish in the old
man's voice. “I guess you will find the person you are looking for
upstairs,” she answered tartly; and flounced out of the house, calling
to Julia and the others to follow her, and declaring that she would soon
let folks know how the parson had brought a “circus ridin' girl” into
the parsonage.

The painted clown stood alone, looking from one wall to the other, then
he crossed the room and placed the alligator satchel and the little coat
and hat on the study table. He was careful not to wrinkle the coat,
for this was Polly's birthday gift. Jim and he had planned to have
sandwiches and soda pop on the top of the big wagon when they offered
their treasures tonight; but now the wagons would soon be leaving--and
where was Polly? He turned to ask this question as Mandy came down the
stairs.

“Well, if dar ain't anudder one,” she cried.

“Never mind, Mandy,” said Douglas, who was just behind her, carrying a
small water pitcher, and searching for a bottle of brandy which had been
placed in the medicine chest for emergencies.

“You can take these upstairs,” he told her, when he had filled the
pitcher with water and found the liquor. Mandy looked threateningly at
Toby, then reluctantly went on her way.

Douglas turned to the old man pleasantly. His was the first greeting
that Toby had received, and he at last found voice to ask whether Polly
was badly hurt.

“The doctor hasn't told us yet,” said Douglas, kindly.

“I'm her Uncle Toby--not her REAL uncle,” the old man explained, “but
that's what she calls me. I couldn't come out right away, because I'm on
in the concert. Could I see her now, please?”

“Here's the doctor,” said Douglas, as Hartley came down the stairs,
followed by Jim. “Well, doctor, not bad, I hope?”

“Yes, rather bad,” said the doctor, adding quickly, as he saw the
suffering in Toby's face, “but don't be alarmed. She's going to get
well.”

“How long will it be before we can have her back--before she can ride
again?” asked Jim gruffly, as he stood apart, twisting his brown, worn
hat in his hands.

“Probably several months,” said the doctor. “No bones are broken, but
the ligaments of one ankle are torn, and she received a bad blow on the
head. It will be some time before she recovers consciousness.” “What are
we goin' to do, Jim?” asked Toby, helplessly.

“You needn't worry, we'll take good care of her here,” said Douglas,
seeing desperation written on their faces.

“Here?” They looked at him incredulously.--And this was a parson!

“Where are her parents?” the doctor asked, looking at Jim and Toby.

“She ain't got no parents 'cept Toby an' me,” replied Jim. “We've took
care of her ever since she was a baby.”

“Oh, I see,” said the doctor. “Well, one of you'd better stay here until
she can be moved.”

“That's the trouble; we can't,” said Toby, hanging his head. “You see,
sir, circus folks is like soldiers. No matter what happens, the show has
to go on, and we got to be in our places.”

“Well, well, she'll be safe enough, here,” said the doctor. “It is a
fortunate thing that Mr. Douglas can manage this. Our town hospital
burned down a few months ago, and we've been rather puzzled as to what
to do with such cases.” He took his leave with a cheery “Good night,”
 and a promise to look in upon the little patient later. Jim shuffled
awkwardly toward the pastor.

“It's mighty good of you to do this,” he mumbled, “but she ain't goin'
to be no charity patient. Me and Toby is goin' to look after her keep.”

“Her wants will be very few,” Douglas answered, kindly. “You needn't
trouble much about that.”

“I mean it,” said Jim, savagely. He met Douglas's glance of surprise
with a determined look, for he feared that his chance of being useful to
Polly might be slipping out of his life.

“You mustn't mind Jim,” the clown pleaded at the pastor's elbow. “You
see pain gets some folks different from others; and it always kinder
makes him savage.”

“Oh, that's all right,” Douglas answered, quickly. His own life had
been so lonely, that he could understand the selfish yearning in the big
man's heart. “You must do what you think best about these things; Mandy
and I will look after the rest.”

Jim hung his head, feeling somehow that the pastor had seen straight
into his heart and discovered his petty weakness. He was about to turn
toward the door when it was thrown open by Barker.

“Where is she?” shouted the manager, looking from one to the other.

“She can't come,” said Jim in a low, steady voice, for he knew the storm
of opposition with which Barker would meet the announcement.

“Can't come?” shrieked Barker. “Of course she'll come. I can't get along
without her. She's GOT to come.” He looked at Jim, who remained silent
and firm. “WHY ain't she comin'?” he asked, feeling himself already
defeated.

“She's hurt bad,” was Jim's laconic reply.

“The devil she is!” said Barker, looking at Douglas for confirmation.
“Is that right?”

“She won't be able to travel for some time,” said Douglas.

“Mr. Barker is our manager,” Toby explained, as he edged his way to the
pastor's side.

“Some time!” Barker looked at Douglas as though he were to blame for
their misfortune. “Well, you just bet she will,” he declared menacingly.

“See here, Barker, don't you talk to him like that,” said Jim, facing
the manager. “He's darned square even if he is a parson.” Barker turned
away. He was not a bad-hearted man, but he was irritated and upset at
losing the star feature of his bill.

“Ain't this my dod-gasted luck?” he muttered to himself, as his eye
again travelled to the boss canvas-man. “You get out a' here, Jim,” he
shouted, “an' start them wagons. The show's got to go on, Poll or no
Poll.”

He turned with his hand on the door-knob and jerked out a grudging
thanks to the pastor. “It's all fired good of you to take her in,” he
said, “but it's tough to lose her. Good night!” He banged the door and
clattered down the steps.

Jim waited. He was trying to find words in which to tell his gratitude.
None came; and he turned to go with a short “good-bye!”

“Good night, Jim,” said the pastor. He crossed the room and took the big
fellow's hand.

“Much obliged,” Jim answered gruffly. It was his only polite phrase, and
he had taught Polly to say it. Douglas waited until Jim had passed down
the steps, then turned to Toby, who still lingered near the table.

“You'll tell her how it was, me and Jim had to leave her without sayin'
'good-bye,' won't you, sir?” Toby pleaded.

“Yes, indeed,” Douglas promised.

“I'll jes' put this little bit o' money into her satchel.” He picked up
the little brown bag that was to have been Polly's birthday gift. “Me
an' Jim will be sendin' her more soon.”

“You're going to miss her, I'm afraid,” Douglas said, feeling an
irresistible desire to gain the old man's confidence.

“Lord bless you, yes, sir,” Toby answered, turning upon him eagerly.
“Me an' Jim has been father an' mother and jes' about everythin' to that
little one. She wan't much bigger'n a handful of peanuts when we begun
a-worryin' about her.”

“Well, Mandy will do the worrying now,” Douglas laughed. “She's been
dying for a chance to mother somebody all along. Why, she even tried it
on me.”

“I noticed as how some of those church people seemed to look kinder
queer at me,” said Toby, “and I been a-wonderin' if mebbe they might
feel the same about her.”

“Oh, they're all right,” Douglas assured him; “they'll be her friends in
no time.”

“She's fit for 'em, sir,” Toby pleaded. “She's good, clean into the
middle of her heart.”

“I'm sure of it,” Douglas answered.

“I've heard how some church folks feels towards us circus people, sir,
and I jes' wanted ye to know that there ain't finer families, or better
mothers or fathers or grandfathers or grandmothers anywhere than we got
among us. Why, that girl's mother rode the horses afore her, and her
mother afore that, and her grandmother and grandfather afore that,
an' there ain't nobody what's cared more for their good name and their
children's good name an' her people has. You see, sir, circus folks
is all like that; they's jes' like one big family; they tends to their
business and takes good care o' theirselves--they has to--or they
couldn't do their work. It's 'cause I'm leavin' her with you that I'm
sayin' all this,” the old man apologised.

“I'm glad you told me, Toby,” Douglas answered, kindly. “I've never
known much about circus folks.”

“I guess I'd better be goin',” Toby faltered, as his eyes roved hungrily
toward the stairway.

“I'll send you our route, and mebbe you'll be lettin' us know how she
is.”

“Indeed I will,” Douglas assured him, heartily.

“You might tell her we'll write ever' day or so,” he added.

“I'll tell her,” Douglas promised earnestly.

“Good night!” The old man hesitated, unwilling to go, but unable to find
further pretext for staying.

“Good night, Toby.” Douglas extended his hand toward the bent figure
that was about to shuffle past him. The withered hand of the white-faced
clown rested in the strong grasp of the pastor, and his pale, little
eyes sought the face of the stalwart man before him; a numb desolation
was growing in his heart; the object for which he had gone on day by day
was being left behind and he must stumble forth into the night alone.

“It's hard to leave her,” he mumbled; “but the show has got to go on.”

The door shut out the bent, old figure. Douglas stood for some time
where Toby had left him, still thinking of his prophetic words. His
revery was broken by the sounds of the departing wagons, the low
muttered curses of the drivers, the shrieking and roaring of the
animals, as the circus train moved up the distant hill. “The show has
got to go on,” he repeated as he crossed to his study table and seated
himself for work in the dim light of the old-fashioned lamp. He put out
one hand to draw the sheets of his interrupted sermon toward him, but
instead it fell upon a small sailor hat. He twisted the hat absently in
his fingers, not yet realising the new order of things that was coming
into his life. Mandy tiptoed softly down the stairs. She placed one
pudgy forefinger on her lips, and rolled her large eyes skyward. “Dat
sure am an angel chile straight from Hebben,” she whispered. “She done
got a face jes' like a little flower.”

“Straight from heaven,” Douglas repeated, as she crossed softly to the
table and picked up the satchel and coat.

“You can leave the lamp, Mandy--I must finish to-morrow's sermon.”

She turned at the threshold and shook her head rather sadly as she saw
the imprint of the day's cares on the young pastor's face.

“Yo' mus' be pow'ful tired,” she said.

“No, no; not at all. Good night, Mandy!”

She closed the door behind her, and Douglas was alone. He gazed absently
at the pages of his unfinished sermon as he tapped his idle pen on the
desk. “The show has got to go on,” he repeated, and far up the hillside
with the slow-moving wagons, Jim and Toby looked with unseeing eyes into
the dim, star-lit distance, and echoed the thought: “The show has got to
go on.”



