CHAPTER II


After about two hours the Court retired, and I was left with a strong
guard to keep away the crowd, some of whom had had the impudence to
shoot their arrows at me as I sat by the door of my house. But the
colonel ordered six of them to be seized and delivered bound into my
hands. I put five of them into my coat pocket; and as to the sixth, I
made a face as if I would eat him alive. The poor man screamed terribly,
and the colonel and his officers were much distressed, especially when
they saw me take out my penknife. But I soon set them at ease, for,
cutting the strings he was bound with, I put him gently on the ground,
and away he ran. I treated the rest in the same manner, taking them one
by one out of my pocket; and I saw that both the soldiers and people
were delighted at this mark of my kindness.

Toward night I got with some difficulty into my house, where I lay on
the ground, as I had to do for a fortnight, till a bed was prepared for
me out of six hundred beds of the ordinary measure.

Six hundred servants were appointed me, and three hundred tailors made
me a suit of clothes. Moreover, six of his Majesty’s greatest scholars
were employed to teach me their language, so that soon I was able to
converse after a fashion with the Emperor, who often honored me with his
visits. The first words I learned were to desire that he would please
to give me my liberty, which I every day repeated on my knees; but he
answered that this must be a work of time, and that first I must swear a
peace with him and his kingdom. He told me also that by the laws of the
nation I must be searched by two of his officers, and that as this could
not be done without my help, he trusted them in my hands, and whatever
they took from me should be returned when I left the country. I took up
the two officers, and put them into my coat pockets. These gentlemen,
having pen, ink, and paper about them, made an exact list of everything
they saw, which I afterward translated into English, and which ran as
follows:

“In the right coat pocket of the great Man-Mountain we found only one
great piece of coarse cloth, large enough to cover the carpet of your
Majesty’s chief room of state. In the left pocket we saw a huge silver
chest, with a silver cover, which we could not lift. We desired that it
should be opened, and one of us stepping into it found himself up to the
mid-leg in a sort of dust, some of which flying into our faces sent us
both into a fit of sneezing. In his right waistcoat pocket we found a
number of white thin substances, folded one over another, about the size
of three men, tied with a strong cable, and marked with black figures,
which we humbly conceive to be writings. In the left there was a sort of
engine, from the back of which extended twenty long poles, with which,
we conjecture, the Man-Mountain combs his head. In the smaller pocket on
the right side were several round flat pieces of white and red metal, of
different sizes. Some of the white, which appeared to be silver, were
so large and heavy that my comrade and I could hardly lift them. From
another pocket hung a huge silver chain, with a wonderful kind of engine
fastened to it, a globe half silver and half of some transparent metal;
for on the transparent side we saw certain strange figures, and thought
we could touch them till we found our fingers stopped by the shining
substance. This engine made an incessant noise, like a water-mill, and
we conjecture it is either some unknown animal, or the god he worships,
but probably the latter, for he told us that he seldom did anything
without consulting it.

“This is a list of what we found about the body of the Man-Mountain, who
treated us with great civility.”

I had one private pocket which escaped their search, containing a pair
of spectacles and a small spy-glass, which, being of no consequence to
the Emperor, I did not think myself bound in honor to discover.


CHAPTER III


My gentleness and good behavior gained so far on the Emperor and his
Court, and, indeed, on the people in general, that I began to have hopes
of getting my liberty in a short time. The natives came by degrees to be
less fearful of danger from me. I would sometimes lie down and let five
or six of them dance on my hand; and at last the boys and girls ventured
to come and play at hide-and-seek in my hair.

The horses of the army and of the royal stables were no longer shy,
having been daily led before me; and one of the Emperor’s huntsmen, on a
large courser, took my foot, shoe and all, which was indeed a prodigious
leap. I amused the Emperor one day in a very extraordinary manner. I
took nine sticks, and fixed them firmly in the ground in a square. Then
I took four other sticks, and tied them parallel at each corner, about
two feet from the ground. I fastened my handkerchief to the nine sticks
that stood erect, and extended it on all sides till it was as tight as
the top of a drum; and I desired the Emperor to let a troop of his best
horse, twenty-four in number, come and exercise upon this plain. His
majesty approved of the proposal, and I took them up one by one, with
the proper officers to exercise them. As soon as they got into order
they divided into two parties, discharged blunt arrows, drew their
swords, fled and pursued, and, in short, showed the best military
discipline I ever beheld. The parallel sticks secured them and their
horses from falling off the stage, and the Emperor was so much delighted
that he ordered this entertainment to be repeated several days, and
persuaded the Empress herself to let me hold her in her chair within
two yards of the stage, whence she could view the whole performance.
Fortunately no accident happened, only once a fiery horse, pawing with
his hoof, struck a hole in my handkerchief, and overthrew his rider and
himself. But I immediately relieved them both, and covering the hole
with one hand, I set down the troop with the other as I had taken them
up. The horse that fell was strained in the shoulder; but the rider was
not hurt, and I repaired my handkerchief as well as I could. However,
I would not trust to the strength of it any more in such dangerous
enterprises.

I had sent so many petitions for my liberty that his Majesty at length
mentioned the matter in a full council, where it was opposed by none
except Skyresh Bolgolam, admiral of the realm, who was pleased without
any provocation to be my mortal enemy. However, he agreed at length,
though he succeeded in himself drawing up the conditions on which I
should be set free. After they were read I was requested to swear to
perform them in the method prescribed by their laws, which was to hold
my right foot in my left hand, and to place the middle finger of my
right hand on the crown of my head, and my thumb on the top of my right
ear. But I have made a translation of the conditions, which I here offer
to the public:

“Golbaste Mamarem Evlame Gurdile Shefin Mully Ully Gue, Most Mighty
Emperor of Lilliput, delight and terror of the universe, whose dominions
extend to the ends of the globe, monarch of all monarchs, taller than
the sons of men, whose feet press down to the center, and whose head
strikes against the sun, at whose nod the princes of the earth shake
their knees, pleasant as the spring, comfortable as the summer, fruitful
as autumn, dreadful as winter: His Most Sublime Majesty proposeth to the
Man-Mountain, lately arrived at our celestial dominions, the following
articles, which by a solemn oath he shall be obliged to perform:

“First. The Man-Mountain shall not depart from our dominions without our
license under the great seal.

“Second. He shall not presume to come into our metropolis without our
express order, at which time the inhabitants shall have two hours’
warning to keep within doors.

“Third. The said Man-Mountain shall confine his walks to our principal
high roads, and not offer to walk or lie down in a meadow or field of
corn.

“Fourth. As he walks the said roads he shall take the utmost care not to
trample upon the bodies of any of our loving subjects, their horses or
carriages, nor take any of our subjects into his hands without their own
consent.

“Fifth. If an express requires extraordinary speed the Man-Mountain
shall be obliged to carry in his pocket the messenger and horse a six
days’ journey, and return the said messenger (if so required) safe to
our imperial presence.

“Sixth. He shall be our ally against our enemies in the island of
Blefuscu, and do his utmost to destroy their fleet, which is now
preparing to invade us.

“Lastly. Upon his solemn oath to observe all the above articles,
the said Man-Mountain shall have a daily allowance of meat and drink
sufficient for the support of 1,724 of our subjects, with free access to
our royal person, and other marks of our favor. Given at our palace at
Belfaburac, the twelfth day of the ninety-first moon of our reign.”

I swore to these articles with great cheerfulness, whereupon my chains
were immediately unlocked, and I was at full liberty.

One morning, about a fortnight after I had obtained my freedom,
Reldresal, the Emperor’s secretary for private affairs, came to my
house, attended only by one servant. He ordered his coach to wait at
a distance, and desired that I would give him an hour’s audience. I
offered to lie down that he might the more conveniently reach my
ear; but he chose rather to let me hold him in my hand during our
conversation. He began with compliments on my liberty, but he added
that, save for the present state of things at Court, perhaps I might not
have obtained it so soon. “For,” he said, “however flourishing we may
seem to foreigners, we are in danger of an invasion from the island of
Blefuscu, which is the other great empire of the universe, almost as
large and as powerful as this of his Majesty. For as to what we have
heard you say, that there are other kingdoms in the world, inhabited
by human creatures as large as yourself, our philosophers are very
doubtful, and rather conjecture that you dropped from the moon, or one
of the stars, because a hundred mortals of your size would soon destroy
all the fruit and cattle of his Majesty’s dominions. Besides, our
histories of six thousand moons make no mention of any other regions
than the two mighty empires of Lilliput and Blefuscu, which, as I was
going to tell you, are engaged in a most obstinate war, which began in
the following manner: It is allowed on all hands that the primitive
way of breaking eggs was upon the larger end; but his present Majesty’s
grandfather, while he was a boy, going to eat an egg, and breaking it
according to the ancient practice, happened to cut one of his fingers.
Whereupon the Emperor, his father, made a law commanding all his
subjects to break the smaller end of their eggs. The people so highly
resented this law that there have been six rebellions raised on that
account, wherein one emperor lost his life, and another his crown. It is
calculated that eleven hundred persons have at different times suffered
rather than break their eggs at the smaller end. But these rebels,
the Bigendians, have found so much encouragement at the Emperor of
Blefuscu’s Court, to which they always fled for refuge, that a bloody
war, as I said, has been carried on between the two empires for
six-and-thirty moons; and now the Blefuscudians have equipped a large
fleet, and are preparing to descend upon us. Therefore his Imperial
Majesty, placing great confidence in your valor and strength, has
commanded me to set the case before you.”

I desired the secretary to present my humble duty to the Emperor, and
to let him know that I was ready, at the risk of my life, to defend him
against all invaders.


