XII

THE WORLD WAR--ITS MEANING AND ITS LESSONS FOR US


Whatever differences of opinion--and honest differences of opinion--may
have existed and may still exist in America in regard to the great world
conflict, there is a wonderful unanimity of thought that has
crystallised itself into the concrete form--_something must be done in
order that it can never occur again_. The higher intelligence of the
nation must assert itself. It must feel and think and act in terms of
internationalism. Not that the feeling of nationalism in any country
shall, or even can be eradicated or even abated. It must be made,
however, to coordinate itself with the now rapidly growing sense of
world-consciousness, that the growing intelligence of mankind, aided by
some tremendously concrete forms of recent experience, is now
recognising as a great reality.

That there were very strong sympathies for both the Allied Nations and
for the Central Powers in the beginning, goes without saying, How could
it be otherwise, when we realise the diverse and complex types of our
citizenship?

One of the most distinctive, and in some ways one of the most
significant, features of the American nation is that it is today
composed of representatives, and in some cases, of enormous bodies of
representatives, numbering into the millions, of practically every
nation in the world.

There are single cities where, in one case twenty-six, in another case
twenty-nine, and in other cases a still larger number of what are today
designated as hyphenated citizens are represented. The orderly removal
of the hyphen, and the amalgamation of these splendid representatives of
practically all nations into genuine American citizens, infused with
American ideals and pushed on by true American ambitions, is one of the
great problems that the war has brought in a most striking manner to our
attention.

Not that these representatives of many nations shall in any way lose
their sense of sympathy for the nations of their birth, in times of
either peace or of distress, although they have found it either
advisable or greatly to their own personal advantage and welfare to
leave the lands of their birth and to establish their homes here.

The fact that in the vast majority of cases they find themselves better
off here, and choose to remain and assume the responsibilities of
citizenship in the Western Republic, involves a responsibility that
some, if not indeed many, heretofore have apparently too lightly
considered. There must be a more supreme sense of allegiance, and a
continually growing sense of responsibility to the nation, that, guided
by their own independent judgment and animated by their own free wills,
they have chosen as their home.

There is a difference between sympathy and allegiance; and unless a man
has found conditions intolerable in the land of his birth, and this is
the reason for his seeking a home in another land more to his liking and
to his advantage, we cannot expect him to be devoid of sympathy for the
land of his birth, especially in times of stress or of great need. We
can expect him, however, and we have a right to demand his _absolute
allegiance_ to the land of his adoption. And if he cannot give this,
then we should see to it that he return to his former home. If he is
capable of clear thinking and right feeling, he also must realise the
fundamental truth of this fact.

There are public schools in America where as many as nineteen languages
are spoken in a single room. Our public schools, so eagerly sought by
the children of parents of foreign birth, in their intense eagerness
for an education, that is offered freely and without cost to all, can
and must be made greater instruments in converting what must in time
become a great menace to our institutions, and even to the very life of
the nation itself, into a real and genuine American citizenship. Our
best educators, in addition to our clearest thinking citizens, are
realising as never before, that our public-school system chiefly, among
our educational institutions, must be made a great melting-pot through
which this process of amalgamation must be carried on.

We are also realising clearly now that, as a nation, we have been
entirely too lax in connection with our immigration privileges,
regulations and restrictions. We have been admitting foreigners to our
shores in such enormous quantities each year that we have not been able
at all adequately to assimilate them, nor have we used at all a
sufficiently wise discrimination in the admission of desirables or
undesirables.

We have received, or we have allowed to be dumped upon our shores, great
numbers of the latter whom we should know would inevitably become
dependents, as well as great numbers of criminals. The result has been
that they have been costing certain localities millions of dollars every
year. But entirely aside from the latter, the last two or three years
have brought home to us as never before the fact that those who come to
our shores must come with the avowed and the settled purpose of becoming
real American citizens, giving full and absolute allegiance to the
institutions, the laws, the government of the land of their adoption.

If any other government is not able so to manage as to make it more
desirable for its subjects to remain in the land of their birth, rather
than to seek homes in the land with institutions more to their liking,
or with advantages more conducive to their welfare, that government then
should not expect to retain, even in the slightest degree, the
allegiance of such former subjects. A hyphenated citizenship may become
as dangerous to a republic as a cancer is in the human body. A country
with over a hundred hyphens cannot fulfil its highest destiny.

We, as a nation, have been rudely shaken from our long dream of almost
inevitable national security. We have been brought finally, and although
as a nation we have no desire for conquest or empire, and no desire for
military glory, and therefore no need of any great army or navy for
offensive purposes, we have been brought finally to realise that we do,
nevertheless, stand in need of a national strengthening of our arm of
defence. A land of a hundred million people, where one could travel many
times for a sixmonth and never see the sign of a soldier, is brought,
though reluctantly, to face a new state of affairs; but one,
nevertheless, that must be faced--calmly faced and wisely acted upon.
And while it is true that as a nation we have always had the tradition
of non-militarism, it is not true that we have had the tradition of
military or of naval impotence or weakness.

Preparedness, therefore, has assumed a position of tremendous
importance, in individual thought, in public discussion, and almost
universally in the columns of the public press. One of the most vital
questions among us then is, not so much as to how we shall prepare, but
how shall we prepare adequately for defensive purposes, in case of any
emergency arising, without being thrown too far along the road of
militarism, and without an inordinate preparation that has been the
scourge and the bane of many old-world countries for so many years, and
that quite as much as anything has been provocative of the horrible
conflict that has literally been devastating so many European countries.

It is clearly apparent that the best thought in America today calls for
an adequate preparation for purposes of defence, and calls for a
recognition of facts as they are. It also clearly sees the danger of
certain types of mind and certain interests combining to carry the
matter much farther than is at all called for. The question is--How
shall we then strike that happy balance that is the secret of all
successful living in the lives of either individuals or in the lives of
nations?

All clear-seeing people realise that, as things are in the world today,
there is a certain amount of preparedness that is necessary for
influence and for insurance. As within the nation a police force is
necessary for the enforcement of law, for the preservation of law and
order, although it is not at all necessary that every second or third
man be a policeman, so in the council of nations the individual nation
must have a certain element of force that it can fall back upon if all
other available agencies fail. In diplomacy the strong nations win out,
the weaker lose out. Military and naval power, unless carried to a
ridiculous excess does not, therefore, lie idle, even when not in actual
use.

Our power and influence as a nation will certainly not be in proportion
to our weakness. Although righteousness exalteth a nation, it is
nevertheless true that righteousness alone will not protect a
nation--while other nations are fully armed. National weakness does not
make for peace.

Righteousness, combined with a spirit of forbearance, combined with a
keen desire to give justice as well as to demand justice, if combined
with the power to strike powerfully and sustainedly in defence of
justice, and in defence of national integrity, is what protects a
nation, and this it is that in the long run exalteth a nation--_while
things are as they are_.

While conditions have therefore brought prominently to the forefront in
America the matter of military training and military service--an
adequate military preparation for purposes of defence, for full and
adequate defence, the best thought of the nation is almost a unit in the
belief that, for us as a nation, an immense standing army is unnecessary
as well as inadvisable.

No amount of military preparation that is not combined definitely and
completely with an enhanced citizenship, and therefore with an advance
in real democracy, is at all worthy of consideration on the part of the
American people, or indeed on the part of the people of any nation.
Pre-eminently is this true in this day and age.

Observing this principle we could then, while a certain degree of
universal training under some system similar to the Swiss or Australian
system is being carried on, and to serve _our immediate needs_, have an
army of even a quarter of a million men without danger of militarism and
without heavy financial burdens, and without subverting our American
ideas--providing it is an industrial arm. There are great engineering
projects that could be carried on, thereby developing many of our now
latent resources; there is an immense amount of road-building that could
be projected in many parts of, if not throughout the entire country;
there are great irrigation projects that could be carried on in the far
West and Southwest, reclaiming millions upon millions of acres of what
are now unproductive desert lands; all these could be carried on and
made even to pay, keeping busy a large number of men for half a dozen
years to come.

This army of this number of men could be recruited, trained to an
adequate degree of military service, and at the same time could be
engaged in profitable employment on these much-needed works. They could
then be paid an adequate wage, ample to support a family, or ample to
lay up savings if without family. Such men leaving the army service,
would then have a degree of training and skill whereby they would be
able to get positions or employment, all more remunerative than the
bulk of them, perhaps, would ever be able to get without such training
and experience.

An army of this number of trained men, somewhat equally divided between
the Atlantic and the Pacific seaboards, the bulk of them engaged in
regular constructive work, _work that needs to be done and that,
therefore, could be profitably done_, and ready to be called into
service at a moment's notice, would constitute a tremendous insurance
against any aggression from without, and would also give a tremendous
sense of security for half a dozen years at least. This number could
then be reduced, for by that time several million young men from
eighteen years up would be partially trained and in first-class physical
shape to be summoned to service should the emergency arise.

In addition to the vast amount of good roads building, whose cost could
be borne in equal proportions by nation, state and county--a most
important factor in connection with military necessity as well as a
great economic factor in the successful development and advancement of
any community--the millions of acres of now arid lands in the West,
awaiting only water to make them among the most valuable and productive
in all the world, could be used as a great solution of our immigration
problem.

Up to the year when the war began, there came to our shores upwards of
one million immigrants every twelve months, seeking work, and most of
them homes in this country. The great bulk of them got no farther than
our cities, increasing congestion, already in many cases acute, and many
of them becoming in time, from one cause or another, dependents, the
annual cost of their maintenance aggregating many millions every year.

With these vast acres ready for them large numbers could, under a wise
system of distribution, be sent on to the great West and Southwest, and
more easily and directly now since the Panama Canal is open for
navigation. Allotments of these lands could be assigned them that they
could in time become owners of, through a wisely established system of
payments. Many of them would thereby be living lives similar to those
they lived in their own countries, and for which their training and
experience there have abundantly fitted them. They would thus become a
far more valuable type of citizens--landowners--than they could ever
possibly become otherwise, and especially through our present
unorganised hit-or-miss system. They would in time also add annually
hundreds of millions of productive work to the wealth of the country.

The very wise system that was inaugurated some time ago in connection
with the Coast Defence arm of our army is, under the wise direction of
our present Secretary of War, to be extended to all branches of the
service. For some time in the Coast Artillery Service the enlisted man
under competent instruction has had the privilege of becoming a skilled
machinist or a skilled electrician. Now the system is to be extended
through all branches of the military service, and many additional trades
are to be added to the curricula of the trade schools of the army. The
young man can, therefore, make his own selection and become a trained
artisan at the same time that he serves his time in the army, with all
expenses for such training, as well as maintenance, borne by the
Government. He can thereby leave the service fully equipped for
profitable employment.

This will have the tendency of calling a better class of young men into
the service; it will also do away with the well-founded criticism that
army life and its idleness, or partly-enforced idleness, unfits a man
for useful industrial service after he quits the army. If this same
system is extended through the navy, as it can be, both army and navy
service will meet the American requirement--that neither military nor
naval service take great numbers of men from productive employment, to
be in turn supported by other workers. Instead of so much dead timber,
they are all the time producing while in active service, and are being
trained to be highly efficient as producers, when they leave the
service.

Under this system the Federal Government can build its own ordnance
works and its own munition factories and become its own maker of
whatever may be required in all lines of output. We will then be able to
escape the perverse influence of gain on the part of large munition
industries, and the danger that comes from that portion of a military
party whose motives are actuated by personal gain.

If the occasion arises, or if we permit the occasion to arise, Kruppism
in America will become as dangerous and as sinister in its influences
and its proportions, as it became in Germany.

Another great service that the war has done us, is by way of bringing
home to us the lesson that has been so prominently brought to the front
in connection with the other nations at war, namely, the necessity of
the speedy and thorough mobilisation of all lines of industries and
business; for the thoroughness and the efficiency with which this can be
done may mean success that otherwise would result in failure and
disaster. We are now awake to the tremendous importance of this.

It is at last becoming clearly understood among the peoples and the
nations of the world that, as a nation, we have no desire for conquest,
for territory, for empire--we have no purposes of aggression; we have
quite enough to do to develop our resources and our as yet great
undeveloped areas.

A few months before the war broke, I had conversations with the heads or
with the representatives of leading publishing houses in several
European countries. It was at a time when our Mexican situation was
beginning to be very acute. I remember at that time especially, the
conversation with the head of one of the largest publishing houses in
Italy, in Milan. I could see plainly his scepticism when, in reply to
his questions, I endeavoured to persuade him that as a nation we had no
motives of conquest or of aggression in Mexico, that we were interested
solely in the restoration of a representative and stable government
there. And since that time, I am glad to say that our acts as a nation
have all been along the line of persuading him, and also many other
like-minded ones in many countries abroad, of the truth of this
assertion. By this general course we have been gaining the confidence
and have been cementing the friendship of practically every South
American republic, our immediate neighbours on the southern continent.
This has been a source of increasing economic power with us, and an
element of greatly added strength, and also a tremendous energy working
all the time for the preservation of peace.

One can say most confidently, even though recognising our many grave
faults as a nation, that our course along this line has been such,
especially of late years, as to inspire confidence on the part of all
the fair-minded nations of the world.

Our theory of the state, the theory of democracy, is not that the state
is above all, and that the individual and his welfare are as nothing
when compared to it, but rather that the state is the agency through
which the highest welfare of all its subjects is to be evolved,
expressed, maintained. No other theory to my mind, is at all compatible
with the intelligence of any free-thinking people.

Otherwise, there is always the danger and also the likelihood, while
human nature is as it is, for some ruler, some clique, or factions so to
concentrate power into their own hands, that for their own ambitions,
for aggrandisement, or for false or short-sighted and half-baked ideas
of additions to their country, it is dragged into periodic wars with
other nations.

Nor do we share in the belief that the state is above morality, but
rather that identically the same moral ideals, precepts and obligations
that bind individuals must be held sacred by the state, otherwise it
becomes a pirate among nations, and it will inevitably in time be hunted
down and destroyed as such, however great its apparent power. Nor do we
as a nation share in the belief that war is necessary and indeed good
for a nation, to inspire and to preserve its manly qualities, its
virility, and therefore its power. Were this the only way that this
could be brought about, it might be well and good; but the price to be
paid is a price that is too enormous and too frightful, and the results
are too uncertain. We believe that these same ideals can be inculcated,
that these same energies can be used along useful, conserving,
constructive lines, rather than along lines of destruction.

A nation may have the most colossal and perfect military system in the
world, and still may suffer defeat in any given while, because of those
unseen things that pertain to the soul of another people, whereby powers
and forces are engendered and materialised that make defeat for them
impossible; and in the matter of big guns, it is well always to remember
that no nation can build them so great that another nation may not build
them still greater. National safety does not necessarily lie in that
direction. Nor, on the other hand, along the lines of extreme
pacificism--surely not as long as things are as they are. The argument
of the lamb has small deterrent effect upon the wolf--as long as the
wolf is a wolf. And sometimes wolves hunt in packs. The most preeminent
lesson of the great war for us as a nation should be this--there should
be constantly a degree of preparedness sufficient to hold until all the
others, the various portions of the nation, thoroughly coordinated and
ready, can be summoned into action. Thus are we prepared, thus are we
safe, and there is no danger or fear of militarism.

In a democracy it should, without question, be a fundamental fact that
hand in hand with equal rights there should go a sense of equal duty. A
call for defence should have a universal response. So it is merely good
common-sense, good judgment, if you please, for all the young men of the
nation to have a training sufficient to enable them to respond
effectively if the nation's safety calls them to its defence. It is no
crime, however we may deprecate war, to be thus prepared.

For young men--and we must always remember that it is the young men who
are called for this purpose--for young men to be called to the colours
by the tens or the hundreds of thousands, unskilled and untrained, to be
shot down, decimated by the thoroughly trained and skilled troops of
another nation, or a combination of other nations, is indeed the crime.
Never, moreover, was folly so great as that shown by him or by her who
will not see. And to look at the matter without prejudice, we will
realise that this is merely policing what we have. It is meeting force
with adequate force, _if it becomes necessary_, so to meet it.

This is necessary until such time as we have in operation among nations
a thoroughly established machinery whereby force will give place to
reason, whereby common sense will be used in adjusting all differences
between nations, as it is now used in adjusting differences between
individuals.

Our period of isolation is over. We have become a world-nation. Equality
of rights presupposes equality of duty. In our very souls we loathe
militarism. Conquest and aggression are foreign to our spirit, and
foreign to our thoughts and ambitions. But weakness will by no means
assure us immunity from aggression from without. Universal military
training up to a reasonable point, and the joint sense of responsibility
of every man and every woman in the nation, and the right of the
national government to expect and to demand that every man and woman
stand ready to respond to the call to service, whatever form it may
take--this is our armour.

All intelligent people know that the national government has always had
the power to draft every male citizen fit for service into military
service. It is not therefore a question of universal military service.
The real and only question is whether these or great numbers of these go
out illy prepared and equipped as sheep to the shambles perchance, or
whether they go out trained and equipped to do a man's work--more
adequately prepared to protect themselves as well as the integrity of
the nation. It is not to be done for the love or the purpose of
militarism; but recognising the fact that militarism still persists,
that with us it may not be triumphant should we at any time be forced to
face it. There are certain facts that only to our peril as well as our
moral degradation, we can be blind to. Said a noted historian but a few
days ago:

"I loathe war and militarism. I have fought them for twenty years. But I
am a historian, and I know that bullies thrive best in an atmosphere of
meekness. As long as this military system lasts you must discourage the
mailed fist by showing that you will meet it with something harder than
a boxing glove. We do not think it good to admit into the code of the
twentieth century that a great national bully may still with impunity
squeeze the blood out of its small neighbours and seize their goods."

We need not fear militarism arising in America as long as the
fundamental principles of democracy are preserved and continually
extended, which can be done only through the feeling of the individual
responsibility of every man and every woman to take a keen and constant
interest in the matters of their own government--community, state,
national, and now international. We must realise and ever more fully
realise that in a government such as ours, the people are the
government, and that when in it anything goes wrong, or wrongs and
injustices are allowed to grow and hold sway, we are to blame.

Universal military training has not militarised Switzerland nor has it
Australia. It is rather the very essence of democracy and the very
antithesis of militarism.

    "Let each son of Freedom bear
      His portion of the burden. Should not each one do his share?
        To sacrifice the splendid few--
        The strong of heart, the brave, the true,
        Who live--or die--as heroes do,
      While cowards profit--is not fair!"

Many still recall that not a few well-meaning people at the close of the
Civil War proclaimed that, with upwards of two million trained men
behind him, General Grant would become a military dictator, and that
this would be followed by the disappearance of democracy in the nation.
But the mind, the temper, the traditions of our people are all a
guarantee against militarism. The gospel, the hallucination of the
shining armour, the will to power, has no attraction for us. We loathe
it; nor do we fear its undermining and crushing our own liberties
internally. Nevertheless, it is true that vigilance is always and always
will be the price of liberty. There must be a constant education towards
citizenship. There must be an alert democracy, so that any land and sea
force is always the servant of the spirit; for only otherwise it can
become its master--but otherwise it will become its master.




