VII

THE DIVINE RULE IN THE MIND AND HEART: THE UNESSENTIALS WE DROP--THE
SPIRIT ABIDES


That Jesus had a supreme aptitude for the things of the spirit, there
can be no question. That through desire and through will he followed the
leadings of the spirit--that he gave himself completely to its
leadings--is evident both from his utterances and his life. It was this
combination undoubtedly that led him into that vivid sense of his life
in God, which became so complete that he afterwards speaks--I and my
Father are one. That he was always, however, far from identifying
himself as equal with God is indicated by his constant declaration of
his dependence upon God. Again and again we have these declarations: "My
meat and drink is to do the will of God." "My doctrine is not mine, but
his that sent me." "I can of myself do nothing: as I hear I judge; and
my judgment is righteous; because I seek not mine own will, but the will
of him that sent me."

And even the very last acts and words of his life proclaim this
constant sense of dependence for guidance, for strength, and even for
succour. With all his Divine self-realisation there was always,
moreover, that sense of humility that is always a predominating
characteristic of the really great. "Why callest thou me good? There is
none good but one--that is God."

It is not at all strange, therefore, that the very first utterance of
his public ministry, according to the chronicler Mark was: The Kingdom
of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel. And while this was
the beginning utterance, it was the keynote that ran through his entire
ministry. It is the basic fact of all his teachings. The realisation of
his own life he sought to make the realisation of all others. It was, it
is, a call to righteousness, and a call to righteousness through the
only channel that any such call can be effective--through a realisation
of the essential righteousness and goodness of the human soul.

An unbiased study of Jesus' own words will reveal the fact that he
taught only what he himself had first realised. It is this, moreover,
that makes him the supreme teacher of all time--Counsellor, Friend,
Saviour. It is the saving of men from their lower conceptions and
selves, a lifting of them up to their higher selves, which, as he
taught, is eternally one with God, the Father, and which, when realised,
will inevitably, reflexly, one might say, lift a man's thoughts, acts,
conduct--the entire life--up to that standard or pattern. It is thus
that the Divine ideal, that the Christ becomes enthroned within. The
Christ-consciousness is the universal Divine nature in us. It is the
state of God-consciousness. It is the recognition of the indwelling
Divine life as the source, and therefore the essence of our own lives.

Jesus came as the revealer of a new truth, a new conception of man.
Indeed, the Messiah. He came as the revealer of the only truth that
could lead his people out of their trials and troubles--out of their
bondage. They were looking for their Deliverer to come in the person of
a worldly king and to set up his rule as such. He came in the person of
a humble teacher, the revealer of a mighty truth, the revealer of the
Way, the only way whereby real freedom and deliverance can come. For
those who would receive him, he was indeed the Messiah. For those who
would not, he was not, and the same holds today.

He came as the revealer of a truth which had been glimpsed by many
inspired teachers among the Jewish race and among those of other races.
The time waited, however, for one to come who would first embody this
truth and then be able effectively to teach it. This was done in a
supreme degree by the Judæan Teacher. He came not as the doer-away with
the Law and the Prophets, but rather to regain and then to supplement
them. Such was his own statement.

It is time to ascend another round. I reveal God to you, not in the
Tabernacle, but in the human heart--then in the Tabernacle in the degree
that He is in the hearts of those who frequent the Tabernacle. Otherwise
the Tabernacle becomes a whited sepulchre. The Church is not a building,
an organisation, not a creed. The Church is the Spirit of Truth. It must
have one supreme object and purpose--to lead men to the truth. I reveal
what I have found--I in the Father and the Father in me. I seek not to
do mine own will, but the will of the Father who sent me.

Everything was subordinated to this Divine realisation and to his Divine
purpose.

The great purpose at which he laboured so incessantly was the teaching
of the realisation of the Divine will in the hearts and minds, and
through these in the lives of men--the finding and the realisation of
the Kingdom of God. This is the supreme fact of life. Get right at the
centre and the circumference will then care for itself. As is the
inner, so always and invariably will be the outer. There is an inner
guide that regulates the life when this inner guide is allowed to assume
authority. Why be disconcerted, why in a heat concerning so many things?
It is not the natural and the normal life. Life at its best is something
infinitely beyond this. "Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you." And if
there is any doubt in regard to his real meaning in this here is his
answer: "Neither shall they say, 'Lo here' or 'Lo there' for behold the
Kingdom of God is within you."

Again and again this is his call. Again and again this is his
revelation. In the first three gospels alone he uses the expression "the
Kingdom of God," or "the Kingdom of Heaven," upwards of thirty times.
Any possible reference to any organisation that he might have had in
mind, can be found in the entire four gospels but twice.

It would almost seem that it would not be difficult to judge as to what
was uppermost in his mind. I have made this revelation to you; you must
raise yourselves, you must become _in reality_ what _in essence_ you
really are. I in the Father, and the Father in me. I reveal only what I
myself know. As I am, ye shall be. God is your Father. In your real
nature you are Divine. Drop your ideas of the depravity of the human
soul. To believe it depraves. To teach it depraves the one who teaches
it, and the one who accepts it. Follow not the traditions of men. I
reveal to you your Divine birthright. Accept it. It is best. Behold all
things are become new. The Kingdom of God is the one all-inclusive
thing. Find it and all else will follow.

"Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? Or with what comparison
shall we compare it? It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it
is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth;
but when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs,
and shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge
under the shadow of it." "Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God? Is
it like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal,
till the whole was leavened?" Seek ye first the Kingdom, and the Holy
Spirit, the channel of communion between God your source, and
yourselves, will lead you, and will lead you into all truth. It will
become as a lamp to your feet, a guide that is always reliable.

To refuse allegiance to the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Truth, is the
real sin, the only sin that cannot be forgiven. Violation of all moral
and natural law may be forgiven. It will bring its penalty, for the
violation of law carries in itself its own penalty, its own
punishment--_it is a part of law_; but cease the violation and the
penalty ceases. The violation registers its ill effects in the illness,
the sickness, of body and spirit. If the violation has been long
continued, these effects may remain for some time; but the instant the
violation ceases the repair will begin, and things will go the other
way.

Learn from this experience, however, that there can be no deliberate
violation of, or blaspheming against any moral or natural law. But
deliberately to refuse obedience to the inner guide, the Holy Spirit,
constitutes a defiance that eventually puts out the lamp of life, and
that can result only in confusion and darkness. It severs the ordained
relationship, the connecting, the binding cord, between the soul--the
self--and its Source. Stagnation, degeneracy, and eventual death is
merely the natural sequence.

With this Divine self-realisation the Spirit assumes control and
mastery, and you are saved from the follies of error, and from the
consequences of error. Repent ye--turn from your trespasses and sins,
from your lower conceptions of life, of pleasure and of pain, and walk
in this way. The lower propensities and desires will lose their hold
and will in time fall away. You will be at first surprised, and then
dumfounded, at what you formerly took for pleasure. True pleasure and
satisfaction go hand in hand,--nor are there any bad after results.

All genuine pleasures should lead to more perfect health, a greater
accretion of power, a continually expanding sense of life and service.
When God is uppermost in the heart, when the Divine rule under the
direction of the Holy Spirit becomes the ruling power in the life of the
individual, then the body and its senses are subordinated to this rule;
the passions become functions to be used; license and perverted use give
way to moderation and wise use; and there are then no penalties that
outraged law exacts; satiety gives place to satisfaction. It was Edward
Carpenter who said: "In order to enjoy life one must be a master of
life--for to be a slave to its inconsistencies can only mean torment;
and in order to enjoy the senses one must be master of them. To dominate
the actual world you must, like Archimedes, base your fulcrum somewhere
beyond."

It is not the use, but the abuse of anything good in itself that brings
satiety, disease, suffering, dissatisfaction. Nor is asceticism a true
road of life. All things are for use; but all must be wisely, in most
cases, moderately used, for true enjoyment. All functions and powers are
for use; but all must be brought under the domination of the Spirit--the
God-illumined spirit. This is the road that leads to heaven here and
heaven hereafter--and we can rest assured that we will never find a
heaven hereafter that we do not make while here. Through everything runs
this teaching of the Master.

How wonderfully and how masterfully and simply he sets forth his whole
teaching of sin and the sinner and his relation to the Father in that
marvellous parable, the Parable of the Prodigal Son. To bring it clearly
to mind again it runs:

"A certain man had two sons: and the younger of them said to his father,
Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth _to me_. And he
divided unto them his living. And not many days after the younger son
gathered all together, and took his journey to a far country, and there
wasted his substance with riotous living. And when he had spent all,
there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in want.
And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent
him into his fields to feed swine. And he would fain have filled his
belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him.
And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my
father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I
will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants. And he arose and
came to his father.

"But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran, and fell upon his neck, and kissed him. And the son
said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight,
and am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the father said to his
servants, Bring forth the best robe and put it on him; and put a ring on
his hand, and shoes on his feet: and bring hither the fatted calf, and
kill it; and let us eat, and be merry; for this my son was dead, and is
alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry. Now
his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the
house, he heard music and dancing. And he called one of the servants,
and asked what these things meant. And he said unto him, Thy brother is
come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath
received him safe and sound. And he was angry and would not go in:
therefore came his father out, and entreated him, and he answering said
to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither
transgressed I at any time thy commandment; and yet thou never gavest me
a kid, that I might make merry with my friends: but as soon as this thy
son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast
killed for him the fatted calf. And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever
with me, and all that I have is thine. It was meet that we should make
merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again;
and was lost, and is found."

It does away forever in all thinking minds with any participation of
Jesus in that perverted and perverting doctrine that man is by nature
essentially depraved, degraded, fallen, in the sense as was given to the
world long, long after his time in the doctrine of the Fall of Man, and
the need of redemption through some external source outside of himself,
in distinction from the truth that he revealed that was to make men
free--the truth of their Divine nature, and this love of man by the
Heavenly Father, and the love of the Heavenly Father by His children.

To connect Jesus with any such thought or teaching would be to take the
heart out of his supreme revelation. For his whole conception of God the
Father, given in all his utterances, was that of a Heavenly Father of
love, of care, longing to exercise His protecting care and to give good
gifts to His children--and this because it is the _essential nature_ of
God to be fatherly. His Fatherhood is not, therefore, accidental, not
dependent upon any conditions or circumstances; it is essential.

If it is the nature of a father to give good gifts to his children, so
in a still greater degree is it the nature of the Heavenly Father to
give good gifts to those who ask Him. As His words are recorded by
Matthew: "Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will
he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If
ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them
that ask him?" So in the parable as presented by Jesus, the father's
love was such that as soon as it was made known to him that his son who
had been lost to him had returned, he went out to meet him; he granted
him full pardon--and there were no conditions.

Speaking of the fundamental teaching of the Master, and also in
connection with this same parable, another has said: "It thus appears
from this story, as elsewhere in the teaching of Jesus, that he did not
call God our father because He created us, or because He rules over us,
or because He made a covenant with Abraham, but simply and only because
He loves us. This parable individualises the divine love, as did also
the missionary activity of Jesus. The gospels know nothing of a national
fatherhood, of a God whose love is confined to a particular people. It
is the individual man who has a heavenly Father, and this individualised
fatherhood is the only one of which Jesus speaks. As he had realised his
own moral and spiritual life in the consciousness that God was his
father, so he sought to give life to the world by a living revelation of
the truth that God loves each separate soul. This is a prime factor in
the religion and ethics of Jesus. It is seldom or vaguely apprehended in
the Old Testament teaching; but in the teaching of Jesus it is central
and normative." Again in the two allied parables of Jesus--the Parable
of the Lost Sheep, and the Parable of the Lost Coin--it is his purpose
to teach the great love of the Father for all, including those lost in
their trespasses and sins, and His rejoicing in their return.

This leads to Jesus' conception and teaching of sin and repentance.
Although God is the Father, He demands filial obedience in the hearts
and the minds of His children. Men by following the devices and desires
of their own hearts, are not true to their real nature, their Divine
pattern. By following their selfish desires they have brought sin, and
thereby suffering, on themselves and others. The unclean, the selfish
desires of mind and heart, keep them from their higher moral and
spiritual ideal--although not necessarily giving themselves to gross
sin. Therefore, they must become sons of God by repenting--by turning
from the evil inclinations of their hearts and seeking to follow the
higher inclinations of the heart as becomes children of God and those
who are dwellers in the Heavenly Kingdom. Therefore, his opening
utterance: "The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand;
repent ye, and believe the gospel."

Love of God with the whole heart, and love of the neighbour, leading to
the higher peace and fulfilment, must take the place of these more
selfish desires that lead to antagonisms and dissatisfactions both
within and without. All men are to pray: Forgive us our sins. All men
are to repent of their sins which are the results of following their own
selfish desires,--those of the body, or their own selfish desires to the
detriment of the welfare of the neighbour.

All men are to seek the Divine rule, the rule of God in the heart, and
thereby have the guidance of the Holy Spirit, which is the Divine
spirit of wisdom that tabernacles with man when through desire and
through will he makes the conditions whereby it can make its abode with
him. It is a manifestation of the force that is above man--it is the
eternal heritage of the soul. "Now the Lord is the Spirit and where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." And therein lies salvation. It
follows the seeking and the finding of the Kingdom of God and His
righteousness that Jesus revealed to a waiting world.

And so it was the spirit of religion that Jesus came to reveal--the real
Fatherhood of God and the Divine Sonship of man. A better righteousness
than that of the scribes and the Pharisees--not a slavish adherence to
the Law, with its supposed profits and rewards. Get the motive of life
right. Get the heart right and these things become of secondary
importance. As his supreme revelation was the personal fatherhood of
God, from which follows necessarily the Divine sonship of man, so there
was a corollary to it, a portion of it almost as essential as the main
truth itself--namely, that all men are brothers. Not merely those of one
little group, or tribe or nation; not merely those of any one little set
or religion; not merely those of this or that little compartment that we
build and arbitrarily separate ourselves into--but all men the world
over. If this is not true then Jesus' supreme revelation is false.

In connection with this great truth he brought a new standard by virtue
of the logic of his revelation. "Ye have heard that it hath been said,
Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you,
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;
that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven."
Struggling for recognition all through the Old Testament scriptures, and
breaking through partially at least in places, was this conception which
is at the very basis of all man's relationship with man.

And finally through this supreme Master of life it did break through,
with a wonderful newborn consciousness.

The old dispensation, with its legal formalism, was an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth. The new dispensation was--"But I say unto you,
Love your enemies." Enmity begets enmity. It is as senseless as it is
godless. It runs through all his teachings and through every act of his
life. If fundamentally you do not have the love of your fellow-man in
your hearts, you do not have the love of God in your hearts and you
cannot have.

And that this fundamental revelation be not misunderstood, near the
close of his life he said: "A new commandment I give unto you, that ye
love one another." No man could be, can be his disciple, his follower,
and fail in the realisation of this fundamental teaching. "By this shall
all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another." And
going back again to his ministry we find that it breathes through every
teaching that he gave. It breathes through that short memorable prayer
which we call the Lord's Prayer. It permeates the Sermon on the Mount.
It is the very essence of his summing up of this discourse. We call it
the Golden Rule. "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them." Not that it was original with Jesus; other teachers
sent of God had given it before to other peoples--God's other children;
but he gave it a new emphasis, a new setting. _He made it fundamental._

So a man who is gripped at all vitally by Jesus' teaching of the
personal fatherhood of God, and the personal brotherhood of man, simply
can't help but make this the basic rule of his life--and moreover find
joy in so making it. A man who really comprehends this fundamental
teaching can't be crafty, sneaking, dishonest, or dishonourable, in his
business, or in any phase of his personal life. He never hogs the
penny--in other words, he never seeks to gain his own advantage to the
disadvantage of another. He may be long-headed; he may be able to size
up and seize conditions; but he seeks no advantage for himself to the
detriment of his fellow, to the detriment of his community, or to the
detriment of his extended community, the nation or the world. He is
thoughtful, considerate, open, frank; and, moreover, he finds great joy
in being so.

I have never seen any finer statement of the essential reasonableness,
therefore, of the essential truth of the value and the practice of the
Golden Rule than that given by a modern disciple of Jesus who left us
but a few years ago. A poor boy, a successful business man, straight,
square, considerate in all his dealings,--a power among his fellows, a
lamp indeed to the feet of many--was Samuel Milton Jones, thrice mayor
of Toledo. Simple, unassuming, friend of all, rich as well as poor, poor
as well as rich, friend of the outcast, the thief, the criminal, looking
beyond the exterior, he saw as did Jesus, the human soul always intact,
though it erred in its judgment--as we all err in our judgments, each in
his own peculiar way--and that by forbearance, consideration, and love,
it could be touched and the life redeemed--redeemed to happiness, to
usefulness, to service. Notwithstanding his many duties, business and
political, he thought much and he loved to talk of the things we are
considering.

His brief statement of the fundamental reasons and the comprehensive
results of the actual practice of the Golden Rule are shot through with
such fine insight, such abounding comprehension, that they deserve to
become immortal. He was my friend and I would not see them die. I
reproduce them here: "As I view it, the Golden Rule is the supreme law
of life. It may be paraphrased this way: As you do unto others, others
will do unto you. What I give, I get. If I love you, really and truly
and actively love you, you are as sure to love me in return as the earth
is sure to be warmed by the rays of the midsummer sun. If I hate you,
ill-treat you and abuse you, I am equally certain to arouse the same
kind of antagonism towards me, unless the Divine nature is so developed
that it is dominant in you, and you have learned to love your enemies.
What can be plainer? The Golden Rule is the law of action and reaction
in the field of morals, just as definite, just as certain here as the
law is definite and certain in the domain of physics.

"I think the confusion with respect to the Golden Rule arises from the
different conceptions that we have of the word love. I use the word
love as synonymous with reason, and when I speak of doing the loving
thing, I mean the reasonable thing. When I speak of dealing with my
fellow-men in an unreasonable way, I mean an unloving way. The terms are
interchangeable, absolutely. The reason why we know so little about the
Golden Rule is because we have not practised it."

Was Mayor Jones a Christian? you ask. He was a follower of the
Christ--for it was he who said: "By this shall all men know ye are my
disciples, if ye love one another." Was he a member of a religious
organisation? I don't know--it never occurred to me to ask him. Thinking
men the world over are making a sharp distinction in these days between
organised Christianity and essential Christianity.

The element of fear has lost its hold on the part of thinking men and
women. It never opened up, it never can open up the springs of
righteousness in the human heart. He believed and he acted upon the
belief that it was the spirit that the Master taught--that God is a God
of love and that He reveals Himself in terms of love to those who really
know Him. He believed that there is joy to the human soul in following
this inner guide and translating its impulses into deeds of love and
service for one's fellow-men. If we could, if we would thus translate
religion into terms of life, it would become a source of perennial joy.

It is not with observation, said Jesus, that the supreme thing that he
taught--the seeking and finding of the Kingdom of God--will come. Do not
seek it at some other place, some other time. It is within, and if
within it will show forth. Make no mistake about that,--it will show
forth. It touches and it sensitises the inner springs of action in a
man's or a woman's life. When a man realises his Divine sonship that
Jesus taught, he will act as a son of God. Out of the heart spring
either good or evil actions. Self-love, me, mine; let me get all I can
for myself, or, thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself--the Divine law
of service, of mutuality--the highest source of ethics.

You can trust any man whose heart is right. He will be straight, clean,
reliable. His word will be as good as his bond. Personally you can't
trust a man who is brought into any line of action, or into any
institution through fear. The sore is there, liable to break out in
corruption at any time. This opening up of the springs of the inner life
frees him also from the letter of the law, which after all consists of
the traditions of men, and makes him subject to that higher moral guide
within. How clearly Jesus illustrated this in his conversations
regarding the observance of the Sabbath--how the Sabbath was made for
man and not man for the Sabbath, and how it was always right to do good
on the Sabbath.

I remember some years ago a friend in my native state telling me the
following interesting incident in connection with his grandmother. It
was in northern Illinois--it might have been in New England. "As a boy,"
said he, "I used to visit her on the farm. She loved her cup of coffee
for breakfast. Ordinarily she would grind it fresh each morning in the
kitchen; but when Sunday morning came she would take her coffee-grinder
down into the far end of the cellar, where no one could see and no one
could hear her grind it." He could never quite tell, he said, whether it
was to ease her own conscience, or in order to give no offence to her
neighbours.

Now, I can imagine Jesus passing by and stopping at that home--it was a
home known for its native kindly hospitality--and meeting her just as
she was coming out of the cellar with her coffee-grinder--his quick and
unerring perception enabling him to take in the whole situation at once,
and saying: "In the name of the Father, Aunt Susan, what were you doing
with your coffee-grinder down in the cellar on this beautiful Sabbath
morning? You like your cup of coffee, and I also like the coffee that
you make; thank God that you have it, and thank God that you have the
good health to enjoy it. We can give praise to the Father through eating
and drinking, if, as in everything else, these are done in moderation
and we give value received for all the things that we use. So don't take
your grinder down into the cellar on the Sabbath morning; but grind your
coffee up here in God's sunshine, with a thankful heart that you have it
to grind."

And I can imagine him, as he passes out of the little front gate,
turning and waving another good-bye and saying: "When I come again, Aunt
Susan, be it week-day or Sabbath, remember God's sunshine and keep out
of the cellar." And turning again in a half-joking manner: "And when you
take those baskets of eggs to town, Aunt Susan, don't pick out too many
of the large ones to keep for yourself, but take them just as the hens
lay them. And, Aunt Susan, give good weight in your butter. This will do
your soul infinitely more good than the few extra coins you would gain
by too carefully calculating"--Aunt Susan with all her lovable
qualities, had a little tendency to close dealing.

I think we do incalculable harm by separating Jesus so completely from
the more homely, commonplace affairs of our daily lives. If we had a
more adequate account of his discourses with the people and his
associations with the people, we would perhaps find that he was not,
after all, so busy in saving the world that he didn't have time for the
simple, homely enjoyments and affairs of the everyday life. The little
glimpses that we have of him along these lines indicate to me that he
had. Unless we get his truths right into this phase of our lives, the
chances are that we will miss them entirely.

And I think that with all his earnestness, Jesus must have had an
unusually keen sense of humour. With his unusual perceptions and his
unusual powers in reading and in understanding human nature, it could
not be otherwise. That he had a keen sense for beauty; that he saw it,
that he valued it, that he loved it, especially beauty in all nature,
many of his discourses so abundantly prove. Religion with him was not
divorced from life. It was the power that permeated every thought and
every act of the daily life.




