XIV

THE WORLD'S BALANCE-WHEEL


It was Lincoln who gave us a wonderful summary when he said: "After all
the one meaning of life is to be kind."

Love, sympathy, fellowship is the very foundation of all civilised,
happy, ideal life. It is the very balance-wheel of life itself. It gives
that genuineness and simplicity in voice, in look, in spirit that is so
instinctively felt by all, and to which all so universally respond. It
is like the fragrance of the flower--the emanation of its soul.

Interesting and containing a most vital truth is this little memoir by
Christine Rossetti: "One whom I knew intimately, and whose memory I
revere, once in my hearing remarked that, 'unless we love people, we
cannot understand them.' This was a new light to me." It contains indeed
a profound truth.

Love, sympathy, fellowship, is what makes human life truly human.
Cooperation, mutual service, is its fruitage. A clear-cut realisation of
this and a resolute acting upon it would remove much of the cloudiness
and the barrenness from many a life; and its mutual recognition--and
action based upon it--would bring order and sweetness and mutual gain in
vast numbers of instances in family, in business, in community life. It
would solve many of the knotty problems in all lines of human relations
and human endeavour, whose solution heretofore has seemed well-nigh
impossible. It is the telling oil that will start to running smoothly
and effectively many an otherwise clogged and grating system of human
machinery.

When men on both sides are long-headed enough, are sensible enough to
see its practical element and make it the fundamental basis of all
relationships, of all negotiations, and all following activities in the
relations between capital and labour, employer and employee, literally a
new era in the industrial world will spring into being. Both sides will
be the gainer--the dividends flowing to each will be even surprising.

There is really no labour problem outside of sympathy, mutuality,
good-will, cooperation, brotherhood.

Injustice always has been and always will be the cause of all labour
troubles. But we must not forget that it is sometimes on one side and
sometimes on the other. Misunderstanding is not infrequently its
accompaniment. Imagination, sympathy, mutuality, cooperation,
brotherhood are the hand-maidens of justice. No man is intelligent
enough, is big enough to be the representative or the manager of
capital, who is not intelligent enough to realise this. No man is fit to
be the representative of, or fit to have anything to do with the
councils of labour who has not brains, intelligence enough to realise
this. These qualities are not synonyms of or in any way related to
sentimentality or any weak-kneed ethics. They underlie the soundest
business sense. In this day and age they are synonyms of the word
practical. There was a time and it was not so many years ago, when heads
and executives of large enterprises did not realise this as fully as
they realise it today. A great change has already taken place. A new era
has already begun, and the greater the ability and the genius the more
eager is its possessor to make these his guiding principles, and to
hasten the time when they will be universally recognised and built upon.
The same is true of the more intelligent in the rank and file of labour,
as also of the more intelligent and those who are bringing the best
results as leaders of labour. There is no intelligent man or woman today
who does not believe in organised labour. There is no intelligent
employer who does not believe in it and who does not welcome it.

The bane of organised labour in the past has too often been the
unscrupulous, the self-seeking, or the bull-headed labour leader.
Organised labour must be constantly diligent to purge itself of these
its worst enemies. Labour is entitled to the very highest wage, or to
the best returns in cooperative management that it can get, and that are
consistent with sound business management, as also to the best labour
conditions that a sympathetic and wise management can bring about. It
must not, however, be unreasonable in its demands, neither bull-headed,
nor seek to travel too fast--otherwise it may lose more than it will
gain.

It must not allow itself to act as a shield for the ineffective worker,
or the one without a sense of mutuality, whose aim is to get all he can
get without any thought as to what he gives in return, or even with the
deliberate purpose of giving the least that he can give and get away
with it. Where there is a good and a full return, there should be not
only the desire but an eagerness to give a full and honest service. Less
than this is indicative of a lack of honest and staunch manhood or
womanhood.

It is incumbent upon organised labour also to remember that it
represents but eight per cent of the actual working people of this
nation. Whether one works with his brains, or his hands, or both, is
immaterial. Nor does organised labour represent the great farming
interests of the country--even more fundamentally the backbone of the
nation.

The desirable citizen of any nation is he or she who does not seek to
prosper at the expense of his fellows, who does not seek the advancement
of his group to the detriment of all other groups--who realises that
none are independent, that all are interdependent.

He who is a teacher or a preacher of class-consciousness, is either
consciously or unconsciously--generally consciously and intentionally--a
preacher of class-hatred. There is no more undesirable citizen in any
nation than he. "Do you know why money is so scarce, brothers?" the soap
box orator demanded, and a fair-sized section of the backbone of the
nation waited in leisurely patience for the answer. A tired-looking
woman had paused for a moment on the edge of the crowd. She spoke
shortly. "It's because so many of you men spend your time telling each
other why, 'stead of hustling to see that it ain't!" He is a fair
representative of the class-consciousness, class-hatred type. Again he
is represented by the theorist constitutionally and chronically too lazy
to do honest and constructive work either physically or mentally. Again
by the one who has the big-head affliction. Or again by the one
afflicted with a species of insanity or criminality manifesting of late
under the name of Bolshevism--a self-seeking tyranny infinitely worse
than Czarism itself.

Its representatives have proved themselves moral perverts, determined to
carry out their theories and gain their own ends by treachery, theft,
coersion, murder, and every foul method that will aid them in reducing
order to chaos--through the slogan of rule or ruin. Through brigandage,
coersion, murder, it gets the funds to send its agents into those
countries whose governments are fully in the hands of the people, and
where if at any time injustice prevails it is solely the fault of the
people in not using in an intelligent and determined manner the
possessions they already have. Or putting it in another way, on account
of shirking the duties it is morally incumbent upon them as citizens of
free governments to perform.

In America, whose institutions have been built and maintained solely by
the people, our duty is plain, for orderly procedure has been and ever
must be our watch-word. Vigilance is moreover nowhere required more than
in representative government. Whenever the red hand of anarchy,
Bolshevism, terrorism raises itself it should be struck so instantly and
so powerfully that it has not only no time to gain adherents, but has no
time to make its escape. It should be the Federal prison for any
American who allows himself to become so misguided as to seek to
substitute terrorism and destruction for our orderly and lawful methods
of procedure, or quick deportation for any foreigner who seeks our
shores to carry out these purposes, or comes as an agent for those who
would do the same.

Organised labour has never occupied so high a position as it occupies
today. That the rank and file will for an instant have commerce with
these agencies, whatever any designing leader here and there may seek to
do, is inconceivable. That its organisations will be sought to be used
by them is just as probable. Its duty as to vigilance and determination
is pronounced. And unless vigilant and determined the set-backs it may
get and the losses it may suffer are just as pronounced. The spirit and
temper of the American people is such that it will not stand for
coersion, lawlessness, or any unfair demands. Public opinion is after
all the court of last resort. No strike or no lockout can succeed with
us that hasn't that tremendous weapon, public opinion, behind it. The
necessity therefore of being fair in all demands and orderly in all
procedure, and in view of this it is also well to remember that
organised labour represents but eight per cent of the actual working
people of this nation.

The gains of organised labour in the past have been very great. It is
also true that the demands of organised labour even today are very
great. In true candor it must also be said that not only the impulse but
the sincere desire of the great bulk of employers is in a conciliatory
way to grant all demands of labour that are at all consistent with sound
economic management, even in many cases to a great lessening of their
own profits, as well as to maintain working conditions as befits their
workers as valuable and honoured members of our body politic, as they
naturally are and as they so richly deserve.

For their own welfare, however, to say nothing of the welfare of the
nation, labour unions must purge themselves of all anarchistic and
destructive elements. Force is a two-edged sword, and the force of this
nation when once its sense of justice and right is outraged and its
temper is aroused, will be found to be infinitely superior to any
particular class, whether it be capital or whether it be labour.
Organised labour stands in the way to gain much by intelligent and
honest work and orderly procedure. And to a degree perhaps never before
equalled, does it stand in a position to lose much if through
self-deception on its own part or through unworthy leadership, it
deceives itself in believing itself superior to the forces of law and
order.

In a nation where the people through their chosen representatives and by
established systems of procedure determine their own institutions, when
agitators get beyond law and reason and lose sight too completely of the
law of mutuality, there is a power backed by a force that it is mere
madness to defy. The rights as well as the power of all the people will
be found to be infinitely superior to those of any one particular group
or class--clear-seeing men and women in any democratic form of
government realise that the words mutuality and self-interest bear a
very close relationship.

The greatest gains in the relations between capital and labour during
the coming few years will undoubtedly be along the lines of
profit-sharing. Some splendid beginnings are already in successful
operation. There is the recognition that capital is entitled initially
to a fair return; again that labour is entitled to a good and full
living wage--when both these conditions are met then that there be an
equal division of the profits that remain, between the capital and the
skill and management back of the capital invested on the one hand, and
labour on the other. Without the former labour would have no employment
in the particular enterprise; without the workers the former could not
carry on. Each is essential to the other.

Labour being not a commodity, as some material thing merely to be bought
and sold, but the human element, is entitled to more than a living wage.
It has human aspirations, and desires and needs. It has not only its
present but its own and its children's future to safeguard. When it is
thus made a partner in the business it becomes more earnest and reliable
and effective in its work, less inclined to condone the shiftless, the
incompetent, the slacker; more eager and resolute in withstanding the
ill-founded, reckless or sinister suggestions or efforts of an
ill-advised leadership.

Capital or employer is the gainer also, because it is insured that loyal
and more intelligent cooperation in its enterprise that is as essential
to its success as is the genius and skill of management.

Taking a different form but proving most valuable alike for management
and capital on the one hand, and its workers on the other, is the case
of one of our great industrial plants, the largest of its kind in the
world and employing many thousands of workers, where already a trifle
over forty per cent. of its stock is in the hands of the workers. Their
thrift and their good judgment have enabled them to take advantage of
attractive prices and easy methods of payment made them by the company's
management. There are already many other concerns where this is true in
greater or less proportion.

These are facts that certain types of labour agitators or even leaders
as well as special pleaders for labour, find it convenient to forget, or
at least not to mention. The same is true also of the millions that are
every year being paid out to make all working conditions and
surroundings cheerful, healthful, safe; in various forms of insurance,
in retiring pensions. Through the initiative of this larger type of
employer, or manager of capital, many hundreds of thousands both men and
women and in continually increasing numbers, are being thus
benefited--outside and above their yearly wage or salary.

A new era in connection with capital and labour has for some time been
coming into being; the era of democracy in industry has arrived. The day
of the autocratic sway on the part of capital has passed; nor will we as
a nation take kindly to the autocratic sway of labour. It is obtaining
a continually fuller recognition; and cooperation leading in many lines
to profit-sharing is the new era we are now passing into.

Though there are very large numbers of men of great wealth, employers
and heads of industrial enterprises, who have caught the spirit of the
new industrial age upon which we have already begun to enter, and who
are glad to see labour getting its fairer share of the profits of
industry and a larger recognition as partners in industry, there are
those who, lacking both imagination and vision, attempt to resist the
tide that, already turned, is running in volume. They are our American
Bourbons, our American Junkers. They are, considering the ominous
undercurrents of change, unrest and discontent that are so apparent in
the entire industrial and economic world today, our worst breeders and
feeders of Bolshevism and lawlessness.

If they had their way and their numbers were sufficiently large, the
flames of Bolshevism and anarchy would be so fed that even in America we
would have little hope of escaping a great conflagration. They are the
ones who are determined to see that their immense profits are
uncurtailled, whose homes must have ten bathrooms each; while great
numbers of their workers without whom they would have to close up the
industry--hence their essential partners in the industry though not in
name--haven't even a single bath-room and with families as large and in
many cases larger.

They are they who must have three or four homes each, aggregating in the
millions to build and to maintain. They are they who cannot see why
workmen should discuss such things among themselves, or even question
them, though in many cases they are scarcely able to make ends meet in
the face of continually advancing or even soaring prices, who never
enjoy a holiday, and are unable to lay up for the years to come, when
they will no longer be "required" in industry. They are they therefore
who have but little if any interest or care for even the physical
well-being of their workers, say nothing of their mental and spiritual
well-being and enjoyments--beyond the fact that they are well enough fed
and housed for the next day's work.

They are they who when it is suggested that, recognizing the change and
the run of the tide, they be keen-minded enough to anticipate changing
conditions and organize their business so that their workers have some
joint share in its conditions and conduct, and some share in its profits
beyond a mere living wage, reply--"I'll be damned if I do." It doesn't
require much of a prophetic sense now however, to be able to tell
them--they'll be damned if they don't.

There is reason to rejoice also that for the welfare of American
institutions, the number of this class is continually decreasing. Did
they predominate, with the unmistakable undercurrents of unrest, born of
a sense of injustice, there would be in time, and in a shorter time than
we perhaps realize, but one outcome. Steeped in selfishness, making
themselves impervious to all the higher leadings and impulses of the
soul--less than men--they are not only enemies of their own better
selves, but enemies of the nation itself.

Bolshevism in Russia was born, or rather was able to get its hold, only
through the long generations of Czarism and the almost universal state
of ignorance in which its people were held, that preceded it. The great
preponderance and the continually growing numbers of men with
imagination, with a sense of care, mutuality, cooperation, brotherhood,
in our various large enterprises is a force that will save this and
other nations from a similar experience.

I have great confidence in the Russian people. Its soul is sound; and
after the forces of treachery, incompetence and terrorism have spent
themselves, and the better elements are able to organize in sufficient
force to drive the beasts from its borders, it will arise and assert
itself. There will be builded a new Russia that will be one of the great
and commanding nations of the world. In the meantime it affords a most
concrete and valuable lesson to us and to all other nations--to strike
on the one hand, the forces of treachery and lawlessness the moment they
show themselves, and on the other hand, to see that the soil is made
fertile for neither their entrance nor growth.

The strong nation is that in which under the leadership of universal
free education and equal opportunities, a due watch is maintained to see
that the rights of all individuals and all classes are nurtured and
carefully guarded. In such a government the nation and its interests is
and must be supreme. Then if built upon high ethical and moral standards
where mutuality is the watch-word and the governing principle of its
life, its motto might through right, power through justice, it becomes a
fit and effective member of the Society of Nations.

Internationalism is higher than nationalism, humanity is above the
nation. The stronger however the individual nation, the stronger
necessarily will be the Society of Nations.

Love, sympathy, fellowship, is not inconsistent with the use of force to
restrain malignant evil, in the case of nations as in the case of
individuals. Where goodness is weak it is exploited and becomes a victim
of the stronger, when, devoid of a sense of mutuality, it is
conscienceless. Strength without conscience, goodness, ungoverned by the
law of mutuality, becomes tyranny. In seeking its own ends it violates
every law of God and man.

For the safety therefore of the better life of the world, for the very
safety and welfare of the Society of Nations, those nations that combine
strength with goodness, strength with good-will, strength with an
ever-growing sense of mutuality, which is the only law of a happy,
orderly, and advancing human life, must combine to check the power of
any people or nation still devoid of the knowledge of this law, lest
goodness, truth and all the higher instincts and potentialities of life,
even freedom itself perish from the earth. This can be done and must be
done not through malice or hatred, but through a sense of right and
duty.

There is no more diabolical, no more damnable ambition on the part of
individuals, organizations or nations than to rule, to gain domination
over the minds and the lives of others either for the sake of power and
domination or for the material gain that can be made to flow therefrom.
As a rule, however, it is both. There is nothing more destructive to
the higher moral and ethical life of the individual or the organization
controlled by this desire, nothing so destructive to the life of the one
or ones so dominated, and as a consequence to the life of society itself
as this evil and prostituting desire and purpose.

Where this has become the clearly controlling motive, malignant and
deep-seated, if in the case of a nation, then it is the duty of those
nations that combine strength with character, strength with goodness, to
combine to check the evil wrought by such a nation. If by persuasion and
good-will, well and good. If not, then through the exercise of a
restraining force. This is not contrary to the law of love, for the love
of the good is the controlling motive. It is only thus that the higher
moral law which for its growth and consummation is dependent upon
individuals, can grow and gain supremacy in the world.

Intellectual independence and acumen, combined with a love of truth,
goodness, righteousness, love and service for others, is the greatest
aid there can be in carrying out the Divine plan and purpose in the
world. The sword of love therefore becomes the sword of righteousness
that cuts out the cancerous growth that is given from to by malignant
ill will; the sword of righteousness that strikes down slavery and
oppression; the sword of righteousness therefore that becomes the sword
of civilization.

It is a weapon that does not have to be always used however; for when
its power is once clearly understood it is feared. Its deterrent power
becomes therefore infinitely more effective than in its actual use. So
in any new world settlement, any nation or group that is not up to this
moral world standard, that would seek to impose its will and its
institutions upon any other nations for the sake of domination, or to
rob them of their goods, must be restrained through the federated power
of the other nations, not by forcing their own beliefs or codes or
institutions upon it, but by restraining it and making ineffective any
ambitions or purposes that it may plan, or until its people whatever its
leadership may be, are brought clearly and concretely to see that such
methods do not pay.

That Jesus to whom we ultimately go for our moral leadership, not only
sanctioned, but used and advocated the use of righteous force, when
malignant evil in the form of self-seeking sought domination, either
intellectual or physical, for its own selfish gain and aggrandizement,
is clearly evidenced by many of his own sayings and his own acts.

So within the nation during this great reconstruction period, these are
times that call for heroic men and women. In a Democracy or in any
representative form of government an alert citizenship is its only
safety. With a vastly increased voting population, in that many millions
of women citizens are now admitted to full citizenship, the need for
intelligent action and attention to matters of government was never so
great. Great numbers will be herded and voted by organizations as well
as by machines. As these will comprise the most ignorant and therefore
the herdable ones, it is especially incumbent upon the great rank and
file of intelligent women to see that they take and maintain an active
interest in public affairs.

Politics is something that we cannot evade except to the detriment of
our country and thereby to our own detriment. Politics is but another
word for government. And in a sense we the individual voter are the
government and unless we make matters of government our own concern,
there are organizations and there are groups of designing men who will
steal in and get possession for their own selfish aggrandizement and
gain. This takes sometimes the form of power, to be traded for other
power, or concessions; but always if you will trace far enough, eventual
money gain. Or again it takes the form of graft and even direct loot.
The losses that are sustained through a lowered citizenship, through
inefficient service, through a general debauchery of public
institutions, through increased taxation to make up for the amounts that
are drawn off in graft and loot are well nigh incalculable--and for the
sole reason that you and I, average citizens, do not take the active
personal interest in our own matters of government that we should take.

Clericalism, Tammanyism, Bolshevism, Syndicalism--and all in the guise
of interest in the people--get their holds and their profits in this
way. It is essential that we be locally wise and history wise. Any class
or section or organization that is less than the nation itself must be
watched and be made to keep its own place, or it becomes a menace to the
free and larger life of the nation. Even in the case of a great national
crisis a superior patriotism is affected and paraded in order that it
may camouflage its other and real activities.

When at times we forget ourselves and speak of rights rather than duties
in connection with our country, it were well to recall and to repeat the
words of Franklin: "The sun never repents of the good he does nor does
he ever demand a recompense."

Not only is constant vigilance incumbent upon us, but realising the fact
that the boys and the girls of today are the citizens of tomorrow--the
nation's voters and law-makers--it is incumbent upon us to see that
American free education through American free public schools, is
advanced to and maintained at its highest possibilities, and kept free
from any agencies that will make for a divided or anything less than a
whole-hearted and intelligent citizenship. The motto on the Shakespeare
statue at Leicester Square in London: "There is no darkness but
ignorance," might well be reproduced in every city and every hamlet in
the nation.

Late revelations have shown how even education can be manipulated and
prostituted for ulterior purposes. Parochial schools whether Protestant,
Catholic, Jewish, or Oriental, have no place in American
institutions--and whether their work is carried on in English or in a
foreign language. They are absolutely foreign to the spirit of our
institutions. They are purely for the sake of something less than the
nation itself. Blind indeed are we if we are not history-wise. Criminal
indeed are we to allow any boys or girls to be diverted to them and to
be deprived of the advantages of a better schooling and being brought
under the influences of agencies that are thoroughly and wholly
American.

American education must be made for American institutions and for
nothing less than this. The nation's children should be shielded from
any power that seeks to get possession of them in order at an early and
unaccountable age to fasten authority upon them, and to drive a wedge
between them and all others of the nation.

The nation has a duty to every child within its borders. To fail to
recognize or to shirk that duty, will call for a price to be paid
sometime as great as that that has been paid by every other nation that
did not see until too late. Sectarianism in education stultifies and
robs the child and nullifies the finest national instincts in education.
It is for but one purpose--the use and the power of the organization
that plans and that fosters it.

Our government profiting by the long weary struggles of other countries,
is founded upon the absolute separation of church and state. This does
not mean the separation of religion in its true sense from the state;
but keeping it free from every type of sectarian influence and
domination. It is ours to see that no silent subtle influences are at
work, that will eventually make the same trouble here as in other
countries, or that will thrust out the same stifling hand to undermine
and to throttle universal free public education, and the inalienable
right that every child has to it. Our children are the wards of and
accountable to the state--they are not the property of any organization,
group or groups, less than the state.

We need the creation of a strong Federal Department of Education of
cabinet rank, with ample means and strong powers to be the guiding
genius of all our state and local departments of education, with greater
attention paid to a more thorough and concrete training in civics, in
moral and ethical education, in addition to the other well recognized
branches in public school education. It should have such powers also as
will enable it to see that every child is in school up to a certain age,
or until all the fundamentals of a prescribed standard of American
education are acquired.

A recent tabulation made public by a Federal Deputy Commissioner of
Naturalization has shown that a little over one tenth, in round numbers,
11,000,000, of our population is composed of unnaturalized aliens. Even
this however tells but a part of the story; for vast numbers of even
those who have become naturalized, have in no sense become Americanized.

Speaking of this class an able editorial in a recent number of one of
our leading New York dailies has said:

"Of the millions of aliens who have gone through the legal forms of
naturalization a very large proportion have not in any sense been
Americanized, and, though citizens, they are still alien in habits of
thought, in speech and in their general attitude toward the community.

"There are industrial centres not far from New York City that are wholly
foreign. There are sections of this city that--except as the children
through the schools and association with others of their own age yield
to change--are intensely alien.

"To penetrate these barriers and open new avenues of communication with
the people who live within them is no longer a task to be performed by
individual effort. Americanization is a work that must be undertaken and
directed on a scale so extensive that only through the cooperation of
the States and the Federal Government can it be successfully carried
out. It cannot longer be neglected without serious harm to the life and
welfare of the Nation."

Some even more startling facts are given out in figures by the
Department of the Interior, figures supplied to it by the Surgeon
General's Office of the Army. The War Department records show that 24.9
per cent. of the draft army examined by that department's agents were
unable to read and understand a newspaper, or to write letters home. In
one draft in New York State in May, 1918, 16.6 per cent. were classed as
illiterate. In one draft in connection with South Carolina troops in
July, 1918, 49.5 per cent. where classed as illiterate. In one draft in
connection with Minnesota troops in July of the same year, 14.2 per
cent. were classed as illiterate. In other words it means for example
that in New York State we have in round numbers 700,000 men between 21
and 31 years of age who are illiterate. The same source reveals the fact
that in the nation in round numbers over 10,000,000 are either
illiterate or without a knowledge of our language. The South is the home
of most of the wholly uneducated, the North of those of foreign speech.
And in speaking of this class a recent editorial in another
representative New York daily, after making mention of one industrial
centre but a few miles out of New York City, in New Jersey, where nearly
16 out of every 100 cannot read English, has said:

"Such people may enjoy the advantages America offers. Of its spirit and
institutions they can comprehend nothing. They are the easy dupes of
foreign agitators, unassimilable, an element of weakness in the social
body that might easily be converted into an element of strength. Many
of them have the vote, controlled by leaders interested only in designs
alien to America's welfare.

"The problem is national in scope * * *. The best way to keep Bolshevism
out of America is to reduce ignorance of our speech and everything else
to a minimum. However alert our immigration officers may be, foreign
agents of social disorder are sure to pass through our doors, and as
long as we allow children to grow up among us who have no means of
finding out the meaning of our laws and forms of government the seeds of
discontent will be sown in congenial soil."

Profoundly true also are the following words from an editorial in still
another New York daily in dealing with that great army of 700,000
illiterates within the State, or rather that portion of them who are
adults of foreign birth:

"The first thing to do is to teach them, and make them realize that a
knowledge of the English language is a prerequisite of first class
American citizenship. * * * The wiping out of illiteracy is a foundation
stone in building up a strong population, able and worthy to hold its
own in the world. With the disappearance of illiteracy and of the
ignorance of the language of the country will also disappear many of the
trouble-breeding problems which have held back immigrants in gaining
their fair share of real prosperity, the intelligence and self-respect
which are vital ingredients in any good citizenship. Real freedom of
life and character cannot be enjoyed by the man or woman whose whole
life is passed upon the inferior plane of ignorance and prejudice. Teach
them all how to deserve the benefits of life in America, and they will
soon learn how to gain and protect them."

It is primarily among the ignorant and illiterate that Bolshevism,
anarchy, political rings, and every agency that attempts through
self-seeking to sow the seeds of discontent, treachery, and disloyalty,
works to exploit them and to herd them for political ends. No man can
have that respect for himself, or feel that he has the respect due him
from others as an honest and diligent worker, whatever his line of work,
who is handicapped by the lack of an ordinary education. The heart of
the American nation is sound. Through universal free public education it
must be on the alert and be able to see through Bourbonism and
understand its methods on the one hand, and Bolshevism on the other; and
be determined through intelligent action to see that American soil is
made uncongenial to both.

Our chief problem is to see that Democracy is made safe for and made of
real service to the world. Our American education must be made
continually more keenly alive to the great moral, ethical and social
needs of the time. Thereby it will be made religious without having any
sectarian slant or bias; it will be made safe for and the hand-maid of
Democracy and not a menace to it.

Vast multitudes today are seeing as never before that the moral and
ethical foundations of the nation's and the world's life is a matter of
primal concern to all.

We are finding more and more that the simple fundamentals of life and
conduct as portrayed by the Christ of Nazareth not only constitutes a
great idealism, but the only practical way of life. Compared to this and
to the need that it come more speedily and more universally into
operation in the life of the world today, truly "sectarian peculiarities
are obsolete impertinences."

Our time needs again more the prophet and less the priest. It needs the
God-impelled life and voice of the prophet with his face to the future,
both God-ward and man-ward, burning with an undivided devotion to truth
and righteousness. It needs less the priest, too often with his back to
the future and too often the pliant tool of the organisation whose chief
concern is, and ever has been, the preservation of itself under the
ostensible purpose of the preservation of the truth once delivered, the
same that Jesus with his keen powers of penetration saw killed the
Spirit as a high moral guide and as an inspirer to high and
unself-centred endeavour, and that he characterised with such scathing
scorn. There are splendid exceptions; but this is the rule now even as
it was in his day.

The prophet is concerned with truth, not a system; with righteousness,
not custom; with justice, not expediency. Is there a man who would dare
say that if Christianity--the Christianity of the Christ--had been
actually in vogue, in practice in all the countries of Christendom
during the last fifty years, during the last twenty-five years, that
this colossal and gruesome war would ever have come about? No
clear-thinking and honest man would or could say that it would. We need
again the voice of the prophet, clear-seeing, high-purposed, and
unafraid. We need again the touch of the prophet's hand to lead us back
to those simple fundamental teachings of the Christ of Nazareth, that
are life-giving to the individual, and that are world-saving.

We speak of our Christian civilisation, and the common man, especially
in times like these, asks what it is, where it is--and God knows that we
have been for many hundred years wandering in the wilderness. He is
thinking that the Kingdom of God on earth that the true teachings of
Jesus predicated, and that he laboured so hard to actualise, needs some
speeding up. There is a world-wide yearning for spiritual peace and
righteousness on the part of the common man. He is finding it
occasionally in established religion, but often, perhaps more often,
independently of it. He is finding it more often through his own contact
and relations with the Man of Nazareth--for him the God-man. There is no
greater fact in our time, and there is no greater hope for the future
than is to be found in this fact.

Jesus gave the great principles, the animating spirit of life, not
minute details of conduct. The real Church of Christ is not an
hierarchy, an institution, it is a brotherhood--the actual establishing
of the Kingdom of God in moral, ethical and social terms in the world.

Among the last words penned by Dr. John Watson--Ian Maclaren--good
churchman, splendid writer, but above all independent thinker and
splendid man, were the following: "Was it not the chief mistake and also
the hopeless futility of Pharisaism to meddle with the minute affairs of
life, and to lay down what a man should do at every turn? It was not
therefore an education of conscience, but a bondage of conscience; it
did not bring men to their full stature by teaching them to face their
own problems of duty and to settle them, it kept them in a state of
childhood, by forbidding and commanding in every particular of daily
life. Pharisaism, therefore, whether Jewish or Gentile, ancient or
modern, which replaces the moral law by casuistry, and the enlightened
judgment of the individual by the confessional, creates a narrow
character and mechanical morals. Freedom is the birthright of the soul,
and it is by the discipline of life the soul finds itself. It were a
poor business to be towed across the pathless ocean of this world to the
next; by the will of God and for our good we must sail the ship
ourselves, and steer our own course. It is the work of the Bible to show
us the stars and instruct us how to take our reckoning * * *.

"Jesus did not tell us what to do, for that were impossible, as every
man has his own calling, and is set in by his own circumstances, but
Jesus has told us how to carry ourselves in the things we have to do,
and He has put the heart in us to live becomingly, not by pedantic
rules, but by an instinct of nobility. Jesus is the supreme teacher of
the Bible and He came not to forbid or to command, but to place the
Kingdom of God as a living force, and perpetual inspiration within the
soul of man, and then, to leave him in freedom and in grace to fulfil
himself."[G]

We no longer admit that Christ is present and at work only when a
minister is expounding the gospel or some theological precept or
conducting some ordained observance in the pulpit; or that religion is
only when it is labelled as such and is within the walls of a church.
That belonged to the chapter in Christianity that is now rapidly
closing, a chapter of good works and results--but so pitiably below its
possibilities. So pitiably below because men had been taught and without
sufficient thought accepted the teaching that to be a Christian was to
hold certain beliefs about the Christ that had been formulated by early
groups of men and that had come down through the centuries.

The chapter that is now opening upon the world is the one that puts
Christ's own teachings in the simple, frank, and direct manner in which
he gave them, to the front. It makes life, character, conduct, human
concern and human service of greater importance than mere matters of
opinion. It makes eager and unremitting work for the establishing of the
Kingdom of God, the kingdom of right relations between men, here on this
earth, the essential thing. It insists that the telling test as to
whether a man is a Christian is how much of the Christ spirit is in
evidence in his life--and in every phase of his life. Gripped by this
idea which for a long time the forward-looking and therefore the big men
in them have been striving for, our churches in the main are moving
forward with a new, a dauntless, and a powerful appeal.

Differences that have sometimes separated them on account of differences
of opinion, whether in thought or interpretation,[H] are now found to be
so insignificant when compared to the actual simple fundamentals that
the Master taught, and when compared to the work to be done, that a
great Interallied Church Movement is now taking concrete and strong
working form, that is equipping the church for a mighty and far-reaching
Christian work. A new and great future lies immediately ahead. The good
it is equipping itself to accomplish is beyond calculation--a work in
which minister and layman will have equal voice and equal share.

It will receive also great inspiration and it will eagerly strike hands
with all allied movements that are following the same leader, but along
different roads.

Britain's apostle of brotherhood and leader of the Brotherhood Movement
there, Rev. Tom Sykes, who has caught so clearly the Master's own basis
of Christianity--love for and union with God, love for and union with
the brother--has recently put so much stimulating truth into a single
paragraph that I reproduce it here:

"The emergence of the feeling of kinship with the Unseen is the most
arresting and revealing fact of human history. * * * _The union
with God_ is not through the display of ritual, but the affiliation and
conjunction of life. We do not believe we are in a universe that has
screens and folds, where the spiritual commerce of man has to be
conducted on the principle of secret diplomacy. The universe is frank
and open, and God is straightforward and honourable. _In making the
spirit and practice of brotherliness_ the test of religious value, we
are at one with Him who said: 'Inasmuch as ye do it unto one of the
least--ye do it unto me.' _We touch the Father when we help His child._
Jesus taught us not to come to God asking, art Thou this or that? but to
call Him Father and live upon it. Do not admit that many of our
Brotherhood meetings are in 'neutral' or 'secular' halls and buildings!
'Where two or three gather in My name, there am I.' Where He is, there
is hallowed ground."

We need a stock-taking and a mobilisation of our spiritual forces. But
what, after all, does this mean? Search as we may we are brought back
_every time_ to this same Man of Nazareth, the God-man--Son of Man and
Son of God. And gathering it into a few brief sentences it is this:
Jesus' great revelation was this consciousness of God in the individual
life, and to this he witnessed in a supreme and masterly way, because
this he supremely realised and lived. Faith in him and following him
does not mean acquiring some particular notion of God or some particular
belief about him himself. It is the living in one's own life of this
same consciousness of God as one's source and Father, and a living in
these same filial relations with him of love and guidance and care that
Jesus entered into and continuously lived.

When this is done there is no problem and no condition in the individual
life that it will not clarify, mould, and therefore take care of; for
"[Greek transliteration: mê merimnate tê psychê hymôn]"--do not worry about your
life--was the Master's clear-cut command. Are we ready for this high
type of spiritual adventure? Not only are we assured of this great and
mighty truth that the Master revealed and going ahead of us lived, that
under this supreme guidance we need not worry about the things of the
life, but that under this Divine guidance we need not think _even of the
life itself_, if for any reason it becomes our duty or our privilege to
lay it down. Witnessing for truth and standing for truth he again
preceded us in this.

But this, this love for God or rather this state that becomes the
natural and the normal life when we seek the Kingdom, and the Divine
rule becomes dominant and operative in mind and heart, leads us directly
back to his other fundamental: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
For if God is my Father and if he cares for me in this way--and every
other man in the world is my brother and He cares for him in exactly the
same way--then by the sanction of God his Father I haven't anything on
my brother; and by the love of God my Father my brother hasn't anything
on me. It is but the most rudimentary commonsense then, that we be
considerate one of another, that we be square and decent one with
another. We will do well as children of the same Father to sit down and
talk matters over; and arise with the conclusion that the advice of
Jesus, our elder brother, is sound: "Therefore all things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them."

He gave it no label, but it has subsequently become known as the Golden
Rule. There is no higher rule and no greater developer of the highest
there is in the individual human life, and no greater adjuster and
beautifier of the problems of our common human life. And when it becomes
sufficiently strong in its action in this, the world awaits its
projection into its international life. This is the truth that he
revealed--the twofold truth of love to God and love for the neighbour,
that shall make men free. The truth of the Man of Nazareth still holds
and shall hold, and we must realise this adequately before we ask or can
expect any other revelation.

We are in a time of great changes. The discovery of new laws and
therefore of new truth necessitates changes and necessitates advances.
But whatever changes or advances may come, the Divine reality still
survives, independent of Jesus it is true, but as the world knows him
still better, it will give to him its supreme gratitude and praise, in
that he was the most perfect revealer of God to man, of God in man, and
the most concrete in that he embodied and lived this truth in his own
matchless human-divine life; and stands as the God-man to which the
world is gradually approaching. For as Goethe has said--"We can never
get beyond the spirit of Jesus."

Love it is, he taught, that brings order out of chaos, that becomes the
solvent of the riddle of life, and however cynical, skeptical, or
practical we may think at times we may be, a little quiet clear-cut
thought will bring us each time back to the truth that it is the
essential force that leads away from the tooth and the claw of the
jungle, that lifts life up from and above the clod. Love is the world's
balance-wheel; and as the warming and ennobling element of sympathy,
care and consideration radiates from it, increasing one's sense of
mutuality, which in turn leads to fellowship, cooperation, brotherhood,
a holy and diviner conception and purpose of life is born, that makes
human life more as it should be, as it must be--as it will be.

I love to feel that when one makes glad the heart of any man, woman,
child, or animal, he makes glad the heart of God--and I somehow feel
that it is true.

As our household fires radiate their genial warmth, and make more joyous
and more livable the lot of all within the household walls, so life in
its larger scope and in all its human relations, becomes more genial and
more livable and reveals more abundantly the deeper riches of its
diviner nature, as it is made more open and more obedient to the higher
powers of mind and spirit.

Do you know that incident in connection with the little Scottish girl?
She was trudging along, carrying as best she could a boy younger, but it
seemed almost as big as she herself, when one remarked to her how heavy
he must be for her to carry, when instantly came the reply: "He's na
heavy. He's mi brither." Simple is the incident; but there is in it a
truth so fundamental that pondering upon it, it is enough to make many a
man, to whom dogma or creed make no appeal, a Christian--and a mighty
engine for good in the world. And more--there is in it a truth so
fundamental and so fraught with potency and with power, that its wider
recognition and projection into all human relations would reconstruct a
world.

    _I saw the mountains stand
    Silent, wonderful, and grand,
    Looking out across the land
    When the golden light was falling
    On distant dome and spire;
    And I heard a low voice calling,
    "Come up higher, come up higher,
    From the lowland and the mire,
    From the mist of earth desire,
    From the vain pursuit of pelf.
    From the attitude of self:
    Come up higher, come up higher."_

                       _James G. Clark_




FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: The Emmanuel Movement in Boston in connection with Emmanuel
Church, inaugurated some time ago under the leadership and direction of
two well-known ministers, Dr. Worcester and Dr. McComb, and a well-known
physician, Dr. Coriat, and similar movements in other cities is an
attestation of this.

That most valuable book under the joint authorship of these three men:
"Religion and Medicine," Moffat, Yard and Company, New York, will be
found of absorbing interest and of great practical value by many. The
amount of valuable as well as interesting and reliable material that it
contains is indeed remarkable.]

[Footnote B: "War and Laughter," by James Oppenheim--The Century
Company, New York.]

[Footnote C: Henry Holt in "Cosmic Relations."]

[Footnote D: From a notable article in the New York "Times Magazine,"
Sunday, April 1, 1917, by George W. Perkins, chairman Mayor's Food
Supply Commission.]

[Footnote E: Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of
James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? And are his sisters not here
with us?--Mark 6:3.]

[Footnote F: From that strong, splendid poem "Buttadeus," by William
Samuel Johnson.]

[Footnote G: "God's Message to the Human Soul"--_Revell_.]

[Footnote H: The thought of the layman in practically all of our
churches is much the same as that of Mr. Lloyd George when he said: "The
Church to which I belong is torn with a fierce dispute; one part says it
is baptism _into_ the name of the Father, and the other that it is
baptism _in_ the name of the Father. I belong to one of these parties. I
feel most strongly about this. I would die for it, but I forget which it
is."]




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes


Made minor punctuation, spelling, and hyphenation changes for
consistency.

Corrected the following typos:

Page 81: Changed Pharasaic to Pharisaic.
  (come into being a Pharisaic legalism)

Page 140: Changed subconsious to subconscious.
  (the slumbering subconsious mind)

Page 193: Changed independant to independent.
  (guided by their own independant judgment)

Page 217: Changed terriffic to terrific.
  (What a terriffic price to pay to learn the lesson)

Page 221: Changed symathy to sympathy.
  (He had, as we have seen, infinite symathy for and forbearance)

Page 232: Changed accompaniament to accompaniment.
  (Misunderstanding is not infrequently its accompaniament.)

Page 237: Changed viligant to vigilant.
  (And unless viligant and determined)

Page 245: Changed tyrany to tyranny.
  (ungoverned by the law of mutuality, becomes tyrany.)

Page 245: Changed malignent to malignant.
  (the use of force to restrain malignent evil,)

Page 253: Changed inaliable to inalienable.
  (the inaliable right that every child has)

Page 258: Changed impertinances to impertinences.
  ("sectarian peculiarities are obsolete impertinances.")

Page 259: Changed Chrisitianity to Christianity.
  (Chrisitianity of the Christ)

Page 260: Changed heirarchy to hierarchy.
  (The real Church of Christ is not an heirarchy,)

Page 262: Changed that to than.
  (human service of greater importance that mere matters of opinion.)










