letter contained; in the efficacy of this interview to restore its
spotlessness to my character, and banish all illusions from the mind of
my friend, continually acquired new evidence and new strength.

What should I fear in his presence? This was unlike an artifice intended
to betray me into his hands. If it were an artifice, what purpose would
it serve? The freedom of my mind was untouched, and that freedom would
defy the assaults of blandishments or magic. Force was I not able to
repel. On the former occasion my courage, it is true, had failed at the
imminent approach of danger; but then I had not enjoyed opportunities of
deliberation; I had foreseen nothing; I was sunk into imbecility by my
previous thoughts; I had been the victim of recent disappointments
and anticipated ills: Witness my infatuation in opening the closet in
opposition to divine injunctions.

Now, perhaps, my courage was the offspring of a no less erring
principle. Pleyel was for ever lost to me. I strove in vain to assume
his person, and suppress my resentment; I strove in vain to believe in
the assuaging influence of time, to look forward to the birth-day of new
hopes, and the re-exaltation of that luminary, of whose effulgencies I
had so long and so liberally partaken.

What had I to suffer worse than was already inflicted?

Was not Carwin my foe? I owed my untimely fate to his treason. Instead
of flying from his presence, ought I not to devote all my faculties to
the gaining of an interview, and compel him to repair the ills of
which he has been the author? Why should I suppose him impregnable
to argument? Have I not reason on my side, and the power of imparting
conviction? Cannot he be made to see the justice of unravelling the maze
in which Pleyel is bewildered?

He may, at least, be accessible to fear. Has he nothing to fear from
the rage of an injured woman? But suppose him inaccessible to such
inducements; suppose him to persist in all his flagitious purposes; are
not the means of defence and resistance in my power?

In the progress of such thoughts, was the resolution at last formed. I
hoped that the interview was sought by him for a laudable end; but, be
that as it would, I trusted that, by energy of reasoning or of action, I
should render it auspicious, or, at least, harmless.

Such a determination must unavoidably fluctuate. The poet's chaos was
no unapt emblem of the state of my mind. A torment was awakened in my
bosom, which I foresaw would end only when this interview was past, and
its consequences fully experienced. Hence my impatience for the arrival
of the hour which had been prescribed by Carwin.

Meanwhile, my meditations were tumultuously active. New impediments
to the execution of the scheme were speedily suggested. I had apprized
Catharine of my intention to spend this and many future nights with her.
Her husband was informed of this arrangement, and had zealously approved
it. Eleven o'clock exceeded their hour of retiring. What excuse should
I form for changing my plan? Should I shew this letter to Wieland, and
submit myself to his direction? But I knew in what way he would decide.
He would fervently dissuade me from going. Nay, would he not do more?
He was apprized of the offences of Carwin, and of the reward offered
for his apprehension. Would he not seize this opportunity of executing
justice on a criminal?

This idea was new. I was plunged once more into doubt. Did not equity
enjoin me thus to facilitate his arrest? No. I disdained the office of
betrayer. Carwin was unapprized of his danger, and his intentions were
possibly beneficent. Should I station guards about the house, and
make an act, intended perhaps for my benefit, instrumental to his own
destruction? Wieland might be justified in thus employing the knowledge
which I should impart, but I, by imparting it, should pollute myself
with more hateful crimes than those undeservedly imputed to me. This
scheme, therefore, I unhesitatingly rejected. The views with which
I should return to my own house, it would therefore be necessary to
conceal. Yet some pretext must be invented. I had never been initiated
into the trade of lying. Yet what but falshood was a deliberate
suppression of the truth? To deceive by silence or by words is the same.

Yet what would a lie avail me? What pretext would justify this change in
my plan? Would it not tend to confirm the imputations of Pleyel? That
I should voluntarily return to an house in which honor and life had so
lately been endangered, could be explained in no way favorable to my
integrity.

These reflections, if they did not change, at least suspended my
decision. In this state of uncertainty I alighted at the _hut_. We gave
this name to the house tenanted by the farmer and his servants, and
which was situated on the verge of my brother's ground, and at a
considerable distance from the mansion. The path to the mansion was
planted by a double row of walnuts. Along this path I proceeded alone.
I entered the parlour, in which was a light just expiring in the socket.
There was no one in the room. I perceived by the clock that stood
against the wall, that it was near eleven. The lateness of the hour
startled me. What had become of the family? They were usually retired
an hour before this; but the unextinguished taper, and the unbarred
door were indications that they had not retired. I again returned to the
hall, and passed from one room to another, but still encountered not a
human being.

I imagined that, perhaps, the lapse of a few minutes would explain
these appearances. Meanwhile I reflected that the preconcerted hour had
arrived. Carwin was perhaps waiting my approach. Should I immediately
retire to my own house, no one would be apprized of my proceeding. Nay,
the interview might pass, and I be enabled to return in half an hour.
Hence no necessity would arise for dissimulation.

I was so far influenced by these views that I rose to execute this
design; but again the unusual condition of the house occurred to me, and
some vague solicitude as to the condition of the family. I was nearly
certain that my brother had not retired; but by what motives he could
be induced to desert his house thus unseasonably I could by no means
divine. Louisa Conway, at least, was at home and had, probably, retired
to her chamber; perhaps she was able to impart the information I wanted.

I went to her chamber, and found her asleep. She was delighted and
surprized at my arrival, and told me with how much impatience and
anxiety my brother and his wife had waited my coming. They were fearful
that some mishap had befallen me, and had remained up longer than the
usual period. Notwithstanding the lateness of the hour, Catharine would
not resign the hope of seeing me. Louisa said she had left them both in
the parlour, and she knew of no cause for their absence.

As yet I was not without solicitude on account of their personal safety.
I was far from being perfectly at ease on that head, but entertained no
distinct conception of the danger that impended over them. Perhaps to
beguile the moments of my long protracted stay, they had gone to
walk upon the bank. The atmosphere, though illuminated only by the
star-light, was remarkably serene. Meanwhile the desirableness of an
interview with Carwin again returned, and I finally resolved to seek it.

I passed with doubting and hasty steps along the path. My dwelling, seen
at a distance, was gloomy and desolate. It had no inhabitant, for my
servant, in consequence of my new arrangement, had gone to Mettingen.
The temerity of this attempt began to shew itself in more vivid colours
to my understanding. Whoever has pointed steel is not without arms; yet
what must have been the state of my mind when I could meditate, without
shuddering, on the use of a murderous weapon, and believe myself secure
merely because I was capable of being made so by the death of another?
Yet this was not my state. I felt as if I was rushing into deadly toils,
without the power of pausing or receding.



