II.

Footnote 592:

The present time is indicated by the head of the lion—because his
condition is strong and impetuous.

Footnote 593:

Time is thought by the wickedest people to be a divinity who deprives
willing people of essential being; by good men it is considered to be
the Cause of the things of the world, but to the wisest and best it does
not seem time, but God.

Footnote 594:

Philo: “In Genesim,” I, 100. (Cited by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I,
p. 82.)

Footnote 595:

Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” Vol. II, p. 193. In the writings
ascribed to Zoroaster, Περὶ Φύσεως, the Ananke, the necessity of fate,
is represented by the air. Cumont: Ibid., I, p. 87.

Footnote 596:

Spielrein’s patient (_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 394) speaks of horses, who eat
men, also exhumed bodies.

Footnote 597:

Negelein: Ibid., p. 416.

Footnote 598:

“Fight,” she said, “and fight bravely, for I will not give away an inch
nor turn my back. Face to face, come on if you are a man! Strike home,
do your worst and die! The battle this day is without quarter ... till,
weary in body and mind, we lie powerless and gasping for breath in each
other’s arms.”

Footnote 599:

P. Thomas a Villanova Wegener: “Das wunderbare äussere und innere Leben
der Dienerin Gottes Anna Catherina Emmerich.” Dülmen i. W. 1891.

Footnote 600:

The heart of the mother of God is pierced by a sword.

Footnote 601:

Corresponding to the idea in Psalm xi:2, “For lo, the wicked bend their
bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string, that they may privily
shoot at the upright in heart.”

Footnote 602:

K. E. Neumann: “The Speeches of Gautama Buddha,” translated from the
German collection of the fragments of Suttanipāto of the Pāli-Kanon.
München 1911.

Footnote 603:

With the same idea of an endogenous pain Theocritus (27, 28) calls the
birth throes “Arrows of the Ilithyia.” In the sense of a wish the same
comparison is found in Jesus Sirach 19:12. “When a word penetrates a
fool it is the same as if an arrow pierced his loins.” That is to say,
it gives him no rest until it is out.

Footnote 604:

One might be tempted to say that these were merely figuratively
expressed coitus scenes. But that would be a little too strong and an
unjustifiable accentuation of the material at issue. We cannot forget
that the saints have, figuratively, taught the painful domestification
of the brute. The result of this, which is the progress of civilization,
has also to be recognized as a motive for this action.

Footnote 605:

Apuleius (“Metam.,” Book II, 31) made use of the symbolism of bow and
arrow in a very drastic manner, “Ubi primam sagittam saevi Cupidinis in
ima praecordia mea delapsam excepi, arcum meum en! Ipse vigor attendit
et oppido formido, ne nervus rigoris nimietate rumpatur” (When I pulled
out the first arrow of fierce Cupid that had entered into my inmost
breast, behold my bow! Its very vigor stretches it and makes me fear
lest the string be broken by the excessive tautness).

Footnote 606:

Thus the plague-bringing Apollo. In Old High German, arrow is called
“strala” (_strahlen_ = rays).

Footnote 607:

Spielrein’s patient (_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 371) has also the idea of the
cleavage of the earth in a similar connection. “Iron is used for the
purpose of penetrating into the earth ... with iron man can ... create
men ... the earth is split, burst open, man is divided ... is severed
and reunited. In order to make an end of the burial of the living, Jesus
Christ calls his disciples to penetrate into the earth.”

The motive of “cleavage” is of general significance. The Persian hero
Tishtriya, who also appeared as a white horse, opens the rain lake, and
thus makes the earth fruitful. He is called Tîr = arrow. He was also
represented as feminine, with a bow and arrow. Mithra with his arrow
shot the water from the rock, so as to end the drought. The knife is
sometimes found stuck in the earth. In Mithraic monuments sometimes it
is the sacrificial instrument which kills the bull. (Cumont: Ibid., pp.
115, 116, 165.)

Footnote 608:

The result is doubtful: the body borne down by the weight of the forest
is carried into empty Tartaros: Ampycides denies this: from out of the
midst of the mass, he sees a bird with tawny feathers issue into the
liquid air.

Footnote 609:

Spielrein’s patient also states that she has been shot through by God.
(3 shots:) “then came a resurrection of the spirit.” This is the
symbolism of introversion.

Footnote 610:

This is also represented mythologically in the legend of Theseus and
Peirithoos, who wished to capture the subterranean Proserpina. With this
aim they enter a chasm in the earth in the grove Kolonos, in order to
get down to the underworld; when they were below they wished to rest,
but being enchanted they hung on the rocks, that is to say, they
remained fixed in the mother and were therefore lost for the upperworld.
Later Theseus was freed by Hercules (revenge of Horus for Osiris), at
which time Hercules appears in the rôle of the death-conquering hero.

Footnote 611:

This formula applies most directly to dementia praecox.

Footnote 612:

See Roscher: s. v. Philoktetes, Sp. 2318, 15.

Footnote 613:

When the Russian sun-hero Oleg stepped on the skull of the slain horse,
a serpent came out of it and bit him on the foot. Then he became sick
and died. When Indra in the form of Çyena, the falcon, stole the soma
drink, Kriçanu, the herdsman, wounded him in his foot with his arrow
(“Rigveda,” I, 155; IV, 322).

Footnote 614:

Similar to the Lord of the Grail who guards the chalice, the mother
symbol. The myth of Philoctetes is taken from a more involved
connection, the Hercules myth. Hercules has two mothers, the benevolent
Alcmene and the pursuing Hera (Lamia), from whose breast he has absorbed
immortality. Hercules conquered Hera’s serpent while yet in the cradle;
that is to say, conquered the “terrible mother,” the Lamia. But from
time to time Hera sent to him attacks of madness, in one of which he
killed his children (Lamia motive). According to an interesting
tradition, this deed occurred at the moment when Hercules refused to
perform a great act in the service of Eurystheus. As a result of the
refusal, the libido, in readiness for the work, regressed in a typical
manner to the unconscious mother-imago, which resulted in madness (as
to-day), during which Hercules identifies himself with Lamia (Hera) and
murders his own children. The delphic oracle communicates to him the
fact that he is named Hercules because he owes his immortal fame to
Hera, who through her persecution compelled him to great deeds. It can
be seen that “the great deed” really means the conquering of the mother
and through her to win immortality. His characteristic weapon, the club,
he cuts from the maternal olive tree. Like the sun, he possessed the
arrows of Apollo. He conquered the Nemean lion in his cave, which has
the signification of “the grave in the mother’s womb” (see the end of
this chapter). Then follows the combat with the Hydra, the typical
battle with the dragon; the complete conquering of the mother. (See
below.) Following this, the capture of the Cerynean doe, whom he wounded
with an arrow in the foot. This is what generally happens to the hero,
but here it is reversed. Hercules showed the captured Erymanthian boar
to Eurystheus, whereupon the latter in fear crept into a cask. That is,
he died. The Stymphalides, the Cretan bull, and the man-devouring horse
of Diomedes are symbols of the devastating powers of death, among which
the latter’s relation to the mother may be recognized especially. The
battle for the precious girdle of the Amazon queen Hippolyte permits us
to see once more very clearly the shadow of the mother. Hippolyte is
ready to give up the girdle, but Hera, changing herself into the form of
Hippolyte, calls the Amazons against Hercules in battle. (Compare Horus,
fighting for the head ornament of Isis, about which there is more later.
Chap. 7.) The liberation of Hesione results from Hercules journeying
downwards with his ship into the belly of the monster, and killing the
monster from within after three days labor. (Jonah motive; Christ in the
tomb or in hell; the victory over death by creeping into the womb of the
mother, and its destruction in the form of the mother. The libido in the
form of the beautiful maiden again conquered.) The expedition to Erythia
is a parallel to Gilgamesh, also to Moses, in the Koran, whose goal was
the confluence of the two seas: it is the journey of the sun to the
Western sea, where Hercules discovered the straits of Gibraltar (“to
that passage”: Faust), and with the ship of Helios set out towards
Erythia. There he overcame the gigantic guardian Eurytion (Chumbaba in
the Gilgamesh epic, the symbol of the father), then the triune Geryon (a
monster of phallic libido symbolism), and at the same time wounded Hera,
hastening to the help of Geryon by an arrow shot. Then the robbery of
the herd followed. “The treasure attained with difficulty” is here
presented in surroundings which make it truly unmistakable. Hercules,
like the sun, goes to death, down into the mother (Western sea), but
conquers the libido attached to the mother and returns with the
wonderful kine; he has won back his libido, his life, the mighty
possession. We discover the same thought in the robbery of the golden
apples of Hesperides, which are defended by the hundred-headed dragon.
The victory over Cerberus is also easily understood as the victory over
death by entrance into the mother (underworld). In order to come to his
wife Deianira, he has to undergo a terrible battle with a water god,
Achelous (with the mother). The ferryman Nessus (a centaur) violates
Deianira. With his sun arrows Hercules killed this adversary, but Nessus
advised Deianira to preserve his poisoned blood as a love charm. When
after the insane murder of Iphitus Delphi denied him the speech of the
oracle, he took possession of the sacred tripod. The delphic oracle then
compelled him to become a slave of Omphale, who made him like a child.
After this Hercules returned home to Deianira, who presented him with
the garment poisoned with Nessus’ blood (the Isis snake), which
immediately clung so closely to his skin that he in vain attempted to
tear it off. (The casting of the skin of the aging sun-god; Serpent, as
symbol of rejuvenation.) Hercules then ascended the funeral pyre in
order to destroy himself by fire like the phœnix, that is to say, to
give birth to himself again from his own egg. No one but young
Philoctetes dared to sacrifice the god. Therefore Philoctetes received
the arrows of the sun and the libido myth was renewed with this Horus.

Footnote 615:

Apes, also, have an instinctive fear of snakes.

Footnote 616:

How much alive are still such primitive associations is shown by
Segantini’s picture of the two mothers: cow and calf, mother and child
in the same stable. From this symbolism the surroundings of the
birthplace of the Savior are explained.

Footnote 617:

The myth of Hippolytos shows very beautifully all the typical parts of
the problem: His stepmother Phaedra wantonly falls in love with him. He
repulses her, she complains to her husband of violation; the latter
implores the water god Poseidon to punish Hippolytos. Then a monster
comes out of the sea. Hippolytos’ horses shy and drag Hippolytos to
death. But he is resuscitated by Aesculapius and is placed by the gods
with the wise nymph, Egeria, the counsellor of Numa Pompilius. Thus the
wish is fulfilled; from incest, wisdom has come.

Footnote 618:

Compare Hercules and Omphale.

Footnote 619:

Compare the reproach of Gilgamesh against Ishtar.

Footnote 620:

Spielrein’s patient is also sick from “a snake bite.” _Jahrbuch_, III,
p. 385.

Footnote 621:

The entirely introverted patient of Spielrein uses similar images: she
speaks of “a rigidity of the soul on the cross,” of “stone figures”
which must be “ransomed.”

I call attention here to the fact that the symbolisms mentioned above
are striking examples of Silberer’s “functional category.” They depict
the condition of introversion.

Footnote 622:

W. Gurlitt says: “The carrying of the bull is one of the difficult ἆθλα”
(services) which Mithra performed in the service of freeing humanity;
“somewhat corresponding, if it is permitted to compare the small with
the great, with the carrying of the cross by Christ” (Cumont: “Textes et
Monuments,” I, 72). Surely it is permissible to compare the two acts.

Man should be past that period when, in true barbaric manner, he
haughtily scorned the strange gods, the “dii minorum gentium.” But man
has not progressed that far, even yet.

Footnote 623:

Robertson (“Evangelical Myths,” p. 130) gives an interesting
contribution to the question of the symbol of the carrying of the cross.
Samson carried the “pillars of the gates from Gaza and died between the
columns of the temple of the Philistines.” Hercules, weighted down by
his burden, carried his columns to the place (Gades), where he also died
according to the Syrian version of the legend. The columns of Hercules
mark the western point where the sun sinks into the sea. In old art he
was actually represented carrying the two columns under his arms in such
a way that they exactly formed a cross. Here we perhaps have the origin
of the myth of Jesus, who carries his own cross to the place of
execution. It is worth noting that the three synoptics substitute a man
of the name of Simon from Cyrene as bearer of the cross. Cyrene is in
Libya, the legendary scene upon which Hercules performed the labor of
carrying the columns, as we have seen, and Simon (Simson) is the nearest
Greek name-form for Samson, which in Greek might have been read Simson,
as in Hebrew. But in Palestine it was Simon, Semo or Sem, actually a
name of a god, who represented the old sun-god Semesch, who was
identified with Baal, from whose myth the Samson myth has doubtless
arisen. The god Simon enjoyed especial honor in Samaria. “The cross of
Hercules might well be the sun’s wheel, for which the Greeks had the
symbol of the cross. The sun’s wheel upon the bas-relief in the small
metropolis at Athens contains a cross, which is very similar to the
Maltese cross.” (See Thiele: “Antike Himmelsbilder,” 1898, p. 59.)

Footnote 624:

The Greek myth of Ixion, who was bound to the “four-spoked wheel,” says
this almost without disguise. Ixion first murdered his stepfather, but
later was absolved from guilt by Zeus and blessed with his favor. But
the ingrate attempted to seduce Hera, the mother. Zeus deceived him,
however, allowing the goddess of the clouds, Nephele, to assume Hera’s
form. (From this connection the centaurs have arisen.) Ixion boasted of
his deed, but Zeus as a punishment plunged him into the underworld,
where he was bound to a wheel continually whirled around by the wind.
(Compare the punishment of Francesca da Rimini in Dante and the
“penitents” by Segantini.)

Footnote 625:

Cited from _Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, Jahrgang II, p. 365.

Footnote 626:

The symbolism of death appearing in abundance in dreams has been
emphasized by Stekel (“Sprache des Traumes,” p. 317).

Footnote 627:

Compare the Cassius scene above.


                              CHAPTER VII

Footnote 628:

A direct unconstrained expression of sexuality is a natural occurrence
and as such neither unbeautiful nor repulsive. The “moral” repression
makes sexuality on one side dirty and hypocritical, on the other
shameless and obtrusive.

Footnote 629:

Compare what is said below concerning the motive of fettering.

Footnote 630:

The sacrilegious assault of Horus upon Isis, at which Plutarch (“De Isis
et Osiris”) stands aghast; he expresses himself as follows concerning
it. “But if any one wishes to assume and maintain that all this has
really happened and taken place with respect to blessed and imperishable
nature, which for the most part is considered as corresponding to the
divine; then, to speak in the words of Aeschylus, ‘he must spit out and
clean his mouth.’” From this sentence one can form a conception of how
the well-intentioned people of ancient society may have condemned the
Christian point of view, first the hanged God, then the management of
the family, the “foundation” of the state. The psychologist is not
surprised.

Footnote 631:

Compare the typical fate of Theseus and Peirithoos.

Footnote 632:

Compare the example given for that in Aigremont: “Fuss- und
Schuhsymbolik.” Also Part I of this book; the foot of the sun in an
Armenian folk prayer. Also de Gubernatis: “Die Tiere in der
Indo-Germanischen Mythologie,” Vol. I, p. 220 ff.

Footnote 633:

Rohde: “Psyche.”

Footnote 634:

Porphyrius (“De antro nympharum.” Quoted by Dieterich: “Mithraslit.,” p.
63) says that according to the Mithraic doctrine the souls which pass
away at birth are destined for winds, because these souls had taken the
breath of the wind into custody and therefore had a similar nature:
“ψυχαῖς δ’ εἰς γένεσιν ἰούσαις καὶ ἀπὸ γενέσεως χωριζομέναις εἰκότως
ἔταξαν ἀνέμους διὰ τὸ ἐφελκεσθαι καὶ αὐτὰς πνεῦμα καὶ οὐσίαν ἔχειν
τοιαύτην—(The souls departing at birth and becoming separated, probably
become winds because of inhaling their breath and becoming the same
substance).

Footnote 635:

In the Mithraic liturgy the generating breath of the spirit comes from
the sun, probably “from the tube of the sun” (see Part I). Corresponding
to this idea, in the Rigveda the sun is called the One-footed. Compare
with that the Armenian prayer, for the sun to allow its foot to rest
upon the face of the suppliant (Abeghian: “Der armenische Volksglaube,”
1899, p. 41).

Footnote 636:

Firmicus Maternus (Mathes., I, 5, 9): “Cui (animo) descensus per orbem
solis tribuitur, per orbem vero lunae praeparatur ascensus” (For which
soul a descent through the disc of the sun is devised, but the ascent is
prepared through the disc of the moon). Lydus (“De mens.,” IV, 3) tells
us that the hierophant Praetextatus has said that Janus despatches the
diviner souls to the lunar fields: τὰς θειοτέρας ψυχὰς ἐπὶ τὴν σεληνικὸν
χόρον ἀποπέμπει. Epiphanius (Haeres LXVI, 52): ὅτι ἐκ τῶν ψυχῶν ὁ δίσκος
[τῆς σελήνης] ἀποπίμπλαται. Quoted by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I,
I, p. 40. In exotic myths it is the same with the moon. Frobenius:
Ibid., p. 352 ff.

Footnote 637:

“The Light of Asia, or The Great Renunciation” (Mahâbhinish-kramana).

Footnote 638:

One sees upon corresponding representations how the elephant presses
into Maya’s head with its trunk.

Footnote 639:

Rank: “The Myth of the Birth of the Hero,” translated by W. White.

Footnote 640:

The speedy dying of the mother or the separation from the mother belongs
to the myth of the hero. In the myth of the swan maiden which Rank has
analyzed very beautifully, there is the wish-fulfilling thought, that
the swan maiden can fly away again after the birth of the child, because
she has then fulfilled her purpose. Man needs the mother only for
rebirth.

Footnote 641:

Indian word for the rustle of the wind in the trees.

Footnote 642:

Means sound of the waves.

Footnote 643:

An introjection of the object into the subject in the sense of Ferenczi,
the “gegenwurf” or “widerwurf” (Objektum) of the mystics Eckart and
Böhme.

Footnote 644:

Karl Joël (“Seele und Welt,” Jena 1912) says (p. 153): “Life does not
diminish in artists and prophets, but is enhanced. They are the leaders
into the lost Paradise, which now for the first time becomes Paradise
through rediscovery. It is no more the old dull unity of life towards
which the artist strives and leads, it is the sentient reunion, not the
empty but the full unity, not the unity of indifference but the unity of
difference.” “All life is the raising of the equilibrium and the pulling
backwards into equilibrium. Such a return do we find in religion and
art.”

Footnote 645:

By the primal experience must be understood that first human
differentiation between subject and object, that first conscious placing
of object, which is not psychologically conceivable without the
presupposition of an inner division of the animal “man” from himself, by
which precisely is he separated from nature which is at one with itself.

Footnote 646:

Crêvecoeur: “Voyage dans la Haute Pensylvanie,” I, 362.

Footnote 647:

The dragons of the Greek (and Swiss) legends live in or near springs or
other waters of which they are often the guardians.

Footnote 648:

Compare the discussion above about the encircling and devouring motive.
Water as a hindrance in dreams seems to refer to the mother, longing for
the mother instead of positive work. The crossing of water—overcoming of
the resistance; that is to say the mother, as a symbol of the longing
for inactivity like death or sleep.

Footnote 649:

Compare also the Attic custom of stuffing a bull in spring, the customs
of the Lupercalia, Saturnalia, etc. I have devoted to this motive a
separate investigation, therefore I forego further proof.

Footnote 650:

In the Gilgamesh epic, it is directly said that it is immortality which
the hero goes to obtain.

Footnote 651:

Sepp: “Das Heidentum und dessen Bedeutung für das Christentum,” Vol.
III, 82.

Footnote 652:

Compare the symbolism of the arrow above.

Footnote 653:

This thought is generally organized in the doctrine of pre-existence.
Thus in any case man is his own generator, immortal and a hero, whereby
the highest wishes are fulfilled.

Footnote 654:

Frazer: “Golden Bough,” IV, 297.

Footnote 655:

“Thou seekest the heaviest burden, there findest thou thyself”
(Nietzsche: “Zarathustra”).

Footnote 656:

It is an unvarying peculiarity, so to speak, that in the whale-dragon
myth, the hero is very hungry in the belly of the monster and begins to
cut off pieces from the animal, so as to feed himself. He is in the
nourishing mother “in the presexual stage.” His next act, in order to
free himself, is to make a fire. In a myth of the Eskimos of the Behring
Straits, the hero finds a woman in the whale’s belly, the soul of the
animal, which is feminine (Ibid, p. 85). (Compare Frobenius: Ibid,
passim.)

Footnote 657:

The carrying of the tree played an important part, as is evident from a
note in Strabo X, in the cult of Dionysus and Ceres (Demeter).

Footnote 658:

A text on the Pyramids, which treats of the arrival of the dead Pharaoh
in Heaven, depicts how Pharaoh takes possession of the gods in order to
assimilate their divine nature, and to become the lord of the gods: “His
servants have imprisoned the gods with a chain, they have taken them and
dragged them away, they have bound them, they have cut their throats,
and taken out their entrails, they have dismembered them and cooked them
in hot vessels. And the king consumed their force and ate their souls.
The great gods form his breakfast, the medium gods his dinner, the
little gods his supper—the king consumes everything that comes in his
way. Greedily he devours everything and his magic power becomes greater
than all magic power. He becomes the heir of the power, he becomes
greater than all heirs, he becomes the lord of heaven, he eats all
crowns and all bracelets, he eats the wisdom of every god, etc.”
(Wiedemann: “Der alte Orient,” II, 2, 1900, p. 18). This impossible
food, this “Bulimie,” strikingly depicts the sexual libido in regression
to the presexual material, where the mother (the gods) is not the object
of sex but of hunger.

Footnote 659:

The sacramental sacrifice of Dionysus-Zagreus and the eating of the
sacrificial meat produced the “νέος Διόνυσος” the resurrection of the
god, as plainly appears from the Cretan fragments of the Euripides
quoted by Dieterich (Ibid., p. 105):

                     ἁγνὸν δὲ βιον τείνων, ἐξ οὐ
                     Διὸς Ιδαίου μύστης γενόμην
                     καὶ νυκτιπόλου Ζαγρέως βούτας
                     τοὺς ὠμοφάγους δαῖτας τελέσας.

  (Living a blameless life whereby I became an initiate of the Idaean
  Zeus, I celebrated the carnivorous banquet of Zagreus, the wandering
  herdsman of the night.)

The mystics took the god into themselves by eating the uncooked meat of
the sacrificial animal.

Footnote 660:

Richter: 14, 14.

Footnote 661:

Thou boy eternal, thou most beautiful one seen in the heavens, without
horns standing, with thy virgin head, etc.

Footnote 662:

Orphic Hymn, 46. Compare Roscher: “Lexicon,” sect. on Iakchos.

Footnote 663:

A winnowing fan used as cradle.

Footnote 664:

A close parallel to this is the Japanese myth of Izanagi, who, following
his dead spouse into the underworld, implored her to return. She is
ready, but beseeches him, “Do not look at me.” Izanagi produces light
with his reed, that is to say, with a masculine piece of wood (the
fire-boring Phallus), and thus loses his spouse. (Frobenius: Ibid., p.
343.) Mother must be put in the place of spouse. Instead of the mother,
the hero produces fire; Hiawatha, maize; Odin, Runes, when he in torment
hung on the tree.

Footnote 665:

Quoted from De Jong: “Das antike Mysterienwesen.” Leiden 1910, p. 22.

Footnote 666:

A son-lover from the Demeter myth is Iasion, who embraces Demeter upon a
thrice-ploughed cornfield. (Bridal couch in the pasture.) For that
Iasion was struck by lightning by Zeus (Ovid: “Metam.,” IX).

Footnote 667:

In a sunless place.

Footnote 668:

Descend into a sunless desert place.

Footnote 669:

Descent into a cave.

Footnote 670:

See Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I, p. 56.

Footnote 671:

“Mithraslit.,” p. 123.

Footnote 672:

For example upon a Campana relief in Lovatelli (“Antichi monumenti,”
Roma, 1889, I, IV, Fig. 5). Likewise the Veronese Priapus has a basket
filled with phalli.

Footnote 673:

Compare Grimm: II, IV, p. 899: Either by the caressing or kissing of a
dragon or a snake, the fearful animal was changed into a beautiful woman
whom the hero wins in this way.

Footnote 674:

The mother, the earth, is the distributor of nourishment. The mother in
presexual material has this meaning. Therefore St. Dominicus was
nourished from the breasts of the mother of God. The sun wife, Namaqua,
consists of bacon. Compare with this the megalomanic ideas of my
patient, who asserted: “I am Germania and Helvetia made exclusively from
‘sweet butter’” (“Psychology of Dementia Praecox”).

Footnote 675:

He who achieved divinity through the womb.

Footnote 676:

He who achieved divinity through the womb; he is a serpent, and he was
drawn through the womb of those who were being initiated.

Footnote 677:

The golden serpent is crowded into the breast of the initiates and is
then drawn out through the lowest parts.

Footnote 678:

O Fœtus, he who is in the vagina or womb.

Footnote 679:

Compare the ideas of Nietzsche: “Piercing into one’s own pit,” etc. In a
prayer to Hermes in a London papyrus it is said: ἐλθέ μοι, κύρίε Ἑρμῆ,
ὡς τὰ βρέφη εἰς τὰς κοιλίας τῶν γυναικῶν (Come to me, Lord Hermes, as
the foetus into the womb of the mother). Kenyon: “Greek Papyrus in the
British Museum,” 1893, p. 116; Pap. CXXII, Z. 2 ff. Cited by Dieterich:
Ibid., p. 97.

Footnote 680:

Compare De Jong: Ibid., p. 22.

Footnote 681:

The typical grain god of antiquity was Adonis, whose death and
resurrection was celebrated annually. He was the son-lover of the
mother, for the grain is the son and fructifier of the womb of the earth
as Robertson very correctly remarks (“Evangelical Myths,” p. 36).

Footnote 682:

De Jong: Ibid., p. 14.

Footnote 683:

On a certain night an image is placed lying down in a litter; there is
weeping and lamentations among the people, with beatings of bodies and
tears. After a time, when they have become exhausted from the
lamentations, a light appears; then the priest anoints the throats of
all those who were weeping, and softly whispers, “Take courage, O
initiates of the Redeemed Divinity; you shall achieve salvation through
your grief.”

Footnote 684:

Faust:

      “There whirls the press, like clouds on clouds unfolding,
      Then with stretched arm swing high the key thou’rt holding!”

Footnote 685:

As an example among many, I mention here the Polynesian Rata myth cited
by Frobenius: Ibid., pp. 64–66: “With a favorable wind the boat was
sailing easily away over the Ocean, when Nganaoa called out one day: ‘O
Rata, here is a fearful enemy who rises up from the Ocean!’ It was an
open mussel of huge dimensions. One shell was in front of the boat, the
other behind it, and the vessel was directly between. The next moment
the horrible mussel would have clapped its shells together and ground
the boat and occupants to pieces in its grip. But Nganaoa was prepared
for this possibility. He grasped his long spear and quickly plunged it
into the belly of the animal so that the creature, instead of snapping
together, at once sank back to the bottom of the sea. After they had
escaped from this danger they continued on their way. But after a while
the voice of the always watchful Nganaoa was again to be heard. ‘O Rata,
once more a terrible enemy rushes upwards from the depths of the ocean.’
This time it was a mighty octopus, whose gigantic tentacles already
surrounded the boat, in order to destroy it. At this critical moment,
Nganaoa seized his spear, and plunged it into the head of the octopus.
The tentacles sank away limp and the dead monster rose to the surface of
the water. Once more they continued on their journey, but a yet greater
danger awaited them. One day the valiant Nganaoa called out, ‘O Rata,
here is a great whale!’ The huge jaws were wide open, the lower jaw was
already under the boat, and the upper one over it. One moment more and
the whale would have devoured them. Now Nganaoa ‘the dragon slayer’
broke his spear into two parts, and at the moment when the whale was
about to devour them, he stuck the two pieces into the jaws of the foe
so that he could not close his jaws. Nganaoa quickly sprang into the
jaws of the great whale (devouring of the hero) and looked into its
belly, and what did he see? There sat both his parents, his father,
Tairitokerau, and his mother, Vaiaroa, who had been gulped down into the
depths of this monster. The oracle has come true. The voyage has come to
its end. Great was the joy of the parents of Nganaoa when they saw their
son. They were convinced that their freedom was at hand. And Nganaoa
resolved upon revenge. He took one of the two pieces from the jaws of
the animal—one was enough to make it impossible for the whale to close
his jaws and so keep a passage free for Nganaoa and his parents. He
broke this part of the spear in two, in order to use them as wood to
produce fire by rubbing. He commanded his father to hold one firmly
below, while he himself managed the upper one, until the fire began to
glimmer (production of fire). Now when he blew this into flames, he
hastened to heat the fatty part (heart) of the belly with the fire. The
monster, writhing with pain, sought help swimming to the nearest land
(journey in the sea). As soon as he reached the sandbank (land) father,
mother and son walked onto the land through the open jaws of the dying
whale (slipping out of the hero).”

Footnote 686:

In the New Zealand Maui myth (quoted by Frobenius: Ibid., p. 66 ff.) the
monster to be conquered is the grandmother Hine-nui-te-po. Maui, the
hero, says to the birds who assist him: “My little friends, now when I
creep into the jaws of the old woman, you must not laugh, but when I
have been in and come out again, from her mouth, then you may greet me
with jubilant laughter.” Then Maui actually creeps into the mouth of the
sleeping old woman.

Footnote 687:

Published and prepared by Julius v. Negelein, in “Relig. Geschichte.”
Vers. u. Vorarb. von Dieterich und Wünsch, Vol. XI. Giessen 1912.

Footnote 688:

Quoted, J. v. Negelein: “Der Traumschlüssel des Jagaddeva,” p. 256.

Footnote 689:

The pine-tree speaks the significant word, “Minne-wawa!”

Footnote 690:

In a fairy tale, the bird comes to the tree which grows upon the grave
of the mother in order to give help.

Footnote 691:

Roscher: s. “Picus,” Sp. 2494, 62. Probably a symbol of rebirth.

Footnote 692:

The father of Picus is called Sterculus or Sterculius, a name which is
clearly derived from stercus = excrementum; he is also said to be the
devisor of manure. The primitive creator who also created the mother did
so in the manner of infantile creation, which we have previously
learned. The supreme god laid an egg, his mother, from which he was
again produced—this is an analogous train of thought.

Footnote 693:

Introversion = to enter the mother; to sink into one’s own inner-world,
or source of the libido, is symbolized by creeping in, passing through,
boring. (Scratching behind the ear = making fire.) Boring into the ear,
scratching with the nails, swallowing serpents. Thus the Buddhist legend
is understandable. When Gautama had spent the whole day sitting in deep
reflection under the sacred tree, at evening he became Buddha, the
illumined one.

Footnote 694:

Compare φαλλός (phallus) above and its etymological connection.

Footnote 695:

Spielrein’s patient received from God three wounds through her head,
breast and eye. “Then there came a resurrection of the Spirit”
(_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 376).

In the Tibetan myth of Bogda Gesser Khan the sun-hero shoots his arrow
into the forehead of the demoniacal old woman, who devours it and spits
it up again. In a Calmuc myth, the hero shoots the arrow into the eye
emitting rays, which is found on the forehead of the bull. Compare with
that the victory of Polyphemus, whose character is signified upon an
Attic vase because with it there is also a snake (as symbol of the
mother. See the explanation of the sacrificium Mithriacum).

Footnote 696:

In the form of the father, for Megissogwon is the demon of the west,
like Mudjekeewis.

Footnote 697:

Compare Deussen: “Geschichte der Philosophie,” Vol. I, p. 14.

Footnote 698:

An analogy is Zeus and Athene. In Rigveda 10, 31, the word of prayer
becomes a pregnant cow. In Persian it is the “Eye of Ahura”; Babylonian
_Nabu_: the word of fate; Persian _vohu mano_: the good thought of the
creator God; in Stoic conceptions, Hermes is _logos_ or world intellect;
in Alexandria the Σοφία, in the Old Testament it is the angel of
Jehovah, or the countenance of God. Jacob wrestled with the angel during
the night at the ford of Jabbok, after he had crossed the water with all
that he possessed. (Night journey on the sea, battle with the night
snake, combat at the ford like Hiawatha.) In this combat, Jacob
dislocated his thigh. (Motive of the twisting out of the arm. Castration
on account of the overpowering of the mother.) This “face” of God was
compared in the old Jewish philosophy to the mystic Metatron, the prince
of the face of God (Josiah 5, 14), who brings “the prayer to God” and
“in whom is the name of God.” The Naassens (Ophits) called the Holy
Ghost the “first word,” the mother of all that lives; the Valentinians
comprehended the descending dove of Pneuma as “the word of the mother
from above, the Sophia.” (Drews: “Christ Myth,” I, pp. 16, 22, 80.) In
Assyria, Gibil, the fire god, had the rôle of Logos. (Tiele: “Assyr.
Gesch.”) In Ephrem, the Syrian writer of hymns, John the Baptist says to
Christ: “A spark of fire in the air waits for thee over the Jordan. If
thou followest it and willst be baptised, then take possession of
thyself, wash thyself, for who has the power to take hold of burning
fire with his hands? Thou, who art wholly fire, have mercy upon me.”
Usener: “Religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen.” Cited by Drews: Ibid.,
p. 81.

Footnote 699:

Perhaps the great significance of the name arose from this phantasy.

Footnote 700:

Grimm mentions the legend that Siegfried was suckled by a doe. (Compare
Hiawatha’s first deed.)

Footnote 701:

Compare Grimm’s “Mythology.” Mime or Mîmir is a gigantic being of great
wisdom, “a very old Nature God,” with whom the Norse gods associate.
Later fables make of him a demon and a skilful smith (closest relation
to Wieland). Just as Wotan obtained advice from the wise woman (compare
the quotation from Julius Cæsar about the German matron), so does Odin
go to the brook of Mîmir in which wisdom and judgment lie hidden, to the
spiritual mother (mother-imago). There he requests a drink (drink of
immortality), but no sooner does he receive it than he sacrifices his
eye to the well (death of the sun in the sea). The well of Mîmir points
undoubtedly to the mother significance of Mîmir. Thus Mîmir gets
possession of Odin’s other eye. In Mîmir, the mother (wise giant) and
the embryo (dwarf, subterranean sun, Harpocrates) is condensed;
likewise, as mother, he is the source of wisdom and art. (“Mother-imago”
therefore may be translated as “phantasy” under certain circumstances.)

Footnote 702:

The magic sleep is also present in the Homeric celebration of the
Hierosgamos. (See above.)

Footnote 703:

This is proved by Siegfried’s words:

                         “Through furious fire
                         To thee have I fared;
                         Nor birny nor buckler
                         Guarded my breast:
                         The flames have broken
                         Through to my heart,
                         My blood doth bound
                         In turbulent streams;
                         A raving fire
                         Within me is kindled.”

Footnote 704:

The cave dragon is the “terrible mother.” In the German legends the
maiden to be rescued often appears as a snake or dragon, and must be
kissed in this form, through which the dragon is changed into a
beautiful woman. A fish’s or a serpent’s tail is attributed to certain
wise women. In the “golden mountain” a king’s daughter was bewitched
into a snake. In the Oselberg near Dinkelsbühl there lives a snake with
a woman’s head and a bunch of keys around her neck. (Grimm.)

Footnote 705:

Faust (II Part):

             Doch im Erstarren such ich nicht mein Heil,
             Das Schaudern ist der Menschheit bestes Teil;
             Wie auch die Welt ihm das Gefühl verteure,
             Ergriffen, fühlt er tief das Ungeheure.

Footnote 706:

“Etymol. Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache,” sub. Hort.

Footnote 707:

“Griechische Etymologie,” sub. κεύθω.

Footnote 708:

Pausanias: I, 18, 7.

Footnote 709:

Ocean, who arose to be the producer of all.

Footnote 710:

Rohde: “Psyche,” IV. Aufl., Vol. I, p. 214.

Footnote 711:

J. Maehly: “Die Schlange im Mythus und Kultus der klassischen Völker,”
1867.

Footnote 712:

Duchesne: “Lib. pontifical.,” I, S. CIX. Cited by Cumont: “Textes et
Monuments,” Vol. I, p. 351.

Footnote 713:

There was a huge dragon on Mount Tarpeius, where the Capitolium stands.
Once a month, with sacrilegious maidens, the priests descended 365 steps
into the hell of this dragon, carrying expiatory offerings of food for
the dragon. Then the dragon suddenly and unexpectedly arose, and, though
he did not come out, he poisoned the air with his breath. Thence came
the mortality of man and the deepest sorrow for the death of the
children. When, for the defence of truth, St. Silvester had had a
conflict with the heathen, it came to this that the heathen said:
“Silvester, go down to the dragon, and in the name of thy God make him
desist from the killing of mankind.”

Footnote 714:

Cited by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” Vol. I, p. 351.

Footnote 715:

Like his counterpart, the apocalyptic “son of man,” from whose mouth
proceeds a “sharp two-edged sword.” Rev. i:16. Compare Christ as serpent
and the Antichrist seducing the people. Rev. xx:3. We come across the
same motive of the guardian dragon who pierces women, in the myth from
Van Diemen’s Land: “A horn-back lay in the cavity of a rock, a huge
horn-back! The horn-back was large and he had a very long spear. From
his cavity he espied the women; he saw them dive into the water, he
pierced them with his spear, he killed them, he carried them away. For
some time they were to be seen no longer.” The monster was then killed
by the two heroes. They made fire(!) and brought the women to life
again. (Cited by Frobenius: Ibid., p. 77.)

Footnote 716:

The eyes of the Son of man are like a flame of fire. Rev. i:15.

Footnote 717:

Near the city of Rome there was a certain cavern in which appeared a
dragon of remarkable size, mechanically produced, brandishing a sword in
his mouth, his eyes glittering like gems, fearful and terrible. Hither
came virgins every year, devoted to this service, adorned with flowers,
who were given to him in sacrifice. Bringing these gifts, they
unknowingly descended the steps to a point where, with diabolical
cunning, the dragon was suspended, striking those who came a blow with
the sword, so that the innocent blood was shed. Now, there was a certain
monk who, on account of his good deeds, was well known to Stilico, the
patrician; he killed this dragon as follows: He examined each separate
step carefully, both with a rod and his own hand, until, discovering the
false step, he exposed the diabolical fraud. Then, jumping over this
step, he went down and killed the dragon, cutting him to pieces,
demonstrating that one who could be destroyed by human hand could not be
a divinity.

Footnote 718:

Cited by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I, p. 352.

Footnote 719:

Compare Roscher: “Lexicon,” I, 2, 1885.

Footnote 720:

Out of dark places she rushes on children and women.

Footnote 721:

The triple form also related to the moon (waxing, full, and waning
moon). However, such cosmic relations are primarily projections of
metapsychology.

Footnote 722:

Faust (II Part): The Scene of the mothers: The key belongs to Hecate,
προθυραία, as the guardian of Hades, and psychopompic Divinity. Compare
Janus, Peter and Aion.

Footnote 723:

Attribute of the “terrible mother”: Ishtar has “tormented the horse with
goad and whip and tortured him to death.” (Jensen: “Gilgamesh Epic,” p.
18.) Also an attribute of Helios.

Footnote 724:

Phallic symbol of fear.

Footnote 725:

Murderous weapon as symbol of the fructifying phallus.

Footnote 726:

Plato has already testified to this as a phallic symbol, as is mentioned
above.

Footnote 727:

White-leaved.

Footnote 728:

Far-shooting Hecate.

Footnote 729:

Far-shooting, the far-darting.

Footnote 730:

Goddess of birth.

Footnote 731:

Cited by Roscher: I, 2, Sp. 1909.

Footnote 732:

Hecate.

Footnote 733:

Compare the symbolism in the hymn to Mary of Melk (12th century).

                        “Santa Maria,
                        Closed gate
                        Opened to God’s command—
                        Sealed fountain,
                        Barred garden,
                        Gate of Paradise.”

The same symbolism occurs in an erotic verse:

                “Maiden, may I enter with you
                Into your rose garden,
                There, where the little red roses grow,
                Those delicate and tender roses,
                With a tree close by,
                Whose leaves sway to and fro,
                And a cool little brook
                Which lies directly beneath it.”

Footnote 734:

Sacrificial cakes offered to the gods.

Footnote 735:

Herzog: “Aus dem Asklepieion von Kos.” _Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft_, Vol. X, H. 2, p. 219 ff.

Footnote 736:

A Mithraic sanctuary was, when at all possible, a subterranean grotto;
often the cavern was merely an artificial one. It is conceivable that
the Christian crypts and subterranean churches are of similar meaning.

Footnote 737:

Compare Schultze: “Die Katakomben,” 1882, p. 9.

Footnote 738:

In the Taurobolia a bull was sacrificed over a grave, in which lay the
one to be consecrated. His initiation consisted in being covered with
the blood of the sacrifice. Also a regeneration and rebirth, baptism.
The baptized one was called _Renatus_.

Footnote 739:

Additional proof in Herzog: Ibid., p. 224.

Footnote 740:

Ibid., p. 225.

Footnote 741:

Ritual sacrificial food offered to the gods.

Footnote 742:

Indeed sacred serpents were kept for display and other purposes.

Footnote 743:

Ritual sacrificial food offered to the gods.

Footnote 744:

Rohde: “Psyche,” chap. 1, p. 244.

Footnote 745:

Vol. I, p. 28.

Footnote 746:

Fick. Compare “Wörterbuch,” I, p. 424.

Footnote 747:

Compare the stable cleaning of Hercules. The stable, like the cavern, is
a place of birth. We find stable and cavern in Mithracism combined with
the bull symbolism, as in Christianity. (See Robertson: “Christ and
Krishna.”) In a Basuto myth, the stable birth also occurs. (Frobenius.)
The stable birth belongs to the mythologic animal fable; therefore the
legend of the conceptio immaculata, allied to the history of the
impregnation of the barren Sarah, appears very early in Egypt as an
animal fable. Herodotus, III, 28, relates: “This Apis or Epaphos is a
calf whose mother was unable to become impregnated, but the Egyptians
said that a ray from heaven fell upon the cow, and from that she brought
forth Apis.” Apis symbolizes the sun, therefore his signs: upon the
forehead a white spot, upon his back a figure of an eagle, upon his
tongue a beetle.

Footnote 748:

According to Philo, the serpent is the most spirited of all animals; its
nature is that of fire, the rapidity of its movements is great and this
without need of any especial limbs. It has a long life and sheds age,
with its skin. Therefore it was inculcated in the mysteries, because it
is immortal. (Maehly: “Die Schlange in Mythologie und Kultus der
klassischen Völker,” 1867, p. 7.)

Footnote 749:

For example, the St. John of Quinten Matsys (see illustration); also two
pictures by an unknown Strassburg master in the Gallery at Strassburg.

Footnote 750:

“And the woman—having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and
filthiness of her fornication” (Rev. xvii:4). The woman is “drunken with
the blood of the saints and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus”: a
striking image of the terrible mother (here, cup = genitals). In the
Tibetan myth of Bogda Gesser Khan there is a beetle (treasure attainable
with difficulty), which the demoniac old woman guards. Gesser says to
her: “Sister, never since I was born have you shown me the beetle my
soul.” The mother libido is also the soul. It is significant that the
old woman desired the hero as a husband. (Frobenius.)

Footnote 751:

This is also the significance of the mysteries. Their purpose is to lead
the useless, regressive incestuous libido over the bridges of symbolism
into rational activity, and through that transform the obscure
compulsion of the libido working up from the unconscious into social
communion and higher moral endeavor.

Footnote 752:

An excellent example of this is the description of the orgies of the
Russian sectarian by Mereschkowski, in his book, “Peter the Great and
Alexei.” In the cult of the Asiatic Goddesses of love (Anaïtis, Mylitta,
etc.), prostitution in the temple was an organized institution. The
orgiastic cult of Anâhita (Anaïtis) has been preserved in modern sects,
with the Ali Illâhîja, the so-called “extinguishers of light”; with the
Yezêds and Dushikkurds, who celebrate nocturnal religious orgies which
end in a wild sexual debauch, during which incestuous unions also occur.
(Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” II, p. 64.) Further examples are to be
found in the valuable work of Stoll (“Das Sexualleben in der
Völkerpsychologie,” Leipzig 1908).

Footnote 753:

Concerning the kiss of the snake, compare Grimm, II, p. 809. By this
means, a beautiful woman was set free. The sucking refers to the
maternal significance of the snake, which exists along with the phallic.
It is a coitus act on the presexual stage. Spielrein’s insane patient
(_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 344) says as follows: “Wine is the blood of
Jesus.—The water must be blessed, and was blessed by him. The one buried
alive becomes the vineyard. That wine becomes blood—the water is mingled
with ‘childishness’ because God says, ‘become like little children.’
There is also a spermatic water which can be drunken with blood. That
perhaps is the water of Jesus.” Here we find a commingling of all the
various meanings of the way to win immortality. Wiedemann (“Der alte
Orient,” II, 2, p. 18; cited by Dieterich: Ibid., p. 101) asserts that
it is an Egyptian idea that man draws in the milk of immortality by
suckling the breast of a goddess. (Compare with that the myth of
Hercules, where the hero attains immortality by a single draw at the
breast of Hera.)

Footnote 754:

From the writings of the sectarian Anton Unternährer: “Geheimes Reskript
der bernischen Regierung an die Pfarr- und Statthalterämter,” 1821. I
owe the knowledge of this fragment to Rev. Dr. O. Pfister.

Footnote 755:

Nietzsche: “Zarathustra”: “And I also give this parable to you: Not a
few who wished to drive out the devil from themselves, by that lead
themselves into the slough.”

Footnote 756:

Compare the vision of Zosimos.

Footnote 757:

The significance of the communion ritual as a unio mystica with God is
at bottom sexual and very corporeal. The primitive significance of the
communion is that of a Hierosgamos. Therefore in the fragment of the
Attis mysteries handed down by Firmicus it is said that the mystic eats
from the Tympanon, drinks from the Kymbalon, and he confesses: ὑπὸ τὸν
παστὸν ὑπέδυον, which means the same as: “I have entered the bridal
chamber.” Usener (in Dieterich: Ibid., p. 126) refers to a series of
quotations from the patristic literature, of which I mention merely one
sentence from the speeches of Proclus of Constantinople: ἡ παστας εν ἡ ὁ
λογος ενυμφευσατο την σακρα (The bridal chamber in which the Logos has
espoused the flesh). The church is also to some extent the bridal
chamber, where the spirit unites with the flesh, really the Cömeterium.
Irenaeus mentions some more of the initiatory customs of certain gnostic
sects, which were undoubtedly nothing but spiritual weddings. (Compare
Dieterich: Ibid., p. 127 ff.) In the Catholic church, even yet, a
Hierosgamos is celebrated on the installation of a priest. A young
maiden there represents the church as bride.

Footnote 758:

Compare also the phantasies of Felicien Rops: The crucified Priapus.

Footnote 759:

Compare with that the symbolism in Nietzsche’s poem: “Why enticest thou
thyself into the paradise of the old serpent?”

Footnote 760:

“Thus Spake Zarathustra.”

Footnote 761:

Nietzsche himself must have shown at times a certain predilection for
loathsome animals. Compare C. A. Bernoulli: “Franz Oberbeck und
Friedrich Nietzsche,” Vol. I, p. 166.

Footnote 762:

I recall Nietzsche’s dream, which is cited in Part I of this book.

Footnote 763:

The Germanic myth of Dietrich von Bern, who had fiery breath, belongs to
this idea: He was wounded in the forehead by an arrow, a piece of which
remained there fixed; from this, he was called the immortal. In a
similar manner, half of Hrûngnir’s wedge-shaped stone fastened itself in
Thor’s head. See Grimm: “Mythology,” I, p. 309.

Footnote 764:

“Geschichte der Philosophie,” Vol. I, p. 181.

Footnote 765:

Sa tapo atapyata.

Footnote 766:

The Stoic idea of the creative primal warmth, in which we have already
recognized the libido (Part I, Chap. IV), belongs in this connection,
also the birth of Mithra from a stone, which resulted _solo aestu
libidinis_ (through the heat of the libido only).

Footnote 767:

The place of discipline.

Footnote 768:

In the accurate prose translation this passage reads: “There Kâma
developed from him in the beginning” (Deussen: “Gesch. d. Phil.,” Vol.
I, p. 123). Kâma is the libido. “The sages found the root of being in
the non-being, in the heart, searching with introspection.”

Footnote 769:

“Fame and Eternity.”

Footnote 770:

Grimm: “Mythology,” III. The heroes have serpent’s eyes, as do the
kings: ormr î auga. Sigurdr is called Ormr î Auga.

Footnote 771:

Nietzsche’s

                                     “In the green light,
             Happiness still plays around the brown abyss.
             His voice grows hoarse,
             His eye flashes verdigris!”

Footnote 772:

From “The Poverty of the Richest.”

Footnote 773:

Nietzsche’s “Fragments of Dionysus-Dithyrambs.”

              “Heavy eyes,
              Which seldom love:
              But when they love, it flashes out
              Like a gold mine
              Where a dragon guards the treasure of love.”

Footnote 774:

He is pregnant with the sun.

Footnote 775:

Galatians iii:27 alludes to this primitive idea: “For as many of you as
have been baptized into Christ have _put on_ Christ.”

Footnote 776:

Just as is Mânî so is Marsyas a crucified one. (See Robertson:
“Evangelical Myths,” p. 66.) Both were hung, a punishment which has an
unmistakable symbolic value, because the suspension (“to suffer and fear
in the torment of suspension”) is the symbol of an unfulfilled wish.
(See Freud: “The Interpretation of Dreams.”) Therefore Christ, Odin,
Attis hung on trees (= mother). The Talmudic Jesus ben Pandira
(apparently the earliest historic Jesus) suffered a similar death, on
the eve of a Passover festival in the reign of Alexander Jannaeus
(106–79 B.C.). This Jesus may have been the founder of the “Essenes,” a
sect (see Robertson: “Evang. Myths,” p. 123) which stood in a certain
relation to subsequent Christianity. The Jesus ben Stada identified with
the preceding Jesus, but removed into the second Christian century, was
also hung. Both were first stoned, a punishment which was, so to speak,
a bloodless one like hanging. The Christian church, which spills no
blood, therefore burned. This may not be without significance for a
peculiar ceremony reported from Uganda: “When a king of Uganda wished to
live forever, he went to a place in Busiro, where a feast was given by
the chiefs. At the feast the Mamba Clan was especially held in honor,
and during the festivities a member of this clan was secretly chosen by
his fellows, caught by them, and beaten to death with their fists; no
stick or other weapon might be used by the men appointed to do the deed.
After death, the victim’s body was flayed and the skin made into a
special whip, etc. After the ceremony of the feast in Busiro, with its
strange sacrifice, the king of Uganda was supposed to live forever, but
from that day he was never allowed to see his mother again.” (Quoted
from Frazer: “Golden Bough,” Part IV, p. 415.) The sacrifice, which is
chosen to purchase everlasting life for another, is here given over to a
bloodless death and after that skinned. That this sacrifice has an
absolutely unmistakable relation to the mother—as we already know—is
corroborated very plainly by Frazer.

Footnote 777:

Frazer: “Adonis, Attis, Osiris,” p. 242.

Footnote 778:

Frazer: Ibid., p. 246.

Footnote 779:

Frazer: Ibid., p. 249.

Footnote 780:

Cited by Dieterich in “Mithrasliturgie,” p. 215.

Footnote 781:

The bull, father of the serpent, and the serpent, father of the bull.

Footnote 782:

Another attempt at solution seems to be the Dioscuri motive: The sun
consists of two brothers similar to each other, the one mortal, the
other immortal. This motive is found, as is well known, in the two
Açvins, who, however, are not further differentiated. In the Mithraic
doctrine, Mithra is the father, Sol the son, and yet both are one as ὁ
μέγας θεὸς Ἥελιος Μίθρας. The motive of twins emerges, not infrequently,
in dreams. In a dream, where it is related that a woman had given birth
to twins, the dreamer found, instead of the expected children, a box and
a bottle-like object. Here the twins had male and female significance.
This observation hints at a possible significance of the Dioscuri as the
sun and its re-bearing mother—daughter (?).

Footnote 783:

Among the daughters of the desert.

Footnote 784:

_Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, Vol. II, p. 169.

Footnote 785:

This problem has frequently been employed in the ancient sun myths. It
is especially striking that the lion-killing heroes, Samson and
Hercules, are weaponless in the combat. The lion is the symbol of the
most intense summer heat, astrologically he is the Domicilium Solis.
Steinthal (_Zeitschrift für Völkerpsychologie_, Vol. II, p. 133) reasons
about this in a most interesting manner, which I quote word for word:

“When the Sun-god fights against the summer heat, he fights against
himself; when he kills it, he kills himself. Most certainly! The
Phœnician, Assyrian and Lydian ascribes self-destruction to his sun-god,
for he can comprehend the lessening of the sun’s heat only as a
self-murder. He believed that the sun stood at its highest in the summer
and its rays scorched with destroying heat: thus does the god burn
himself, but he does not die, only rejuvenates himself.—Also Hercules
burns himself, but ascends to Olympus in the flames. This is the
contradiction in the pagan gods. They, as forces of nature, are helpful
as well as harmful to men. In order to do good and to redeem they must
work against themselves. The opposition is dulled, when either of the
two sides of the forces of nature is personified in an especial god, or
when the power of nature is conceived of as a divine personage; however,
each of its two modes of action, the benevolent and the injurious, has
an especial symbol. The symbol is always independent, and finally is the
god himself; and while originally the god worked against himself,
destroyed himself, now symbol fights against symbol, god against god, or
the god with the symbol.”

Certainly the god fights with himself, with his other self, which we
have conceived of under the symbol of mother. The conflict always
appears to be the struggle with the father and the conquering of the
mother.

Footnote 786:

The old Etruscan custom of covering the urn of ashes, and the dead
buried in the earth, with the shield, is something more than mere
chance.

Footnote 787:

Incest motive.

Footnote 788:

Compare the idea of the Phœnix in the Apocalypse of Baruch, Part I of
this book.


                              CHAPTER VIII

Footnote 789:

The kingdom of the mother is the kingdom of the (unconscious) phantasy.

Footnote 790:

Behind nature stands the mother, in continuation of our earlier
discussions and in the foregoing poem of Hölderlin. Here the mother
hovers before the poet’s mind as a tree, on which the child hangs like a
blossom.

Footnote 791:

Once he called the “stars his brothers.” Here I must call to mind the
remarks in the first part of this work, especially that mystic
identification with the stars: εγω ειμι συμπλανος ὑμιν αστερ (I am a
star who wanders together with you). The separation and differentiation
from the mother, the “individuation” creates that transition of the
subjective into the objective, that foundation of consciousness. Before
this, man was one with the mother. That is to say, with the world as a
whole. At that period man did not know the sun as brother. This occurred
for the first time, when after the resulting separation and placing of
the object, the libido, regressing to the infantile, perceived in that
first state its possibilities and the suspicion of his relationship to
the stars forced itself upon him. This occurrence appears not
infrequently in the introversion psychoses. A young peasant, an ordinary
laboring man, developed an introversion psychosis (Dementia Praecox).
His first feelings of illness were shown by a special connection which
he felt with the sun and the stars. The stars became full of meaning to
him, and the sun suggested ideas to him. This apparently entirely new
perception of nature is met with very often in this disease. Another
patient began to understand the language of birds, which brought him
messages from his beloved (mother). Compare Siegfried.

Footnote 792:

The spring belongs to the idea as a whole.

Footnote 793:

This idea expresses the divine-infantile blessedness, as in Hyperion’s
“Song of Fate.”

                  “You wander above there in the light
                  Upon soft clouds, blessed genii!
                  Shining breezes of the gods
                  Stir you gently.”

Footnote 794:

This portion is especially noteworthy. In childhood everything was given
him, and man is disinclined to obtain it once more for himself, because
it is won only through “toil and compulsion”: even love costs trouble.
In childhood the well of the libido gushed forth in bubbling fulness. In
later life it involves hard work to even keep the stream flowing for the
onward striving life, because with increasing age the stream has a
growing inclination to flow back to its source, if effectual mechanisms
are not created to hinder this backward movement or at least to organize
it. In this connection belongs the generally accepted idea, that love is
absolutely spontaneous; only the infantile type of love is something
absolutely spontaneous. The love of an adult man allows itself to be
purposefully directed. Man can also say “I will love.” The heights of
culture are conditioned by _the capacity for displacement of the
libido_.

Footnote 795:

Motive of immortality in the fable of the death of Empedocles. Horace:
_Deus immortalis haberi—Dum cupit Empedocles ardentem frigidus
Aetnam—Insiluit_ (Empedocles deliberately threw himself into the glowing
Aetna because he wanted to be believed an immortal god).

Footnote 796:

Compare the beautiful passage in the journey to Hades of Odysseus, where
the hero wishes to embrace his mother.

  “But I, thrilled by inner longing,
  Wanted to embrace the soul of my departed mother.
  Three times I endeavored, full of passionate desire for the embrace:
  Three times from my hands she escaped
  Like nocturnal shades and the images of dreams,
  And in my heart sadness grew more intense.” (“Odyss.,” XI, 204.)

The underworld, hell, is indeed the place of unfulfilled longing. The
Tantalus motive is found through all of hell.

Footnote 797:

Spielrein’s patient (_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 345) speaks in connection with
the significance of the communion of “the water mixed with childishness;
spermatic water, blood and wine.” P. 368 she says: “The souls fallen
into the water are saved by God, they fall into the deep abyss—The souls
were saved by the son of God.”

Footnote 798:

The φάρμακον ἀθανασίας, the drink of Soma, the Haoma of the Persians,
might have been made from Ephedra vulgaris. Spiegel: “Erân.
Altertumskunde,” I, p. 433.

Footnote 799:

Like the heavenly city in Hauptmann’s “Hannele”:

 “Salvation is a wonderful city,
 Where peace and joy never end,
 Its houses are marble, its roofs are gold,
 But wine flows in silver fountains,
 Flowers are strewed upon the white, white streets,
 Continually from the towers sound the wedding bells.
 Green as May are the battlements, shining with the light of early
    morning.
 Giddy with butterflies, crowned with roses.

        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

 There below, hand in hand,
 The festive people wander through the heavenly land,
 The wide, wide sea is filled with red, red wine,
 They plunge in with shining bodies!
 They plunge into the foam and the splendor,
 The clear purple covers them entirely,
 And they exulting arise from the flood,
 Thus they are washed by Jesus’ blood.”

Footnote 800:

Richter: 15, 17.

Footnote 801:

Prellwitz: “Griech. Etym.,” s. σκήπτω.

Footnote 802:

Of the father.

Footnote 803:

Fate.

Footnote 804:

Chances and fates.

Footnote 805:

This was really the purpose of all mysteries. They create symbolisms of
death and rebirth for the practical application and education of the
infantile libido. As Frazer (“The Golden Bough,” I, p. 442) points out,
exotic and barbaric peoples have in their initiatory mysteries the same
symbolism of death and resurrection, just as Apuleius (“Metam.,” XI, 23)
says of the initiation of Lucius into the Isis mysteries: “Accessi
confinium mortis et calcato Proserpinae limine per omnia vectus elementa
remeavi” (I have reached the confines of death and trodden the threshold
of Proserpina; passing through all the elements, I have returned).
Lucius died figuratively (ad instar voluntariae mortis) and was born
anew (renatus).

Footnote 806:

This does not hinder the modern neurasthenic from making work a means of
repression and worrying about it.

Footnote 807:

Compare Genesis xlix: 17: “Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder
in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall
backward.”

Footnote 808:

Compare with this the Egyptian representation of the Heaven as woman and
cow.

Footnote 809:

Freud: “Formulierungen über die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen
Geschehens,” 1912 _Jahrbuch_, p. 1 ff.

Footnote 810:

This form of question recalls the well-known Indian symbol of the
world-bearing animal: an elephant standing upon a tortoise. The elephant
has chiefly masculine-phallic significance and the tortoise, like every
shell animal, chiefly feminine significance.

Footnote 811:

_Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, Vol. II, p. 171.

Footnote 812:

The neurotic Don Juan is no evidence to the contrary. That which the
“habitué” understands by love is merely an infirmity and far different
from that which love means!

Footnote 813:

Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” II, 667.

Footnote 814:

Freud: “Eine Kindheitserinnerung des Leonardo da Vinci,” p. 57: “The
almighty, just God and benevolent nature appear to us as a great
sublimation of father and mother, rather than revivals and reproductions
of the early childish ideas of them. Religiousness leads biologically
back to the long-continued helplessness and need of the offspring of
man, who, when later he has recognized his real loneliness, and weakness
against the great powers of life, feels his condition similar to that of
childhood, and seeks to disavow this forlorn state by regressive renewal
of the infantile protective powers.”

Footnote 815:

Nietzsche: “Fröhliche Wissenschaft,” Aphorism 157. “Mentiri—give
heed!—he muses: immediately he will have a lie prepared. This is a stage
of culture, upon which whole peoples have stood. One should ponder over
what the Romans meant by mentiri!” Actually the Indo-Germanic root
_méntis_, men, is the same for mentiri, memini and mens. See Walde:
“Lat. Etym.,” sub. mendax, memini und mens.

Footnote 816:

See Freud: _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 60.

Footnote 817:

Bundehesh, XV, 27. The bull Sarsaok was sacrificed at the destruction of
the world. But Sarsaok was the originator of the race of men: he had
brought nine of the fifteen human races upon his back through the sea to
the distant points of the compass. The primitive bull of Gayomart has,
as we saw above, most undoubtedly female and maternal significance on
account of his fertility.

Footnote 818:

If for Silberer the mythological symbolism is a process of cognition on
the mythological stage (_Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 664), then there
exists, between this view and mine, only a difference of standpoint,
which determines a different manner of expression.

Footnote 819:

This series of representations begins with the totem meal.

Footnote 820:

Taurus is astrologically the Domicilium Veneris.

Footnote 821:

There comes from the library of Asurbanipal an interesting
Sumeric-Assyrian fragment (Cuneiform Inscr., I, IV, 26, 6. Quoted by
Gressmann: “Altorient. Text. und Bild.,” I, p. 101):

        “To the wise man he said:
        A lamb is the substitute for a man.
        He gives a lamb for his life,
        He gives the heads of lambs for the heads of men,” etc.

Footnote 822:

Compare the remarkable account in Pausanias: VI, 17, 9 ff. “While
sleeping, the sperma of Zeus has flowed down upon the earth; in time has
arisen from this a demon, with double generative organs; that of a man,
and that of a woman. They gave him the name of Agdistis. But the gods
changed Agdistis and cut off the male organs. Now when the almond tree
which sprang forth from this bore ripe fruit, the daughter of the
spring, Sangarios, took of the fruit. When she placed it in her bosom,
the fruit disappeared at once; but she found herself pregnant. After she
had given birth to the child, a goat acted as protector: when he grew
up, he was of superhuman beauty, so that Agdistis fell in love with the
boy. His relatives sent the full-grown Attis to Pessinus, in order to
marry the king’s daughter. The wedding song was beginning when Agdistis
appeared and in delirium Attis castrated himself.”

Footnote 823:

Beloved of the mother of the gods, inasmuch as the Cybeline Attis sheds
his human shape in this way and stiffens into this tree trunk.

Footnote 824:

Firmicus: “De error. prof. rel.,” XXVIII. Quoted by Robertson: “Evang.
Myths,” p. 136, and Creuzer: “Symbolik,” II, 332.

Footnote 825:

Pentheus, as a hero with a serpent nature; his father was Echion, the
adder.

Footnote 826:

The typical sacrificial death in the Dionysus cult.

Footnote 827:

In the festival processions they wore women’s clothes.

Footnote 828:

In Bithynia Attis was called πάπας (papa, pope) and Cybele, Mã. In the
early Asiatic religions of this mother-goddess, there existed fish
worship and prohibition against fish as food for the priests. In the
Christian religion, it is noteworthy that the son of Atargatis,
identified with Astarte, Cybele, etc., is called Ἰχθύς (Creuzer:
“Symbolik,” II, 60). Therefore, the anagram of the name of Christ =
ΙΕΣΟΥΣ ΧΡΙΣΤΟΣ ΘΕΟΥ ΥΙΟΣ ΣΩΤΕΡ = ΙΧΘΥΣ.

Footnote 829:

Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” 2, 76.

Footnote 830:

A. Nagel: “Der chinesische Küchengott Tsau-kyun.” _Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft_, XI, 23 ff.

Footnote 831:

In Spiegel’s “Parsigrammatik,” pp. 135, 166.

Footnote 832:

Porphyrius says: ὡς καὶ ὁ ταῦρος δημιουργὸς ὡν ὁ Μίθρας καὶ γενέσεως
δεσπότης (As the bull is the Creator, Mithra is the Lord of birth).

Footnote 833:

The death of the bull is voluntary and involuntary. When Mithra
strangles the bull, a scorpion bites the bull in the testicles (autumn
equinox).

Footnote 834:

Benndorf: “Bildwerke des Lateran Museum,” No. 547.

Footnote 835:

“Textes et Monuments,” I, 182.

Footnote 836:

In another place Cumont speaks of “the sorrowful and almost morbid grace
of the features of the hero.”

Footnote 837:

Infantilism is merely the result of the much deeper state of
introversion of the Christian in contrast to the other religions.

Footnote 838:

The libido nature of the sacrificed is unquestionable. In Persia, a ram
helped the first people to the first sin, cohabitation: it is also the
first animal which they sacrificed (Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,”
Vol. I, p. 511). The ram is the same as the paradisical serpent, which
was Christ according to the Manichaean version. The ancient Meliton of
Sardes taught that Christ was a lamb, similar to the ram in the bush,
which Abraham sacrificed in place of his son. Here the bush is analogous
to the cross (Fragment V, quoted by Robertson: Ibid).

Footnote 839:

See above. “Blood bridegroom of the mother.” From Joshua v: 2 we learn
that Joshua again instituted the circumcision and redemption of the
first-born: “With this he must have substituted for the sacrifice of
children, which earlier it was the custom to offer up to Jehovah, the
sacrifice of the male foreskin” (Drews: “Christusmythe,” I, p. 47).

Footnote 840:

See Cumont: Ibid., p. 100.

Footnote 841:

The Zodiacal sign of the sun’s greatest heat.

Footnote 842:

This solution apparently concerns only the dogmatic symbolism. I merely
intimate that this sacrificial death was related to a festival of
vegetation or of Spring, from which the religious legend originated. The
folk customs contain in variations these same fundamental thoughts.
(Compare with that Drews: “Christusmythe,” I, p. 37).

Footnote 843:

A similar sacrificial death is that of Prometheus. He was chained to a
rock. In another version his chains were drawn through a pillar, which
hints at the enchainment to a tree. That punishment was his which Christ
took upon himself willingly. The fate of Prometheus therefore recalls
the misfortune of Theseus and Peirithoos, who remain bound to the rock,
the chthonic mother. According to Athenaeus, Jupiter commanded
Prometheus, after he had freed him, to wear a willow crown and an iron
ring, by which his lack of freedom and slavery was symbolically
represented. (Phoroneus, who in Argos was worshipped as the bringer of
fire, was the son of Melia, the ash, therefore tree-enchained.)
Robertson compares the crown of Prometheus to the crown of thorns of
Christ. The devout carry crowns in honor of Prometheus, in order to
represent the captivity (“Evangelical Myths,” p. 126). In this
connection, therefore, the crown means the same as the betrothal ring.
These are the requisites of the old Hierosgamos with the mother; the
crown of thorns (which is of Egyptian derivation according to Athenaeus)
has the significance of the painful ascetic betrothal.

Footnote 844:

Hecate.

Footnote 845:

The spear wound given by Longinus to Christ is the substitute for the
dagger thrust in the Mithraic bull sacrifice: “The jagged tooth of the
brazen wedge” was driven through the breast of the enchained and
sacrificed Prometheus (Aeschylus: “Prometheus”).

Footnote 846:

Mention must also be made of the fact that North German mythology was
acquainted with similar thoughts regarding the fruitfulness of the
sacrificial death on the mother: Through hanging on the tree of life,
Odin obtained knowledge of the Runes and the inspiring, intoxicating
drink which invested him with immortality.

Footnote 847:

I have refrained in the course of this merely orienting investigating
from referring to the countless possibilities of relationship between
dream symbolism and the material disclosed in these connections. That is
a matter of a special investigation. But I cannot forbear mentioning
here a simple dream, the first which a youthful patient brought to me in
the beginning of her analysis. “She stands between high walls of snow
upon a railroad track with her small brother. A train comes, she runs
before it in deadly fear and leaves her brother behind upon the track.
She sees him run over, but after the train has passed, the little fellow
stands up again uninjured.” The meaning of the dream is clear: the
inevitable approach of the “impulse.” The leaving behind of the little
brother is the repressed willingness to accept her destiny. The
acceptance is symbolized by the sacrifice of the little brother (the
infantile personality) whose apparently certain death becomes, however,
a resurrection. Another patient makes use of classical forms: she
dreamed of a mighty eagle, which is wounded in beak and neck by an
arrow. If we go into the actual transference phantasy (eagle =
physician, arrow = erotic wish of the patient), then the material
concerning the eagle (winged lion of St. Mark, the past splendor of
Venice; beak = remembrances of certain perverse actions of childhood)
leads us to understand the eagle as a composition of infantile memories,
which in part are grouped around the father. The eagle, therefore, is an
infantile hero who is wounded in a characteristic manner on the phallic
point (beak). The dream also says: I renounce the infantile wish, I
sacrifice my infantile personality (which is synonymous with: I paralyze
it, castrate the father or the physician). In the Mithra mysteries, in
the introversion the mystic himself becomes ἀετός, the eagle, this being
the highest degree of initiation. The identification with the
unconscious libido animal goes very far in this cult, as Augustine
relates: “alii autem sicut aves alas percutiunt vocem coracis imitantes,
alii vero leonum more fremunt” (Some move the arms like birds the wings,
imitating the voice of the raven, some groan like lions).

Footnote 848:

Miss Miller’s snake is green. The snake of my patient is also green. In
“Psychology of Dementia Praecox,” p. 161, she says: “Then a little green
snake came into my mouth; it had the finest, loveliest sense, as if it
had human understanding; it wanted to say something to me, almost as if
it had wished to kiss me.” Spielrein’s patient says of the snake: “It is
an animal of God, which has such wonderful colors, green, blue and
white. The rattlesnake is green; it is very dangerous. The snake can
have a human mind, it can have God’s judgment; it is a friend of
children. It will save those children who are necessary for the
preservation of human life” (_Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 366). Here the
phallic meaning is unmistakable. The snake as the transformed prince in
the fairy tale has the same meaning. See Riklin: “Wish Fulfilment and
Symbolism in Fairy Tales.”

Footnote 849:

A patient had the phantasy that she was a serpent which coiled around
the mother and finally crept into her.

Footnote 850:

The serpent of Epidaurus is, in contrast, endowed with healing power.
_Similia similibus._

Footnote 851:

This Bleuler has designated as Ambivalence or ambitendency. Stekel as
“Bi-polarity of all psychic phenomena” (“Sprache des Traumes,” p. 535).

Footnote 852:

I am indebted for permission to publish a picture of this statuette to
the kindness of the director of the Veronese collection of antiques.

Footnote 853:

The “Deluge” is of one nature with the serpent. In the Wöluspa it is
said that the flood is produced when the Midgard serpent rises up for
universal destruction. He is called “Jörmungandr,” which means,
literally, “the all-pervading wolf.” The destroying Fenris wolf has also
a connection with the sea. Fen is found in Fensalir (Meersäle), the
dwelling of Frigg, and originally meant sea (Frobenius: Ibid., p. 179).
In the fairy stories of Red Riding Hood, a wolf is substituted in place
of a serpent or fish.

Footnote 854:

Compare the longing of Hölderlin expressed in his poem “Empedocles.”
Also the journey to hell of Zarathustra through the crater of the
volcano. Death is the entrance into the mother, therefore the Egyptian
king, Mykerinos, buried his daughter in a gilded wooden cow. That was
the guarantee of rebirth. The cow stood in a state apartment and
sacrifices were brought to it. In another apartment near the cow were
placed the images of the concubines of Mykerinos (Herodotus, II, p. 129
f).

Footnote 855:

Kluge: “Deutsche Etymologie.”

Footnote 856:

The whistling and snapping is a tasteless, archaic relic, an allurement
for the theriomorphic divinity, probably also an infantile reminiscence
(quieting the child by whistling and snapping). Of similar significance
is the roaring at the divinity. (“Mithr. Lit.,” p. 13): “You are to look
at him and give forth a long roar, as with a horn, using all your
breath, pressing your sides, and kiss the amulet ... etc.” “My soul
roars with the voice of a hungry lion,” says Mechthild von Magdeburg.
“As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after
God.”—_Psalms_ xlii: 2. The ceremonial custom, as so often happens, has
dwindled into a figure of speech. Dementia praecox, however, revivifies
the old custom, as in the “Roaring miracle” of Schreber. See the
latter’s “Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken,” by which he demands
that God, i.e. the Father, so inadequately oriented with humanity, take
notice of his existence.

The infantile reminiscence is clear, that is, the childish cry to
attract the attention of the parent to himself; the whistling and
smacking for the allurement of the theriomorphic attribute, the “helpful
animal.” (See Rank: “The Myth of the Birth of the Hero.”)




                                 INDEX


Abegg, 182

Abélard, 16

Abraham, 6, 29, 143, 151, 162

Activity, displaced rhythmic, 160

Adaptation to environment, 14

Agni, 164, 185

Agriculture, 173

Aitareyopanishad, 178

Ambitendency, 194

Amenhotep IV, 106

Analogy, importance of, 156

Analysis of dreams, 9

Antiquity, brutality of, 258

Anxiety, representations of, 292

Arnold, Sir Edwin, 273, 355

Art, instinct of, 145
  first, 177

Asceticism, 91

Asterius, Bishop, 375

Augustine, 90, 114

Autismus, 152

Autoerotism, 176

Autonomy, moral, 262

Avenarius, R., 146

Aztec, 205


Baldwin, Mark, 17

Baptism, 357

Bergerac, Cyrano de, 43, 60, 119

Bergson, Henri, 314

Bertschinger, 203

Bhagavad-Gîtâ, 195

Bingen, Hildegarde von, 101

Bleuler, Prof., 152, 194

“Book of the Dead, Egyptian,” 278, 289, 314

Boring, act of, 157, 177

Bousset, 402

Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad, 174, 178, 313, 466

Bruno, Giordano, 25

Buddha, 273, 323, 344, 355

Bundehesh, 277

Burckhardt, Jacob, 40, 83

Byron’s “Heaven and Earth,” 117


Cæsar, Julius, 317

Cannegieter, 281

Causation, law of, 59

Cave worship, 375

Chidher, 216, 219

Child, development of, 461

Childhood, valuations, 211

Children, analysis of, 207
  regression in, 462

Christ, 30, 90, 135, 185, 217, 219, 225, 245, 252, 278, 344, 357, 372
  and Antichrist, 403
  death and resurrection, 449
  sacrifice of, 475

Christianity, 78, 80, 85, 255

Chrysostomus, John, 113

Cicero, 136

City, mother symbolism of, 234, 241

Cohabitation, continuous, 236, 298

Coitus play, 167
  wish, meaning of, 339

Communion cup, 410

Complex, 37
  law of return, 56, 67
  mass, 43
  mother, 208
  nuclear, 195
  of representation, 70, 76, 95

Compulsion, unconscious, 454

Condensation, 6

Conflict, internal, 196, 328

Consciousness, birth of, 361

Creation, by means of thought, 58, 62
  ideal, 64
  from introversion, 416, 456
  from mother, 286, 371
  through sacrifice, 466

Creuzer, 268

Cross, 264, 278
  meaning of, 296

Cult, Father-Son, 166
  Earth, 173

Cumont, Franz, 83, 221, 225, 450, 473
Cyrano de Bergerac, 43, 60, 119, 317


Dactyli, 132

Death, fear of, 304, 434
  phantasies, 117
  voluntary, 423
  wish for, 320, 419

Dementia præcox, 141, 159, 461

Destiny of man, 390, 427

Deussen, 415, 466

Dieterich, 376, 450

Dismemberment, motive of, 267

Displaced rhythmic activity, 160

Domestication of man, 267, 304

Dragon, psychologic meaning, 402, 410

Dream, analysis, 9
  interpretation of, 8
  Nietzsche, 28
  regression, 26
  sexual assault, 10
  sexual language of, 433
  source of, 9
  symbolism, 8, 12, 233

Drews, 147

Drexler, 275


Eleusinian mysteries, 373

Emmerich, Katherine, 322

Erman, 106

Erotic fate, 117
  impression, 54, 67

Eusebius of Alexandria, 114

Evolution, 144


Fairy tales, interpretation of, 281

Family, separation from, 344

Fasting, 369

Father, 62, 98, 293
  Imago, 55
  transference, 71

Faust, 68, 88, 130, 181, 231, 245, 250, 283, 305, 349

Fear, as forbidden desire, 389

Ferenczi, 47, 146

Ferrero, Guglielmo, 34

Finger sucking, 177

Firdusi, 315

Fire, onanistic phase of, 174
  preparations of, 163, 165, 172
  sexual significance, 167, 172

Firmicus, 379, 419

Flournoy, 37

France, Anatole, 15, 37

Francis of Assisi, 97

Frazer (“Golden Bough”), 367, 478

Freud, Sigmund, 12, 26, 29, 35, 37, 67, 71, 73, 81, 133, 139, 151, 189,
   232, 281, 367, 421, 459
  interpretation of the dream, 3
  “Leonardo da Vinci,” 7
  source of the dream, 9

Frobenius, 237, 275, 280, 436


Galileo, 146

Gilgamesh, 365

God, as creator and destroyer, 70
  as sun, 127
  “becoming one with,” 96
  crucified, 295
  fertilizing, 348
  love of, 200
  of creation, 69, 394
  vs. erotic, 94

Goethe, 417

Gunkel, 286


Hand, erotic use of, 176
  symbolism of, 206

Hartmann, 198

Hauptmann, Gerhart, 330

Hecate, mysteries of, 403

Heine, 353

Helios, 96, 110, 221

Herd instinct, 201

Hero, 32, 191, 200, 379
  as wanderer, 231
  betrayal of, 38
  birth of, 356
  psychologic meaning, 135
  sacrifice of, 452
  teleological meaning, 347

Herodotus, 290

Herzog, 408

Hesiod, 147

Hiawatha, song of, 346

Hierosgamos, 274, 376

Hölderlin, 182, 435, 436, 437, 440, 442, 443, 444, 445, 448, 452

Homosexuality, 34

Honegger, 108, 154

Humboldt, 349

Hypnagogic vision, 197


Idea, independence of, 84

Iliad, 274

Imago, Father, 55

Immortality, 227, 427

Incest barrier, 72, 100, 266, 458, 461
  phantasy, 3, 63, 404
  problem, 171, 195, 230, 250, 289, 364, 454, 463

Incestuous component, 172

Independence, battle for, 344

Infantilism, 319, 431, 479

Inman, 184, 236

Introjection, 146

Introversion, 37, 50, 98, 193, 201, 329, 367, 415
  hysterical, 151
  willed, 336

Isis, 96, 264


Jaehns, 311

James, William, 21

Janet, Pierre, 142

Jensen, 225

Jew, Wandering, 215, 225

Job, Book of, 58, 60, 68, 326

Jodl, 17

Joël, Karl, 360

Jones, 6


Kathopanishad, 130

Kepler, 25

Kluge, 409

Koran, 216

Kuhn, Adalbert, 162

Kulpe, 21


Laistner, 281

Lajard, 229

Lamia, 280

Language, 15
  vs. Speech, 16

Legends, Judas, 37

Lenclos, Ninon de, 4

Libido, 20, 47, 67, 71, 78, 94, 96, 101, 120, 128, 157, 193, 228, 249
  as hero, 417
  definition of, 135
  descriptive conception, 144
  desexualized, 149
  genetic conception, 144
  in opposition, 292, 308, 329
  in resistance, 422
  introverting, 415
  liberation of, 420
  mother, 289, 469, 474
  repressed objects of, 203
  transference of, 368
  transformation of, 171

Licentiousness, 258

Life, fear of, 335
  natural conception of, 343

Lilith, 279

Logos, 63

Lombroso, 212

Longfellow’s “Hiawatha,” 346

Lord’s Supper, 372

Love, 193
  infantile, 431

Lucius, 106


Macrobius, 226, 314

Maeder, 6

Maeterlinck, 64

Magdeburg, Mechthild von, 190, 314

Manilius, 182

Mary, 283, 302

Matthew, Gospel of, 92

Maurice, 297

Mauthner, Franz, 19

Maya, 283

Mayer, Robert, 138

Mead, 109

Meliton, 113

Mereschkowski, 403

Messiah, 79

Miller, Miss Frank, 41

Milton, 52

Mind, archaic tendencies, 35
  infantile, 36

Mithra, 104, 110, 217, 221, 245, 278, 293, 372, 450, 471

Mithracism, 78, 82, 85, 89, 96, 101, 108, 221, 225, 269, 314

Moral autonomy, 262

Mother, 98, 230, 241, 283
  heavens as, 301, 456
  imago, 250, 303, 319
  libido, 469, 474
  longing for, 335, 371, 428
  love, 338
  of humanity, 201
  terrible, 196, 202, 243, 267, 280, 364, 405
  transference, 71
  twofold, 356, 387, 428
  wisdom of, 452

Motive of dismemberment, 267
  embracing and entwining, 272

Mörike, 11, 354

Mouth, erotic importance of, 176
  as instrument of speech, 176

Müller, 295

Music, origin of, 165

Mysticism, 101

Mythology, 24, 240
  Hindoo, 128

Myths, as dream images, 29
  of rebirth, 272
  religious, 262


Nakedness, cult of, 412

Naming, importance of, 208

Narcissus state, 337

Neuroses, hysteria and compulsion, 142

Nietzsche, 16, 23, 28, 72, 102, 104, 195, 327, 328, 337, 345, 414, 417,
   418, 420, 423, 434, 447
  on dreams, 28

Nodfyr, 166


Oedipus, 3, 202

Oegger, Abbi, 37

Onanism, 158, 175, 186

Osiris, 264, 436

Ovid, 325, 373, 469


“Paradise Lost,” 52

Paranoia, 140

Paranoidian mechanism, 73

Pausanias, 274

Persecution, fear of, 332

Personality, dissociated, 37

Peter, 221, 222

Pfister, 6, 56

Phallic, cult, 33
  symbolism, 228, 248, 310

Phallus, 105, 132
  negative, 334
  Sun, 108

Phantasy, how created, 31
  infantile, 462
  onanistic, 175
  sexual, 140
  source of, 32, 460
  thinking, 22

Philo of Alexandria, 113, 315

Pick, 37

Pindar, 325

Plato, 147, 388
  Symposium, 34, 298

Plotinus, 147

Plutarch, 311, 375, 436

Poe, 66

Polytheism, 106

Pope, Roman, 200

Preiswerk, Samuel, 378

Presexual stage, 161, 171, 369

Primitive, reduction to, 259

Procreation, self, 358

Projection, 73

Prometheus, 162

Psychic energy, 142

Psychoanalysis, 75, 421
  object of, 479

Psychoanalytic thinking, 257

Psychology, unconscious, 197

Psychopathology, 50


Ramayana, 239

Rank, 6, 12, 29, 356

“Raven, The,” 66

Reality, adaptation to, 461
  corrective of, 146, 261
  function of, 144, 150, 416
  principle of, 146

Rebirth, 240, 251, 272, 351
  battle for, 364

Regression, 26, 27, 172, 173
  to the mother, 369

Religion, benefits of, 99
  and morality, 85
  as a pose, 82, 260
  sexuality, 78
  source of, 474
  vs. orgies, 412

Renan, 127

Renunciation, 444

Repression, 6, 67, 73, 150, 161, 342

Resistance, 196

Resistance to primitive sexuality, 156

Revelation, 111, 244

Rhythm, sexual, 165

Rigveda, 165, 247, 367, 393, 415, 416, 456, 465

Riklin, 6, 29, 281

Robertson, 378

Rochefoucauld, La, 195

Rodhe, 376, 407

Roscher, 326

Rose, symbolism of, 436

Rostand, 43

Rudra, 128


Sacrifice, 287, 294, 391, 452, 465, 478
  Christian vs. Mithraic, 478
  of bull, 473
  retrogressive longing, 453, 465

Sainthood, difficulty of, 322

Schmid, 188

Scholasticism, 22

Schopenhauer, 16, 136, 146, 198, 416, 467, 480

Science, 23, 84
  vs. Mythology, 24

Self-consciousness, creation of, 303

Self-control, 73

Seneca, 78, 83, 85, 96

Sentimentality, 474

Serpent, 292

Sexual assault dream, 10
  impulse, derivatives of, 144, 149
  problem, treatment of, 454

Sexuality, and nutrition, 161
  and religion, 78
  cult of, 256
  importance of, 342
  resistance to primitive, 156, 170

Shakespeare, 317
  “Shvetâshvataropanishad,” 128
  “Siegfried,” Wagner’s, 391

Silberer, 6, 234

Snake, phallic meaning of, 110, 413
  as symbol of death, 408

Sodomy, 34

Soma, 185

Somnambulism, intentional, 192

Sophocles, 332

Soul, conception of, 299

Speech, 14
  origin of, 178

Sphinx, 202

Spielrein, 154, 449

St. Augustine, 82

Stage, presexual, 161, 171, 369

Steinthal, 156

Stekel, 12

Subject vs. object, 360

Sublimation, 64, 150, 254

Suckling, act of, 160

Sun, 95, 217, 223, 390, 427
  as God, 99, 127
  energy, 128
  hero, 112, 115, 191, 231
  night journey of, 237
  phallus, 108
  worship, 114

Surrogates, archaic, 154

Symbolism, Christian, 115
  Christian vs. Mithraic, 478
  of arrow, 321, 366
  „ city, 234, 241
  „ crowd, 233
  „ dreams, 8, 12
  „ eating, 372
  „ every-day thought, 13
  „ eyes, 301
  „ fish, 223
  „ forest, 307
  „ horse, 308
  „ libido, 105
  „ light, 112
  „ moon, 352
  „ mother, 241, 278
  „ mystery, 233
  „ serpent, 333, 414, 417, 479
  „ sun, 390
  „ sword, 393
  „ trees, 246, 264, 385
  phallic, 33, 228, 248

Symbols, use of, 249, 262, 400

Symean, 101


Tertullian, 114

Theatre, 43

Thinking, 13
  act of, 459
  archaic, 28
  directed or logical, 14, 36
  dream, 22
  intensive, 13
  limitations of, 19
  of children, 27
  origin of, 465
  phantastic, 22, 31, 36
  psychoanalytic, 257

Time, symbol of, 313

Transference, 75, 76, 171, 201
  real, 77, 78, 84
  to nature, 82

Transformation, 155

Treading, symbolic meaning of, 349

Treasure, difficult to attain, 186, 365
  guardian of, 293, 408

Tree of Death, 278

Tree of Life, 246

Trinity, 147, 225


Unconscious, 197, 201

Upanishad, 131, 247, 466


Verlaine, Paul, 483

Vinci, Leonardo da, 7, 403

Virgil, 90

Virgin Mother, 63

Vollers, 221


Wagner’s “Siegfried,” 391

Waitz, 353

Water, symbolism of, 244, 384, 388

Watschandies, 167

Weber, 165

Will, conception of, 146
  duality of, 194
  original division of, 171

Wind as creator, 108, 354

Wirth, 115

Woman, misunderstood, 342

Work as a duty, 455

World as mother, 456

Wundt, 17


Zarathustra, 423

Zend Avesta, 464

Zosimos vision, 416

Zöckler, 278, 296

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. P. 113, changed “cuis” to “cuius”.
 2. P. 113, changed “phopheta” to “propheta”.
 3. P. 144, changed “genetic definition of the libido” to “generic
    definition of the libido”.
 4. P. 520, changed “αὸν” to “σόν”.
 5. P. 548, changed “κεὺθω” to “κεύθω”.
 6. P. 549, changed “he pieced them” to “he pierced them”.
 7. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 8. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
 9. Footnotes were re-indexed using numbers and the page footnotes were
    collected together with the end notes.
10. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.

