CHAPTER I

THE CONTROVERSY ABOUT CREATION

EVOLUTION AND DOGMA


The controversy over the idea of evolution is a prominent feature
in the mental life of the nineteenth century. It is true that a
few great thinkers had spoken of a natural evolution of all things
several thousand years ago. They had, indeed, partly investigated
the laws that control the birth and death of the world, and the
rise of the earth and its inhabitants; even the creation-stories
and the myths of the older religions betray a partial influence
of these evolutionary ideas. But it was not until the nineteenth
century that the idea of evolution took definite shape and was
scientifically grounded on various classes of evidence; and it
was not until the last third of the century that it won general
recognition. The intimate connection that was proved to exist
between all branches of knowledge, once the continuity of
historical development was realised, and the union of them all
through the Monistic philosophy, are achievements of the last few
decades.

The great majority of the older ideas that thoughtful men had
formed on the origin and nature of the world and their own frame
were far removed from the notion of "self-development." They
culminated in more or less obscure creation-myths, which generally
put in the foreground the idea of a personal Creator. Just as man
has used intelligence and design in the making of his weapons and
tools, his houses and his boats, so it was thought that the Creator
had fashioned the world with art and intelligence, according to
a definite plan. Among the many legends of this kind the ancient
Semitic story of creation, familiar to us as the Mosaic narrative,
but drawn for the most part from Babylonian sources, has obtained
a very great influence on European culture owing to the general
acceptance of the Bible. The belief in miracles, that is involved
in these religious legends, was bound to come in conflict,
at an early date, with the evolutionary ideas of independent
philosophical research. On the one hand, in the prevalent religious
teaching, we had the supernatural world, the miraculous, teleology:
on the other hand, in the nascent science of evolution, only
natural law, pure reason, mechanical causality. Every step that was
made by this science brought into greater relief its inconsistency
with the predominant religion.[1]

If we glance for a moment at the various fields in which the idea
of evolution is scientifically applied we find that, firstly,
the whole universe is conceived as a unity; secondly, our earth;
thirdly, organic life on the earth; fourthly, man, as its highest
product; and fifthly, the soul, as a special immaterial entity.
Thus we have, in historical succession, the evolutionary research
of cosmology, geology, biology, anthropology, and psychology.

The first comprehensive idea of cosmological evolution was put
forth by the famous critical philosopher Immanuel Kant, in 1755,
in the great work of his earlier years, _General Natural History
of the Heavens, or an Attempt to Conceive and to Explain the
Origin of the Universe mechanically, according to the Newtonian
Laws_. This remarkable work appeared anonymously, and was
dedicated to Frederick the Great, who, however, never saw it. It
was little noticed, and was soon entirely forgotten, until it
was exhumed ninety years afterwards by Alexander von Humboldt.
Note particularly that on the title-page stress is laid on the
_mechanical_ origin of the world and its explanation on Newtonian
principles; in this way the strictly Monistic character of the
whole cosmogony and the absolutely universal rule of natural law
are clearly expressed. It is true that Kant speaks much in it of
God and his wisdom and omnipotence; but this is limited to the
affirmation that God created once for all the unchangeable laws of
nature, and was henceforward bound by them and only able to work
through them. The Dualism which became so pronounced subsequently
in the philosopher of Koenigsberg counts for very little here.

The idea of a natural development of the world occurs in a clearer
and more consistent form, and is provided with a firm mathematical
basis, forty years afterwards, in the remarkable _Mécanique
Céleste_ of Pierre Laplace. His popular _Exposition du Système du
Monde_ (1796) destroyed at its roots the legend of creation that
had hitherto prevailed, or the Mosaic narrative in the Bible.
Laplace, who had become Minister of the Interior, Count, and
Chancellor of the Senate, under Napoleon, was merely honourable
and consistent when he replied to the emperor's question, "What
room there was for God in his system?": "Sire, I had no need
for that unfounded hypothesis." What strange ministers there
are sometimes![2] The shrewdness of the Church soon recognised
that the personal Creator was dethroned, and the creation-myth
destroyed, by this Monistic and now generally received theory
of cosmic development. Nevertheless it maintained towards it
the attitude which it had taken up 250 years earlier in regard
to the closely related and irrefutable system of Copernicus. It
endeavoured to conceal the truth as long as possible, or to oppose
it with Jesuitical methods, and finally it yielded. If the Churches
now silently admit the Copernican system and the cosmogony of
Laplace and have ceased to oppose them, we must attribute the fact,
partly to a feeling of their spiritual impotence, partly to an
astute calculation that the ignorant masses do not reflect on these
great problems.

In order to obtain a clear idea and a firm conviction of this
cosmic evolution by natural law, the eternal birth and death of
millions of suns and stars, one needs some mathematical training
and a lively imagination, as well as a certain competence in
astronomy and physics. The evolutionary process is much simpler,
and more readily grasped in geology. Every shower of rain or wave
of the sea, every volcanic eruption and every pebble, gives us a
direct proof of the changes that are constantly taking place on
the surface of our planet. However, the historical significance
of these changes was not properly appreciated until 1822, by Karl
von Hoff of Gotha, and modern geology was only founded in 1830
by Charles Lyell, who explained the whole origin and composition
of the solid crust of the earth, the formation of the mountains,
and the periods of the earth's development, in a connected system
by natural laws. From the immense thickness of the stratified
rocks, which contain the fossilised remains of extinct organisms,
we discovered the enormous length--running into millions of
years--of the periods during which these sedimentary rocks were
deposited in water. Even the duration of the _organic_ history of
the earth--that is to say, the period during which the plant and
animal population of our planet was developing--must itself be put
at more than a hundred million years. These results of geology and
paleontology destroyed the current legend of the six days' work of
a personal Creator. Many attempts were made, it is true, and are
still being made, to reconcile the Mosaic supernatural story of
creation with modern geology.[3] All these efforts of believers
are in vain. We may say, in fact, that it is precisely the study
of geology, the reflection it entails on the enormous periods of
evolution, and the habit of seeking the simple mechanical causes
of their constant changes, that contribute very considerably to
the advance of enlightenment. Yet in spite of this (or, possibly,
because of this), geological instruction is either greatly
neglected or entirely suppressed in most schools. It is certainly
eminently calculated (in connection with geography) to enlarge
the mind, and acquaint the child with the idea of evolution. An
educated person who knows the elements of geology will never
experience _ennui_. He will find everywhere in surrounding nature,
in the rocks and in the water, in the desert and on the mountains,
the most instructive stimuli to reflection.

The evolutionary process in organic nature is much more difficult
to grasp. Here we must distinguish two different series of
biological development, which have only been brought into proper
causal connection by means of our biogenetic law (1866); one series
is found in embryology (or ontogeny), the other in phylogeny (or
race-development). In Germany "evolution" always meant embryology,
or a part of the whole, until forty years ago. It stood for a
microscopic examination of the wonderful processes by means of
which the elaborate structure of the plant or animal body is
formed from the simple seed of the plant or the egg of the bird.
Until the beginning of the nineteenth century the erroneous
view was generally received that this marvellously complicated
structure existed, completely formed, in the simple ovum, and that
the various organs had merely to grow and to shape themselves
independently by a process of "evolution" (or unfolding), before
they entered into activity. An able German scientist, Caspar
Friedrich Wolff (son of a Berlin tailor), had already shown the
error of this "pre-formation theory" in 1759. He had proved, in his
dissertation for the doctorate, that no trace of the later body,
of its bones, muscles, nerves, and feathers, can be found in the
hen's egg (the commonest and most convenient object for study),
but merely a small round disk, consisting of two thin superimposed
layers. He had further showed that the various organs are only
built up gradually out of these simple elements, and that we can
trace, step by step, a series of real new growths. However, these
momentous discoveries, and the sound "theory of epigenesis" that
he based on them, were wholly ignored for fifty years, and even
rejected by the leading authorities. It was not until Oken had
re-discovered these important facts at Jena (1806), Pander had more
carefully distinguished the germinal layers (1817), and finally
Carl Ernst von Baer had happily combined observation and reflection
in his classical _Animal Embryology_ (1828), that embryology
attained the rank of an independent science with a sound empirical
base.

A little later it secured a well-merited recognition in botany
also, especially owing to the efforts of Matthias Schleiden of
Jena, the distinguished student who provided biology with a new
foundation in the "cell theory" (1838). But it was not until the
middle of the nineteenth century that people generally recognised
that the ovum of the plant or animal is itself only a simple cell,
and that the later tissues and organs gradually develop from this
"elementary organism" by a repeated cleavage of, and division of
labour in, the cells. The most important step was then made of
recognising that our human organism also develops from an ovum
(first discovered by Baer in 1827), in virtue of the same laws, and
that its embryonic development resembles that of the other mammals,
especially that of the ape. Each of us was, at the beginning of
his existence, a simple globule of protoplasm, surrounded by a
membrane, about 1/120 of an inch in diameter, with a firmer nucleus
inside it. These important embryological discoveries confirmed the
rational conception of the human organism that had been attained
much earlier by comparative anatomy: the conviction that the
human frame is built in the same way, and develops similarly from
a simple ovum, as the body of all other mammals. Even Linné had
already (1735) given man a place in the mammal class in his famous
_System of Nature_.

Differently from these embryological facts, which can be directly
observed, the phenomena of phylogeny (the development of species),
which are needed to set the former in their true light, are usually
outside the range of immediate observation. What was the origin of
the countless species of animals and plants? How can we explain the
remarkable relationships which unite similar species into genera
and these into classes? Linné answers the question very simply
with the belief in creation, relying on the generally accepted
Mosaic narrative: "There are as many different species of animals
and plants as there were different forms created by God in the
beginning." The first scientific answer was given in 1809 by the
great French scientist, Lamarck. He taught, in his suggestive
_Philosophie Zoologique_, that the resemblances in form and
structure of groups of species are due to real affinity, and that
all organisms descend from a few very simple primitive forms (or,
possibly, from a single one). These primitive forms were developed
out of lifeless matter by spontaneous generation. The resemblances
of related groups of species are explained by _inheritance_ from
common stem-forms; their dissimilarities are due to _adaptation_
to different environments, and to variety in the action of the
modifiable organs. The human race has arisen in the same way, by
transformation of a series of mammal ancestors, the nearest of
which are ape-like primates.

These great ideas of Lamarck, which threw light on the whole
field of organic life, and were closely approached by Goethe in
his own speculations, gave rise to the theory that we now know
as transformism, or the theory of evolution or descent. But the
far-seeing Lamarck was--as Caspar Friedrich Wolff had been fifty
years before--half a century before his time. His theory obtained
no recognition, and was soon wholly forgotten.

It was brought into the light once more in 1859 by the genius
of Charles Darwin, who had been born in the very year that the
_Philosophie Zoologique_ was published. The substance and the
success of his system, which has gone by the name of Darwinism
(in the wider sense) for forty-six years, are so generally known
that I need not dwell on them. I will only point out that the
great success of Darwin's epoch-making works is due to two causes:
firstly, to the fact that the English scientist most ingeniously
worked up the empirical material that had accumulated during
fifty years into a systematic proof of the theory of descent; and
secondly, to the fact that he gave it the support of a second
theory of his own, the theory of natural selection. This theory,
which gives a causal explanation of the transformation of species,
is what we ought to call "Darwinism" in the strict sense. We cannot
go here into the question how far this theory is justified, or how
far it is corrected by more recent theories, such as Weismann's
theory of germ-plasm (1844), or De Vries's theory of mutations
(1900). Our concern is rather with the unparalleled influence that
Darwinism, and its application to man, have had during the last
forty years on the whole province of science; and at the same time,
with its irreconcilable opposition to the dogmas of the Churches.

The extension of the theory of evolution to man was, naturally,
one of the most interesting and momentous applications of it. If
all other organisms arose, not by a miraculous creation, but by a
natural modification of earlier forms of life, the presumption is
that the human race also was developed by the transformation of the
most man-like mammals, the primates of Linné--the apes and lemurs.
This natural inference, which Lamarck had drawn in his simple way,
but Darwin had at first explicitly avoided, was first thoroughly
established by the gifted zoologist, Thomas Huxley, in his three
lectures on _Man's Place in Nature_ (1863). He showed that this
"question of questions" is unequivocally answered by three chief
witnesses--the natural history of the anthropoid apes, the anatomic
and embryological relations of man to the animals immediately
below him, and the recently discovered fossil human remains.
Darwin entirely accepted these conclusions of his friend eight
years afterwards, and, in his two-volume work, _The Descent of Man
and Sexual Selection_ (1871), furnished a number of new proofs in
support of the dreaded "descent of man from the ape." I myself
then (1874) completed the task I had begun in 1866, of determining
approximately the whole series of the extinct animal ancestors of
the human race, on the ground of comparative anatomy, embryology,
and paleontology. This attempt was improved, as our knowledge
advanced, in the five editions of my _Evolution of Man_. In the
last twenty years a vast literature on the subject has accumulated.
I must assume that you are acquainted with the contents of one
or other of these works, and will turn to the question, that
especially engages our attention at present, how the inevitable
struggle between these momentous achievements of modern science and
the dogmas of the Churches has run in recent years.

It was obvious that both the general theory of evolution and
its extension to man in particular must meet from the first
with the most determined resistance on the part of the Churches.
Both were in flagrant contradiction to the Mosaic story of
creation, and other Biblical dogmas that were involved in it,
and are still taught in our elementary schools. It is creditable
to the shrewdness of the theologians and their associates, the
metaphysicians, that they at once rejected Darwinism, and made a
particularly energetic resistance in their writings to its chief
consequence, the descent of man from the ape. This resistance
seemed the more justified and hopeful as, for seven or eight years
after Darwin's appearance, few biologists accepted his theory, and
the general attitude amongst them was one of cold scepticism. I can
well testify to this from my own experience. When I first openly
advocated Darwin's theory at a scientific congress at Stettin in
1863, I was almost alone, and was blamed by the great majority
for taking up seriously so fantastic a theory, "the dream of an
after-dinner nap," as the Göttinger zoologist, Keferstein, called
it.

The general attitude towards Nature fifty years ago was so
different from that we find everywhere to-day, that it is difficult
to convey a clear idea of it to a young scientist or philosopher.
The great question of creation, the problem how the various species
of plants and animals came into the world, and how man came into
being, did not exist yet in exact science. There was, in fact, no
question of it.

Seventy-seven years ago Alexander von Humboldt delivered, in this
very spot, the lectures which afterwards made up his famous
work, _Cosmos, the Elements of a Physical Description of the
World_. As he touched, in passing, the obscure problem of the
origin of the organic population of our planet, he could only say
resignedly: "The mysterious and unsolved problem of how things
came to be does not belong to the empirical province of objective
research, the description of what _is_." It is instructive to
find Johannes Müller, the greatest of German biologists in the
nineteenth century, speaking thus in 1852, in his famous essay,
"On the Generation of Snails in Holothurians": "The entrance of
various species of animals into creation is certain--it is a
fact of paleontology; but it is _supernatural_ as long as this
entrance cannot be perceived in the act and become an element of
observation." I myself had a number of remarkable conversations
with Müller, whom I put at the head of all my distinguished
teachers, in the summer of 1854. His lectures on comparative
anatomy and physiology--the most illuminating and stimulating I
ever heard--had captivated me to such an extent that I asked and
obtained his permission to make a closer study of the skeletons and
other preparations in his splendid museum of comparative anatomy
(then in the right wing of the buildings of the Berlin University),
and to draw them. Müller (then in his fifty-fourth year) used to
spend the Sunday afternoon alone in the museum. He would walk to
and fro for hours in the spacious rooms, his hands behind his
back, buried in thought about the mysterious affinities of the
vertebrates, the "holy enigma" of which was so forcibly impressed
by the row of skeletons. Now and again my great master would turn
to a small table at the side, at which I (a student of twenty
years) was sitting in the angle of a window, making conscientious
drawings of the skulls of mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and fishes.

I would then beg him to explain particularly difficult points in
anatomy, and once I ventured to put the question: "Must not all
these vertebrates, with their identity in internal skeleton, in
spite of all their external differences, have come originally from
a common form?" The great master nodded his head thoughtfully, and
said: "Ah, if we only knew that! If ever you solve that riddle,
you will have accomplished a supreme work." Two months afterwards,
in September, 1854, I had to accompany Müller to Heligoland, and
learned under his direction the beautiful and wonderful inhabitants
of the sea. As we fished together in the sea, and caught the lovely
medusæ, I asked him how it was possible to explain their remarkable
alternation of generations; if the medusæ, from the ova of which
polyps develop to-day, must not have come originally from the more
simply organised polyps? To this precocious question, I received
the same resigned answer: "Ah, that is a very obscure problem! We
know nothing whatever about the origin of species."

Johannes Müller was certainly one of the greatest scientists of the
nineteenth century. He takes rank with Cuvier, Baer, Lamarck, and
Darwin. His insight was profound and penetrating, his philosophic
judgment comprehensive, and his mastery of the vast province
of biology was enormous. Emil du Bois-Reymond happily compared
him, in his fine commemorative address, to Alexander the Great,
whose kingdom was divided into several independent realms at his
death. In his lectures and works Müller treated no less than four
different subjects, for which four separate chairs were founded
after his death in 1858--human anatomy, physiology, pathological
anatomy, and comparative anatomy. In fact, we ought really to add
two more subjects--zoology and embryology. Of these, also, we
learned more from Müller's classic lectures than from the official
lectures of the professors of those subjects. The great master died
in 1858, a few months before Charles Darwin and Alfred R. Wallace
made their first communications on their new theory of selection
in the Journal of the Linnæan Society. I do not doubt in the least
that this surprising answer of the riddle of creation would have
profoundly moved Müller, and have been fully admitted by him on
mature reflection.

To these leading masters in biology, and to all other anatomists,
physiologists, zoologists, and botanists up to 1858, the question
of organic creation was an unsolved problem; the great majority
regarded it as insoluble. The theologians and their allies, the
metaphysicians, built triumphantly on this fact. It afforded a
clear proof of the limitations of reason and science. A miracle
only could account for the origin of these ingenious and carefully
designed organisms; nothing less than the Divine wisdom and
omnipotence could have brought man into being. But this general
resignation of reason, and the dominance of supernatural ideas
which it encouraged, were somewhat paradoxical in the thirty years
between Lyell and Darwin, between 1830 and 1859, since the natural
evolution of the earth, as conceived by the great geologist, had
come to be universally recognised. Since the earlier of these dates
the iron necessity of natural law had ruled in inorganic nature,
in the formation of the mountains and the movement of the heavenly
bodies. In organic nature, on the contrary, in the creation and the
life of animals and plants, people saw only the wisdom and power of
an intelligent Creator and Controller; in other words, everything
was ruled by mechanical causality in the inorganic world, but by
teleological finality in the realm of biology.

Philosophy, strictly so called, paid little or no attention to
this dilemma. Absorbed almost exclusively in metaphysical and
dialectical speculations, it looked with supreme contempt or
indifference on the enormous progress that the empirical sciences
were making. It affected, in its character of "purely mental
science," to build up the world out of its own head, and to have no
need of the splendid material that was being laboriously gathered
by observation and experiment. This is especially true of Germany,
where Hegel's system of "absolute idealism" had secured the highest
regard, particularly since it had been made obligatory as "the
royal State-philosophy of Prussia"--mainly because, according to
Hegel, "in the State the Divine will itself and the monarchical
constitution alone represent the development of reason; all
other forms of constitution are lower stages of the development
of reason." Hegel's abstruse metaphysics has also been greatly
appreciated because it has made so thorough and consistent a use
of the idea of evolution. But this pretended "evolution of reason"
floated far above real nature in the pure ether of the absolute
spirit, and was devoid of all the material ballast that the
empirical science of the evolution of the world, the earth, and its
living population, had meantime accumulated. Moreover, it is well
known how Hegel himself declared, with humorous resignation, that
only _one_ of his many pupils had understood him, and this one had
misunderstood him.

From the higher standpoint of general culture the difficult
question forces itself on us: What is the real value of the idea
of evolution in the whole realm of science? We are bound to
answer that it varies considerably. The facts of the evolution of
the individual, or of ontogeny, were easy to observe and grasp:
the evolution of the crust of the earth and of the mountains in
geology seemed to have an equally sound empirical foundation; the
physical evolution of the universe seemed to be established by
mathematical speculation. There was no longer any serious question
of _creation_, in the literal sense, of the deliberate action
of a personal Creator, in these great provinces. But this made
people cling to the idea more than ever in regard to the origin of
the countless species of animals and plants, and especially the
creation of man. This transcendental problem seemed to be entirely
beyond the range of natural development; and the same was thought
of the question of the nature and origin of the soul, the mystic
entity that was appropriated by metaphysical speculation as its
subject. Charles Darwin suddenly brought a clear light into this
dark chaos of contradictory notions in 1859. His epoch-making work,
_The Origin of Species_, proved convincingly that this historical
process is not a supernatural mystery, but a physiological
phenomenon; and that the preservation of improved races in the
struggle for life had produced, by a natural evolution, the whole
wondrous world of organic life.

To-day, when evolution is almost universally recognised in biology,
when thousands of anatomic and physiological works are based on
it every year, the new generation can hardly form an idea of the
violent resistance that was offered to Darwin's theory and the
impassioned struggles it provoked. In the first place, the Churches
at once raised a vigorous protest; they rightly regarded their
new antagonist as the deadly enemy of the legend of creation,
and saw the very foundations of their creed threatened. The
Churches found a powerful ally in the dualistic metaphysics that
still claims to represent the real "idealist philosophy" at most
universities. But most dangerous of all to the young theory
was the violent resistance it met almost everywhere in its own
province of empirical science. The prevailing belief in the fixity
and the independent creation of the various species was much more
seriously menaced by Darwin's theory than it had been by Lamarck's
transformism. Lamarck had said substantially the same thing fifty
years before, but had failed to convince through the lack of
effective evidence. Many scientists, some of great distinction,
opposed Darwin because either they had not an adequate acquaintance
with the whole field of biology, or it seemed to them that his bold
speculation advanced too far from the secure base of experience.

When Darwin's work appeared in 1859, and fell like a flash of
lightning on the dark world of official biology, I was engaged in a
scientific expedition to Sicily and taken up with a thorough study
of the graceful radiolarians, those wonderful microscopic marine
animals that surpass all other organisms in the beauty and variety
of their forms. The special study of this remarkable class of
animals, of which I afterwards described more than 4,000 species,
after more than ten years of research, provided me with one of the
solid foundation-stones of my Darwinian ideas. But when I returned
from Messina to Berlin in the spring of 1860, I knew nothing as yet
of Darwin's achievement. I merely heard from my friends at Berlin
that a remarkable work by a crazy Englishman had attracted great
attention, and that it turned upside down all previous ideas as to
the origin of species.

I soon perceived that almost all the experts at Berlin--chief
amongst them were the famous microscopist, Ehrenberg; the
anatomist, Reichert; the zoologist, Peters; and the geologist,
Beyrich--were unanimous in their condemnation of Darwin. The
brilliant orator of the Berlin Academy, Emil du Bois-Reymond,
hesitated. He recognised that the theory of evolution was
the only natural solution of the problem of creation; but he
laughed at the application of it as a poor romance, and declared
that the phylogenetic inquiries into the relationship of the
various species had about as much value as the research of
philologists into the genealogical tree of the Homeric heroes.
The distinguished botanist, Alexander Braun, stood quite alone
in his full and warm assent to the theory of evolution. I found
comfort and encouragement with this dear and respected teacher,
when I was deeply moved by the first reading of Darwin's book,
and soon completely converted to his views. In Darwin's great and
harmonious conception of Nature, and his convincing establishment
of evolution, I had an answer to all the doubts that had beset me
since the beginning of my biological studies.

My famous teacher, Rudolf Virchow, whom I had met at Würtzburg in
1852, and was soon associated with in the most friendly relations
as special pupil and admiring assistant, played a very curious
part in this great controversy. I am, I think, one of those
elderly men who have followed Virchow's development, as man and
thinker, with the greatest interest during the last fifty years.
I distinguish three periods in his psychological metamorphoses.
In the first decade of his academic life, from 1847 to 1858,
mainly at Würtzburg, he effected the great reform of medicine that
culminated brilliantly in his cellular pathology. In the following
twenty years (1858-1877) he was chiefly occupied with politics
and anthropology. He was at first favourable to Darwinism, then
sceptical, and finally rejected it. His powerful and determined
opposition to it dates from 1877, when, in is famous speech on "The
Freedom of Science in the Modern State," he struck a heavy blow
at that freedom, denounced the theory of evolution as dangerous
to the State, and demanded its exclusion from the schools. This
remarkable metamorphosis is so important, and has had so much
influence, yet has been so erroneously described, that I will
deal with it somewhat fully in the next chapter, especially as
I have then to treat one chief problem, the descent of man from
the ape. For the moment, I will merely recall the fact that in
Berlin, the "metropolis of intelligence," as it has been called,
the theory of evolution, now generally accepted, met with a more
stubborn resistance than in most of our other leading educational
centres, and that this opposition was due above all to the powerful
authority of Virchow.

We can only glance briefly here at the victorious struggle that
the idea of evolution has conducted in the last three decades of
the nineteenth century. The violent resistance that Darwinism
encountered nearly everywhere in its early years was paralysed
towards the end of the first decade. In the years 1866-1874 many
works were published in which not only were the foundations of the
theory scientifically strengthened, but its general recognition
was secured by popular treatment of the subject. I made the first
attempt in 1866, in my _General Morphology_, to present connectedly
the whole subject of evolution and make it the foundation of a
consistent Monistic philosophy; and I then gave a popular summary
of my chief conclusions in the ten editions of my _History of
Creation_. In my _Evolution of Man_ I made the first attempt to
apply the principles of evolution thoroughly and consistently to
man, and to draw up a hypothetical list of his animal ancestors.
The three volumes of my _Systematic Phylogeny_ (1894-1896)
contain a fuller outline of a natural classification of organisms
on the basis of their stem-history. There have been important
contributions to the science of evolution in all its branches in
the Darwinian periodical, _Cosmos_, since 1877; and a number of
admirable popular works helped to spread the system.

However, the most important and most welcome advance was made by
science when, in the last thirty years, the idea of evolution
penetrated into every branch of biology, and was recognised as
fundamental and indispensable. Thousands of new discoveries and
observations in all sections of botany, zoology, protistology,
and anthropology, were brought forward as empirical evidence of
evolution. This is especially true of the remarkable progress of
paleontology, comparative anatomy, and embryology, but it applies
also to physiology, chorology (the science of the distribution
of living things), and œcology (the description of the habits of
animals). How much our horizon was extended by these, and how
much the unity of our Monistic system gained, can be seen in any
modern manual of biology. If we compare them with those that gave
us extracts of natural history forty or fifty years ago, we see
at once what an enormous advance has taken place. Even the more
remote branches of anthropological science, ethnography, sociology,
ethics, and jurisprudence, are entering into closer relations with
the theory of evolution, and can no longer escape its influence. In
view of all this, it is ridiculous for theological and metaphysical
journals to talk, as they do, of the failure of evolution and "the
death-bed of Darwinism."

Our science of evolution won its greatest triumph when, at the
beginning of the twentieth century, its most powerful opponents,
the Churches, became reconciled to it, and endeavoured to bring
their dogmas into line with it. A number of timid attempts to
do so had been made in the preceding ten years by different
free-thinking theologians and philosophers, but without much
success. The distinction of accomplishing this in a comprehensive
and well-informed manner was reserved for a Jesuit, Father Erich
Wasmann of Luxemburg. This able and learned entomologist had
already earned some recognition in zoology by a series of admirable
observations on the life of ants, and the captives that they
always keep in their homes, certain very small insects which have
themselves been curiously modified by adaptation to their peculiar
environment. He showed that these striking modifications can only
be rationally explained by descent from other free-living species
of insects. The various papers in which Wasmann gave a thoroughly
Darwinian explanation of the biological phenomena first appeared
(1901-1903) in the Catholic periodical, _Stimmen aus Maria-Laach_,
and are now collected in a special work entitled, _Modern Biology
and the Theory of Evolution_.

This remarkable book of Wasmann's is a masterpiece of Jesuitical
sophistry. It really consists of three entirely different sections.
The first third gives, in the introduction, what is, for Catholics,
a clear and instructive account of modern biology, especially the
cell-theory, and the theory of evolution (chapters i.-viii.). The
second third, the ninth chapter, is the most valuable part of the
work. It has the title: "The Theory of Fixity or the theory of
Evolution?" Here the learned entomologist gives an interesting
account of the results of his prolonged studies of the morphology
and the œcology of the ants and their captives, the myrmecophilæ.
He shows impartially and convincingly that these complicated and
remarkable phenomena can only be explained by evolution, and that
the older doctrine of the fixity and independent creation of the
various species is quite untenable. With a few changes this ninth
chapter could figure as a useful part of a work by Darwin or
Weismann or some other evolutionist. The succeeding chapter (the
last third) is flagrantly inconsistent with the ninth. It deals
most absurdly with the application of the theory of evolution to
man. The reader has to ask himself whether Wasmann really believes
these confused and ridiculous notions, or whether he merely aims at
befogging his readers, and so preparing the way for the acceptance
of the conventional creed.

Wasmann's book has been well criticised by a number of competent
students, especially by Escherich and Francé. While fully
recognising his great services, they insist very strongly on
the great mischief wrought by this smuggling of the Jesuitical
spirit into biology. Escherich points out at length the glaring
inconsistencies and the obvious untruths of this "ecclesiastical
evolution." He summarises his criticism in the words: "If the
theory of evolution can really be reconciled with the dogmas of the
Church only in the way we find here, Wasmann has clearly proved
that any such reconciliation is impossible. Because what Wasmann
gives here as the theory of evolution is a thing mutilated beyond
recognition and incapable of any vitality." He tries, like a good
Jesuit, to prove that it does not tend to undermine, but to give a
firm foundation to, the story of supernatural creation, and that it
was really not Lamarck and Darwin, but St. Augustin and St. Thomas
of Aquin, who founded the science of evolution. "God does not
interfere directly in the order of Nature when he can act by means
of natural causes." Man alone constitutes a remarkable exception;
because "the human soul, being a spiritual entity, cannot be
derived from matter even by the Divine omnipotence, like the vital
forms of the plants and animals" (p. 299).

In an instructive article on "Jesuitical Science" (in the Frankfort
_Freie Wort_, No. 22, 1904), R. H. Francé gives an interesting
list of the prominent Jesuits who are now at work in the various
branches of science. As he rightly says, the danger consists "in
a systematic introduction of the Jesuitical spirit into science,
a persistent perversion of all its problems and solutions, and an
astute undermining of its foundations; to speak more precisely,
the danger is that people are not sufficiently conscious of it,
and that they, and even science itself, fall into the cleverly
prepared pit of believing that there is such a thing as _Jesuitical
science_, the results of which may be taken seriously."[4]

While fully recognising these dangers, I nevertheless feel that the
Jesuit Father Wasmann, and his colleagues, have--unwittingly--done
a very great service to the progress of pure science. The Catholic
Church, the most powerful and widespread of the Christian sects,
sees itself compelled to capitulate to the idea of evolution. It
embraces the most important application of the idea, Lamarck and
Darwin's theory of descent, which it had vigorously combated until
twenty years ago. It does, indeed, mutilate the great tree, cutting
off its roots and its highest branch; it rejects spontaneous
generation or archigony at the bottom, and the descent of man
from animal ancestors above. But these exceptions will not last.
Impartial biology will take no notice of them, and the religious
creed will at length determine that the more complex species have
been evolved from a series of simpler forms according to Darwinian
principles. The belief in a supernatural creation is restricted
to the production of the earliest and simplest stem-forms, from
which the "natural species" have taken their origin; Wasmann gives
that name to all species that are demonstrably descended from a
common stem-form; in other words, to what other classifiers call
"stems" or "phyla." The 4,000 species of ants in his system, which
he believes to be genetically related, are comprised by him in
one "natural species." On the other hand, man forms one isolated
"natural species" for himself, without any connection with the
other mammals.

The Jesuitical sophistry that Wasmann betrays in this ingenious
distinction between "systematic and natural species" is also
found in his philosophic "Thoughts on Evolution" (chap. viii.),
his distinction between philosophic and scientific evolution,
or between evolution in one stem and in several stems. His
remarks (in chap. vii.) on "the cell and spontaneous generation"
are similarly marred by sophistry. The question of spontaneous
generation or archigony--that is to say, of the first appearance of
organic life on the earth, is one of the most difficult problems
in biology, one of those in which the most distinguished students
betray a striking weakness of judgment. Dr. Heinrich Schmidt, of
Jena, has lately written an able and popular little work on that
subject. In his _Spontaneous Generation and Professor Reinke_
(1903), he has shown to what absurd consequences the ecclesiastical
ideas lead on this very question. The botanist Reinke, of Kiel,
is now regarded amongst religious people as the chief opponent of
Darwinism; for many conservatives this is because he is a member
of the Prussian Herrenhaus (a very intelligent body, of course!).
Although he is a strong evangelical, many of his mystic deductions
agree surprisingly with the Catholic speculations of Father
Wasmann. This is especially the case with regard to spontaneous
generation. They both declare that the first appearance of life
must be traced to a miracle, to the work of a personal deity,
whom Reinke calls the "cosmic intelligence." I have shown the
unscientific character of these notions in my last two works,
_The Riddle of the Universe_, and _The Wonders of Life_. I have
drawn attention especially to the widely distributed monera of the
chromacea class--organisms of the simplest type conceivable, whose
whole body is merely an unnucleated, green, structureless globule
of plasm (Chroococcus); their whole vital activity consists of
growth (by forming plasm) and multiplication (by dividing into
two). There is little theoretical difficulty in conceiving the
origin of these new simple monera from inorganic compounds of
albumen, or their later transformation into the simplest nucleated
cells. All this, and a good deal more that will not fit in his
Jesuitical frame, is shrewdly ignored by Wasmann.

In view of the great influence that Catholicism still has on public
life in Germany, through the Centre party, this change of front
should be a great gain to education. Virchow demanded as late as
1877 that the dangerous doctrine of evolution should be excluded
from the schools. The Ministers of Instruction of the two chief
German States gratefully adopted this warning from the leader of
the progressive party, forbade the teaching of Darwinian ideas,
and made every effort to check the spread of biological knowledge.
Now, twenty-five years afterwards, the Jesuits come forward, and
demand the opposite. They recognise openly that the hated theory of
evolution is established, and try to reconcile it with the creed!
What an irony of history! And we find much the same story when we
read the struggles for freedom of thought and for the recognition
of evolution in the other educated countries of Europe.

In Italy, its cradle and home, educated people generally look
upon the papacy with the most profound disdain. I have spent many
years in Italy, and have never met an educated Italian of such
bigoted and narrow views as we usually find amongst educated
German Catholics--represented with success in the Reichstag by the
Centre party. It is proof enough of the reactionary character of
German Catholics that the Pope himself describes them as his most
vigorous soldiers, and points them out as models to the faithful
of other nations. As the whole history of the Roman Church shows,
the charlatan of the Vatican is the deadly enemy of free science
and free teaching. The present German Emperor ought to regard it as
his most sacred duty to maintain the tradition of the Reformation,
and to promote the formation of the German people in the sense
of Frederick the Great. Instead of this we have to look on with
heavy hearts while the Emperor, badly advised and misled by those
in influence about him, suffers himself to be caught closer and
closer in the net of the Catholic clergy, and sacrifices to it
the intelligence of the rising generation. In September, 1904,
the Catholic journals announced triumphantly that the adoption of
Catholicism by the Emperor and his Chancellor was close at hand.[5]

The firmness of the belief in conventional dogmas, which hampers
the progress of rational enlightenment in orthodox Protestant
circles as well as Catholic, is often admired as an expression of
the deep emotion of the German people. But its real source is their
confusion of thought and their credulity, the power of conservative
tradition, and the reactionary state of political education. While
our schools are bent under the yoke of the creeds, those of our
neighbours are free. France, the pious daughter of the Church,
gives anxious moments to her ambitious mother. She is breaking the
chains of the Concordat, and taking up the work of the Reformation.
In Germany, the birthplace of the Reformation, the Reichstag and
the Government vie with each other in smoothing the paths for the
Jesuits, and fostering, instead of suppressing, the intolerant
spirit of the sectarian school. Let us hope that the latest episode
in the history of evolution, its recognition by Jesuitical science,
will bring about the reverse of what they intend--the substitution
of rational science for blind faith.




