CHAPTER II

THE STRUGGLE OVER OUR GENEALOGICAL TREE

OUR APE-RELATIVES AND THE VERTEBRATE-STEM


EXPLANATION OF PLATE II

SKELETONS OF FIVE ANTHROPOID APES

    These skeletons of the five living genera of anthropomorpha
    are reduced to a common size, in order to show better the
    relative proportions of the various parts. The human skeleton
    is 1/20th natural size, the gorilla 1/18th, the chimpanzee
    1/7th, the orang 1/7th, the gibbon 1/9th. Young specimens of
    the chimpanzee and orang have been selected, because they
    approach nearer to man than the adult. No one of the living
    anthropoid apes is nearest to man in all respects; this cannot
    be said of either of the African (gorilla and chimpanzee) or
    the Asiatic (orang and gibbon). This anatomic fact is explained
    phylogenetically on the ground that none of them are direct
    ancestors of man; they represent divergent branches of the
    stem, of which man is the crown. However, the small gibbon is
    nearest related to the hypothetical common ancestor of all the
    anthropomorpha to which we give the name of Prothylobates.
    Further information will be found in my _Last Link_ and
    _Evolution of Man_ (chap. xxiii.).


PLATE II.

SKELETONS OF FIVE ANTHROPOID APES.

[Illustration:

1/20 MAN (Homo)

1/18 GORILLA

1/7 Young CHIMPANZEE (Anthropithecus)

1/7 Young ORANG (Satyrus)

1/9 GIBBON (Hylobates)]


CHAPTER II

THE STRUGGLE OVER OUR GENEALOGICAL TREE

OUR APE-RELATIVES AND THE VERTEBRATE-STEM


In the previous chapter I tried to give you a general idea of
the present state of the controversy in regard to evolution.
Comparing the various branches of thought we found that the older
mythological ideas of the creation of the world were driven long
ago out of the province of inorganic science, but that they did
not yield to the rational conception of natural development until
a much later date in the field of organic nature. Here the idea of
evolution did not prove completely victorious until the beginning
of the twentieth century, when its most zealous and dangerous
opponent, the Church, was forced to admit it. Hence the open
acknowledgment of the Jesuit, Father Wasmann, deserves careful
attention, and we may look forward to a further development. If his
force of conviction and his moral courage are strong enough, he
will go on to draw the normal conclusions from his high scientific
attainments and leave the Catholic Church, as the prominent
Jesuits, Count Hoensbroech and the able geologist, Professor Renard
of Ghent, one of the workers on the deep-sea deposits in the
_Challenger_ expedition, have lately done. But even if this does
not happen, his recognition of Darwinism, in the name of Christian
belief, will remain a landmark in the history of evolution. His
ingenious and very Jesuitical attempt to bring together the
opposite poles will have no very mischievous effect; it will
rather tend to hasten the victory of the scientific conception of
evolution over the mystic beliefs of the Churches.

You will see this more clearly if we go on to consider the
important special problem of the "descent of man from the ape,"
and its irreconcilability with the conventional belief that God
made man according to His own image. That this ape or pithecoid
theory is an irresistible deduction from the general principle
of evolution was clearly recognised forty-five years ago, when
Darwin's work appeared, by the shrewd and vigilant theologians;
it was precisely in this fact that they found their strongest
motive for vigorous resistance. It is quite clear. _Either_ man
was brought into existence, like the other animals, by a special
creative act, as Moses and Linné taught (an "embodied idea of the
Creator," as the famous Agassiz put it so late as 1858); _or_ he
has been developed naturally from a series of mammal ancestors, as
is claimed by the systems of Lamarck and Darwin.

In view of the very great importance of this pithecoid theory,
we will first cast a brief glance at its founders and then
summarise the proofs in support of it. The famous French biologist,
Jean Lamarck, was the first scientist definitely to affirm the
descent of man from the ape and seek to give scientific proof
of it. In his splendid work, fifty years in advance of his time,
the _Philosophie Zoologique_ (1809), he clearly traced the
modifications and advances that must have taken place in the
transformation of the man-like apes (the primate forms similar to
the orang and the chimpanzee); the adaptation to walking upright,
the consequent modification of the hands and feet, and later,
the formation of speech and the attainment of a higher degree of
intelligence. Lamarck's remarkable theory, and this important
consequence of it, soon fell into oblivion. When Darwin brought
evolution to the front again fifty years afterwards, he paid no
attention to the special conclusion. He was content to make the
following brief prophetic observation in his work: "Light will be
thrown on the origin and the history of man." Even this innocent
remark seemed so momentous to the first German translator of the
work, Bronn, that he suppressed it. When Darwin was asked by
Wallace whether he would not go more fully into it, he replied: "I
think of avoiding the whole subject, as it is so much involved in
prejudice; though I quite admit that it is the highest and most
interesting problem for the thinker."

The first thorough works of importance on the subject appeared
in 1863. Thomas Huxley in England, and Carl Vogt in Germany,
endeavoured to show that the descent of man from the ape was a
necessary consequence of Darwinism, and to provide an empirical
base for the theory by every available argument. Huxley's work
on _Man's Place in Nature_ was particularly valuable. He first
gave convincingly, in three lectures, the empirical evidence on
the subject--the natural history of the anthropoid apes, the
anatomical and embryological relations of man to the next lowest
animals, and the recently discovered fossil human remains. I then
(1866) made the first attempt to establish the theory of evolution
comprehensively by research in anatomy and embryology, and to
determine the chief stages in the natural classification of the
vertebrates that must have been passed through by our earlier
vertebrate ancestors. Anthropology thus becomes a part of zoology.
In my _History of Creation_ I further developed these early
evolutionary sketches, and improvements were made in the successive
editions.

In the meantime, the great master, Darwin, had decided to deal
with this chief evolutionary problem in a special work. The two
volumes of his _Descent of Man_ appeared in 1871. They contained an
able discussion of sexual selection, or the selective influence of
sexual love and high psychic activities connected therewith, and
their significance in regard to the origin of man. As this part of
Darwin's work was afterwards attacked with particular virulence, I
will say that, in my opinion, it is of the greatest importance, not
only for the general theory of evolution, but also for psychology,
anthropology, and æsthetics.

My own feeble early efforts (1866), not only to establish the
descent of man from the nearest related apes, but also to determine
more precisely the long series of our earlier and lower vertebrate
ancestors, had not at all satisfied me. In particular, I had had to
leave unanswered in my _General Morphology_ the very interesting
question: from which invertebrate animals the vertebrate stem
originally came. A clear and unexpected light was thrown on it some
time afterwards by the astounding discoveries of Kowalevsky, which
revealed an essential agreement in embryonic development between
the lowest vertebrate (Amphioxus) and a lowly tunicate (Ascidia).
In the succeeding years, the numerous discoveries in connection
with the formation of the germinal layers in different animals so
much enlarged our embryological outlook that I was able to prove
the complete homology of the two-layered _gastrula_ (a cup-shaped
embryonic form) in all the tissue-forming animals (_metazoa_) in
my _Monograph on the Sponges_. From this I inferred, in virtue of
the biogenetic law, the common descent of all the metazoa from
one and the same gastrula-shaped stem-form, the _gastræa_. This
hypothetical stem-form, to which man's earliest multicellular
ancestors also belong, was afterwards proved by Monticelli's
observations to be still in existence. The evolution of these
very simple tissue-forming animals from still simpler unicellular
forms (_protozoa_) is shown by the corresponding processes that
we witness in what is called the segmentation of the ovum or
gastrulation, in the development of the two-layered germ from the
single cell of the ovum.

Encouraged by these great advances of modern phylogeny, and with
the support of many new discoveries in comparative anatomy and
embryology, in which a number of distinguished observers were at
work, I was able in 1874 to venture on the first attempt to trace
continuously the whole story of man's evolution. In doing so, I
took my stand on the firm ground of the biogenetic law, seeking
to give a phylogenetic cause for each fact of embryology. My
_Evolution of Man_, which made the first attempt to accomplish this
difficult task, was materially improved and enlarged as new and
important discoveries were made. The latest edition (1903 [1904 in
English]) contains thirty chapters distributed in two volumes, the
first of which deals with embryology (or ontogeny), and the second
with the development of species (or phylogeny).

Though I was quite conscious that there were bound to be gaps
and weak points in these first attempts to frame a natural
anthropogeny, I had hoped they would have some influence on
modern anthropology, and especially that the first sketches of a
genealogical tree of the animal world would prove a stimulus to
fresh research and improvement. In this I was much mistaken. The
dominant school of anthropology, especially in Germany, declined to
suffer the introduction of the theory of evolution, declaring it to
be an unfounded hypothesis, and described our carefully prepared
ancestral trees as mere figments. This was due, in the first place,
to the great authority of the founder and president (for many
years) of the German Anthropological Society, Rudolf Virchow, as I
briefly pointed out in the previous chapter. In view of the great
regard that is felt for this distinguished scientist, and the
extent to which his powerful opposition prevented the spread of the
theory, it is necessary to deal more fully with his position on the
subject. I am still further constrained to do this because of the
erroneous views of it that are circulating, and my own fifty years'
acquaintance with my eminent teacher enables me to put them right.

Not one of Virchow's numerous pupils and friends can appreciate
more than I do his real services to medical science. His _Cellular
Pathology_ (1858), his thorough application of the cell-theory to
the science of disease, is, in my opinion, one of the greatest
advances made by modern medicine. I had the good fortune to
begin my medical studies at Würzburg in 1852, and to spend six
valuable terms under the personal guidance of four biologists of
the first rank--Albert Kölliker, Rudolf Virchow, Franz Leydig
and Carl Gegenbaur. The great stimulus that I received from
these distinguished masters in every branch of comparative and
microscopic biology was the starting-point of my whole training
in that science, and enabled me subsequently to follow with ease
the higher intellectual flight of Johannes Müller. From Virchow
especially I learned, not only the analytic art of careful
observation and judicious appreciation of the detailed facts of
anatomy, but also the synthetic conception of the whole human
frame, the profound conviction of the _unity_ of our nature, the
inseparable connection of body and mind, to which Virchow gave a
fine expression in his classic essay on "The Efforts to bring about
Unity in Scientific Medicine" (1849). The leading articles which
he wrote at that time for the Journal of Pathological Anatomy and
Physiology, which he had founded, contain much new insight into the
wonders of life, and a number of excellent general reflections on
their significance--pregnant ideas that we can make direct use of
for Monistic purposes. In the controversy that broke out between
empirical rationalism and materialism and the older vitalism and
mysticism, he took the side of the former, and fought together
with Jacob Moleschott, Carl Vogt, and Ludwig Büchner. I owe the
firm conviction of the unity of organic and inorganic nature, of
the mechanical character of all vital and psychic activity, which
I have always held to be the foundation of my Monistic system,
in a great measure to Virchow's teaching and the exhaustive
conversations I had with him when I was his assistant. The profound
views of the nature of the cell and the independent individuality
of these elementary organisms, which he advanced in his great
work _Cellular Pathology_, remained guiding principles for me in
the prolonged studies that I made thirty years afterwards of the
organisation of the radiolaria and other unicellular protists;
and also in regard to the theory of the cell-soul, which followed
naturally from the psychological study of it.

His life at Würtzburg was the most brilliant period of Virchow's
indefatigable scientific labours. A change took place when he
removed to Berlin in 1856. He then occupied himself chiefly with
political and social and civic interests. In the last respect
he has done so much for Berlin and the welfare of the German
people that I need not enlarge on it. Nor will I go into his
self-sacrificing and often thankless political work as leader of
the progressive party; there are differences of opinion as to its
value. But we must carefully examine his peculiar attitude towards
evolution, and especially its chief application, the ape-theory.
He was at first favourable to it, then sceptical, and finally
decidedly hostile.

When the Lamarckian theory was brought to light again by Darwin in
1859, many thought that it was Virchow's vocation to take the lead
in defending it. He had made a thorough study of the problem of
heredity; he had realised the power of adaptation through his study
of pathological changes; and he had been directed to the great
question of the origin of man by his anthropological studies. He
was at that time regarded as a determined opponent of all dogmas;
he combated transcendentalism either in the form of ecclesiastical
creeds or anthropomorphism. After 1862 he declared that "the
possibility of a transition from species to species was a necessity
of science." When I opened the first public discussion of Darwinism
at the Stettin scientific congress in 1863, Virchow and Alexander
Braun were among the few scientists who would admit the subject
to be important and deserving of the most careful study. When I
sent to him in 1865 two lectures that I had delivered at Jena on
the origin and genealogical tree of the human race, he willingly
received them amongst his _Collection of Popular Scientific
Lectures_. In the course of many long conversations I had with
him on the matter, he agreed with me in the main, though with the
prudent reserve and cool scepticism that characterised him. He
adopts the same moderate attitude in the lecture that he delivered
to the Artisans' Union at Berlin in 1869 on "Human and Ape Skulls."

His position definitely changed in regard to Darwinism from 1877
onward. At the Scientific Congress that was then held at Munich I
had, at the pressing request of my Munich friends, undertaken the
first address (on 18th September) on "Modern Evolution in Relation
to the whole of Science." In this address I had substantially
advanced the same general views that I afterwards enlarged in my
_Monism_, _Riddle of the Universe_, and _Wonders of Life_. In the
ultramontane capital of Bavaria, in sight of a great university
which emphatically describes itself as Catholic, it was somewhat
bold to make such a confession of faith. The deep impression that
it had made was indicated by the lively manifestations of assent on
the one hand, and displeasure on the other, that were at once made
in the Congress itself and in the Press. On the following day I
departed for Italy (according to an arrangement made long before).
Virchow did not come to Munich until two days afterwards, when he
delivered (on 22nd September, in response to entreaties from people
of position and influence) his famous antagonistic speech on "The
Freedom of Science in the Modern State." The gist of the speech
was that this freedom ought to be restricted; that evolution is
an unproved hypothesis, and ought not to be taught in the school
because it is dangerous to the State: "We must not teach," he said,
"that man descends from the ape or any other animal." In 1849, the
young Monist, Virchow, had emphatically declared this conviction,
"that he would never be induced to deny the thesis of the unity
of human nature and its consequences"; now, twenty-eight years
afterwards, the prudent Dualistic politician entirely denied it.
He had formerly taught that all the bodily and mental processes in
the human organism depend on the mechanism of the cell-life; now
he declared the soul to be a special immaterial entity. But the
crowning feature of this reactionary speech was his compromise with
the Church, which he had fought so vigorously twenty years before.

The character of Virchow's speech at Munich is best seen in the
delight with which it was at once received by the reactionary and
clerical papers, and the profound concern of all Liberal journals,
either in the political or the religious sense. When Darwin read
the English translation of the speech he--generally so gentle in
his judgments--wrote: "Virchow's conduct is shameful, and I hope he
will some day feel the shame." In 1878, I made a full reply to it
in my _Free Science and Free Teaching_, in which I collected the
most important press opinions on the matter.[6]

From this very decided turn at Munich until his death, twenty-five
years afterwards, Virchow was an indefatigable and very influential
opponent of evolution. In his annual appearances at congresses he
has always contested it, and has obstinately clung to his statement
that "it is quite certain that man does not descend from the ape or
any other animal." To the question: "Whence does he come, then?"
he had no answer, and retired to the resigned position of the
Agnostic, which was common before Darwin's time: "We do not know
how life arose, and how the various species came into the world."
His son-in-law, Professor Rabl, has tried to draw attention once
more to his earlier conception, and has declared that even in
later years Virchow often recognised the truth of evolution in
private conversation. This only makes it the more regrettable that
he always said the contrary in public. The fact remains that ever
since the opponents of evolution, especially the reactionaries and
clericals, have appealed to the authority of Virchow.

The wholly reactionary system that this led to has been well
described by Robert Drill (1902) in his _Virchow as a Reactionary_.
How little qualified the great pathologist was to appreciate the
scientific bases of the pithecoid theory is clear from the absurd
statement he made, in the opening speech of the Vienna Congress
of Anthropologists, in 1894, that man might just as well be
claimed to descend from a sheep or an elephant as from an ape. Any
competent zoologist can see from this the little knowledge Virchow
had of systematic zoology and comparative anatomy. However, he
retained his authority as president of the German Anthropological
Society, which remained impervious to Darwinian ideas. Even such
vigorous controversialists as Carl Vogt, and such scientific
partisans of the ape-man of Neanderthal as Schaafhausen, could
make no impression. Virchow's authority was equally great for
twenty years in the Berlin Press, both Liberal and Conservative.
The _Kreutzzeitung_ and the _Evangelische Kirchenzeitung_ were
delighted that "the learned progressist was conservative in the
best sense of the word as regards evolution." The ultramontane
_Germania_ rejoiced that the powerful representative of pure
science had, "with a few strokes of his cudgel, reduced to
impotence" the absurd ape-theory and its chief protagonist, Ernst
Haeckel. The _National-Zeitung_ could not sufficiently thank the
free-thinking, popular leader for having lifted from us for ever
the oppressive mountain of the theory of simian descent. The editor
of the _Volks-Zeitung_, Bernstein, who has done so much for the
spread of knowledge in his excellent popular manuals of science,
obstinately refused to admit articles that ventured to support the
erroneous ape-theory "refuted" by Virchow.

It would take up too much space to attempt to give even a general
survey of the remarkable and enormous literature of the subject
that has accumulated in the last three decades in the shape of
thousands of learned treatises and popular articles. The greater
part of these works have been written under the influence of
conventional religious prejudice, and without the necessary
acquaintance with the subject, that can only be obtained by a
thorough training in biology. The most curious feature of them is
that most of the authors restrict their genealogical interests to
the most manlike apes, and do not deal with their origin, or with
the deeper roots of our common ancestral tree. They do not see the
wood for the trees. Yet it is far easier and safer to penetrate
the great mysteries of our animal origin, if we look at the
subject from the higher standpoint of vertebrate phylogeny and go
deeper into the earlier records of the evolutionary history of the
vertebrates.

Since the great Lamarck established the idea of the vertebrate at
the beginning of the nineteenth century (1801), and his Parisian
colleague, Cuvier, shortly afterwards recognised the vertebrates
as one of his four chief animal groups, the natural unity of this
advanced section of the animal world has not been contested. In
all the vertebrates, from the lowest fishes and amphibians up to
the apes and man, we have the same type of structure, the same
characteristic disposition and relations of the chief organs; and
they differ materially from the corresponding features in all other
animals. The mysterious affinities of the vertebrates induced
Goethe, 140 years ago, long before Cuvier, to make prolonged and
laborious studies in their comparative anatomy at Jena and Weimar.
Just as he had, in his _Metamorphosis of Plants_, established the
unity of organisation by means of the leaf as the common primitive
organ, he, in the metamorphosis of the vertebrates, found this
common element in the vertebral theory of the skull. And when
Cuvier established comparative anatomy as an independent science,
this branch of biology was developed to such an extent by the
classic research of Johannes Müller, Carl Gegenbaur, Richard Owen,
Thomas Huxley, and many other morphologists, that Darwinism found
its most powerful weapons in this arsenal. The striking differences
of external form and internal structure that we find in the fishes,
amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, are due to _adaptation_
to the various uses of their organs and their environments.
On the other hand, the astonishing agreement in their typical
character, that persists in spite of their differences, is due to
_inheritance_ from common ancestors.

The evidence thus afforded by comparative anatomy is so cogent that
anyone who goes impartially and attentively through a collection of
skeletons can convince himself at once of the morphological unity
of the vertebrate stem. The evolutionary evidence of comparative
ontogeny, or embryology, is less easy to grasp and less accessible,
but not less important. It came to light at a much later date, and
its extreme value was only made clear, by means of the biogenetic
law, some forty years ago. It shows that every vertebrate, like
every other animal, develops from a single cell, but that the
course of its embryonic development is peculiar, and characterised
by embryonic forms that are not found in the invertebrates. We
find in them especially the _chordula_, or chorda-larva, a very
simple worm-shaped embryonic form, without limbs, head, or higher
sense-organs; the body consists merely of six very simple primitive
organs. From these are developed steadily the hundreds of different
bones, muscles, and other organs that we afterwards distinguish in
the mature vertebrate. The remarkable and very complex course of
this embryonic development is essentially the same in man and the
ape, and in the amphibians and fishes. We see in it, in accordance
with the biogenetic law, a new and important witness to the common
descent of all vertebrates from a single primitive form, the
_chordæa_.

But, important as these arguments of comparative embryology are,
one needs many years' study in the unfamiliar and difficult
province of embryology before one can realise their evolutionary
force. There are, in fact, not a few embryologists (especially of
the modern school of experimental embryology) who do not succeed
in doing so. It is otherwise with the palpable proofs that we take
from a remote science, paleontology. The remarkable fossil remains
and impressions of extinct animals and plants give us directly the
historical evidence we need to understand the successive appearance
and disappearance of the various species and groups. Geology has
firmly established the chronological order of the sedimentary
rocks, which have been successively formed of mud at the floor of
the ocean, and has deduced their age from the thickness of the
strata, and determined the relative date of their formation. The
vast period during which organic life has been developing on the
earth runs to many million years. The number is variously estimated
at less than a hundred or at several hundred million years.[7]
If we take the smaller number of 200 million years, we find them
distributed amongst the five chief periods of the earth's organic
development in such a way that the earlier or archeozoic period
absorbs nearly one half. As the sedimentary rocks of this period,
chiefly gneisses and crystalline schists, are in a metamorphosed
condition, the fossil remains in them are unrecognisable. In
the next succeeding strata of the paleozoic period we find the
earliest remains of fossilised vertebrates, Silurian primitive
fishes (selachii) and ganoids. These are followed, in the Devonian
system, by the first dipneust fishes (a transitional form from the
fishes to the amphibia). In the next, the Carboniferous system, we
find the first terrestrial or four-footed vertebrates--amphibians
of the order of the stegocephala. A little later, in the Permian
rocks, the earliest amniotes, lowly, lizard-like reptiles
(tocosauria), make their appearance; the warm-blooded birds
and mammals are still wanting. We have the first traces of the
mammals in the Triassic, the earliest sedimentary rocks of the
mesozoic age; these are of the monotreme sub-class (pantotheria
and allotheria). They are succeeded by the first marsupials
(prodidelphia) in the Jurassic, the ancestral forms of the
placentals (mallotheria), in the Cretaceous. See p. 115.

But the richest development of the mammal class takes place in
the next or Tertiary age. In the course of its four periods--the
eocene, oligocene, miocene, and pliocene--the mammal species
increase steadily in number, variety, and complexity, down to
the present time. From the lowest common ancestral group of the
placentals proceed four divergent branches, the legions of the
carnassia, rodents, ungulates, and primates. The primate legion
surpasses all the rest. In this Linné long ago included the
lemurs, apes, and man. The historical order in which the various
stages of vertebrate development make their successive appearance
corresponds entirely to the morphological order of their advance in
organisation, as we have learned it from the study of comparative
anatomy and embryology.

These paleontological facts are among the most important proofs
of the descent of man from a long series of higher and lower
vertebrates. There is no other explanation possible except
evolution for the chronological succession of these classes,
which is in perfect harmony with the morphological and systematic
distribution. The anti-evolutionists have not even attempted to
give any other explanation. The fishes, dipneusts, amphibians,
reptiles, monotremes, marsupials, placentals, lemurs, apes,
anthropoid apes, and ape-men (pithecanthropi), are inseparable
links of a long ancestral chain, of which the last and most perfect
link is man. (_Cf._ the tables pp. 116-118.)

One of the paleontological facts I have quoted, namely, the
late appearance of the mammal class in geology--is particularly
important. This most advanced group of the vertebrates comes on
the stage in the Triassic period, in the second and shorter half
of the organic history of the earth. It is represented only by
low and small forms in the whole of the mesozoic age, during the
domination of the reptiles. Throughout this long period, which is
estimated by some geologists at 8-11, by others at 20 or more,
million years, the dominant reptile class developed its many
remarkable and curious forms; there were swimming marine reptiles
(halisauria), flying reptiles (pterosauria), and colossal land
reptiles (dinosauria). It was much later, in the Tertiary period,
that the mammal class attained the wealth of large and advanced
placental forms that secured its predominance over this more recent
period.

The many and thorough investigations made during the last few
decades into the ancestral history of the mammals have convinced
all zoologists who were engaged in them that they may be traced
to a common root. All the mammals, from the lowest monotremes and
marsupials to the ape and man, have a large number of striking
characteristics in common, and these distinguish them from all
other vertebrates: the hair and glands of the skin, the feeding of
the young with the mother's milk, the peculiar formation of the
lower jaw and the ear-bones connected therewith, and other features
in the structure of the skull; also, the possession of a knee-cap
(_patella_), and the loss of the nucleus in the red blood-cells.
Further, the complete diaphragm, which entirely separates the
pectoral cavity from the abdominal, is only found in the mammals;
in all the other vertebrates there is still an open communication
between the two cavities. The monophyletic (or single) origin
of the whole mammalian class is therefore now regarded by all
competent experts as an established fact.

In the face of this important fact, what is called the
"ape-question" loses a good deal of the importance that was
formerly ascribed to it. All the momentous consequences that follow
from it in regard to our human nature, our past and future, and our
bodily and psychic life, remain undisturbed whether we derive man
directly from one of the primates, an ape or lemur, or from some
other branch, some unknown lower form, of the mammalian stem. It is
important to point this out, because certain dangerous attempts
have been made lately by Jesuitical zoologists and zoological
Jesuits to cause fresh confusion on the matter.

In a richly illustrated and widely read work that Hans Kraemer
published a few years ago, under the title, _The Universe and
Man_, an able and learned anthropologist, Professor Klaatsch of
Heidelberg, deals with "the origin and development of the human
race," and admirably describes the primitive history of man and
his civilisation. However, he denounces the idea of man's descent
from the ape as "irrational, narrow-minded, and false"; he grounds
this severe censure on the fact that none of the living apes can
be the ancestor of humanity. But no competent scientist had ever
said anything so foolish. If we look closer into this fight with
windmills, we find that Klaatsch holds substantially the same
view of the pithecoid theory as I have done since 1866. He says
expressly: "The three anthropoid apes, the gorilla, chimpanzee,
and orang, seem to diverge from a common root, which was near
to that of the gibbon and man." I had long ago given the name
of _archiprimas_ to this single hypothetical root-form of the
primates, which he calls the "primatoid." It lived in the earliest
part of the Tertiary period, and had probably been developed in
the Cretaceous from older mammals. The very forced and unnatural
hypothesis by means of which Klaatsch goes on to make the primates
depart very widely from the other mammals, seems to me to be quite
untenable, like the similar hypothesis that Alsberg, Wilser, and
other anthropologists who deny our pithecoid descent, have lately
advanced.

All these attempts have a common object--to save man's privileged
position in Nature, to widen as much as possible the gulf between
him and the rest of the mammals, and to conceal his real origin. It
is the familiar tendency of the _parvenu_, which we so often notice
in the aristocratic sons of energetic men who have won a high
position by their own exertions. This sort of vanity is acceptable
enough to the ruling powers and the Churches, because it tends
to support their own fossilised pretensions to a "Divine image"
in man and a special "Divine grace" in princes. The zoologist or
anthropologist who studies our genealogy in a strictly scientific
spirit takes no more notice of these tendencies than of the
_Almanach de Gotha_. He seeks to discover the naked truth, as it
is yielded by the great results of modern science, in which there
is no longer any doubt that man is really a descendant of the
ape--that is to say, of a long extinct anthropoid ape. As has been
pointed out over and over again by distinguished supporters of this
opinion, the proofs of it are exceptionally clear and simple--much
clearer and simpler than they are in regard to many other mammals.
Thus, for instance, the origin of the elephants, the armadilloes,
the sirena, or the whales, is a much more difficult problem than
the origin of man.

When Huxley published his powerful essay on "Man's Place in Nature"
in 1863, he gave it a frontispiece showing the skeletons of man and
the four living anthropoid apes, the Asiatic orang and gibbon,
and the African chimpanzee and gorilla. Plate II. in the present
work differs from this in giving two young specimens of the orang
and the chimpanzee, and raising their size to correspond with the
other three skeletons. Candid comparison of these five skeletons
shows that they are not only very like each other generally, but
are _identical_ in the structure, arrangement, and connection of
all the parts. The same 200 bones compose the skeleton in man and
in the four tailless anthropoid apes, our nearest relatives. The
same 300 muscles serve to move the various parts of the skeleton.
The same hair covers the skin; the same mammary glands provide
food for the young. The same four-chambered heart acts as central
pump of the circulation; the same 32 teeth are found in our jaws;
the same reproductive organs maintain the species; the same groups
of neurona or ganglionic cells compose the wondrous structure
of the brain, and accomplish that highest function of the plasm
which we call the soul, and many still believe to be an immortal
entity. Huxley has thoroughly established this profound truth, and
by further comparison with the lower apes and lemurs he came to
formulate his important pithecometra principle: "Whatever organ
we take, the differences between man and the anthropoid apes are
slighter than the corresponding differences between the latter
and the lower apes." If we make a superficial comparison of our
skeletons of the anthropomorpha, we certainly notice a few salient
differences in the size of the various parts; but these are purely
quantitative, and are due to differences in growth, which in turn
are caused by adaptation to different environments. There are, as
is well known, similar differences between human beings; their arms
are sometimes long, sometimes short; the forehead may be high or
low, the hair thick or thin, and so on.

These anatomic proofs of the pithecoid theory are most happily
supplemented and confirmed by certain recent brilliant discoveries
in physiology. Chief amongst these are the famous experiments of
Dr. Hans Friedenthal at Berlin. He showed that the human blood acts
poisonously on and decomposes the blood of the lower apes and other
mammals, but has not that effect on the blood of the anthropoid
apes.[8]

From previous transfusion experiments it had been learned that the
affinity of mammals is connected to a certain extent with their
chemical blood-relationship. If the living blood of two nearly
related animals of the same family, such as the dog and the fox, or
the rabbit and the hare, is mixed together, the living blood-cells
of each species remain uninfluenced. But if we mix the blood of the
dog and the rabbit, or the fox and the hare, a struggle for life
immediately takes place between the two kinds of blood-cells. The
watery fluid or serum destroys the blood-cells of the rodent, and
_vice versâ_. It is the same with specimens of the blood of the
various primates. The blood of the lower apes and lemurs, which are
close to the common root of the primate stem, has a destructive
effect on the blood of the anthropoid apes and man, and _vice
versâ_. On the other hand, the human blood has no injurious effect
when it is mixed with that of the anthropoid apes.

In recent years these interesting experiments have been continued
by other physiologists and physicians, such as Professor Uhlenhuth
at Greifswald and Nuttall at London, and they have proved directly
the blood-relationship of various mammals. Nuttall studied them
carefully in 900 different kinds of blood, which he tested by
16,000 reactions. He traced the gradation of affinity to the
lowest apes of the New World; and Uhlenhuth continued as far
as the lemurs. By these results the affinity of man and the
anthropoid apes, long established by anatomy, has now been proved
physiologically to be in real "blood-relationship."[9]

Not less important are the embryological discoveries of the
deceased zoologist, Emil Selenka. He made two long journeys to the
East Indies, in order to study on the spot the embryology of the
Asiatic anthropoid apes, the orang and gibbon. By means of a number
of embryos that he collected he showed that certain remarkable
peculiarities in the formation of the placenta, that had up to
that time been considered as exclusively human, and regarded as a
special distinction of our species, were found in just the same way
in the closely related anthropoid apes, though not in the rest of
the apes. On the ground of these and other facts, I maintain that
the descent of man from extinct Tertiary anthropoid apes is proved
just as plainly as the descent of birds from reptiles, or the
descent of reptiles from amphibians, which no zoologist hesitates
to admit to-day. The relationship is as close as was claimed by my
former fellow-student, the Berlin anatomist, Robert Hartmann (with
whom I sat at the feet of Johannes Müller fifty years ago), in his
admirable work on the anthropoid apes (1883). He proposed to divide
the order of primates into two families, the _primarii_ (man and
the anthropoid apes), and _simianæ_ (the real apes, the catarrhine
or eastern, and the platyrrhine or western apes).

Since the Dutch physician, Eugen Dubois, discovered the famous
remains of the fossil ape-man (_pithecanthropus erectus_) eleven
years ago in Java, and thus brought to light "the missing
link," a large number of works have been published on this very
interesting group of the primates. In this connection we may
particularly note the demonstration by the Strassburg anatomist,
Gustav Schwalbe, that the previously discovered Neanderthal skull
belongs to an extinct species of man, which was midway between the
pithecanthropus and the true human being--the _homo primigenus_.
After a very careful examination, Schwalbe at the same time refuted
all the biassed objections that Virchow had made to these and
other fossil discoveries, trying to represent them as pathological
abnormalities. In all the important relics of fossil men that
prove our descent from anthropoid apes Virchow saw pathological
modifications, due to unsound habits, gout, rickets, or other
diseases of the dwellers in the diluvial caves. He tried in every
way to impair the force of the arguments for our primate affinity.
So in the controversy over the pithecanthropus he raised the most
improbable conjectures, merely for the purpose of destroying its
significance as a real link between the anthropoid apes and man.

Even now, in the controversy over this important ape-question,
amateurs and biassed anthropologists often repeat the false
statement that the gap between man and the anthropoid ape is not
yet filled up and the "missing link" not yet discovered. This is a
most perverse statement, and can only arise either from ignorance
of the anatomical, embryological, and paleontological facts, or
incompetence to interpret them aright. As a fact, the morphological
chain that stretches from the lemurs to the earlier western
apes, from these to the eastern tailed apes, and to the tailless
anthropoid apes, and from these direct to man, is now uninterrupted
and clear. It would be more plausible to speak of missing links
between the earliest lemurs and their marsupial ancestors, or
between the latter and their monotreme ancestors. But even these
gaps are unimportant, because comparative anatomy and embryology,
with the support of paleontology, have dissipated all doubt as
to the _unity of the mammalian stem_. It is ridiculous to expect
paleontology to furnish an unbroken series of positive data, when
we remember how scanty and imperfect its material is.

I cannot go further here into the interesting recent research in
regard to special aspects of our simian descent; nor would it
greatly advance our object, because all the general conclusions as
to man's primate descent remain intact, whichever way we construct
hypothetically the special lines of simian evolution. On the other
hand, it is interesting for us to see how the most recent form of
Darwinism, so happily described by Escherich as "ecclesiastical
evolution," stands in regard to these great questions. What does
its astutest representative, Father Erich Wasmann, say about
them? The tenth chapter of his work, in which he deals at length
with "the application of the theory of evolution to man," is a
masterpiece of Jesuitical science, calculated to throw the clearest
truths into such confusion and so to misrepresent all discoveries
as to prevent any reader from forming a clear idea of them. When
we compare this tenth chapter with the ninth, in which Wasmann
represents the theory of evolution as an irresistible truth on the
strength of his own able studies, we can hardly believe that they
both came from the same pen--or, rather, we can only understand
when we recollect the rule of the Jesuit Congregation: "The end
justifies the means." Untruth is permitted and meritorious in the
service of God and his Church.

The Jesuitical sophistry that Wasmann employs in order to save
man's unique position in Nature, and to prove that he was
immediately created by God, culminates in the antithesis of
his two natures. The "purely zoological conception of man,"
which has been established beyond question by the anatomical and
embryological comparison with the ape, is said to fail because it
does not take into account the chief feature, his "mental life."
It is "psychology that is best fitted to deal with the nature and
origin of man." All the facts of anatomy and embryology that I
have gathered together in my _Evolution of Man_ in proof of the
series of his ancestors are either ignored or misconstrued and
made ridiculous by Wasmann. The same is done with the instructive
facts of anthropology, especially the rudimentary organs, which
Robert Wiedersheim has quoted in his _Man's Structure as a
Witness to his Past_. It is clear that the Jesuit writer lacks
competence in this department; that he has only a superficial and
inadequate acquaintance with comparative anatomy and embryology. If
Wasmann had studied the morphology and physiology of the mammals
as thoroughly as those of the ants, he would have concluded,
if he were impartial, that it is just as necessary to admit a
monophyletic (or single) origin for the former as for the latter.
If, in Wasmann's opinion, the 4,000 species of ants form a single
"natural system"--that is to say, descend from one original
species--it is just as necessary to admit the same hypothesis for
the 6,000 (2,400 living and 3,600 fossil) species of mammals,
including the human species.

The severe strictures that I have passed on the sophisms and
trickery of this "ecclesiastical evolution" are not directed
against the person and the character of Father Wasmann, but the
Jesuitical system which he represents. I do not doubt that this
able naturalist (who is personally unknown to me) has written his
book in good faith, and has an honourable ambition to reconcile the
irreconcilable contradictions between natural evolution and the
story of supernatural creation. But this reconciliation of reason
and superstition is only possible at the price of a sacrifice
of the reason itself. We find this in the case of all the other
Jesuits--Fathers Cathrein, Braun, Besmer, Cornet, Linsmeier, and
Muckermann--whose ambiguous "Jesuitical science" is aptly dealt
with in the article of R. H. Francé that I mentioned before (No. 22
of the _Freie Wort_, 16th February, 1904, Frankfort).

This interesting attempt of Father Wasmann's does not stand alone.
Signs are multiplying that the Church militant is about to enter on
a systematic campaign. I heard from Vienna on the 17th of February,
that on the previous day (which happened to be my birthday), a
Jesuit, Father Giese, had, in a well-received address, admitted
not only evolution in general, but even its application to man,
and declared it to be reconcilable with Catholic dogmas--and this
at a crowded meeting of "catechists"! It is important to note that
in a new Catholic cyclopædia, Benziger's _Library of Science_,
the first three volumes (issued at Einsiedeln and Cologne, 1904)
deal very fully and ably with the chief problems of evolution: the
first with the formation of the earth, the second with spontaneous
generation, the third with the theory of descent. The author of
them, Father M. Gander, makes most remarkable concessions to our
theory, and endeavours to show that they are not inconsistent
with the Bible or the dogmatic treatises of the chief fathers
and schoolmen. But, though there is a profuse expenditure of
sophistical logic in these Jesuitical efforts, Gander will hardly
succeed in misleading thoughtful people. One of his characteristic
positions is that spontaneous generation (as the development
of organised living things by purely material processes) is
inconceivable, but that it might be made possible "by a special
Divine arrangement." In regard to the descent of man from other
animals (which he grants), he makes the reserve that the soul must
in any case have been produced by a special creative act.

It would be useless to go through the innumerable fallacies
and untruths of these modern Jesuits in detail, and point out
the rational and scientific reply. The vast power of this most
dangerous religious congregation consists precisely in its device
of accepting one part of science in order to destroy the other part
more effectively with it. Their masterly act of sophistry, their
equivocal "probabilism," their mendacious "reservatio mentalis,"
the principle that the higher aim sanctifies the worst means, the
pernicious casuistry of Liguori and Gury, the cynicism with which
they turn the holiest principles to the gratification of their
ambition, have impressed on the Jesuits that black character that
Carl Hoensbroech has so well exposed recently.

The great dangers that menace real science, owing to this smuggling
into it of the Jesuitical spirit, must not be undervalued. They
have been well pointed out by Francé, Escherich, and others.
They are all the greater in Germany at the present time, as the
Government and the Reichstag are working together to prepare the
way for the Jesuits, and to yield a most pernicious influence
on the school to these deadly enemies of the free spirit of
the country. However, we will hope that this clerical reaction
represents only a passing episode in modern history. We trust that
one permanent result of it will be the recognition, in principle,
even by the Jesuits, of the great idea of evolution. We may then
rest assured that its most important consequence, the descent of
man from other primate forms, will press on victoriously, and soon
be recognised as a beneficent and helpful truth.




