
Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 53639-h.htm or 53639-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/53639/53639-h/53639-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/53639/53639-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/lastwordsonevolu00haeciala


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      More details of transcription can be found at the end of the
      book.





LAST WORDS ON EVOLUTION


[Illustration: Bräunlich & Tesch (Emil Tesch), Hofphot. Jena.
Published by A. Owen & Co., London.

Ernst Haeckel.]


LAST WORDS ON EVOLUTION

A Popular Retrospect and Summary

by

ERNST HAECKEL

Professor at Jena University

Translated from the Second Edition by Joseph McCabe

With Portrait and Three Plates







London
A. Owen & Co.
28 Regent Street, S.W.
1906




CONTENTS


                                                        PAGE

  INTRODUCTION                                             7

  PREFACE                                                 11


  CHAPTER I

  THE CONTROVERSY ABOUT CREATION

  Evolution and Dogma                                     15

  PLATE I.--Genealogical Tree of the Vertebrates          17


  CHAPTER II

  THE STRUGGLE OVER OUR GENEALOGICAL TREE

  Our Ape-Relatives and the Vertebrate-Stem               49

  PLATE II.--Skeletons of Five Anthropoid Apes            51


  CHAPTER III

  THE CONTROVERSY OVER THE SOUL

  The Ideas of Immortality and God                        83

  PLATE III.--Embryos of Three Mammals                    85


  APPENDIX

  EVOLUTIONARY TABLES

  Geological Ages and Periods                            115

  Man's Genealogical Tree--_First Half_                  116

  Man's Genealogical Tree--_Second Half_                 117

  Classification of the Primates                         118

  Genealogical Tree of the Primates                      119

  Explanation of Genealogical Table 1.                   120


  POSTSCRIPT

  Evolution and Jesuitism                                121




INTRODUCTION


A few months ago the sensational announcement was made that
Professor Haeckel had abandoned Darwinism and given public support
to the teaching of a Jesuit writer. There was something piquant
in the suggestion that the "Darwin of Germany" had recanted the
conclusions of fifty years of laborious study. Nor could people
forget that only two years before Haeckel had written with some
feeling about the partial recantation of some of his colleagues.
Many of our journals boldly declined to insert the romantic news,
which came through one of the chief international press agencies.
Others drew the attention of their readers, in jubilant editorial
notes, to the lively prospect it opened out. To the many inquiries
addressed to me as the "apostle of Professor Haeckel," as Sir
Oliver Lodge dubs me in a genial letter, I timidly represented that
even a German reporter sometimes drank. But the correction quickly
came that the telegram had exactly reversed the position taken up
by the great biologist. It is only just to the honourable calling
of the reporter to add that, according to the theory current in
Germany, the message was tampered with by subtle and ubiquitous
Jesuistry. Did they not penetrate even into the culinary service at
Hatfield?

I have pleasure in now introducing the three famous lectures
delivered by Professor Haeckel at Berlin, and the reader will
see the grotesqueness of the original announcement. They are the
last public deliverance that the aged professor will ever make.
His enfeebled health forbids us to hope that his decision may yet
be undone. He is now condemned, he tells me, to remain a passive
spectator of the tense drama in which he has played so prominent
a part for half a century. For him the red rays fall level on the
scene and the people about him. It may be that they light up too
luridly, too falsely, the situation in Germany; but the reader will
understand how a Liberal of Haeckel's temper must feel his country
to be between Scylla and Charybdis--between an increasingly clear
alternative of Catholicism or Socialism--with a helmsman at the
wheel whose vagaries inspire no confidence.

The English reader will care to be instructed on the antithesis of
Virchow and Haeckel which gives point to these lectures, and which
is often misrepresented in this country. Virchow, the greatest
pathologist and one of the leading anthropologists of Germany, had
much to do with the inspiring of Haeckel's Monistic views in the
fifties. Like several other prominent German thinkers, Virchow
subsequently abandoned the positive Monistic position for one of
agnosticism and scepticism, and a long and bitter conflict ensued.
It is hardly too much to say that Virchow's ultra-timid reserve in
regard to the evolution of man and other questions has died with
him. Apart from one or two less prominent anthropologists, and
the curious distinction drawn by Dr. A. R. Wallace, science has
accepted the fact of evolution, and has, indeed, accepted the main
lines of Haeckel's ancestral tree of the human race.

In any case, Haeckel had the splendid revenge of surviving his old
teacher and almost lifelong opponent. Berlin had for years been
dominated by the sceptical temper of Virchow and Du Bois-Reymond.
The ardent evolutionist and opponent of Catholicism was impatient
of a reserve that he felt to be an anachronism in science and an
effective support of reactionary ideas. It was, therefore, with
a peculiar satisfaction that he received the invitation, after
Virchow's death, to address the Berlin public. Among the many and
distinguished honours that have been heaped upon him in the last
ten years this was felt by him to hold a high place. He could at
last submit freely, in the capital of his country, the massive
foundations and the imposing structure of a doctrine which he holds
to be no less established in science than valuable in the general
cause of progress.

The lectures are reproduced here not solely because of the
interest aroused in them by the "Jesuit" telegram. They contain a
very valuable summary of his conclusions, and include the latest
scientific confirmation. Rarely has the great biologist written
in such clear and untechnical phrases, so that the general reader
will easily learn the outlines of his much-discussed Monism. To
closer students, who are at times impatient of the Lamarckian
phraseology of Haeckel--to all, in fact, who would like to see how
the same evolutionary truths are expressed without reliance on the
inheritance of acquired characters--I may take the opportunity
to say that I have translated, for the same publishers, Professor
Guenther's "Darwinism and the Problems of Life," which will shortly
be in their hands.

  JOSEPH MCCABE.

  _November, 1905._




PREFACE


In the beginning of April, 1905, I received from Berlin a very
unexpected invitation to deliver a popular scientific lecture
at the Academy of Music in that city. I at first declined this
flattering invitation, with thanks, sending them a copy of a
printed declaration, dated 17th July, 1901, which I had made
frequent use of, to the effect that "I could not deliver any more
public lectures, on account of the state of my health, my advanced
age, and the many labours that were still incumbent on me."

I was persuaded to make one departure from this fixed resolution,
firstly, by the pressing entreaties of many intimate friends
at Berlin. They represented to me how important it was to give
an account myself to the educated Berlin public of the chief
evolutionary conclusions I had advocated for forty years. They
pointed out emphatically that the increasing reaction in higher
circles, the growing audacity of intolerant orthodoxy, the
preponderance of Ultramontanism, and the dangers that this involved
for freedom of thought in Germany, for the university and the
school, made it imperative to take vigorous action. It happened
that I had just been following the interesting efforts that the
Church has lately made to enter into a peaceful compromise with
its deadly enemy, Monistic science. It has decided to accept
to a certain extent, and to accommodate to its creed (in a
distorted and mutilated form) the doctrine of evolution, which it
has vehemently opposed for thirty years. This remarkable change
of front on the part of the Church militant seemed to me so
interesting and important, and at the same time so misleading and
mischievous, that I chose it as the subject of a popular lecture,
and accepted the invitation to Berlin.

After a few days, when I had written my discourse, I was advised
from Berlin that the applications for admission were so numerous
that the lecture must either be repeated or divided into two. I
chose the latter course, as the material was very abundant. In
compliance with an urgent request, I repeated the two lectures
(17th and 18th April); and as demands for fresh lectures continued
to reach me, I was persuaded to add a "farewell lecture" (on 19th
April), in which I dealt with a number of important questions that
had not been adequately treated.

The noble gift of effective oratory has been denied me by Nature.
Though I have taught for eighty-eight terms at the little
University of Jena, I have never been able to overcome a certain
nervousness about appearing in public, and have never acquired
the art of expressing my thoughts in burning language and with
appropriate gesture. For these and other reasons, I have rarely
consented to take part in scientific and other congresses; the few
speeches that I have delivered on such occasions, and are issued
in collected form, were drawn from me by my deep interest in the
great struggle for the triumph of truth. However, in the three
Berlin lectures--my _last_ public addresses--I had no design of
winning my hearers to my opinions by means of oratory. It was
rather my intention to put before them, in connected form, the
great groups of biological facts, by which they could, on impartial
consideration, convince themselves of the truth and importance of
the theory of evolution.

Readers who are interested in the evolution-controversy, as I
here describe it, will find in my earlier works (_The History of
Creation_, _The Evolution of Man_, _The Riddle of the Universe_,
and _The Wonders of Life_) a thorough treatment of the views I
have summarily presented. I do not belong to the amiable group
of "men of compromise," but am in the habit of giving candid and
straightforward expression to the convictions which a half-century
of serious and laborious study has led me to form. If I seem to be
a tactless and inconsiderate "fighter," I pray you to remember that
"conflict is the father of all things," and that the victory of
pure reason over current superstition will not be achieved without
a tremendous struggle. But I regard _ideas_ only in my struggles:
to the _persons_ of my opponents I am indifferent, bitterly as they
have attacked and slandered my own person.

Although I have lived in Berlin for many years as student and
teacher, and have always been in communication with scientific
circles there, I have only once before delivered a public lecture
in that city. That was on "The Division of Labour in Nature and
Human Life" (17th December, 1868). I was, therefore, somewhat
gratified to be able to speak there again (and for the last time),
after thirty-six years, especially as it was in the very spot, the
hall of the Academy of Music, in which I had heard the leaders of
the Berlin University speak fifty years ago.

It is with great pleasure that I express my cordial thanks to those
who invited me to deliver these lectures, and who did so much to
make my stay in the capital pleasant; and also to my many hearers
for their amiable and sympathetic attention.

  ERNST HAECKEL.

  JENA, _9th May, 1905_.




CHAPTER I

THE CONTROVERSY ABOUT CREATION

EVOLUTION AND DOGMA


EXPLANATION OF PLATE I

GENEALOGICAL TREE OF THE VERTEBRATES


    The genetic relationship of all vertebrates, from the earliest
    acrania and fishes up to the apes and man, is proved in its
    main lines by the concordant testimony of paleontology,
    comparative anatomy, and embryology. All competent and
    impartial zoologists now agree that the vertebrates are all
    descended from a _single_ stem, and that the root of this is
    to be sought in extinct pre-Silurian _Acrania_ (1), somewhat
    similar to the living lancelet. The _Cyclostoma_ (2) represent
    the transition from the latter to the _Fishes_ (3); and the
    _Dipneusts_ (4) the transition from these to the _Amphibia_
    (5). From the latter have been developed the _Reptiles_ (6)
    on the one hand, and the _Mammals_ (7) on the other. The
    most important branch of this most advanced class is the
    _Primates_ (8); from the half-apes, or lemurs, a direct line
    leads, through the baboons, to the anthropoid apes, and
    through these on to man. (_Cf._ the tables on pp. 115-120).
    Further information will be found in chapters xxiv.-xxvii. of
    the _History of Creation_, and chapters xxi.-xxiii. of the
    _Evolution of Man_.


PLATE I.

[Illustration: GENEALOGICAL TREE OF THE VERTEBRATES]


LAST WORDS ON EVOLUTION


