Chapter X.  ("Sir Walter Scott") in Prof. Raleigh's "The English
Novel."  (John Murray, 1894.)

Chapters X., XI., and XII. in Prof. Saintsbury's "Essays in English
Literature, 1780-1860.  Second series."  (J. M. Dent & Co., 1895.)

[Originally appeared in Macmillan's Magazine, August, September,
and October, 1894.  A contribution to the subject of quite
exceptional brilliance and value.]

"A Descriptive List of Novels and Tales dealing with the History of
North America," by W. M. Griswold.  (Cambridge, U.S.A., 1895.)

The Section headed "Historical Tales" in "Guide to the Study of
American History," by E. Channing and A. B. Hart. (Ginn and Co.,
1896.)

A Letter on "Historical Novels, Past and Present," by "Mazarin," in
The Bookman, October, 1896.

Article on "The Indian Mutiny in Fiction," in Blackwood's Magazine,
February, 1897.

Article on "The Importance of Illustrating New England History by a
series of Romances," by Rufus Choate, in The New England Magazine,
November, 1897.

Paper read before the College of Preceptors, on "The Use of
Historical Romances in the Teaching of History," by R. F. Charles
in The Educational Times, November, 1897.

Article on "The American Historical Novel," by Paul Lester Ford, in
The Atlantic Monthly, December, 1897.

[In this article a definition of the "Historical Novel" at variance
with my own, has been suggested.  In spite of Mr. Fords argument, I
am still of opinion that the line of demarcation between the
Historical Novel proper and the Novel of Character or Adventure can
be more clearly drawn than he allows.  I was careful, when dealing
with this question in my Introduction, to avoid making the test one
of actual historical accuracy, but there are, I have implied,
certain readily-verifiable personages and events which form a basis
amply sufficient for purposes of distinction. The pirates of
"Treasure Island" are taken (as Mr. Ford says) from actual figures
of the Eighteenth Century, but under my definition Stevenson's
novel is not thereby constituted "historical" in the strict sense.]

Article on "The Neo-Romantic Novel," by G. R. Carpenter, in The
Forum, March, 1898.

Article on "Historical Novels Past and Present," by Harold
Frederic, in The Bookman (American), December, 1898.

[An admirably-written, stimulating article.)

List of Historical Novels, &c., illustrating the Period 1066 to
1815, in the volume "Work and Play in Girls' Schools," by Dorothea
Beale, Lucy H. M. Soulsby, and Jane Frances Dove (Longmans, 1898).

"Le Roman Historique l'Epoque Romantique," by Louis Maigron
(Hachette et Cie., Paris, 1898).

[Contains a fine tribute to Scott, and much interesting matter.]

Chapters III. and IV. of "The Development of the English Novel," by
W. L. Cross (Macmillan, 1899.)

[A very full treatment.  In the Appendix are some useful lists of
the earlier Historical Novels.]

Article on "Three American Historical Romances," by W. E. Simonds,
in The Atlantic Monthly, March, 1900.

Article on "The Reading of Historical Novels and the Study of
History," by Ada Shurmer, in The Scots Magazine, April, 1900.

Chapter III.  ("The Historical Novel"), in F. H. Stoddard's "The
Evolution of the English Novel" (Macmillan, 1900).

[A highly important contribution.]

The two sections on Historical Fiction, relating to Greece and Rome
respectively, in Arthur L. Goodrich's "Topics of Greek and Roman
History" (Macmillan, 1900).

[For those requiring a fuller list of Greek and Roman tales than
that given in my pages, the above will be found useful.]

Article on "Historical Novels and their uses in teaching," by C. S.
Fearenside, in The School World, November, 1900.

[An exceptionally good article.  The writer states his case clearly
and forcibly, and his argument is all the more convincing by reason
of its moderation.]

Article on "The New Historical Romances," by W. D. Howells, in The
North American Review, December, 1900.

The Essay on "The Historical Novel" in Prof. J. Brander Matthews'
"The Historical Novel and other essays" (Scribner's, 1901).

[Originally appeared in The Forum, September, 1897.  Represents
that School of Criticism which is most adverse to Historical
Romance.  Some of the Professor's remarks convey the impression
that he disbelieves in ANY reconstruction of the Past; such an
attitude is, surely, unfavourable to History itself, which is
always more than any mere statement of "facts."]

The List of Historical Novels in Mudie's Library Catalogue (The New
Enlarged Edition, January, 1902).

[Non-selective, but useful more especially on account of its
Topographical arrangement.]

The list of Historical Tales given in J. S. Lindsey's "Certificate
Note-Book of European History, 1814-1848."  (Heffer & Sons,
Cambridge, 1902).

"History of English Romanticism in the Nineteenth Century," by
Henry A. Beers (Kegan Paul & Co., 1902).

[Contains some valuable direct criticism. See especially Chapter
I.]

The "Dedicatory Epistle" in Scott's "Ivanhoe."

The very brief but exceedingly suggestive opening section in
Chapter I. of Charles Reade's "The Cloister and the Hearth."

The Preface to Scheffel's "Ekkehard."



NOTE.

Some of the American Public Libraries (notably Boston) have issued
useful Lists of Historical Novels.

Two works--announced for a considerable time--I should have been
glad to consult; these are Mr. P. L. Ford's "The American
Historical Novel" (Macmillan), and Mr. E. A. Baker's "Guide to
Fiction" (Sonnensehein).  The last-named volume will, I understand,
contain a section devoted to Historical Romance.






