X

THE GREAT SEARCH

The cry, "How may I be right?" is the cry of the ages.  Human history
is the record of our attempt to answer it.  Man is naturally a truth
seeker, and this is the search of all truly great souls.  The enduring
monuments of literature are those that have in some measure answered
this question.  All things that have been worth while have helped us to
know and to realize the right.  Health, happiness, freedom, morality,
all are but parts of the right; all are but sections of the sublime
whole for which man ever seeks.  The search manifests itself in
different ways; it may be as science, the passion for the knowledge of
the right relations of things; as justice, for right relations amongst
men; as philosophy, as ethics, as religion.  Back of all our life is
the instinct of progress; we push towards the perfect.  And perfection
we now know rests not in more things but in bringing all the things
that are into right relations with one another.

The idea that any man can be right regardless of others we scout as
absurd.  The ideal civilization we work for here, even the heaven we
long for, is simply a condition of living where the things that
separate, despoil, and introduce discord are no more.  The hope of the
race is to be in right relations with all things.  All the great
religions are as the footprints of peoples who have sought the truth
that would lead them to be right and just with one another, with the
world, and with the great unseen powers behind all being.  Our
universal sense of wrongness is but part of our passion for rightness.

The sense of imperfection and the desire for improvement have marked
all religions that have influenced men.  In the Jew this desire for
righteousness was supreme.  Job is but a type.  Coming to himself
amongst the ruin of all the things he counted most precious, he forgets
their loss in his desire to solve the great problem, What is right and
how may I reach it?  Somewhere he knows there is a solution to all the
riddles of his friends and the questions of his own heart.  An orderly
universe is not crowned by a being whose life must ever remain an
unsolved riddle.  Men are not adrift in a fog with no hope of taking
bearings.  If men have marked the natural world with lines of latitude
and longitude for the guidance of its travellers, the moral world is
not without its markings.

Job's very question contains the only answer that has ever satisfied
man.  God Himself is the great meridian of all morality.  From Him we
may measure all relationships and get them right.  That is the
essential message of the Bible; it strikes that first of all in "In the
beginning God----"  Every life is right in the measure that it adjusts
itself to the unvarying will; amongst the nations they have the kingdom
who do His will.  The world has made progress in precisely the
proportion that this will has been realized.  The promise of the
present is that this great standard, this universal law by which all
may find the right, has been made known to all through a life.  One of
our own has set forth God.  One has lived who has shown us how to live.
For every problem there is now an example of its solution.  For every
difficulty there is something better far than a declaration of duty;
there is the great Doer of the deed.  He has come near to man that men
might come near to one another.  He reveals the right.

Yet we must not allow His perfection to make Him unapproachable.  He is
only an example as long as His example is attainable.  His divinity
does not depend on His distance from us but on the degree in which He
lifts us, inspires us towards the height He has gained.



THE HUNGER OF THE AGES

"Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be filled," is the central beatitude; in a measure it
embraces all the others, for every virtue they inculcate is included in
righteousness.  But it is often rejected as impracticable because
fanciful teachers who substitute subtle definitions for simple duties
have twisted its plain words until righteousness is made something so
unreasonable as to be repulsive to a right mind.  As a matter of fact,
it means no more than rightness; the hunger and thirst for
righteousness is but the earnest, supreme desire and endeavour to be
right and to do right at all times, the appetite for the right.

Theological righteousness may mean some strange imputed quality laid on
a man like a cloak to cover his real condition or a bill of health
given to a sick man.  But men who live next to real things care nothing
one way or the other for theoretical rightness; they want the real
article.  And a right man will not be satisfied to have even the Most
High think of him as being perfectly right when he knows he falls far
short of it.  He would rather be the faltering pursuer of actual
rightness than the possessor of a hypothetical, ascribed perfection.

The great Teacher cares nothing about imaginary virtues; He praises
those who ardently seek the real ones.  He knows that in the market of
character cash alone is currency; here you cannot draw checks on some
other person's deposits.  To Him it is better by far to die facing the
right than to live in smug content with borrowed merits.  This world
will never be content with a gospel that offers only vicarious virtues;
at its heart it knows too well its need of the genuine usable ones; it
has at least the dormant faculties of an appetite for rightness.

And all this world story is but a record of the struggle for rightness.
All human progress is but its fruitage.  In every age there have been
glorious souls who have made this passion a thing that glowed in their
lives and became a light to their day.  In every man the divine
discontent that divides him from the animal is the sign of this desire
in some form; it shows man seeking to find more perfect, more nearly
right relations with the things about him.  As the things about him
come to include God and heaven and things unseen so will his search for
rightness become wider and deeper and more spiritual.  Every form of
spiritual aspiration, every religion, no matter how uncouth and
strange, is still the soul of man seeking right relations to the
infinite.

What a glorious thing is this passion for the right; what visions it
has seen, what strength it has given to their realization.  It is the
great tide that, moving restless and resistless in our bosoms, has
carried us on towards God.  We cannot but believe it is born of him.
It does not originate in him, for it disturbs his peace, it stirs him
from sloth, it spurs him to new and often unwelcome endeavours.  It
ever holds before him the shining possibility of a perfect being in a
perfect world.

No wonder Christ used the figure of hunger and thirst.  Literal
appetites have been the motives back of the world's struggle for
physical rightness; yet these cravings have not been more general or
more forceful than those of the soul.  But for hunger and thirst man
would have lived in perfect content with the form and facts of life as
he found them; progress, all that we call civilization, would not have
been.

Man is happy in proportion as necessity compels him to heed these
cravings.  So is it in the moral world; the struggle has been our
salvation.  To cease to strive for rightness is to cease to live.
Individually and nationally they are happy who accept the rigorous
climate of lofty ethical ideals, who are not content to take life as
they find it, but who seek to cultivate flowers and fruits of paradise
on the sterile, rocky soil of the human heart.  This is the life that
Jesus shows, the life that seeks and finds the truth, that with
passionate ardour seeks right relations both with His fellows and with
His Father.  Out of the fullness of experience, in the midst of His own
struggle He encourages all who strive; they shall be satisfied.  No
ideal, no noble passion, no glorious sacrifice, no honest endeavour for
the right was ever in vain; the soul finds itself in seeking the
supreme good.



THE SOLE SATISFACTION

Through the ages men have waited for voices to speak from out the great
unknown.  Answering to this universal longing for larger light, to this
search for truth, there has been the conviction that, where our own
scanty knowledge ended, there something akin to revelation would give
us light.  We have been listening for voices that would speak with an
authority transcending that given to our fellows.

Cold reason may mock at revelation, but the soul struggling in
darkness, baffled by its problems, lost in the night, still looks up
and hopes.  For what awaits us but despair if the mysteries of the
universe are forever sealed, our questions forever unanswered, and no
higher appeal to be known than that to our own selfish interests?  It
is not strange that men have heeded those who, though often mistaken or
but impostors, have cried, "Thus saith the Lord!"

It would be strange if in a world of spirits there might be no
communication of spirit.  If the fairest thought of our era is that
which was given us when man was taught to think of the omnipotent as
father, it would be strange if there should be no way by which such a
father might speak to his children.  Such a world would contradict all
our best instincts.  Such a world would mean that man was better than
his maker.

The divine voice speaks, but we too often listen in the wrong
direction.  It falls not from the skies; it comes not in strange,
unusual ways of visions and portents.  But it is ever speaking through
the things of daily life; it is ever revealing truth and beauty to the
inner ear, for it comes not from without but springs up within; heard
by the heart rather than by the ear.

The best things have not dropped down; they have grown up.  Life is not
from without, but from within.  God speaks not in thunders, but in the
hopes and the longings of hearts.  Even the voice we hear in the
sighings of the wind or the message we read in the rays of setting sun
must be in us before it means aught to us.

The ten commandments owe their force not to any writing on stone but to
their writing on our hearts; to them the soul of man answers
affirmatively.  The only moral code we can follow is that which speaks
with the authority of a conscience convicted.  That does not mean that
man is his own God, nor that he knows no law higher than himself; it
does mean that by the laws of spiritual development the law is being
written on every heart.

Every real revelation is a divine revelation, since all truth is
divine.  Once we thought the scientist the enemy of religion; now we
know that whenever science lays bare one of the facts of the universe
we do but look on what the finger of the Infinite has written.  When
religion fights truth simply because truth speaks an unfamiliar tongue
or fails to respect her traditions, she is fighting against God Himself.

Our need is not some strange, awe-inspiring voice that shall break the
silence of the midnight sky; our need is an ear trained to hear, a
spirit to understand and reverence the sublime voices that are ever
speaking in our world, the voices of the beauty of nature, the joy of
living, the stories of every-day divine heroism, the forces that are
making a new world to-day as truly as ever one was made long ago.

The life of our day has not less of the divine than the life of long
ago; but the message is harder to read; it is for an educated race; it
is spiritual rather than merely material; it is from within; it is
found in every good impulse, in every outgoing sympathy, in the
kindling of eye as friend greets friend, in the good that men are
doing, in the toleration that is becoming wider, the love stronger
between man and man.

God speaks to men now as He spoke to Moses or to David, though the
manner may have changed.  But the poor in spirit, those with whom pride
of the past has not served to make them unwilling to learn, these hear
the voice; the pure in heart see Him; the seekers after truth find Him,
and to all He comes in the thrilling moment or in the quiet hour when
the voice of the heart makes itself heard.




XI

The Price of Success

  _The Law of Selection_
  _The Fallacy of Negation_
  _The Secret of All_


_No life is lost that is lived for love._

_The only wealth you can possess is that you have in the heart._

_Love never knows hardship, even when it meets it._

_When men pray for harvest they often get a plow._

_A man's holiness is to be measured by the happiness he creates._

_The only way to reach heaven is by attempting to realize heaven now._

_Whatever is saved by selfishness is lost to the true self._

_One of the worst offenses against humanity is the pretense of
divinity._

_Weapons that fly off the handle have little effect on the walls of
sin._

_Many a man thinks that taking a lease on a front pew gives him a
freehold on a corner lot in heaven._

_Success is not in an endeavour to do a great things but in repeated
endeavours to do greater things._


