III

SELF AND SERVICE

There is such a thing as supremely selfish self-denial.  A man retires
into the monk's pietic seclusion; he isolates himself from interest in
the world battles; he shuts himself from sympathy with the struggles of
business, civil, and even social life.  To him these things are carnal.
He is engrossed with the complication of interpretations of languages
long dead, or with visions of an unknown heaven, and this, he thinks,
is living the life of self-denial.

The denial of self is not the death of self; it is the leading of the
best self into larger life.  It is not the dwarfing of the life; it is
its development into usefulness.  It is not the emasculation of
character; it is the submission and discipline of the life to new and
nobler motives.

He best denies himself who best develops himself with the purpose of
serving his fellows.  What Jesus meant was that if any man would be one
of His he must cease to make his own selfish pleasures, ambitions, and
passions the end of his living; he must make the most of himself that
he might have the more to give to the service of mankind; he must make
the one motive and end of his life the benefit and help of every other
man.

That kind of a life means a change of centre.  Instead of regarding the
universe as revolving about itself it sees that self as but part of the
great machinery of life, planned and operating for the good of all.  A
man begins to deny himself as soon as he begins to love another.  Even
a yellow dog may act to deflect the heart from its old self-centre.
The love of kin and family, of friends, and associates all serve to
strengthen the habit of self-denial.

The fewer people a man takes into his plan of life the more likely is
he to be selfish.  But some lives are but the more selfish because they
take in all mankind and look on them as designed to contribute to their
single enriching.  That kind of a life commits suicide; ever grasping
and never giving it dies of plethora.  It had never learned that
strange secret of the best self-development, sacrificing service.

We need to guard ourselves against the delusion that the denial of
oneself means the impoverishment of the life.  There can be no true
giving of the life in service unless there is a wise enriching of the
self, a thorough fitting for that service.  The more of a man you are,
the brighter your intellect, the broader your sympathies, the better
your service to the world may be.  The sloth that sinks the soul in
indifference to its own development is the most sinful of all forms of
selfishness.

This way of denial is more, the Master tells His disciples, than an
emptying of the life.  If some of the cares of self are cast out the
burdens of others more than take their place.  It is a full life,
overflowing with the interests, the fears, loves, hopes, and longings
of other lives.  It bears the cross, not of an ornamental,
vanity-serving glory, but the cross of a world's sin and sorrow.

Each man must carry his cross not on his breast but on his heart and
brain.  It is what he can do, what he can plan, suggest, undertake
towards saving this world.  The cross of discipleship will be to some
statesmanship, to others science, to others the daily service of a home
or the work in the shop; it is the kindly word, the cheering look, the
lift by the way; it is whatever is done in unselfish desire to make
life better, to bring men nearer to one another and to the Father of
all.

You have only to look at the great Teacher to know what self-denial and
cross bearing really mean, and you have only to follow Him to fully
carry out their principles.  To Him they meant the life of doing good,
of seeking the sorrowing, befriending the forsaken, helping the
helpless.  They who follow Him lead the world; they who seek to
minister instead of being ministered to are the world's masters.  The
value of every life must be measured at last not by what it has
gathered to itself but by what it has given for the enriching and help
of the whole life of the world.



MY SOUL OR MY SERVICE

There is no more subtle temptation than that which sets the soul as a
hindrance to the service we should render.  A surprise awaits him who
carefully will compare the emphasis laid upon the individual soul and
its salvation by the modern church with the place given this in the
teachings of the Bible.  Perhaps he will find in modern preaching, with
its insistent appeal to men to save their own souls, an explanation of
prevalent selfishness.  The moral effect of urging a man to save his
soul is not much better than that which comes from advising him to save
his skin at any cost.

The most serious objection ever made to religion is that it produces a
narrow, self-centred type of mind.  That type of religion cannot be
right, regardless of its doctrinal orthodoxy, which produces a wrong
type of men and women.  But may not failure here be accounted for by
the selfish basis on which men build the plea for what they call
personal salvation?

What could be more selfish than this continual appeal to fear, this
urging of men to escape from punishment, to make sure of a house in the
heavenly city, this offering of crowns and perpetual rest, plenty and
peace, this emphasis on the great object of saving your own soul?  It
is opposite directly to what the great Teacher told men.  Did He not
say that the man who would save his own life should lose it?

The concentration of mind on the self, whether in the name of religion
or in any other name, is but moral suicide.  People who have no other
object in life than that of saving their own souls are but little
better than those whose whole object is to fatten, protect, and keep
safe their bodies.

But Christianity must be perverted greatly to make it teach men to set
their own interests first.  It is the religion of the other man.  Its
appeal is not to the love of self, but to the love of society.  It
offers a way of salvation, not as a thing desirable for your exclusive
use, but as the pathway for all lives, for all the people.  Its tree of
life is not for a single pair, but for the healing of the nations.

True religion is not in self-centred culture, but in the culture of all
through the service of the single ones and the culture of the one
through his service for all.  Only in the atmosphere of service does
the soul grow, expand, and find itself.  To live in a circle is to die;
it is the centrifugal life that finds salvation.  They court death who
seek only their own lives; they find life who, disregarding death and
loss, seek only to make others live.

Religion is not simply a cure for my ills.  True, it does cure many of
them, but only that I may be better able to do its work.  It is a great
cause, a mighty project, commanding the noblest enthusiasms and the
highest efficiency of effort, the project of bringing this whole world
to salvation.  And that not the salvation of a mental condition but of
the perfection of its whole being, the realization of its highest
possibilities, the full noontide of the day of God.

Is not this enough to satisfy any man and to call forth the best in
him, that he should in some way serve this glorious ideal?  Is not this
man's purpose in this world even as it was the purpose of the one who
called Himself the Son of Man?  What nobler summary could any life have
than His, that He went about doing good?  How quickly would that
kingdom of heaven come if this were the program of every life!

Let but a man do his duty towards this shining ideal, let him but be
lifted up, carried along in the mighty enthusiasm it ought to engender,
and his own soul, his own development, his character perfection will
take care of itself.  No man ever did any great work without becoming
greater himself, and greatness never was found in any other way.  This
is an unvarying law.  Service is the secret of culture.

The pious hypochondriac is sure to be a sickly soul.  The best thing
you can do for your soul is to forget that you have one, just as the
healthy man forgets he has a heart or liver.  The self-forgetting
service is the secret of happiness, of full finding of self.  Freedom
in self-giving brings fullness in living.

In the right life the hour of prayer, the quiet thought, the search for
abstract truth, may all have their place; but it is only the place that
the wise workman gives to his meals.  He does not live for these
things; they are but ministrants to his work.  He uses everything that
will make him a better workman; but not because he sees the workman as
his end.  He forgets himself in the perfection of that he seeks to
make.  The saving of the soul, the culture of the self, as an end is
shame and suicide; as a means to service it is life and peace and
perfection.



THE SATISFACTION OF SERVICE

A man always thinks more of his work than of his wages.  He would never
be content to toil day in and day out but for the thought that somehow
to some one his work was worth while.  Neither wages, nor salary, nor
any other cash consideration would of itself be sufficient to satisfy
him.  The workman is proud of the product of his hands; his reward is
in that he has made; the good shepherd thinks more of the flock than of
their fleece or his pay.

Satisfaction in work can only come from service rendered.  Whether a
man be plowing or preaching, sweeping the streets or building empires,
his work is only worthy if his motive be the good he is doing, the
value of the work itself.  We call the man who preaches a minister, a
servant.  There is no more honourable title, but it belongs to every
one who seeks to do any worthy work in the world.

The purpose of living is service, therefore the business of religion
must be the cultivation of proficiency in service.  The work of
Christianity is to teach men how to be most valuable and useful as
children and parents, as neighbours and citizens, how to make the most
of their lives and to do the most with them.  It aims to bring the race
to its highest efficiency.

Religion reveals to man the worth-while object of all his endeavours,
to work as a servant for others.  Never was Jesus more glorious than
when He stooped to lift the palsied, to heal the sick, to feed the
hungry.  He found His right to rule men by His exercise of the
privilege of serving them.  The sheep belong to the good shepherd
because he gives his life to them.

This marks the true follower of the great Teacher to-day; his business
is to serve, he makes living an investment for humanity.  He is
commanded to lose his life, to be willing to give up, to sacrifice all
in self-denial, to take his cross and suffer persecution and loss in
this way of walking after his Master.

But he is not told to throw his life away as a worthless thing.  He is
to lose it as the seed is lost in the sowing, as the money in the
investing; to sacrifice it as the tool is sacrificed to that which it
is carving.  He who would be of real service to the world must
cultivate the best in himself.  If living is seed sowing, then the seed
must be good or the harvest will be thin.

True altruism finds right expression first in self-care.  It is a man's
business to be strong, healthy, sane, trained, developed; to be the
best kind of a man, complete in all his faculties, that he may have the
more to offer to the service of his fellows.  There is no merit in
offering the wrecked body and soured mind.  If you are going to give
your life to the world you must make it worth the giving.

Heaven's work demands the finest tools.  Nothing is too good for the
service of humanity.  There is a good deal more religion in the honest
attempt to make the most of yourself, to keep health, to secure
education and culture, in order that you may have the larger, better,
wealthier self to use in service than in unending ascetic exercises,
prayers, devotions, meditations, mumbling, or visions of things
spiritual.

The only way you can prove the genuineness of your religion is by your
gifts to the children of God, your own brothers about you.  There is no
gift that begins to compare in value with a well-trained,
well-equipped, strong and clean life.  We cannot all give gold or
lands, or even learning to men, but we can all give lives, and that
which heaven and earth both have a right to expect is that we shall
give the best lives we can.




IV

The Right to Happiness

  _The Power of Happiness_
  _The Secret of Happiness_
  _The Folly of Anxiety_


_Happy is that happy makes._

_Heaven leaves the heart when hatred enters._

_The man who is so wise that he never laughs is the greatest of fools._

_When your face spells failure it's no use talking of the glory of your
faith._

_To set a child towards gladness is to incline him towards God._

_The graces do not grow in gloom._

_There's no argument equal to a happy smile._

_Stealing sorrow is as much a sin as acquiring stolen joys._

_Life's music is never perfect without the chord of pain._

_Happiness is never found by dodging my neighbour's sorrows._


