XVIII

"THE VICTORY THAT OVERCOMETH"

You cannot believe little things and do great ones; you cannot believe
in half successes and accomplish whole ones.  A man's faith sets the
boundaries of his work.  He will do what he believes and accomplish
what he believes can be accomplished.  Mountains are not subdued by men
who stand discouraged at a mole-hill.  A man must conquer the fatigues
of the way in his own heart or he will never set out on the road.

Back of all free action lies some creed, some conviction.  All great
battles have been fought and either lost or won in the heart.  The
simple or stubborn confidence that leads to all-conquering effort, this
is faith, the vision that vitalizes.  The eye of faith sees the prize
at the end long before it is reached; the eye of fear looks so closely
at the difficulties and dangers of the course that the prize is not
seen at all.

There is a good deal of fatalism seeking to pass as faith.  People say
we must have faith in God; let things take their course and they will
come out all right.  The church long commended the slothful who let
things drift, and called their laziness resignation.  But faith feels
the certitude of a harvest because it has first diligently plowed and
sown and because of the goodness that has ever brought the seed-time
and the harvest.

Superstitious credulity is not faith.  It is more than the foresight
that feeds on visions of a future heaven; it is the clear eye that
looks keenly at the things of to-day.  No truth is the better for being
taken on trust; it cannot be possessed until it is known, not on the
authority of another but on your own experience.  No man ever became a
martyr for a truth he received at second hand.

Only a first hand faith is a force in the world.  It is born of life;
it determines life.  Your faith forms you.  If you do not believe men,
how can you be a man?  If you do not believe in things better, nobler,
purer, how can you move towards them?  If at bottom your faith is in
things mean, sordid, sensual, base, then thither turns your life, and
no extraneous efforts, no badges, buttons, or creeds can change its
course.

You can measure a man's weight in this world, by the strength and
clearness of his convictions.  Poor you may be, friendless, alone,
weak, unlearned; but all this can be overcome if bright in the heart
there burns the unquenchable flame of some great passion, some high
faith.  Given this fire within them, all the tools shall be found, but
without it the finest endowment of brain and body is valueless.

Given but some great principle, some purpose that becomes a holy
passion, something that leads you, like one of long ago who
"steadfastly set His face to go up to Jerusalem," then all power is
yours.  The man who has faith to remove mountains always finds the
picks and the steam shovels somewhere.  He takes the tools he has,
though they may seem but toys beside his task, and lo! some morning
when the dreamers awake the mountain is no longer there.  Faith has had
her perfect work.

It is faith that gives fortitude, faith that gives force.  The dreamers
of dreams have ever been, after all, the doers of the great deeds.
Seeing the things that are not seen is the secret of doing the things
that remain to be seen.

No worthier word was ever said of the divine Man than that which spoke
of Him as the leader and completer of faith.  So great a work was
possible only with sublime confidence in the glorious possibilities of
mankind, only with unshakable assurance that all that was good and true
in the universe was working with Him for the good of all.  With Him
faith was an eye that saw man's hidden good, a hand that grasped the
infinite might moving for the best.



FEAR AND FAITH

To many faith simply means denying the reason and relying on emotion.
They have what is called saving faith and are able to feel that the
Almighty forgives their wrong-doings, ceasing to be angry with them;
their faith being perfect when it takes away fear of punishment.  To
these faith is that which they pay in the form of credence to whatever
is ecclesiastically asserted in exchange for the complaisance of diety
[Transcriber's note: deity?].

Those who deny all religion assert that it is founded on fear.  There
is enough in that assertion to give it the colour of truth.  Yet fear
of the unseen is but the survival of savagery.  Faith founded on fear
becomes servile, debasing, superstitious.  If religion has no higher
motive than that of fear, the trembling and dread before some great
omnipotent unknown, it can give the world neither help nor uplift.

What is there in God to fear?  Is the Lord of life also the foe of our
lives?  Is the author of a world so fair and lovely, inviting us to joy
and inspiring with feelings of pleasure, the foe of happiness?  Has He
made the world a paradise and planted in man's breast the seeds of
kindness, gentleness and sweet thoughts only to glower over His world
in hatred and to damn it with dread of Himself?

All things that can be known argue the goodness of the unknown.  As
soon as a man learns to live with nature he loses his fear of forest,
beast, and sea.  Familiarity breeds confidence, affection and
reverence.  Only the remote and unfamiliar fill us with dread.  The
city bred tremble in the woods at night, where the native feels himself
amongst well loved friends.

In the same manner the fear of the divine, born of unfamiliarity,
instead of being an evidence of reverence or of religion, becomes the
mark of ignorance and cowardice.  Rectitude of conduct, resulting
wholly from regulating oneself as under an all-seeing critical eye and
in dread of a far-reaching devastating hand, cannot produce enrichment
of character.  Hatred never gave birth to holiness.

The souls that in all ages have lived nearest to things spiritual, that
have most enriched the world with thoughts, whose inner visions pierced
our outer clouds, seeing something of the glory of the infinite,
brought back no pictures of a face austere, of a cruel despot, or of
aught for love or truth to fear.

True faith instead of being a compromise to allay our fears of unknown
ills and calamities, ever has been the fearless, reverent search for
the face of the infinite.  It does not say: "I believe that God will
let me alone because I did those prescribed things"; rather it says: "I
cannot be satisfied alone and apart from Him, the source and sole
satisfaction of all life."

Science with its passion for truth, art with its passion for beauty,
ethics with its passion for rightness, are all but parts of true
religion, the soul's passion for the infinite heart and mind in which
all ideas of truth and beauty take their rise and find their full
realization.

The soul of man never has ceased to cry out for the living God; the
religion of fear has given it no satisfaction.  Its followers have been
too busy building themselves shelters from the heaven they dread,
shelters that become as leaden shields shutting out the eternal
tenderness and beneficence.  No man ever found the celestial city or
its glorious king so long as he regarded his religion as a cyclone
cellar.

To those who, with eyes of reverence, seek to find the good in all
things here, believing that love is better and mightier than hate, that
whatever is good, kindly, tender, pure, and ennobling in us, is but the
reflection from the glory of the infinite, traces in our dust by which
we find our way to Him who inhabits eternity, these, through eyes of
faith, have found a presence beyond description or definition.

Fear sets afar off a mighty monarch; faith finds near at hand one whom
it calls "Father."  Fear shrinks from the impending wrath, love rests
in the unchanging goodness.  Fear imagines a throne and flaming sword;
faith has confidence in a better day ever dawning, in the triumph at
last of right, in the reality of an incomprehensible love that sings in
its joy, soothes in its sorrow, strengthens in its discipline, a life
and love nearer and more real than any of the other facts of living.



FAITH FOR THE FUTURE

You cannot tell much about a man's faith by his willingness to deal in
futures without any foundation in fact.  And yet no man is ready to
face the future unless his heart is nerved by a high and worthy faith.
This alone can give strength to look down the coming days and to take
up their tasks.

None of us can know what these new days hold for us; fear readily
conjures up pictures of disaster.  But because of certain sublime
confidences we hold we banish our fears, shake off our sloth, and
gladly step out into the unknown and untrodden country of to-morrow.

Faith is the force of all the ages.  It accounts for the past; it
enters and determines the future.  Because certain men in days gone by
believed certain things intensely; because they were thrilled by great
visions, by glorious ideals, history was wrought out in the forge of
their convictions, under the hammer of their wills.

No great things are done except by the power of faith, under glowing
hopes and compelling convictions.  It is her faith in her boy's future
that makes the mother willing to suffer, keeps her patient, that buoys
up the father in the strife and weariness of life.  No man or woman is
doing anything that makes the world richer for mere bread and butter;
some purpose and vision is behind the worthy work.

It is because somehow we believe, no matter how we may phrase the
belief, that destiny is behind this strange weaving we call life that
we are content to seem to be the shuttles jerked hither and thither.
We bear the ills of to-day because we dimly see the glorious goal of
the good of all.  We do a full day's work only as we see somehow an
eternal wage.

It makes little difference what creed a man may hold, for that has
become almost wholly a matter of philosophical speculation regarding
things unknown and often unimportant, but it makes all the difference
what measure and quality of faith he has, whether he feels the force of
great aspirations and is controlled by eternal principles.

It may belong to few of us to be heralded as heroes, and the judgment
of history may confer on none the martyr's crown, but the hero's joy
and the martyr's glory are in the heart of every one who boldly reaches
up to and lives out the highest he conceives, for he will not do that
without sacrifice and pain on his side nor without enriching for
mankind on the other.

The largest faith may be manifest in the lowliest places.  When all the
work of the ages appears, when the weaving of the centuries is turned
with its finished side towards us, we may see that the man who has laid
the brick or fed the furnace or the woman who has washed and cooked in
the home and tended the little ones, doing these things for love, has
shot the most glowing colours into the great fabric.

It is not the thing you do so much as the spirit in which you do it
that makes it great or small.  Faith determines this spirit, for faith
is that which fashions the ideal of the one we love, the ideal we serve
and for which we joyfully suffer.  The prophet whose burning words
cannot forget lives by the faith in a vision broad and sweeping; but
not less is the faith of the humble toiler who lives each day by the
vision of his home and fireside.

Nor is this all.  It is faith that draws on life's invisible sources of
power and refreshing; it is faith that finds inner contact with the
invisible.  How empty is life if it hold nothing but things; how hungry
grows the heart fed only on cold facts.  For each day as it comes we
need to be able to draw on the deep springs of the water of life, the
springs from which our fathers drank and found strength to lay the
foundations of our day.

Faith is not the blind confidence that, somehow, Providence will send
us daily bread.  It is the faculty by which the heart eats of the bread
of heaven, by which it comes into fellowship with the great and
immortal of all ages, by which it walks with Jesus of Nazareth and
every spirit like His and learns to read life as love law and see it as
leading to eternal good.




XIX

Hindrances and Helps from Within

  _Worry_
  _A Cure for the Blues_
  _The Gospel of Song_


_Airing our aches will never heal them._

_This would be a sad world but for our sorrows._

_A merry heart kills more microbes than any medicine._

_It is always a pleasure to boost another sinner down._

_We make mistakes; other people commit sins._

_Nothing worries worry worse than work._

_A little modesty often hides a lot of vanity._

_He whose life leads nowhere is never late in getting there._

_Love runs over but it never gives over._

_Never put off to-morrow the meanness you can put off to-day._

_Happiness rests on thoughts and not on things._

_He who has friends only to use them has them only to lose them._

_To-morrow's burden is the only one that breaks the back of to-day._


XIX

WORRY

Worry is wicked because it causes weakness.  It robs the life of its
powers; it thwarts our possibilities.  Anxiety is wrong, not because it
indicates infidelity as to the wise and loving providence overruling
life, but because it is a criminal waste of life's forces, it prevents
our doing our own work, and it irritates and hinders others.

What a great cloud would be lifted from our world if all the needless
fears and frowns were chased away.  One scowling man, going to his work
worrying over it, will spread the contagion of apprehension and
cowardly fretfulness through almost every group with which he mingles.
Our mental health has as much to do with our success and happiness as
any other thing.

The fog that bothers us most of all is that we carry on our faces, that
which rises from our heart fears.  Once savage man lived in perpetual
fear of innumerable malignant spirits; civilized man lives in fear of
invisible and imaginary accidents.  For every real foe that has to be
faced we fight out hypothetical battles with a dozen shadows.

Worry is a matter of outlook and habit.  It depends, first of all, on
whether you are going to take all the facts into account and look on
life as a whole, or see only the dismal possibilities.  Then it depends
on whether you will yield continually to the blue moods that may arise
from apprehension or from indigestion until you have become colour
blind to all but the blue things.

How trivial are the things over which we worry, by means of which we
cultivate the enslaving habit of worry, whether we will catch the
approaching car or the one that will come two minutes later, whether it
will rain when we want it to shine, or shine when we want it to rain.

How ineffective it all is.  Whoever by worrying all night succeeded in
bringing about the kind of weather he wanted?  More than that, it is
fatal to successfully accomplishing those things that do lie within our
power.  The worry over catching a train or doing a piece of work so
agitates the mind and unsettles the will that it reduces the chances of
efficiency.

But there are larger causes of worry than these, sickness, loss,
impending disasters.  Yet how futile to help and how potent to increase
these ills is worry.  The darkest days and the deepest sorrows need
that we should be at our best to meet them.  To yield to fear and
fretting is to turn the powers of heart and brain from allies to
enemies.

No occasion is so great or so small that we can afford to meet it
either with fear or without forethought.  The imperative obligation to
make the most of our lives is not met by apprehending the worst, but by
doing the best we can.  We have no right to give to forebodings the
time and force we need for preparing for and actually meeting our
duties.

The best cure for worry is work.  In the larger number of instances if
we but do our work well we shall have no need to worry over the
results.  Much of our fearful fretting is but a confession of work illy
done and the apprehension of deserved consequences.

Then faithful work by absorbing the thought and energies cures the
habit of worry.  It is the empty mind that falls first prey to
foreboding, and is most easily filled with the spectres of woe.  Do
your work with all your might; let it go at that, knowing that no
amount of further thought can affect the issue of it.

No matter how dark the way, how empty the scrip, the cheerful heart has
sunshine and feasting.  And this not by a blind indifference, a
childish optimism, but by the blessed faculty of finding the riches
that are by every wayside, of catching at all the good there is in
living.  If you would dispel your gloom and depreciate your burdens,
begin to appreciate your blessings.  Do your best, seek out the best,
believe in the best, and the best shall be.



A CURE FOR THE BLUES

There is an honest confession, and one that proved to be good for the
soul of the man who made it, in the Seventy-seventh Psalm.  Asaph, the
singer of that song, had had a bad spell of the blues.  He was nervous,
sleepless, fretful, full of vague regrets and querulous complainings.
He had reviewed the whole troop of his imaginary miseries, and wound up
by wondering whether God really cared anything about him.  One might
well believe that he had been taking in altogether too many social
functions.  Whatever the cause, he had come to an exceedingly
disagreeable condition.

Despite the fact that many suppose that saintliness is never fully
achieved unless the whole nature be soured, it still remains true that
of all the blights upon this earth, few are more contrary to the will
of a God of love and sunshine than the disposition that abides in the
chronic blues.  It lives on regrets for the good things that might have
been and dreadings of the evil things that yet may be.  It is either
complaining or criticising.

Their gall enters the hearts of such people.  They who look within and
see nothing but bitterness, when they look without find a film over
their eyes that colours their whole world, until they lose faith in God
and hope for man.  Then they lay the blame on their circumstances, or,
worse yet, on what they call an "All Wise Providence," whom they
imagine to be as bitter against them as they are against the world.

This attitude soon becomes fixed.  Unconsciously it is cultivated.
Then friends and members of the family turn with loathing from the
atmosphere of chronic pessimism; the habitue has become a cuttlefish
among his fellows, only emanating floods of inky misery.  He wonders
why things do not come his way; why business associates desert him and
troubles assail him more and more.  The truth is that imaginary
troubles tend to become real, and fortune never smiles on a man who
turns a sour face towards her.

Character is contagious.  Even if we had the right to enjoy our own
misery we have no right to infect our neighbours with it.  You are
bound by social obligations as well as by selfish reasons to cure the
blues every time you have them.

And there is a remedy.  Asaph began to cure himself when, instead of
saying, "All things are against me," he said, "This is my infirmity,"
my fault; I am enough to turn a beehive sour.  His cure was almost
perfect when he said, "I will remember the years of the right hand of
the Most High."  The cure for the blues is simple, then.  First, own up
to it that the largest part of your miseries comes out of your own
mind, out of your distorted views of things.  Then begin to thank God
for His goodness, call to mind the many things for which you should be
grateful.

To remember our mercies is to bury our miseries.  There is a lot of
good in this old world and they get it who go for it.  There is
something good in every man; the best people find the best in people.
After all, our lives are determined not by the things about us but by
the things we invite into us.  It is impossible to keep that man blue
who persistently looks for the bright side of things, or to keep him
poor or sad who is affording a welcome to every good thing, every
happy, cheering thought.  Soon the man who lives like that gets so busy
keeping track of his own and other people's happiness that he forgets
to think whether he is happy or not, just as a healthy man forgets to
count his pulse or his respirations.  So, if you are tempted to feel
blue, remember it is a sin to nurse your sadness; it is a duty to
cultivate happiness.



THE GOSPEL OF SONG

Singing cures sighing.  Lift up a note of praise and you can raise the
heaviest off and roll it clean off the heart.  Christianity is a
religion of song.  Its forerunner, Judaism, left the ages the rich
legacy of the Psalms.  Its founder, when he knew that death was
imminent, sang one of those ancient songs with his friends.  His
followers early gathered for worship in song.  Peter beguiled prison
hours with hymns.  Meeting in the catacombs, the early Christians made
the galleries echo with their praise.

To-day every revival is but a wave of song.  The successful churches
know the inspirational and the ethical power of good hymns.  The
decline of many a church may be traced to the exclusion of the people
from their share in the worship, to the attempt to praise God by proxy,
or to substitute an artistic exhibition for an act of exaltation.

Not only in public worship, but in private life, hymns and songs have a
significant influence.  It is always easy to remember rhymed forms of
truth; happy the heart with a store of good hymns; it is provisioned
for many a long voyage.  When the light burns low the heart is
illumined by the memory of choice thoughts expressed in poetry, by
songs sung long ago.  When the burden seems all too heavy, and the
traveller would fain lie down in despair, he remembers some word of
cheer, some stanza from another pilgrim's song, and he is strengthened
for the road.

Christianity is a singing religion, because it is a happy religion.  It
came to end the gloom of this world.  The song must take the place of
the sigh.  Happiness must rule the utterance.  Even a hearty whistle
may be a wonderful means of grace.  Every natural expression of
happiness becomes a religious act.  The flowers praise the gardener by
being beautiful and fragrant, and men praise God by being happy.

Song is a creator of happiness.  You cannot sing songs of joy and
nourish jealousy or hatred.  A song of gratitude for things you have
will often chase away the clouds of gloom over those you dread.  It is
a sin to be sad when you might as well be glad, and it is a sin to be
silent when you might as well be singing.

One song may surpass many a sermon in its power over a life.  Great
songs have sung men into battle and stiffened their melting hearts.
Great songs have touched our clay and thrilled it to the divinely
heroic.  Songs sung in the stillness of the evening over the baby's
cradle have ever been the mother's consecration for all her sacrifice.
Hymns bring back hallowed memories; a strain of song will touch a chord
no syllogism could sound; the simple words of an old hymn bring comfort
and new hope to hearts broken and crushed.

We may not all make sermons, but we can all sing songs.  To make the
good singer there is needed not the artist but the heart.  Sing away
the gloom; sing in the gratitude, the joy, and love, and strength; sing
in the courage, the aspiration and hope.  Men may reject our sermons,
but they will rejoice in our songs, for they are theirs also.  The
creeds change, but the old hymns stand.

Store your memory with the songs that time has tried.  The thoughts
that were meat and strength to others shall be your bread in desert
days, your light in darkness.  Praise God by a life of happy praise.




XX

Does He Care?

  _The One at The Helm_
  _The Shepherd and The Sheep_
  _The Father's Care_


_Faith's fervour is more than effervescence._

_The lights of the world are not advertising signs._

_Sow the sand and you reap only cinders in your eyes._

_No man ever broke his back under his brother's burden._

_The fear of reputation is often taken for the love of righteousness._

_You cannot cure your sorrows by taking them out in a wheel chair._

_A niggardly purse in the pocket becomes a thorn in the side._

_Tears over yesterday's broken toys blind us to today's treasures._

_Things do not prove themselves sacred by segregating themselves from
secular concerns._

_Heaven intrusts no great cargo to the vessel that spreads its sails to
every wind that blows._

_When a man is getting fat out of the fall of others he is sure to be a
warm advocate of their right to be free to fall._

_Many a man will be surprised when he gets to heaven to find how large
a place his little kindly deeds occupy in its history._


