XX

THE ONE AT THE HELM

Danger tears away our disguises.  In hours of peril the true man
appears, and at such times, if ever, the man speaks the truth.  Fearing
the boat was sinking, the disciples had little thought of the dignity
or the divinity of the one who lay asleep in the helmsman's place.
Rudely they awaken Him with their indignant cries, wondering why one
who had spoken such wondrous words before seems indifferent now to
their danger.  "Carest Thou not that we perish?" they cry.

Every man who has been accustomed to take God for granted has used
almost the same words at some time in his life.  The hour of tempest,
when the uncontrollable waves of trouble and winds of adversity seemed
ready to overwhelm him, when he had done all that mortal might do, then
it seemed as though this God to whom he had prayed so often, of whom he
had learned to think as part of his life, was absent or indifferent.

It is the question of every soul in sorrow or testing, "Does God care
anything about me?"  It is more than a speculative inquiry then.
Theologians may have drawn up their specifications of the Most High,
and, in the peaceful ways of their lives, they may be satisfied with
their handiwork.  But when, even into their cloistered walks, some
great sorrow or grim death has come stalking, then, with dry lips and
moist brow they cry, "Master, are you asleep?  Do you not care?"

What is there at the helm of this great ship of life?  Is there any one
or is it steered automatically, blindly holding its way and heeding
neither waves nor rocks nor other craft?  Has this universe a heart or
only an engine at its centre?  The inquiry becomes pressing and
pertinent, indeed, when inexplicable distress and anguish that seem all
unnecessary break down all the man's strength and courage.

A man can no more content himself with a far off being, sitting in the
heavens in royal state, winning reverence by remoteness, than his own
children would be satisfied to know him only as a sovereign.  He craves
the friendship of that one; he longs for compassion, sympathy,
assistance such as friend gives to friend; in a word, he looks for
love.  You cannot love an absentee God any more than you can love an
abstraction or a theory.

But the need of one who will come close into our lives, who aids in the
hour of extremity, does not meet itself.  The fact remains that often
we seem to be left to the mercy of the tempest; the elements do their
worst and no hand is lifted and no voice is heard that still the waves.
Full often the storm seems to finish its work and only clinging to the
wreckage or swept on the waves do we come into port.

Is there any answer to the great question, Does any greater one care
for our lives?  If we are looking for an answer as susceptible to
demonstration as a mathematical proposition we are doomed to
disappointment.  It is possible to believe in providence without being
able either to prove or fully comprehend it.  The child must become the
parent before he can understand the ways of the father or mother with
him; yet he can know their love before he can comprehend their ways.

Nothing could do more harm than to have the absolute assurance that an
almighty friend would fly to our aid and protection in every time of
danger or need.  A friend whose power relieved us from the necessity of
prudence or courage or endeavour would be a foe indeed.  The All Wise
loves man too well and too wisely to make plain always His ways of
caring for him and His purposes of protection.

The furrowed faces and whitened heads of men may be the will of love as
truly as the smooth ways of ease and complacency.  There is one at the
helm, but His concern is more for the making of strong sailors than for
the securing of smooth sailing.  The best evidence of the care of the
Most High for all the sons of men is not in the immediate unbaring of
His arm for their protection, but rather in the manner in which He
causes the wind and the waves, the struggle with the tempest, the need
for the nerving of the soul in the hour of peril all to work out His
will, the will of great love, the bringing of the mariner to His
likeness in character and soul.



THE SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEP

Millions have lived and died in faith in that word, The Lord is my
Shepherd; nations have sung its strain into the strength of their
being.  The picture of the one who leads His flock, who carries the
lambs in His arms, appeals to all; yet who has not some time, perhaps
often, questioned: After all, is there any one who cares; is there any
eye to see or heart to heed if I--or, indeed, all men--should faint or
fall by the way?

Perhaps there are some who no longer find aught beyond an imagery of
poetic beauty in the old strain, who even feel that it would be
retreating intellectually to conceive of an infinite heart that broods
over men or a hand that helps.  They tell us that science has wiped out
the possibility of such an one as this great Shepherd of the flock of
humanity.  Yet even they are not dead to this great thought that so
long stirred men's souls and made them brave, ready to sacrifice, to
die.

The truth is, the singer of long ago was but giving expression, in
figures familiar to him, of a truth we all apprehend with greater or
less clearness, one that alone gives strength, hope, and faith to our
hearts, the conviction that back of all the warring purposes and
jangling discords of our lives and our world there is reason, and
order, and beneficence.

The science that seemed to wipe out the conception of a mighty Creator
who fashioned the first man with His fingers, but emphasizes with a
stress that grows from day to day the fact that this universe is not
without order, its forces as sheep without a shepherd; that the stars
are not wandering, nor the least atom without guidance; that, as one
put it long ago, all things work together for good.

If the remotest particle of matter is bound up with the mighty laws of
the universe, guided, governed, led to its appointed end, bound to
serve its purpose, shall we not have faith that the law that guides the
atom and holds the planet, pervades all the universe and takes us in
its mighty grasp?

Not with doubt but with larger meaning and deeper assurance may I sing,
"The Lord is my shepherd," thinking not only of one who takes up my
little life and carries it, but of the great fact of all life under
law, law divine, all pervading, moving in majesty on to the completion
of its purposes.  I may not know what the Shepherd looks like; I may
have lost my old simple pictures of personality and appearance; the
larger fact grows too great for fixed words.

This is to see the guidance of the Shepherd in the great things of our
world as well as in the little.  It is a strange, a poor religion that
believes that providence will send a man his dinner but never gives a
thought to the great purposes working out through all the strife of our
common life, through our industrial, social, and political problems,
nor remembers that life is more than meals or millinery.

There is the large faith which we need for all times, to believe that a
plan is being wrought out behind all the seeming chaos, that there is a
purpose even though we cannot yet trace its lines, to be willing to go
on doing our work, laying down our lives, because the great world needs
us; the Shepherd cannot bring His flock to the green pastures and the
still waters unless we live and labour and die.

There is only one solution to all the mystery of our lives, the riddle
of history and the universe; it is the spirit solution, that we are but
the offspring, as all things are but the creation of Spiritual forces;
that we are working out spiritual destinies, the green pastures and the
still waters are but emblems of felicities and beauties beyond our
tongue, the full orbed glory of the soul to which the Shepherd leads by
toilsome mountain ways or dreary desert trails; but at last we come to
the house of the Lord, where we may dwell forever.



THE FATHER'S CARE

Formal creeds have little to say of the belief in the overruling care
of the All Father.  Perhaps the belief is so nearly universal as to be
without the range of debate so dear to creed makers.  Yet at all times,
in all lands, man, whether the savage, the oriental mystic, or the
cool-headed Christian, in various ways and with different phrases, has
recognized the hand that, from behind the scenes, touched his affairs
and often seemed to order his life.  Whether it be the hand of force or
of friend, the fact has been felt.

True, the laziest man is apt to have the readiest sense of the
intention of Providence to care for him, to send him bread well
buttered; the foolish and thoughtless depend on heaven to do their
thinking, and many court bankruptcy while praying for solvency.  But
the improvidence of man does not disprove the providence of God.  So
far from encouraging sloth and recklessness this truth provokes to
progress by the assurance of the cooeperation of infinite powers with
our best endeavours.

It is a thought we cannot escape; the all wise must be the all loving.
The spirit at the centre of all must embrace all within the circle of
his love; and that love will not lie quiescent, helpless when its
objects are in distress, in perplexity, or need, when it might succour,
save, or suggest the way of success.  If there is a heart of love there
is a hand of help.

Yet it seems too great a thought.  What are we but dust on the wheels
of the universe?  Often do our fainting hearts question whether there
be any, outside our own little circle, who care whether we suffer,
whether we succeed.  Can it be that the petty affairs of a life that
passes like the hoar frost before the morning sun can even interest,
still less call forth the aid, of the one in whom we all live and move
and have our being?

Despite all questionings men will ever go on praying to that one; they
will turn to an ear that hears, they will seek a heart that feels, and
look for hands reached out in hours of necessity.  Experience indorses
their faith.  Nearly all can look back and see where destiny has seemed
to breathe upon them; their old plans wilted, and new ones, and new
ways sprung up, bearing other and fairer flowers than they had ever
dreamed; a mighty, mysterious power had intervened.

What does it all mean?  That we are but puppets in these strange unseen
hands; that we can neither will nor work for ourselves?  No; it but
means what poets sang long ago when, seeking after that which far
transcends all thought and all imagery, they cried, "Surely Thou art
our Father."  That which was best in them, the holy fire of fatherhood,
became a mirror in which they saw the infinite.

From the source of all life, humanity has learned the great lessons of
family care and provision.  All that is good in our families is true of
this great family of all mankind.  The great purpose of this family, as
of all families, is the development of the highest, fullest life in its
members.  Fatherhood regards the provision of food, clothing, and
shelter but as incidental to the great purpose of training the children.

This is the purpose of the Father of us all, to develop the best in us.
When our weak hearts cry for ease, for rest, for pleasures, He sends
the task, the sorrow, the loss.  When we think all life's lessons well
learned He sends us up to higher grades with harder tasks.  Yet ever
over all is the pitying, compassionate yearning of a father's heart
that never forgets the weakness of the child.

Wisely the father's love seems to hide its working.  Like all things
deep and sublime it passes comprehension; it may often seem like
indifference.  All the child can do is to bend every effort to do his
best, to work out the father's plan so far as he knows it, to know,
through all, that God is good.  Then, when the child grows to the man,
the man towards the divine, the things that seemed strange are made
plain in the light of the Father's face.





