XVI

RELIGION OF A PRACTICAL MIND

Is there a faith for the practically minded man and woman?  Or is
religion exclusively for the dreamers and those who are contented with
sentiment and feeling?  These people of action, who measure by results,
who have no life to waste on things not evidently useful; these who
feel so intensely the needs of humanity that they have no time to waste
in anything other than work--is there a religion for them?

But religion is not a form of life nor a point of view for one kind of
people alone; it is the spirit of higher things coming into the lives
of all kinds of people.  Its expression will depend on the temperament
of the individual.  It may lead some to sing hymns, but it will
certainly compel others to build houses and to care for the sick and
needy.

In a world of men and affairs no man is actually religious unless his
faith is finding some practical expression, and the greatest need of
our day is that our hard-headed men and women who do things shall
become inspired with the spirit and ideas of religion and shall do
those things which religion's spirit of love and service would indicate
as needing to be done.

Pious people are deluding themselves if they think that they are
cultivating the religious life and meriting the rewards of faith by
simply sitting in church and feeding themselves on beautiful sentiments
and thrilling visions, or even by vigorously attacking all those who
dare to differ from them in matters of religious philosophy.

Nor can religion find full expression in harking back over the
centuries and elucidating the mysteries of ancient miracles or tracing
the history of ancient peoples.

If as much brain and energy had been given to solving the problem of
society and leading men into the way of right living to-day as have
been given to digging into the historical and philological problems of
Scripture this world would be a better world by far.  We must let the
dead past bury its dead.  Stay not weeping by the tomb of yesterday; do
the work of to-day.

There will be much more real religion in the intelligence, care, and
sacrifice applied to the problem presented by the millions coming in at
the gates of our country than in the most pains-taking study of the
emigration of a horde of Israelites millenniums ago.  This is what the
practical man feels; there is so much to be done, why waste time in
dreaming of how things once were done or in wishing for a world where
no need or sorrow exists?  Therefore, he is apt to say, in the business
of bringing things to pass religion has no place; it is only for the
dreamers.

Yet no one needs religion more than the man who would do any worthy and
lasting work in the world.  Indeed, the possibility of such a work will
not dawn upon him unless some of the spirit of religion and the
possession of desire to do great and worth while things is evidence of
the heavenly flame within.  Any work for the sake of humanity needs a
wider vision than that of its own field.  Courage fails and hope dies
if we see only the dismal problem; if we have only the practical
outlook.  Some vision of the ideal must enter into all great work; one
must learn to see humanity in the light of divinity.

It is a good thing to be able to see the Divine in the commonplace, the
hand of Providence in American history, the work of the Most High as
recorded in the daily papers, as well as in the Gospels; to do our work
whether it be laying railroad track, selling dry goods, making or
teaching or trading, as part of the service necessary to bring in the
better day.

Here is the religion of the practical mind, to express by the service
of heart and brain and hand the belief that he has in the possibilities
humanity, the hope that he has of a fairer, sweeter, nobler age than
this, to make real the world's best ideals.  So, seeking to bring to
earth the best that heaven has dreamed, men have found themselves
lifted into the light of infinite truth and love.



THE HEAD AND THE HEART

There are temperamental types which never reach any conclusion by pure
reasoning; intuitions, emotions, and inspirations take the place of
intellectual processes.  It would be the height of folly to attempt to
make such natures reduce their religion to syllogisms, or to ask them
to bring to the bar of the head all the findings of the heart.

The emotional nature does not comprehend the manner in which the
average mind must wait for its own light.  These souls that move by
great tides often reach sublime heights.  The world would be poor,
indeed, without their all-compelling enthusiasms, their glorious
visions, and their dominant convictions.  But such ones must not forget
that there is no royal road to truth; that human nature is not cast in
one single, unvarying mold; diversity is not necessarily heresy.

There are other natures, not less necessary to the world, not less
glorious in their records of leaders, martyrs, and masters of men.
These are those that find truth by the slow steps of reasoning; that
seek the way of right, with hearts of reverence and feet of faith, in
the light of the faculties heaven has given them.  They do not feel,
they do not understand the winds that, sighing round them, convey such
mighty meaning to other souls; they cannot buy progress at the price of
blindness.  They are the intellectual type.

The conclusion that the emotional type must, after all, be the right
one is a common one.  This is because it makes the most noise and the
most easily apprehended demonstration.  And, therefore, some tell us
that the man who seeks to find the way of truth by the light of the
intellect must, without fail, wander into the pit of error; that the
only way to come to religious truth is to shut the eyes of the mind and
yield to emotion.

The thinker constantly is being warned that he cannot apprehend God
with his intellect; that he cannot see the way to heaven with the eyes
of reason.  He is urged to give up the use of his head that he may
develop his heart.  He even is told that faith is incompatible with
reason, and love with logic.  So strong is the emphasis on this that he
is led to suspect that indolence is seeking to deify ignorance, and
that men whose intellectual faculties have atrophied by their
subjection to the emotional now are envious of those who retain the
power to think clearly, and would have them also deprived of these
powers.

Nothing could be more clearly opposed to the way of truth than the
notion that religion can be bought only at the price of reason, or that
the consequence of using the intelligence is the losing of the power of
affection for the divine, the good, and the true--of the warmth of
heart and feeling that often determine character and conduct.

If the faculties are God given they are given for working purposes.  If
man has a mind and yet may not think concerning the deepest and highest
things of his own nature and destiny, then the giving of that mind or
the permitting it to develop is the most cruel mockery known to human
history.

But the simple law of nature that every faculty has some purpose, that
no power is without its duty, is the answer to all this.  The mind is
as sacred as the heart; it is as much a sacred duty to think as it is
to aspire.  There is nothing too holy for men to think about, to reason
about.  The mind must serve the truth--must with reverence lead to
larger truth.

No man is religious who represses any of his reasoning faculties.
Every one of the higher powers must be brought to their greatest
perfection.  Not by dwarfing but by developing themselves do men
glorify their Creator.  Just as the finest tree in the forest speaks
most eloquently of the bounty and beauty of nature, so does the
gigantic intellect glorify the intelligence that ordered its being.

Fear not to think of sacred things; nothing is sacred because it is
mysterious; reverence does not dwell apart from reason.  Faith does not
reach its perfection in the fool; it shines most glorious where wisdom
dwells.  There still are the superstitious souls who confound darkness
with divinity; who cry aloud against the light of knowledge.  But they
can no more stay the discovery of truth than the bats can hold back the
dawn.



NEW TRUTHS FOR NEW DAYS

There are many who think they must live without religion because they
cannot be content with the views held by their fathers.  The facts on
which the faith of the past was based have come into the light so that
the modern man, examining them, finds himself in all honesty compelled
to question them and often ultimately to call them fables.

The attempt to answer the questions of the clear-eyed modern scientific
mind by accusing it of inherent antagonism to religion is cheap and
ineffectual.  There are honest doubters who at the same time are
earnest seekers after truth, who desire the best, who are willing to
pay any price for personal character and social righteousness.

It is because such men are honest that they refuse to be bound by
creeds they cannot believe and to buttress beliefs they cannot indorse.
No greater loss could come to character than to insist that we shall
act and speak a lie in order that the body of religious teaching shall
remain undisturbed.  The heresy we most need to fear is that which
blatantly declares one thing while at heart fearing that another is
true.

The old generation in religion is accusing the new of treason to faith
and the new is accusing the old of blindness to truth.  When the father
says to the son, "Believe this or be lost," the son answers that he
rather would be lost in company with truth and honesty of conscience
than be saved at the cost of both.

But do these divergencies mean that the man of the modern mind must
give up religion and that those who hold to the traditional views can
find no fellowship with those who see new light?  This is more than an
academic question; it presses on every man who, finding in him the
universal thirst for religion, finds also standing before the living
waters him who says, "You can drink only out of this cup handed down
from the fathers; you can approach only on speaking our shibboleth."

Our fathers looked on religious truth as something complete and
unchangeable, once for all delivered to the saints.  But they forgot
how different was the truth, as they saw it, from its vision as given
to their fathers.  Every age tends to look upon itself as the final
goal and on its views as the last possible statement of truth.

Yet how clearly does the past teach us that our vision of truth is ever
changing.  The science of to-day will be largely the folly of
to-morrow.  Truth, in any realm, is a country whose boundaries lie ever
before us, whose geography each age must write anew.  Truth is a road,
not a terminus; a process of search and not the thing discovered alone.

He only is religious really who opens heart and mind to the increasing
vision of truth, in whom religion is not a cut and dried, fixed and
unchanging philosophy, but to whom it is a method and motive for
living, a process of adjusting himself to all his world in the full
light of all the truth that can come to him.

There is a religion for the man who must deny many things that once
seemed essential to religion; for the man who feels compelled to doubt
all things; it is the religion of the honest, open souled, unreserved
search for truth and the translation of that truth as it is known into
character, and living.

If the setting of the face towards truth means breaking through ancient
theology it also will mean bringing us face to face with the infinite.
It is a good thing to lose the symbol if we only will seek for the
substance.  The heart of man cries out for the reality that lies back
of all our words and for the realization of our doctrines in deeds.

When the test of trouble comes, when earth is a desert and the heavens
are brass, we find our refreshing, we find the real resources of
religion not in doctrinal statements, not in formal creeds, but in that
creed which experience has written on our hearts, in the consciousness
of an eternal love not demonstrated by logic, in the sense of the unity
of ourselves and our race with the infinite and divine.

Every day must have its new creed, its enlarging vision of truth, but
back of all lies truth itself, the reality upon which our fathers
leaned and the unfailing springs where they were refreshed and the
glowing visions that led them on.  In that reality lies every man's
religion.




XVII

The Fruits of Faith

  _Root and Fruit_
  _The Orthodox Accent_
  _The Business of Religion_


_Killing hope is moral suicide._

_Sow happiness and reap heaven._

_Every man is made up of many men._

_You cannot travel towards heaven with your back turned to honour._

_Earthly prudence is a large part of heavenly providence._

_Homes are often closest knit about some grave of separation._

_Your credit in heaven depends on earth's debts to you._

_To attempt a great work is to become a great worker._

_The practice of happiness does much for the power of holiness._

_No man ever found this world a weary place who had a worthy work to
do._

_It's no use talking about the religion in your heart if it is not
visible in your home._


