XIV

RICHES AND RIGHTEOUSNESS

Let no man take it, that the statement on the inaccessibility of heaven
to the rich involves the opposite, how easily shall they that have
nothing enter in.  The people who have lived pulseless lives are apt to
point to their poverty as the proof of their piety.  But righteousness
is neither a matter of riches nor of rags.  The great Teacher glorifies
neither.  The qualifications for citizenship in His kingdom strike
deeper than that.

His words have nothing to do with the bitter envy of the demagogue who
denounces those who have earned that for which he would not labour.  He
measures men not by that they have but by that they are.  He looks
through both the fine linen and the tattered rags to the man.  Money
interests Him only as it affects character.  The question of riches and
poverty is not a matter of housing and eating, but what a man does for
himself and his world with that which he has.

Riches of themselves do not bar a man from heaven; but they full often
eat into his heart, become of absorbing interest, and so effectually
and forever blind the inner vision to the best things.  It is not that
heaven has shut its gates, but that the love of money, the selfishness,
born of cupidity, has paralyzed those spiritual senses by which he
might have found his way therein.

The possession of wealth is not a sin; to some it has come almost
without effort, even against their wills; but it does constitute one of
the most severe tests that can be set before a soul.  It increases the
difficulties of the right life, because it enlarges so greatly the
responsibilities.  The greater the wealth the greater the trust laid
upon a man as the steward of the produce of the earth.

The principle holds of all possessions; all are tests of character.  A
man can love gold just as ardently when he has but a grain as when he
has possessions beyond computation.  A single dollar, laid on the
heart, can shut out the light of heaven as effectually as can a
million.  The relation between riches and righteousness is not
determined by the balance in the bank, but by the balance that a man
succeeds in maintaining in his heart between his own interests and the
trusteeship which possession places upon him.

Money makes men as well as unmakes them.  The burdens, the tests, the
responsibilities it entails, the temptations it presents, all form part
of life's great lesson.  Out of the struggle between self and the
service we owe the world, out of the keen fighting against
covetousness, and the battle against the debasing tendencies of the
love for gold and the greed for gain arise the giants--or fall the lost
souls.

The rich young ruler came to Jesus and faced his test; the demand that
he should sell all and give to the poor simply put his heart on trial;
it set before him the great choices; it decided as to the things which
he held first.  To him the possession of things was more than the
possibilities of using them in service; before the great test he fell.

It is just as easy and often fully as dangerous to set your heart on
the gold you haven't got as it is to fall into the snare of the miser.
Everything depends on the place you give to riches in your life.  One
man seeks them as a prize to be won and enjoyed for his own
gratification, his own glory and fame; another seeks them only as
larger avenues to usefulness, and to him riches come as tools, as
servants, as possibilities of making his life count for more.

Some men die with their houses full of tools unused; they have made the
fatal mistake of setting their hearts on the tools instead of on the
work.  Others come to their accounting possessing as many tools, but
all of them shining from hard use, and counting as their treasures not
the tools but the things produced, the good accomplished.  Wealth is
for work and the work is for the making of the man.  They enter the
kingdom who are kingly, whether they learned the royal lesson and
acquired the heavenly character through the school of poverty or that
of riches.



RELIGION AND BUSINESS

The question, can a man be a Christian and succeed in business, though
old, is still asked every day.  There are yet a great many who regard
religion and business as conflicting pursuits, and they attempt a
compromise by the clear-cut division of time into business hours and
church time.  Others are answering this question in the negative.
"Look at me," they say.  "I have always been pious and honest, and
therefore I have failed to make money or achieve success; religion does
not pay."

If the question means, can a man take out his backbone and succeed in
business, there need be no hesitancy as to the answer.  If becoming a
Christian means the elimination of all virility from the character, the
substitution of soft soap and sawder for strength and diligence,
religion cannot be regarded as a help in business.  There are too many
people who think that sloth is a sign of spirituality and that you
cannot be a saint unless you have softening of the brain.

But it is simply whether you can keep your whole life, in the market or
out, up to the level of a certain ideal, whether you can be honest,
true, fair-minded, unselfish, merciful, and kind and at the same time
do the work and meet the exigencies of modern commercial and industrial
strife.  It is whether you can measure steadily towards heaven's ideal
while mastering earth's daily duties.

The question is either a reproach to religion or to business.  It is
assumed by many, with especial conviction by those who know business
only by reputation, that it demands the sacrifice constantly of honour,
truth, mercy, and every other virtue.  The man who thinks that he is
pious because he is pulseless, draws a fancy picture of red-blooded men
fighting, intriguing, slaying, like demons new from the pit; and that,
he thinks, is modern business.

Strife is everywhere.  If religion means sequestration from temptation
we need to pray to be delivered from it.  There is as much danger of a
man's losing his character, selling his soul, in the church as in the
market.  The temptation to the merchant to misrepresent his goods for a
larger profit is not greater than that which comes to the minister to
magnify his abilities for an increase in fame.

Things honourable are the same everywhere; they are written deep within
us, and by them church and mart both are judged.  Every man knows that
the chief business of life, whether through commerce, toil, study,
recreation, or worship, is to develop the best life, to make of himself
a true, full grown man, who shall render to this world a full man's
service.

Business is a more effective school of character than any other we
have.  If some of the standards of that school have been unworthy--and
who shall say they have not?--it is our duty to revise them, to make
them higher; not to abolish the school, not to stay away from it
because it is imperfect, but to make it fit to serve its true purpose.

Business always will be immoral as long as it is an end in itself.  The
product is greater than the machine, the making of character greater
than the mechanism by which we make a living.  The serious danger comes
when a man begins to lay his soul on the counter, when he reverses the
course in this school of character and makes the end serve the means,
when he sacrifices honour, truth, and the soul that business may
succeed.

Only failure lies that way.  No business ever became permanently great
by making its people small.  Success here is to be measured by the
soul.  No matter what a man may be doing he must keep himself above his
task.  The work must serve the worker.

The question is whether we are serving business or it is serving us.
If a man lives for his wage he will sacrifice everything to get it, but
if he works that he may find life, then he will ever refuse to lose the
things of which life is made in the pursuit of success.  He knows he
does not have to make money, but he does have to make manhood.  That is
the end both of religion and of business.



THE MORAL END OF MONEY-MAKING

There are those who talk of money and business as though these were
necessarily and intrinsically evil.  It is often supposed that capacity
for goodness is established by incapacity for business, while those to
whom poverty seems inevitable find consolation in regarding it as
evidence of piety.

Large numbers of otherwise sensible people feel that there is some
unavoidable conflict between the ideal and the real, between what they
call the sacred and the secular, between the things they would like to
do and to be and the things they actually have to do as part of their
daily affairs and duties.

Probably the greater number try to meet the difficulty by dividing
their lives and interest into separate parts.  They say, business is
business; religion is another thing altogether; I will work hard and
honestly at my business and look forward to the comforts and pleasures
of religion and ideal things.

So it happens that there are those who feel that to speak of religion
on a week-day reveals a lack of the sense of the fitness of things,
while other good people are quite sure that it is a wholly irreverent
thing to speak of business on a Sunday.  We tend to dwell alternately
in two sets of apartments, the practical and the pious.

Even where there are no such sharp lines through the life we feel that
manufacture and the market, money-making, and trading tend to blunt the
finer sensibilities and act as a hindrance to the realization of our
ideals, while, on the other hand, we are sure that the life of ideals
is unfitted for business.

The result of this separation and apparent antagonism is that we cannot
develop our lives symmetrically; we are torn by conflicting purposes;
we fail to see any ideal ends in business or to find any practical
values in religion.  Religion without business tends to dreamy,
purposeless moral enervation; business without ideal ends and aims to
grossness and materialism.

We need to spiritualize all our acts, our whole lives, our business,
our work, our pleasures, by giving them moral intent and value, so as
to unify the sacred and the secular, the utilitarian, and the ideal by
making each serve the other.

It does not make so much difference whether a man is engaged in
money-making or in writing poems and picturing the fair dreams of
better things; the question is this, is the money-making for the sake
of the money or for some high and worthy end?  What is the motive that
impels either the dealer in dollars or the dealer in dreams?

Our ideals, visions, aspirations, and our religion become most damaging
if they fail to find expression in conduct and work; lacking the
practical, they result in a character that is satisfied with
contemplating the good instead of realizing it.  The man who sinks his
soul in dollars may personally be no worse than he who allows it to
atrophy while he dreams.

Here in religion are the dynamic and the motives that bear men on and
buoy them up to do the toil, bear the burdens, stand in the fight of
daily living; here are the visions that lift our eyes from the desk and
the machine, from profits and discounts, and help us to see the worthy
prizes of life.

No man could become a saint by separating himself from this world's
turmoil and reading his Bible alone; neither can any man find strength
and stability for life's business and battle, find satisfaction in its
service and rewards, unless he sees through its dollars and its dirt
the moral ends of all this world's work.

This noisy mill of daily living may be the greatest blessing we know;
it is the opportunity for the expression of our highest ideals, for the
translation of religion into terms of daily living; it is the place
where character is molded by its stress, its calls to the strong will,
and its manifold opportunities for the service of all mankind by each
man in his place.




XV

The Every-Day Heaven

  _The Beauty of Holiness_
  _The Gladness of Goodness_
  _The True Paradise_


_Self shrinks the soul._

_The keen eye needs the kindly heart._

_There's no argument equal to a happy smile._

_Imaginary evils have more than imaginary effects._

_You never find truth by losing the temper._

_Menial work may be noblest service._

_They who live off the flock are never willing to die for it._

_The life that would be fruitful seeks showers as well as sunshine._

_Kindness makes all kin._

_All we get from heaven we owe to earth._

_Pain is a small price to pay for the joy of sacrifice._

_He who gives on feeling generally begrudges in fact._

_Every loss met by love leads to gain._

_The long look within ourselves will cure us of a lot of impatience
with other folks._

_The last person to enter heaven will be the one whose religion has all
been in the first person singular._

_We often talk a good deal about the salvation of souls in order to
escape service for the salvation of society._

_Much that is called orthodoxy is scepticism at heart, fear to examine
the foundations lest there are none._


