VI

THE SUFFICIENT SIGN

The scribe and the Pharisee are still with us.  "Establish the
credibility of the miracles of Jesus, or, better still, let Him work a
miracle to-day, and we will believe," they say.  This age is credulous;
it hungers to believe the extraordinary.  Yet, while it is running
after folly, it is blind to the most extraordinary fact, the most
stupendous miracle that ever took place, although it goes on right
before its eyes and is open to every kind of proof.  It cannot see the
miracle of Jesus in the world to-day, the miracle beside which all the
works He did in His lifetime sink into insignificance.

Here is the sign to-day offered to the skeptic: Once, nearly twenty
centuries ago, a young preacher travelled and taught through the
villages and by the wayside in an obscure oriental country.  He
addressed a subject race, insular in their prejudices, lacking in
political genius and in artistic culture.  He lived in days calculated
to chill the most fervid religious enthusiasm.  He was at first ignored
and then hated by His own people; the religious leaders became His
implacable foes.  His work ended in apparent failure, in a death of
shame.

But that was not the end.  It is strange that the world remembers
anything about that young preacher; but stranger still is the fact that
to-day He influences more than half the population of the globe,
surpassing all other teachers, more people are under His sway now than
the whole world held when He lived.  These millions make Him the object
of their worship and devotion; in His name they gather regularly all
over the world, without regard to language or race.

More than this, this one whom the wise men of His day ignored has been
the inspiration of the works of genius and art, of the deeds of
heroism, of the lofty endeavours of the world since He died.  He has
changed the mind.  He has changed the appearance of the world; by Him
nations have fallen and risen.  The humble, the despised, the rejected
has become the world's hero, the mightiest of all the sons of men, the
saviour of His race.

Once He touched a few who were blind and lame and they were healed;
to-day in His name, in every city, a thousand suffering ones are made
whole.  Science does the work; but the opportunity for its development
and the inspiration for its application came from Him.

Nor is this all.  He made the world to see; He touched the blind eyes
of the people, as they groped in superstition, and has given them
sight; He has made the ages, once limping and halting, to arise and
march forward with magnificent tread; He found the world a babel of
jarring voices and fretting purposes, and His touch gave peace and
singleness of purpose until men could discern that "through the ages
one unceasing purpose runs."  He did for man and mind what was first
done for matter, brought the cosmos out of chaos.  This is the miracle
indeed.

It goes right on before our eyes.  They take His name to a dead people,
and soon there is life there.  Light, and love, and larger life spring
up everywhere in His name.  From this modern miracle of the power, the
growing authority, the kingship of the once despised Jesus we cannot
escape; we are perforce participants in its benefits; it conditions all
our lives.

If all the gospel stories could be proved myths and the miracles but
inventions, there would still remain the greater, the insuperable
miracle of the world's picture of the perfect and all glorious
personality of Jesus and the fact of His preeminent power in the world
to-day.  This is the sign He gives this age, and to this the open mind
answers: "Thou art the Christ, the saviour of the world."



BEHOLD THE MAN

The two words, "Ecce homo," contemptuously spoken by the cynical Roman
governor contained the highest tribute that had been given to Jesus.
How empty appear all the high sounding titles, such as king and
emperor, beside this significant one of Man.  How sad and self-damning
the bitter railing of His enemies in the light of that serene dignity.
How puerile the bickering over words and ways of worship, and all the
wrangling that blinded them to the heavenly radiance of that all
glorious manhood.  The wonder of Jesus is not in the deeds He did, but
in the being He was.  And the wonder of His being is not in that it
offers elements for arguments as to a divine personality, but it is
that of a simple, clear, sublimely perfect manhood.  It is upon this
perfection of personal character that His abiding claim to divinity
must rest; it depends not on His birth but on His being.

There is something strange about the perversity with which the church
has emphasized the least attractive aspects of its master's person.
The preachers have scolded men for not coming to church, and when they
did come they offered them pictures of an emaciated, effeminate being
for their adoration.  With them the painters have conspired to set on
canvas and in church window representations from the reality of which
we would turn with repulsion or on which we would look with pity.

If Jesus is to be the leader of men He must go before them.  He must
stand in the front, not set there by artificial arguments as to His
right to rule over men, but there because He belongs there, first
because He is first in all that makes manhood; He is king because He
can, and because He has overcome in life's great conflict.

If He is to show us the way we should go He must walk in that way; He
must be flesh of our flesh, true man, knowing the full fellowship of
our lives.  If He was born with a halo; if He lived on angel's fare; if
somehow He belongs to another world and His perfections are not those
of our nature, then, almighty as He may be as a leader for beings of
another world, He has no value to us.

But men have ever set aside the weavings of minds so absorbed in the
wonder of their speculations that they could not see the truth.  They
have seen through the dreamings of poets, painters, and preachers, who
pictured only their sickly ideals.  And, instead of their caricatures,
men have held in their hearts a man, one of their own.  And this true
fellow, brother and friend, has spurred them to noble deeds and lofty
living.

Perfection is seen in strength, not in weakness, in virility and not in
tears, in majesty, the majesty truly of meekness, but not of a maudlin,
mooning etherealism.  The revelation of the perfect man cannot come in
a form that a child will pity; it will be admirable from all points of
view.  It is the heroic rather than the esthetic we must admire.

The men who followed that one long ago did so not because they had
heard arguments as to His divine claims, but because they were drawn by
the heavenly power of His manhood.  This it is that wins men ever, the
magnetism of manhood.  The force of a great life is mightier than any
of the things it does.  There is about this leader, Jesus, that which
compels us to greatness, spurs us to strife for our better selves,
strengthens to sacrifice and to service for our fellows.

It matters little whence a life like this has come; the greater
question is where does it lead us.  Childish minds spend time on the
genealogical trees of the giants; the wise men follow them.  The value
of the life of the great Teacher does not depend on our ability to
comprehend it biologically or arrange it chronologically, but on our
vision of its moral and manly perfections and on the power these
attributes have over our lives.

This world will be little helped by the most irrefutable syllogism
concerning the peculiar nature and separate exclusive divinity of its
great religious Teacher.  But lives will be lifted everywhere in the
measure that they see the man in Him who taught us of God.  For men
need not so much a God who has come down as a man who has attained to
God, not a descent, but an ascent, one who is the life and the truth
because He is the way which they may tread up to the glory that is
their heritage and the God who is their own.



THE LIFE THAT LIFTS

To any save the few in the group of His friends that statement of Jesus
that being lifted up He would draw all men to Him must have sounded
like the ravings of one deluded.  It has taken the centuries to show
that He was right.  He was right in His estimation of His life's end;
it was a lifting up.  His enemies thought it a casting down, a defeat;
He knew it to be a triumph.  Sorrow, injustice, oppression, hatred, the
things that seem to crush are the things that elevate.  Only by
opposition has any life discovered power.  The fiercer blow these winds
the firmer grows the tree.  Out of the petty persecutions, the
countless meannesses, the littleness of those who oppose him the great
soul builds its greatness.  It is, and ever has been by a cross that
men are lifted up.  History abounds with prisons, gibbets, and crosses
which have become thrones of eternal glory.

Whether we shall be cast down or lifted up depends upon ourselves;
neither enemies nor adverse circumstances have the power to do this.
The soul that seeks the stars builds its staircase out of the stones
flung by the persecutor, out of the rocks of difficulties.  If your
heart is great, my brother, nothing can keep you from greatness; if it
is mean, no amount of o'ervaulting ambition can make you other than a
little, obscure man, as truly lost on the peak as you would be at the
base.

Jesus died a failure; His friends were few, and the best of them
thought His life a mistake.  It takes more than the span of our lives
to measure their size.  It is better that a great soul should be called
a failure than that it should die a shrivelled success.  Earth measures
by what the hands hold; heaven by the heart.  The hands at last lose
their grasp, but the heart wealth goes on from more to more.  This it
is that is worth while.

Jesus was right when He said that He would draw all men to Him.  Then
it sounded like folly; to-day it demonstrates His divine insight.
Lifted up in shame the riches of His life were revealed.  After all,
the best in us answers to the best; it is love that leads.  In the end,
goodness, truth, gentleness, sincerity have the greatest attraction for
men.  Jesus is known and loved by millions who never heard of Nero or
of Augustus.  Their glory was that of circumstance; His that of
character.  His life lifts.

This it is that most helps the world; not learning, but a life; not
power or position, but simple passion for men; not riches, but wealth
of the inner life.  You may not found a university or build libraries
or hospitals, or even write books or preach sermons.  But every one may
do the principal thing that Jesus did.  That was to live a life amongst
men of love for them, of simple kindnesses, of God-seeking aspiration,
of white sincerity.  The race needs not so much men who will shake it
with their power or dazzle it with their learning as it needs men and
women who will lift it with the quiet earnestness and sincerity of
their lives.  Herein is lasting greatness and true power, to live as He
lived, to love as He loved, true to God, to yourself, and to your
fellows, seeking the best and giving of your best.

Service and sacrifice are the things that lift to the supreme places;
the lower you stoop in helpfulness the higher you are lifted in lasting
glory.  And they are lifted to heaven, they achieve immortality, they
can never die who were willing to die if death lay in the path of duty,
to be sacrificed if sacrifice was part of their service.




VII

Seeing the Unseen

  _The Sense of the Unseen_
  _The Brook in the Way_
  _That Which is High_


_The song of sympathy never comes until the singer has been to the
school of sorrow._

_True spirituality can see the altar in the cookstove and the washtub._

_People who are always off the key are never content out of the choir._

_The only version of the Bible authorized by heaven is that on two
feet._

_Every life must have days in the desert but it does not need to build
its house there._

_Many a man thinks he is patient with pain when he is only perverse in
eating pickles._

_No man knows how much religion he has until he goes of fishing alone
where mosquitoes are many._

_There are too many people to whom God has given wings who are
complaining of corns._

_It is some consolation to know that when you aim at nothing you are
sure to hit it._

_If you have large reserves of religion you will not be without the
small change of kindness._


