VII

THE SENSE OF THE UNSEEN

When the practically-minded man Paul writes of looking at the things
which are not seen his words sound like either fantasy or folly.   Yet
it is plain fact, practical, and certainly essential to any success.
He is blind who can see only with his eyes, and he only is sensible who
knows there are many things beyond his senses.  Practical men consider
all the factors to every problem, and things are not less real to them
because they may chance to be intangible.

The unseen things are imminent to us always.  There are many things not
yet pigeonholed by our science nor catalogued by our philosophies.  You
can dissect a daisy and enumerate its parts; but you never know a daisy
until you have seen the unseen things thereof, until you have felt the
subtle appeal of its beauty.  Bobbie Burns saw more of the daisy than
the greatest botanist without his spiritual eyes.

The danger is that in our hard workaday we shall forget the reality of
the unseen, we shall get to think that gold and steel and land are the
only real things, and we shall shape ourselves by the blind and base
creed of gold, and steel, and land.  How easy it is to measure every
man by his possessions in tangible things.  How easy to make these our
chief end in life, to slight the real prizes, the unseen wealth that
lies so close at hand or already possessed, while we rush and strive
for the rainbow of riches.

Deep within us we know that he is rich, and he alone, who has wisdom,
love, patience, who possesses friends, who creates kindly thoughts,
whose life with simple joy abounds.  Once again and often do we need to
see Bunyan's picture of the man bending over his refuse, gathered with
the muck rake, and heedless of the angel holding the crown that only
waits his taking.

A man is wealthy according to what is within him.  His greatness is of
the things that are unseen.  There are limits to the possession and the
use of the things that are seen; but who shall set a limit to a man's
possible wealth in love and honour, in wisdom and integrity, in all the
things that make up the soul of man?  Few are the things that a man may
hold for his own all the days of his life, and fewer still are those he
may grasp with pleasure when the hands are falling helpless by his
side.  But many are the riches he may have to hold forever in the
things of the unseen.  Many a man walks through the fields penniless
and yet richer far than their owner; to him the birds sing, for him the
flowers bloom, to his eyes there are beauties in the blue beyond all
words, and all the loveliness of the fair land lifts his heart within
him.  The other man who holds the title deeds sees nothing beside them.
Possession is wholly a matter of appreciation.  The earth is the Lord's
and He gives it to those who have eyes to see.

It is the eye to see the unseen that gives wealth to the seen.  Values
depend on vision.  Appreciation does not prevent possession; it makes
the possession actual.  And the vision of the realities behind things
keeps a man from the sense of destitution when all things are taken
from him.  He cannot be destitute.  He may lose all his fellows, but he
cannot be friendless; the Father of Spirits cannot lose him, nor can he
be cut off from fellowship with those who die no more.

The seeing eye is the stimulus to the worth while endeavour.  The
inventors who have enriched the world endured derision seeing the
things invisible to others.  The truth is that it is the unspiritual
world that makes the least progress in things material.  The men of
faith and vision are back of all advance.  They have endurance,
patience, and strength.  The sense of another world where motives are
rightly measured, the sense of a great cloud of worthy witnesses to
other eyes invisible, the sense of reward in the very service itself,
rewards intangible yet most real, the joy of sacrifice and service;
these all enable one to push on, to toil, to endure.  Then, long
afterwards, the dull, weary world sees and understands.



THE BROOK IN THE WAY

Alongside every highway runs the brook whereof a man may drink often if
he will and drinking lift up his head.  Its little song we scarce hear
in the rush of our businesses; its refreshing we forget even though our
throats be parched with the dust of our petty affairs.  Yet it is ever
there, cool, refreshing, this world of spirits and ideals.

Nature has a prodigal way of scattering rivulets down the hillside and
along the pathways, little heeding whether men walk there or not.  The
practical eye sees waste; these streams might have been made to turn
wheels; the needs of the traveller, weary with the way, might be met by
faucets at regular intervals.

It is well for us all that the power of the practical man finds its
limitations, else all poetry would have gone from the world, and great
and glorious as might have been our physical perfections our bodies
would be but the empty habitations whence souls had long since fled.
The utilitarian would have stolen from us the bliss of the deep draft
from the pebbly brook.

The man who is proud of being practical tells us we are wasting time
and nervous energy in stopping to think of ideal things; we must take
the world as we find it, he says, forgetting how fair and poetic we
once found it and how bleak and ugly we are likely to leave it.  But to
him trees are always lumber, grass and flowers but hay, bird songs
spell poultry, wind and waters energy.  Many are too busy making things
ever to enjoy anything that is made.

In this steel age it may seem folly and waste to stop and think of
sacrifice and courage and love, to admire and answer to the thrill of
human passions; but alas for him who never sees the light of heaven in
another's tear, nor hears the brush of angels' wings when men and women
fly to their fellow's aid.

If you haven't time in your busy life to turn aside to drink of the
brook of human affection, to look deep into the eyes of friendship, to
sympathize, to comfort, to taste this strange sweet and bitter cup of
our common fellowship, then is your heart going dry and thirsty and
life becoming a whitened road that knows no wells or springs.

But something there is in man that calls for drafts at yet deeper
streams than these.  Foolish and unlearned he may be, ignorant of the
wise conclusions of philosophers who have looked into these things with
their lanterns, but through the ages he has been drinking eagerly at
the waters of eternity.  In every man there is a thirst after the deep,
immeasurable things divine; the deeper the nature of the man the
greater his necessity for drinking often here.

The consciousness of the great life that embraces all life, the sense
of its nearness to us all, has been a perennial refreshing to all great
hearts.  In some way to bring the life into touch with the infinite is
to take down its limitations, break its barriers, and give it a sense
of infinitude, to lift up the head in vision of the divinity of our
lives and of every life.  We who walk in the dust often need to be
filled with the divine lest we become ourselves but dust.

This world of things is hungry for the life that is more than things,
the life of the spirit; that is why so many love to sing of heaven and
dream of a fair world peopled by strange and glorious celestial ones.
Heaven is nearer than we think; like the brook by the way, the life of
the spirit flows beside this life; happy they who drink of its waters,
who already enter into eternity, who find strength for this life's way
and work by the contact with the life that is life indeed.

Is it any wonder that life is a wearisome thing, a dead drag, when you
are starving its very sources?  You neglect the soul at the peril of
all.  So anxious are you to run this race that you have no time to
allow him who rides in the chariot to drink of the water of life.  This
is not utilitarianism; this is suicide from the centre out.

The most practical common sense demands that you feed the inner places
of your life, the heart that has gone so long thirsty and longing for
love, for things too deep for words, for things that cannot be used and
cannot be quoted in dollars.  Give your inner life its deep drafts of
the infinite life and your outer life shall take its place and do its
work in the world.



THAT WHICH IS HIGH

There are two ways of viewing the oncoming years, as burdens or as
opportunities, with fear or with expectation.  The days of the new year
may loom up as a series of unwelcome tasks to be unwillingly done or as
so many invitations to attempt and achieve great things.  The
difference between these two points of view marks the difference
between enduring life and finding the life that endures.

The wise preacher of long ago caught sight of one of these distinctions
that cut clear through to the roots of things.  He says that the sign
of old age is that a man is "afraid of that which is high."  When
courage and ambition have gone old age and decrepitude have entered in,
no matter whether a man be eighteen or eighty.

He alone has youth, he alone has life before him, who can still catch
the vision of the ideal, of that which is high, who can lift up his
eyes beyond the horizon of practicabilities and precedents and see the
things not yet realized.  There is a time when men must dream dreams
and see visions, when they must feast on noble purposes or die so far
as the inner spirit and all that makes real living is concerned.

If you find the will becoming dull and listless, with no quickening of
the pulses, but only apathy or a sneer for the high purpose or the
great promise, it is but a sign of the approach of senility, of the
failure of the powers.  When the ambition can be satisfied with the
less while the greater is before it, when things low and base are
preferred to things high, afar off, and difficult to attain, the heart
is dying already.

Cherish as the spark of life the aspiration to have and do and be the
best.  Yet who is there does not know the paralyzing chill that the
sneer of the philistine or even the memory of our own many failures can
give when great possibilities offer themselves to us?  How easily enter
in the cold considerations that deaden our aspirations; how subtle the
temptation to be content with the condition that involves neither toil
nor pain.  How hard to realize that this is an invitation to death.

To all men comes the thrill of the passion to do some great thing, to
give to our world some worthy service.  To yield to this is to keep the
heart young, is to defy time, to conquer the years.  Whether the coming
days shall bend the back with their burdens or shall nerve and
strengthen the life does not depend on whether they have cares or joys
in them, but on whether they find us responsive to the call of noble
things.

No man can afford to let a pure and lofty impulse die, nor, for fear of
failure or of ridicule, to become afraid or ashamed of his ideals.
Living is more than a dull feeding at tables or troughs, more than
shelter and sleep; it is growing, climbing, becoming, finding higher
levels and seeing yet higher before.

Nor is this all; the spirit of greatness finds ample play in daily
duties.  The success of the year does not depend on whether you can do
things that shall amaze men to-day or make your name known forever, but
upon whether into all the things you do, lowly, humdrum, commonplace as
they may seem to be, the daily duties of home or shop or store, the
care of the baby, or the running of a typewriter, there shall enter the
great and high motive.

This is what we all need, the high vision of the lowly things, the
sight of the fact that the least piece of work is an essential part of
the service of the whole universe, that a man serves the Divine not by
wearing a black coat but by doing, as in God's name, with high motives
the least duties that may be his.  It is not place nor authority nor
wage that makes the work high or low; it is the spirit of the service
and the part it plays in the world's great business of perfecting
humanity.

Would you ward off old age, cherish vitality and give value to your
days, seek the things that are above, the life that serves some worthy
end.  One is young as long as his heart leaps responsive to a noble
call.  But he who lives to pleasure, to the satisfaction of self, who
has shut his eyes to the high things that call for self-denial, for
toil and loss, is dead already.




VIII

Sources of Strength and Inspiration

  _Strength for the Daily Task_
  _The Sense of the Infinite_
  _The Great Inspiration_


_Living heartily is one secret of living happily._

_Life is early blighted if it knows no clouds._

_You can tell the character of any age by the place it gives to
character._

_There is little danger in the discontent with conditions that is
equalled by discontent with character._

_Heart health never comes so long as the hand is kept on the pulse._

_Feed on garbage and you soon lose faith in good things._

_The fruitful life seeks showers as well as sunshine._

_It's hard for a man who has ground of his nose on the money mill to
smell a taint on anything._

_Many a man goes back by trying to put up a good front and nothing
more._

_Every life is worth the love it gives._


