IX

THE PASSING AND PERMANENT

When the walls are being rebuilt it is easy to imagine that the
foundations are being destroyed.  Old creeds pass away, but truth
remains; if they were true in their day they do but give place to the
larger truth of the new day.  We need to distinguish between the
turmoil attendant to the process of building and the beauty of the new
temple that arises.

The old folks hear the new truths and ask, where are the foundations
gone?  The young hear the discussion between the old and the new and
ask, is there anything settled, anything worth believing?  What are the
permanent elements in religion on which the life may build while the
things that are but temporary are adjusting themselves?

It would be the height of folly to assert that there is no change.
Some say that we must believe precisely the same things as our fathers
believed.  To do so would be to be false to our fathers, for they
refused to accept the traditions of their elders.  The landmarks we
leave behind once were far in front of the seekers after truth.

Truth never changes but our vision is ever enlarging.  The road
remains, but the traveller moves on.  With the living every day has
some new light.  Creeds are crystallized statements of truth; truth is
vital and cannot be contained in unchanging forms.  Credulity blindly
accepts yesterday's picture of truth; faith, with open eyes, seeks
to-day's truth itself.

Skepticism is much less sinful than credulity.  The sloth of the man
who will not examine things, will not prove them, who prefers to buy
his garments of truth ready made, results in what is worse than
unbelief, and that is blind belief in the false.  It is a religious
duty to question every teaching, to prove all things.

How may we find those things that are certain?  How may we discover the
truth for our day, the truth upon which we may build?  Surely there are
some things fixed and certain, there is somewhere pole star and
compass.  How may we find that truth which belongs to our day and in
which we may have the confidence that our fathers had in their truth?

The test of the vital truths is a practical one.  Only those truths are
vital which concern the present business of living in all its wide
sweep.

It is a matter of indifference what we may think of the colour of
angels' hair or the number of strings to their harps; it is a vastly
different matter what we may believe as to moral obligations, human
rights, and duties.

The test of creed is an ethical one.  What things work out best in
living, what are the ideals, doctrines, beliefs that make the noblest
characters and the most useful citizens, the best sons, and daughters,
and parents, and neighbours?  What are the things that help me most in
my life, the things that give me moral stimulus and bracing, the things
that lead me to covet the best?

The way to find the truth is to do the truth; only the truth that we
can do is worth discussing.  If you will give yourself to the business
of living the truth you have you soon will have the living truth for
this new day.

Too many people are holding up as saving doctrines matters of
philosophy and speculation, matters of childish curiosity, because it
is easier to hold these things theoretically than to hold living truth
practically.  The truths that save men are the ones that change their
characters; the great authorized and divine translation of the Bible is
its translation into present day lofty living.

Build your life on the belief in goodness, in eternal, infinite
goodness as the order of the universe, on the superiority of love to
hatred, on the final victory of love and goodness, on the ideal of this
great human family of ours that shall come to live in unity and
brotherliness, and so fulfill the will of the infinite father of all.
These things work well.



FACING THE FACTS

This is the age of the dominance of science.  When a man asks, What
shall I believe? only one answer can be returned: Believe the things
that are.  An age now past found it easy to believe that it believed
what it was told, even the things that it knew were not so.  But to-day
at least has the merit of finding no merit in that form of
self-deception.

The passion for absolute truth and rightness is one of the noblest that
can spring up in any breast; it is a ripe fruit of religion.  The
scientist, by his devotion to exact facts, to pure truth, is the
religious man of our day, and the schools become religious educators in
their power to instill a primary love for truth and to lift up ideals
of exactness and equity.

When we translate religion into terms of life, into actuality as
contrasted with imagination, we begin to discover the necessity for
foundations deeper than legend or romance.  So long as a man's religion
consisted in what he might picture in glowing colours of imagination on
the canvas of fancy about his past or future he did not need to take
his designs from facts.

But when religion becomes the science of right living, the process of
securing right social relationships and character as the expression of
ideal personal and individual character, it is evident that in such a
work religion must proceed on ascertained, indisputable verities.

We may be satisfied with myths as to the ordering of the first family,
and we may leave to the play of fancy the specifications of an ideal
heaven; but when we begin to order our own families and adjust our
social and civic affairs we are compelled to wait for principles based
on facts, for truth.  Religion thus becomes a science.

Much eloquence was spilled over the conflict between religion and
science.  It was only a conflict between the old religion and its new
form, between the gray dawn and the growing day.  Our fathers were not
wilfully false, holding on to darkness when the light came; but they so
long had held sacred the pictures seen in twilight they were loath to
give them up for those of the full day's printing.

The most damaging infidelity is the lack of faith in truth, the fear
that it might not be safe to allow all the facts to be known.  He who
in the name of religion seeks to prevent our seeing and accepting the
full facts is religion's greatest foe.  Only the full truth can set us
fully free, intellectually, spiritually, morally.

Why should we fear the light of investigation on the things of
religion?  There is more sacredness in simple truth than in secrecy.
It were better to be lost forever seeking truth than saved by
sophistry.  How foolish to attempt to adjust our lives by laws built
out of speculation, to attempt to steer by a compass when there is no
pole of truth?

In to-day's changing tides of thought, when the old faiths seem
slipping away, when we wonder why we have lost the simple faith of our
own youth or our father's, looking for some firm ground for our feet,
we do well to set them down on nothing but facts, to discriminate among
the sands of time and the alluvial deposits of tradition till we find
the rock of truth.

But facing the facts we find everywhere one writ large, over all one
great principle of unchanging law, one great purpose moving through all
nature and all history, and what we once only dared to hope and dream,
that back of all there throbs infinite love and there rules infinite
wisdom, now is attested by the impressive array of the witnesses of
science.

Truth always is safe.  The holiest error must be born of hell.  We can
make no mistake in refusing to go beyond truth, and we will find that
she leads to the ordering of life according to eternal laws, to the
doing of duties and finding of sweet joys as old as the hills and as
unchanging; she will lead in the paths of rightness.

Some day our race will know all the alphabet of nature and be able to
read the story of the unchanging goodness; some day we shall comprehend
the wavering handwriting of history; some day we shall catch the
harmony of love and law; we shall know the full truth that is religion;
shall know things as they are and be what we should be.



THE REAL FOUNDATION

A good many thousand sermons have been preached on the parable of the
houses built on sand and on rock, probably nearly all of them with the
intent to prove that the way to build the life on a rock foundation is
to pass through the experience known as conversion, obtain saving faith
and join the church.  This is typical of a popular way of interpreting
the scriptures: First, determine what you wish them to mean and then
make them mean that.  The purpose being to persuade people to join the
church, then by hook or crook that duty must be discovered in every
divine precept.

But this is simply to ignore the plain words of the great Teacher.   It
would be impossible to clarify His statement: "If any man hears and
does the things I have been teaching he is like one who builds on a
rock."  One thing marks the rock founded life, the doing of Christly
deeds.  The course of conduct, the kind of character He has just
outlined in the sermon on the mount gives the established staple
character.

The enduring life is not built on dreams.  Many people think that their
lives are rock founded because they have a nebulous admiration for the
moral teachings of Jesus.  On the whole they admire the sermon on the
mount; having taken the trouble to say as much as this they sit back
with the comfortable feeling that they have set themselves right with
the universe, that the Almighty will be delighted with their
indorsement.

One of the most dangerous hypocrites is the easy-going, thoughtless
being who fancies that the indorsement of a duty is equivalent to the
doing of it.  He evaporates his convictions into compliments instead of
crystallizing them into conduct.  So far from being built on a rock he
floats around like a wisp of hay in a high wind.  A butterfly might
better hope to drill and quarry out a foundation than he.  Besides
this, his hypocritical praise of right precepts makes them only
offensive to those who might desire to practice them.

Others imagine that an intellectual assent to certain statements
concerning the church or the Bible or Jesus is sufficient to fix the
life in stability.  But the great Teacher does not place the emphasis
so much on what men may think of His character or mission, nor even on
their honest opinions on the theories of the past and the future, which
have delighted mental gymnasts since the world was young, to Him the
great differentiating fact touches those dynamic convictions that are
determining your conduct this day.

He places conduct before creed.  He long ago took that method of
teaching which modern pedagogy approves.  He taught religion by the
manual method.  Instead of saying, as theologians do, first comprehend
these doctrines and then you will be able to do them, He says, first do
these things, practice My precepts, and they will ere long become plain
to you.  Men learn religion by doing.  Begin to do the right and you
will get the reason; get the rule through the example.  Deeds are the
solvents of doctrines.

The house of life is built differently from any other; we get the plans
by erecting the structure.  In the realm of character it is houses
rather than architecture we need.  Build but one hour's conduct
squarely on the plain, cogent teachings of the man of Nazareth and you
will serve the world better than if you gave a lifetime to the
explanation of His words.

Doctrines are but teachings intended to be done into deeds.  Doing them
you gain a larger peace of mind and sense of stability of life than in
any other way.  If you want the equilibrium of faith you will find it
by simply laying life's daily details on the plain foundation of His
principles.  Nothing could be plainer; there are no hair-splitting
metaphysics, no subtle questions of policy here; do these things and
the heart finds calm, the life certitude, the soul satisfaction.




X

The Passion for Perfection

  _The Great Search_
  _The Hunger of the Ages_
  _The Sole Satisfaction_


_Pain is the parent of power._

_Marking time leaves no mark on time._

_The proof of love is loving the unlovely._

_Truth never is found by twisting the facts._

_Wings come not to those who refuse to walk._

_An ideal usually is what we want the other man to be._

_There is no righteousness without some self-respect._

_You cannot lead men to the divine by crawling in the dust._

_The real saints have no time to write their autobiographies._

_When a man boils over quickly you soon find out what is in him._

_True piety simply is the prosperity of the eternal things in a man._

_The world never will be won from the love of evil until we make the
good lovely._


