XVII

ROOT AND FRUIT

There is honest inquiry rather than querulous criticism in the
question, often asked, Why does not religion produce a higher and
stronger type of moral character?  Enthusiasm for the teachings of
Christ often is cooled by contact with some flabby-willed,
narrow-minded professed follower of those teachings.

It is a common saying with business men that it is hard to find a man
of absolute integrity, one who even measures up to the standards of
commercial honour among those who are religious, either by vocation or
avocation.  At any rate, it is true that a certificate of religious
affiliations by no means is equivalent to a guarantee of high moral
worth.

Yet it is easy to arrive at wrong conclusions when judging the effect
of religion on personal character as tested by daily business and
living.  One is in danger of judging from exceptions.  We may remember
as a religious person the man who makes the loudest protestations of
his piety and fail to recognize the religious sources of strength in
the quieter one of whose sterling qualities we need no persuasion.

When religion has little root it often springs up with a rapid
self-assertive growth; but it withers even more quickly under the
scorching sun of the market and business affairs.  It also would be the
height of folly to conclude that religion contributed nothing to a
man's moral worth, because the morally worthless seek to hide their
nakedness by wearing it as a cloak.

If we stop to think of the strong men and women we know, of those whose
integrity is undoubted, whose character wealth constitutes the real
reserve and bulwark of our business stability, we shall find that they
are controlled by religious ideals and principles, that the strength
and beauty which we admire in them in itself is religion.

They may have or may not have ecclesiastical affiliations; these are
but incidental.  They do have religion.  Somehow we feel that their
actions rise not from superficial wells of policy or custom but from
deep springs that go back into the roots and rock of things.  They look
out on life with eyes that see beyond questions of immediate and
passing advantage; they see visions and ideals; they are drawn on by
lofty aspirations.

The recognition which we accord to real worth, to high, and noble, and
strong manhood and womanhood, with the scorn we have for the canting
weakling, is but part of our discrimination between a living, deep
religion expressed in conduct and a mask or pretense adopted for profit
or convenience.

Still there are many good people, sincere in their religious
professions, who practically are no good at all when they come to some
strain on conscience, or some real test in life.  Is it not because in
their minds religion never has been related to conduct?  They are
grounded on the eschatology of Christianity but not on its ethics.

It is possible to go through a full course of religious instruction in
the regularly appointed agencies of many churches and to come out with
clear-cut conceptions of heaven and angels, but with the most misty and
even misleading conceptions of right relations among men, of honesty,
and justice, and truth.

The schools teach us about the stars and the earth, about men dead and
beasts living; the church teaches us of saints and seraphs, and about
an ancient literature; but who shall teach us and our children the art
of living, the laws of human duties?  Of what value is all our
knowledge unless we get the wisdom of right living?

No man is saved until he is made strong, sane, useful, and reliable.
The most irreligious thing in this world is a religion that makes
people think that an imputed or technical salvation absolves them from
the necessity of practical salvation, the working out of the best and
noblest in their lives.  Religion without morality is a mockery.

Real religion is the secret and source of the highest, strongest,
cleanest character.  It furnishes the life with motives mightier than
any considerations of advantage or profit; it ties the soul up to
eternal and spiritual verities; it refreshes the heart as with living
waters when life seems all desert; it sets the heart in step with the
Infinite One who marches on through the ages.



THE ORTHODOX ACCENT

Perhaps the chief damage done by the confusion of tongues at Babel was
that it tended to a multiplicity of words.  Whether it was so before
that time or not, it is certain that ever since there has been a
constant likelihood of religion and every other good thing being
drowned in floods of rhetoric.  Where there are ten ways of saying a
thing it is so much easier to use them all than to do the thing in the
one way in which it may be done.  Words become the chief enemies of
works.  A volume containing all the words of the great Teacher would
look mighty insignificant beside the ponderous tomes of the modern
exponents of His teachings.  That is because the minister has become
the preacher.

The tendency also is for laymen to prove their piety by becoming
teachers.  It is so in every direction.  Reforms dissipate into theses;
it is always easier to make speeches on the city beautiful than it is
to refrain from throwing the refuse in the street.  We are all talking
about what ought to be done.  Perhaps some leader will arise and
institute the order of the practicers.

Dreamers, philosophers, thinkers, writers have poured forth their
floods upon a thirsty world.  But the only words that have been worth
anything to mankind have been those that have grown out of the
speaker's soul as it has been molded by his living and doing.

Because talking is so easy to the knowing ones it is not strange that
they should water their stock of superstitious prestige with the less
knowing ones from their reservoir of words.  Then it is the most
natural thing for the glib man to set up the thing he can do most
easily as the thing essential to salvation, and thus a shibboleth
becomes the saving sign.

But salvation does not depend on any shibboleth.  No man is going to
fail of seeing the Most High because he cannot render the precise name
by which one race chose to call Him, nor will the sun cease to shine
upon him should he seek the highest good in other ways than names.  The
heart of the universe asks not that we be consistent with the
syllogisms of the past, but that we be true to the truth we know
ourselves.

Every man has some creed back of every deed; but when he puts his creed
up in front his deeds soon die.  Where words reign they soon reign
alone, with nothing but words to serve them.  Orthodoxy is so general,
because it is so easy and so meaningless.  Catch the accent and you are
orthodox.  But if heaven is to be won by an accent most honest men
would rather pay board, somewhere else.

No life can be interpreted in language alone.  The church is but an
obscuration on Christianity when it meets only to analyze the life of
its Lord and never to exemplify His deeds.  What must heaven think to
see a thousand able-bodied men and women gather in a beautiful building
to sing hymns of praise to their Diety [Transcriber's note: Deity?] and
to listen to arguments about His divinity while, within block of them,
there are, in sickness and squalor, distress and sorrow, the ones to
whom He sent these people to minister?  The doctrines manufactured
about Him have hidden the directions given by Him.

The trouble is not that we have too much doctrine so much as that we
have the wrong kind.  The Master's great teaching was, Do the divine
things, and the divine truths will take care of themselves.

The kingdom will never come until His will is done.  Half-tones of
heaven will not keep people warm in winter; it is half tons of coal
they need.  The world will believe in any church that tries to do good.
But the church does not believe in itself yet; half the people are
strenuously endeavouring to fool themselves into what they call
spiritual warmth.  What they need is plain Christian perspiration.  No
man really credits his own religion until he converts it into reality.

But the man who prides himself on his heterodoxy is often equally
guilty here.  He ridicules the old type of piety and thinks to improve
on it with new sets of phrases.  All these critics have is new
arrangements of words.  Even the man who rejects all religion satisfies
himself with the cant phrase of irreligion.

We need most of all to treat religion as sensibly as we do business, to
leave the science to those interested while we give ourselves to the
practice of its art, the doing of its deeds, the living its life.



THE BUSINESS OF RELIGION

Any religion that will not stand the strain of modern business may have
been good for some other age; but it is valueless in this one.  The
test of your piety is not peace in the pews of the church, but power
and direction in the stress of the market, its adaptability to your
activities as well as your meditations.

The problem of the reconciliation of business and religion is not
nearly so complex as we would believe.  The people who are saying it is
impossible to be upright and get on in the world mean that it is
impossible to be honest and to gain all the questionable advantages on
which they have set their hearts.  When a man says that religion and
business will not work in harmony he either has a wrong brand of piety
or a false conception of business.

Religion is built for business.  The only creed that is worth a
moment's thought is a working creed, that is, one that gets into
action.  Religion is not the mere acceptance of a speculative
philosophy of this and other worlds.  It consists in principles,
ideals, and motives which dominate conduct.  It is more concerned with
the kind of a world you are making here than with the conceptions you
may have of a world beyond.

Religion is more than an institution; it is a course of life.  It has
to do with the church only in so far as the church serves its purposes.
It is more concerned with what a man pays his employees than with what
he puts into the plate at the collection.  The man who can put all his
piety into the prayer-meeting and the services of the church never has
enough seriously to embarrass him under any circumstances.

If for your religion you have adopted principles of high living; if you
have set the worth of the soul above all other things; if you have
determined to frame your life according to the golden rule of the great
Teacher, and, with Him as hero and ideal, are seeking to do good to
others and make this world a better place for us all, with less of sin
and sorrow and more of joy and love, you will make your business as
well as your praying the servant of these ends.

But if you have said that you wish to do these things, that you wish to
live the pure and beneficent life while in your heart your sole desire
is to get riches, to gain fame, to secure power, then there is bound to
be conflict between the religion you profess and the business that
possesses you.

Everything depends on the purposes of living, on the things a man
really and deep within himself sets first in his life; he will follow
those things no matter what other professions he may make.  Business as
a servant deserves our allegiance and devotion; business as a master is
the most evil and soul devastating thing in this universe.

There is the most perfect harmony; there is relatively easy settlement
of problems and difficulties if but this principle be adopted; that you
have taken as your chief business in life the ends of true religion,
the development of character and the service of humanity, and, with
this purpose, the daily toil, the opportunities and enginery of your
trade or profession shall be made to serve these higher ends.

Religion then becomes the motive in business and business the
manifestation of religion.  A man serves the Most High in his office
with the same devotion and elevation of spirit as a priest at the
altar.  He is doing a great work, because the spirit is great.  In
questions of conscience he can afford to lose everything except the
great end; he will not sacrifice the lesser to the greater.




XVIII

The Force of Faith

  "_The Victory that Overcometh_"
  _Fear and Faith_
  _Faith for the Future_


_Some talk so hard about duty they have no strength left for deeds._

_When a good man gets down in the dirt some one is sure to stumble over
him._

_Many a man who would make a first-class lighthouse is wasting his life
trying to be a fog-horn._

_The mournful saint works a good deal more harm than the cheerful
sinner._

_The faith that shows up strong on the fence may fail altogether when
it gets on the field._

_It's not the man who says the loudest amen who makes the most
impression on heaven._

_There are too many folks trying to meet the world's hunger for love
with essays on affection._

_Lots of people let their daily manna spoil while they pray for butter
and sugar to spread on it._

_People who lay their sins on the old Adam are not anxious to have
their successes attributed to him._

_Many a man thinks his life is clouded over when the truth is he is
burying his head in the steam of his own sighings._


