XII

THE IDEAL SERVICE

Never was the greatest of all greater than when He put about Him the
badge of the servant.  His example has made the towel, the apron, the
badge of true honour.  Nothing could have surprised those men who were
quarrelling over their precedence more than that their great Master
should stoop to perform this menial service of washing their feet.
Like many who call themselves His to-day they strove over chief seats,
honours, titles, and dignities.  They were seeking the chief places and
by their strife showing themselves fit only for the lowest.  Nowhere is
the sense of honour more easily slain than in the search for honours.

The only dignity that really adorns a man is that which comes without
his demanding it.  How often have the servants of the meek and lowly
Jesus turned the world away from Him by their examples of vanity,
greed, lust for power, their pomp and pride of self-glory.  They who
were sent to be the shepherds of men have fleeced the flock for their
own adorning and then fought amongst themselves to see who should wear
the choicest robes.  History has shown that they were wrong and their
Master was right.  The greater their greedy ambition the greater their
shame; the higher the place they have claimed the lower has been that
which the voice of humanity has awarded them.

On the other hand there shine forth those who have followed Him in
lowly service; theirs is the honour to-day.  Because He took upon Him
the form of a servant then now is the kingdom and the power and the
glory His.

So it has always been, sovereignty comes by way of service; heaven and
earth unite in honouring those who have not scorned the humble place of
helpfulness.  John says that it was because Jesus was conscious of His
divine origin and His glorious destiny that He took the towel and did
the work of the slave.  Only those who realize their true greatness can
ignore the littleness of man's petty dignities, can lose all sense of
stooping, of condescension when they serve others, and so can be of
service to mankind.  A man proves that he is the son of a heavenly
Father by his service for his least brother.  When that dignity, heaven
born, is in a man's heart there is nothing in the dirt he may touch by
deeds of kindness that can defile him; contact does not contaminate.

Love never thinks of any of its services as loathsome.  That from which
a superficial dignity would revolt love does with rejoicing.  It thinks
nothing of the honour or the dishonour, but only of the helpfulness it
may render.  It is not asking whether men are approving or whether
promotion is coming.  It needs no promotion or approval; the work
itself is the highest reward; the service elevates to the loftiest of
all positions.

The world's sovereigns are its servants.  He makes an alliance with God
who helps a fellow man.  Work is that by which the Creator has lifted
man above the creatures of the field, and the work that sacrifices that
it may serve is that by which God lifts man to Himself.  The heavenly
gate may be shut to robes and miters, epaulettes and crowns; but it
shall be open wide to that great throng who bear the stains of toil,
who have served their fellows, who wear the apron of sacrificing
service; and the Son of the carpenter shall lead them in.

This is a working world; its Maker is pictured as a worker; there is no
better evidence of religion than willingness to serve.  Work determines
a man's worth to the world.  And religion must be known by the things
it does, and not, as many have fondly supposed, by the dreams it has.



THE ORTHODOX SERVICE

This is a working world, with no place for the idler, whether he be
high or low, rich or poor.  The measure of a man is the service he
renders humanity.  Actions are measured by the same rule.  The value of
religion to life, its right to time and place, is measured by this,
Does it help or inspire men to service, does it increase the quantity
or improve the quality of the work that they do for their world?

Men rightly ignore the piety that satisfies itself with platitudes on
the duties of others, or with philosophical speculations on problems
which, if they were accurately solved, would contribute nothing either
to our peace, our possessions, or our personal characters.  Yet, how
many imagine that they are profoundly pious because they cherish
properly indorsed opinions, duly certified as to their antiquity.

They who profess to follow the Man of Nazareth cannot do it by sitting
in their pews or kneeling at their altars; they cannot do it by
dreaming of a place of bliss or picturing one of torment.  One of the
first lessons He gives His disciples is that it is not he that speaketh
the word, but he that doeth the will, who is pleasing to God.

Nor do men do His will in any important or complete sense by going to
church or serving in its meetings or on its committees.  When a man is
ordained to divine orders, that is, to give himself wholly to do the
will and work of the Most High, it is said that he becomes a minister.
If "minister" means anything at all it means servant, one who works for
others, who ministers to them.  The Master spoke of Himself as being
among men as one who served them.  The only orthodox service is the
service of humanity.

This is religion, such a consciousness of the reality of the Infinite
Spirit that you will steadily do the things that that spirit of love is
doing in this world, ministering to men, binding up the broken in
heart, lifting the lame, and leading the wandering, feeding the hungry
and clothing the naked, bringing light and love and cheer to those that
sit in darkness, you will become feet and fingers to God.

One does not need to wait for a special garb to do this religious work;
one does not need to wait for formal ordination; whoever loves men
already is divinely ordained to serve them.  One does not need to wait
for a church or a special organization; the sufficient motive is deep,
sacrificing love; the method will be just what the Master's was, to go
where men are and help them.

After all, what this world needs is not so much that men shall go to
their fellows with money, with clothes, or even with employment; it
needs that they shall just go to them.  The good mixer, who mingles
with men, who knows how they live, and what they think, how they
suffer, and what they feel, if, going amongst them, he carries a clean
heart, a love for his fellows, a firm faith in heaven, and hope for
men, is doing them more good by his presence than he who may send
carloads of goods.

Men did not need that Jesus should wear a label saying that the Most
High was with Him; the more He mingled with men, the more clearly they
saw He belonged to God.  What He was willing to do for them showed that
they, too, were the children of the Most High.  If any man would have
that infinite presence with him, if he desires the deep sense of the
spiritual, let him seek it not in closet or convent, but in the touch
of hand and in the sight of the face of friend and fellow being.

Many of us are worried at times because our lives seem wasted in doing
little things; we would become immortal by saving our powers for some
great deed.  We need to remember Him whom the world most easily
remembers and most highly honours, the Man of Nazareth, whose life was
spent in trivial services, doing the next thing that came to hand,
helping ordinary people in every-day needs.  Yet God was with Him, as
He ever is with those who love their fellows in sincere service.



THE HEAVENLY SERVICE

It seems easy to see something peculiarly holy, something deeply
religious in the occupations and acts of the priesthood or the
ministry.  But thinking of these as religious and of such service as
divine we fall into the habit of thinking that they alone, in all the
world of action, are divine.  We set on one side of life the religious
service limited to these formal acts and on the other side what we call
the secular life and service.

We have sacred days, sacred deeds, sacred callings, religious services;
all separate from the rest of life, belonging in a department, a
pigeon-hole, by themselves.  Whatever is not of these is of the world,
worldly, secular, lacking in the peculiar aroma of sanctity that
attaches to the church or the profession of religion.

There are many who desire to do some religious work; who fain would
engage in divine service.  There is in almost every breast a desire to
do something high and holy, something that is not necessary,
utilitarian, with some other motive than bread-winning.  But there
seems to be no opportunity; such deeds are supposed to belong to
special callings; one must be ordained to do divine service.

The truth is, divine service is the duty and high privilege of every
human being; we all are divinely called to the ministry; the service of
God and humanity belongs to us all.  We must not wait for ordaining
hands nor ecclesiastical robes nor for the environment of official
sanctity.  Every impulse to do good, to show human love, and do loving
service is a commission from high heaven.

The good Master invites men and women to His kind of service, the
highest and holiest known to all the ages.  He never was separated to a
clerical calling; He did not wait for an ordaining council nor did He
confine His divine service to prayer and praise or to the activities of
the church ritual.  His divine service was the service of the sons of
men, the going about doing good.

Heavenly work is not work for some far off heaven; it is the work of
making this present earth like heaven.  The work of God is not working
for an absent deity; it is doing the work that the God of all love
would do in this world; it is being feet and fingers, voice and lips to
the great Spirit who is over and in us all.  It is making that spirit
of love real, actual, concrete to our fellows.

The holiest work in this world may be done in the humblest places; the
most divine service may not be in the cathedral but in the cottage; the
angels may pass by the intoning choir to listen to a mother's crooning
cradle song or to watch the patient service, the loving kindness shown
in washing the faces or wiping away the tears of dirty and destitute
children.

The holy service which will fill your heart with joy and give you the
unfading crown of eternity, never will be done if you are waiting for
some ecclesiastical uniform to do it in.  Whatever is done in the
spirit of the infinite love, in the spirit of the great Master, that
truly is divine and glorious.

It is the good work that is glorious.  It is a thing more truly divine
to do well your daily duty, to put out good, honest work, than it is to
wear a clerical garb or perform professional religious duties.  The
honour, the worthiness, the glory of your work may be measured by the
spirit in which it is done and by its helpfulness and worth to the
world.

All life becomes glorious as we see that even in the least of our daily
tasks we may be doing the will of God, that it may be just as necessary
a part of the divine service that I should serve at a desk, a counter,
or a machine, should sweep a room or tend a child as that another
should preach or pray.  For the great Master of all who knows all our
work, measures it all, not as we do; He sees the glory of the cup of
cold water and the divinity of the commonplace.




XIII

Our Father and Our Fellows

  _The Primary Reconciliation_
  _Faith in Our Fellows_
  _The Law of Forgiveness_


_Sorrow is sympathy's school._

_Love makes the heaviest load seem light._

_To be willing to be saved alone is to be lost._

_The truly godly see something divine in all._

_Your appreciation may be another's inspiration._

_Kindness is the sign of divine kinship._

_You cannot knit the souls of men with soft sawder._

_You cannot be a leader and lose sight of those who are to be led._

_The shortness of the day excuses no man from greatness of endeavour._

_When a man thinks of nothing but his sins and failures he will have
nothing else to think of._

_Lots of people who talk of their lives as blue are only colour blind,
they either are green or yellow._

_He is only shortsighted who pronounces the world bad after looking in
his own heart._

_Many a man is waiting for an inspiration who would find success at
once if he was not so afraid of a little perspiration._


