XI

THE LAW OF SELECTION

Jesus said, "If thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and
cast them from thee," but this age finds it hard to accept that saying.
It asks, If we are to throw life away why should it have been given to
us?  Why this selfhood with its passions, its surging desires, its
great longing to be untrammelled and free if all is to be restrained
and the passions are to be perpetually denied?  If religion means, as
some plainly have said, doing the things you don't want to do and
leaving undone those you desire, then it is a mockery, a contradiction
of our lives and natures.

Therefore there exists another philosophy which says, boldly: Live out
all that is in you; do all the things you want to do; your passions in
themselves are sufficient justification for their gratification.  They
say man is free; therefore, let him realize himself by giving free and
full expression to every thought, inclination, appetite, and
possibility within him.

When the average man puts the two philosophies in contrast he is likely
to conclude that the path of self-denial, of stern repression, is the
mistaken one; for, he will say, does it not contradict nature?--does it
not involve the repression of natural instincts and make all life a
perpetual fight against ourselves, a waste of forces, instead of, as it
should be, a plan by which a man might find success through the
realization of the best in himself?

But let another test be put to this philosophy--the test of life.  How
does it work out?  What are the best lives, the lives that are richest
and that have most enriched the world?  Are they those that have given
free rein to every fancy, that have nurtured and brought to fruitage
every growth of the heart's garden, whether it be thistle, brier, or
poison root, or fair, nutritious product?  Are they those that have
given the tiger and the beast of prey free and full range of the life?

There is striking unanimity in the answer.  The rich and the enriching
lives have been those that have come by the path of the cross; they
have learned repression, practiced denial, and suffered death.  In
every sphere the lights that have illumined the way of man's advance
have not been the dancing flames of selfish, sensual passion but the
consuming of the bodies of the martyrs and heroes, either burning in
their passion for others or denying and losing all rather than denying
truth and light.

The law runs through all; if you would have a perfect flower you must
deny existence to many weeds, you must repress the rank growth, you
must pluck off many a leaf and nip many a bud that the one may come to
the fullness of its beauty.  Through the grain of character goes the
wise husbandman, and death is in his hand--the death of the less
worthy, the harmful, and the enemy that life may abound yet more and
more in that which is worthy.

In those fields where all things grow in their own way the weeds become
the standard for all; license brings all down to the level of the
lowest.  But life is not license--it is choice, selection, sacrifice,
death.  Pain is the only price at which perfection may be purchased.
Self-realization comes not by permitting all things to have their way
but by subjecting all parts to the securing of that high end.

It is but cowardice that cries for the so-called natural outworking of
everything within man; it seeks to save the labour of weeding, the pain
of cutting here and pruning there.  It asks only to be left alone.  But
that way lies the deepest pain of all, the pain of a life where there
is nothing but tangles of weeds--no flowers, no capacities for joy, no
power to will, no eye to see the good and true and beautiful.

No; the great Teacher was right when He called for self-denial and
self-victory.  He only is great, he alone has found life who has
learned to bring all his parts and faculties into service, who brings
all his body and self into subjection that all may be keen and well
kept tools in the work he is doing as a servant of his brothers and his
age.  This service gives the supreme and sufficient motive for the
suppression and elimination of all things that might hinder; the
development of the best self for the best service by means of the
cutting off of anything that might hinder or thwart the high and holy
service purposes of a life.



THE FALLACY OF NEGATION

The ancient law that nature abhors a vacuum holds true in the moral
realm.  The heart of man is never long empty.  And yet the whole scheme
of modern ecclesiastical regulation of life is built on the plan of
making a man holy by emptying him of all evil and stopping there,
leaving a negative condition, without a thought of the necessity of
filling the void.

So long have we been trained in this that we are all a good deal more
concerned about the things we ought not to do than about the things we
ought to do.  We spend our days nipping off the buds of evil
inclinations, pulling up the weeds of evil habits, wondering how it
happens they multiply so fast, forgetting altogether the wiser plan we
would adopt with weeds and briers in our gardens.

There are many who still think of the pious man as one who succeeds in
accomplishing the largest number of repressions in his life, the ideal
being the colourless life, never doing a thing that is wrong or subject
to criticism.  The energy of many a life is being spent in a campaign
against a certain list of proscribed deeds.  Blessed is the
man--according to their beatitudes--who has the largest number of
things he does not do.

But if rightness is abstinence from evil, then a lamp-post must always
be better than a man, for it justly can lay claim to all the negative
virtues.  What an easy way of life is this, simply to find out the
things we know other people like to do and to determine that if we only
can leave them undone we are holy in the sight of heaven.

But not only is this a way of folly, it is a way of positive harm, a
way fatal at last to the true life.  To do no more than to turn out one
set of devils only is to invite other and worse devils into the heart.
To seek emptiness only is to invite yet more iniquity.  An empty heart
is as dangerous as an empty hour.

Emptiness is not holiness, it is idiocy.  There cannot be an empty
heart.  To take a bad thing away from a man gives an opportunity for a
worse thing to enter unless you simply choke the bad by implanting the
good.  Some of the most dangerous people are those who feel pious
because they can say, We never did any harm.

Religion often has come to mean only a multitude of repressive
regulations, apparently a scheme for making others abstain from those
things for which we have no appetite.  Little wonder that children feel
only repulsion for a church which seems to take delight in finding
impiety in every natural pleasure; that men turn from a path which,
according to its prospectus, promises nothing but pain, privation, and
emptiness.

We do not object to the pain and privation provided they have their
purpose.  But all nature objects to a course of life that maims,
pinches, and restricts without corresponding and compensating
development and liberty somewhere.  We fight against every law of life
and court the ways of death so long as we endeavour to develop
character by putting it into bandages, leading strings, and legal
restrictions.

There is evil to be eliminated; there are thousands of things we ought
not to do.  But the best way to get rid of the tares is to sow good
wheat in abundance.  The way to avoid the things we ought not to do is
to do the things that ought to be done.  The empty life is a standing
invitation to temptation; the busy man seldom finds the devil's card
left at his door.

Live the life above the things you would overcome.  It never has been
found necessary to pass a law prohibiting the president from playing
marbles; larger interests fill his life so that these things do not
even occur to him.  Give a man a great work to do and you will save him
from a thousand temptations to do small and unworthy things.  Do not
allow the modern conception of religion as gloom and denial to keep you
from that which is your right as a spiritual being, the strength, joy
and beauty of the divine life.

Holiness of life is not in innocence of evil but in positive
forcefulness for good; not in doing as little harm as we can, but in
filling the whole life with worthy, helpful, uplifting deeds.  The good
life not only has no debts--it has large assets, deep and lasting
value; it enriches all life.  It offers to the world not barren land
claiming the virtue of freedom from the thorn and the brier, it crowns
all with the abundance and glory of fir and myrtle.



THE SECRET OF ALL

The words hold a large place in every alert life: Happiness, Health and
Heart; some may put them Success, Strength and the Soul.  It is easy to
recognize the importance of the first two; that of the third is more
remote.  Some have imagined that religion emphasizes the last alone and
ignores the other two.

Evidently it is a legitimate thing for the Christian to pray for
prosperity; and it is right for him to try to answer his own prayers.
Poverty is no proof of piety.  Nothing about God is or can be
poverty-stricken.  He gives us a rich and glorious world, prolific in
its resources; its life is rich and prosperous.  Nature is running
over, fairly rioting in splendour and wealth.  The Creator has given
man this garden of glory that he might enjoy it.  It is a sin not to
enter into its possession; he is dead already who does not desire
prosperity, who no longer seeks success in life.  It is an easy matter
for the man who has made an all around failure to talk about the
dispensations of Providence and the compensations of the future.
Prosperity is always a sin to the man who lacks the pluck to secure it.

Yet many who seem to have failed may have succeeded best of all.
Prosperity often comes in strange packages; it may even be labelled
Adversity.  Not all will succeed according to popular standards.  Many
will be more fortunate; they will win the riches of influence,
friendship, family, thought, knowledge, love, character.  It is not the
things we have that make us rich; it is the amount of life we are
capable of enjoying.  The soul determines prosperity.  It is the
energizing spirit of man, stirring him out of the ignoble dust,
creating the desire for more of the things of life and then for more of
life itself.  It determines values.  It has a way of reversing things
so that one man gets more out of a dollar book than another gets out of
a million dollar bond.  It alone gives appetite and appreciation, and,
without these, though there may be many possessions, there is no
prosperity.

What is true of prosperity is true also of health.  Happily the days
are gone when sickness passed for saintliness.  No longer is red blood
counted a foe of righteousness.  We are getting back to the simpler,
earlier thinking.  It is not only right to seek health; it is wrong not
to.  The haggard face no longer indicates the holy heart; it is likely
to evidence the opposite.  We are getting over the notion that God is
glorified by ruining the fair temple He has given us.  Men no longer
count on being beautiful angels in the skies because they have looked
like walking sepulchres on our streets.  It is an imperfect holiness
that does not have health.  Health, that is physical prosperity, is a
duty.

And here, also, the soul is central.  The clean heart, pure thoughts,
controlled appetites, aspiring hopes, these make health.  Evil temper,
lust, worry, care, envy, these are the soul processes that disturb the
life and destroy health.  Happiness is health, and happiness is wholly
of the heart.  The soul is but the sum of all the things within, the
force that moves all things in life; if within the man looks up, then
he lives up; if the soul droops, he decays.  What you are within
determines what you are without; he who is poor in heart, in this inner
life, will be poor in prosperity and weak in health, no matter how much
he possesses.  But he who with his soul takes in the world of beauty,
of love, of joy, who reaches out to heaven and God, all these things
are his and he is rich and strong indeed.




XII

Divine Service

  _The Ideal Service_
  _The Orthodox Service_
  _The Heavenly Service_


_Kindness is the evidence of kingliness._

_The surest way to impoverish your heart is to hoard up your love._

_A really smart man will refrain from saying things that smart._

_Many a prayer for vision ought to be changed to a petition for
vertebra._

_The damning doubts are those that deter us from good deeds._

_The leaders of men are not the ones who are trying to get ahead of
their fellows._

_Folks who are too good for anything are good for nothing._

_It's hard to steer a straight course if your conscience is in your
pants pocket._

_You do not have much faith in your Father unless you have some in His
family._

_No man can have a place in the kingdom of heaven who is complacent to
the ills of earth._


