
THE LITTLE WHITE BIRD

OR ADVENTURES IN KENSINGTON GARDENS

By J.M. Barrie




CONTENTS

         I. David and I Set Forth Upon a Journey
        II. The Little Nursery Governess
       III. Her Marriage, Her Clothes, Her Appetite, and an
            Inventory of Her Furniture.
        IV. A Night-Piece
         V. The Fight For Timothy
        VI. A Shock
       VII. The Last of Timothy
      VIII. The Inconsiderate Waiter
        IX. A Confirmed Spinster
         X. Sporting Reflections
        XI. The Runaway Perambulator
       XII. The Pleasantest Club in London
      XIII. The Grand Tour of the Gardens
       XIV. Peter Pan
        XV. The Thrush's Nest
       XVI. Lock-Out Time
      XVII. The Little House
     XVIII. Peter's Goat
       XIX. An Interloper
        XX. David and Porthos Compared
       XXI. William Paterson
      XXII. Joey
     XXIII. Pilkington's
      XXIV. Barbara
       XXV. The Cricket Match
      XXVI. The Dedication




THE LITTLE WHITE BIRD




I. David and I Set Forth Upon a Journey

Sometimes the little boy who calls me father brings me an invitation
from his mother: “I shall be so pleased if you will come and see me,”
 and I always reply in some such words as these: “Dear madam, I decline.”
 And if David asks why I decline, I explain that it is because I have no
desire to meet the woman.

“Come this time, father,” he urged lately, “for it is her birthday, and
she is twenty-six,” which is so great an age to David, that I think he
fears she cannot last much longer.

“Twenty-six, is she, David?” I replied. “Tell her I said she looks
more.”

I had my delicious dream that night. I dreamt that I too was twenty-six,
which was a long time ago, and that I took train to a place called
my home, whose whereabouts I see not in my waking hours, and when I
alighted at the station a dear lost love was waiting for me, and we went
away together. She met me in no ecstasy of emotion, nor was I surprised
to find her there; it was as if we had been married for years and parted
for a day. I like to think that I gave her some of the things to carry.

Were I to tell my delightful dream to David's mother, to whom I have
never in my life addressed one word, she would droop her head and raise
it bravely, to imply that I make her very sad but very proud, and she
would be wishful to lend me her absurd little pocket handkerchief. And
then, had I the heart, I might make a disclosure that would startle her,
for it is not the face of David's mother that I see in my dreams.

Has it ever been your lot, reader, to be persecuted by a pretty woman
who thinks, without a tittle of reason, that you are bowed down under
a hopeless partiality for her? It is thus that I have been pursued for
several years now by the unwelcome sympathy of the tender-hearted and
virtuous Mary A----. When we pass in the street the poor deluded soul
subdues her buoyancy, as if it were shame to walk happy before one she
has lamed, and at such times the rustle of her gown is whispered words
of comfort to me, and her arms are kindly wings that wish I was a little
boy like David. I also detect in her a fearful elation, which I am
unaware of until she has passed, when it comes back to me like a faint
note of challenge. Eyes that say you never must, nose that says why
don't you? and a mouth that says I rather wish you could: such is the
portrait of Mary A---- as she and I pass by.

Once she dared to address me, so that she could boast to David that I
had spoken to her. I was in the Kensington Gardens, and she asked would
I tell her the time please, just as children ask, and forget as they
run back with it to their nurse. But I was prepared even for this, and
raising my hat I pointed with my staff to a clock in the distance. She
should have been overwhelmed, but as I walked on listening intently, I
thought with displeasure that I heard her laughing.

Her laugh is very like David's, whom I could punch all day in order to
hear him laugh. I dare say she put this laugh into him. She has been
putting qualities into David, altering him, turning him forever on a
lathe since the day she first knew him, and indeed long before, and all
so deftly that he is still called a child of nature. When you release
David's hand he is immediately lost like an arrow from the bow. No
sooner do you cast eyes on him than you are thinking of birds. It is
difficult to believe that he walks to the Kensington Gardens; he always
seems to have alighted there: and were I to scatter crumbs I opine he
would come and peck. This is not what he set out to be; it is all the
doing of that timid-looking lady who affects to be greatly surprised by
it. He strikes a hundred gallant poses in a day; when he tumbles, which
is often, he comes to the ground like a Greek god; so Mary A---- has
willed it. But how she suffers that he may achieve! I have seen him
climbing a tree while she stood beneath in unutterable anguish; she had
to let him climb, for boys must be brave, but I am sure that, as she
watched him, she fell from every branch.

David admires her prodigiously; he thinks her so good that she will be
able to get him into heaven, however naughty he is. Otherwise he would
trespass less light-heartedly. Perhaps she has discovered this; for, as
I learn from him, she warned him lately that she is not such a dear as
he thinks her.

“I am very sure of it,” I replied.

“Is she such a dear as you think her?” he asked me.

“Heaven help her,” I said, “if she be not dearer than that.”

Heaven help all mothers if they be not really dears, for their boy
will certainly know it in that strange short hour of the day when every
mother stands revealed before her little son. That dread hour ticks
between six and seven; when children go to bed later the revelation has
ceased to come. He is lapt in for the night now and lies quietly there,
madam, with great, mysterious eyes fixed upon his mother. He is summing
up your day. Nothing in the revelations that kept you together and
yet apart in play time can save you now; you two are of no age, no
experience of life separates you; it is the boy's hour, and you have
come up for judgment. “Have I done well to-day, my son?” You have got to
say it, and nothing may you hide from him; he knows all. How like your
voice has grown to his, but more tremulous, and both so solemn, so
unlike the voice of either of you by day.

“You were a little unjust to me to-day about the apple; were you not,
mother?”

Stand there, woman, by the foot of the bed and cross your hands and
answer him.

“Yes, my son, I was. I thought--”

But what you thought will not affect the verdict.

“Was it fair, mother, to say that I could stay out till six, and then
pretend it was six before it was quite six?”

“No, it was very unfair. I thought--”

“Would it have been a lie if I had said it was quite six?”

“Oh, my son, my son! I shall never tell you a lie again.”

“No, mother, please don't.”

“My boy, have I done well to-day on the whole?”

Suppose he were unable to say yes.

These are the merest peccadilloes, you may say. Is it then a little
thing to be false to the agreement you signed when you got the boy?
There are mothers who avoid their children in that hour, but this will
not save them. Why is it that so many women are afraid to be left alone
with their thoughts between six and seven? I am not asking this of
you, Mary. I believe that when you close David's door softly there is a
gladness in your eyes, and the awe of one who knows that the God to whom
little boys say their prayers has a face very like their mother's.

I may mention here that David is a stout believer in prayer, and has had
his first fight with another young Christian who challenged him to the
jump and prayed for victory, which David thought was taking an unfair
advantage.

“So Mary is twenty-six! I say, David, she is getting on. Tell her that I
am coming in to kiss her when she is fifty-two.”

He told her, and I understand that she pretended to be indignant. When I
pass her in the street now she pouts. Clearly preparing for our meeting.
She has also said, I learn, that I shall not think so much of her when
she is fifty-two, meaning that she will not be so pretty then. So little
does the sex know of beauty. Surely a spirited old lady may be the
prettiest sight in the world. For my part, I confess that it is they,
and not the young ones, who have ever been my undoing. Just as I was
about to fall in love I suddenly found that I preferred the mother.
Indeed, I cannot see a likely young creature without impatiently
considering her chances for, say, fifty-two. Oh, you mysterious girls,
when you are fifty-two we shall find you out; you must come into the
open then. If the mouth has fallen sourly yours the blame: all the
meannesses your youth concealed have been gathering in your face. But
the pretty thoughts and sweet ways and dear, forgotten kindnesses linger
there also, to bloom in your twilight like evening primroses.

Is it not strange that, though I talk thus plainly to David about his
mother, he still seems to think me fond of her? How now, I reflect, what
sort of bumpkin is this, and perhaps I say to him cruelly: “Boy, you are
uncommonly like your mother.”

To which David: “Is that why you are so kind to me?”

I suppose I am kind to him, but if so it is not for love of his mother,
but because he sometimes calls me father. On my honour as a soldier,
there is nothing more in it than that. I must not let him know this, for
it would make him conscious, and so break the spell that binds him and
me together. Oftenest I am but Captain W---- to him, and for the best of
reasons. He addresses me as father when he is in a hurry only, and never
have I dared ask him to use the name. He says, “Come, father,” with an
accursed beautiful carelessness. So let it be, David, for a little while
longer.

I like to hear him say it before others, as in shops. When in shops he
asks the salesman how much money he makes in a day, and which drawer he
keeps it in, and why his hair is red, and does he like Achilles, of whom
David has lately heard, and is so enamoured that he wants to die to meet
him. At such times the shopkeepers accept me as his father, and I cannot
explain the peculiar pleasure this gives me. I am always in two minds
then, to linger that we may have more of it, and to snatch him away
before he volunteers the information, “He is not really my father.”

When David meets Achilles I know what will happen. The little boy will
take the hero by the hand, call him father, and drag him away to some
Round Pond.

One day, when David was about five, I sent him the following letter:
“Dear David: If you really want to know how it began, will you come and
have a chop with me to-day at the club?”

Mary, who, I have found out, opens all his letters, gave her consent,
and, I doubt not, instructed him to pay heed to what happened so that he
might repeat it to her, for despite her curiosity she knows not how
it began herself. I chuckled, guessing that she expected something
romantic.

He came to me arrayed as for a mighty journey, and looking unusually
solemn, as little boys always do look when they are wearing a great
coat. There was a shawl round his neck. “You can take some of them off,”
 I said, “when we come to summer.”

“Shall we come to summer?” he asked, properly awed.

“To many summers,” I replied, “for we are going away back, David, to see
your mother as she was in the days before there was you.”

We hailed a hansom. “Drive back six years,” I said to the cabby, “and
stop at the Junior Old Fogies' Club.”

He was a stupid fellow, and I had to guide him with my umbrella.

The streets were not quite as they had been in the morning. For
instance, the bookshop at the corner was now selling fish. I dropped
David a hint of what was going on.

“It doesn't make me littler, does it?” he asked anxiously; and then,
with a terrible misgiving: “It won't make me too little, will it,
father?” by which he meant that he hoped it would not do for him
altogether. He slipped his hand nervously into mine, and I put it in my
pocket.

You can't think how little David looked as we entered the portals of the
club.




II. The Little Nursery Governess

As I enter the club smoking-room you are to conceive David vanishing
into nothingness, and that it is any day six years ago at two in the
afternoon. I ring for coffee, cigarette, and cherry brandy, and take my
chair by the window, just as the absurd little nursery governess comes
tripping into the street. I always feel that I have rung for her.

While I am lifting the coffee-pot cautiously lest the lid fall into the
cup, she is crossing to the post-office; as I select the one suitable
lump of sugar she is taking six last looks at the letter; with the aid
of William I light my cigarette, and now she is re-reading the delicious
address. I lie back in my chair, and by this time she has dropped the
letter down the slit. I toy with my liqueur, and she is listening to
hear whether the postal authorities have come for her letter. I scowl at
a fellow-member who has had the impudence to enter the smoking-room, and
her two little charges are pulling her away from the post-office. When
I look out at the window again she is gone, but I shall ring for her
to-morrow at two sharp.

She must have passed the window many times before I noticed her. I know
not where she lives, though I suppose it to be hard by. She is taking
the little boy and girl, who bully her, to the St. James's Park, as
their hoops tell me, and she ought to look crushed and faded. No doubt
her mistress overworks her. It must enrage the other servants to see her
deporting herself as if she were quite the lady.

I noticed that she had sometimes other letters to post, but that
the posting of the one only was a process. They shot down the slit,
plebeians all, but it followed pompously like royalty. I have even seen
her blow a kiss after it.

Then there was her ring, of which she was as conscious as if it rather
than she was what came gaily down the street. She felt it through her
glove to make sure that it was still there. She took off the glove and
raised the ring to her lips, though I doubt not it was the cheapest
trinket. She viewed it from afar by stretching out her hand; she stooped
to see how it looked near the ground; she considered its effect on the
right of her and on the left of her and through one eye at a time. Even
when you saw that she had made up her mind to think hard of something
else, the little silly would take another look.

I give anyone three chances to guess why Mary was so happy.

No and no and no. The reason was simply this, that a lout of a young man
loved her. And so, instead of crying because she was the merest nobody,
she must, forsooth, sail jauntily down Pall Mall, very trim as to her
tackle and ticketed with the insufferable air of an engaged woman. At
first her complacency disturbed me, but gradually it became part of my
life at two o'clock with the coffee, the cigarette, and the liqueur. Now
comes the tragedy.

Thursday is her great day. She has from two to three every Thursday for
her very own; just think of it: this girl, who is probably paid several
pounds a year, gets a whole hour to herself once a week. And what does
she with it? Attend classes for making her a more accomplished person?
Not she. This is what she does: sets sail for Pall Mall, wearing all her
pretty things, including the blue feathers, and with such a sparkle
of expectation on her face that I stir my coffee quite fiercely. On
ordinary days she at least tries to look demure, but on a Thursday she
has had the assurance to use the glass door of the club as a mirror in
which to see how she likes her engaging trifle of a figure to-day.

In the meantime a long-legged oaf is waiting for her outside the
post-office, where they meet every Thursday, a fellow who always wears
the same suit of clothes, but has a face that must ever make him free of
the company of gentlemen. He is one of your lean, clean Englishmen,
who strip so well, and I fear me he is handsome; I say fear, for your
handsome men have always annoyed me, and had I lived in the duelling
days I swear I would have called every one of them out. He seems to be
quite unaware that he is a pretty fellow, but Lord, how obviously Mary
knows it. I conclude that he belongs to the artistic classes, he is
so easily elated and depressed; and because he carries his left thumb
curiously, as if it were feeling for the hole of a palette, I have
entered his name among the painters. I find pleasure in deciding that
they are shocking bad pictures, for obviously no one buys them. I feel
sure Mary says they are splendid, she is that sort of woman. Hence the
rapture with which he greets her. Her first effect upon him is to make
him shout with laughter. He laughs suddenly haw from an eager exulting
face, then haw again, and then, when you are thanking heaven that it is
at last over, comes a final haw, louder than the others. I take them to
be roars of joy because Mary is his, and they have a ring of youth
about them that is hard to bear. I could forgive him everything save his
youth, but it is so aggressive that I have sometimes to order William
testily to close the window.

How much more deceitful than her lover is the little nursery governess.
The moment she comes into sight she looks at the post-office and sees
him. Then she looks straight before her, and now she is observed, and he
rushes across to her in a glory, and she starts--positively starts--as
if he had taken her by surprise. Observe her hand rising suddenly to her
wicked little heart. This is the moment when I stir my coffee violently.
He gazes down at her in such rapture that he is in everybody's way, and
as she takes his arm she gives it a little squeeze, and then away they
strut, Mary doing nine-tenths of the talking. I fall to wondering what
they will look like when they grow up.

What a ludicrous difference do these two nobodies make to each other.
You can see that they are to be married when he has twopence.

Thus I have not an atom of sympathy with this girl, to whom London is
famous only as the residence of a young man who mistakes her for someone
else, but her happiness had become part of my repast at two P.M., and
when one day she walked down Pall Mall without gradually posting a
