CHAPTER III.

THE INFLUENCE OF RACE AND HEREDITY ON GENIUS AND INSANITY.

     Race--Insanity--The influence of sex--The heredity of
     genius--Criminal and insane parentage and descent of genius--Age of
     parents--Conception.


_Race._--We have seen that in Italy the Greek and the Etruscan racial
elements combine with the temperate and mountainous climate to produce
men of genius; the influence of race calling forth genius even where the
climate is not happy. We cannot otherwise explain the genius produced at
Modena, Mantua, and Lucca, which possess the Etruscan origin, although
not the delicious climate, of Florence. The Jews, again, offer us an
eloquent example.

I have elsewhere shown (_Uomo Bianco e l’Uomo di Colore_ and _Pensiero e
Meteore_) how, owing to the bloody selection of mediæval persecutions,
and owing also to the influence of temperate climate, the Jews of Europe
have risen above those of Africa and the East, and have often surpassed
the Aryans. It is not only a difference in general culture, but we find
more precocious and extended mental work applied to different sciences.
It is certainly thus in music, the drama, satirical and humorous
literature, journalism, and in various branches of science. This has
been statistically proved by various writers, as by Jacobs in a very
careful study on the ability of the Jews in Western Europe and of Jews
in general.[247]

    In 100,000 celebrities--
  -------------------+------------+-----------
                     | Europeans. |   Jews.
  -------------------+------------+-----------
  Actors             |     21     |     34
  Agriculture        |      2     |     --
  Antiquaries        |     23     |     26
  Architects         |      6     |      6
  Artists            |     40     |     34
  Authors            |    316     |    223
  Divines            |    130     |    105
  Engineers          |     13     |      9
  Engravers          |      3     |     --
  Lawyers            |     44     |     40
  Medicals           |     31     |     49
  Merchants          |     12     |     43
  Military           |     56     |      6
  Miscellaneous      |      4     |      3
  Metaphysics        |      2     |     18
  Musicians          |     11     |     71
  Natural Science    |     22     |     25
  Naval              |     12     |     --
  Philologists       |     13     |    123
  Poets              |     20     |     36
  Political Economy  |     20     |     26
  Science            |     51     |     52
  Sculptors          |     10     |     12
  Sovereigns         |     21     |     --
  Statesmen          |    125     |     83
  Travellers         |     25     |     12
  -------------------+------------+-----------

“The two lists are approximately equal in antiquaries, architects,
artists, lawyers, natural science, political economy, science,
sculptors. Jews seem to have superiority as actors, chess-players,
doctors, merchants (chiefly financiers), in metaphysics, music, poetry,
and philology.... Of course, Jews have no Darwin. It took England 180
years after Newton before she could produce a Darwin, and as Britishers
are five times the number of Jews, even including those of Russia, it
would take, on the same showing, 900 years before they produce another
Spinoza, or, even supposing the double superiority to be true, 450 years
would be needed.”

Jews have given to the world musicians like Meyerbeer, Halèvy, Gutzkow,
Mendelssohn, Offenbach, Rubinstein, Joachim, Benedict, Moscheles, Cowen,
Sullivan, Goldmark, Strauss; poets, novelists, humourists, &c., like
Heine, Saphir, Camerini, Revere, Jung, Weill, Fortis, Gozlan, Moritz
Hartmann, Auerbach, Börne, Ratisbonne, Kompert, Grace Aguilar, Franzos,
Massarani, Lindau, Catulle Mendes; linguists like Ascoli, Benfey, Munk,
Fiorentino, Luzzato, Oppert, Bernhardi, Friedland, Weil, Lazarus,
Steinthal; physicians like Valentin, Hermann, Haidenhain, Schiff,
Casper, Stilling, Gluge, Traube, Fraenkel, Kuhn, Cohnheim, Hirsch,
Liebreich, Bernstein, Remak, Weigert, Meynert, Hitzig, Westphal, Mendel,
Leidesdorf, Benedikt; philosophers like Spinoza, Maimon, Sommerhausen,
Moses Mendelssohn; naturalists like Cohn; economists like Ricardo,
Lassalle, Karl Marx; jurists and statesmen like Stahl, Gans,
Beaconsfield, Crémieux. Even in sciences in which the Semite formerly
showed no ability, such as mathematics and astronomy, we find such men
as Goldschmidt, Beer, Sylvester, Kronecker, and Jacobi.

It must be observed that a very large proportion of these men of genius
have been radically creative; revolutionary in politics, and in
religion, and in science. Jews, indeed, initiated Nihilism and Socialism
on the one hand, Mosaism and Christianity on the other. Commerce owes to
them the bill of exchange, philosophy owes to them Positivism,
literature the Neo-humourism.

Jacobs shows that this abundance of Jewish men of genius of the first
order is allied with a deficiency in men of the second order of
intellect. He explains the superiority by the higher level of education
among the Jews, their devotion to family life, the almost complete
absence of priests and dogmas, the facilities which the study of Hebrew
offers for investigations in philosophy and for that kind of music which
forms part of their religious ceremonies. It is difficult, however, to
find a relationship between this rhythmical caterwauling and the sublime
notes of Meyerbeer and Mendelssohn; and Jews possess more than enough of
priests and dogmas. I would add that if the Jews have not yet produced
men like Newton, Darwin, and Michelangelo, it is because they have not
yet accomplished their ethnic evolution, as they show by the obstinacy
with which they cling to their ancient beliefs.

It is strange that among the factors of Jewish superiority in genius
Jacobs does not mention the neurotic tendency, the existence of which,
as we shall see, he has himself shown. This would also well explain the
deficiency of Jews in intellect of medium quality in which the morbid
element is always less marked.

_Insanity._--It is curious to note that the Jewish elements in the
population furnish four and even six times as many lunatics as the rest
of the population. Jacobs, who, as we have seen, does not suspect the
correlation between genius and insanity, gives a remarkable proof of it
by pointing out that while Englishmen have 3,050 per million afflicted
with mental disease, Scotchmen have 3,400, and Jews 3,900, the
proportion of insanity in the three races being related to the
proportion of genius. And while, according to Galton, there are 256,000
of the mediocre class among a million Englishmen, Jacobs reckons that
there are only 239,000 among Scotchmen, and 222,000 among Jews.

Servi found 1 lunatic to 391 Jews in Italy, nearly four times as many as
among Catholics.[248] This fact has been made still clearer by
Verga[249] who in 1870 found the proportions of lunatics among Catholics
to be 1 in 1775, as against 1 in 384 among Jews. Mayr[250] (in 1871)
gives the proportion of lunatics in Germany as follows:--

               Per 10,000 Christians.   Per 10,000 Jews.
  Prussia              8.7                    14.1
  Bavaria              9.8                    25.2
  All Germany          8.6                    16.1

This is a singular proportion or disproportion in a population among
which the aged who supply so large a number of cases of senile dementia
are numerous, but where alcoholism is rare. This fatal privilege has not
attracted the attention of the leaders of that anti-Semitic movement
which is one of the shames of contemporary Germany.[251] They would be
less irritated at the success of this race if they had thought of all
the sorrows that are the price of it, even at our epoch; for if the
tragedies of the past were more bloody, the victims are not now less
unhappy, struck at the source of their glory, and because of it,
deprived even of the consolation of being able, as formerly, to
contribute to the most noble among the selections of species.

This is not true of the Jews alone. Beard, in his _American
Nervousness_, remarks that the neurotic tendency which dominates North
America makes of that country a land of great orators.

The influence of race is as visible in genius as in insanity. Education
counts for little, heredity for much. “By education,” said Helvetius,
“you can make bears dance, but never create a man of genius.”[252]

_Influence of Sex._--In the history of genius women have but a small
place. Women of genius are rare exceptions in the world. It is an old
observation that while thousands of women apply themselves to music for
every hundred men, there has not been a single great woman composer. Yet
the sexual difference here offers no obstacle. Out of six hundred women
doctors in North America not one has made any discovery of importance;
and with few exceptions the same may be said of the Russians. In
physical science, it is true, Mary Somerville emerges; and in literature
we have George Eliot, George Sand, Daniel Sterne, and Madame de Staël;
in the fine arts, Rosa Bonheur, Lebrun, Maraini; Sappho and Mrs.
Browning opened new paths for poetry; Eleonora d’Arborea, it is said
(but the assertion is contested), initiated at the beginning of the
fifteenth century legal reforms of almost modern character; Catherine of
Siena influenced the politics and religion of her time; Sarah Martin, a
poor dressmaker, influenced prison reform; Mrs. Beecher Stowe played a
large part in the abolition of slavery in the United States. But of all
these, none touch the summits reached by Michelangelo, or Newton, or
Balzac. Even J. S. Mill, who was very partial to the cause of women,
confessed that they lacked originality. They are, above all,
conservators. Even the few who emerge have, on near examination,
something virile about them. As Goncourt said, there are no women of
genius; the women of genius are men.

Pulcheria, Marie dei Medici, Louise, mother of Francis I., Maria
Christina, Maria Théresa, Catherine II., Elizabeth, displayed eminent
political ability as rulers; as in the field of democracy Madame Roland,
Fonseca, G. Sand, Madame Adam; Mill affirms that when an Indian state is
ruled with vigour and vigilance, three times out of four the ruler is a
woman. At the same time it is noted that when women rule, men command,
just as when men rule, women command. In any case their number is too
limited to compare them with masculine rulers. As in politics, so
admirable examples of valour were given by Caterina Sforza and Joan of
Arc, Annita Garibaldi, Enrichetta Castiglioni, and many others.

These facts become more notable because unexpected and exceptional. It
may be said that the disparity would be much less if the predominance of
men, depriving women of the vote in politics and of action in war, had
not taken away from women the opportunity of manifesting their
capacities. But if there had been in women a really great ability in
politics, science, &c., it would have shown itself in overcoming the
difficulties opposed to it; nor would arms have been lacking, nor allies
in the enemy’s camp. In revolutions (except in religion) women have
always been in a small minority, not being found, for example, in the
English Revolution, or in that of the Low Countries, or of the United
States. They never created a new religion, nor were they ever at the
head of great political, artistic, or scientific movements.

On the contrary, women have often stood in the way of progressive
movements. Like children, they are notoriously misoneistic; they
preserve ancient habits and customs and religions. In America there are
tribes in which women keep alive ancient languages which the men have
lost; in Sardinia, Sicily, and some remote valleys of Umbria, many
ancient prejudices and pagan rites, perhaps of a prehistoric
character--superstitious cures, for instance--are preserved by women. As
Goncourt remarks, they only see persons in everything; they are, as
Spencer observes, more merciful than just.

_The Heredity of Genius._--According to Galton[253] and Ribot,[254]
genius is often hereditary, especially in the musical art which
furnishes so large a contingent to insanity. Thus Palestrina, Benda,
Dussek, Hiller, Eichhorn, had sons who were very distinguished in music.
Andrea Amati was the most illustrious of a family of violinists at
Cremona; Beethoven’s father was a tenor at the Elector of Cologne’s
chapel, and his grandfather had been a singer and then _maestro_ at the
same chapel; Bellini was the son and nephew of musicians; Haydn had a
brother who was an excellent organist and composer of religious music;
in Mendelssohn’s family there were several musical amateurs; Mozart was
the son of a _maestro_ of the chapel of the Prince Archbishop of
Salzburg; Palestrina had sons who died young but who left praiseworthy
compositions preserved among their father’s works.

The Bach family perhaps presents the finest example of mental heredity.
It began in 1550, and passed through eight generations, the last known
member being Wilhelm Friedrich Ernst, Kapellmeister to the Queen of
Prussia, who died in 1845. During two centuries this family produced a
crowd of musicians of high rank. The founder of the family was Veit
Bach, a Presburg baker, who amused himself with singing and playing. He
had two sons who were followed by an uninterrupted succession of
musicians who inundated Thuringia, Saxony, and Franconia during two
centuries. They were all organists or church singers. When they became
too numerous to live together and had to disperse, they agreed to
reunite on a fixed day once a year. This custom was preserved up to the
middle of the eighteenth century, and sometimes one hundred and twenty
persons of the name of Bach met at the same spot. Fétis counts among
them twenty-nine musicians of eminence.[255]

Among musicians may be named the Adams, the Coustons, the Sangallos;
among painters, the Van der Weldes, the Coypels, the Van Eycks, the
Murillos, the Veroneses, the Bellinis, the Caraccis, the Correggios, the
Mieris, the Bassanos, the Tintorettos, the Caliaris, the Vanloos, the
Teniers, the Vernets, and especially the Titians who produced a race of
painters, as shown in the following genealogy taken from Ribot’s
excellent book:--

                         Tiziano Vecellio.
                                X
            ------------------------------------------
            X                                        X
            |                                        |
     +------------+                                  |
     |            |                                  |
     |            X                                  |
     |            |                                  |
     |     -----------------+                        X
     |     Francesco        |                        |
     |                   TIZIANO           -+---------------+---
   --+---------        -----------          |               |
   Mario      X             |               Fabricio      Cesare
     |        |             |
     |        |       +-----------+
     |        |       |           |
     |        |    Pomponio     Orazio
     |        |
  Tizianello Tomaso.

Among poets may be noted Bacchylides, the nephew of Simonides and uncle
of Æschylus who again had sons and nephews who were poets; Manzoni, the
nephew of Beccaria; Lucan, the nephew of Seneca; Tasso, the son of
Bernardo; Ariosto, with a brother and nephew poets; Aristophanes, with
two sons who wrote comedies; Corneille, Racine, Sophocles, Coleridge,
who had sons and nephews who were poets; the Dumas, father and son; the
brothers Joseph and André Chenier, Alphonse and Ernest Daudet.

In the natural sciences we find the two Plinies, uncle and nephew, the
families of Darwin, Euler, De Candolle, Hooker, Herschel, Jussieu,
Saussure, Geoffroy St. Hilaire. Among philosophers we find the
Scaligers, the Vossius, the Fichtes, and the brothers Humboldt, Schlegel
and Grimm; among statesmen the Pitts, Foxes, Cannings, Walpoles, Peels,
and Disraelis; among archæologists, the Viscontis. Aristotle, himself
the son of a scientific physician, had sons and nephews who were men of
science. Cassini, an astronomer, had a son, who was a celebrated
astronomer, a grandson who was a member of the Academy of Sciences at
the age of twenty-two, and a more remote relation who was a
distinguished naturalist and philologist.

Here is the genealogical tree of the Bernouilli family:--

             Jacques Bernouilli
                     |
     +---------------+---------------+
     |               |               |
  Jacques           Jean          Nicolas
                     |
        +------------+------------+
        |            |            |
     Nicolas       Daniel       Jean
                                  |
                           +------+------+
                           |             |
                         Jean         Jacques

All the members of this family were distinguished in some science; at
the beginning of this century there was a Bernouilli who was a chemist
of some distinction; and in 1863 there still lived at Bâle Christophe
Bernouilli, a professor of the natural sciences.

Galton, in a work of great value, but in which he often commits the
mistake (from which I also cannot free myself) of confusing talent with
genius, calculates a proportion of 425 men of ability to a million among
the male population over fifty years of age, and the more select part of
them as 250 to a million. Dealing with 300 families, containing 1000
eminent men, he concludes that the percentage of eminent kinsmen in
these families would be as follows:--

  48 sons
  41 brothers
  31 fathers
  14 grandsons
  22 nephews
  18 uncles
  13 cousins
  17 grandfathers
  3 great-grandfathers
  5 great-uncles

The probabilities of kinsmen of illustrious men rising to eminence
are--15½ to 100 in the case of fathers; 13½ to 100 in the case of
brothers; 24 to 100 in the case of sons.

Galton remarks that these figures vary, according as we are concerned
with artists, diplomatists, soldiers, &c.

I am not, however, inclined to believe that this immense accumulation of
fact authorizes us to accept a hereditary influence in genius as
complete as in insanity. In the first place, in insanity the hereditary
influence is exercised in a more intense and decisive manner, as 48 to
80; and then if Galton’s law applies to judges and statesmen, among whom
adulation and the fetishistic adoration of a party or a caste can raise
the son or grandson of a great man far above his merits, it is quite
otherwise with artists and poets, who present an exaggerated hereditary
action in brothers and sons and especially nephews, but very little in
grandparents and uncles. And while in the heredity of genius the
masculine sex prevails over the feminine in the proportion of 70 to 30,
in the heredity of insanity there is scarcely any difference between the
two sexes.[256]

Many men of genius have been thought to inherit from their mothers: such
are Cicero, Condorcet, Cuvier, Buffon, Goethe, Sydney Smith, Cowper,
Napoleon, Cromwell, Chateaubriand, Scott, Byron, Lamartine, Saint
Augustine, Gray, Swift, Fontenelle, Ballanche, Manzoni, Kant,
Wellington, Foscolo. On the other hand, Bacon, Raphael, Weber, Schiller,
Milton, Alberti, Tasso, are said to inherit from their fathers. Yet, it
may be asked, what was the celebrity of these fathers and mothers that
one can feel assured they transmitted any genius to their children?
Among most men of genius, also, there can be no heredity because of the
predominance of sterility and of degeneration, of which the aristocracy
furnishes us with a remarkable proof.[257]

With a few exceptions, then, such as the Darwins, the Cassinis, the
Bernouillis, the Saint Hilaires, the Herschels, men of genius only
transmit to their descendants a slight tendency magnified in our eyes by
the _prestige_ of a great name:--

    “_Rare volte risurge per li rami_
     _L’umana probitate._”[258]

Who thinks of Tizianello beside Titian, of Nicomachus beside Aristotle,
of Orazio Ariosto beside his great uncle; or of the worthy professor
Christophe beside his great ancestor Jacques Bernouilli?

Insanity, on the other hand, is often completely transmitted, or even
with greater intensity, to succeeding generations. Cases of hereditary
insanity in children and grandchildren, the form of insanity often being
the same as in the ancestor, are very numerous. All the descendants of a
Hamburg noble, whom history registers as a great soldier, were struck by
insanity at the age of forty.[259] At Connecticut Asylum eleven members
of the same family have arrived in succession.[260]

A watchmaker, having recovered from an attack of insanity caused by the
revolution of 1789, finally poisoned himself: later on his daughter
became insane, and fell into a state of dementia; one of his brothers
struck a knife into his own abdomen; another became a drunkard and died
on the roadside; a third refused food and perished from starvation; his
sister, who was of good health, had a son who was an epileptic lunatic,
a daughter who became insane after her confinement and rejected food, an
infant who refused to be suckled, and two others who died of cerebral
diseases.

In a family studied by Berti, in four generations of about eighty
individuals descended from an insane melancholiac we find ten subject to
insanity, nearly always melancholia, nineteen who were neurotic, three
who had special ability and three with criminal tendencies. The disorder
was aggravated in the later generations and developed at an earlier age.
In the third and fourth branches, the insane and neurotic appeared in
every generation; in the others, the hereditary influence passed over
one generation in the men and two in the women.

The history of the so-called “Jukes” family[261] shows that such an
influence may be still more powerfully developed, especially in
association with alcoholism. From the head of the family, Max Jukes, a
great drunkard, descended, in 75 years, 200 thieves and murderers, 280
invalids attacked by blindness, idiocy, or consumption, 90 prostitutes
and 300 children who died prematurely. The various members of this
family cost the state more than a million dollars.

These are not isolated facts. But in what families can we find genius so
fatally and progressively fruitful?

Flemming and Demaux, again, have shown that not only do drunkards
transmit to their descendants, tendencies to insanity and crime, but
that even habitually sober parents, who at the moment of conception are
in a temporary state of drunkenness, beget children who are epileptic or
paralytic, idiotic or insane, very often microcephalic, or with
remarkable weakness of mind which at the first favourable occasion is
transformed into insanity.[262] Thus a single embrace, given in a moment
of drunkenness, may be fatal to an entire generation.

What analogy can we find here with the rare and nearly always incomplete
heredity of genius?

_The Criminal and Insane Parentage and Descent of Genius._--The
parallelism of genius to insanity is, however, still present. We find
that many lunatics have parents of genius, and that many men of genius
have parents or sons who were epileptic, mad, or, above all, criminal.
It is sufficient to study the history of the Cæsars, of Charles V., of
Peter the Great. We see a progressive degeneration in crime and insanity
in relations or children, rather than any conservation or increase of
genius. This fact confirms _a posteriori_ the degenerative character of
genius; and at the same time reveals the relationship which it generally
has with moral insanity. Commodus, son of the virtuous Marcus Aurelius,
was a monster of cruelty. The son of Scipio Africanus was an imbecile,
the son of Cicero a drunkard. Luther’s son was insubordinate and
violent; William Penn’s was a debauched scoundrel. Themistocles,
Aristides, Pericles, Thucydides were unhappy in their children.

Cardan had two sons who were criminals; one, of great ability, was
condemned to death for poisoning; the other, given up to gaming,
drinking, and thieving, was successively imprisoned at Pavia, Milan,
Cremona, Bologna, Piacenza, Naples. When arrested he would promise
reformation, but as soon as he was free he at once returned to his old
habits, and even calumniated his father and attempted to get him
imprisoned.[263] Cardan’s father was eccentric and stammered; he did not
dress like other people, and pursued various strange studies; he had
lost some part of his skull in consequence of a wound received in youth,
and he believed that he was guided by a spirit. His mother was
irascible; when pregnant with him she attempted to abort.[264]

It appears that Aretino’s mother was a prostitute. Petrarch had a lazy
and vicious son, “the most refractory to letters that man of letters
ever had;” he died at the age of twenty-four.[265] Rembrandt brought up
his son Titus, with great care, to be an artist; but in spite of all
efforts he could make nothing of him. Walter Scott’s son, a cavalry
officer, was ashamed of his father’s literary celebrity, and boasted
that he had never read one of his novels. Mozart’s son, when asked by
Bianchini if he liked music, replied by throwing a handful of gold on
the table: “That is the only music I like!” Sophocles’ son tried to
represent his old father as imbecile. Frederick the Great’s father was
morally insane and a drunkard; Peter the Great had a son who was a
drunkard and maniacal; Richelieu’s sister imagined that her back was
made of crystal; his brother thought he was God the Father; Niccolini’s
sister thought she was damned because of her brother’s heresy, and
attempted to kill him; Hegel’s sister was insane, as also was Diderot’s;
Lamb’s sister killed her mother during a maniacal attack. Gray’s father
was a worthless scoundrel, who used to beat his wife, by whose exertions
the children were supported. Thomas Campbell’s only son was hopelessly
imbecile.

Charles V.’s mother suffered from melancholia; his grandchildren and
great-grandchildren were also insane: Don Carlos, brutal, cruel, and
turbulent; Philip III., subject to convulsions; Charles II., an imbecile
epileptic, with whom the race was extinguished; and Alexander Farnese, a
bastard grandson of eccentric genius.[266]

The drunkenness of Beethoven’s father was notorious. Byron’s mother was
half-mad; his father, known as “mad Jack Byron,” was dissolute and
eccentric, and is said to have committed suicide. It has been said of
Byron that if ever there was a case in which hereditary influence could
justify eccentricity of character it was his, for he was descended from
individuals in whom everything seemed calculated to destroy harmony of
character and domestic peace. Alexander had a dissolute and perverse
mother, a drunken father. Plutarch’s grandfather was much given to wine,
of which he delighted to celebrate the virtues; and Cimon’s was a
drunkard and debauched. Kerner had a maternal uncle who was mad; his
sister was melancholic and had two children, of whom one was insane, the
other a somnambulist.[267] The sons of Tacitus, Carlini, Bernardin de
Saint-Pierre, Mercadante, Donizetti, Volta, Manzoni, a daughter of
Victor Hugo, the father and brothers of Villemain, the sister of Kant,
the brothers of Zimmermann, Perticari, and Puccinotti were all insane.
D’Azeglio, who had a grandfather and a brother more than eccentric,
records a saying current at Turin: “_I Taparei a l’an nen le grumele a
port_.”[268]

The origins of Renan’s neurosis, of which I have already spoken, he has
himself indicated in speaking of his religious and prematurely
sacerdotal education, that education of the seminary which when it once
takes hold of a man never more leaves him, and which is so productive of
insanity. The alienist will find other sources of neurosis and atavism
in the little town of Tréguier in which Renan was born. On account of
the frequency of consanguineous marriages and of the preponderance of
the ecclesiastical element, the place swarmed with the insane and
semi-insane. “These inoffensive lunatics,” he writes, “were a sort of
institution, a municipal affair. We said, ‘our lunatics,’ as at Venice
they say ‘_nostre carampane_.’ One met them nearly everywhere; they
saluted you, greeted you with some nauseous pleasantry, which yet raised
a smile. They were liked, and they were useful. I shall always remember
the good lunatic Brian, who imagined that he was a priest, and passed
part of the day in church, imitating the ceremonies of the mass; all the
afternoon the cathedral was filled with a nasal murmur; it was the poor
lunatic’s prayer, well worth any other.”[269] A still greater influence
on Renan’s psychosis must be attributed to the insanity in his own
family. His paternal uncle, semi-insane, passed his days and nights at
inns telling stories and legends to the peasants with whom he was a
great favourite; one night he was found dead on the roadside. His
grandfather, an ardent and honest patriot, lost his reason in 1815,
through grief, and used to walk about with an enormous tricoloured
cockade, exclaiming: “I should like to know who would dare to snatch
from me this cockade!” He himself, a seven-months’ child, remained for a
long time small and weak, and for this reason was the more easily
disturbed by a sacerdotal education, which inflames, like a hot iron,
even the most tranquil spirits.

In Schopenhauer, also, the insane and neurotic hereditary tendency was
well marked. On his father’s side he was descended from an old family of
Dantzig merchants; his great-grandfather was a man of very strong and
energetic character; his grandfather, a man of quiet business habits,
seems to have brought the property into the family, but the grandmother
had an aunt and a grandmother who were insane. Schopenhauer’s father
seems to have been a skilled man of business; a republican, he possessed
the native arrogance of a democratic patrician; inclined to deafness
from childhood, he had attacks of rage from which even the domestic dog
and cat fled terrified. With the increase of his deafness he became more
irritable, and suffered, if not from actual insanity, at least from
morbid fears. It was suspected that he committed suicide. He presented
various characters of degeneration: large ears, very prominent eyes,
thick lips, a short, up-turned nose; he was, however, of considerable
height. Schopenhauer’s mother, married at the age of nineteen, was witty
and ambitious, and, as he himself said, very frivolous. His brother was
imbecile from childhood.

This influence of insane heredity can to-day be controlled by
statistics. The Prussian statistics for 1877 show that among 10,676
lunatics, morbid heredity may be traced in 6,369.[270] They are divided
as follows:--

                         Father or   Grandparents   Sisters or
                          mother       or uncles     brothers
                         per cent.     per cent.     per cent.
  Insanity                 89·0          86·0          76·1
  Serious Neurosis         12·4           6·7          13·1
  Crime                     1·0           0·1           0·1
  Alcoholism               18·0           3·1           3·3
  Suicide                   1·7           2·7           2·3
  Extraordinary talent      6·3           1·3           3·6

This seems to show that a considerable number of lunatics are descended
from men of ability. The number of brothers and sisters of lunatics
endowed with ability, surpassing that of suicidal, alcoholistic, or
criminal brothers confirms the influence. In twenty-two cases of
hereditary insanity Aubonel and Thoré observed two cases of sons of
ability.[271]

These facts were not unknown to old observers. Tassoni, a very original
writer, in his _Pensieri Diversi_ (1621) discusses the question: “How it
happens to wise fathers to have very foolish children, and to very
foolish fathers to have very wise children.” Among the former he
mentions the sons of Scipio Africanus, Anthony, Cicero, Agrippa
Posthumus, Claudius the son of Drusus, Caligula, of Germanicus,
Commodus, of Marcus Aurelius, Lamprocles, of Socrates, Arrhidaeus, of
Philip. Among many opinions, more or less extravagant, of learned men of
his time, he reports one to the effect that “in great men the vital
spirits assemble at the brain to fortify and give vigour to the powers
of the intelligence; it happens in consequence that the blood and sperm
remain cold and languid, and the children of such men, especially the
males, are inclined to stupidity.”

_Age of Parents._--This is one of the hereditary influences which often
escape from view, and are at present not clearly seen. Marro has shown
the great influence of the advanced age of the parents on the
intelligence or the insanity of the children. Very great is the number
of men of genius, and even of talent, issued from aged fathers:
Frederick II., Napoleon I., Sciacci, Bizzozzero, Rochefort, Dumas
_père_, A. Jussieu, Balzac, J. Cassini, C. Vernet, Beaconsfield, Horace
Walpole, William Pitt, Racine, Adler, Auriac, Béclard, Schopenhauer.
From young fathers I have, on the other hand, only found Victor Hugo, De
Girardin, Arneth, Barral, Bertillon, Ségur. This influence may explain
the longevity of men of genius.

_Conception._--De Candolle speaks of the influence which strong passion
on the part of the parents at conception may have on the offspring, and
recalls the considerable number of bastards of genius. Erasmus boasted
that he was not the fruit of wearisome conjugal duty. Isaac Disraeli
wrote in his “Memoirs of Toland” that birth outside marriage creates
strong and resolute characters. Among illegitimate sons were:
Themistocles, Charles Martel, William the Conqueror, the Duke of
Berwick whom Montesquieu called the perfect man, Leonardo da Vinci,
Boccaccio, A. Dumas, Cardan, D’Alembert, Savage, Prior, De Girardin, La
Harpe, Alexander Farnese, Dupanloup.[272] Newton was conceived after his
parents had spent two years of forced continence. It will be seen from
these and other facts how far we are yet from having exhausted the
numerous sources of hereditary genius.

Those who recall how many men of genius have been born of consumptive
and drunken parents, and who know how these two forms of degeneration
are often transformed in the children into moral insanity, will perceive
that there can be other hereditary causes of genius which escape
ordinary observers, and are, therefore, little known.




