CHAPTER III.

LATENT FORMS OF NEUROSIS AND INSANITY IN GENIUS.

     Chorea and Epilepsy--Melancholy--Megalomania--_Folie du
     doute_--Alcoholism--Hallucinations--Moral Insanity--Longevity.


It is now possible to explain the frequency among men of genius, even
when not insane, of those forms of neurosis or mental alienation which
may be called latent, and which contain the germs and as it were the
outlines of these disorders.

_Chorea and Epilepsy._--Many men of genius, like the insane, are subject
to curious spasmodic and choreic movements. Lenau and Montesquieu left
upon the floor of their rooms the signs of the movements by which their
feet were convulsively agitated during composition; Buffon, Dr. Johnson,
Santeuil, Crébillon, Lombardini, exhibited the most remarkable facial
contortions.[89] There was a constant quiver on Thomas Campbell’s thin
lips. Chateaubriand was long subject to convulsive movements of the arm.
Napoleon suffered from habitual spasm of the right shoulder and of the
lips; “My anger,” he said, one day after an altercation with Lowe, “must
have been fearful, for I felt the vibration of my calves, which has not
happened to me for a long time.” Peter the Great suffered from
convulsive movements which horribly distorted his face. Carducci’s face
at certain moments, writes Mantegazza, is a veritable hurricane;
lightnings dart from his eyes and his muscles tremble.[90] Ampère could
only express his thoughts while walking, and when his body was in a
state of constant movement.[91] Socrates often danced and jumped in the
street without reason, as if by a freak.

Julius Cæsar, Dostoieffsky, Petrarch, Molière, Flaubert, Charles V.,
Saint Paul, and Handel, appear to have been all subject to attacks of
epilepsy. Twice upon the field of battle the epileptic vertigo nearly
had a serious influence on Cæsar’s fate. On another occasion, when the
Senate had decreed him extraordinary honours, and had gone out to meet
him with the consuls and prætors, Cæsar, who at that moment was seated
at the tribune, failed to rise, and received the Senators as though they
were ordinary citizens. They retired showing signs of discontent, and
Cæsar, suddenly returning to himself, immediately went home, took off
his clothes and uncovering his neck, exclaimed that he was ready to
deliver his throat to any one who wished to cut it. He explained his
behaviour to the Senate as due to the malady to which he was subject; he
said that those who were affected by it were unable to speak standing,
in public, that they soon felt shocks in their limbs, giddiness, and at
last completely lost consciousness.[92]

Convulsions sometimes hindered Molière from doing any work for a
fortnight at a time. Mahomet had visions after an epileptic fit: “An
angel appears to me in human form; he speaks to me. Often I hear as it
were the sound of cats, of rabbits, of bells: then I suffer much.” After
these apparitions he was overcome with sadness and howled like a young
camel. Peter the Great and his son by Catherine were both epileptics.

It may be noted here that artistic creation presents the intermittence,
the instantaneousness, and very often the sudden absences of mind which
characterize epilepsy. Paganini, Mozart, Schiller, and Alfieri, suffered
from convulsions. Paganini was even subject to catalepsy.[93] Pascal
from the age of twenty-four had fits which lasted for whole days. Handel
had attacks of furious and epileptic rage. Newton and Swift were subject
to vertigo, which is related to epilepsy. Richelieu, in a fit, believed
he was a horse, and neighed and jumped; afterwards he knew nothing of
what had taken place.[94] Maudsley remarks that epileptics often believe
themselves patriarchs and prophets. He thinks that by mistaking their
hallucinations for divine revelations they have largely contributed to
the foundation of religious beliefs. Anne Lee, who founded the sect of
Shakers, was an epileptic: she saw Christ come to her physically and
spiritually. The vision which transformed Saint Paul from a persecutor
into an apostle seems to have been of the same order. The Siberian
Shamans, who profess to have intercourse with spirits, operate in a
state of convulsive exaltation, and choose their pupils by preference
from among epileptic children.

_Melancholy._--The tendency to melancholy is common to the majority of
thinkers, and depends on their hyperæsthesia. It is proverbially said
that to feel sorrow more than other men constitutes the crown of thorns
of genius. Aristotle had remarked that men of genius are of melancholic
temperament, and after him Jürgen-Meyer has affirmed the same. “_Tristes
philosophi et severi_,” said Varro.

Goethe, the impassible Goethe, confesses that “my character passes from
extreme joy to extreme melancholy;” and elsewhere that “every increase
of knowledge is an increase of sorrow;” he could not recall that in all
his life he had passed more than four pleasant weeks. “I am not made for
enjoyment,” wrote Flaubert.[95] Giusti was affected by hypochondria,
which reached to delirium; sometimes he thought he had hydrophobia.
Corradi has shown[96] that all the misfortunes of Leopardi, as well as
his philosophy, owe their origin to an exaggerated sensibility, and a
hopeless love which he experienced at the age of eighteen. In fact, his
philosophy was more or less sombre according as his health was better or
worse, until the tendency was transformed into a habit. “Thought,” he
wrote, “has long inflicted on me, and still inflicts, such martyrdom as
to produce injurious effects, and it will kill me if I do not change my
manner of existence.”[97] In his poems Leopardi appears the most
romantic and philanthropic of men. In his letters, on the other hand, he
appears cold, indifferent to his parents, and still more to his native
country. From the publications of his host and protector Ranieri[98] may
be seen how little grateful he was to his friends, and that he was
eccentric to the verge of insanity. Desiring death every moment in
verse, he took exaggerated pains to cling to life, exposing himself to
the sun for hours together, sometimes eating only peaches, at other
times only flesh, always in extremes. No one hated the country more than
he, who so often sang its praises. He hardly reached it before he wished
to return, and stayed with difficulty an entire day. He made day night,
and night day. He suspected every one; one day he even suspected that he
had been robbed of a box in which he preserved old combs.

The list of great men who have committed suicide is almost endless. It
opens with the names of Zeno Aristotle(?), Hegesippus, Cleanthes,
Stilpo, Dionysus of Heraclea, Lucretius, Lucan, and reaches to
Chatterton, Clive, Creech, Blount, Haydon, David. Domenichino was led to
commit suicide by the contempt of a rival; Spagnoletto by the abduction
of his daughter; Nourrit by the success of Dupré; Gros could not survive
the decadence of his genius. Robert, Chateaubriand, Cowper, Rousseau,
Lamartine on several occasions nearly put an end to their lives. Burns
wrote in a letter: “My constitution and frame were _ab origine_ blasted
with a deep incurable taint of melancholia which poisons my existence.”
Schiller passed through a period of melancholy which caused him to be
suspected of insanity. In B. Constant’s letters we read: “If I had had
my dear opium, it would have been the moment, in honour of _ennui_, to
put an end to an excessive movement of love.”[99] Dupuytren thought of
suicide even when he had reached the climax of fame. Pariset and Cavour
were only saved from suicide by devoted friends. The latter twice
attempted to kill himself. Lessmann, the humorous writer, who wrote the
_Journal of a Melancholiac_, hanged himself in 1835 during an attack of
melancholia. So died, also, the composer of _Masaniello_, Fischer,
Romilly, Eult von Burg, Hugh Miller, Göhring, Kuh (the friend of
Mendelssohn), Jules Uberti, Tannahill, Prévost-Paradol, Kleist, who died
with his mistress, and Majláth, who drowned himself with his daughter.

George Sand, who seems, however, free from all neurosis, declared that
whether it was that bile made her melancholy, or that melancholy made
her bilious, she had been seized at moments of her life by a desire for
eternal repose--for suicide. She attributed this to an affection of the
liver. “It was an old chronic disorder, experienced and fought with from
early youth, forgotten like an old travelling companion whom one
believes one has left behind, but who suddenly presents himself. This
temptation,” she continues, “was sometimes so strange that I regarded it
as a kind of madness. It took the form of a fixed idea and bordered on
monomania. The idea was aroused chiefly by the sight of water, of a
precipice, of phials.”

George Sand tells us that Gustave Planche was of strangely melancholy
character. Edgar Quinet suffered at times from unreasonable melancholy,
in this taking after his mother. Rossini experienced, about 1848, keen
grief because he had bought a house at a slight loss. He became really
insane, and took it into his head that he was reduced to extreme misery,
so that he must beg. He believed that he had become an idiot. He could,
indeed, neither compose nor even hear music spoken of. The care of
Sansone, of Ancona, gradually restored him to fame and to his friends.
The great painter Van Leyden believed himself poisoned, and during his
latter years never rose from his bed. Mozart was convinced that the
Italians wished to poison him. Molière had numerous attacks of
melancholia.[100] Voltaire was hypochondriacal.[101] “With respect to my
body,” he wrote, “it is moribund.... I anticipate dropsy. There is no
appearance of it, but you know that there is nothing so dry as a
dropsical person.... Diseases, more cruel even than kings, are
persecuting me. Doctors only are needed to finish me.” “All this”
(travels, pleasures, &c.), said Grimm, “did not prevent him from saying
that he was dead or dying; he was even very angry when one dared to
assure him that he was still full of strength and life.” Zimmermann was
afraid sometimes of dying of hunger, sometimes of being arrested; he
actually died of voluntary starvation, the result of a fixed idea that
he had no money to pay for food. The poet Gray, the “melancholy Gray,”
was of a gloomy and extremely reserved character. Abraham Lincoln was a
victim of constitutional melancholy, which assumed a most dangerous form
on one or two occasions in his earlier years.

Chopin during the last years of his life was possessed by a melancholy
which went as far as insanity. An abandoned convent in Spain filled his
imagination with phantoms and terrors. One day G. Sand and her son were
late in returning from a walk. Chopin began to imagine, and finally
believed, that they were dead; then he saw himself dead, drowned in a
lake, and drops of frozen water fell upon his breast. They were real
drops of rain falling upon him from the roof of the ruin, but he did not
perceive this, even when George Sand pointed it out. Some trifling
annoyance affected him more than a great and real misfortune. A crumpled
petal, a fly, made him weep.[102]

Cavour from youth believed himself deprived of domestic affections. He
saw no friends around; he saw above him no ideal to realise; he found
himself alone.[103] His condition reached such a point that, to avoid
greater evils and to leave an insipid life, he wished to kill himself.
He hesitated only because he was doubtful about the morality of suicide.
“But, while this doubt exists, it is best for me to imitate Hamlet. I
will not kill myself: no, but I will put up earnest prayers to heaven to
send me a rapid consumption which may carry me off to the other world.”
At a very youthful age he sometimes gave himself up to strange attacks
of bad temper. One day, at the Castle of Diluzers, at Balangero, he
threw himself into so violent a rage on being asked to study that he
wished to kill himself with a knife and throw himself from the window.
These attacks were very frequent but of brief duration.[104] When the
hopes of war raised by the words of Napoleon III. to Baron Hübner seemed
suddenly to give place in the Emperor’s mind to thoughts of peace,
Cavour was carried away by such agitation that some extreme resolution
was apprehended. This is confirmed by Castelli, who went to his house
and found him alone in his room. He had burnt various papers, and given
orders that no one should be admitted. The danger was plain. He looked
fixedly at Castelli, who spoke a few calm words calculated to affect
him, and then burst into tears. Cavour rose, embraced him convulsively,
took a few steps distractedly about the room, and then said slowly: “Be
at rest; we will brave everything, and always together.” Castelli ran to
reassure his friends, but the danger had been very grave.[105]

Chateaubriand relates, in his _Mémoires d’outre Tombe_, that one day as
a youth he charged an old musket, which sometimes went off by itself,
with three balls, inserted the barrel in his mouth and struck the stock
against the ground. The appearance of a passer-by suspended his
resolution.

Gérard de Nerval was never so much inspired as in those movements when,
according to the saying of Alexandre Dumas, his melancholy became his
muse. “Werther, René, Antony,” says Dumas, “never uttered more poignant
complaints, more sorrowful sighs, tenderer words, or more poetic cries.”

J. S. Mill[106] was seized during the autumn of 1826, at the age of
twenty, by an attack of insanity which he himself could only describe in
these words of Coleridge’s:

    “A grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear,
     A drowsy, stifled, unimpassioned grief,
     Which finds no natural outlet or relief
     In word, or sigh, or tear.”

I quote these lines the more willingly as they show in their extreme
energy that Coleridge himself was affected by the same malady. To this
state of mind succeeded another in which Mill sought to cultivate the
feelings; among other preoccupations he feared the exhaustion of musical
combinations: “The octave consists only of five tones and two
semi-tones, which can be put together in only a limited number of ways,
of which but a small proportion are beautiful: most of them, it seemed
to me, must have been already discovered, and there could not be room
for a long succession of Mozarts and Webers to strike out, as these had
done, entirely new and surpassingly rich veins of musical beauty. This
source of anxiety may, perhaps, be thought to resemble that of the
philosophers of Laputa, who feared lest the sun should be burnt
out.”[107]

_Megalomania_ (_Delusions of grandeur_).--The delirium of melancholia
alternates with that of grandiose monomania.

“The title ‘Son of David,’” writes Renan, “was the first which Jesus
Christ accepted, probably without taking part in the innocent frauds by
which it was sought to make it certain. The family of David had, in
fact, long been extinct.” Later on he declared himself the son of God.
“His Father had given him all power; nature obeyed him; he could forgive
sins; he was superior to David, to Abraham, to Solomon, to the prophets.
It is evident,” Renan continues, “that the title of Rabbi, with which he
was at first contented, no longer satisfied him; even the title of
Prophet or Messenger from God no longer corresponded to his conception.
The position which he attributed to himself was that of a superhuman
being.” He declared that he was come to give sight to the blind, and to
blind those who think they see. One day his ill humour with the Temple
called forth an imprudent expression: “This Temple, made by human
hands,” he said, “I could, if I liked, destroy, and in its place build
another, not made by human hands. The Queen of Sheba,” he added, “will
rise up at the Judgment against the men of to-day and condemn them,
because they came from the ends of the earth to hear Solomon’s wisdom;
yet a greater than Solomon is here. The men of Nineveh will rise up at
the Judgment against the men of to-day and condemn them, because they
repented at the preaching of Jonah; yet a greater than Jonah is here.”

Dante’s pride, legitimate as it may have been, is proverbial. It is well
known that he placed himself “_sesto fra cotanto senno_,” and declared
himself superior to his contemporaries in style and the favourite of
God:--

                “_ ... e forse e nato_
    _Chi l’uno e l’altro caccierà di nido...._
                _ ... perchè tanta_
    _Grazia in te luce prima che sei morto...._”

At the Institute Dumas said with truth of Hugo: “Victor Hugo was
dominated by a fixed idea: to become the greatest poet and the greatest
man of all countries and all ages.” It is this, according to Dumas,
which explains the entire life and all the changes in Victor Hugo, who
began by being a Catholic and monarchist. “He could not submit to be
shut up within a government and a religion where he had not the right to
say anything and the chance to be first. The glory of Napoleon long
haunted Victor Hugo. But the day came when he could no longer tolerate
that any one should have glory equal to his own. The great captain must
give way to the great poet; the giant of action must efface himself
before the giant of thought. Is not Homer greater than Achilles? Victor
Hugo came to believe himself superior to all human beings. He did not
say, ‘I am Genius,’ but he began to believe firmly that the world would
say so. His personages do not possess the characters of reality nor the
proportions of man; they are always above and beyond humanity, sometimes
reversed, not to say upside down; that was because Nature had for him
aspects that were seen by no other. His eye enlarged everything; he saw
herbs as tall as trees; he saw insects as large as eagles.”

Hegel believed in his own divinity. He began a lecture with these words:
“I may say with Christ, that not only do I teach truth, but that I am
myself truth.”[108]

“Man is the vainest of animals, and the poet is the vainest of men,”
wrote Heine, who knew.[109] And in another letter: “Do not forget that I
am a poet, and, as such, convinced that men must forsake all and read my
verses.”

“Every one knows,” wrote George Sand of her friend Balzac,[110] “how the
consciousness of greatness overflowed in him, how he loved to speak of
his works and to narrate them. Genial and ingenuous, he asked advice
from children, but never waited for the answer, or else opposed it with
all the obstinacy of his superiority. He never instructed, but always
talked very well indeed of himself, of himself alone. One evening,
having on a beautiful new dressing-gown, he wished to go out, thus
clothed, with a lamp in his hand, to excite the admiration of the
public.”

Chopin directed in his will that he should be buried in a white tie,
small shoes, and short breeches. He abandoned the woman whom he tenderly
loved because she offered a chair to some one else before giving the
same invitation to himself.[111]

Giordano Bruno declared himself illumined by superior light, a messenger
from God, who knew the essence of things, a Titan who would destroy
Jupiter: “And what others see far ahead I leave behind.”[112] And
again:--

                                  “_Nam me Deus alter_
    _Vertentis sæcli melioris non mediocrem_
    _Destinat, haud veluti, media de plebe, magistrum._”

The poet Lucilius did not rise when Julius Cæsar entered the college of
poets because he believed himself his superior in the art of verse.
Ariosto, after receiving the laurel from Charles V., ran like a madman
through the streets.[113] The celebrated surgeon Porta would not suffer
any medical paper to be read at the Lombard Institute without murmuring
and showing his contempt; as soon as a mathematical or philological
paper was brought forward he became quiet and attentive. Comte gave out
that he was the High Priest of Humanity. Wetzel intitled his works,
_Opera Dei Wetzelii_. Rouelle, the founder of chemistry in France,
quarrelled with all his disciples who wrote on chemistry. They were, he
said, ignorant bunglers, plagiaries; this latter term assumed so odious
a significance in his mind that he applied it to the worst criminals;
for instance, to express his horror of Damiens he said he was a
plagiary.

Many men of genius, while avoiding these excesses, nevertheless believe
that they embody in themselves absolute truth; they modify scientific
conclusions in their own interests, and in accordance with the part they
are themselves able to take. Delacroix, become incapable of drawing
beautiful lines, declared, “Colour is everything.” Ingres said, “Drawing
is honesty, drawing is honour.” Chopin charged Schubert and Shakespeare
with temerity because in these great men he always sought a
correspondence with his own temperament.[114] The Princess Conti having
said to Malherbe, “I wish to show you some of the most beautiful verses
in the world, which you have not yet seen,” he replied immediately with
emotion, “Pardon me, madame, I have seen them; for, since they are the
most beautiful in the world, I must have written them myself.”

_Folie du doute._--Among men of genius we often find the phenomena which
characterizes that disorder termed by alienists _folie du doute_, one of
the varieties of melancholia. In this form of insanity the subject has
every appearance of mental health; he reasons, writes, and speaks like
other people; everything goes well until he has to execute a definite
action, and in this he finds all sorts of imaginary dangers. Thus I have
treated a woman who when she had to get up in the morning, would
hesitate for hours beside her bed, with one arm in the sleeve of her
chemise, and the other sleeve hanging down, until her husband came to
her help. Sometimes the husband was obliged to give her a few slight
blows to induce her to take action. If she went for a walk and knocked
against a stone, or came across a puddle, she would remain motionless;
her husband had then to carry her for a few instants. In conversation
she seemed the best and most sensible of mothers, but woe to the
unfortunate person who dropped any word she regarded with suspicion,
such as “devil,” “death,” “God”; she immediately seized him and cried
out, until he repeated a certain formula, declaring a dozen times that
the word had not been uttered to injure her. A peasant, affected by the
same disorder, was incapable of attending to his work, unless some one
was there to watch over him; for, said he, “I cannot make up my mind
whether I ought to dig or to hoe, to go to the field or to the hill, and
my uncertainty is so great that I end by doing nothing.”

When Johnson walked along the streets of London he was compelled to
touch every post he passed; if he omitted one he had to return. He
always went in or out of a door or passage in such a way that either his
right or his left foot (Boswell was not certain which) should be the
first to cross the threshold; when he made any mistake in the movement,
he would return, and, having satisfactorily performed the feat, rejoin
his companions with the air of a man who had got something off his mind.
Napoleon I. could not pass through a street, even at the head of his
army, without counting and adding up the rows of windows. Manzoni, in a
letter (addressed to Giorgio Briano) which has become famous, declared
that he was incapable of giving himself up to politics because he did
not know how to decide on anything; he was always in a state of
uncertainty before every resolution, even the most trifling. He was
afraid of drowning in the smallest puddle, and could never resolve to go
out alone; he confessed on various occasions that, from his youth up, he
had suffered from melancholy.[115] He passed whole days without being
able to apply himself to anything,[116] so that in a month there were
five or six useful days during which he worked five hours, and then he
became incapable of thinking.[117] Ugo Foscolo said that “very active in
regard to some things, he was in regard to others less than a man, less
than a woman, less than a child.”[118] Tolstoi confesses that
philosophic scepticism had led him into a condition approximating to
madness; let us add, to _folie du doute_. “I imagined,” he said, “that
there existed nothing outside me, either living or dead; that the
objects were not objects, but vain appearances; this state reached such
a point that sometimes I turned suddenly round, and looked behind me in
the hope of seeing _nothing_ where I was not.” “The deplorable mania of
doubt exhausts me,” cried Flaubert, “I doubt about everything, even
about my doubts.”[119] “I am embarrassed and frightened at my own
ideas,” wrote Maine de Biran, “every expression stops me and gives me
scruples. I have no confidence in anything that I publish, and am always
tempted to withdraw my works when they have scarcely appeared, to
substitute others which would certainly be worthless. I always call
those happy who are tied down to fixed labour, who are not submitted to
the torment of uncertainty, to the indecision which poisons men who are
masters of their time. I am always trying my strength; I commence, and
recommence again and again. It is my fortune to be useless, to be
wanting in measure, never to feel my existence, never to have confidence
in my capacity. I am never happy wherever I am, because I carry within
my own organism a source of affliction and unrest. I have only
sufficient feeling of my own personality to feel my impotence, which is
a great torture. I am always ready to do a number of things ... and I do
nothing.”[120] The little miseries of existence were tortures for
Carlyle; to have to pack his portmanteau was a grave affair of state;
the idea of ordering coats or buying gloves crushed him. “I have long
renounced the omnibus,” wrote Renan in his _Souvenirs de Jeunesse_, “the
conductors refuse to regard me as a serious traveller. At the railway
station, unless I have the protection of an inspector, I always obtain
the worst place.... I see too well that to do a good turn to one, is
usually to do a bad one to another. The vision of the unknown person I
am injuring stops short my zeal.”

Renan, indeed, is a most singular instance of these characteristics in
connection with genius, from his earliest years. At mass his childish
eye wandered over the roof of the chapel, and he thought of the great
men told of in books. It was his dream to write books. “My gentleness,”
he writes, “which often arises from indifference, my indulgence, which
is very sincere and which depends on a clear perception of the injustice
of men to each other, the conscientious habits which are a pleasure to
me, the indefinite endurance of _ennui_ which I possess--having,
perhaps, been inoculated in my youth--may be explained by my
surroundings, and the deep impressions I have received. The paradoxical
vow to preserve the clerical virtues without the faith which serves as
basis for them, and in a world for which they are not made, produced, so
far as I am concerned, the most amusing incidents. If ever a comic
writer wishes to amuse the public at my expense, he needs but my
collaboration; I could tell him things far more amusing than he could
invent.” A layman and a sceptic he preserved, involuntarily, the vow of
poverty. “My dream would be to be housed, fed, clothed, and warmed,
without having to think about it, by someone who would take charge of me
and leave me free. The competence which I possess came late, and in
spite of myself.... I always thought about writing; it did not occur to
me it could bring me any money. What was my astonishment when I saw a
gentleman of agreeable and intelligent appearance enter my garret,
compliment me on some articles I had published, and offer to collect
them in a volume. He brought a stamped paper stipulating conditions I
thought astonishingly generous, so that when he asked me to include all
my future writings in the same contract, I consented. The idea came to
me to make some observations, but I paused at sight of the document; the
thought that that beautiful sheet of paper would be lost stopped me. I
did well to stop.” The politeness which he wrongly believes he learnt at
the seminary is not the raw and cold politeness of the priest, but the
special and excessive timidity of genius. He could not, he says, treat
even a dog with an air of authority. But authority is the chief
characteristic of priests. To imagine as he does that men are always
good and deserving could only be, as he himself justly notes, a
continual danger. “Notwithstanding all my efforts to the contrary, I was
predestined to be what I am, a romantic protesting against romanticism,
an utopian preaching materialistic politics, an idealist uselessly
giving himself much trouble to appear _bourgeois_, a tissue of
contradictions.... It is as a great observer Challemel-Lacour has
excellently said, ‘He thinks like a man, feels like a woman, and acts
like a child.’ I do not complain, since this moral constitution has
procured me the most vivid intellectual joys that may be tasted.”[121]

But the most striking example of this permanent state of doubt is
supplied by another philosopher, the author of a journal of his own
life, Amiel. He was so tormented by doubt that the strength of his
genius was only shown after his death, when in his journal he revealed
with absolute exactness the wound which gnawed him. Let us read a few of
the most remarkable passages:--

     “As life flees,” he says, “I mourn the loss of reality: thought is
     sad without action, and action is sad without thought: the real is
     spoilt when the ideal has not added its perfume; but the ideal,
     when not made one with the real, becomes a poison. I have never
     learnt the art of writing; it would have been useful to me, but I
     was ashamed of the useful: on the other hand, I have acquired two
     opposed intellectual habits: to note immediately passing
     impressions and to analyse them scientifically.... This journal
     will be useful to no one, and even for me it will serve rather to
     plan out life than to practice it; it is a pillow of idleness....
     And even in style I am unequal. Always energetic and correct: that
     results from my existence: I see before me several expressions and
     I do not know which I ought to choose. The unique expression is an
     act of courage which implies confidence in oneself.... I
     discovered very early that it is easier to give up a wish than to
     gratify it.... The idea may be modified, but not the action, so I
     abhor it, for I fear useless remorse: I thrust aside the idea of a
     family, because every lost joy is the stab of a knife, because
     every hope is an egg from which may proceed a serpent as well as a
     dove.... Action is my cross because it would be my dream; but to be
     false to the ideal would soil the conscience and be an unpardonable
     error.... It is my passion to injure my interests. When a thing
     attracts me I flee from it.”[122]

Every one may see the glorious kinship to genius of all these forms of
disease. And every one will think of the great poet-alienist who divined
insanity in genius, and left of it a monumental portrait in Hamlet, the
man afflicted by _folie du doute_.

It is scarcely necessary to add that these great disordered minds must
not be confused with the poor inmates, without genius, of our asylums.
Although, as diseased persons, they belong to the same category, and
have some of the same characters, they must not be identified with them.
While ordinary lunatics are reduced to inaction, or the agitation of
sterile delirium, these disordered men of genius are the more active in
the ideal life because the less apt for practical life. Further, when we
analyse more delicately this form of insanity, or rather of impotence
for practical action, so common among men of genius, we see that it is
distinct from the other forms. In scientific work these men do not lack
precision, or decision, or audacity. But by expending their strength on
theoretical problems, they end by failing with reference to practical
things. By carrying their glance above and beyond, these sublimely
far-sighted persons become, like astronomers, unable to perceive
neighbouring objects. The effects seem partly identical, but the nature
of the phenomena and their causes are absolutely different.

In his “Dialogue of Nature,” Leopardi, after having shown how the
excellence of genius involves a greater intensity of life, and
consequently a more vivid sense of individual misfortune, makes Nature
address him thus: “Besides, the delicacy of your own intelligence and
the vivacity of your imagination will shut you out, for a great part,
from your empire of yourself. The brutes follow easily the ends that
they propose to themselves, with all their faculties and all their
strength. But men very rarely utilize all their power; they are usually
stopped by reason and imagination, which create for them a thousand
uncertainties in deliberation, a thousand obstacles in execution. Those
who are less apt or less accustomed to consider and balance motions are
the most prompt in taking a resolution, the most powerful in action. But
those who are like you, the elect souls, continually folded on
themselves and outrun, as it were, by the greatness of their own
faculties, consequently powerless to govern themselves, are most often
subjected, either in deliberation or execution, to irresolution, which
is one of the greatest penalties which afflict human life. Add to this
that the excellence of your aptitudes will enable you to surpass, easily
and briefly, all other souls in the most profound sciences and the most
difficult researches; but, nevertheless, it will always be impossible or
extremely difficult for you to learn or to put in practice a great many
things, insignificant in themselves, but absolutely necessary in your
relations with other men. And at the same time you will find these
things learnt and easily applied by minds, not only inferior to yours,
but altogether contemptible.”

_Alcoholism._--Many men of genius have abused alcoholic drinks.
Alexander died, it is said, after having emptied ten times the goblet of
Hercules, and it was without doubt in an alcoholic attack, while
pursuing naked the infamous Thais, that he killed his dearest friend.
Cæsar was often carried home on the shoulders of his soldiers. Neither
Socrates, nor Seneca, nor Alcibiades, nor Cato, nor Peter the Great (nor
his wife, Catherine, nor his daughter, Elizabeth), were remarkable for
their abstinence. One recalls Horace’s line:

    “_Narratur et prisci Catonis sæpe mero caluisse virtus._”

Tiberius Nero was called by the Romans Biberius Mero. Septimius Severus
and Mahomet II. succumbed to drunkenness or _delirium tremens_. Among
confirmed drunkards must be counted the Constable de Bourbon and
Avicenna, who, it was said, devoted the second half of his life to
showing the uselessness of the studies to which he had devoted the first
half; so also have been many famous painters, such as the Caracci, Jan
Steen, Barbatelli (on this account nicknamed Pocetta), G. Morland,
Turner; and many poets and novelists, such as Murger, Gérard de Nerval,
Alfred de Musset, Kleist, Poe, Hoffmann, Addison, Steele, Carew,
Sheridan, Burns, Charles Lamb, James Thomson, Majláth, Hartley
Coleridge. Tasso wrote in a letter: “I do not deny that I am mad, but I
believe that my madness is caused by intoxication and love; for I know
that I drink too much.” Coleridge, on account of his lack of will, and
his abuse of alcoholic drinks and opium, never succeeded in executing
any of his gigantic projects; in youth he was offered thirty guineas for
a poem he had improvised, but he never succeeded in getting it on to
paper. His son, Hartley, a distinguished writer, gave himself up to
drink so entirely that he died of it. It was said of him that he “wrote
like an angel and drank like a fish.” Savage, during the last days of
his life almost lived on wine and died in a Bristol prison. Helius, a
German poet of the sixteenth century, affirmed that it was the greatest
of shames to be beaten in drinking. Shenstone said of his comrade in
poetry, Somerville, that he was “forced to drink himself into pains of
the body, in order to get rid of the pains of the mind.” Madame de Staël
and De Quincey abused opium; the latter has left a vivid picture of his
excesses in the _Confessions of an Opium Eater_. Many musical composers
were great drinkers; such were Dussek, Handel, and Glück, who used to
say that he loved money, wine, and fame for an excellent reason: the
first enabled him to obtain the second, and the second, by inspiring
him, procured him fame. But besides wine he liked brandy, and one day he
drank so much that he died of it.[123] One may say the same of Rovani
and of Praga.

_Hallucinations._--We have already seen that hallucinations are so
closely connected with artistic and genial creations that Brierre de
Boismont associated them with the physiology of great men. Every one
knows the celebrated hallucination of Cellini in his cell, those of
Brutus, of Cæsar, of Napoleon, of Swedenborg, who believed that he had
visited Heaven, conversed with the spirits of the great dead, and seen
the Eternal Father in person; Van Helmont declared that he had seen his
own soul in the form of a brilliant crystal; Kerner was visited by a
spectre. Shelley thought he saw a child rise from the sea and clap its
hands. Clare, after having read some historical episode, imagined that
he was himself spectator and actor. Blake thought he really perceived
the fantastic images reproduced by his pencil. A celebrated professor
was often subject to a similar illusion, and he believed himself changed
into Confucius, Papirius, and Tamerlane. Hobbes confessed that he could
not go in the dark without thinking that he saw visions of the
dead.[124] Bunyan heard voices.

When Columbus was cast on the shores of Jamaica he had an hallucination
of hearing. He heard a voice reproaching him for giving himself up to
grief and for having but a weak faith in God: “What happens to you
to-day is a deserved punishment for having served the masters of the
world and not God. All these tribulations are engraved on marble, and
are not brought about without reason.” Later, Columbus declared that in
him was accomplished an ancient prophecy announcing the end of the world
on the day on which the universal diffusion of Christianity would be
realized. According to the same prophecy, only 156 years of existence
remained for humanity.[125]

Malebranche declared that he had distinctly heard within himself the
voice of God. Descartes, after a long seclusion, believed himself
haunted by an invisible person who charged him to follow up the search
for truth.[126] Byron sometimes imagined he was haunted by a spectre;
he afterwards explained this himself by the extreme excitability of his
brain.[127] Dr. Johnson distinctly heard his mother call him “Samuel!”
although she was living in a distant town. Pope, who suffered much from
the bowels, one day asked his doctor about an arm which seemed to
protrude from the wall. Goethe assures us that he one day saw his own
image coming to meet him.[128] When Oliver Cromwell was lying on his
bed, kept awake by extreme fatigue, the curtain opened and a woman of
gigantic proportions appeared and announced that he would be the
greatest man in England.[129]

_Moral Insanity._--Complete absence of moral sense and of sympathy is
frequently found among men of genius, as well as among the morally
insane. It is an old proverb that “_Quo quisque est doctior eo est
nequior_.” Aristotle, in reply to the question, “Why the most learned
man is of all living beings the most unjust?” replies: “Because he aims
always at pleasures which can only be attained by injustice. And,
besides, knowledge resembles the stone which is good to sharpen
instruments on, but may also serve the murderer’s turn.” And Philip of
Comines says: “_Doctrina vel meliores reddit homines vel pejores pro
cujusque natura_.” And Cardan: “_Sapientes cum calidissimi natura sint,
ac humidissimi, nisi philosophia proficiant, pessimi omnium sunt.
Adiuvant ad scelera perpetranda industria quam ex studiis acquisuerunt,
et melancolia quæ resoluto humore pinguiore gignitur ex superfluis
studiis, atque, vigiliis_,” _&c._

“The older I grow,” wrote George Sand, “the more I reverence goodness
because I see that this is the gift of which God is most avaricious.
Where there is no intelligence, that which is called goodness is merely
stupidity. Where there is no strength the pretended goodness is apathy.
Where there is strength and intelligence, goodness can scarcely be
found, because experience and observation have given birth to suspicion
and hate. The souls devoted to the noblest principles are often the most
rough and bitter, because they have become diseased through deceptions.
One esteems them, one admires them still, but one cannot love them. To
have been unhappy without ceasing to be intelligent and good implies a
very powerful organization, and it is such that I seek and love.... I am
sick of great men (forgive the expression); I should like to see them
all in Plutarch. There they do not make one suffer on the human side.
Let them be cut in marble or cast in bronze, and let them be silent. So
long as they live they are wicked, persecuting, fantastic, despotic,
bitter, suspicious. They confuse in the same proud contempt the goats
and the sheep. They are worse to their friends than to their enemies.
God protect us from them; be good--stupid if you will.”[130]

“I regret,” said Valerius Maximus,[131] “to speak of the youth of
Themistocles, when I see, on the one hand, his father disinheriting him
with ignominy, and, on the other, his mother, from shame of such a son,
hanging herself with grief.” Sallust, who wrote such beautiful tirades
on virtue, passed his life in debauchery. Speusippus, the disciple of
Plato, was killed in the act of adultery.[132] Democritus is said to
have blinded himself because he could not look at a woman without
desiring her. Aristippus, under the mask of austerity, abandoned himself
to debauchery. Anaxagoras denied a deposit confided to him by strangers;
Aristotle basely flattered Alexander. Theognis wrote moral maxims,
particularly on a happy death, and bequeathed his patrimony to a
prostitute (?), leaving his own family destitute. Euripides, Juvenal,
and Aretino remarked that women of letters were nearly always
licentious. Thus Sappho, Philena, and Elephantina were prostitutes, as
was Leontion, philosopher and priestess, who gave herself to all the
philosophers; and Demophila who told little love stories, and put them
in practice. At the Renaissance, Veronica Franco, Tullia of Aragon, and
other prostitutes, were as well known for their licentiousness as for
their poetry. Voigt considers that immorality was a characteristic
feature of the Renaissance period.[133]

In my _Uomo Delinquente_ I have considered criminal genius. Sallust,
Seneca, and Bacon were accused of peculation; Cremani was a forger,
Demme a poisoner. One may also refer to Casanova, who was declared to
have forfeited his nobility for a crime the nature of which is not
known, and Avicenna, an epileptic, who in old age plunged into
debauchery, and took opium in excess, so that it was said of him that
philosophy had not enabled him to live honestly, nor medicine to live
healthily.[134]

Among poets and artists criminality is, unfortunately, well marked. Many
among them are dominated by passion which becomes the most powerful spur
of their activity; they are not protected by the logical criticism and
judgment with which men of science are armed. This is why we must count
among criminals Bonfadio, Rousseau, Aretino, Ceresa, Brunetto Latini,
Franco, Foscolo, possibly Byron. Observe that I leave out of the
question ancient times and barbarous countries among which brigandage
and poetry went hand in hand.

More criminal still seem to have been Albergati, a comic writer
belonging to the highest aristocracy, who killed his wife through
jealousy;[135] Muret, the humanist, condemned in France for sodomy; and
Casanova, so highly gifted for mathematical science and finance, who
stained his fine genius by a life of swindling and turpitude, giving us
in his _Mémoires_ a complete and cynical picture of it. Villon belonged
to an honourable family; he received the name by which he is known
(_villon_, rascal, robber), when he became famous in scoundrelism, to
which he was led, by his own confession, by gaming and women. He began
by stealing objects of little value to give a good dinner to his
mistresses and companions in idleness; it was their wine that he stole.
His chief robbery was inspired by hunger when the woman, at whose
expense he lived, turned him out of doors at night in winter. It is to
this woman whom, in his _Petit Testament_ he bequeaths his heart. He is
supposed to have joined a band of armed robbers, who attacked travellers
on the Rueil road, and being arrested a second time he with difficulty
escaped the halter.

It has been said of the man of genius, as of the madman, that he is born
and dies in isolation, cold and insensible to family affection and
social conventions. Men of letters, it is true, make much of the
powerful cries of pain in artists and writers who have lost, or been
abandoned by, a loved person. But often, as in Petrarch’s case, this is
only a pretext, an opportunity for literary labours.[136] Very often
such cries were sincere (or could they have been so powerful and
effective?) but they were then intermittent explosions, in opposition to
the habitual state of these men, or else temporary reactions against
their ordinary apathy, from which they were only drawn by personal
vanity, and the passion of æsthetic and scientific researches.

Bulwer Lytton, from the first days of his marriage ill-treated his wife
by biting and insulting her, so that the courier who accompanied them on
the honeymoon refused to proceed to the end. Later he confessed to the
wrong he had done her, but wrote to her that a common life was
insupportable, and that he must live in liberty.

It is curious to observe that the writers who have been most chaste in
their lives are least so in their writings, and _vice versa_. Flaubert
wrote in one of his letters, “Poor Bouilhet used to say to me, ‘There
never was so moral a man who loved immorality so much as you.’ There is
truth in that. Is it a result of my pride, or of a certain
perversity?”[137] George Sand and Sallust offer the opposite phenomenon.

It is not known whether Comte ever forgave an injury. He certainly
always preserved the rancour and the recollection of injuries, and
pursued, even to the grave, the memory of his unfaithful wife. The
amorous worship which he dedicated to Clotilde de Vaux was so little
sincere that he determined beforehand the month, day, and hour when he
should shed tears over her memory.[138]

Bacon employed all his eloquence for the condemnation of the greatest of
his benefactors, Essex; by cowardly complaisance to the king, he
introduced for the first time into the court of justice an odious abuse,
and submitted Peacham to torture so as to be able to condemn him; he
sold justice at a price, and, as Macaulay concludes, he was one of those
of whom we may say, _scientiis tanquam angeli, cupiditatibus tanquam
serpentes_.

“Bridget,” confesses A. de Musset, “calumniated, exposed (by her love)
to the insults of the world, had to endure all the disdain and injury
which an angry and cruel libertine can heap on the girl whom he pays....
The days passed on and my fits of ill-humour and sarcasm took on a
sombre and obstinate character.”[139]

Byron’s intimate friend, Hobhouse, wrote of him that he was possessed by
a diseased egoism. Even when he loved his wife he refused to dine with
her, so as not to give up his old habits. He afterwards treated her so
badly that, in good faith, and perhaps with reason, she consulted
specialists as to his mental condition.

Napoleon’s conduct towards his wife, his brothers, and towards those who
trusted in him was that of a man without moral sense. Taine sums up the
diagnosis in one word: he was a _condottiere_.

“A man’s genius is no sinecure,” said Carlyle’s wife, a most intelligent
and cultivated woman, who, though capable of becoming (as she had hoped
and been assured) her husband’s fellow-worker, was compelled to be his
servant. The idea of travelling in a carriage with his wife seemed to
him out of the question; he must have his brother with him; he neglected
her for other women, and pretended that she was indifferent. Her chief
duty was to preserve him from the most remote noises; the second was to
make his bread, for he detested that of the bakers; he obliged her to
travel for miles on horseback as his messenger, only saw her at
meal-time, and for weeks together never addressed a word to her,
although his prolonged silence caused her agony. It was only after her
death, accelerated by his conduct, that, in a literary form, he showed
his repentance, and narrated her history in affecting language, but, as
his biographer adds, if she had been still alive he would have tormented
her afresh.

Frederick II. said, like Lacenaire, that vengeance is the pleasure of
the gods, and that he would die happy if he could inflict on his enemies
more evils than he had suffered from them. He experienced real delight
in morally tormenting his friends, sometimes beating them; if a courtier
liked to pomade himself, he soaked his clothes in oil; he bargained with
Voltaire over sugar and chocolate, and deprived him of his money.

Donizetti treated his family brutally; it was after a fit of savage
anger, in which he had beaten his wife, that he composed, sobbing, the
celebrated air, _Tu che a Dio spiegasti l’ali_;[140] a remarkable
instance of the double nature of personality in men of genius, and at
the same time of their moral insensibility.

Houssaye narrates a similar scene, in which A. Dumas was so carried away
during a quarrel, as to tear out his wife’s hair. She, in despair,
wished to retire to a convent; yet after some minutes he gaily wrote a
comic scene, and said to his friends: “If tears were pearls, I would
make myself a necklace of them.”

Byron used to beat the Guiccioli, and also his Venetian mistress, the
gondolier’s wife, who, however, gave him as good.

Fontenelle, seeing his companion at table struck by apoplexy, was not
disconcerted; he simply took advantage of the incident to change the
sauce for the asparagus to vinegar; out of deference to his friend’s
taste he had previously ordered butter.

It is sufficient to be present at any academy, university, faculty, or
gathering of men who, without genius, possess at least erudition, to
perceive at once that their dominant thought is always disdain and hate
of the man who possesses, almost or entirely, the quality of genius. The
man of genius, in his turn, has nothing but contempt for others. He
believes he has all the more right to laugh at others, from being
himself sensitive to the slightest criticism; he is even offended at
praise given to another as blame directed to himself. That is why at
academical gatherings the greatest men only agree in praising the most
ignorant person. We have seen that Chateaubriand was offended when his
shoemaker was praised. Lisfranc called his colleague, Dupuytren, a
brigand, and Roux and Velpeau forgers.

I have been able to observe men of genius when they had scarcely reached
the age of puberty: they did not manifest the deep aversions of moral
insanity, but I have noted among all a strange apathy for everything
which does not concern them; as though plunged in the hypnotic
condition, they did not perceive the troubles of others, or even the
most pressing needs of those who were dearest to them; if they observed
them, they grew tender, and even at once hastened to attend to them; but
it was a fire of straw, soon extinguished, and it gave place to
indifference and weariness.

Genius, said Schopenhauer, is solitary. Genius, wrote Goethe, is only
related to its time by its defects.

This emotional anæsthesia may be found even in philanthropists, who
possess the genius of sentiment, and have made goodness and pity for the
poor the pivot of their actions. It is difficult to explain otherwise
some pages in the Gospel. “You think, perhaps,” said Jesus, “that I have
come to bring peace to the earth? No, I have come to throw down a sword
there.... In a household of five persons, three will be against two, and
two against three. I have come to bring division between father and son,
between mother and daughter, between daughter-in-law and mother-in-law.
From this time a man’s enemies will be of his own household.”[141] “I
have come to bring fire on to the earth: if it burns already, so much
the better!”[142] “I declare to you,” he added, “whoever leaves house,
wife, brothers, and parents, will receive a hundredfold in this world,
and in the world to come everlasting life.”[143] “If any one comes to me
and does not hate his father, mother, wife, children, brothers,
sisters, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.”[144] “He who
loves his father and his mother more than me is not worthy of me; he who
loves his son or his daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.”[145]
Jesus said to a man, “Follow me.” “Lord;” this man replied, “let me
first go and bury my father.” Jesus answered: “The dead may bury their
dead: go, you, and preach the kingdom of God.”[146]

Dante, Goethe, Leopardi, Byron, and Heine were reproached with hating
their country. Tolstoi disapproves of patriotism. Schopenhauer said, “In
the face of death I confess that I despise the Germans for their
unspeakable bestiality, and am ashamed to belong to them.”

_Longevity._--This diseased apathy, this diminution of affection, which
furnishes genius with a breastplate against so many assaults, and which
rapidly destroys fibres at once so delicate and so strong, explains the
remarkable longevity of men of genius, in spite of their hyperæsthesia
in other directions. I have noted this character in 134 cases out of
143.

Sophocles, Humboldt, Fontenelle, Brougham, Xenophon, Cato the Elder,
Michelangelo, Petrarch, Bettinelli, died at 90; Passeroni, Auber,
Manzoni, Xavier de Maistre at 89; Hobbes at 92; Dandolo at 97; Titian at
99; Cassiodorus and Mlle. Scudéry at 94; Viennet and Diogenes at 91;
Voltaire, Franklin, Watt, John of Bologna, Vincent de Paul, Baroccio,
Young, Talleyrand, Raspail, Grimm, Herschel, Metastasio at 84; Victor
Hugo, Donatello, Goethe, Wellington at 83; Zingarelli, Metternich,
Theodore de Beza, Lamarck, Halley at 86; Bentham, Newton, St. Bernard de
Menthon, Bodmer, Luini, Scarpa, Bonpland, Chiabrera, Carafa, Goldoni at
85; Thiers, Kant, Maffei, Amyot, Villemain, Wieland, Littré at 80;
Anacreon, Mercatori, Viviani, Buffon, Palmerston, Casti, J. Bernouilli,
Pinel at 81; Galileo, Euler, Schlegel, Béranger, Louis XIV., Corneille,
Cesarotti at 78; Herodotus, Rossini, Cardan, Michelet, Boileau,
Garibaldi, Archimedes, Paisiello, Saint Augustine at 75; Tacitus and B.
Disraeli at 76; Pericles at 70; Thucydides at 69; Hippocrates at 103;
and Saint Anthony at 105.

According to Beard the average life of 500 men of genius is 54, and that
of 100 modern men of genius is 70. The average duration of life of 35
men of musical genius was 63 years, and 8 months.[147] But this fact
does not exclude degeneration when, as among persons with moral
insanity, it is united with an apathy which renders temperaments
otherwise mobile, insensible to the strongest griefs, and I have shown
in another book[148] that instinctive criminals, living out of prison,
enjoy great longevity. It should be added that longevity is not always
found in genius; many great men of genius, such as Raphael, Pascal,
Burns, Keats, Byron, Mozart, Felix Mendelssohn, Bellini, Bichat, Pico de
la Mirandola died before the age of forty.




