CHAPTER IV.

GENIUS AND INSANITY.

     Resemblance between genius and insanity--Men and women of genius
     who have been
     insane--Montanus--Harrington--Haller--Schumann--Gérard de
     Nerval--Baudelaire--Concato--Mainländer--Comte--Codazzi--Bolyai--Cardan--Tasso--Swift--Newton--Rousseau--Lenau--Széchényi--Hoffmann--Foderà--Schopenhauer--Gogol.


The resemblance between insanity and genius, although it does not show
that these two should be confounded, proves at all events that one does
not exclude the other in the same subject.

In fact, without speaking of the numerous men of genius who at some
period of their lives were subject to hallucinations or insanity, or of
those who, like Vico, terminated a great career in dementia, how many
great thinkers have shown themselves all their lives subject to
monomania or hallucinations!

In recent times insanity has shown itself in Farini, Brougham, Southey,
Govone, Gounod, Gutzkow, Monge, Fourcroy, Cowper, Rocchia, Ricci,
Fenicia,[149] Engel, Pergolese, Batjusckoff, Mürger, William Collins,
Techner, Hölderlen, Von der West, Gallo, Spedalieri, Bellingeri,
Salieri, Johannes Müller, Lenz, Barbara, Fuseli, Petermann, the
caricaturist Cham, Hamilton, Poe, Uhlrich.

In France, remarks Martini, many young and original poets have died
insane.[150] Such also seems to have been the fate of Briffault, and of
Laurent attacked by a veritable mania of calumny.[151] Among women
Günderode, Stieglitz (who both committed suicide with great
deliberation), Brachmann, L. E. Landon lived and died insane.[152]

Montanus, a victim to solitude and a disordered imagination, was
convinced that he had become a grain of wheat. He refused to move for
fear of being swallowed by birds.[153] Harrington is said to have
imagined that diseases took the form of bees and flies, and for this
reason he retired to a cabin armed with a broom to disperse them. Haller
believed that he was persecuted by men and damned by God on account of
the vileness of his soul and his heretical works. He could only soothe
his excessive terror by enormous doses of opium and by converse with
priests.[154] Ampère burnt a treatise on the future of chemistry
believing he had written it by Satanic suggestion. The great Dutch
artist, Van Goes, thought he was possessed. Carlo Dolce, a prey to
religious monomania, vowed only to paint religious pictures. He devoted
his pencil to Madonnas, though his Madonna, indeed, is the portrait of
Balduini. On his wedding-day he alone was missing; after some hours he
was found prostrated before the altar of the Annunciation. Nathaniel
Lee, the dramatist, composed thirteen tragedies during the course of his
disease; one day a feeble dramatic colleague told him that it was easy
to write like a madman. “It is not easy to write like a madman,” he
replied, “but it is very easy to write like a fool.” Thomas Lloyd, who
wrote excellent verse, was a strange mixture of malice, pride, genius,
and insanity.[155] If he was not satisfied with his verses he put them
in his glass to polish them, as he said. Everything that he came across,
even coal, paper, and tobacco, he was accustomed to mix with his food
for hygienic reasons; the carbon purified it, stone imparted mineral
virtues, &c. Charles Lamb in early life had an attack of insanity which
was hereditary in his family; writing of this to Coleridge, he said: “At
some future time I will amuse you with an account, as full as my memory
will permit, of the strange turns my frenzy took. I look back upon it at
times with a gloomy kind of envy, for, while it lasted, I had many,
many hours of pure happiness. Dream not, Coleridge, of having tasted all
the grandeur and wildness of fancy till you have gone mad. All now seems
to me vapid, or comparatively so.”

Robert Schumann (1810-1856), the precursor of the music of the future,
was the youngest son of a well-to-do bookseller in Zwickau, and met with
no obstacles in the pursuit of his cherished art. When a law student he
met Clara Wieck, the celebrated pianist, and in her found an excellent
and lovable companion; but at the age of twenty-three he became subject
to melancholia; at forty-six he was pursued by turning-tables which knew
everything; he heard sounds which developed into concords and even whole
compositions. For several years he was afraid of being sent to a lunatic
asylum; Beethoven and Mendelssohn dictated musical combinations to him
from their tombs. In 1854 he threw himself into the Rhine; he was saved,
and died two years later in a private asylum at Bonn. The autopsy
revealed osteophytes, thickening of the cranial membranes and atrophy of
the brain.[156]

Gérard de Nerval was subject to _folie circulaire_, with alternate
periods of exaltation and depression, each of which lasted six months.
In his moments of calm he was a spiritualist; he heard the spirits of
Adam, Moses, and Joshua in a piece of furniture; and practised
cabalistic exorcisms, executing the dance of the Babylonians. During his
stay at an asylum he imagined that it was the superintendent who was a
victim to insanity. “He believes,” he said, “that he is superintending
an asylum, but he is himself the madman and we feign madness in order to
humour him.” With the honey of flowers he traced on paper symbols which
radiated round a fantastic giantess who united the characters of Diana,
Saint Rosalie, and of an actress named Colon with whom he believed he
was in love. In reality he adored her from a great distance, sending her
large bouquets, and buying enormous opera-glasses in order to see her,
and superb canes with which to applaud her; so that it was said of him
that he ruined himself in orgies of opera-glasses and debaucheries of
canes. He had discovered a mediæval bed which was to serve for his
_amours_, and in order to set it in suitable surroundings he obtained an
apartment and luxurious furniture. In days of poverty the furniture was
sold, leaving the bed alone in the room, then in a barn, and at last it
also disappeared, and its proprietor passed his nights in taverns and
low lodging-houses, or writing beneath trees and porches. Later, when he
had ceased to see Colon, she became for him a kind of idol with which he
lived and who in his mystic ideas became confounded partly with the
saints and partly with the stars; one day he declared that she was an
incarnation of Saint Theresa. When he heard that she had declared she
had never loved him and only seen him once, which was true, he said:
“What good if she had loved me?” and he added, quoting a verse of Heine,
“He who loves for the second time without hope is a madman. I am that
madman. The sky, the sun, the stars laugh at it; I also laugh at it,
laugh at it and die of it.”

One day, at sunset, he was on the balcony of a house. He suddenly saw a
phantom and heard a voice calling him. He ran forward, fell, and was
nearly killed. That was his first attack, characterised by
hallucinations of sight and hearing.

Towards the end of his life, at the age of forty-six, _folie des
grandeurs_ developed in him; he spoke of his _châteaux_ at Ermenonville,
of his physical beauty which was astonishing, he said, to his
attendants; he bought up coins of Nerva, not wishing that the name of
his ancestors should circulate as money, yet Nerval was only a
pseudonym. Sometimes he gave out that he was a descendant of Folobello
de Nerva whose history he wished to write, and all whose male
descendants presented, according to him, a supernatural sign, the
tetragramma of Solomon, on their breasts. Timid and cautious in his days
of calm, he became bold and noisy when the attack came on, and even
threatened his friends with weapons. In spite of the low temperature he
refused to leave off his summer clothes. “Cold,” he declared, “is a
tonic and the Lapps are never ill.” A few days after, he hanged
himself.[157]

Baudelaire appears before us, in the portrait placed at

[Illustration: BAUDELAIRE.]

the beginning of his posthumous works, as the type of the lunatic
possessed by the _Délire des grandeurs_.[158] He was descended from a
family of insane and eccentric persons. It was not necessary to be an
alienist to detect his insanity. In childhood he was subject to
hallucinations; and from that period, as he himself confessed, he
experienced opposing sentiments; the horror and the ecstasy of life; he
was hyperæsthetic and at the same time apathetic; he felt the necessity
of freeing himself from “an oasis of horror in a desert of _ennui_.”
Before falling into dementia he committed impulsive acts; for instance,
he threw pots from his house against shop windows for the pleasure of
hearing them break. He changed his lodgings every month; asked the
hospitality of a friend in order to complete work he was engaged on, and
wasted his time in reading which had no relation to it whatever. Having
lost his father, he quarrelled with his mother’s second husband, and one
day, in the presence of friends, attempted to strangle him. Sent out to
India, in order, it is said, to be put to business, he lost everything
and only brought back from his voyage a negress to whom he dedicated
exotic poems. He desired to be original at all costs; gave himself to
excess in wine before high personages, dyed his hair green, wore winter
garments in summer, and _vice versa_. He experienced morbid passions in
love. He loved ugly and horrible women, negresses, dwarfs, giantesses;
to a very beautiful woman he expressed a desire that he might see her
suspended by the hands to the ceiling that he might kiss her feet; and
kissing the naked foot appears in one of his poems as the equivalent of
the sexual act.

He was constantly dreaming of work, calculating the hours and the lines
necessary to pay his debts: two months or more. But that was all, and
the work was never begun.[159]

Proud, misanthropic, and apathetic, he said of himself: “Discontented
with others and discontented with myself, I desire to redeem myself, to
regard myself with a little pride in the silence and solitude of the
night. Souls of those I have loved, souls of those I have sung,
strengthen me, sustain me, remove from me the lies and the corrupting
vapours of the world; and thou, O Lord my God, grant me grace to produce
some fine lines which will prove to myself that I am not the last of
men, that I am not inferior to those whom I contemn.”[160]

And he had need of it, for he called Gustave Planche imbecile, Dumas a
_farceur_, Sue stupid, Féval an idiot, George Sand a Veuillot without
delicacy. What he attacked in all these writers was the fame he wished
to possess; that is why he made fun of Molière and Voltaire.

With the progress of insanity he used to invert words, saying “shut”
when he meant to say “open,” &c. He died of progressive general
paralysis of the insane, of which his excessive ambition was already a
fore-running symptom.

Concato was the son of a poor tailor, the victim of grave cerebral
affections. He himself presented certain characters of degeneration,
such as pallor and large cheek bones; during many years he was subject
to various forms of insanity. At the age of seventeen he was seized by
the terror of sudden death, and provided himself with nitre to prevent
future cerebral crises. At twenty he resolved to become a monk, although
in childhood he had been so little devout that he had fabricated false
notes of confession. Afterwards he quarrelled with an Austrian officer,
and then became afraid of all sentinels and soldiers. He would never
allow an officer to enter his house with his sword by his side; and even
in old age trembled at the sight of one of the city guards. One night he
dreamt he had committed a homicide, and for many days he was a prey to
strange terrors. He suffered from claustrophobia: woe to whomsoever
tried to lock him up in a carriage or a room! There were some days
during which he considered himself the lowest of men. He was so
irascible that he used to say that, to be in good health, one must be
angry at least once a day. Yet he was one of the greatest of European
physicians.[161]

Mainländer had a grandfather who, after the death of a son, carried
religious mysticism to the extent of insanity, and died of inflammation
of the brain at the age of thirty-three. A brother, also insane, wished
to embrace Buddhism. As a youth, looking at the sea at Sorrento, he felt
impelled to throw himself in, merely attracted by the purity of the
water. He educated himself and wrote his celebrated book, _Die
Philosophie der Erlösung_, but to realize his theories entirely, he
adopted a rule of absolute chastity, and on the day on which his book
was published hanged himself, the better to confirm a passage which
said: “In order that man may be redeemed it is necessary that he should
recognize the value of not-being, and desire intensely not to be.”[162]

The great Auguste Comte, the initiator of the positivist philosophy, was
for ten years under the care of Esquirol, the famous alienist; he
recovered, but only to repudiate, without any cause, the wife who had
saved him; later, he--who had wished to abolish all priest-craft--believed
himself the priest and apostle of a materialistic religion. In his
works, amidst stupendous elucubrations, genuinely maniacal ideas may be
found, as, for example, the prophecy that one day women will be
fecundated without the help of the male.[163]

It is said that mathematicians are exempt from psychical derangements,
but this is not true; it is sufficient to recall not only Newton and
Enfantin, of whom I will speak at length, but the two famous
distractions of Archimedes, the hallucination of Pascal, and the
vagaries of the mathematician Codazzi (not to be confounded with
Codazza). Codazzi was sub-microcephalic, oxycephalic, alcoholic,
sordidly avaricious; to affective insensibility he added vanity so great
that while still young he set apart a sum for his own funeral monument,
and refused the least help to his starving parents; he admitted no
discussion of his judgment even if it only concerned the cut of a coat;
and he had taken it into his head that he could compose melodic music
with the help of the calculus.

All mathematicians admire the great geometer Bolyai, whose
eccentricities were of an insane character; thus he provoked thirteen
officials to duels and fought with them, and between each duel he played
the violin, the only piece of furniture in his house; when pensioned he
printed his own funeral card with a blank date, and constructed his own
coffin--a vagary which I have found in two other mathematicians who died
in recent years. Six years later he had a similar funeral card printed,
to substitute for the other which he had not been able to use. He
imposed on his heir the obligation to plant on his grave an apple-tree,
in remembrance of Eve, of Paris, and of Newton.[164] Such was the great
reformer of Euclid.

Cardan, called by his contemporaries the greatest of men and the most
foolish of children--Cardan, who first dared to criticise Galen, to
exclude fire from the number of the elements, and to call witches and
saints insane--this great Cardan was the son, cousin, and father of
lunatics, and himself a lunatic all his life. “A stammerer, impotent,
with little memory or knowledge,” he himself wrote, “I have suffered
since childhood from hypno-fantastic hallucinations.” Sometimes it was a
cock which spoke to him in a human voice; sometimes Tartarus, full of
bones, which displayed itself before him. Whatever he imagined, he could
see before him as a real object. From the age of nineteen to that of
twenty-six, a genius, similar to one which already protected his father,
gave him advice and revealed the future. When he had reached the age of
twenty-six he was not altogether deprived of supernatural aid; a recipe
which was not quite right forgot one day the laws of gravity, and rose
to his table to warn him of the error he was about to commit.[165]

He was hypochondriacal, and imagined he had contracted all the diseases
that he read of: palpitation, sitophobia, diarrhœa, enuresis, podagra,
hernia--all these diseases vanished without treatment, or with a prayer
to the Virgin. Sometimes his flesh smelled of sulphur, of extinguished
wax; sometimes he saw flames and phantoms appear in the midst of violent
earthquakes, while his friends perceived nothing. Persecuted by every
government, surrounded by a forest of enemies, whom he knew neither by
name nor by sight, but who, as he believed, in order to afflict and
dishonour him, had condemned his much-loved son, he ended by believing
himself poisoned by the professors of the University of Pavia, who had
invited him for this purpose. If he escapes from their hands, he owes it
to the help of St. Martin and of the Virgin. Yet such a man in theology
had audaciously anticipated Dupuis and Renan!

He declares himself inclined to all vices--wine, gaming, lying,
licentiousness, envy, cunning, deception, calumny, inconstancy; he
observes that four times during the full moon he found himself in a
state of real mental alienation. His sensibility was so perverted, that
he never felt comfortable except under the stimulus of some physical
pain; and in the absence of natural pain, he procured it by artificial
means, biting his lips or arms until he fetched blood. “I sought causes
of pain to enjoy the pleasure of the cessation of pain, and because I
perceived that when I did not suffer I fell into so grave and
troublesome a condition, that it was worse than any pain.” This fact
helps us to understand many strange tortures which madmen have
voluptuously imposed on themselves.[166] He had so blind a faith in the
revelations of dreams, that he printed a strange work _De Somniis_,
conducted his medical consultations, concluded his marriage, and began
his works (for example, that on the _Varietà delle Cose_ and _Sulle
Febbri_) in accordance with dreams.[167]

He was impotent up to the age of thirty-four. Virility was given to him
in a dream, and to this gift was added, not altogether happily, the
cause of his troubles--his future wife, a brigand’s daughter, whom,
before this dream, as he asserts, he had never even seen. His unhappy
mania even led him to regulate his medical consultations according to
his dreams, as he himself boasts of doing in the case of Borromeo’s son.
It is possible to cite other examples, sometimes comic, sometimes
strange or terrible. I will quote one which unites all these characters:
his dream of the jewel.

It was in May, 1560, when Cardan was fifty-two years of age. His son had
just been publicly condemned for poisoning. No misfortune could wound
more deeply Cardan’s already sensitive soul. He loved his son with all
a father’s tenderness, as is witnessed by his fine verses, _De Morte
Filii_, in which there is the imprint of real passion. He hoped also for
a grandson who should resemble himself. Drawn more and more into insane
ideas by grief, he saw in this condemnation the hands of persecutors.
“Thus overwhelmed, I sought distraction in vain in study or in play. In
vain I bit myself and struck my arms and legs. It was my third night of
sleeplessness, about two hours before dawn. I saw that there was nothing
else for me but to die or go mad. Therefore I prayed God to snatch me
entirely away from life. And then, against my expectation, sleep took
possession of me, and at the same time I heard a person approaching me,
whose form I could not see, but who said, ‘Why grieve about your son?
Put into your mouth the precious stone which you bear suspended from
your neck, and as long as you carry it there you will not think of your
son.’ On waking up, I asked myself what connection there could be
between forgetfulness and an emerald; but as I had no other resource, I
recalled the sacred words, ‘_Credidit et reputatum ei est ad
justitiam_’; I put the emerald into my mouth, and then, against all
expectation, everything that recalled my son vanished from my memory. It
was so for a year and a half. It was only during my meals, and at my
public lectures, when I was unable to keep the precious stone in my
mouth, that I fell back into my old grief.” This singular cure had its
pretext in the double sense of the Italian word _gioia_, which means at
once “joy” and “jewel.” Cardan had, however, no need of the revelation
of a genius, for in his own works he had already recognized a consoling
virtue in precious stones, due to the bond of this absurd
etymology.[168]

A megalomaniac, he called himself “the seventh physician since the
creation of the world;” he claimed to know the things which are before
and above us, and those which shall come after.[169]

Like Rousseau and like Haller, Cardan, during the last days of his
tormented existence, wrote his own life; he also foretold the exact date
of his death, which he looked for, and perhaps himself brought about, in
order that his horoscope should not be made to lie.[170]

What shall we say of Tasso? For those who do not know Verga’s monograph
(_Lipemania del Tasso_), it will be enough to quote the following
letter: “So great is my grief, that I am considered by others and by
myself as mad, when, powerless to keep my sorrowful thoughts hidden, I
give myself up to long conversations with myself. My troubles are at
once human and diabolical; the human are cries of men, and especially of
women, and also the laughter of beasts; the diabolical are songs, &c.
When I take into my hands a book to give myself up to study, I hear
voices sounding in my ear, and distinguish the name of Paul Fulvius.” In
his _Messaggiero_, which became with him, later on, a real
hallucination, he had already made the often-repeated confession of his
madness, which he attributed to wine and to women. I am thus inclined to
believe that he described himself in the character of Thyrsis, in that
admirable stanza of the _Aminta_, which another monomaniac, Rousseau,
loved so much:--

    “_Vivrò fra i miei tormenti e fra le cure,_
     _Mie giuste furie, forsennato, errante;_
     _Paventerò l’ombre solinghe e scure_
     _Che il primo error mi recheranno avante;_
     _E del sol che scoprì le mie sventure_
     _A schivo ed in orror avrò it sembiante:_
     _Temerò me medesmo, e da me stesso_
     _Sempre fuggendo, avrò me sempre appresso._”[171]

One day, certainly under the influence of some hallucination, or in a
maniacal attack, he drew a knife, and was about to attack a serving-man
who entered the ducal chamber; he was imprisoned, says the Tuscan
Ambassador, more to cure him than to punish him.

The unfortunate poet went from one country to another, but sorrowful
visions everywhere threatened him; and with them came ceaseless remorse,
suspicions of poison, and the terrors of hell for the heresies of which
he accused himself in three letters to the “too-indulgent” inquisitor.

“I am always troubled by sad and wearisome thoughts,” he confesses to
the physician Cavallaro, “by figures and phantoms; also by a great
weakness of memory, therefore I beg of your lordship to think to
strengthen my memory in the pills that you order for me.” “I am
frenzied,” he wrote to Gonzaga, “and I am surprised that they have not
written to you of all the things that I say in talking to myself:
honours, the good graces of emperors and kings which I dream of, forming
and re-forming them according to my fancy.” This curious letter shows us
how sombre and sorrowful images alternated in him with others that were
joyous, like subjective colours in the retina.

Some days later he wrote to Cattaneo: “I have here much more need of the
exorcist than of the physician, for my trouble is caused by magic art. I
will tell you about my goblin. The little thief has robbed me of many
crowns; he puts all my books upside down, opens my chests, hides my
keys, so that I do not know how to protect myself against him. I am
always unhappy, but especially at night, and I do not know if my trouble
should be attributed to frenzy.” In another letter: “When I am awake I
seem to see lights sparkling in the air; sometimes my eyes are inflamed
so that I fear I may lose my sight. At other times I hear horrible
noises, hissings, and tinklings, the sound of bells, and, as it were,
clocks all striking the hour at the same time. When I am asleep I seem
to see a horseman throwing himself on me and casting me to the earth, or
else I imagine that I am covered by filthy beasts. All my joints feel
it; my head becomes heavy, and in the midst of so many pains and terrors
sometimes there appears to me the image of the Virgin, beautiful and
young, with her Son, and crowned with a rainbow.” Later he told
Cattaneo how a goblin carried away letters in which he was mentioned,
“and that is one of the miracles which I saw myself at the hospital.
Thus I possess the certainty that these wonders must be attributed to a
magician. I have numerous proofs of it. One day a loaf was taken from
me, beneath my eyes, towards three o’clock.”

When ill with acute fever he was cured, thanks to an apparition of the
Virgin, to whom he testified his gratitude in a sonnet. He wrote and
spoke to, almost touched, his genius, who often resembled his former
_Messaggiero_, and suggested to him ideas which he had not conceived
before.

Swift, the inventor of irony and humour, predicted even in youth that he
would die insane, as had been the case with a paternal uncle. He was
walking one day in a garden when he saw an elm almost completely
deprived of foliage at the top. “Like that tree,” he said, “I shall die
at the top.” Proud almost to monomania with the great, he yet led a wild
and vicious life, and was known as the “Mad Parson.” Though a clergyman,
he wrote irreligious books, and it was said that before making him a
bishop it would be desirable to baptise him. His giddiness began, as he
himself tells us, at the age of twenty-three, so that his brain disease
lasted for over fifty years. _Vertiginosus_, _inops_, _surdus_, _male
gratus amicis_, as he defined himself, he almost succumbed to the grief
caused by the death of his beloved Stella, and at the same time he wrote
his burlesque _Directions to Servants_. Some months later he lost his
memory and only preserved his mordant loquacity; he remained for a whole
year without speaking or reading or recognising any one; he would walk
for ten hours a day, eating his meals standing, or refusing food, and
giving way to attacks of rage when any one entered his room. With the
development of some boils his condition seemed to improve; he was heard
to say several times: “I am a fool;” but the interval of lucidity was
short. He fell back into the stupor of dementia, although his irony
seemed to survive reason, and even, as it were, life itself. He died in
1745 in a state of complete dementia, leaving by a will made some years
previously a sum of nearly £11,000 to a lunatic asylum. A _post-mortem_
examination showed softening of the brain and extreme effusion; his
skull (examined in 1855) showed great irregularities from thickening and
roughening, signs of enlarged and diseased arteries, and an extremely
small cerebellar region. In an epitaph which he had written for himself
he summed up the cruel tortures of his soul now at rest, “_ubi sæva
indignatio ulterius cor lacerare nequit_.”

Newton, of whom it was truly said that his mind conquered the human
race, was in old age afflicted by mental disorder, though of a less
serious character than that of which we have just read. It was probably
during this illness that he wrote his _Chronology_, his _Apocalypse_,
and the _Letters to Bentley_, so inferior in value to the work of his
earlier years. In 1693, after his house had been burnt a second time,
and after excess in study, he is reported to have talked so strangely
and incoherently to the archbishop that his friends were seriously
alarmed. At this time he wrote two letters which, in their confused and
obscure form, seem to show that he had been suffering from delusions of
persecution. He wrote to Locke (1693): “Being of opinion that you
endeavoured to embroil me with women, and by other means, I was so much
affected with it, as that when one told me you were sickly and would not
live, I answered, ’twere better if you were dead. I desire you to
forgive me this uncharitableness; for I am now satisfied that what you
have done is just, and I beg your pardon for my having hard thoughts of
you for it, and for representing that you struck at the root of
morality, in a principle you laid in your book of ideas, and designed to
pursue in another book, and that I took you for a Hobbist. I beg your
pardon also for saying or thinking that there was a design to sell me an
office or to embroil me. I am your most humble and unfortunate servant,
Is. Newton.”[172] Locke replied kindly, and a month later Newton again
wrote to him: “The last winter, by sleeping too often by my fire, I got
an ill habit of sleeping; and a distemper, which this summer has been
epidemical, put me further out of order, so that when I wrote to you I
had not slept an hour a night for a fortnight together, and for five
days together not a wink. I remember I wrote to you, but what I said of
your book I remember not.” And in a letter to Pepys he says that he has
“neither ate nor slept this twelvemonth, nor have my former consistency
of mind.”[173]

Those who, without frequenting a lunatic asylum, wish to form a fairly
complete idea of the mental tortures of a monomaniac, have only to look
through Rousseau’s works, especially his later writings, such as the
_Confessions_, the _Dialogues_, and the _Rêveries_. “I have very ardent
passions,” he writes in his _Confessions_, “and while under their
influence, my impetuosity knows no bounds; I think only of the object
which occupies me; the entire universe besides is nothing to me; but
this only lasts a moment, and the moment which follows throws me into a
state of prostration. A single sheet of fine paper tempts me more than
the money to buy a ream of it. I see the thing and am tempted; if I only
see the means of acquiring it I am not tempted. Even now, if I see
anything that tempts me, I prefer taking it to asking for it.”

This is the distinction between the kleptomaniac and the thief: the
former steals by instinct, to steal; the latter steals by interest, to
acquire: the first is led away by anything that strikes him; the second
is attracted by the value of the object.

Dominated by his senses, Rousseau never knew how to resist them. The
most insignificant pleasure, he says, so long as it was present,
fascinated him more than all the joys of Paradise. In fact, a monk’s
dinner (Father Pontierre) led him to apostasy, and a feeling of
repulsion caused him to abandon cruelly an epileptic friend on the road.

It was not only his passions that were morbid and violent; his
intelligence also was affected from his earliest days, as he shows in
his _Confessions_: “My imagination has never been so cheerful as when I
have been suffering. My mind cannot beautify the really pleasant things
that happen to me, only the imaginary ones. If I wish to describe spring
well, it must be in winter.” Real evils had little hold on Rousseau, he
tells us; imaginary evils touched him more nearly. “I can adapt myself
to what I experience, but not to what I fear.” It is thus that people
kill themselves through fear of death.

On first reading medical books Rousseau imagined that he had the
diseases which he found described, and was astonished, not to find
himself healthy, but to find himself alive. He came to the conclusion
that he had a polypus at the heart. It was, as he himself confesses, a
strange notion, the overflow of an idle and exaggerated sensibility
which had no better channel. “There are times,” he says, “in which I am
so little like myself that I might be taken for a man of quite different
character. In repose I am indolence and timidity itself, and do not know
how to express myself; but if I become excited I immediately know what
to say.”

This unfortunate man went through a long series of occupations from the
noblest to the most degrading; he was an apostate for money, a
watchmaker, a charlatan, a music-master, an engraver, a painter, a
servant, an embryo diplomatic secretary; in literature and science he
took up medicine, music, botany, theology, teaching.

The abuse of intellectual work, especially dangerous in a thinker whose
ideas were developed slowly and with difficulty, joined to the
ever-increasing stimulus of ambition, gradually transformed the
hypochondriac into a melancholiac, and finally into a maniac. “My
agitations and anger,” he wrote, “affected me so much that I passed ten
years in delirium, and am only calm to-day.” Calm! When disease, now
become chronic, no longer permitted him to distinguish what was real,
what was imaginary in his troubles. In fact, he bade farewell to the
world of society, in which he had never felt at home, and retired into
solitude; but even in the country, people from the town zealously
pursued him, and the tumult of the world and notions of _amour-propre_
veiled the freshness of nature. It is in vain for him to hide himself in
the woods, he writes in his _Rêveries_; the crowd attaches itself to
him and follows him. We think once more of Tasso’s lines:--

                        “_e da me stesso_
    _Sempre fuggendo, avrò me sempre appresso._”

Rousseau doubtless alluded to these lines when he wrote to Corancez that
Tasso had been his prophet. He wrote later that he believed that
Prussia, England, France, the King, women, priests, men, irritated by
some passages in his works, were waging a terrible war against him, with
effects by which he explained the internal troubles from which he
suffered.

In the refinement of their cruelty, he says in the _Rêveries_, his
enemies only forgot one thing--to graduate their torments, so that they
could always renew them. But the chief artifice of his enemies was to
torture him by overwhelming him with benefits and with praise. “They
even went so far as to corrupt the greengrocers, so that they sold him
better and cheaper vegetables. Without doubt his enemies thus wished to
prove his baseness and their generosity.”[174] During his stay in London
his melancholia was changed into a real attack of mania. He imagined
that Choiseul was seeking to arrest him, abandoned his luggage and his
money at his hotel, and fled to the coast, paying the innkeepers with
pieces of silver spoons. He found the winds contrary, and in this saw
another indication of the plot against him. In his exasperation he
harangued the crowd in bad English from the top of a hill; they listened
stupefied, and he believed he had affected them. But on returning to
France his invisible enemies were not appeased. They spied and
misinterpreted all his acts; if he read a newspaper, they said he was
conspiring; if he smelled the perfume of a rose, they suspected he was
concocting a poison. Everything was a crime: they stationed a
picture-dealer at his door; they prevented the door from shutting; no
visitor came whom they had not prejudiced against him. They corrupted
his coffee-merchant, his hairdresser, his landlord; the shoeblack had no
more blacking when Rousseau needed him; the boatman had no boats when
this unfortunate man wished to cross the Seine. He demanded to be put in
prison--and even that was refused him.

In order to take from him the one weapon which he possessed, the press,
a publisher, _whom he did not know_, was arrested and thrown into the
Bastille. The custom of burning a cardboard figure at the _mi-carême_
had been abolished. It is re-established, certainly to make fun of him
and to burn him in effigy; in fact, the clothes placed on it resembled
his.[175] In the country he meets a child who smiles at him; he turns to
respond, and suddenly sees a man whom, by his mournful face (note the
method of recognition), he sees to be a spy placed by his enemies.

Under the constant impression of this monomania of persecution he wrote
his _Dialogues sur Rousseau jugé par Rousseau_, in which, in order to
appease his innumerable enemies he presented a faithful and minute
portrait of his hallucinations. He began to distribute his defence, in a
truly insane manner, by presenting a copy to any passer-by whose face
did not appear prejudiced against him by his enemies. It was dedicated:
“_A tous les Français aimant encore la justice et la vérité_.” In spite
of this title, or, perhaps, because of it, he found no one who accepted
it with pleasure; several even refused it.

No longer able to put trust in any mortal he turned, like Pascal, to
God, to whom he addressed a very tender and familiar letter; then in
order to ensure the arrival of his letter at its destination, he placed
it together with the manuscript of the _Dialogues_ on the altar of
Nôtre-Dame at Paris. Then, having found the railing closed, he suspected
a conspiracy of Heaven against him.

Dussaulx, who saw him often in the last years of his life, writes that
he even distrusted his dog, finding a mystery in his frequent
caresses.[176] The _délire des grandeurs_ was never absent; it may be
seen continually in the _Confessions_, in which he defies the human race
to show a better being than himself.

After all this testimony, it does not seem to me that Voltaire and
Corancez were altogether wrong in affirming that Rousseau had been mad,
and that he confessed it himself. Numerous passages in the _Confessions_
and in Grimm’s letters allude to other affections such as paralysis of
the bladder and spermatorrhœa, which probably originated in the spinal
cord, and which certainly aggravated his melancholia. It must also be
remembered that from childhood, Rousseau, like so many other subjects of
degeneration, showed sexual precocity and perversion; it appears that he
had no pleasure in his relations with women unless they beat him naked,
like a child, or threatened to do so.[177]

Nicolaus Lenau, one of the greatest lyric poets of modern times, ended,
forty years ago, in the asylum of Döbling at Vienna, a life which from
childhood shows a mingling of genius and insanity.

He was born in 1802 in Hungary, the son of a proud and vicious
aristocrat, and of a melancholy, sensitive, and ascetic mother. At an
early age he manifested tendencies to sadness, to music, and to
mysticism. He studied medicine, law, agriculture, and especially music.
In 1831 Kerner remarked in him strange fits of sadness and melancholy,
and noted that at other times he would spend whole nights in the garden
playing his favourite violin. “I feel myself,” he wrote to his sister,
“gravitating towards misfortune; the demon of insanity riots in my
heart; I am _mad_. To you, sister, I say it, for you will love me all
the same.” This demon induced him to go, almost aimlessly to America. He
returned to find himself fêted and received with gladness by all; but
hypochondria, in his own words, had planted its teeth deep in his heart,
and everything was useless.[178] And, in fact, this unhappy heart had an
attack of pericarditis, from which it recovered only imperfectly. From
that time sleep, once the only medicine for his troubles, ceased to
visit him; every night he is surrounded by terrible visions. “One would
say,” he wrote, in a truly insane fashion, “that the devil is hunting in
my belly. I hear there a perpetual barking of dogs and a funereal echo
of hell. Without joking, it is enough to make one despair.”

That misanthropy which we have already noted in Haller and Swift and
Cardan and Rousseau took possession of Lenau in 1840 with all the
accompaniments of mania. He is afraid and ashamed of men, disgusted with
them. Germany was preparing bouquets and triumphal arches in his honour,
but he fled, and without any cause went to and fro from one country to
another; he was causelessly angry and impatient, and felt himself
incapable of work; _non est firmum sinciput_, it seemed, as he himself
said; at the same time his appetite became as insane as his brain. He
returned with a strange taste to the mysticism of his childhood, wished
to study the Gnostics, and read over again the stories of sorcerers
which he had found so attractive in his youth, while he drank coffee
enormously and smoked excessively. It was incredible, he observed, how
in moving his body, in lighting or changing a cigar, new ideas arose
within him. He wrote during entire nights, wandered, journeyed,
meditated a marriage, projected great works, and executed none.

It was the last flickering of a great spirit; in 1844 Lenau complained
more and more of headache, of constant perspiration, of extreme
weakness. His left hand and the muscles of the eyes and cheeks were
paralysed, and he began to write with orthographic errors and quibbles,
as _Wie gut es mir gut_ for _mir geht_; or “I am not delirious, but
lyrical.” Suddenly, on the 12th of October, he had a violent attack of
suicidal mania. He was restrained, and furiously struck and broke
everything, burning his manuscripts. Gradually he became composed and
intelligent again, and even analyzed his attack minutely in that
terrible, chaotic poem the _Traumgewalien_. It was a ray of sunlight in
the dark night; it was, as Schilling well said, genius for the last time
dominating insanity. In fact, his condition was constantly getting
worse; another suicidal attack was followed by that fatal comfort, that
pleasant excitement which marks the commencement of general paralysis.
“I enjoy life,” he said; “I am glad that the terrible visions of old
have been succeeded by pleasant and delightful visions.” He imagined
that he was in Walhalla with Goethe, and that he had become King of
Hungary and was victorious in battle; he made puns on his family name,
Niembsch. In 1845 he lost his sense of smell, which had previously been
very delicate, and ceased to care for violets, his favourite flowers. He
no longer recognised his old friends. Notwithstanding this sad
condition, he was still able to write a lyric marked by extravagant
mysticism, but not without the old beauty. One day when conducted to
Plato’s bust, he said: “There is the man who invented stupid love.”
Another time, hearing some one say, “Here lives the great Lenau,” the
unfortunate man replied: “Now Lenau has become very, very small,” and he
wept for a long time. “Lenau is unhappy” were his last words. He died on
the 21st of August, 1850. The autopsy only revealed a little serum in
the ventricles and traces of progressive pericarditis.

In this same asylum at Döbling died some years later another great man,
Széchényi,[179] the creator of Danubian navigation, the founder of the
Magyar Academy, the promoter of the revolution of 1848. At the very
apogee of the revolution, when Széchényi was a minister, he was heard
one day begging Kossuth, one of his colleagues in the Ministry, not to
let him be hanged. It was looked upon as a joke, but it was not so. He
foresaw the misfortunes which would fall on his country, and wrongly
judged himself responsible. The monomania of persecution took possession
of him, and threatened to lead him to suicide. He gradually became calm,
but exhibited a morbid loquacity, strange in a diplomatist and
conspirator, and all day long he would stop the lunatics and idiots,
and, what was worse, the enemies of his country whom he met in prison,
and narrate to them the long confession of his imaginary sins. In 1850
an old passion for chess awoke in him, and took an insane character. It
became necessary to pay a poor student to play with him for ten or
twelve hours at a time. The unfortunate student went mad, but Széchényi
slowly became sane. At the same time he began to lose an aversion for
contact with human beings which had taken possession of him, and which
made it impossible for him even to see his relations. There only
remained of his morbid habits a certain repugnance to the bright country
light, and a great objection to leave his room. On certain days of the
month he consented to receive his much-loved children; with a gesture he
led them tenderly to his table, and read what he had written; but it
required much diplomacy to bring him out into the park. His intelligence
remained clear; it was even more robust than ever. He kept himself
acquainted with the whole German and Magyar literary movement, and he
watched for the smallest sign of better fortune to come to his country.
When he saw an Austrian intrigue hindering the completion of the eastern
railway to which he had devoted himself so vigorously he wrote a letter
to Zichy, in which he shows all his old power, as may be seen from the
following passages: “What has existed once often reappears in the world
under another form and different conditions. A broken bottle cannot be
put together, yet those poor fragments of glass are not lost; they may
be thrown into the furnace and become a vessel for Tokay, the king of
wines, to sparkle in, while the broken bottle may have held but a very
inferior wine.... The greatest praise that can be given to a Hungarian
is to tell him that he has stood firm. You know, my friend, our old
proverb: ‘Stand firm, even in the mire.’ Let us apply that motto;
distrust the reproaches even of our brothers to serve the common cause.
To remain at one’s post, in spite of the mud that fanatical or frivolous
patriots throw in the faces of their brothers and companions in arms, to
remain obstinately there, even when insult strikes one in the face--that
should be the _mot d’ordre_ of the present time.”

In 1858, when the Austrian Ministry exerted pressure on the Hungarian
Academy to abolish the articles of its statutes which constituted the
culture of the Magyar language, its fundamental task, Széchényi wrote
another letter, which describes his mental condition: “Can I be silent
when I see that noble seed crushed? Can I forget the services which
that powerful benefactor has rendered us? I ask--I, whose misfortune
lies, not in a vague confusion of ideas, but, on the contrary, in the
fatal gift of seeing too clearly, too distinctly, to make any illusion
possible. Ought I not to raise a cry of alarm, seeing our dynasty
possessed by I know not what evil influence, fighting against the most
energetic of its peoples, against that for whom the future reserves the
highest destiny, and not only contemning it but stifling it, depriving
it of its proper character, shaking to its roots the secular tree of the
empire. Founder of this Academy, it is my duty to-day to speak. So long
as my head is on my shoulders, so long as my brain is not entirely
obscured, so long as the light of my eyes remains unveiled by eternal
night, I shall retain my right to decide concerning the rules. Our
Emperor will sooner or later understand that the assimilation of the
races of the empire is merely the Utopia of his ministers; the day will
come when all will detach themselves. Hungary alone, which has no racial
affinity with the other European nations, will seek to accomplish its
own destiny beneath the ægis of the royal dynasty.”

That was in 1858. In 1859, even before the outbreak of war, he
prophesied defeat, and showed its results: “There are crises,” he said,
“which lead to cure when the sick person is not incurable.” He published
at London a book in which, in a strange and humorous, but at the same
time terrible way, he traced the history of Hungary’s sufferings under
Bach’s iron rule, sketched the future of his country, and counselled a
policy of concord, parallel but not servile to that of Austria. “In
truth,” he wrote himself, “this book is miserable; but do you know how
the Margaret Island was formed? According to an old legend, the Danube
once occupied its site; some carrion once, no one knows how, settled on
to a sand-bank and became attached there. Whatever the river swept down,
froth, leaves, branches, trees, all were piled up there, and at last a
magnificent island arose. My work is something like that carrion. Who
knows what may arise out of it at last?”

A few months later Hübner succeeded Bach, and the Liberal system was
inaugurated. Széchényi was wild with joy; from his humble room he
encouraged the minister, sent him plans of reform, inspired or wrote
papers on the renewal of Austria, not forgetting Hungary. The dream was
soon dissipated; Hübner was succeeded by Thierry, a bad disciple of
Bach, armed with the old and superannuated systems of Austria; all
reform was abandoned. The unfortunate Széchényi resisted sorrowfully; he
called Rechberg, begged him to inform the Emperor of his mistake while
there was still time, and submitted programmes for an Austrian
constitution and a Hungarian constitution, internal affairs to be
treated separately, and external affairs conjointly. Rechberg, far less
foreseeing than this inspired madman, said, shaking his head: “One can
easily see that this project comes from a lunatic asylum.” Worse still,
Thierry, suspecting a vulgar conspirator in the great Magyar, sent a
troop of police to visit the asylum, threatened to imprison him, and
deprived him of his papers.

The unhappy man, whose madness was merely an irresistible need to serve
his country at all costs, had only one remorse; he feared he had not
sufficiently served his country, and henceforth all hopes were closed.
He sought in vain to stifle his poignant grief by playing desperately at
chess. At last he shot himself with a revolver. That was on the 8th of
April, 1860. In 1867, Francis Joseph was crowned King of Hungary, thus
realizing the dreams of the Döbling lunatic; and Rechberg, who had
laughed at them, was called upon to put them in practice.

E. T. A. Hoffmann, that strange poet, artist, and musician, whose
drawings ended in caricature, his tales in extravagance, and his music
in a mere medley of sound, but who was, nevertheless, the real creator
of fantastic poetry, was a drunkard. Many years before his death he
wrote in his journal: “How is it that, awake or asleep, my thoughts are
always running, in spite of myself, on this miserable theme of madness?
Disorderly ideas seem to rise out of my mind like blood from opened
veins.” He was so sensitive to atmospheric variations that he
constructed a meteorological scale out of his subjective emotions. For
many years he was subject to a real monomania of persecution, with
hallucinations in which the fantasies of his stories were converted into
realities.

The famous Sicilian physiologist Foderà often declared that he could
furnish bread for 200,000 men with a single oven of very simple
construction, and that, with forty soldiers he could overcome any army,
even 1,000,000 strong. When about fifty years of age he fell violently
in love with a young girl who lived opposite him. One fine day, being in
the street, he gazed up rapturously at the charming maiden, who, to free
herself from her wearisome adorer, emptied a vessel of dirty water on
his head. Foderà, however, regarded this act as a manifestation of love,
and returned home full of joy. In the courtyard he saw a fowl, which, as
he declared, had an extraordinary resemblance to the beloved maiden; he
immediately bought it, covered it with kisses, allowed the precious
creature to do anything, to soil his books, and his clothes, and even to
perch on his bed.[180]

The most complete type of madness in genius is presented to us by
Schopenhauer.[181] He himself considered that he inherited his
intelligence from his mother, a literary woman full of vivacity, but
heartless; while his character came from his father, a banker, who was
misanthropic and eccentric to monomania. From childhood his hearing was
defective, and he believed--and it is probably true--that he inherited
his deafness, his very large head, and his brilliant eyes, from his
father. He lived for some time in England under the care of a clergyman.
He learnt to know the English language and literature, and also learnt
to despise the bigotry of his hosts. Notwithstanding constant change of
scene involved in his travels, he was never cheerful, and gave free
course to his discontent with himself and his surroundings. “From my
youth,” he says, “I have always been melancholy. Once, when I was
perhaps eighteen, I

[Illustration: SCHOPENHAUER.]

thought to myself, in spite of my youth, that the world could not be the
work of a God, but rather of a devil. During my education I certainly
had to suffer too much from my father’s temperament.” He was frightened
by imaginary diseases. In Switzerland the Alps aroused in him sadness
rather than admiration. His mother, like all those who came in contact
with him, experienced the unhappy effects of his character, for when, in
1807, he wished, at the age of nineteen, to come and see her at Weimar,
she wrote to him, “I have always told you that it would be very
difficult for me to live with you; the more nearly I observe you, the
more this difficulty increases, so far at least as I am concerned. I do
not hide from you that, so long as you remain what you are now, I would
support any sacrifice rather than submit to it. I do not misunderstand
the foundation of goodness in you; what separates me from you is not
your heart, not your inner, but your outer, self, your views, your
judgments, your manner of behaving; in short, I cannot harmonize with
you in anything that concerns your external self. Even your ill-humour,
your lamentations over the inevitable, your sombre face, your
extravagant opinions, which you give forth like oracles, and tolerate no
opposition to, oppress me, shock my serenity, and are no use to
yourself. Your disagreeable discussions, your lamentations over the
stupidity of the world and human misery, give me wretched nights and bad
dreams.”[182]

He became more and more estranged from his mother, alleging that she had
not respected his father’s memory, that she had dissipated the common
fortune by her extravagance, and had thus reduced him to the necessity
of working for his living. This effort was entirely repugnant to his
nature. In this he yielded to a feeling of anguish, which, by his own
confession, bordered on madness. “If there is nothing to cause me
misery, I am tormented by the thought that there must be something
hidden from me. _Misera conditio nostra._”[183]

In 1814 Schopenhauer left Weimar to complete his great work. He was
convinced that he could and must open a new and only way to lead men of
mind and heart to truth; he felt in himself something more than mere
science, something demoniacal (_dämonisches_).

In 1813 he had already said: “Beneath my hand, and still more in my
head, a work, a philosophy, is ripening, which will be at once an ethic
and a metaphysic, hitherto so unreasonably separated, just as man has
been divided into body and soul. The work grows, and gradually becomes
concrete, like the fœtus in its mother’s womb. I do not know what will
appear at last. I recognize a member, an organ, one part after another.
I write without seeking for results, for I know that it all stands on
the same foundation, and will thus compose a vital and organic whole. I
do not understand the system of the work, just as a mother does not
understand the fœtus that develops in her bowels, but she feels it
tremble within her. My mind draws its food from the world by the medium
of intelligence and thought; this nourishment gives body to my work; and
yet I do not know why it should happen in me and not in others who
receive the same food. O Chance! sovereign of this world, let me live in
peace for a few years yet, for I love my work as a mother loves her
child. When it is ripe and brought to the light, then exercise your
rights, and claim interest for the delay. But if, in this iron century,
I succumb before that hour, may these unripened principles and studies
be received by the world as they are, until perhaps some related mind
appears who will collect and unite the members.”

All the characteristic symptoms of the various steps that lead up to
insanity, the rapid passage from profound grief to excessive joy, may be
found in Schopenhauer. In a moment of tranquil reflection on himself, in
1814, after having found that men were “a soup of bread dipped in water
with a little arsenic,” and after having declared that “their egoism is
like that which binds the dog to his master,” he wrote: “And now do not
except yourself; examine your loves and your friendships; observe if
your objective judgments are not in great part subjective and impure.”
And in another page: “Just as the most beautiful body contains within it
fæcal and mephitic gases, so the noblest character offers traits of
badness, and the greatest genius presents traces of pettiness and
excessive pride.”

The same alternations may be found throughout his life; sometimes, a
keen and contemptuous critic, he shows haughty presumption; at other
times he descends to the lowest literary platitudes; sometimes he
wandered about the delightful suburbs of Dresden lost in the
contemplation of nature; at other times he wallowed in prosaic love
adventures, from which distinguished friends were obliged to save him,
and this while he was elaborating his great work, _Die Welt als Wille
und Vorstellung_, which was to astonish the world. “He thus,” remarks
Von Sedlitz, “gave the example of a _mania puerperii spiritualis_, such
as sometimes takes possession of pregnant women.” Schopenhauer himself
told Frauenstedt that at the time when he was writing his great work he
must have been very strange in his person and behaviour, as people took
him for a madman. One day when he was walking in a conservatory at
Dresden, and, while contemplating the plants, talked aloud to himself
and gesticulated, an attendant came up and asked him who he was. “If you
can tell me who I am,” replied Schopenhauer, “I shall be very much
obliged to you.” And he walked away leaving the astonished attendant
fully persuaded that he was a lunatic. With such a disposition it is not
surprising that Schopenhauer, like many prophets, believed that he was
impelled by a demon or spirit. “When my intelligence had touched its
apogee, and was, under favourable conditions, at its point of greatest
tension, it was capable of embracing anything; it could suddenly bring
forth revelations and give birth to chains of thought well worthy of
preservation.”[184] In 1816 he wrote: “It happens to me among men as to
Jesus of Nazareth when he had to awake his disciples always asleep.”
Even in old age he spoke of his great work in such a way as to exclude
all doubt as to the inspiration which had produced it, such a work only
being possible under the influence of inspiration. At that age he gazed
with astonishment at his work, especially at the fourth book, as at a
work written by some other person. It is worth while recalling here the
doubling of personality so common in men of genius.

After he had handed his book over to the publisher he set out for Italy,
without awaiting its publication, with the proud faith that he had given
a revelation to the world. His _délire des grandeurs_ at this period
increased, and the mental disturbance he underwent revealed itself
later. He wrote: “In enchanting Venice, Love’s arms held me long
enfettered, until an inner voice bade me break free and lead my steps
elsewhere.” And again: “If I could only satisfy my desire to look upon
this race of toads and vipers as my equals, it would be a consolation to
me.” While oscillating between mental exaltation and depression he heard
of the collapse of his banking-house. It is easy to understand the
grief which this news caused him; he was reduced to the necessity of
living by philosophy, instead of for philosophy, as he had desired to
do. He twice sought to become a _Privatdozent_ in Berlin, but he was
unsuccessful in these attempts. His violent attacks on his
contemporaries displeased his hearers, and his passionate disputations,
and his tenacity in holding strange opinions, which he gave forth as
oracles, rendered precarious his relations with friends and men of
learning.

The invasion of cholera, at the beginning of 1831, completed his
troubles. On the last night of 1830 he had already had a dream, which he
looked upon as a prophecy, foretelling his death in the new year. “This
dream,” he wrote in his _Cogitata_, “influenced me in my departure from
Berlin immediately the cholera began in 1831. I had scarcely reached
Frankfort-on-the-Main, when I had a very distinct vision of spirits.
They were, as I think, my ancestors, and they announced to me that I
should survive my mother, at that time still living. My father, who was
dead, carried a light in his hand.” That this hallucination was
accompanied by real brain affection is proved by the fact that at that
time he “fell into deep melancholy, not speaking to any one for weeks
together.” The doctors were alarmed, and induced him to go to Mannheim
for change of scene. More than a year later he returned to Frankfort,
when the acute period of his illness had apparently passed. Signs of it
remained, however, in his peculiar bearing, his habit of gesticulating
and talking aloud to himself as he walked through the streets of the
city, or sat at table in the restaurant, and in his fury against “such
philosophasters as Hegel, Schleiermacher, and similar charlatans, who
shine like so many stars in the firmament of philosophy, and rule the
philosophic market.” He accused them of depriving him of the praise and
fame he deserved, by deliberately keeping silence concerning his work.
This was a fixed idea with him, like the idea of his own infallibility,
even after he seemed to return to a relatively normal condition, thanks
to the fame which, after a delay of thirty years, at length crowned his
name and his works.

His _délire des grandeurs_, his melancholy accompanied by morbid rage,
born of the idea of persecution, had really shown themselves in him from
childhood. At six years of age he believed that his parents wished to
abandon him. As a student he was always morose. One of the things which
caused him most trouble was noise, especially when produced by the whips
of drivers. “To be sensitive to noise,” he wrote, “is one of the
numerous misfortunes which discount the privilege of genius.” “_Qui non
habet indignationem_,” he wrote, “_non habet ingenium_.” But his
indignation was excessive, a morbid rage. One day when his landlady was
chattering in the anteroom he came out and shook her so violently that
he broke her arm, and was fined for damages. He was genuinely
hypochondriacal. He was driven from Naples by the fear of small-pox,
from Verona by the idea that he had been poisoned by snuff, from Berlin
by the dread of cholera, and previously by the conscription. In 1831, he
had a fresh attack of restlessness; at the least sound in the street he
put his hand to his sword; his fear became real suffering; he could not
open a letter without suspecting some great misfortune; he would not
shave his beard, but burnt it; he hated women and Jews and philosophers,
especially philosophers, and loved dogs, remembering them in his will.
He reasoned about everything, however unimportant; about his great
appetite, about the moonlight, which suggested quite illogical ideas to
him, &c. He believed in table-turning, and that magnetism could heal his
dog’s paws and restore his own hearing. One night the servant dreamt
that she had to wipe some ink stains; in the morning he spilt some, and
the great philosopher deduced that “everything happens necessarily.”

He was contradiction personified. He placed annihilation, _nirvana_, as
the final aim of life, and predicted (which means that he desired), one
hundred years of life. He preached sexual abstinence as a duty, but did
not himself practise it. He who had suffered so much from the
intolerance of others, insulted Moleschott and Büchner, and rejoiced
when the Government deprived them of their professorial chairs.

He lived on the first storey, in case of fire; would not trust himself
to his hairdresser; hid gold in the ink-pot, and letters of change
beneath the bed-clothes. “When I have no troubles,” he said (like
Rousseau), “it is then that I am most afraid.” He feared to touch a
razor; a glass that was not his own might communicate some disease; he
wrote business documents in Greek or Latin or Sanskrit, and disseminated
them in books to prevent unforeseen and impossible curiosity, which
would have been much easier avoided by a simple lock and key. Though he
regarded himself as the victim of a vast conspiracy of professors of
philosophy, concerted at Gotha, to preserve silence concerning his
books, he yet dreaded lest they should speak of them; “I would rather
that worms should gnaw my body than that professors should gnaw my
philosophy.” Lacking all affection, he even insulted his mother, and
drew from her example conclusions against the whole female sex, “long of
hair and short of sense.” Yet, while despising monogamy, he recommended
tetragamy, to which he saw but one objection--the four mothers-in-law.
The same lack of affection made him despise patriotism, “the passion of
fools, and the most foolish of passions;” he took part with the soldiers
against the people, and to the former and to his dog he left his
property. He was always preoccupied with himself, not only with the self
that was the creator of a new system, but in hundreds of his letters he
speaks with strange complaisance of his photograph, of his portrait in
oils and of a person who had bought it “in order to place it in a kind
of chapel, like the image of a saint.”

No one has, for the rest, maintained more openly than Schopenhauer, the
relationship of genius to insanity. “People of genius,” he wrote, “are
not only unpleasant in practical life, but weak in moral sense and
wicked.” And elsewhere: “Such men can have but few friends; solitude
reigns on the summits.... Genius is closer to madness than to ordinary
intelligence.... The lives of men of genius show how often, like
lunatics, they are in a state of continual agitation.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Nicolaï Vasilyevitch Gogol (born 1809), after suffering from an unhappy
love affair, gave himself up for many years to unrestrained onanism, and
became eventually a great novelist. Having known Poushkin he was
attracted to the short story, then he fell under the influence of the
Moscow school, and became a humourist of the highest order. In his _Dead
Souls_ he satirises the Russian bureaucracy with so much _vis comica_ as
to show the need of putting an end to a form of government which is a
martyrdom both for the victims and the executioners.

On the publication of his historical Cossack romance, _Taras Bulba_, he
reached the summit of his fame. His admirers compared him to Homer; even
the Government patronized him. Then a new idea began to dominate him; he
thought that he painted his country with so much crudity and realism
that the picture might incite to a revolution which would not be kept
within reasonable limits, and might overturn society, religion, and the
family, leaving him the remorse of having provoked it. This idea took
possession of his mind and dominated it, as it had formerly been
dominated by love, by the drama, and by the novel. He then sought by his
writings to combat western liberalism, but the antidote attracted fewer
readers than the poison. Then he abandoned work, shut himself up in his
house, giving himself up to prayer to the saints, and supplicating them
to obtain God’s pardon for his revolutionary sins. He accomplished a
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, from which he returned somewhat consoled, when
the revolution of 1848 broke out, and his remorse was again aroused. He
was constantly pursued by visions of the triumph of Nihilism, and in his
alarm he called on Holy Russia to overthrow the pagan West, and to found
on its ruins the orthodox Panslavist empire. In 1852, the great novelist
was found dead at Moscow of exhaustion, or rather of tabes dorsalis, in
front of the shrine before which he was accustomed to lie for days in
silent prayer.




