
                   The Contemporary Science Series.

                       Edited by Havelock Ellis.


     I. THE EVOLUTION OF SEX. By Prof. PATRICK GEDDES and J. A. THOMSON.
     With 90 Illustrations. Second Edition.

     “The authors have brought to the task--as indeed their names
     guarantee--a wealth of knowledge, a lucid and attractive method of
     treatment, and a rich vein of picturesque language.”--_Nature._

     II. ELECTRICITY IN MODERN LIFE. By G. W. DE TUNZELMANN. With 88
     Illustrations.

     “A clearly-written and connected sketch of what is known about
     electricity and magnetism, the more prominent modern applications,
     and the principles on which they are based.”--_Saturday Review._

     III. THE ORIGIN OF THE ARYANS. By Dr. ISAAC TAYLOR. Illustrated.
     Second Edition.

     “Canon Taylor is probably the most encyclopædic all-round scholar
     now living. His new volume on the Origin of the Aryans is a
     first-rate example of the excellent account to which he can turn
     his exceptionally wide and varied information.... Masterly and
     exhaustive.”--_Pall Mall Gazette._

     IV. PHYSIOGNOMY AND EXPRESSION. By P. MANTEGAZZA. Illustrated.

     “Brings this highly interesting subject even with the latest
     researches.... Professor Mantegazza is a writer full of life and
     spirit, and the natural attractiveness of his subject is not
     destroyed by his scientific handling of it.”--_Literary World_
     (Boston).

     V. EVOLUTION AND DISEASE. By J. B. SUTTON, F.R.C.S. With 135
     Illustrations.

     “The book is as interesting as a novel, without sacrifice of
     accuracy or system, and is calculated to give an appreciation of
     the fundamentals of pathology to the lay reader, while forming a
     useful collection of illustrations of disease for medical
     reference.”--_Journal of Mental Science._

     VI. THE VILLAGE COMMUNITY. By G. L. GOMME. Illustrated.

     “The fruit of some years of investigation on a subject which has of
     late attracted much attention, and is of much importance, inasmuch
     as it lies at the basis of our society.”--_Antiquary._

     VII. THE CRIMINAL. By HAVELOCK ELLIS. Illustrated.

     “An ably written, an instructive, and a most entertaining
     book.”--_Law Quarterly Review._

     “The sociologist, the philosopher, the philanthropist, the
     novelist--all, indeed, for whom the study of human nature has any
     attraction--will find Mr. Ellis full of interest and
     suggestiveness.”--_Academy._

     VIII. SANITY AND INSANITY. By Dr. CHARLES MERCIER. Illustrated.

     “He has laid down the institutes of insanity.”--_Mind._

     “Taken as a whole, it is the brightest book on the physical side of
     mental science published in our time.”--_Pall Mall Gazette._

     IX. HYPNOTISM. By Dr. ALBERT MOLL. Second Edition.

     “Marks a step of some importance in the study of some difficult
     physiological and psychological problems which have not yet
     received much attention in the scientific world of
     England.”--_Nature._

     X. MANUAL TRAINING. By Dr. C. M. WOODWARD, Director of the Manual
     Training School, St. Louis. Illustrated.

     “There is no greater authority on the subject than Professor
     Woodward.”--_Manchester Guardian._

     XI. THE SCIENCE OF FAIRY TALES. By E. SIDNEY HARTLAND.

     “Mr. Hartland’s book will win the sympathy of all earnest students,
     both by the knowledge it displays, and by a thorough love and
     appreciation of his subject, which is evident
     throughout.”--_Spectator._

     XII. PRIMITIVE FOLK. By ELIE RECLUS.

     “An attractive and useful introduction to the study of some aspects
     of ethnography.”--_Nature._

     “For an introduction to the study of the questions of property,
     marriage, government, religion,--in a word, to the evolution of
     society,--this little volume will be found most
     convenient.”--_Scottish Leader._

     XIII. THE EVOLUTION OF MARRIAGE. By Professor LETOURNEAU.

     “Among the distinguished French students of sociology, Professor
     Letourneau has long stood in the first rank. He approaches the
     great study of man free from bias and shy of generalisations. To
     collect, scrutinise, and appraise facts is his chief business. In
     the volume before us he shows these qualities in an admirable
     degree.... At the close of his attractive pages he ventures to
     forecast the future of the institution of marriage.”--_Science._

     XIV. BACTERIA AND THEIR PRODUCTS. By Dr. G. SIMS WOODHEAD.
     Illustrated.

     “An excellent summary of the present state of knowledge of the
     subject.”--_Lancet._

     XV. EDUCATION AND HEREDITY. By J. M. GUYAU.

     “It is at once a treatise on sociology, ethics, and pædagogics. It
     is doubtful whether among all the ardent evolutionists who have had
     their say on the moral and the educational question any one has
     carried forward the new doctrine so boldly to its extreme logical
     consequence.”--Professor SULLY in _Mind_.

     XVI. THE MAN OF GENIUS. By Prof. LOMBROSO. Illustrated.

     “By far the most comprehensive and fascinating collection of facts
     and generalizations concerning genius which has yet been brought
     together.”--_Journal of Mental Science._

     XVII. THE GRAMMAR OF SCIENCE. By Prof. KARL PEARSON. Illustrated.

     “The problems discussed with great ability and lucidity, and often
     in a most suggestive manner, by Prof. Pearson, are such as should
     interest _all_ students of natural science.”--_Natural Science._

     XVIII. PROPERTY: ITS ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT. By CH. LETOURNEAU,
     General Secretary to the Anthropological Society, Paris, and
     Professor in the School of Anthropology, Paris.

     “M. Letourneau has read a great deal, and he seems to us to have
     selected and interpreted his facts with considerable judgment and
     learning.”--_Westminster Review._

     XIX. VOLCANOES, PAST AND PRESENT. By Prof. EDWARD HULL, LL.D.,
     F.R.S.

     “A very readable account of the phenomena of volcanoes and
     earthquakes.”--_Nature._

     XX. PUBLIC HEALTH. By Dr. J. F. J. SYKES. With numerous
     Illustrations.

     “Not by any means a mere compilation or a dry record of details and
     statistics, but it takes up essential points in evolution,
     environment, prophylaxis, and sanitation bearing upon the
     preservation of public health.”--_Lancet._

     XXI. MODERN METEOROLOGY. AN ACCOUNT OF THE GROWTH AND PRESENT
     CONDITION OF SOME BRANCHES OF METEOROLOGICAL SCIENCE. By FRANK
     WALDO, PH.D., Member of the German and Austrian Meteorological
     Societies, etc.; late Junior Professor, Signal Service, U.S.A. With
     112 Illustrations.

     “The present volume is the best on the subject for general use that
     we have seen.”--_Daily Telegraph._


     IMPORTANT ADDITION TO THE SERIES.

     XXII. _THE GERM-PLASM: A THEORY OF HEREDITY. By August Weismann,
     Professor in the University of Freiburg-in-Breisgau. With 24
     Illustrations._

     “There has been no work published since Darwin’s own books which
     has so thoroughly handled the matter treated by him, or has done so
     much to place in order and clearness the immense complexity of the
     factors of heredity, or, lastly, has brought to light so many new
     facts and considerations bearing on the subject.”--_British Medical
     Journal._

     XXIII. INDUSTRIES OF ANIMALS. By F. HOUSSAY. With numerous
     Illustrations.

     “His accuracy is undoubted, yet his facts out-marvel all romance.
     These facts are here made use of as materials wherewith to form the
     mighty fabric of evolution.”--_Manchester Guardian._

     XXIV. MAN AND WOMAN. By HAVELOCK ELLIS. Illustrated.

     “Altogether we must congratulate Mr. Ellis upon having produced a
     book which, apart from its high scientific claims, will, by its
     straightforward simplicity upon points of delicacy, appeal strongly
     to all those readers outside purely scientific circles who may be
     curious in these matters.”--_Pall Mall Gazette._

     “This striking and important volume ... should place Mr. Havelock
     Ellis in the front rank of scientific thinkers of the
     time.”--_Westminster Review._

     XXV. THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM. By JOHN A. HOBSON, M.A.

     “Every page affords evidence of wide and minute study, a weighing
     of facts as conscientious as it is acute, a keen sense of the
     importance of certain points as to which economists of all schools
     have hitherto been confused and careless, and an impartiality
     generally so great as to give no indication of his [Mr. Hobson’s]
     personal sympathies.”--_Pall Mall Gazette._

     XXVI. APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. By FRANK PODMORE, M.A.

     “A very sober and interesting little book.... That
     thought-transference is a real thing, though not perhaps a very
     common thing, he certainly shows.”--_Spectator._

     XXVII. AN INTRODUCTION TO COMPARATIVE PSYCHOLOGY. By Professor C.
     LLOYD MORGAN. With Diagrams.

     “A strong and complete exposition of Psychology, as it takes shape
     in a mind previously informed with biological science.... Well
     written, extremely entertaining, and intrinsically
     valuable.”--_Saturday Review._

     XXVIII. THE ORIGINS OF INVENTION: A STUDY OF INDUSTRY AMONG
     PRIMITIVE PEOPLES. By OTIS T. MASON, Curator of the Department of
     Ethnology in the United States National Museum.

     “A valuable history of the development of the inventive
     faculty.”--_Nature._

     XXIX. THE GROWTH OF THE BRAIN: A STUDY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN
     RELATION TO EDUCATION. By HENRY HERBERT DONALDSON, Professor of
     Neurology in the University of Chicago.

     “We can say with confidence that Professor Donaldson has executed
     his work with much care, judgment, and discrimination.”--_The
     Lancet._

     XXX. EVOLUTION IN ART: AS ILLUSTRATED BY THE LIFE-HISTORIES OF
     DESIGNS. By Professor ALFRED C. HADDON.




                  _THE CONTEMPORARY SCIENCE SERIES._

                       EDITED BY HAVELOCK ELLIS.


                          THE MAN OF GENIUS.

                       [Illustration: PAINTERS.

                 Proportion to a million inhabitants.]




                                  THE

                            MAN OF GENIUS.

                                  BY

                           CESARE LOMBROSO,

       _Professor of Legal Medicine at the University of Turin_.


                          WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                LONDON:
                             WALTER SCOTT,
                  24, WARWICK LANE, PATERNOSTER ROW.
                                 1891.




PREFACE.


It has never before happened that in the latest edition of a book I have
had to disown so much in preceding editions; my first imperfect and
spontaneous idea has never before been so modified and transformed, the
final form being, perhaps, not even yet altogether attained.

The idea that genius was a special morbid condition had indeed often
occurred to me, but I had always repelled it; and besides, without a
sure experimental basis, ideas to-day do not count. Like still-born
children, they appear but for a moment, to disappear at once. I had been
enabled to discover in genius various characters of degeneration which
are the foundation and the sign of nearly all forms of congenital mental
abnormality, but the exaggerated extension which was at that time given
to theories of degeneration, and still more the vague and inexact
character of that conception, had repelled me; so that I accepted the
facts, but not their ultimate consequences. How, in fact, can one
suppress a feeling of horror at the thought of associating with idiots
and criminals those individuals who represent the highest manifestations
of the human spirit?

But recent teratologic researches, especially those of Gegenbauer, have
shown that the phenomena of atavistic retrogression do not always
indicate true degradation, but that very often they are simply a
compensation for considerable development and progress accomplished in
other directions. Reptiles have more ribs than we have; quadrupeds and
apes possess more muscles than we do, and an entire organ, the tail,
which we lack. It has been in losing these advantages that we have
gained our intellectual superiority. When this is seen, the repugnance
to the theory of genius as degeneration at once disappears. Just as
giants pay a heavy ransom for their stature in sterility and relative
muscular and mental weakness, so the giants of thought expiate their
intellectual force in degeneration and psychoses. It is thus that the
signs of degeneration are found more frequently in men of genius than
even in the insane.

And again, this theory has entered to-day on so certain a path, and
agrees so entirely with my studies on genius, that it is impossible for
me not to accept it, and not to see in it an indirect confirmation of my
own ideas. I find this confirmation in the characters of degeneration
recently discovered;[1] and still more in the uncertainty of the
theories which were at first advanced to explain the problem of genius.
Thus Joly affirms in a too convenient formula that “it is not even
necessary to refute the theory of insanity in genius;” for, he says,
“strength is not weakness, health is not disease, and for the rest the
cases quoted in favour of these hypotheses are only particular
cases.”[2] But the physician knows that very often, in the delirious and
epileptic, strength is precisely an index of disease. As to the second
objection, it falls to the ground as facts accumulate. It is certain
that there have been men of genius presenting a complete equilibrium of
the intellectual faculties; but they have presented defects of
affectivity and feeling; though no one may have perceived it, or,
rather, recorded it. Up to recent years, historians, being chroniclers
rather than psychologists, very careful to transmit to us the adventures
and pageantries of princes and peoples, and the wars which have so much
importance in the eyes of the multitude, have neglected everything which
concerns the psychology of thought. They have very seldom informed us
concerning the disorders and degenerative characters which exist in men
of genius and their families; while vanity, which is extreme in men of
genius, has never allowed them, save in rare instances (such as Cardan,
Rousseau, J. S. Mill, Renan), to yield spontaneous revelations of
themselves. If Richelieu had not on one single occasion been caught in
an epileptic fit, who could ever have guessed it? If it had not been for
the recent works of Berti and Mayor, who would have believed that Cavour
twice attempted to kill himself? If Taine had not been one of those rare
writers who understand what help psychiatry can give in the study of
history, he would never have been able to surprise those characteristics
which make Napoleon’s moral insanity manifest to all. Carlyle’s wife
wrote the narration of her tortures; few wives do as much, and, to tell
the truth, few husbands are anxious to publish such narratives. Many
persons still regard as an angelic being the celebrated painter
Aiwosowski, who succoured hundreds of poor persons and left his own wife
and children to die of hunger.

It must be added that moral insanity and epilepsy which are so often
found in association with genius are among the forms of mental
alienation which are most difficult to verify, so that they are often
denied, even during life, although quite evident to the alienist. There
are still many estimable persons who doubt the insanity of King Ludwig
of Bavaria, and even openly deny it.[3]

There are, also, no individual cases in nature; all particular cases are
the expression and effect of a law. And the fact, now unquestioned, that
certain great men of genius have been insane, permits us to presume the
existence of a lesser degree of psychosis in other men of genius.

But, adds Joly, genius is often precocious; as Raphael at fourteen years
of age, Mozart at six, Michelangelo at sixteen; and sometimes it is
tardy, with special characteristics, as in Alfieri. This is true;
precocious originality is one of the characteristics of genius; but
precisely because genius is a neurosis, an accidental circumstance may
provoke it even at a comparatively late age, and like every neurosis
which depends on irritation of the cerebral cortex it may take on
different aspects, according to the spot attacked, while preserving the
same nature.

Hailes, in a much praised essay on genius in art, maintains that genius
is a continuation of the conditions of ordinary life; thus, as we all
write prose we must all have a little genius. But how then does it
happen, Brunetière rightly objects,[4] that one individual alone becomes
a great painter or a great poet? And how is it that so many philosophers
affirm, and quite truly, that genius consists in an exaggerated
development of one faculty at the expense of others?

The man of genius is a monster, say others. Very well, but even monsters
follow well-defined teratologic laws.

Brunetière remarks that there have been men of talent, like Addison and
Pope, who were lacking in genius; and men of genius, like Sterne, who
were lacking in talent. These two facts, however, are not contradictory;
to be lacking in talent, or rather in good sense or common sense, is one
of those characters of genius which witness to the presence of neurosis,
and indicate that hypertrophy of certain psychic centres is compensated
by the partial atrophy of other centres. As to the first assertion, it
confirms rather than destroys my conclusions. Certainly talent is not
genius, just as vice is not crime, but there is a transition from one to
the other in virtue of that law of continuity which may be observed in
all natural phenomena. _Natura non facit saltus._

I must confess here that very often in this book I have had to confound
genius with talent; not because they are not quite distinct, but because
the line that separates them, like that which separates vice from crime,
is very difficult to define. A man of scientific genius, lacking in
education and opportunities--a Gorini, for example--will appear more
sterile than a man of talent, who has been favoured by circumstances
from the first.

For the rest--and this is the point which concerns us most--the morbid
effects and analogies are the same in both, since the man of talent,
even without genius, presents various slight but real abnormalities. A
man of even ordinary talent may be so exhausted as to exhibit the
pathological central reactions of the most powerful genius, and to leave
traces of degeneration in his offspring; and, although it is rare, it is
not impossible for the man of talent to descend from the neurotic and
insane. This may easily be explained: talent, like genius, is
accompanied by cortical excitation, only in a less degree and in a
smaller brain. The true normal man is not the man of letters or of
learning, but the man who works and eats--_fruges consumere natus_.

But our nature, it is customary to say, revolts against a conception
which tends to lower the most sublime manifestation of humanity to the
level of the sorrowfully degenerate, to idiocy and insanity. It is sad,
I do not deny, but has not nature caused to grow from similar germs, and
on the same clod of earth, the nettle and the jasmine, the aconite and
the rose? The botanist cannot be blamed for these coincidences; and
since they exist it is not a crime that he should record them as he
finds them. Repugnance also is a sentiment, not a reason; and a
sentiment, moreover, which has not been shared by the race generally,
who long ago reached conclusions--repugnant to the academic world, which
sometimes closes its eyes in order not to see--entirely in harmony with
the results here presented. We may see this in the most ancient
etymologies; in Hebrew as well as in Sanscrit the lunatic is synonymous
with the prophet. We may see it, too, in proverbs: “_I matti ed i
fancialli indovinano_;” “_Kinder und Narren sprechen die Wahrheit_;”
“_Un fol advise bien un sage_;” “_Sæpe enim est morio valde opportune
locutus_.” The lunatic, again, among barbarous people is feared and
adored by the masses who often confide to him supreme authority.

In modern times the same conviction has been preserved, but in a form,
it must be confessed, altogether disadvantageous to genius. Not only is
fame (and until recent years even liberty), denied to men of genius
during their lives, but even the means of subsistence. After death they
receive monuments and rhetoric by way of compensation. And why is this?
Neither the jealousy of rivals nor the envy of mediocre men is enough to
explain it. The reason is that if we leave out certain great statesmen
(though there are exceptions--Bismarck, for example), men of genius are
lacking in tact, in moderation, in the sense of practical life, in the
virtues which are alone recognized as real by the masses, and which
alone are useful in social affairs. “_Le bon sens vaut mieux que le
génie_,” says an old French adage. And as Mirabeau said, “Good sense is
the absence of every strong passion, and only men of strong passions can
be great.” Good sense travels on the well-worn paths; genius, never. And
that is why the crowd, not altogether without reason, is so ready to
treat great men as lunatics, while the lettered crowd cry out when--as I
have attempted to do here--this general opinion is attached to a theory.

By some of those persons who have too much good sense--and who do not
know that that destroys every great truth, because we reach truth more
by remote paths than by smooth and ordinary roads--it has been objected:
“Many of these defects that you find in great men may be found also in
those who are not men of genius.” This is very true, but it is by the
quality and quantity that the abnormal character is marked; and, above
all, by the contradiction with the whole of the other characters of
their personality, that the abnormality appears. Cooks are vain, but in
those matters which refer to their occupation they are not so vain as to
believe themselves gods. The nobleman will boast of descent from a
mediæval hero, but not of being a sculptor. We are all forgetful
sometimes, but not so far forgetful that we cannot recall our own names
while at the same time we have an extraordinary memory for our own
discoveries. Many have said what Michelangelo said of monks, but they
have not afterwards spent large sums in fattening monasteries. In short,
it is the doubling and contradiction of personality in genius which
reveals the abnormality.

It has again been objected to me that these studies are deficient in
utility. To this I might reply with Taine that it is not always
necessary that the true should be useful. Yet numerous practical
applications arise out of these researches; they furnish us with
explanations of those strange religious insanities which become the
nucleus of great historical events. The examination of the productions
of the insane supply us with new sources of analysis and criticism for
the study of genius in art and literature; and, above all, these data
bring an important element to the solution of penal questions, for they
overthrow for ever that prejudice by virtue of which only those are
declared insane, and therefore irresponsible, whose reason has entirely
departed, a prejudice which has handed thousands of irresponsible
creatures to the executioner. They show us, lastly, that literary
madness is not only a curious psychiatric singularity, but a special
form of insanity, which hides impulses the more dangerous, because not
easy to perceive, a form of insanity, which, like religious insanity,
may be transformed into a historical event.

C. LOMBROSO.




CONTENTS.


PART I.

_THE CHARACTERISTICS OF GENIUS._

CHAPTER I.

.....PAGE

HISTORY OF THE PROBLEM.....1-4

Aristotle--Plato--Democritus--Felix Plater--Pascal--Diderot--Modern
writers on genius.

