PART III.

_GENIUS IN THE INSANE._




CHAPTER I.

INSANE GENIUS IN LITERATURE.

Periodicals published in lunatic
asylums--Synthesis--Passion--Atavism--Conclusion.


The connection which, as we have seen, exists between genius and
insanity is confirmed by the over-excitement of the intelligence, and
the temporary appearance of real genius frequently observed among the
insane.

“It seems,” writes Charles Nodier, “as if the divergent and scattered
rays of the diseased intellect were suddenly concentrated, like those of
the sun in a lens, and then lent to the speech of the poor madman so
much brilliancy that one may be permitted to doubt whether he had ever
been more learned, clear, or persuasive while in full possession of his
reason.”[282]

“Madness,” writes Théophile Gautier,[283] “which creates such enormous
gaps, does not always suspend all the faculties. Poems written during
complete dementia often observe the rules of quantity extremely well.
Domenico Theotocopuli, the Greek painter, whose master-pieces are
admired in the Spanish churches, was insane. We have seen in England,
scenes of lions and stallions fighting, the work of an insane patient,
done on a board with a red-hot iron, which looked like some of
Géricault’s sketches rubbed in with bitumen.”

Under the influence of insanity, “an ignorant peasant will make Latin
verses; another will suddenly speak in an idiom which he has never
learnt, and of which he will not know a word after his recovery. A woman
will sing Latin hymns and poems entirely unknown to her; a child,
wounded in the head, constructs syllogisms in German, and is unable,
when no longer ill, to utter a single expression in that language.”[284]

Winslow knew a gentleman, incapable in his normal condition of doing a
simple addition sum, who became an excellent mathematician during his
attacks of mania. In the same way, a woman who wrote poetry while in the
asylum, after her cure became once more a peaceable and prosaic
housekeeper.

A monomaniac at the Bicêtre lamented his detention in the following
striking verse:--

    “_Ah! le poète de Florence_
     _N’avait pas, dans son chant sacré_
     _Rêvé l’abîme de souffrance_
     _De tes murs, Bicêtre exécré._”[285]

Esquirol gives an account of a maniac who invented, during the acute
period of his malady, a new kind of cannon which was afterwards adopted.

Morel had under his care a madman, subject to intermittent states in
which all his faculties were more or less blunted, if not actually lost,
who, during his lucid intervals, composed fine comedies.

John Clare, who wrote nonsense as soon as he began to express himself in
prose, in some of his tender and melancholy elegies rose to a rare
perfection of style and the choicest ideas.[286]

Leuret says, in speaking of mania, “It has happened to me more than once
to form too favourable an idea of the intellectual capacity of some
persons, when I could only judge of it by what they said or did during
an attack of mania. A patient whose conversation and flashes of wit had
struck me, sometimes turned out, after his recovery, to be a very
ordinary man, far inferior to the opinion I had conceived of him.”[287]

Marcé has recorded the case of a young married woman of cultivated mind,
but merely ordinary intelligence, who, during the course of an attack of
mania, in which ideas of jealousy predominated, “wrote to her husband
letters which, for their eloquence and the passionate energy of their
style, might easily be placed beside the most fervent passages of the
_Nouvelle Héloise_. When the attack was over her letters became simple
and modest, and no one, on comparing them with the others, would have
believed that the two sets came from the same pen.”[288]

Excessive activity of the intellect, writes Dagonet, is also sometimes
observed in the depressive forms of mental aberration, but much less
frequently than in the expansive forms. As a proof of this, it is
sufficient to cite the following letter, written by a patient affected
with melancholic delusion, to her husband, a country schoolmaster. The
letter was full of mistakes in spelling; the woman who wrote it had no
education, and in her normal condition, no eloquence; but disease had
transformed her by developing her intellectual faculties:--

“Why did not the Master of the universe open the tomb to me in my
brilliant youth? Why, at the same time, did He not remove me from you,
since you do not love me, and I am making you unhappy?

“Why did I become a mother? To be unhappy--more than unhappy--to leave
the children who are so dear to me.... Why do you hate me? Though I
stood with my feet in boiling oil, I should still say, I love you!...

“Why did you not let me die? You would be happy,--and I--my troubles
would be over.... My dear children would come and play by my grave. I
should still be near them--I should still, in the darkness of the grave,
hear them say, ‘There is our mother!’”[289]

If this woman had fed her mind on the works of Chateaubriand she could
not have expressed herself with more poetry or imagination.

“It has been known,” says Tissot, “that a young man, whose tutor had
never been able to teach him anything, and who, as the saying is, could
not put a noun and an adjective together, spoke Latin fluently, after
some days of malignant fever, and developed ideas which till then had
not struck him.”[290]

Among other examples of what Lecamus calls learned frenzies, he cites
Mademoiselle Antheman who, during her delirium, was of “smiling
countenance and agreeable humour. Having lost the use of her right hand
through paralysis, she painted and embroidered with her left, with
incredible dexterity; and the productions of her mind were no less
surprising than those of her hands. She recited verses which showed the
greatest possible vivacity and delicacy, though they were the first she
had ever composed.”[291]

“I am going to try,” says Gérard de Nerval, in his book entitled _Le
Rêve et la Vie_, “to transcribe the impressions of a long illness which
ran its course entirely in the mysteries of my mind. I do not know why I
make use of the term illness, for never--as far as I am concerned--did I
feel better. Sometimes I thought my strength and activity were doubled;
it seemed that I knew and understood everything, imagination gave me
infinite delight. In recovering what men called reason, shall I have to
regret the loss of this?”

What mental practitioner has not heard similar words over and over again
from the mouth of unhappy patients who, after recovering their reason,
regretted their past state, that new life, that _vita nuova_, which
Gérard defines as “_L’épanchement du songe dans la vie réelle!_”

Increase of intellectual activity, says Dr. Parchappe, is frequently met
with in insanity; it is even one of the most salient characteristics of
this disease in its acute period. The annals of science--adds the same
author--contain a certain number of well-authenticated facts, which have
contributed to confirm the superstition of a supernatural heightening
of the intellectual faculties, and which explain, up to a certain point,
how the love of the marvellous, in credulous observers, by exaggerating
and distorting analogous facts, has been able to gain credit for the
wonderful tales which abound in the history of religious sects at all
epochs, and more especially in the history of diabolical possessions in
the Middle Ages.[292]

Van Swieten (Comment., 1121) relates that he had seen a woman who,
during her attacks of mania, only spoke in verse, which she composed
with admirable facility, although in health she had never shown the
least poetic talent.

Lorry cites the case of a lady of rank, of very ordinary intellect, who
was subject to attacks of melancholy, during which her intelligence was
so far developed as to enable her to discuss the most difficult
questions with eloquence.

A young girl of the people, aged fourteen, attacked with insanity in
consequence of a religious revival, talked on theological subjects as if
she had devoted herself to this study; she spoke like a preacher, of God
and of Christian duties, and gave sagacious answers to the objections
which were made.[293]

“I have had occasion,” writes Morel,[294] “to remark, in some
hypochondriac, hysteric, and epileptic patients, an extraordinary
intellectual activity at the critical periods of the disease. It is not
rarely observed that the attacks of exacerbation to which they are
subject are preceded by an abnormal manifestation of the intellectual
forces. A young hypochondriacal patient, confided to my care, often
astonished those who saw him by the facility of his elocution, and the
brilliancy with which he expressed his ideas. At certain times he would
compose, in the course of a single night, a piece of music or a play
which possessed remarkable traits, and some beauties of the first order.
But, knowing the patient, I was never mistaken in my prognostications
from this state of things. I knew that, after three or four days of
excitement, this young man would fall into a dull stupor and become a
prey to a torpid apathy which prevented him from feeling the instinct
of his greatest natural necessities. The case ended in complete
dementia.”

“In the case of a hysterical patient, with a predominance of exalted
religious ideas, I have also observed remarkable phenomena of
intellectual reminiscence. She had heard a great number of sermons, and
read still more. I have heard her repeat word for word what she had read
or what had been delivered in her presence. We were able to follow her,
book in hand, when, under the influence of a nervous excitement which
quickened her memory, she recited sermons by well-known Christian
orators. She was quite unable to repeat this phenomenon in her ordinary
condition; but, as in the preceding case, we knew what view to take of a
fact of this nature--not to mention that it resembled a large number of
other cases, by means of which, at different times, the public credulity
has been exploited. In this woman the phenomenon always preceded a
crisis of exacerbation followed by stupor.

“Let us now pass to the extreme concentration of the attention in a
hypochondriacal patient relating her own sensations. The following
extracts are from a diary left to me by the patient in question. It
summarizes all that is experienced by this class of patients.

“_September 6, 1852_, 9 p.m. This evening, on going to bed, sharp pain
in the sacral regions and in the thighs. Tearing pains in the left ear
and eye while falling asleep. I was overpowered by the feeling of fear.
I seemed to be rolling into bottomless abysses, and to have, as it were,
an iron hook fixed in my skull and heart, and dragging them out.

“_September 7, 1852_, 7 a.m. Lancinating pain in the eyes, acute
suffering in the eyelids. Pressure on the temples, principally on the
left, eyes constantly watering, larynx contracted; a horrible,
never-ceasing devouring hunger, which seems to make me start. I am
seized by an anger which makes me seem mad in the eyes of others. If I
could still cry out, that would relieve me; I am boiling over with
anger, and I look wild. It is as though I had a little saw inside my
head. Always this motion of sawing--of a wheel which keeps turning and
carries me with it. My bones feel to me like dead wood which burns like
logwood.

“_September 8, 1852._ The whole day without having been able to do
anything. My forehead seemed encircled with a tight iron band. I went to
bed with a feeling of deep depression. Fear overpowers me--sometimes a
feeling of hatred--a very little excusable jealousy of those who can act
freely and work. I have in my back something like little strings pulling
in all directions, making music like an accordion. It is torturing. The
strongest man would fall dead with terror, if he could see the reality
of a person in my state of health.... And they laugh at me.... The
doctors refuse to believe in my sufferings. There are moments when all
that I have ever seen in my life is before my eyes at once. I feel
myself lifted into the air or up to the roofs; I feel a horror of
myself. It is like an old painting by Rembrandt etched in _aqua fortis_.

“_Dreams._--Dead horses, headless, dismembered--horrors of all kinds....
Then there are members of my family who appear to me; but everything I
see is distorted and reduced in size; there is, as it were, a _camera
obscura_ in me, and the reflector shows me everything in miniature. I
admit that I may be insane--but you, too, must admit at least that I am
very ill,” &c.

It is known, says Paulhan,[295] that with some dementia patients,
certain faculties remain intact; they can, for instance, play at cards
or draughts, though their mind in general may be quite disorganized. The
same is found to be the case with idiots. Griesinger saw, in the
Earlswood Asylum, a young man who had made, all by himself, a remarkable
model of a man-of-war. This individual’s intelligence was very limited;
he had no idea whatever of numbers. “It more frequently happens,” adds
the author, “that complete idiots execute fairly good work in drawing or
painting. In such cases, it is, of course, only a mechanical talent.”

Esquirol reports the case of a general suffering from mania, whose
“delusions persist throughout the summer, with some lucid intervals,
during which the patient writes comedies and vaudevilles which betray
the incoherence of his ideas.... In spite of the confusion of his mind,
the general conceives an idea for the perfecting of a certain weapon,
draws designs, and manifests the desire of getting a model constructed.”
One day, he went to the foundry, and, on his return, was seized with
agitation and delirium. A while later, he paid a second visit to the
foundry, and “the model having been executed, gave an order for fifty
thousand. This order was the only act which gave the founder reason to
suspect the general’s malady. His invention was afterwards officially
adopted.” Thus, in the midst of general incoherence, an important series
of ideas was maintained and carried out to the end.

A writer not practised in mental disease, Esquiros whom we have already
had occasion to quote, mentions the following facts, which are very
significant:--

“Dr. Leuret,” he says, “related to us the history of a patient in the
Bicêtre who, during his malady, had shown a remarkable talent for
writing, though when in good health he would have been quite incapable
of doing as much. ‘I am not quite cured,’ he said to the physician, who
thought him convalescent. ‘I am still too clever for that. When I am
well, I take a week to write a letter. In my natural condition I am
stupid; wait till I become so again.’ The same observer also cites the
case of a merchant whose affairs were in danger. During his illness,
this man found means to re-establish them; the result of each of his
attacks was the perfecting of some mechanism, or the invention of some
means for facilitating his industry; and at the end of this invaluable
insanity, he was found to have recovered both his reason and his
fortune.

“We have been shown at Montmartre, in Dr. Blanche’s establishment,
traces of charcoal-drawings on a wall. These half-effaced figures, one
of which represented the Queen of Sheba, and the other some king, were
the work of a distinguished young author, who has since recovered his
reason. This illness had developed a new talent, which was non-existent,
or at least played a most insignificant part, while he was in health.

“It is said that Marion Delorme met, in a madhouse, with the first man
who conceived the idea of applying the forces of steam to the needs of
industry, Salomon de Caus. Talents created by disease forsake the
individual, for the most part, at the same time as the disease
itself.”[296]

I had under treatment at Pavia, a peasant lad, aged twelve, who composed
extremely original musical melodies, and bestowed on his companions in
misfortune nicknames which fitted so well that they always kept them.
With him was a little old man afflicted with rickets and _pellagra_ who,
when asked whether he was happy, replied, like a philosopher of ancient
Greece, “All _men_ are happy, even the rich, if they are only willing.”

Many of my pupils still remember B----, by turns musician, servant,
porter, keeper of a cookshop, tinman, soldier, public letter-writer, but
always unfortunate. He left us an autobiography, which, apart from a few
orthographical mistakes in spelling, would be quite worth printing; and
he asked me for his discharge in terms which, for an uneducated working
man, were wanting neither in beauty nor in originality.

Not long ago I heard a poor hawker of sponges, when insane, thus
conjecture and sum up the cardinal idea of the circulation of life: “We
do not die. When the soul is worn out it melts, and is turned into
another shape. In fact, when my father had buried a dead mule, we
afterwards saw mushrooms growing in great numbers on the same spot, and
the potatoes in the same place, which were formerly very small, grew to
twice their usual size.”

Thus a vulgar mind, enlightened by the energy of mania, stumbles on
theories which the greatest thinkers arrive at with difficulty.

G. B., a maniac, nephew of a celebrated author, said to me one day, when
I hesitated before permitting him to ride a somewhat skittish horse, “No
fear, doctor--_similia similibus_.”

M. G., a merchant, suffering from melancholia, said to some one who had
called him “Count” by mistake, “What count? I have kept plenty of
_accounts_--I know no others!”

“Why will you not shake hands with me?” I asked Madame M----, a sufferer
from moral insanity, one morning, “Are you angry with me?” “_Pallida
virgo cupit, rubicunda recusat_,” she replied. Another time I asked her,
“Do you hope to leave this establishment soon?” She answered, “I shall
leave it when those outside have recovered their reason.”

V----, a thief, and insane, made his escape during a walk which had been
permitted him. When overtaken and reproached with having betrayed the
confidence reposed in him, he replied, “I only wanted to try whether my
knees were stiff or not.”

B. B., a maniac woman, over seventy years of age, who had lost all her
teeth, made obscene remarks. When remonstrated with for using
expressions so unbecoming to her age, she said, “Old! old! Why, do you
not see that I have not yet cut my teeth?”

N. B., who became a poet through insanity, writes with much subtlety,
but his verses do not scan. His companion, G. R., once told us that he
lengthened the feet on purpose, so that, being well _planted_, they
should not be able to escape his memory.[297]

_Synthesis._--The most original and general characteristic of the poets
who are the product of insanity is precisely the forcing of the mind to
a state so at variance with previous conditions of life and culture. In
many, it is true, the only result of this effect is a continuous flow of
epigrams, plays upon words, and assonances--puns, in short, such as are
praised in society as evidences of wit; though it is no wonder that they
should abound in lunatic asylums, being, as they are, the very negative
of truth and logic. This tendency, or, at least, the tendency to
alliteration and rhyme, is evident in all their works, even those
written in prose. Yet, on the other hand, we not rarely meet with
improvised philosophers, who in their utterances reproduce parts of the
systems of the Positivists, of Epicurus and Comte; the brain, quickened
by insanity, being able to seize upon those salient points of truth from
which the systems named took their rise, and that because these men have
less hatred of novelty, and more originality, than normal people.

Their most salient characteristic--originality heightened to the point
of absurdity--is due to the overflowing of the imagination which can no
longer be restrained within the bounds of logic and common sense. It is
natural that the mind which has been most injured, or is by nature the
most deficient, should exceed most in this respect. We need only refer
now to the pretended metamorphosis and journeyings of the soul of P----
of Siena, and the writings of M---- of Pesaro, who had carried his
passion for the Greek language so far as to invent a new idiom, in which
gravel was called _lithiasis_, the sea, _equor_, convictions, _agonies_,
the world, a _vase_.[298]

Their more rapid association of ideas, and livelier imagination, often
enable them to solve problems which more cultivated, but normal,
intellects can scarcely attack with success.

Another peculiarity characteristic of them, but which, be it noted, is
often found also in the writings of criminals, is the tendency to speak
of themselves or their companions, and to write autobiographies,
abandoning themselves without restraint to the torrent of ambition or
love. But with insane persons the form of expression is much less
artificial than that used by criminals, in whose writings one finds more
coherence but less creative power and originality.

The use of assonances in place of reasoning is entirely peculiar to the
insane, as also the use of special words, or words used in a peculiar
sense, and the exaggerated importance attributed to the most trifling
things.

    “_C’est le travail des fous d’épuiser leurs cervelles_
    _Sur des riens fatigants, sur quelques bagatelles_,”

said Hécart in his _Gualana_, which, by the way, is only the work of a
mattoid.

Many of them, though fewer than among the mattoids, mingle drawing with
poetry, as though neither art by itself were sufficient for the impetus
of their ideas. Their style lacks the polish which comes of much
elaboration, but abounds in incisive and vigorous sentences, so that it
often equals, and even surpasses, the productions of calmer and more
refined art.

_Passion._--This should not cause surprise any more than the tendency to
versification in individuals who, before losing their reason, were
ignorant of prosody, when it is remembered that poetry--as Byron well
said and demonstrated in his own person--is the expression of passion
under excitement, and grows in vigour and effectiveness as the
excitement increases.

That rhythm can relieve and express abnormal psychic excitement much
better than prose can be deduced from the poetic inspirations of
drunkards, as well as from the spontaneous affirmations of insane poets.

    “_Je vous-écris en vers, n’en soyez point choqué,_
     _En prose je ne sais exprimer ma pensée_,”

an insane criminal wrote to Arboux, clearly explaining this
tendency.[299]

A lunatic at Pesaro gave this reason for some of his verses: “Poetry is
a spontaneous emanation from the mind--poetry is the cry of the soul
pierced by a thousand griefs.”[300]

_Atavism._--Vico had already guessed, and Buckle, at a later date, has
admirably explained that, among primitive peoples, all thinkers and
sages were poets. In fact, the earliest histories were put into a fixed
form and handed down by the bards of Gaul, or by the Toolkolos of Tibet;
likewise in America,[301] the Deccan,[302] Africa,[303] and
Oceania.[304] Ellis writes that the Polynesians have recourse to their
ballads as to historical documents when any question arises regarding
the deeds of their ancestors. And as in ancient India, so also in
mediæval Europe, the sciences were explained in verse. Montucla speaks
of a mathematical treatise of the thirteenth century written in verse;
an Englishman versified the Institutes of Justinian, and a Pole wrote a
rhyming work on heraldry.

History, properly so called, though written in prose was in the Middle
Ages no less fabulous and full of fantastic absurdities and puns than
poetry. Troyes was derived from Troy, Nuremberg from Nero, the Saracens
from Sara; Mahomet was a cardinal; Naples was built on a foundation of
eggs; after certain victories of the Turks there were children born with
22 or 23 instead of 32 teeth. Turpin, the Macaulay of those times,
relates in his chronicle that the walls of Pampeluna fell as soon as the
followers of Charlemagne had begun to pray. Ferrante was 20 cubits in
height, and had a face a cubit in length. In short, the history of those
days was the same as the fairy tales still told at rustic firesides,
from which we can gather nothing but the uniform quality of human
imbecility which becomes more fantastic the more ignorant it is.

A tendency to revert to ancestral conditions appears even in the prose
of the mattoid or insane. Thus Tanzi and Riva,[305] speaking of some
works by monomaniacs write as follows:--

“For the demonomaniacs of a hundred years ago--belated representatives
of mediæval mysticism, who typify the ancient form of _paranoia_--are
now substituted the modern paranoiacs; new alchemists who, with their
pseudo-scientific delusions, and their vainglorious phrases, revive in
our day the style and thoughts of Trithemius, Agrippa, Paracelsus, and
other men of the sixteenth century who were strange, but learned and
venerated students of occult science and magic. Paranoia follows the
path of humanity through the centuries, undergoing, with a certain
delay, all its changes, though often separated from it only by a slight
interval. As an example of this latter kind we may take the following
passage from an extremely long autobiography, written by a paranoiac, in
which the acute and accurate account of his own adventures is found in
company with insane statements like the following:--

“‘It ought to be known that the aristocracy, or persons descended from
them, secrete a certain, as yet undefined, substance which produces
electricity. In this way it is easy to understand how there can be
communication between one nobly-born person and another--if one thinks
for a moment of the telegraph and its electric batteries. In this manner
two nobles, being placed in communication, act upon each other as
electric batteries, transmitting every movement and thought by means of
a thread, as if the idea and way of thinking were so many strokes on the
part of the manipulator of the telegraphic instrument. The system, as
may be understood, is infinitesimal, for thought, transmitted from one
side, forms on the other as many infinitesimal points as there are atoms
forming the idea.’”

MM. Riva and Tanzi observe that many of the ancient alchemists expressed
themselves in precisely the same way.

“So,” they continue, “nothing could be easier than to recognize a born
paranoiac in the King of Bavaria,[306] misanthropic, vain, ambitious,
mystical, romantic, voluble, subject to hallucinations, eccentric in his
acts, his habits, his judgment and his conduct, perverted in his
æsthetic tastes, in love, in the ethical sentiments, exaggerated and
unbalanced in everything. He was so profoundly impressed with the stamp
of mediæval atavism that political journalism--hitting the mark with
unconsciously scientific correctness--designated him as a Sir Percival
come to life again.”

The pathologic and atavistic origin of many of the literary productions
of the insane explains the frequent inequalities of the style, which is
as feeble and slovenly when the excitement ceases, as it was at first
splendid and vigorous, and the abrupt transition from stanzas worthy of
a classic author to the scribbling of an idiot. This origin also
accounts for the extreme contradictions to be found in the writings of
one and the same author--as is seen in Farina and Lazzaretti--their
fondness for aphorisms and detached periods, the abrupt and disconnected
character of their style--which is both primitive and childish--and the
monotonous repetition of certain words or phrases, recalling the verses
of the Bible or the suras of the Koran. It also explains their
propensity for continually dwelling on the same subject, nearly always
connected with matters out of the line of their own studies, and (what
is more important) of no advantage to themselves or others. Their works
are nearly always autobiographical.

_Conclusion._--Summing up what has been said, there is a special
organization in all the writings of madmen, even the absurdest--a true
finality, as Paulhan calls it.

“I understand by this,” he says, “that, as soon as one psychic element
exists, it tends to call forth others. It is not the totality of the
mind--if it is not itself co-ordinated--which determines the appearance
of phenomena, but the elements. That is to say, what is already
systematized in the mind tends to acquire a more complete
systematization. If it is a sensation, it will tend to awaken
particular, precise, and appropriate ideas or acts; if it is a general
tendency--a pre-established mental organization--it will tend to make
the mind interpret in such or such a manner the sensations which reach
it.

“As every psychic element is systematic, and as, when finality is not to
be found in the totality of a psychic organism, or of a series of
actions, or a theory, or an argument, or a passion (and in this case all
these facts are not really psychic elements), it exists in the elements.
This tendency on the part of the elements to systematic association,
exercising itself without higher control, without general direction,
ends in producing numerous discords in the totality of psychic
operations. The result is somewhat as though all the musicians in an
orchestra were to play different tunes in as many different keys.

“When, in the constitution of society, an association is dissolved, a
law of finality is broken and the elements (the human beings who formed
the association) are restored to individual life. They then enter upon
new forms of social activity. If, for example, a factory is closed, the
men and women who worked there and were united by a systematic
association, go to work again, each on his or her own account, either
separately, or in new associations, in which some of them may chance to
meet again. The same thing takes place with the psychic elements,
wherever, from one cause or another, the bond which united them is
broken; they enter into new associations where they work, each on its
own account, at the risk of producing nothing but incoherence. This
isolated activity of the elements is met with in a striking manner in
mental disease.

“The pun is a form of this disorder. On analyzing it, we find that it
consists essentially in this: A sound employed in a particular complexus
(consisting of the sound, the ideas, and the systematized images
constituting the signification of the sound), itself forming part of a
more complex system, separates itself at least partially from these two
systems, and becomes associated with other systems of ideas and images.
The association through a resemblance between certain parts of the
words--for example, by means of rhyme--is an essentially analogous fact.
Here it is a sound which, systematically associated with other sounds,
allies itself at the same time with different sounds, in order to form
simultaneously, or at short intervals, systems which do not harmonise
together. Among the latter class may be reckoned the greater number of
_lapsus linguæ_ and _lapsus calami_.

“Examples of this abound. M. Regnard has cited several pieces of verse
written by madmen, which show in a high degree the mode of elementary
systematic association. Sometimes one observes a remnant of intellectual
co-ordination, as in the following lines, in which, however, incoherence
is also abundantly manifested:--

    “‘_J’aime le feu de la fougère_
     _Ne durant pas, mais pétillant;_
     _La fumée est âcre de goût._
     _Mais des cendres de: là Fou j’erre_
     _On peut tirer en s’amusant_
     _Deux sous d’un sel qui lave tout,_
     _De soude, un sel qui lave tout._’[307]

At other times sense disappears altogether, as in these lines, also
quoted by M. Regnard, and composed by a patient whose mania was that of
self-conceit, and who had been insane for twenty-five years:--

    “‘_Magnan! à mon souhait, médecin_ Magnan _ime,_
     _Adore de mon sort la force qui ... t’anime_.

           *       *       *       *       *

    _Admirant son beau crâne ... autre remord de Phèdre,_
     _Nargue Legrand du Saulle et sois un Grand du Cèdre._’[308]

A good example of this phenomenon is afforded by the patient, observed
by Trousseau, who wrote down more than five hundred pages of words
connected with one another by assonance or sense: _Chat_, _chapeau_,
_peau_, _manchon_, _main_, _manches_, _robe_, _rose_, _jupon_, _pompon_,
_bouquet_, _bouquetière_, _cimetière_, _bière_, _&c._[309]

“One need not be either insane or imbecile to make puns and associate
words together on account of superficial resemblances. In this case,
instead of being a permanent dissociation of the more complex systems,
it is a momentary dissociation which gives rise to the phenomenon.
Nothing is more natural--when one feels the need of unbending one’s
mind--than to restore to themselves the psychic elements retained in
complex systems not necessary to life, and to allow them a liberty which
they sometimes abuse. To continue the above comparison--which may be
carried a long way--the workmen in the factory are not always at work;
they have their moments of rest and recreation, and then usually occupy
themselves with less complex systems.”[310]

Those most prone to these rhythmic manifestations are, in my opinion
(which is borne out by Adriani and Toselli), chronic maniacs, alcoholic
maniacs, and paralytics in the early stage--in whom, however, there is
apt to be more rhyme than verse, and more verse than sense. Melancholy
patients would take the next place, owing to the small number of these
found in asylums; they seem to find in versification a relief from their
habitual silence, or a defence against imaginary persecutions. This is
a much more important fact than would appear at first sight, when
connected with another, already well known, viz., that all great
thinkers and poets are constitutionally inclined to melancholy.




