CHAPTER IV.

SANE MEN OF GENIUS.

Their unperceived
defects--Richelieu--Sesostris--Foscolo--Michelangelo--Darwin.


But a graver objection is that afforded by those few men of genius who
have completed their intellectual orbit without aberration, neither
depressed by misfortune nor thrown out of their course by madness.

Such have been Galileo, Leonardo da Vinci, Voltaire, Machiavelli,
Michelangelo, Darwin. Each one of these showed, by the ample volume and
at the same time the symmetrical proportion of the skull, force of
intellect restrained by the calm of the desires. Not one of them allowed
his great passion for truth and beauty to stifle the love of family and
country. They never changed their faith or character, never swerved from
their aim, never left their work half completed. What assurance, what
faith, what ability they showed in their undertakings; and, above all,
what moderation and unity of character they preserved in their lives!
Though they, too, had to experience--after undergoing the sublime
paroxysm of inspiration--the torture inflicted by ignorant hatred, and
the discomfort of uncertainty and exhaustion, they never, on that
account, deviated from the straight road. They carried out to the end
the one cherished idea which formed the aim and purpose of their lives,
calm and serene, never complaining of obstacles, and falling into but a
few mistakes--mistakes which, in lesser men, might even have passed for
discoveries.

But I have already answered, in the opening pages of this book, the
objection furnished by these rare exceptions, pointing out that epilepsy
and moral insanity (which is its first variety) often pass unobserved,
not only in distinguished men, the prestige of whose name and work
dazzles our judgment, and prevents our discerning them, but in those
criminals to whom such researches might at least restore self-respect,
by depriving them of all responsibility.

Who, but for the revelations of some of his intimate friends, would have
suspected that Cavour was repeatedly subject to attacks of suicidal
mania, or thought that Richelieu was epileptic? No one would have paid
any attention to the morbid impulsiveness of Foscolo, or recorded it as
a symptom, if Davis had not examined his skull after death. Who could
make any assertion with regard to the moral sense of Sesostris? Yet, as
Arved Barine justly remarks,[479] his skull completely corresponds to
the criminal type. The low and narrow forehead, prominent superciliary
arch, thick eyebrows, eyes set close together, long, narrow, aquiline
nose, hollow temples, projecting cheek-bones, strong jaws; the
expression not intelligent, but animal, fierce, proud, and majestic; the
head small in proportion to the body, are all so many indications of the
most complete absence of moral sense.

In all the biographies of Michelangelo we do not discover one spot on
that gentle and yet robust soul, who trembled for the sorrows of his
country as at the expression of beauty. But the publication of his
letters,[480] and the keen researches of Parlagreco,[481] have revealed
physical anomalies never before suspected.

One of the most important is his complete indifference to women. This
may be observed in his works, and his masterpieces were all
masculine--Moses, Lorenzo, Giuliano de’ Medici, &c. He never used, it
appears, the living female model, though he made use of corpses; his
Bacchante is a virago with masculine muscles, unformed breasts and no
feminine touch. In his many love sonnets, written rather to follow the
prevailing fashion than from any true inspiration of passion, none bear
the mark of being addressed to real women; only fourteen times, it is
said, does the word “donna” occur. On the other hand, in the Barbera
Collection, Sonnets xviii. and xii. show a very marked admiration for
the male, and Varchi considers that these are addressed to Cavalieri who
was of great physical beauty. There are in existence two of his letters
addressed to Cavalieri (July 28, 1523, and July 28, 1532), which seem to
be written to a mistress, and in which, humiliating himself, he swears
that, if banished from the other’s heart, he will die. There is a
similar letter written to Angelini.

This moral anomaly, which he would share with many artists, Cellini,
Sodoma, &c., is not the only one met with. “In his letters,” writes
Parlagreco, “may be seen constant contradictions between ideas that are
great and generous, and others that are puerile; between will and
speech; between thought and action; extreme irritability, inconstant
affection, great activity in doing good, sudden sympathies, great
outbursts of enthusiasm, great fears, sometimes unconsciousness of his
own actions, marvellous modesty in the field of art, unreasonable vanity
in the appearances of life--these are the various psychical
manifestations in the life of Buonarroti which lead me to believe that
the great artist was affected by a neuropathic condition bordering on
hysteria.”

Every day in his old age he discovered some sin in his past life, and he
sent money to Florence for masses to be said and for alms to the poor,
and to enable poor girls to be married, and, which is stranger, to be
made nuns. All this was to gain Paradise (Lett. 187, 214, 240, 330), to
save his soul--he who had said: “It is not strange that the monks should
spoil a chapel [at the Vatican], since they have known how to spoil the
whole world.”

At some moments he feels that his conscience is clean and then he
desires to die, so that he may not fall back into evil; but then his
discouragement returns, and he believes (strange blasphemy), that it was
a sin to have been born an artist.

    “_Conosco di quant’ era d’error carca_
    _L’affettuosa fantasia_
    _Che_ l’arte _mi fece idolo e monarca_ ...
    _Le parole del mondo mi hanno tolto_
    _Il tempo dato a contemplar Iddio._”

And he believes himself destined by God to a long life simply that he
may complete the fabric of St. Peter’s.

In old age he who had shown so little vanity where his work was
concerned, and so much modesty in speaking of it, went about studying
how he could best exhibit the nobility of his descent, claiming to trace
it in a direct line from the Counts of Canossa, a claim which, even if
valid, would not be worth a finger of his Moses.

Michelangelo tenderly loved his father and brother and nephews, and
enabled them to live in easy circumstances; yet in his letters to them
he frequently shows himself suspicious and treats them unjustly. In
1544, he fell seriously ill at Rome. His nephew naturally hastened to
his bedside. Michelangelo became very angry and wrote: “You are come to
kill me and to see what I leave behind.... Know that I have made my will
and that there is nothing here for you to think about. Therefore, go in
peace and do not write to me more.” Three months after, he changed his
tone. “I will not fail in what I have often thought about, that is, in
helping you.” He has himself left a confession of his almost morbid
melancholy in a letter (97), to Sebastiano del Piombo: “Yesterday
evening I was happy because I escaped from my mad and melancholy
humour.”

Without the recent biographical and autobiographical notes published by
his son,[482] no one could have imagined that Darwin, a model father and
citizen, so self-controlled and even so free from vanity, was a
neuropath. His son tells us that for forty years he never enjoyed
twenty-four hours of health like other men. Of the eight years devoted
to the study of the cirripedes, two, as he himself writes, were lost
through illness. Like all neuropaths he could bear neither heat nor
cold; half an hour of conversation beyond his habitual time was
sufficient to cause insomnia and hinder his work on the following day.
He suffered also from dyspepsia, from spinal anæmia and giddiness (which
last is known to be frequently the equivalent of epilepsy); and he
could not work more than three hours a day. He had curious crotchets.
Finding that eating sweets made him ill, he resolved not to touch them
again, but was unable to keep his resolution, unless he had repeated it
aloud. He had a strange passion for paper--writing the rough drafts of
his correspondence on the back of proof-sheets, and of the most
important MSS. which were thus rendered difficult to decipher. He often
instituted what he himself called “fool’s experiments”--_e.g._, having a
bassoon played close to the cotyledons of a plant.[483] When about to
make an experiment, he seemed to be urged on by some inward force. From
a morbid dislike to novelty, he used the millimetric tables of an old
book which he knew to be inaccurate, but to which he was accustomed. He
would not change his old chemical balance though aware that it was
untrustworthy; he refused to believe in hypnotism, and also, at first,
in the discovery of prehistoric stone weapons.[484] He frequently, says
his daughter, inverted his sentences, both in speaking and writing, and
had a difficulty in pronouncing some letters, especially _w_. Like
Skoda, Rockitanski, and Socrates, he had a short snub nose, and his ears
were large and long. Nor were degenerative characteristics wanting among
his ancestors. It is true that he reckoned among them several men of
intellect and almost of genius, such as Robert (1682), a botanist and
intelligent observer; and Edward, author of a _Gamekeeper’s Manual_,
full of acute observations on animals. His father had great powers of
observation; but his paternal grandfather, Erasmus--poet and naturalist
at the same time--had a passionate temper and an impediment in his
speech. One of his sons, Charles, a poet and collector, resembled him in
this respect. Finally, another uncle, Erasmus, a man of some intellect,
a numismatist and statistician, ended by madness and suicide.

It might be objected that the fact of such different forms of
psychosis--melancholy, moral insanity, monomania--being found either
complete or undeveloped in men of genius, excludes the special psychosis
of genius, and still more that of epilepsy. But it may be answered that
recent research, which has enlarged the domain of epilepsy, has also
demonstrated that, apart from impulsive and hallucinatory delusions,
epilepsy may be superadded to any form of mental alienation, especially
megalomania and moral insanity. And, as is the case in nearly all
degenerative psychoses, undeveloped forms of mental disease, and
recurring multiform delusions brought on by the most trivial causes,
especially predominate in epilepsy.




