CHAPTER II.

ANALOGY OF SANE TO INSANE GENIUS.

Want of character--Pride--Precocity--Alcoholism--Degenerative
signs--Obsession--Men of genius in revolutions.


But these characteristics are not confined to insane genius; they are
also met with, though far less conspicuously among the great men freest
from any suspicion of insanity, those of whom the insane geniuses just
mentioned are but the exaggeration and caricature. It is thus that the
complete and perfect character, while conspicuously seen in Socrates,
Columbus, Cavour, Christ, Galileo, Spinoza, is not to be found in
Napoleon, Bacon, Cicero, Seneca, Alcibiades, Alexander, Julius Cæsar,
Machiavelli, Carlyle, Frederick II., Dumas, Byron, Comte, Bulwer Lytton,
Petrarch, Aretino, Gibbon.

Self-esteem, carried to an almost incredible point, has been noticed in
Napoleon, Hegel, Dante, Victor Hugo, Lassalle, Balzac, and Comte; and,
as we have already seen, even in men of talent, but not of genius, as
Cagnoli, Lucius, Porta, &c.

Precocity, moreover, does not fail to appear in normal men of genius,
such as Mozart, Raphael, Michelangelo, Charles XII., Stuart Mill,
D’Alembert, Lulli, Cowley, Otway, Prior, Pope, Addison, Burns, Keats,
Sheffield, Hugo.

Among these we also find the abuse of alcohol, sexual deficiencies, or
excesses followed by sterility, the tendency to vagrancy, and impulsive
acts of violence, alternating, or associated, with convulsive movements.
Bismarck once said to Beust, “Do you ever feel the wish to break
anything as an amusement?” Like Gladstone and the Belgian Malon, he
often takes exercise by cutting down trees like a woodman.

We have also found, in some of them, numerous anomalies in the shape of
the skull and conformation of the brain. Degenerative symptoms, such as
stammering, lefthandedness, precocity, sterility, abound in both, as
well as divergences from ancestral character.

There is also seen in them that invasion, or rather possession, by their
subject which transforms the creature of the imagination into a true
hallucination, or an auto-suggestion. Flaubert says that his characters
seized upon him, and pursued him, or that, more correctly speaking, he
lived through them. When he described the poisoning of Madame Bovary, he
felt the taste of arsenic on his tongue, and showed symptoms of actual
poisoning so far as to vomit. Dickens, too, was affected by sorrow and
compassion for his characters, as if they had been his own
children.[450]

“To my mind,” writes Edmond de Goncourt, “my brother died of over-work,
and more especially the elaboration of literary form, the chiselling of
phrases, the labour of style. I can still see him taking up again pieces
which we had written together, and which, at first, had satisfied us,
working at them for hours, for half a day at a time, with an almost
angry persistency....

“You must remember, in short, that all our work--and in this, perhaps,
consists its originality, an originality dearly bought--has its root in
nervous illness; that we drew our pictures of disease from our own
experience, and that, by dint of analyzing, studying, dissecting
ourselves, we at last attained a kind of super-acute sensitiveness,
which was wounded on all sides by the infinite littlenesses of life. I
say _we_, for, when we wrote _Charles Demailly_, I was more diseased
than he. Alas! he took the first place, later on. _Charles
Demailly!_--it is a strange thing to write one’s own history fifteen
years in advance.”[451]

The obsession of genius sometimes attains such a point as actually to
create a double personality, and transform a philanthropist into an
overbearing tyrant, a melancholy man into a jovial reveller.

Finally, we have found, even in the sanest and most complete genius, the
incomplete and rudimentary forms of mania--as melancholy, megalomania,
hallucinations, &c.--a fact which helps to explain the convictions of
certain prophets and founders of dynasties, convictions so deeply rooted
as to serve the purpose of inspiration, as far as the mass of the people
were concerned. Maudsley says that one of the conditions essential to
the originality of genius is a disposition to be dissatisfied with the
existing state of things.

We have also met with the use of peculiar words which is so frequent a
characteristic of monomania, and also those uncertainties which reach
their extreme point in the madness of doubt.

The whole difference resolves itself, at bottom, into this: that in sane
genius the symptoms are less exaggerated, the double personality is less
conspicuous, the choice of subjects connected with madness less frequent
(Shakespeare, Goncourt, and Daudet being exceptions), and the note of
absurdity less emphasized. This, however, is scarcely ever wanting,
inasmuch as nothing is closer to the ridiculous than the sublime.

It is also not without importance to note that, whenever genius appears
in a race, the number of the insane also increases. Of this fact we have
found remarkable proofs among the Italian, German, and English Jews. So
much is this the case, that it is the custom, in German lunatic asylums,
to reckon genius in the parents among the etiological elements of
insanity. Both genius and insanity are influenced by violent passions at
the time of conception, by advanced age, or alcoholism in the parents;
and as, in all degenerate natures, genius is only exceptionally
transmitted, it almost always assumes the form of more and more
aggravated neurosis, and rapidly disappears, thanks to that beneficent
sterility through which nature provides for the elimination of monsters.
Though all the proofs we have given should have been forgotten, the
fact would be quite sufficiently demonstrated by the pedigrees of Peter
the Great, the Cæsars, and Charles V., in which epileptics, men of
genius, and criminals, alternate with ever greater frequency, till the
line ends in idiocy and sterility.[452]

In all these three types (insanity, insane genius, and sane genius), we
see at work, with nearly equal intensity, the influence of race,[453] of
hot climates, of diminutions (unless greatly exaggerated), in the degree
of atmospheric pressure, and, in frequent cases, of maladies accompanied
by a high temperature.

But the most convincing proof of all is offered by the insane who,
though not possessed of genius, apparently acquire it, for a time, while
under treatment. These cases prove that geniality, originality, artistic
and æsthetic creation may show themselves in the least predisposed
natures, as a consequence of mental alienation. Finally, not the least
important proof is contained in the singular phenomenon of the mattoid,
who, as distinguished from the really insane, has all the appearances,
without the reality, of genius.

Taking all this into consideration, we may confidently affirm that
genius is a true degenerative psychosis belonging to the group of moral
insanity, and may temporarily spring out of other psychoses, assuming
their forms, though keeping its own special peculiarities, which
distinguish it from all others.

The identity of genius with moral insanity is seen in that general
alteration of the affective instincts, which shows itself, more or less
disguised, in all,[454] even in those rare altruistic persons with a
genius for goodness to whom the name of saints has been given. This also
explains their longevity.

There is, beyond all doubt, some connection between all these
observations, and the fact, established by Tamburini and myself, that
the best artists of the asylums were all morally insane.

It should be remembered here, that the Klephts were brigands, and that
the moral character of many great conquerors has been so far subject to
alteration as to make of them true brigands on a large scale. Arved
Barine, in noticing the beauty of countenance of certain brigands
figured in my work in _L’uomo Delinquente_, has very justly
observed[455] that “such a profession requires high intellectual
endowments, and precisely the same as those needed by conquerors, who
certainly have had no superabundance of moral sense. History proves that
the moral sense is in no degree a function of the intellect. Great men
have been so often devoid of it, that the world has been forced to
invent for them a special morality which may be summed up in five words,
frequently uttered by such--from Napoleon down to Benvenuto Cellini:
_Everything is permitted to genius_.”

Men of genius are among the principal factors in true revolutions.[456]
History records the saying of Tarquin that for the preservation of
despotism it was necessary to cut down the tallest heads. Carlyle
believed that the whole of history is that of great men. Emerson wrote
that every new institution might be regarded as the prolonged shadow of
some man of genius, Islamism of Mahomet, Protestantism of Calvin,
Quakerism of Fox, Methodism of Wesley, Abolitionism of Clarkson, &c. Men
of genius, wrote Flaubert,[457] summarise in a single type many
separate personalities, and bring new persons to consciousness in the
human race. This is one of the causes of their immense influence. And
not only are they not misoneistic; they are haters of old things and
ardent lovers of the new and the unknown. Garibaldi, when he pushed on
into almost unknown regions of America, said, “I love the unknown.”[458]
And Christ carried his idea of the new world, that was about to appear,
as far as complete communism. Many men of genius rule beyond the tomb:
Cæsar was never so powerful (wrote Michelet) as when he was a corpse;
and so William the Silent. Max Nordau even claims that all human
progress is owing to despots of genius. “Every revolution is the work of
a minority whose individuality cannot conform to conditions which were
neither calculated nor created for them.” The only real innovators known
to history are tyrants endowed with ability and knowledge. “No
revolution succeeds without a leader,” wrote Machiavelli; and elsewhere,
“A multitude without a head is useless.” This is natural, because the
man of genius, being essentially original and a lover of originality, is
the natural enemy of traditions and conservatism: he is the born
revolutionary, the precursor and the most active pioneer of
revolutions.




