CHAPTER II.

ART IN THE INSANE.

     Geographical distribution--Profession--Influence of the special
     form of
     alienation--Originality--Eccentricity--Symbolism--Obscenity--Criminality
     and moral insanity--Uselessness--Insanity as a
     subject--Absurdity--Uniformity--Summary--Music among the insane.


Though the artistic tendency is very pronounced, and might almost be
called a general characteristic, in some varieties of insanity, few
authors have paid sufficient attention to it.

The only exceptions are Tardieu, who, in his _Études Médico-Légales sur
la folie_, remarks that the drawings of the insane are of great
importance from the point of view of forensic medicine; Simon,[311] who,
in speaking of drawing among megalomaniacs, observes that the
imagination appears in them in inverse proportion to the intellect; and
Frigerio, who some time later gave a survey of the subject in an
excellent essay, published in the _Diario del Manicomio di Pesaro_.[312]
Since then I have been able to make a completer examination of this
subject, thanks to the curious documents supplied to me by MM. Riva,
Toselli, Lolli, Frigerio, Tamburini, Maragliano, and Maxime du Camp.

By comparing their observations with my own, I find a total of 108
mental patients with artistic tendencies, of which:--46 were towards
painting, 10 sculpture, 11 engraving, 8 music, 5 architecture, 28
poetry.

The prevailing psychopathic forms in these 108 cases were:--In 25,
sensorial monomania and that of persecution; 21 dementia, 16
megalomania, 14 acute or intermittent mania, 8 melancholia, 8 general
paralysis, 5 moral insanity, 2 epilepsy.

It is evident that those which predominate are the congenital and least
readily curable forms (monomania and moral insanity), together with
dementia, and those forms which it accompanies, or in which it is latent
(megalomania and paralysis).

Let us now consider the special characteristics of these insane artists.

_Geographical distribution._--In the districts where the artistic
tendency is more marked among the sane, the number of insane artists is
also higher. In fact, I have found very few of the latter at Turin,
Pavia, or Reggio, while at Perugia, Lucca, and Siena they abound.

_Profession._--Only in a few cases could the tendency be explained by
profession or habits acquired before the appearance of the disease. We
find among the insane artists mentioned above--8 ex-painters or
sculptors, 10 ex-architects, carpenters, or cabinet makers; 10 former
schoolmasters or priests, 1 telegraphist, 2 students, 6 sailors,
soldiers, or officers of engineers.

Among modern painters affected with insanity, we may note Gill, Cham,
Chirico, Mancini, and others.

In some cases, former tendencies were accentuated by insanity. Thus, a
mechanician made drawings of machines, two sailors constructed models of
ships, a major-domo traced, on the floor, pictures of tables prepared
for a banquet, with pyramids of fruit. At Reggio, a cabinet-maker carved
some very fine foliage and ornaments; a naval officer at Genoa at first
carved models of ships, and afterwards was continually occupied in
depicting--though he had never learnt to paint--scenes at sea which, he
said, consoled him for being debarred from his favourite element.

Sometimes these men were inspired by insanity with a strange energy in
their work, “just as if,” as MM. de Paoli and Adriani wrote to me, “they
had been paid for it. They cover the walls, the tables, and even the
floor, with painting.” One of them, a painter, who had formerly only
reached mediocrity, attained such perfection through his malady, that a
copy of one of Raphael’s Madonnas, executed by him during one of his
attacks, gained a prize medal at the Exhibition.

Mignoni, the celebrated painter of Reggio, who became an inmate of the
asylum at that town on account of dementia and megalomania, remained
idle there for fourteen years. At last, at the suggestion of Dr. Zani,
he resumed his brush, and covered the walls of the asylum with excellent
frescoes. One of them represented the story of Count Ugolino so vividly,
that one of the patients began to throw meat at it, so that the father
and children might not die of hunger, and the grease spots are still to
be seen.[313]

Of eight painters, whose history Adriani has related to me, four kept
their former skill while under the influence of acute or intermittent
mania; in two others, it was so far weakened that one of them, after his
recovery, sincerely deplored the work done during his illness.

_Influence of the special form of Insanity._--In many cases, the choice
of subject is inspired by the malady. A melancholiac was continually
carving a figure of a man with a skull in his hand. A woman affected
with megalomania was always working the word DIO (God) into her
embroidery. Most monomaniacs habitually allude to their imaginary
misfortunes by means of special emblems.

A monomaniac, who laboured under the delusion that he was being
persecuted, drew his enemies pursuing him on one side of the picture and
Justice defending him on the other.

Alcoholic maniacs often make an excessive use of yellow in their
pictures. One painter, in whom alcohol had completely destroyed the
sense of colour, became very skilful in the rendering of white, and,
between his drunken fits, became the best painter of snow-scenes in
France.

An artist of note, C----, when affected with general paralysis, lost his
sense of proportion, _e.g._, he began to sketch a tree which, if drawn
in its entirety, would have reached beyond the frame of the picture. He
collected the poorest oleographs and admired them, and coloured
everything green.

It is more usual, however, for insanity to transform into painters
persons who have never been accustomed to handle a brush, than for it to
improve skilled artists. Sometimes the disease, while suppressing some
qualities of value to art, causes the appearance of others which did not
previously exist, and gives to all a peculiar character.

Insanity changed Luke Clennell from a painter to a poet,[314] while
Melmour, a physician who fell into a state of dementia after the loss of
his wife, who died on their wedding-day, took to literature and lost his
previous aptitudes.

“Exaggeration pushed to its extreme--to the improbable, or even the
impossible,” says Regnard, “is one characteristic of paralytics. One of
these madmen painted a man touching the stars with his head and the
earth with his feet.”[315]

Daudet, in _Jack_, speaks of insane artists whose pictures seemed to
represent earthquakes or the inside of a ship during a storm.

Individuals, who previously had not the remotest idea of art, are
impelled by disease to paint, especially at the periods of strongest
excitement. B----, a mason, became a painter while in the Pesaro asylum.
His attacks of mania were always announced by an outbreak of his
tendency to draw caricatures of the hospital staff, whom he condemned,
in effigy, to the strangest punishments. For instance, he painted the
cook, a stout and ruddy man, in the attitude of an _Ecce Homo_, behind a
grating which prevented him from touching the most appetising viands.
This was the penalty for having refused B---- one of his favourite
dishes.

The grotesque apotheosis of himself, painted by the pederast and
megalomaniac, R----, in which he excretes and fecundates eggs which
symbolise worlds, is characteristic of the boundless vanity and
unbridled imagination of megalomaniacs and paralytics.

Among the pictures executed by the patients at San Servolo, the most
curious is one by a lunatic who, in his lucid intervals, paints fairly
well, though with excessive minuteness of detail; but during his attacks
this minuteness is so far exaggerated as to become grotesque.

Nothing but an intense religious monomania could have inspired the
singular self-crucifixion of the Venetian shoemaker, Matteo Lovat. I
have been able to procure an authentic picture of this strange
performance which is reproduced below. Shortly afterwards Lovat died in
an asylum.[316]

[Illustration]

One patient, G----, was a poor peasant woman, utterly uneducated, in
whose family _pellagra_ and insanity were both hereditary. In the long
isolation required by her state, she developed great skill (quite
unknown before her illness) in embroidering on linen, with coloured
threads pulled from her clothing, an extraordinary number of figures,
which were faithful representations of her delusions. Her autobiography
is, so to speak, traced in this embroidery; in every piece of work she
has represented herself, sometimes struggling with the nurses or the
nuns, sometimes herding cows, or occupied with other rustic work.
Elsewhere she would depict tables spread for meals, with an infinite
variety of accessories. But the most singular thing is that the outlines
are drawn with a clearness which would be the envy of a professional
caricaturist; no shading whatever, four stitches, representing nose,
eyes, and mouth, were arranged with so much artistic judgment as to show
clearly the individual expression of each face.

Another artist in the same line, though of less striking gifts, is a
certain I----, suffering from moral insanity, who shows numerous
degenerative symptoms. She, too, embroiders figures of men and women
with considerable skill, but always in harmony with her perverted sexual
tendencies.[317]

_Originality._--Disease often develops (as we have already seen in the
case of insane authors) an originality of invention which may also be
observed in mattoids, because their imagination, freed from all
restraint, allows of creations from which a more calculating mind would
shrink, for fear of absurdity, and because intensity of conviction
supports and perfects the work.

At Pesaro there was a woman who drew, or embroidered, by a method
peculiar to herself, unravelling cloth, and fastening the threads on
paper by means of saliva.

Another embroideress, formerly given to drink, executed butterflies
which seemed to be alive. She had applied to white embroidery the
methods of coloured work, and was able to produce marvellous effects of
light and shade.

At Macerata a patient, with a number of pipe-stems, constructed a model
of the front of the asylum; another had the idea of representing a song
in sculpture. At Genoa, a dementia patient carved pipes out of coal.

One Zanini, at Reggio, constructed a boot which was unique of its kind,
so that, as he said, no one else should be able to put it on. This
exceptional foot-gear was open on one side, and tied up with string, its
edges were ornamental, and worked with hieroglyphics.

M. L---- of Pesaro was constantly making requests to leave the asylum.
When told that there was no means of transporting him to his home, he
set about constructing one for himself. This was a four-wheeled cart,
with an upright pole, at the top of which was a pulley with a rope
running through it. One end of the rope was fastened to the axle of the
fore-wheels, the other to that of the hind-wheels. An elastic cord was
attached to the rope for a distance of four or five centimetres, and by
pulling this, first at one end and then at the other, a person standing
on the cart was able to make the wheels go round.[318]

In many arabesques drawn by a megalomaniac, one can trace, carefully
hidden among the curves, sometimes a ship, sometimes an animal, a human
head, or a railway train, or even landscapes and towns; though the
essential character of arabesques is the absence of the human figure.

The best asylums of Italy have sent to the exhibitions of Siena and
Voghera, models in relief of their respective buildings, admirably
executed by some of the patients. That of the asylum at Reggio could be
taken to pieces, and showed the inside arrangements, staircases, rooms,
with their furniture, &c., all carefully finished. Even the trees, I am
told, were copied accurately from nature.

A canon, who had no technical knowledge of architecture, began, after an
attack of melancholia, to construct with cardboard and papier-mâché,
models of temples and amphitheatres, which excited great admiration.

Dr. Virgilio has made me a present of some portraits of Italian
specialists, nearly all of them exceedingly lifelike, the work of a
melancholia patient. The note of originality only comes out in some
accessory introduced into each picture, such as a fly, or a butterfly,
repeated persistently in every copy, or in the way in which the artist’s
name is worked into the painting, in vertical lines so as to form some
sort of decorative ornament.

A work of extreme though useless skill and originality is the
self-crucifixion of Lovat, already mentioned.

“The monomaniac, King Louis of Bavaria, was the first who entirely
understood Wagner. His prodigality in spending money, and the creation
of the theatre at Bayreuth--one of his most original conceptions--have
been known for years, but the greatest manifestation of his genius is
known only to a few. Three castles, three palaces of splendid and
indescribable beauty, rose from the earth, as if by enchantment. He
superintended even the minutest details himself. King Louis’s madness
was a dream with his eyes open. By himself, in the space of ten years,
he accomplished more than any twenty sovereigns, aided by the artistic
genius of the best ages. Certainly no one, at the present day, could
produce another such hall, 75 mètres in length (without counting the two
rooms at either end, which would bring the length up to 100 mètres), a
gallery illuminated by 17 great windows, 33 rock-crystal chandeliers, 44
candelabra, and who knows what else!”[319]

_Eccentricity._--But even originality ends by degenerating, in all, or
nearly all, into mere eccentricity, which only seems logical when one
enters into the idea of the delusion.

Simon remarks that, in manias of persecution, and in paralytic
megalomania, the greater the mental disturbance the livelier the
imagination, and the more grotesque the fancies engendered by it. He
mentions the case of a painter, who declared that he could see the
interior of the earth, filled with houses of crystal, illuminated by
electric light, and pervaded by sweet odours. He described the city of
Emma, whose inhabitants have two noses and two mouths--one for ordinary
food, the other for sweet things--a silver chin, golden hair, three or
four arms, and only one leg resting on a little wheel.[320]

These bizarre creations arise in great part from the strange
hallucinations to which the patients are subject. We may see an example
of this in the four-legged and seven-headed beasts painted by Lazzaretti
on his banners. A melancholiac made himself a cuirass of stones, to
defend himself against his enemies. Another would continue all day
drawing the map of the stains left by damp on the walls of his room.
Later on it was discovered that he believed those lines to represent the
topography of the regions which God had given him to rule over on earth.

This is one of the reasons why, sometimes, greater excellence in art is
found in cases of dementia, than in those of mania or melancholia.

_Symbolism._--Another characteristic trait of art in the insane is the
mingling of inscriptions and drawings, and, in the latter, the abundance
of symbols and hieroglyphics. All this closely recalls Japanese and
Indian pictures, and the ancient wall-paintings of Egypt, and is due in
part to the same cause at work in these--the need of helping out speech
or picture, each powerless by itself to express a given idea with the
requisite energy.

This cause is very evident in a case communicated to me by Dr. Monti, in
which an architectural design, though well and accurately drawn, was
rendered incomprehensible by the numerous inscriptions, often in rhyme,
which had been crowded into it by its author, an aphasiac, who had
suffered from dementia for fifteen years.

In some megalomaniacs this happens through the fancy they have for
expressing their ideas in a language different from that of ordinary
human beings. Such was the case of the master of the world, fully
treated of elsewhere, by M. Toselli and myself.[321]

The patient in question was a peasant named G---- L----, 63 years of age,
with an easy and confident bearing, prominent cheek-bones, spacious
forehead, and expressive and penetrating look. Cranial capacity 1544,
index 82, temperature, 37° 6´.

In the autumn of 1871 he became noted for vagrancy and excessive
loquacity; he stopped the most notable persons of the village in public
places, complaining of injustice which he alleged himself to have
suffered; he destroyed the vines, devastated the fields, and rushed
about the streets, threatening terrible vengeance.

Gradually he began to identify himself with the Deity, and believe
himself ruler of the universe, and preached in the Cathedral of Alba on
his lofty destiny. In the asylum he remained calm as long as he was able
to believe that his power was recognized by every one, but at the first
show of opposition he threatened--in the character of ruler and
personification of the elements, calling himself sometimes the son,
sometimes the brother, or at others the father of the sun--to convulse
the world with earthquakes, overthrow kingdoms and empires, and erect
his throne on the ruins. He was tired, he said, of keeping up so many
armies, and providing for so many idle persons; it would be but just if
the authorities and the rich were at least to send him a large sum of
money, to redeem themselves from what he called “the debts of death.” In
return for this payment he would allow them to live for ever. The poor
ought all to die, as useless persons, and it was preposterous that he
had to support so many madmen in his own palace. He therefore suggested
to the doctor that it would be well to cut their heads off; yet he
waited on them with the greatest unselfishness when they were ill, an
inconsistency which is among the characteristics of paranoia.

He usually bestowed his scanty earnings on some rogue whom he entrusted
with letters and commissions for the other world, addressed to the sun,
the stars, the weather, Death, the lightning, and other powers, whose
help he was in the habit of invoking, and with whom he held confidential
conversations at night. He was quite pleased when some calamity had
desolated the country, this being the beginning of the judgments
threatened by him, and a sign that the weather, the sun, or the
lightning, had obeyed him.

He kept in a trunk some roughly-fashioned crowns which, he said, were
the true royal and imperial crowns of Italy, France, and other states.
Those worn by the actual sovereigns of these states were no longer of
any value, having been usurped by wretched men, doomed to speedy
destruction, unless they paid him their _debts of death_, in letters of
exchange to the amount of several hundred millions.

But his most characteristic eccentricities were the writings in which
his delusion was manifested. Although able to read and write, he scorned
the use of the ordinary kind of writing, and, in a character of his own,
scrawled letters, orders, and cheques, to the Sun, to Death, or to the
civil and military authorities. He always had his pockets full of these
documents. His writing consisted mainly of large capital letters, mixed,
at intervals, with signs and figures indicating objects or persons. The
words are usually separated by one or two large dots, and he only wrote
some of the letters of each word (nearly always the consonants) without
any respect for the laws of syllabation. In some of his writings, the
alphabet almost entirely disappears.

For instance, in order to demonstrate his effective power, he sketched a
series of rough figures representing the elements and powers which were
his familiar spirits,--the army ready, at a sign from him, to make war
on all terrestrial powers contending with him for the dominion of the
world. These are--1. The Eternal Father. 2. The Holy Spirit. 3. St.
Martin. 4. Death. 5. Time. 6. Thunder. 7. Lightning. 8. Earthquake. 9.
The Sun. 10. The Moon. 11. Fire (his minister of war). 12. A very
powerful man who has lived ever since the beginning of the world, and is
G. L.’s brother. 13. The Lion of Hell. 14. Bread. 15. Wine. The whole is
followed of his usual signature--a two-headed eagle. Each of these
powers is also indicated by letters placed beneath the figures, thus,
the 1st=P. D. E.; the 2nd=L. S. P. S., &c.

This mixture of letters, hieroglyphics, and figurative signs,
constitutes a kind of writing recalling the phonetico-ideographic stage
through which primitive peoples (the Mexicans and Chinese certainly)
passed, before the discovery of alphabetic writing.

Among the savages of America and Australia, writing consists in a more
or less rough kind of painting; _e.g._, to indicate, “would that I had
the swiftness of a bird,” they depict a man with wings instead of
arms.[322] These characters are not so much writing as aids to memory
still further connected together and vivified by traditional songs or
stories.

Some tribes, however, have attained to a somewhat less imperfect mode,
which resembles our _rebus_; for instance, the Maya of America, to
signify a physician, painted a man with a herb in his hand and wings to
his feet; an evident allusion to the rapidity with which he is obliged
to hasten to those who require him. Rain is represented by a
bucket.[323]

The ancient Chinese represented _malice_ by means of three women,
_light_ by the sun and moon, and the verb _to listen_ by an ear between
two doors.

This primitive writing shows us that the rhetorical tropes and figures
of which our pedants are so proud, are expressions of poverty rather
than wealth on the part of the intellect. In fact, they are frequently
found in the speech of idiots and of educated deaf-mutes.

After having used this system for a considerable time, some more
civilised races, such as the Chinese and Mexicans, took another step
forward. They classified the more or less picturesque figures referred
to above, and succeeded in forming ingenious combinations which, without
directly representing the idea, indirectly suggested a reminiscence of
it, as in our charades. Besides this, to prevent any uncertainty on the
reader’s part, they placed either before or after these signs a sketch
of the object to be expressed--a scanty remnant of the actual
picture-writing of a previous age. This certainly took place at a time
when--the language once being fixed--it was observed how some people, in
writing down a given sign, recalled the sound of the words which it
suggested. Thus Itzicoatl, the name of a Mexican king, was written by
drawing a serpent (Coatl, in Mexican) and a lance (Itzli); thus, too, in
Chinese, the character _tschen_ represents _boat_, _lance_, and
_table_.[324]

Our megalomaniac, by reviving this custom, affords one more proof that,
in the visible manifestation of their thoughts, the insane frequently
revert (as also do criminals) to the prehistoric stage of civilization.
In the present case, it is quite easy to understand by what mental
process G---- came to use this mode of writing. Under the megalomaniac
delusion, believing himself lord of the elements, superior to all known
or imaginable forces, he could not make himself properly understood with
the common words of ignorant and incredulous men; neither could ordinary
writing suffice to express ideas so new and marvellous. The lion’s
claws, the eagle’s beak, the serpent’s tongue, the lightning-flash, the
sun’s rays, the arms of the savage, were much worthier of him, and more
calculated to inspire men with fear and respect for his person.

Nor is this an isolated case. One quite analogous to it is described by
Raggi in his excellent study of the writings of the insane. Prof.
Morselli has furnished me with another and still more interesting
instance.

“The patient A. T----” he writes, “was a joiner and cabinet-maker; he
had a certain skill in wood-carving, and his furniture was much sought
after.[325] About seven years ago he was attacked with mental disease,
apparently melancholia, and tried to commit suicide by throwing himself
from the roof of the town hall. He is now subject to attacks of
excitement with systematized delusions. His predominant ideas are
political--republican and anarchist--on a certain groundwork of
ambition. He fancies himself changed into some great criminal; sometimes
he is Gasperone, sometimes Il Passatore, at others Passanante. He is
always drawing or carving, and his work generally takes the form of
trophies or allegorical figures.

“The most curious of all these is a piece of carving which represents a
man dressed as a soldier, provided with wings, and standing on an
inlaid pedestal covered with allegorical inscriptions. This figure has a
trophy on its head, and other objects are carved on or around it, each
of which expresses emblematically some one of T----’s delusions. For
instance, the wings recall the fact that, when his first attack came on,
he was in the square at Porto Recanati, selling his carvings, among
which were several figures of angels, at a soldo a-piece. The ‘Medal of
the order of the Pig’ is a token of contempt, wherewith he would like to
decorate all the rich and powerful of the earth. The helmet, with a
lantern hanging to the vizor (a reminiscence of Offenbach’s _Brigands_),
symbolises the gendarmes who escorted him to the asylum. The cigar
placed crosswise (note the position) represents his disdain for kings
and tyrants; and the position of the leg recalls a fracture of that limb
sustained by him in his attempt at suicide.

“The inscriptions on the pedestal are scraps of verse or extracts from
newspapers which T---- is always quoting, and to which he attaches some
mysterious significance. They always, however, refer to the state of
slavery to which he is reduced (_i.e._, his detention in the asylum),
and the vengeance he will one day wreak on his captors.

“The most remarkable thing, however, is the trophy resting on the head
of the figure, which is the graphic expression, so to speak, of a
song[326] either written by him or adapted from other popular poetry.
Each phrase of the song has its symbol in the trophy. Thus the word
_poison_ in the first verse is represented by the cup; the _two daggers_
are likewise present; the _end of life_ and the _tomb_ are figured by a
kind of sarcophagus or closed chest; _love_ by two sprays of flowers.
The _bell_ of the second stanza is easily recognisable; the _funereal
music_ are the two trumpets crossed, lower down. The _cross_ of the
third stanza, and the _priest_ (represented by a clerical hat) are not
forgotten. It is curious that the _gallows_ should be wanting to
complete this trophy. The _spoon_ and _fork_, by the by, are T----’s
favourite implements. They denote that he eats and drinks in slavery,
or, as he says, in a convict-prison; and for this reason, he always
wears a set, carved in wood by himself, in the button-hole of his coat,
or in his cap.”

We may once more remind the reader that savages hand down their history
by associating picture-signs with poetry.

A most interesting example of elaborate symbolic faculty in a
monomaniac, combined with higher artistic power than is usually found
among the insane, has been recorded with very full illustrations by Dr.
William Noyes.[327] This patient studied art at Paris under Gérome and
returned to America to become an illustrator of books and magazines. He
developed systematic religious delusions, and frequently worked them out
in very beautiful and artistic shapes, nine of which, all executed in
the asylum at which he was confined, are here reproduced. The circular
design is one of a series of twelve charts (one for each of the tribes
of Israel) illustrating the progress of the Holy Spirit. They were all
delicately coloured in water colours, the fine shading making it very
difficult to give in black and white an adequate idea of the beauty of
the original.

[Illustration]

“In the centre is the dove representing the Holy Spirit, and surrounding
it are seven different crosses [St. Andrew, St. Colomba, St. George, St.
Michael, The Prophet, St. Evangeli, Royal Priesthood], and a close study
will show the seven crosses, most ingeniously worked together. It is
probable that in looking at the design closely for the first time one
will suddenly see a new cross take shape before his eyes, and this
indeed is what the patient says occurs with him. In describing the
crosses he will say, for example, that in drawing the cross of St.
Andrew the lines suddenly took a new shape and he found he had also
made a cross of St. Michael. This to him is a matter of deep
significance, and he feels that, his work is directly controlled by a
higher power, and that the work of his fancy is really inspired.

“Outside these central crosses are the names of three ancient deities
who were each characterized by some special attribute, and under these
the parts of the body that the artist conceives these deities especially
to have represented, and then comes the name of the Biblical personage
in whom these elements were finally exemplified and embodied. To the
left of the dove is Venus, representing Blood, exemplified in Moses;
above is Osiris, representing Flesh, embodied in Adam; and to the right
Psyche, representing Water, typified in Noah. These three are but the
gross and material parts of Man, representing indeed necessary steps in
his progress through life, but secondary and subordinate to the higher
part of his nature represented by Truth and the Spirit--which receive
their ultimate embodiment in _Christ_.

“The Lion denotes Might, and the Eagle signifies Emulation; but it is
uncertain just what symbolism is connected with the serpent twining
round the cross, and the open book crossed by a sword and pen, unless
indeed this last may mean the Bible with the emblems of peace and war
lying quietly within it, and it seems not unlikely that the serpent is
emblematic of the Betrayal. For the rest of the design, however, we need
make no inferences, as it corresponds closely with his description.

“Outside of the circle enclosing the crosses are the seals, sealing the
Holy Spirit. In the large light triangles, or rather rays of the sun,
are given the names of the twelve apostles, forming the Seal of the
Prophet. Above these, in the same space, are the signs of the zodiac in
the extreme points of the triangle, with the names of the parts of the
body underneath, that these signs correspond to in the ancient
mythology; this forms the Seal of the Zodiac. Between these large light
coloured triangles are the twelve holy stones, represented as ovals, and
with their names plainly distinguished in the cut, making the Seal of
the Holy Stones. In the small triangles directly above the Holy Stones
are given the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, but the colour of
these in the chart (vermilion) is such that the lettering does not come
out in the photographic negative. This gives the Seal of the Twelve
Tribes. Directly beneath the Holy Stones, filling in the space between
the bottom of each large triangle, is the Seal of the Germ, coloured
dark green, and running down on each side of the top of these large
triangles are small triangles, coloured dark red and forming the Seal of
the Aceldama or Bloody Seal. On the circumference are the names of the
constellations of the zodiac, and directly under these the names of the
corresponding months of the year, and under these again are the
mythological representations of the constellations, Leo (July) being at
the top, and then in order to the right come Virgo (August), Libra
(September), Scorpio (October), Sagittarius (November), Capricornus
(December), Aquarius (January), Pisces (February), Aries (March), Taurus
(April), Gemini (May), Cancer (June). This gives the last sealing of the
Seed, the Seal of the Sun.

“It will be seen that beginning at the circumference at any point and
going toward the centre there is a complete astronomical representation
of the season of the year, first the name of the constellation, then in
succession the month, the constellation depicted pictorially, the sign
of the zodiac and the part of the human body corresponding in the old
astronomy to this sign of the zodiac.”

Of the four designs reproduced together, the first, the Shechinah, or
Light of Love, represents that miraculous light or visible glory which
was to the Jews a symbol of the Divine presence; the second represents
the angel Sandalphon with the Holy Grail at the side and the letters
Alpha and Omega at top (the design must be inverted to make out the
Omega); the third, Sub Rosa, and the fourth, Imp and Frogs, are graceful
fancies which sufficiently explain themselves, as does the Witch.

While working on these sketches, he made at the same time the design for
a book-plate, representing Cupid learning the alphabet, and the entire
design, he says, is full of symbolism--a favourite word with him. Cupid
has his finger on _Alpha_, signifying the beginning of his education;
above the book is Cupid’s target, with a heart for

[Illustration: SHECHINAH.]

[Illustration: SANDALPHON.]

[Illustration: SUB ROSA.]

[Illustration: IMP AND FROGS.]

the centre, that he has pierced with an arrow, while the full quiver
stands to the right. The curious fish under the _Veritas_ represents the
ΙΧΘΥΣ of the early Christians, while three crosses, symbolic
of the Christian religion, are in the upper left-hand corner, brought
out by heavy shading of the cross lines. On the book of knowledge is
perched the dove, emblematic of purity, while the olive branch at the
left of the book and the palm under the Fool’s Bauble give still other
religious symbols. The lamp of knowledge is burning brightly in front of
Cupid, while at his feet are the square, compass, triangle, and pencils,
symbolizing the designer’s profession.

_Minuteness of Detail._--In some insane artists, especially monomaniacs,
we find an opposite characteristic--the exaggeration of particular
details--the general effect being lost in obscurity through their
excessive efforts after verisimilitude. Thus, in a landscape exhibited
among those rejected from the Turin _salon_, not only was a general view
of the country given, but every separate blade of grass could be
distinguished. In another picture, intended to be very imposing, the
strokes of the brush produced the effect of pencil shading.

[Illustration: THE WITCH.]

_Atavism._--Both minuteness and symbolism are themselves atavistic
phenomena; but, in addition to them, there may be noted (in a large
number of cases) a

[Illustration: ARABESQUES BY PARANOIAC ARTIST.]

total absence of perspective, while the rest of the execution shows
clearly enough that the author is not wanting in artistic sense. One
would take him to be a true artist, but one brought up in China or
ancient Egypt. Here we have evidently a kind of atavism explicable by
arrested development of some one organ, and a corresponding backwardness
in the products of that organ. A French captain, suffering from
paralysis, drew figures stiff as Egyptian profiles. A megalomaniac of
Reggio executed a coloured bas-relief, in which the disproportionate
size of the feet and hands, the extreme smallness of the faces, and the
stiffness of the limbs, completely recall the work of the thirteenth
century. Another patient, at Genoa, carved bas-reliefs on pipes and on
vases, exactly similar to those of the Neolithic Age.

Raggi has sent me some flints carved by a monomaniac entirely ignorant
of archæology, which, in the choice of figures and emblems, recall the
style of Egyptian and Phœnician amulets. In these instances we see the
influence of similar psychical conditions at work.

_Arabesques._--In some few patients, M. Toselli has called my attention
to a singular predilection for arabesques and ornaments which tend to
assume a purely geometric form, without loss of elegance. This is the
case with monomaniacs; in cases of dementia and acute mania there
prevails a chaotic confusion, which, however, does not always imply
absence of taste. I have seen an instance of this in a kind of ship, the
work of a dementia patient, composed of an enormous number of little
slips of wood, brilliantly coloured, very thin, and intertwined in an
infinite variety of ways, the general effect being very graceful.

_Obscenity._--In some work done by erotomaniacs, paralytics, and
demented patients, the salient characteristic, both of the drawings and
of the verses, is the most shameless indecency. Thus a cabinet-maker
would carve virile members at every corner of a piece of furniture, or
at the summits of trees. This, too, recalls many works of savages and of
ancient races, in which the organs of sex are everywhere prominent. A
captain at Genoa was fond of drawing scenes in a brothel. In many the
obscene character is marked by the most singular pretexts, as though it
were demanded by artistic requirements. A monomaniac priest used to
sketch his figures nude, and then artfully drape them by means of lines
which revealed the generative organs. He defended himself against
criticism by saying that his figures could only appear indecent to those
who were in search of evil.

M---- illustrated his strange and often beautiful verses with
innumerable daubs, representing animals of monstrous forms struggling
with men and women, or monks and nuns, naked, in the most shameless
attitudes.

In others the indecency is, if possible, still more evident, especially
in cases of paralytic dementia. I remember an old man who used to draw a
vulva on the address of his letters to his wife, surrounding it with
obscene couplets in dialect.

It is a curious coincidence that two artists--one at Turin and the other
at Reggio--who were both megalomaniacs, should both have had sodomitic
instincts, which they combined with the delusion of being deities, and
lords of the world, which they had created and emitted from their
bodies. One of them (who, nevertheless, had a real artistic sense)
painted a full-length picture of himself, naked, among women, ejecting
worlds, and surrounded by all the symbols of power. This repeats, and at
the same time explains, the Ithyphallic divinity of the Egyptians.

_Criminality and Moral Insanity._--In this connection it is important to
notice that the greater number of these artists show, in addition to
their other forms of mania, a marked tendency to moral insanity,
especially in the form of unnatural vice. The painter who produced the
picture of “Delirium” was a pederast. The man who constructed the
marvellous model of the Reggio Asylum, already alluded to, was neither
draughtsman, sculptor, nor engineer. He was a madman, and, in addition,
a thief, with unnatural tendencies. This man, whenever the fancy took
him, escaped from the asylum, wandered about for some days, began to
steal when he had exhausted the small amount of money he had about him,
and when imprisoned declared himself a lunatic, and so got acquitted
and sent back to Reggio, when, after a short interval, he would repeat
the same line of conduct.

Dr. Tamburini told me that he, too, had been struck by the co-existence
of artistic faculty and moral insanity in these patients.

_Uselessness._--A characteristic common to many is the complete
uselessness of the work to which they devote themselves; and here I
recall once more Hécart’s dictum:--

    “_C’est le travail des fous d’épuiser leurs cervelles_
     _Sur des riens fatigants, sur quelques bagatelles._”[328]

A Genevan, affected by persecutory monomania, spent years in
embroidering on egg-shells and lemons. Though her work was most
beautiful, it could be of no advantage to her, for she kept it jealously
concealed; and I myself, though she was very fond of me, never saw any
of it till after her death.

Here we have, as in the case of artists of genius, the love of truth and
beauty for their own sake alone, only that the aim is reversed.

Sometimes the work done, though very useful in itself, is of no
advantage to the artist, and has no connection with his profession. Thus
a captain, who had become insane, presented me with the model of a bed
for violent patients, which, I believe, would be extremely useful in
practice. Two other patients, together, made, out of a piece of
beef-bone, some very neat match-boxes, ornamented with carvings in
relief, which could be of no profit to themselves, since they refused to
part with them for money.

There are, however, some exceptions. A melancholiac patient, with
homicidal and suicidal tendencies, manufactured himself a very
serviceable knife, fork, and spoon--metal ones not being allowed
him--out of the bones which remained over from his dinner. A café-keeper
at Colligno, a megalomaniac, compounded excellent liqueurs out of the
scraps left over from meals, though of the most different kinds of food.
A criminal lunatic constructed himself a key out of a number of small
pieces of wood joined together. I do not count among these examples
those who have prepared themselves real cuirasses of iron and stone--a
piece of work in relation to the special delusion of persecutions, and
implying an amount of labour out of proportion to the advantage
obtained.

[Illustration: DELIRIUM.]

_Insanity as a subject._--Many choose insanity as the subject of their
paintings. Professor Virgilio has furnished me with a very curious
portrait of an insane patient at the moment of attack--the eyes rolling,
the hair on end, the arms extended. Under his feet is the epigraph:
“_Delira_” (“He is raving”). This is the work of an alcoholic pederast.

I think that a sane artist would have some difficulty in painting a
closer likeness of delirium. This reminds me how frequently I have
found, among the poets of asylums, the tendency to describe insanity;
and it has been a favourite theme with great poets who have suffered
from ill-health--Tasso, Lenau, Barbara, Musset. Mancini, immediately
after his recovery, painted a woman offering for sale the picture
executed by a madman; and Gill, in the hospital of Sainte-Anne, painted
a raving maniac with terrible truth to nature.[329]

_Absurdity._--One of the most salient characteristics of insane art is,
as might be expected, absurdity, either in drawing or colouring. This is
especially noteworthy in some maniacs, owing to the exaggerated
association of ideas, through which the connecting links (which would
serve to explain the author’s conception) are totally lost. Thus, an
artist painted a “Marriage at Cana,” with all the figures of the
apostles exceedingly well drawn; but in place of the figure of Christ
was a large bunch of flowers.

Paralytic patients draw objects without any sense of proportion; their
hens are the size of horses, and their cherries of melons; or, while
striving after perfection in the design, the execution is merely
childish. One, who believed himself a second Horace Vernet, drew horses
by means of four straight strokes and a tail.[330] Another drew all his
figures upside down. Other dementia patients, owing to the same amnesia
which is apparent in their speech, leave out the most essential points
of their conception, like M---- at Pesaro, who made an excellent drawing
of a general, seated, but forgot the chair. (Frigerio.)

_Imitation._--There are some who are very successful in imitation, but
can produce nothing original; they will, for instance, copy the _façade_
of the asylum, or heads of animals, with the minute accuracy of detail
which characterizes primitive art. In this branch I have seen successful
work done by cretins and idiots, the latter drawing in exactly the same
manner as primitive man.

_Uniformity._--Many continually repeat the same idea; thus one,
mentioned by Frigerio, filled sheets of paper with a bee gnawing the
head of an ant; another, who believed that he had been shot, would paint
nothing but fire-arms; a third confined himself to arabesques.

_Summary._--These traits explain the instances of partial perfection to
be found in dementia patients; for a repetition of the same movement
tends to bring it nearer and nearer to perfection. At other times, as we
have seen in the extempore poets and authors of the asylum, it is the
tenacity and energy of the hallucinations which makes a painter of a man
who was never one before. Blake was able to picture to himself, as
living and present, persons already dead, angels, &c. This was the case,
also, with the strange insane poet, John Clare, who believed himself a
spectator of the Battle of the Nile, and the death of Nelson; and was
firmly convinced that he had been present at the death of Charles I. In
fact, he described these events with such remarkable fidelity and
accuracy, that it is scarcely probable he could have done it so well had
he been in full possession of his reason--the more so, as he was
entirely without culture.[331] This explains why insane painters and
poets are so numerous. It is easy to reproduce clearly what one sees
clearly. Moreover, the imagination is most unrestrained when reason is
least dominant; for the latter, by repressing hallucinations and
illusions, deprives the average man of a true source of artistic and
literary inspiration.

For the same reason, too, art itself, may, in its turn, encourage the
development of mental disease. Vasari relates that one Spinelli, a
painter of Arezzo, having attempted to paint the deformity of Lucifer,
the latter appeared to him in a dream and reproached him with having
made him so ugly. The painter was so affected by this apparition as to
fall seriously ill; and it continued to haunt him for years.[332]

_Music in the Insane._--Musical ability is often diminished in those
who, previous to their illness, cultivated this art with passion. Dr.
Adriani observed that musicians, under his care for insanity, almost
entirely lost their powers. They could still play any piece, but it was
done quite mechanically and without expression. Other dementia patients
would play the same piece, sometimes even a few phrases, over and over
again.

Donizetti, in the last stage of dementia, no longer recognized his
favourite melodies. His last works show traces of that fatal influence
which critics have also observed in Schumann’s symphony of the “Bride of
Messina,” composed during his attacks of insanity.[333]

These facts, however, do not contradict our assertion that insanity
awakens new artistic qualities in persons not previously gifted in that
way; they only show that (as we have seen in the case of professional
painters) it can give no additional power or skill to those who already
possessed them when attacked by disease.

A megalomaniac--formerly a syphilitic patient--under the care of Dr.
Tamburini, sang beautiful airs when under excitement, at the same time,
instead of playing an accompaniment, she improvised, on the pianoforte,
two distinct motives which had no connection with each other or the air
she was singing. This fact confirms the observations of Luys as to the
independent action of the cerebral hemispheres.

A young man attacked by _pellagra_, who recovered in my hospital,
composed expressive and original melodies.

M. Raggi told me that he had had under his care a melancholic patient
who, during her attacks, played without enthusiasm, and even with
repugnance, but, when the fit passed off, would spend whole days at the
piano, and execute the most difficult _partitions_ with a truly artistic
enthusiasm. In the same way, a paralytic showed, through the whole
course of his illness, a genuine musical mania, during which he imitated
all instruments, and agitated himself, in frantic enthusiasm, at the
_piano_ passages.

Raggi also observed a paralytic dementia patient who, after breaking his
thigh-bone by a leap from a window, rendered every bandage which could
be devised useless by singing, for days together, motives from _Il
Trovatore_ at the top of his voice, and accompanying his singing with
abrupt rhythmical movements of the pelvis. A fancy for monotonous
chanting also showed itself in another paralytic, who believed himself
to be a great admiral.

In maniacs, acute and joyous notes predominate, and, still more, the
repetition of the rhythm.

Every one who has paid even a short visit to an asylum has noticed the
frequency of singing and shouting and “high and thin voices, and with
them a sound of hands.”[334] Nor is it hard to understand this, if we
remember how Spencer and Ardigò have shown that the law of rhythm is the
most general form under which, in the whole of nature, energy is
manifested, from the crystal to the star, or to the animal organism.
Man, therefore, only follows a general organic law in giving way to this
impulse, which he does the more readily the less he is controlled by
reason. This explains the number of poets of the new school who are
found in asylums. This is the reason why savage nations have a natural
inclination for music; and a missionary told Spencer that many to whom
he taught the Psalms, with music, in the evening, could repeat them by
heart on the following day.

Savages, in speaking, make use of a sort of monotonous chant analogous
to our recitative. Primitive poetry was always sung, whence all the
different words connected with singing applied to poetry and poets. The
mysterious magic formulas and recipes of the ancients[335] were also
sung, or chanted, whence the word “enchantment.” Even at the present
day, in the neighbourhood of Novi and Oulx, I have heard peasant-women,
in making inquiries of one another, modulate their voices in true
musical rhythm. Modern _Improvvisatori_ do not seem able to produce
their verses except when singing, and agitating all their muscles.

It must be remembered that, according to the observations of Herbert
Spencer,[336] “the act of singing employs and exaggerates the signs of
the natural language of passion. Mental excitement is transformed into
muscular energy. An infant will laugh and bound in its nurse’s arms at
the sight of a brilliant colour, or the hearing of a new sound.” Strong
sensations or painful emotions cause us to gesticulate; in short, they
excite the muscular system, which is acted upon in proportion to the
intensity of the sensations. Slight pain calls forth a groan, greater
pain a cry: the pitch of the voice varies with the force of the emotion,
so that, in the strongest emotions, it rises to the octave, or higher;
and singing is always involuntarily accompanied by tremors and
agitations of the muscles.

What could be more natural than that, in the conditions in which the
emotions are most energetic, and so frequently atavistic, as is the case
in insanity, these tendencies should be reproduced on a larger scale?

This, too, explains why so many morbid men of genius should be
musicians: Mozart, Schumann, Beethoven, Donizetti, Pergolese, Fenicia,
Ricci, Rocchi, Rousseau, Handel, Dussek, Hoffmann, Glück, Petrella.[337]
Musical creation is the most subjective manifestation of thought, the
one most intimately connected with the affective emotions, and having
less relation to the external world than any other, which causes it to
stand more in need of the fervent but exhausting emotions of
inspiration.

Perhaps the study of these peculiarities of art in the insane, besides
showing us a new phase in this mysterious disease, might be useful in
æsthetics, or at any rate in art-criticism, by showing that an
exaggerated predilection for symbols, and for minuteness of detail
(however accurate), the complication of inscriptions, the excessive
prominence given to any one colour (it is well known that some of our
foremost painters are great sinners in this respect), the choice of
licentious subjects, and even an exaggerated degree of originality, are
points which belong to the pathology of art.




