CHAPTER II.

GENIUS AND DEGENERATION.

     The signs of
     degeneration--Height--Rickets--Pallor--Emaciation--Physiognomy--Cranium
     and Brain--Stammering--Lefthandedness--Sterility--Unlikeness to
     Parents--Precocity--Delayed
     development--Misoneism--Vagabondage--Unconsciousness--Instinctiveness--Somnambulism--The
     Inspiration of Genius--Contrast--Intermittence--Double
     Personality--Stupidity--Hyperæsthesia--Paræsthesia--Amnesia--Originality--Fondness
     for special words.


The paradox that confounds genius with neurosis, however cruel and sad
it may seem, is found to be not devoid of solid foundation when examined
from various points of view which have escaped even recent observers.

A theory, which has for some years flourished in the psychiatric world,
admits that a large proportion of mental and physical affections are the
result of degeneration, of the action, that is, of heredity in the
children of the inebriate, the syphilitic, the insane, the consumptive,
&c.; or of accidental causes, such as lesions of the head or the action
of mercury, which profoundly change the tissues, perpetuate neuroses or
other diseases in the patient, and, which is worse, aggravate them in
his descendants, until the march of degeneration, constantly growing
more rapid and fatal, is only stopped by complete idiocy or sterility.

Alienists have noted certain characters which very frequently, though
not constantly, accompany these fatal degenerations. Such are, on the
moral side, apathy, loss of moral sense, frequent tendencies to
impulsiveness or doubt, psychical inequalities owing to the excess of
some faculty (memory, æsthetic taste, &c.) or defect of other qualities
(calculation, for example), exaggerated mutism or verbosity, morbid
vanity, excessive originality, and excessive pre-occupation with self,
the tendency to put mystical interpretations on the simplest facts, the
abuse of symbolism and of special words which are used as an almost
exclusive mode of expression. Such, on the physical side, are prominent
ears, deficiency of beard, irregularity of teeth, excessive asymmetry of
face and head, which may be very large or very small, sexual precocity,
smallness or disproportion of the body, lefthandedness, stammering,
rickets, phthisis, excessive fecundity, neutralized afterwards by
abortions or complete sterility, with constant aggravation of
abnormalities in the children.[11]

Without doubt many alienists have here fallen into exaggerations,
especially when they have sought to deduce degeneration from a single
fact. But, taken on the whole, the theory is irrefutable; every day
brings fresh applications and confirmations. Among the most curious are
those supplied by recent studies on genius. The signs of degeneration in
men of genius they show are sometimes more numerous than in the insane.
Let us examine them.

_Height._--First of all it is necessary to remark the frequency of
physical signs of degeneration, only masqued by the vivacity of the
countenance and the prestige of reputation, which distracts us from
giving them due importance.

The simplest of these, which struck our ancestors and has passed into a
proverb, is the smallness of the body.

Famous for short stature as well as for genius were: Horace
(_lepidissimum_ homunculum _dicebat Augustus_), Philopœmen, Narses,
Alexander (_Magnus Alexander corpore parvus erat_), Aristotle, Plato,
Epicurus, Chrysippus, Laertes, Archimedes, Diogenes, Attila, Epictetus,
who was accustomed to say, “Who am I? A little man.” Among moderns one
may name, Erasmus, Socinus, Linnæus, Lipsius, Gibbon, Spinoza, Haüy,
Montaigne, Mezeray, Lalande, Gray, John Hunter (5ft. 2in.), Mozart,
Beethoven, Goldsmith, Hogarth, Thomas Moore, Thomas Campbell,
Wilberforce, Heine, Meissonnier, Charles Lamb, Beccaria, Maria
Edgeworth, Balzac, De Quincey, William Blake (who was scarcely five
feet in height), Browning, Ibsen, George Eliot, Thiers, Mrs. Browning,
Louis Blanc, Mendelssohn, Swinburne, Van Does (called the Drum, because
he was not any taller than a drum), Peter van Laer (called the Puppet).
Lulli, Pomponazzi, Baldini, were very short; so also were Nicholas
Piccinini, the philosopher Dati, and Baldo, who replied to the sarcasm
of Bartholo, “_Minuit præsentia fama_,” with the words, “_Augebit cætera
virtus_;” and again, Marsilio Ficino, of whom it was said, “_Vix ad
lumbos viri stabat_.” Albertus Magnus was of such small size that the
Pope, having allowed him to kiss his foot, commanded him to stand up,
under the impression that he was still kneeling. When the coffin of St.
Francis Xavier was opened at Goa in 1890, the body was found to be only
four and a half feet in length.

Among great men of tall stature I only know Volta, Goethe, Petrarch,
Schiller, D’Azeglio, Helmholtz, Foscolo, Charlemagne, Bismarck, Moltke,
Monti, Mirabeau, Dumas _père_, Schopenhauer, Lamartine, Voltaire, Peter
the Great, Washington, Dr. Johnson, Sterne, Arago, Flaubert, Carlyle,
Tourgueneff, Tennyson, Whitman.

_Rickets._--Agesilaus, Tyrtæus, Æsop, Giotto, Aristomenes, Crates,
Galba, Brunelleschi, Magliabecchi, Parini, Scarron, Pope, Leopardi,
Talleyrand, Scott, Owen, Gibbon, Byron, Dati, Baldini, Moses
Mendelssohn, Flaxman, Hooke, were all either rachitic, lame,
hunch-backed, or club-footed.

_Pallor._--This has been called the colour of great men; “_Pulchrum
sublimium virorum florem_” (S. Gregory, _Orationes XIV._). It was
ascertained by Marro[12] that this is one of the most frequent signs of
degeneration in the morally insane.

_Emaciation._--The law of the conservation of energy which rules the
whole organic world, explains to us other frequent abnormalities, such
as precocious greyness and baldness, leanness of the body, and weakness
of sexual and muscular activity, which characterize the insane, and are
also frequently found among great thinkers. Lecamus[13] has said that
the greatest geniuses have the slenderest bodies. Cæsar feared the lean
face of Cassius. Demosthenes, Aristotle, Cicero, Giotto, St. Bernard,
Erasmus, Salmasius, Kepler, Sterne, Walter Scott, John Howard,
D’Alembert, Fénelon, Boileau, Milton, Pascal, Napoleon, were all
extremely thin in the flower of their age.

Others were weak and sickly in childhood; such were Demosthenes, Bacon,
Descartes, Newton, Locke, Adam Smith, Boyle, Pope, Flaxman, Nelson,
Haller, Körner, Pascal, Wren, Alfieri, Renan.

Ségur wrote of Voltaire that his leanness recalled his labours, and that
his slight bent body was only a thin, transparent veil, through which
one seemed to see his soul and genius. Lamennais was “a small, almost
imperceptible man, or rather a flame chased from one point of the room
to the other by the breath of his own restlessness.”[14]

_Physiognomy._--Mind, a celebrated painter of cats, had a cretin-like
physiognomy. So also had Socrates, Skoda, Rembrandt, Dostoieffsky,
Magliabecchi, Pope, Carlyle, Darwin, and, among modern Italians,
Schiaparelli, who holds so high a rank in mathematics.

_Cranium and Brain._--Lesions of the head and brain are very frequent
among men of genius. The celebrated Australian novelist, Marcus Clarke,
when a child, received a blow from a horse’s hoof which crushed his
skull.[15] The same is told of Vico, Gratry, Clement VI., Malebranche,
and Cornelius, hence called _a Lapide_. The last three are said to have
acquired their genius as a result of the accident, having been
unintelligent before. Mention should also be made of the parietal
fracture in Fusinieri’s skull;[16] of the cranial asymmetry of Pericles,
who was on this account surnamed Squill-head (σκινοκἑφαλος) by
the Greek comic writers[17]; of Romagnosi, of Bichat, of Kant,[18] of
Chenevix,[19] of Dante, who presented an abnormal development of the
left parietal bone, and two osteomata on the frontal bone; the
plagiocephaly of Brunacci and of Machiavelli; the

[Illustration:

Figs. 1-3. Kant’s Skull.

 “      4. Volta’s Skull.

Figs. 5-6. Fusinieri’s Skull.

 “    7-8. Foscolo’s Skull.]

extreme prognathism of Foscolo (68°) and his low cephalic-spinal and
cephalic-orbital index;[20] the ultra-dolichocephaly of Fusinieri (index
74), contrasting with the ultra-brachycephaly which is characteristic of
the Venetians (82 to 84); the Neanderthaloid skull of Robert Bruce;[21]
of Kay Lye,[22] of San Marsay (index 69), and the ultra-dolichocephaly
of O’Connell (index 73), which contrasts with the mesocephaly of the
Irish; the median occipital fossa of Scarpa;[23] the transverse
occipital suture of Kant, his ultra-brachycephaly (88·5), platycephaly
(index of height 71·1), the disproportion between the superior portion
of his occipital bone, more developed by half, and the inferior or
cerebellar portion. It is the same with the smallness of the frontal
arch compared to the parietal.

In Volta’s skull[24] I have noted several characters which
anthropologists consider to belong to the lower races, such as
prominence of the styloid apophyses, simplicity of the coronal suture,
traces of the median frontal suture, obtuse facial angle (73°), but
especially the remarkable cranial sclerosis, which at places attains a
thickness of 16 millemetres; hence the great weight of the skull (753
grammes).

The researches of other investigators have shown that Manzoni, Petrarch,
and Fusinieri had receding foreheads; in Byron, Massacra (at the age of
32), Humboldt, Meckel,[25] Foscolo, Ximenes, and Donizetti there was
solidification of the sutures; submicrocephaly in Rasori, Descartes,
Foscolo, Tissot, Guido Reni, Hoffmann, and Schumann; sclerosis in
Donizetti and Tiedemann who, moreover, presented a bony crest between
the sphenoid and the basilar apophysis; hydrocephalus in Milton,
Linnæus, Cuvier, Gibbon, &c.

The capacity of the skull in men of genius, as is natural, is above the
average, by which it approaches what is found in insanity. (De
Quatrefages noted that the greatest degree of macrocephaly was found in
a lunatic, the next in a man of genius.) There are numerous exceptions
in which it descends below the ordinary average.

It is certain that in Italy, Volta (1,860 c.cm.), Petrarch (1,602
c.cm.), Bordoni (1,681 c.cm.), Brunacci (1,701 c.cm.), St. Ambrose
(1,792 c.cm.), and Fusinieri (1,604 c.cm.), all presented great cranial
capacity. The same character is found to a still greater degree in Kant
(1,740 c.cm.), Thackeray (1,660 c.cm.), Cuvier (1,830 c.cm.), and
Tourgueneff (2,012 c.cm.).

Le Bon studied twenty-six skulls of French men of genius, among whom
were Boileau, Descartes, and Jourdan.[26] He found that the most
celebrated had an average capacity of 1,732 cubic centimetres; while the
ancient Parisians offered only 1,559 c.cm. Among the Parisians of to-day
scarcely 12 per cent. exceed 1,700 c.cm., a figure surpassed by 73 per
cent. of the celebrated men.

But sub-microcephalic skulls may also be found in men of genius. Wagner
and Bischoff,[27] examining twelve brains of celebrated Germans, found
the capacity very great in eight, very small in four. The latter was the
case with Liebig, Döllinger, Hausmann, in whose favour advanced age may
be advanced as an excuse; but this reason does not exist for Guido Reni,
Gambetta, Harless, Foscolo (1426), Dante (1493), Hermann (1358), Lasker
(1300). Shelley’s head was remarkably small.

In the face of all these facts I shall not be taxed with temerity if I
conclude that, as genius is often expiated by inferiority in some
psychic functions, it is often associated with anomalies in that organ
which is the source of its glory.

Reference should here be made to the ventricular dropsy in Rousseau’s
brain,[28] to the meningitis of Grossi, of Donizetti, and of Schumann,
to the cerebral œdema of Liebig and of Tiedemann. In the last-named,
besides remarkable thickness of the skull, especially at the forehead,
Bischoff noted adherence of the _dura mater_ to the bone, thickening of
the arachnoid and atrophy of the brain. In the physician Fuchs, Wagner
found the fissure of Rolando interrupted by a superficial convolution,
an anomaly which Giacomini found only once in 356 cases, and Heschl once
in 632.[29] Pascal’s brain showed grave lesions of the cerebral
hemispheres. It has recently been discovered that Cuvier’s voluminous
brain was affected by dropsy; in Lasker’s there was softening of the
corpora striata, pachymeningitis, hæmorrhage, and endarteritis deformans
of the artery of the fissure of Sylvius.[30]

In eighteen brains of German men of science Bischoff and Rüdinger found
congenital anomalies of the cerebral convolutions, especially of the
parietal.[31] In the brains of Wülfert and Huber, the third left
frontal convolution was greatly developed with numerous meanderings. In
Gambetta this exaggeration became a real doubling; and the right
quadrilateral lobule is divided into two parts by a furrow which starts
from the occipital fissure; of these two parts the inferior is
subdivided by an incision with numerous branches, arranged in the form
of stars, and the occipital lobe is small, especially on the right.[32]

“The comparative study of these brains,” writes Hervé,[33] “shows that
individual variations of the cerebral convolutions are more numerous and
more marked in men of genius than in others. This is especially the case
in regard to the third frontal convolution which is not only more
variable in men of genius, but also more complex, especially on one
side, while in ordinary persons it is very simple both on the left and
on the right. Without doubt the individual arrangements which may be
presented by the brains of men of remarkable intelligence may also be
found in ordinary brains, but only in rare exceptions.”

I refer those who wish to form an idea of the development reached by
Broca’s centre in some of the brains of the Munich collection to
Rüdinger’s monograph, and to the beautiful plates which accompany it.
One remarks especially the enormous size and the numerous superficial
folds at the foot of the left convolution in the jurist Wülfert, who was
remarkable among other qualities for his great oratorical talent. On the
other hand, the convolution is much reduced and very simple on the left,
much developed in all its parts on the right, in the brain of the
pathologist Buhl, a professor whose speech was clear and facile, but who
was left-handed, or at all events ambidextrous. To these facts others
may be added, showing the morphological complexity of Broca’s
convolution in distinguished men; in the brains, for instance, of
various men of science, described and figured by R. Wagner.[34] Among
these was the illustrious geometrician, Gauss: compared with Gauss’s
brain that of an artisan called

[Illustration:

Fig. 1. Gauss’s Brain.

 “   2. Frontal Lobe of same.

 “   3. Brain of a German Workman.

Fig. 4. Frontal Lobe of same.

 “   5. Dirichlet’s Brain.

 “   6. Hermann’s Brain.]

Krebs was much less complicated, and notably narrower in the frontal
region. The frontal convolutions were also inferior in development to
those of Gauss; and the anterior lobes were voluminous in another
celebrated mathematician, Professor De Morgan, whose brain is in
Bastian’s possession.[35]

_Stammering._--Men of genius frequently stammer. I will mention:
Aristotle, Æsop, Demosthenes, Alcibiades, Cato of Utica, Virgil,
Manzoni, Erasmus, Malherbe, C. Lamb, Turenne, Erasmus and Charles
Darwin, Moses Mendelssohn, Charles V., Romiti, Cardan, Tartaglia.

_Lefthandedness._--Many have been left-handed. Such were: Tiberius,
Sebastian del Piombo, Michelangelo, Fléchier, Nigra, Buhl, Raphael of
Montelupo, Bertillon. Leonardo da Vinci sketched rapidly with his left
hand any figures which struck him, and only employed the right hand for
those which were the mature result of his contemplation; for this reason
his friends were persuaded that he only wrote with the left hand.[36]
Mancinism or leftsidedness is to-day regarded as a character of atavism
and degeneration.[37]

_Sterility._--Many great men have remained bachelors; others, although
married, have had no children. “The noblest works and foundations,” said
Bacon,[38] “have proceeded from childless men, which have sought to
express the images of their minds, where those of their bodies have
failed. So the care of posterity is most in them that have no
posterity.” And La Bruyère said, “These men have neither ancestors nor
descendants; they themselves form their entire posterity.”

Croker, in his edition of _Boswell_, remarks that all the great English
poets had no posterity. He names Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, Milton, Otway,
Dryden, Rowe, Addison, Pope, Swift, Gay, Johnson, Goldsmith, Cowper.
Hobbes, Camden, and many others, avoided marriage in order to have more
time to devote to study. Michelangelo said, “I have more than enough of
a wife in my art.” Among celibates may be mentioned also: Kant, Newton,
Pitt, Fox, Fontenelle, Beethoven, Gassendi, Galileo, Descartes, Locke,
Spinoza, Bayle, Leibnitz, Malebranche, Gray, Dalton, Hume, Gibbon,
Macaulay, Lamb, Bentham, Leonardo da Vinci, Copernicus, Reynolds,
Handel, Mendelssohn, Meyerbeer, Schopenhauer, Camoëns, Voltaire,
Chateaubriand, Flaubert, Foscolo, Alfieri, Cavour, Pellico, Mazzini,
Aleardi, Guerrazzi. And among women: Florence Nightingale, Catherine
Stanley, Gaetana Agnesi (the mathematician), and Luigia Laura Bassi. A
very large number of married men of genius have not been happy in
marriage: Shakespeare, Dante, Marzolo, Byron, Coleridge, Addison,
Landor, Carlyle, Ary Scheffer, Rovani, A. Comte, Haydn, Milton, Sterne,
Dickens, &c. St. Paul boasted of his absolute continence; Cavendish
altogether lacked the sexual instinct, and had a morbid antipathy to
women. Flaubert wrote to George Sand: “The muse, however intractable,
gives fewer sorrows than woman. I cannot reconcile one with the other.
One must choose.”[39] Adam Smith said he reserved his gallantry for his
books. Chamfort, the misanthrope, wrote: “If men followed the guidance
of reason no one would marry; for my own part, I will have nothing to do
with it, lest I should have a son like myself.” A French poet has said:

    “_Les grands esprits, d’ailleurs très-estimables,_
     _Ont très peu de talent pour former leurs semblables._”[40]

_Unlikeness to Parents._--Nearly all men of genius have differed as much
from their fathers as from their mothers (Foscolo, Michelangelo, Giotto,
Haydn, &c.). That is one of the marks of degeneration. For this reason
one notes physical resemblances between men of genius belonging to very
different races and epochs; for example, Julius Cæsar, Napoleon, and
Giovanni of the Black Bands; or Casti, Sterne, and Voltaire. They often
differ from their national type. They differ by the possession of noble
and almost superhuman characters (elevation of the forehead, notable
development of the nose and of the head, great vivacity of the eyes);
while the cretin, the criminal, and often the lunatic, differ by the
possession of ignoble features: Humboldt, Virchow, Bismarck, Helmholtz,
and Holtzendorf, do not show a German physiognomy. Byron was English
neither in his face nor in his character; Manin did not show the
Venetian type; Alfieri and d’Azeglio had neither the Piedmontese
character nor face. Carducci’s face is not Italian. Nevertheless, one
finds very notable and frequent exceptions. Michelangelo, Leonardo da
Vinci, Raphael, and Cellini, presented the Italian type.

_Precocity._--Another character common to genius and to insanity,
especially moral insanity, is precocity. Dante, when nine years of age,
wrote a sonnet to Beatrice; Tasso wrote verses at ten. Pascal and Comte
were great thinkers at the age of thirteen, Fornier at fifteen, Niebuhr
at seven, Jonathan Edwards at twelve, Michelangelo at nineteen,
Gassendi, the Little Doctor, at four, Bossuet at twelve, and Voltaire at
thirteen. Pico de la Mirandola knew Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee, and
Arabic, in his childhood; Goethe wrote a story in seven languages when
he was scarcely ten; Wieland knew Latin at seven, meditated an epic poem
at thirteen, and at sixteen published his poem, _Die Vollkommenste
Welt_. Lopez de la Vega composed his first verses at twelve, Calderon at
thirteen. Kotzebue was trying to write comedies at seven, and at
eighteen his first tragedy was acted. Schiller was only nineteen when
his epoch-making _Räuber_ appeared. Victor Hugo composed _Irtamène_ at
fifteen, and at twenty had already published _Han d’Islande_,
_Bug-Jargal_, and the first volume of _Odes et Ballades_; Lamennais at
sixteen dictated the _Paroles d’un Croyant_. Pope wrote his ode to
_Solitude_ at twelve and his _Pastorals_ at sixteen. Byron wrote verses
at twelve, and at eighteen published his _Hours of Idleness_. Moore
translated _Anacreon_ at thirteen. Meyerbeer at five played excellently
on the piano. Claude Joseph Vernet drew very well at four, and at twenty
was already a celebrated painter. At thirteen Wren invented an
astronomical instrument and offered it to his father with a Latin
dedication. Ascoli at fifteen published a book on the relation of the
dialects of Wallachia and Friuli. Metastasio improvised at ten; Ennius
Quirinus Visconti excited the admiration of all at sixteen months, and
preached when six years old. At fifteen Fénelon preached at Paris before
a select audience; Wetton at five could read and translate Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew, and at ten knew Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic. Mirabeau
preached at three and published books at ten. Handel composed a mass at
thirteen, at seventeen _Corinda_ and _Nero_, and at nineteen was
director of the opera at Hamburg. Raphael was famous at fourteen. Restif
de la Bretonne had already read much at four; at eleven he had seduced
young girls, and at fourteen had composed a poem on his first twelve
mistresses. Eichorn, Mozart, and Eybler gave concerts at six. At
thirteen Beethoven composed three sonatas. Weber was only fourteen when
his first opera, _Das Waldmädchen_, was represented. Cherubini at
thirteen wrote a mass which filled his fellow-citizens with enthusiasm.
Bacon conceived the _Novum Organum_ at fifteen. Charles XII. manifested
his great designs at the age of eighteen.[41]

This precocity is morbid and atavistic; it may be observed among all
savages. The proverb, “A man who has genius at five is mad at fifteen”
is often verified in asylums.[42] The children of the insane are often
precocious. Savage knew an insane woman whose children could play
classical music before the age of six, and other children who at a
tender age displayed the passions of grown men. Among the children of
the insane are often revealed aptitudes and tastes--chiefly for music,
the arts, and mathematics--which are not usually found in other
children.

_Delayed Development._--Delay in the development of genius may be
explained, as Beard remarks, by the absence of circumstances favourable
to its blossoming, and by the ignorance of teachers and parents who see
mental obtusity, or even idiocy, where there is only the distraction or
amnesia of genius. Many children who become great men have been
regarded at school as bad, wild, or silly; but their intelligence
appeared as soon as the occasion offered, or when they found the true
path of their genius. It was thus with Thiers, Pestalozzi, Wellington,
Du Guesclin, Goldsmith, Burns, Balzac, Fresnel, Dumas _père_, Humboldt,
Sheridan, Boccaccio, Pierre Thomas, Linnæus, Volta, Alfieri. Thus
Newton, meditating on the problems of Kepler, often forgot the orders
and commissions given him by his mother; and while he was the last in
his class he was very clever in making mechanical playthings. Walter
Scott, who also showed badly at school, was a wonderful story-teller.
Klaproth, the celebrated Orientalist, when following the courses at
Berlin University, was considered a backward student. In examination
once a professor said to him: “But you know nothing, sir!” “Excuse me,”
he replied, “I know Chinese.” It was found that he had learnt this
difficult language alone, almost in secret. Gustave Flaubert “was the
very opposite of a phenomenal child. It was only with extreme difficulty
that he succeeded in learning to read. His mind, however, was already
working, for he composed little plays which he could not write, but
which he represented alone, playing the different personages, and
improvising long dialogues.”[43] Domenichino, whom his comrades called
the great bullock, when accused of being slow and not learning so fast
as the other pupils, replied: “It is because I work in myself.”

Sometimes children have only made progress when abandoned to their own
impulses. Thus Cabanis, although intelligent, was regarded at school as
obstinate and idle, and was sent home. His father then decided to risk
an experiment. He allowed his son, at fourteen years of age, to study
according to his own taste. The experiment succeeded completely.

_Misoneism._--The men who create new worlds are as much enemies of
novelty as ordinary persons and children. They display extraordinary
energy in rejecting the discoveries of others; whether it is that the
saturation, so to say, of their brains prevents any new absorption, or
that they have acquired a special sensibility, alert only to their own
ideas, and refractory to the ideas of others. Thus Schopenhauer, who was
a great rebel in philosophy, has nothing but words of pity and contempt
for political revolutionaries; and he bequeathed his fortune to men who
had contributed to repress by arms the noble political aspirations of
1848. Frederick II., who inaugurated German politics, and wished to
foster a national art and literature, did not suspect the worth of
Herder, of Klopstock, of Lessing, of Goethe;[44] he disliked changing
his coats so much that he had only two or three during his life. The
same may be said of Napoleon and his hats. Rossini could never travel by
rail; when a friend attempted to accustom him to the train he fell down
fainting, remarking afterwards: “If I was not like that I should never
have written the _Barbiere_.” Napoleon rejected steam, and Richelieu
sent Salomon de Caus, its first inventor, to the Bicêtre. Bacon laughed
at Gilbert and Copernicus; he did not believe in the application of
instruments, or even of mathematics, to the exact sciences. Baudelaire
and Nodier detested freethinkers.[45] Laplace denied the fall of
meteorites, for, he said, with an argument much approved by the
Academicians, how can stones fall from the sky when there are none
there? Biot denied the undulatory theory. Voltaire denied fossils.
Darwin did not believe in the stone age nor in hypnotism.[46] Robin
laughed at the Darwinian theory.

_Vagabondage._--Love of wandering is frequent among men of genius. I
will mention only Heine, Alfieri, Byron, Giordano Bruno, Leopardi,
Tasso, Goldsmith, Sterne, Gautier, Musset, Lenau. “My father left me his
wandering genius as a heritage,” wrote Foscolo. Hölderlin, after his
much loved wife had entered a convent, wandered for forty years without
settling down anywhere. Every one knows of the constant journeys of
Petrarch, of Paisiello, of Lavoisier, of Cellini, of Cervantes, at a
time when travelling was beset by difficulties and dangers. Meyerbeer
travelled for thirty years, composing his operas in the train. Wagner
travelled on foot from Riga to Paris. One knows that sometimes, at the
Universities, professors are seized by the desire of change, and to
satisfy it forget all their personal interests.

_Unconsciousness and Instinctiveness._--The coincidence of genius and
insanity enables us to understand the astonishing unconsciousness,
instantaneousness and intermittence of the creations of genius, whence
its great resemblance to epilepsy, the importance of which we shall see
later, and whence also a distinction between genius and talent.
“Talent,” says Jürgen-Meyer,[47] “knows itself; it knows how and why it
has reached a given theory; it is not so with genius, which is ignorant
of the how and the why. Nothing is so involuntary as the conception of
genius.” “One of the characters of genius,” writes Hagen, “is
irresistible impulsion. As instinct compels the animal to accomplish
certain acts, even at the risk of life, so genius, when it is dominated
by an idea is incapable of abandoning itself to any other thought.
Napoleon and Alexander conquered, not from love of glory, but in
obedience to an all-powerful instinct; so scientific genius has no rest;
its activity may appear to be the result of a voluntary effort, but it
is not so. Genius creates, not because it wishes to, but because it must
create.” And Paul Richter writes: “The man of genius is in many respects
a real somnambulist. In his lucid dream he sees farther than when awake,
and reaches the heights of truth; when the world of imagination is taken
away from him he is suddenly precipitated into reality.”[48]

Haydn attributed the conception of the _Creation_ to a mysterious grace
from on high: “When my work does not advance,” he said, “I retire into
the oratory with my rosary and say an _Ave_; immediately ideas come to
me.” When our Milli produces, almost without knowing it, one of her
marvellous poems, she is agitated, cries, sings, takes long walks, and
almost becomes the victim of an epileptic attack.

Many men of genius who have studied themselves, and who have spoken of
their inspiration, have described it as a sweet and seductive fever,
during which their thought has become rapidly and involuntarily
fruitful, and has burst forth like the flame of a lighted torch. Such is
the thought that Dante has engraved in three wonderful lines:--

          “_I’ mi son un che, quando_
    _Amore spira, noto ed in quel modo_
    _Che detta dentro vo significando._”[49]

Napoleon said that the fate of battles was the result of an instant, of
a latent thought; the decisive moment appeared; the spark burst forth,
and one was victorious. (Moreau.) Kuh’s most beautiful poems, wrote
Bauer, were dictated in a state between insanity and reason; at the
moment when his sublime thoughts came to him he was incapable of simple
reasoning. Foscolo tells us in his _Epistolario_, the finest monument of
his great soul, that writing depends on a certain amiable fever of the
mind, and cannot be had at will: “I write letters, not for my country,
nor for fame, but for the secret joy which arises from the exercise of
our faculties; they have need of movement, as our legs of walking.”
Mozart confessed that musical ideas were aroused in him, even apart from
his will, like dreams. Hoffmann often said to his friends, “When I
compose I sit down to the piano, shut my eyes, and play what I
hear.”[50] Lamartine often said, “It is not I who think; my ideas think
for me.”[51] Alfieri, who compared himself to a barometer on account of
the continual changes in his poetic power, produced by change of season,
had not the strength in September to resist a new, or rather, renewed,
impulse which he had felt for several days; he declared himself
vanquished, and wrote six comedies. In Alfieri, Goethe, and Ariosto
creation was instantaneous, often even being produced on awaking.[52]

This domination of genius by the unconscious has been remarked for many
centuries. Socrates said that poets create, not by virtue of inventive
science, but, thanks to a very certain natural instinct, just as
diviners predict, saying beautiful things, but not having consciousness
of what they say.[53] “All the manifestations of genius,” wrote Voltaire
to Diderot, “are the effects of instinct. All the philosophers of the
world put together would not be able to produce Quinault’s _Armide_, or
the _Animaux Malades de la peste_, which La Fontaine wrote without
knowing what he did. Corneille composed _Horace_ as a bird composes its
nest.”[54]

Thus the greatest conceptions of thought, prepared, so to say, by former
sensations, and by exquisite organic sensibility, suddenly burst forth
and develop by unconscious cerebration. Thus also may be explained the
profound convictions of prophets, saints, and demoniacs, as well as the
impulsive acts of the insane.

_Somnambulism._--Bettinelli wrote: “Poetry may almost be called a dream
which is accomplished in the presence of reason, which floats above it
with open eyes.” This definition is the more exact since many poets have
composed their poems in a dream or half-dream. Goethe often said that a
certain cerebral irritation is necessary to the poet; many of his poems
were, in fact, composed in a state bordering on somnambulism. Klopstock
declared that he had received several inspirations for his poems in
dreams. Voltaire conceived during sleep one of the books of his
_Henriade_; Sardini, a theory on the flageolet; Seckendorf, his
beautiful ode to imagination, which in its harmony reflects its origin.
Newton and Cardan resolved mathematical problems in dreams. Nodier
composed _Lydia_, together with a complete theory of future destiny, as
the result of dreams which “succeeded each other,” he wrote, “with such
redoubled energy, from night to night, that the idea transformed itself
into a conviction.” Muratori, many years after he had ceased to write
verse, improvised in a dream a Latin pentameter. It is said that La
Fontaine composed in a dream his _Deux Pigeons_, and that Condillac
completed during sleep a lesson interrupted in his waking hours.[55]
Coleridge’s _Kubla Khan_ was composed, in ill health, during a profound
sleep produced by an opiate; he was only able to recall fifty-four
lines. Holde’s _Phantasie_ was composed under somewhat similar
conditions.

_Genius in Inspiration._--It is very true that nothing so much resembles
a person attacked by madness as a man of genius when meditating and
moulding his conceptions. _Aut insanit homo aut versus facit._ According
to Réveillé-Parise, the man of genius exhibits a small contracted pulse,
pale, cold skin, a hot, feverish head, brilliant, wild, injected eyes.
After the moment of composition it often happens that the author himself
no longer understands what he wrote a short time before. Marini, when
writing his _Adone_, did not feel a serious burn of the foot. Tasso,
during composition, was like a man possessed. Lagrange felt his pulse
become irregular while he wrote. Alfieri’s sight was troubled. Some, in
order to give themselves up to meditation, even put themselves
artificially into a state of cerebral semi-congestion. Thus Schiller
plunged his feet into ice. Pitt and Fox prepared their speeches after
excessive indulgence in porter. Paisiello composed beneath a mountain of
coverlets. Descartes buried his head in a sofa. Bonnet retired into a
cold room with his head enveloped in hot cloths. Cujas worked lying
prone on the carpet. It was said of Leibnitz that he “meditated
horizontally,” such being the attitude necessary to enable him to give
himself up to the labour of thought. Milton composed with his head
leaning over his easy-chair.[56] Thomas and Rossini composed in their
beds. Rousseau meditated with his head in the full glare of the sun.[57]
Shelley lay on the hearthrug with his head close to the fire. All these
are instinctive methods for augmenting momentarily the cerebral
circulation at the expense of the general circulation.

It is known that very often the great conceptions of thinkers have been
organized, or at all events have taken their start, in the shock of a
special sensation which produced on the intelligence the effect of a
drop of salt water on a well-prepared voltaic pile. All great
discoveries have been occasioned, according to Moleschott’s remark, by a
simple sensation.[58] Some frogs which were to furnish a medicinal broth
for Galvani’s wife were the origin of the discovery of galvanism; the
movement of a hanging lamp, the fall of an apple, inspired the great
systems of Galileo and Newton. Alfieri composed or conceived his
tragedies while listening to music, or soon after. A celebrated cantata
of Mozart’s _Don Giovanni_ came to him on seeing an orange, which
recalled a popular Neapolitan air heard five years before. The sight of
a porter suggested to Leonardo da Vinci his celebrated _Giuda_. The
movements of his model suggested to Thorwaldsen the attitude of his
Seated Angel. Salvator Rosa owed his first grandiose inspirations to the
scenes of Posilipo. Hogarth conceived his grotesque scenes in a Highgate
tavern, after his nose had been broken in a dispute with a drunkard.
Milton, Bacon, Leonardo da Vinci, liked to hear music before beginning
to work. Bourdaloue tried an air on the violin before writing one of his
immortal sermons. Reading one of Spenser’s odes aroused the poetic
vocation in Cowley. A boiling teakettle suggested to Watt the idea of
the steam-engine.

In the same way a sensation is the point of departure of the terrible
deeds produced by impulsive mania. Humboldt’s nursemaid confessed that
the sight of the fresh and delicate flesh of his child irresistibly
impelled her to bite it. Many persons, at the sight of a hatchet, a
flame, a corpse, have been drawn to murder, incendiarism, or the
profanation of cemeteries.

It must be added that inspiration is often transformed into a real
hallucination; in fact, as Bettinelli well says, the man of genius sees
the objects which his imagination presents to him. Dickens and Kleist
grieved over the fates of their heroes. Kleist was found in tears just
after finishing one of his tragedies: “She is dead,” he said. Schiller
was as much moved by the adventures of his personages as by real
events.[59] T. Grossi told Verga that in describing the apparition of
Prina, he saw the figure come before him, and was obliged to relight his
lamp to make it disappear.[60] Brierre de Boismont tells us that the
painter Martina really saw the pictures he imagined. One day, some one
having come between him and the hallucination, he asked this person to
move so that he might go on with his picture.[61]

_Contrast, Intermittence, Double Personality._--When the moment of
inspiration is over, the man of genius becomes an ordinary man, if he
does not descend lower; in the same way personal inequality, or,
according to modern terminology, double, or even contrary, personality,
is the one of the characters of genius. Our greatest poets, Isaac
Disraeli remarked (in _Curiosities of Literature_), Shakespeare and
Dryden, are those who have produced the worst lines. It was said of
Tintoretto that sometimes he surpassed Tintoretto, and sometimes was
inferior to Caracci. Great tragic actors are very cheerful in society,
and of melancholy humour at home. The contrary is true of genuine
comedians. “John Gilpin,” that masterpiece of humour, was written by
Cowper between two attacks of melancholia. Gaiety was in him the
reaction from sadness. It was singular, he remarked, that his most comic
verses were written in his saddest moments, without which he would
probably never have written them. A patient one day presented himself to
Abernethy; after careful examination the celebrated practitioner said,
“You need amusement; go and hear Grimaldi; he will make you laugh, and
that will be better for you than any drugs.” “My God,” exclaimed the
invalid, “but I am Grimaldi!” Débureau in like manner went to consult an
alienist about his melancholy; he was advised to go to Débureau.
Klopstock was questioned regarding the meaning of a passage in his poem.
He replied, “God and I both knew what it meant once; now God alone
knows.” Giordano Bruno said of himself: “_In hilaritate tristis, in
tristitia hilaris_.” Ovidio justly remarked concerning the
contradictions in Tasso’s style, that “when the inspiration was over, he
lost his way in his own creations, and could no longer appreciate their
beauty or be conscious of it.”[62] Renan described himself as “a tissue
of contradictions, recalling the classic _hirocerf_ with two natures.
One of my halves is constantly occupied in demolishing the other, like
the fabulous animal of Ctesias, who ate his paws without knowing
it.”[63]

“If there are two such different men in you,” said his mistress to
Alfred de Musset, “could you not, when the bad one rises, be content to
forget the good one?”[64] Musset himself confesses that, with respect to
her, he gave way to attacks of brutal anger and contempt, alternating
with fits of extravagant affection; “an exaltation carried to excess
made me treat my mistress like an idol, like a divinity. A quarter of an
hour after having insulted her I was at her knees; I left off accusing
her to ask her pardon; and passed from jesting to tears.”

_Stupidity._--The doubling of personality, the amnesia and the misoneism
so common among men of science, are the key to the innumerable
stupidities which intrude into their writings: _quandoque bonus dormitat
Homerus_. Flaubert made a very curious collection of these, and called
it the “_Dossier de la sottise humaine_.” Here are some examples: “The
wealth of a country depends on its general prosperity” (Louis Napoleon).
“She did not know Latin, but understood it very well” (Victor Hugo, in
_Les Misérables_). “Wherever they are, fleas throw themselves against
white colours. This instinct has been given them in order that we may
catch them more easily.... The melon has been divided into slices by
nature in order that it may be eaten _en famille_; the pumpkin, being
larger, may be eaten with neighbours” (Bernardin de Saint Pierre in
_Harmonie de la Nature_). “It is the business of bishops, nobles, and
the great officers of the State to be the depositaries and the guardians
of the conservative virtues, to teach nations what is good and what is
evil, what is true and what is false, in the moral and spiritual world.
Others have no right to reason on these matters. They may amuse
themselves with the natural sciences. What have they to complain of?”
(De Maistre in _Soirées de St. Petersbourg, 8e Entretien_, p. 131).
“When one has crossed the bounds there are no limits left” (Ponsard). “I
have often heard the blindness of the council of Francis I. deplored in
repelling Christopher Columbus, when he proposed his expedition to the
Indies” (Montesquieu, in _Esprit des Lois_, liv., xxi., chap. xxii.
Francis I. ascended the throne in 1515; Columbus died in 1506).
“Bonaparte was a great gainer of battles, but beyond that the least
general is more skilful than he.... It has been believed that he
perfected the art of war, and it is certain that he made it retrograde
towards the childhood of art” (Chateaubriand, _Les Buonaparte et les
Bourbons_). “Voltaire is nowhere as a philosopher, without authority as
a critic and historian, out of date as a man of science” (Dupanloup,
_Haute Éducation intellectuelle_). “Grocery is respectable. It is a
branch of commerce. The army is more respectable still, because it is an
institution, the aim of which is order. Grocery is useful, the army is
necessary” (Jules Noriac in _Les Nouvelles_). Let us recall Pascal, at
one time more incredulous than Pyrrho, at another, writing like a Father
of the Church; or Voltaire, believing sometimes in destiny, which
“causes the growth and the ruin of States”;[65] sometimes in fatality
which “governs the affairs of the world”;[66] sometimes in
Providence.[67]

_Hyperæsthesia._--If we seek, with the aid of autobiographies, the
differences which separate a man of genius from an ordinary man, we find
that they consist in very great part in an exquisite, and sometimes
perverted, sensibility.

The savage and the idiot feel physical pain very feebly; they have few
passions, and they only attend to the sensations which concern more
directly the necessities of existence. The higher we rise in the moral
scale, the more sensibility increases; it is highest in great minds, and
is the source of their misfortunes as well as of their triumphs. They
feel and notice more things, and with greater vivacity and tenacity than
other men; their recollections are richer and their mental combinations
more fruitful. Little things, accidents that ordinary people do not see
or notice, are observed by them, brought together in a thousand ways,
which we call _creations_, and which are only binary and quaternary
combinations of sensations.

Haller wrote: “What remains to me except sensibility, that powerful
sentiment which results from a temperament vividly moved by the
impressions of love and the marvels of science? Even to-day to read of a
generous action calls tears from my eyes. This sensibility has certainly
given to my poems a passion which is not found elsewhere.”[68] Diderot
said: “If nature has ever made a sensitive soul it is mine. Multiply
sensitive souls, and you will augment good and evil actions.”[69]

The first time that Alfieri heard music he experienced as it were a
dazzling in his eyes and ears. He passed several days in a strange but
agreeable melancholy; there was an efflorescence of fantastic ideas; at
that moment he could have written poetry if he had known how, and
expressed sentiments if he had had any to express. He concludes, with
Sterne, Rousseau, and George Sand, that “there is nothing which agitates
the soul with such unconquerable force as musical sounds.” Berlioz has
described his emotions on hearing beautiful music: first, a sensation of
voluptuous ecstasy, immediately followed by general agitation with
palpitation, oppression, sobbing, trembling, sometimes terminating with
a kind of fainting fit. Malibran, on first hearing Beethoven’s symphony
in C minor, had a convulsive attack and had to be taken out of the hall.
Musset, Goncourt, Flaubert, Carlyle had so delicate a perception of
sounds that the noises of the streets and bells were insupportable to
them; they were constantly changing their abodes to avoid these sounds,
and at last fled in despair to the country.[70] Schopenhauer also hated
noise.

Urquiza fainted on breathing the odour of a rose. Baudelaire had a very
delicate sense of smell; he perceived the odour of women in dresses; he
could not live in Belgium, he said, because the trees had no fragrance.

Guy de Maupassant says of Gustave Flaubert: “From his early childhood
the distinctive features of his nature were a great _naïveté_ and a
horror of physical action. All his life he remained _naïf_ and
sedentary. It exasperated him to see people walking or moving about him,
and he declared in his mordant, sonorous, always rather theatrical
voice, that it was not philosophic. ‘One can only think and write
seated,’ he said.”[71] Sterne wrote that intuition and sensibility are
the only instruments of genius, the source of the delicious impressions
which give a more brilliant colour to joy, and which make us weep with
happiness. It is known that Alfieri and Foscolo often fell at the feet
of women who were very unworthy of them. Alfieri could not eat on the
day when his horse did not neigh. Every one knows that the beauty and
love of the Fornarina inspired Raphael’s palette, but very few know
that he also composed one hundred sonnets in her honour.[72]

Dante and Alfieri fell in love at nine years of age, Scarron at eight,
Rousseau at eleven, Byron at eight. At sixteen Byron, hearing that his
beloved was about to marry, almost fell into convulsions; he was almost
suffocated and, although he had no idea of sex, he doubted if he ever
loved so truly in later years. He had a convulsive attack, Moore tells
us, on seeing Kean act. The painter Francia died of joy on seeing one of
Raphael’s pictures. Ampère was so sensitive to the beauties of nature
that he thought he would die of happiness on seeing the magnificent
shores of Genoa. In one of his manuscripts he had left the journal of an
unfortunate passion. Newton was so affected on discovering the solution
of a problem that he was unable to continue his work. Gay-Lussac and
Davy, after making a discovery, danced about in their slippers.

It is this exaggerated sensibility of men of genius, found in less
degree in men of talent also, which causes great part of their real or
imaginary misfortunes. “This precious gift,” writes Mantegazza, “this
rare privilege of genius, brings in its train a morbid reaction to the
smallest troubles from without; the slightest breeze, the faintest
breath of the dog-days, becomes for these sensitive persons the rumpled
rose-petal which will not let the unfortunate sybarite sleep.”[73] La
Fontaine perhaps thought of himself when he wrote:--

     “_Un souffle, une ombre, un rien leur donne la fièvre._”

Offences which for others are but pin-pricks for them are sharpened
daggers. When Foscolo heard a mocking word from one of his friends he
became indignant, and said to her: “You wish to see me dead; I will
break my skull at your feet”; so saying, he threw himself with great
violence and lowered head against the edge of the marble mantlepiece; a
charitable bystander promptly seized him by the collar of his coat, and
saved his life by throwing him on the ground. Boileau and Chateaubriand
could not hear any one praised, even their shoemakers, without a certain
annoyance. Hence the manifestations of morbid vanity which often
approximate men of genius to ambitious monomaniacs. Schopenhauer was
furious and refused to pay his debts to any one who spelled his name
with a double “p.” Barthez could not sleep with grief because in the
printing of his _Génie_ the accent on the _ē_ was divided into two.
Whiston said he ought not to have published his refutation of Newton’s
chronology, as Newton was capable of killing him. Poushkin was seen one
day in the crowded theatre, in a fit of jealousy, to bite the shoulder
of the wife of the Governor-General, Countess Z., to whom he was then
paying attention.

Any one who has had the rare fortune to live with men of genius is soon
struck by the facility with which they misinterpret the acts of others,
believe themselves persecuted, and find everywhere profound and infinite
reasons for grief and melancholy. Their intellectual superiority
contributes to this end, being equally adapted to discover new aspects
of truth and to create imaginary ones, confirming their own painful
illusions. It is true, also, that their intellectual superiority permits
them to acquire and to express, regarding the nature of things,
convictions different from those adopted by the majority, and to
manifest them with an unshakeable firmness which increases the
opposition and contrast.

But the principal cause of their melancholy and their misfortunes is the
law of dynamism which rules in the nervous system. To an excessive
expenditure and development of nervous force succeeds reaction or
enfeeblement. It is permitted to no one to expend more than a certain
quantity of force without being severely punished on the other side;
that is why men of genius are so unequal in their productions.
Melancholy, depression, timidity, egoism, are the prices of the sublime
gifts of intellect, just as uterine catarrhs, impotence, and tabes
dorsalis are the prices of sexual abuse, and gastritis of abuse of
appetite.

Milli, after one of her eloquent improvisations which are worth the
whole existence of a minor poet, falls into a state of paralysis which
lasts several days. Mahomet after prophesying fell into a state of
imbecility. “Three _suras_ of the _Koran_,” he said one day to
Abou-Bekr, “have been enough to whiten my hair.”[74] In short, I do not
believe there has ever been a great man who, even at the height of his
happiness, has not believed and proclaimed, even without cause, that he
was unfortunate and persecuted, and who has not at some moment
experienced the painful modifications of sensibility which are the
foundation of melancholia.

Sometimes this sensibility undergoes perversion; it consumes itself, and
is agitated around a single point, remaining indifferent to all others.
Certain series of ideas or sensations acquire, little by little, the
force of a special stimulant on the brain, and sometimes on the entire
organism, so that they seem to survive life itself. Heine, who in his
letters declared himself incapable of understanding the simplest things,
Heine, blind and paralytic, when advised to turn towards God, replied in
his dying agony: “_Dieu me pardonnera; c’est son métier_;” thus crowning
with a stroke of supreme irony the most æsthetically cynical life of our
time. The last words of Aretino after extreme unction were, it is said,
“Keep me from the rats now I am anointed.” The dying Rabelais enveloped
his head in his _domino_, and said, “_Beati qui in Domino moriuntur_.”
Malherbe, in his last illness, reproached his nurse with the solecisms
she committed, and rejected the counsel of his confessor on account of
its bad style. The last words of Bouhours the grammarian, were, “_Je
vais ou je va mourir: l’un et l’autre se disent_.”

Foscolo confesses that “very active in some directions, he was in others
inferior to a man, to a woman, to a child.”[75] It is known that
Corneille, Descartes, Virgil, Addison, La Fontaine, Dryden, Manzoni,
Newton, were almost incapable of expressing themselves in public.
D’Alembert and Ménage, insensible to the sufferings of a surgical
operation, wept at a slight critical censure. Luce de Lancival smiled
when his legs were amputated, but could not endure Geoffrey’s
criticisms. Linnæus, at the age of sixty, rendered paralytic and
insensible by an apoplectic stroke, was aroused when carried near to his
beloved herbarium.[76] Lagny was stretched out comatose, insensible to
the strongest stimulants, when it occurred to some one to ask him the
square of twelve, he replied immediately, “One hundred and forty-four.”
Sebouyah, the Arab grammarian, died of grief because the Khalif
Haroun-al-Raschid did not agree with him on some grammatical point.

It should be observed here that men of genius, at all events, if men of
science, often present that species of mania which Wechniakoff[77] and
Letourneau[78] have called _monotypic_. Such men occupy themselves
throughout their whole lives with one single problem, the first which
takes possession of their brains, and which henceforth rules them. Otto
Beckmann was occupied during the whole of his life with the pathology of
the kidneys; Fresnel with light; Meyer with ants. Here is a new and
striking point of resemblance with monomaniacs.

On account of this exaggerated and concentrated sensibility, it becomes
very difficult to persuade or dissuade either men of genius or the
insane. In them the roots of error, as well as those of truth, fix
themselves more deeply and multiplexly than in other men, for whom
opinion is a habit, an affair of fashion, or of circumstance. Hence the
slight utility of moral treatment as applied to the insane; hence also
the frequent fallibility of genius.

In the same way we can explain why it is that great minds do not seize
ideas that the most vulgar intelligence can grasp, while at the same
time they discover ideas which would have seemed absurd to others: their
greater sensibility is associated with a greater originality of
conception. In exalted meditation thought deserts the more simple and
easy paths which no longer suit its robust energy. Thus Monge resolved
the most difficult problems of a differential calculus, and was
embarrassed in seeking an algebraic root of the second degree which a
schoolboy might have found. One of Lulli’s friends used to say
habitually on his behalf: “Pay no attention to him; he has no common
sense: he is all genius.”

_Paræsthesia._--To the exhaustion and excessive concentration of
sensibility must be attributed all those strange acts showing apparent
or intermittent anæsthesia, and analgesia, which are to be found among
men of genius as well as among the insane. Socrates presented a
photo-paræsthesia which enabled him to gaze at the sun for a
considerable time without experiencing any discomfort. The Goncourts,
Flaubert, Darwin had a kind of musical daltonism.

_Amnesia._--Forgetfulness is another of the characters of genius. It is
said that Newton once rammed his niece’s finger into his pipe; when he
left his room to seek for anything he usually returned without bringing
it.[79] Rouelle generally explained his ideas at great length, and when
he had finished, he added: “But this is one of my arcana which I tell to
no one.” Sometimes one of his pupils rose and repeated in his ear what
he had just said aloud; then Rouelle believed that the pupil had
discovered the arcanum by his own sagacity, and begged him not to
divulge what he had himself just told to two hundred persons. One day,
when performing an experiment during a lecture, he said to his hearers:
“You see, gentlemen, this cauldron over the flame? Well, if I were to
leave off stirring it an explosion would at once occur which would make
us all jump.” While saying these words, he did not fail to forget to
stir, and the prediction was accomplished; the explosion took place with
a fearful noise: the laboratory windows were all smashed, and the
audience fled to the garden.[80] Sir Everard Home relates that he once
suddenly lost his memory for half an hour, and was unable to recognise
the house and the street in which he lived; he could not recall the
name of the street, and seemed to hear it for the first time. It is
told of Ampère that when travelling on horseback in the country he
became absorbed in a problem; then, dismounting, began to lead his
horse, and finally lost it; but he did not discover his misadventure
until, on arrival, it attracted the attention of his friends. Babinet
hired a country house, and after making the payments returned to town;
then he found that he had entirely forgotten both the name of the place
and from what station he had started.[81]

One day Buffon, lost in thought, ascended a tower and slid down by the
ropes, unconscious of what he was doing, like a somnambulist. Mozart, in
carving meat, so often cut his fingers, accustomed only to the piano,
that he had to give up this duty to other persons. Of Bishop Münster, it
is said that, seeing at the door of his own ante-chamber the
announcement: “The master of the house is out,” he remained there
awaiting his own return.[82] Of Toucherel, it is told by Arago, that he
once even forgot his own name. Beethoven, on returning from an excursion
in the forest, often left his coat on the grass, and often went out
hatless. Once, at Neustadt, he was arrested in this condition, and taken
to prison as a vagabond; here he might have remained, as no one would
believe that he was Beethoven, if Herzog, the conductor of the
orchestra, had not arrived to deliver him. Gioia, in the excitement of
composition, wrote a chapter on the table of his bureau instead of on
paper. The Abbé Beccaria, absorbed in his experiments, said during mass:
“_Ite! experientia facta est_.” Saint Dominic, in the midst of a
princely repast, suddenly struck the table and exclaimed: “_Conclusum
est contra Manicheos_.” It is told of Ampère that having written a
formula, with which he was pre-occupied, on the back of a cab, he
started in pursuit as soon as the cab went off.[83] Diderot hired
vehicles which he then left at the door and forgot, thus needlessly
paying coachmen for whole days. He often forgot the hour, the day, the
month, and even the person to whom he was speaking; he would then speak
long monologues like a somnambulist.[84] Rossini, conducting the
orchestra at the rehearsal of his _Barbiere_, which was a fiasco, did
not perceive that the public and even the performers had left him alone
in the theatre until he reached the end of an act.

_Originality_.--Hagen notes that originality is the quality that
distinguishes genius from talent.[85] And Jürgen-Meyer: “The imagination
of talent reproduces the stated fact; the inspiration of genius makes it
anew. The first disengages or repeats; the second invents or creates.
Talent aims at a point which appears difficult to reach; genius aims at
a point which no one perceives. The novelty, it must be understood,
resides not in the elements, but in their shock.” Novelty and grandeur
are the two chief characters which Bettinelli attributes to genius; “for
this reason,” he says, “poets call themselves _troubadours_ or
_trouvères_.” Cardan conceived the idea of the education of deaf mutes
before Harriot; he caught a glimpse of the application of algebra to
geometry and geometric constructions before Descartes.[86] Giordano
Bruno divined the modern theories of cosmology and of the origin of
ideas. Cola di Rienzi conceived Italian unity, with Rome as capital,
four hundred years before Cavour and Mazzini. Stoppani admits that the
geological theory of Dante, with regard to the formation of seas, is at
all points in accordance with the accepted ideas of to-day.

Genius divines facts before completely knowing them; thus Goethe
described Italy very well before knowing it; and Schiller, the land and
people of Switzerland without having been there. And it is on account of
those divinations which all precede common observation, and because
genius, occupied with lofty researches, does not possess the habits of
the many, and because, like the lunatic and unlike the man of talent, he
is often disordered, the man of genius is scorned and misunderstood.
Ordinary persons do not perceive the steps which have led the man of
genius to his creation, but they see the difference between his
conclusions and those of others, and the strangeness of his conduct.
Rossini’s _Barbiere_, and Beethoven’s _Fidelio_ were received with
hisses; Boito’s _Mefistofele_ and Wagner’s _Lohengrin_ have been hissed
at Milan. How many academicians have smiled compassionately at Marzolo,
who has discovered a new philosophic world! Bolyai, for his invention of
the fourth dimension in anti-Euclidian geometry, has been called the
geometrician of the insane, and compared to a miller who wishes to make
flour of sand. Every one knows the treatment accorded to Fulton and
Columbus and Papin, and, in our own days, to Piatti and Praga and Abel,
and to Schliemann, who found Ilium, where no one else had dreamed of
looking for it, while learned academicians laughed. “There never was a
liberal idea,” wrote Flaubert, “which has not been unpopular; never an
act of justice which has not caused scandal; never a great man who has
not been pelted with potatoes or struck by knives. The history of human
intellect is the history of human stupidity, as M. de Voltaire
said.”[87]

In this persecution, men of genius have no fiercer or more terrible
enemies than the men of academies, who possess the weapons of talent,
the stimulus of vanity, and the _prestige_ by preference accorded to
them by the vulgar, and by governments which, in large part, consist of
the vulgar. There are, indeed, countries in which the ordinary level of
intelligence sinks so low that the inhabitants come to hate not only
genius, but even talent.

Originality, though usually of an aimless kind, is observed with some
frequency among the insane--as we shall see later on--and especially
among those inclined to literature. They sometimes reach the divinations
of genius: thus Bernardi, at the Florence Asylum in 1529, wished to show
the existence of language among apes.[88]

In exchange for this fatal gift, both the one and the other have the
same ignorance of the necessities of practical life which always seems
to them less important than their own dreams, and at the same time they
possess the disordered habits which renders this ignorance dangerous.

_Fondness for Special Words._--This originality causes men of genius, as
well as the insane, to create special words, marked with their own
imprint, unintelligible to others, but to which they attach
extraordinary significance and importance. Such are the _dignità_ of
Vico, the _individuità_ of Carrara, the _odio serrato_ of Alfieri, the
_albero epogonico_ of Marzolo, and the _immiarsi_, the _intuarsi_, and
the _entomata_ of Dante.




