CHAPTER IV.

THE INFLUENCE OF DISEASE ON GENIUS.

Spinal diseases--Fevers--Injuries to the head and their relation to
genius.


Gérard de Nerval in his book, _Le Rêve et la Vie_, after having
confessed that he often wrote in a state of morbid exaltation, adds that
the old saying _Mens sana in corpore sano_ is false, for many powerful
minds have been allied to weak and diseased bodies.

Conolly treated a man whose intelligence was aroused by the use of
blisters, and another whose ability was called forth during the initial
period of phthisis and gout. Cabanis, Tissot, and Pomme observe that
certain febrile conditions provoke extraordinary mental activity.
Sylvester remarks that during the nocturnal fever of what he describes
as a fortunate attack of bronchitis he was enabled to reach the solution
of a mathematical problem.[273]

A man of genius, Maine de Biran, who was always ill, well expresses the
influence of infirmities on genius, “The feeling of existence,” he
writes, “is not found among the majority of men because with them it is
continuous; when a man does not suffer he does not think of himself;
disease alone and the habit of reflection enable us to distinguish
ourselves.”

It has frequently happened that injuries to the head and acute diseases,
those frequent causes of insanity, have changed a very ordinary
individual into a man of genius. Vico, when a child, fell from a high
staircase and fractured his right parietal bone. Gratry, a mediocre
singer, became a great master, after a beam had fractured his skull.
Mabillon, almost an idiot from childhood, fell down a stone staircase
at the age of twenty-six, and so badly injured his skull that it had to
be trepanned; from that time he displayed the characteristics of genius.
Gall, who narrates this fact, knew a Dane who had been half idiotic, and
who became intelligent at the age of thirteen, after having rolled head
foremost down a staircase.[274] Wallenstein was looked upon as a fool
until one day he fell out of a window, and henceforward began to show
remarkable ability. Some years ago, a cretin of Savoy, having being
bitten by a mad dog, became very intelligent during the last days of his
life. Cases have been recorded in which ordinary persons have displayed
extraordinary intelligence after diseases of the spinal cord.[275] “It
is possible that my disease [of the spinal cord] may have given a morbid
character to my later compositions,” wrote with true divination the
unfortunate Heine. And the remark does not apply to his later writings
only. “My mental excitement,” he wrote, some months before his condition
had become aggravated, “is the effect of disease rather than of genius.
I have written verses to appease my suffering a little.... In this
horrible night of senseless pain my poor head is flung backwards and
forwards, shaking with pitiless gaiety the bells on my jester’s
cap.”[276] Béclard turned from mere theories to experiment, after a
stroke of apoplexy.[277] Pasteur’s greatest discoveries were made after
a stroke of apoplexy. Bichat and Schroeder van der Kolk have observed
that men with anchylosis of the neck possess remarkably bright
intelligence. It is a common saying that the hump-backed are keen and
malicious. Rokitansky sought to explain this by the resulting curve of
the aorta, after giving origin to the vessels which supply the brain,
the volume of the heart and the arterial pressure in the head being thus
augmented.




CHAPTER V.

THE INFLUENCE OF CIVILIZATION AND OF OPPORTUNITY.

Large Towns--Large Schools--Accidents--Misery--Power--Education.


However clearly such laws as we have examined may seem to be
ascertained, the conclusions deduced from them must be accepted with a
certain reserve; since there exists a series of factors, almost
impossible to seize, which intercept and confound all these influences,
not excepting even the orographic.

We have already seen how great agglomerations of individuals, whatever
the climate and race, are sufficient to increase the number of artists
and of talents. But might not this be a purely factitious effect, as,
for instance, when individuals who have left their birthplace for some
great capital (as often happens in the case of infants and invalids),
are looked upon as natives of the latter? This becomes certain, if we
remember the pernicious influence of great towns, and consider with
Smiles, that the life of large towns is not favourable to intellectual
work, that men who have had a great influence on their age have been
brought up in solitude, and that all the great men of England, and even
of London, were born in the country, though this fact is often ignored
on account of their having fixed their residence in the capital. Carlyle
says that a man born in London seems but the fraction of a man. We read,
in the _Lives of the Engineers_, that all great English engineers have
been country-bred.

The establishment of a school of painting, even when it is the result of
an importation, makes an artistic centre of a place which was not so
previously, and, if the establishment goes back to a very distant time,
the number of artists becomes very large. Let us look, for example, at
Piedmont, where, assuredly, a military education reinforced by climate
and race, and, to a still greater degree, by clerical influence,
retarded for a long time the development of the fine arts, and
especially of music. Up to 1460, celebrated painters were not numerous
in Piedmont, and the only ones to be found there were of foreign origin,
such as Bono and Bondiforte. But Bondiforte, who had been sent for from
Milan, was immediately followed by Sodoma, Martini, Giovannone,
Vercellese. Ferro di Valduggia was followed by Lanini, and Tansi by
Valduggia, in the same way as Viotti’s example attracted thither, within
a short time, five celebrated violinists.

Scarcely had a few distinguished painters--such as Macrino and Gaudenzio
Ferrari, shown themselves at Novara, at Alba, and at Vercelli, than
others were immediately seen to appear; and, in our own day, wherever
military influence has been entirely superseded by social, this province
has furnished, in proportion to its size, as many artists as the rest,
or even more, and those of quite equal standing--_e.g._, Gastaldi,
Mosso, Pittara, &c.

Had any one undertaken, 300 years ago, to draw up the statistics of
Scotch thought, he would scarcely have found a single name to include in
his list. Yet Scotland, delivered from the leaden mantle of religious
intolerance, has become, as we have seen, one of the richest centres in
Europe for bold and original thinkers.

On the other hand, Greece, placed in ancient times by race and nature in
the first rank, as regards intellectual creation, no longer shows any
trace of her superiority. Nature and the race have not changed, but
slavery, political struggles, and hard living have exhausted all her
strength; for a nation does not afford itself the luxury of art and high
thinking till its existence is assured and easy.

Thus the influences of agglomeration might often have been disguised by
the influence of national well-being.

Not that the action of race and climate disappears, but its
manifestations remain latent. The mighty intellect due to the Tuscan
race and climate, reveals itself at the present day--after the
enervating influence of the Medici, the priests, and the linguistic
pedants, has done its work--in the improvisations of Pistoian peasant
women, and the subtle epigrams of the Florentine populace. Genius (such
as that of Pacini, Carrara, Betti, Giusti, Guerrazzi, Carducci) is no
longer endemic, but occurs sporadically.

It appears to me that, in many cases, social influences are more
apparent than real--analogous rather to the peck of the chicken which
cracks the egg-shell than to the spermatozoid which generates the
embryo.

We see that Florence, like Athens, supplied at the epoch of republican
agitations the _maximum_ of Italian genius. But similar agitations in
South America and in France (1789) did not yield as many great men; but
simply a number of men who, being useful in the emergency of the time,
passed for great.[278] One might even be inclined to suspect that the
numerous great men who appeared at Florence were themselves the cause of
her revolutions.[279]

The same assertion holds good of opportunity. Opportunity appears,
sometimes, to have assisted the development of genius. Thus Mutius
Scaevola, having been reproached by Servius Sulpicius with ignorance of
his country’s laws, became a great jurisconsult.

It has often happened that stonecutters in the quarries of Florence, in
the old Republican times, have become celebrated sculptors, like Mino da
Fiesole, Desiderio da Settignano, and Cronaca. Canova and Vincenzo Vela
were also quarrymen, and Hugh Miller, from working as a mason, became a
highly-esteemed geologist.

Andrea del Castagno, a shepherd of Mugello, one day, when overtaken by a
storm, took refuge in an oratory, where a house-painter was daubing a
picture of the Virgin. From thenceforth he felt an irresistible desire
to imitate him, and practised drawing figures in charcoal whenever he
could; so much so, that his fame soon spread among the peasants, and,
afterwards, by the assistance of Bernadino de’ Medici, who enabled him
to study, he became a celebrated painter.

Vespasiano de’ Bisticci, a Florentine paper-maker, whose profession
involved the handling of many books, and contact with a great number of
literary and learned men, took to literature himself.

More frequently, however, opportunity is only the last drop which makes
the vessel run over. This is so true that the cases in which genius has
manifested itself in spite of adverse circumstances and even violent
opposition, are innumerable. It is sufficient to recall Boccaccio,
Goldoni, Muratori, Leopardi, Ascoli, Cellini, Cavour, Petrarch,
Metastasio, and, finally, Socrates, who was obliged to cut and carve
stones. All our recent great musicians--Wagner, Rossini, Verdi--were
misunderstood in their youth.

Long ago, it was said, “He to whom Nature would not tell it, would not
be told by a thousand Athens and a thousand Romes.”[280]

Circumstances, then, and a certain degree of civilization gain
acceptance and toleration for genius and its discoveries which, under
other conditions, would have either passed unnoticed, or met with
ridicule, and even persecution.

History shows that great discoveries are rarely absolute novelties, and
that they have long existed as toys or curiosities. “Steam,” says
Fournier, “was a plaything for children in the time of Hero of
Alexandria, and Anthemius of Tralles. The human mind and the needs of
our race have to work by experience, a million times over, before
deducing all the consequences of a fact.[281]

In 1765, Spedding offered _portable gas_, prepared and ready for use, to
the corporation of Whitehaven, and was refused. At a later date came
Chaussier, Minkelers, Lebon, and Windsor, who had no other merit than
that of appropriating his discovery.

Coal had been known ever since the fifteenth century; in 1543 Blasco de
Garay appears to have propelled a vessel by steam and paddles in the
port of Barcelona; the screw-steamer was invented before 1790. When
Papin experimented with steam navigation, he met with nothing but
derision, and was treated as a charlatan. When the screw was at last
applied, Sauvage, who had invented it, never saw it in action, except
from the prison where he was confined for debt.

Daguerreotypy was guessed at in Russia during the sixteenth century, and
again, in Italy, by Fabricius, in 1566. It was afterwards discovered
anew by Thiphaigne de la Roche. Galvanism was also discovered by Cotugno
and by Duverney.

The theory of Natural Selection itself does not belong exclusively to
Darwin. Existing species, it was already said by Lucretius, have only
been able to maintain themselves by their cunning, strength, or
swiftness; others have succumbed. And Plutarch, remarking that horses
which have been pursued by wolves are swifter than others, gives this
reason--that, the slower ones of the band having been overtaken and
devoured, only the more agile survived.

Newton’s law of attraction was already foreshadowed in works of the
sixteenth century--more particularly in those of Copernicus and
Kepler--and was nearly completed by Hooke.

It has been the same with magnetism, chemistry, and even criminal
anthropology. Civilization, therefore, does not _produce_ men of genius,
and discoveries; but it assists their development, or, more correctly
speaking, determines their acceptance.

It may therefore be admitted that genius can exist in any age and any
country; but, as in the struggle for existence the greater number of
beings are only born to become the prey of others, so many men of
genius, if they do not meet with the favourable moment, either remain
unknown or are misunderstood.

While there are some civilizations which assist the development of
genius, others are injurious to it. In those parts of Italy, for
instance, where civilization is most ancient, and where it has been
frequently renewed, becoming stronger at each renewal, though the
temper of the people is more open, the formation of genius is of rare
occurrence. In general, when the average culture of a nation is of
earlier date, novelties are less eagerly received. On the contrary, in
countries where civilization is recent, as in Russia, new ideas are
accepted with the greatest favour.

When the repetition of the same observation renders a new truth less
difficult to accept, then genius is not only recognized as useful and
even necessary, but received with acclamations. The public, perceiving
the coincidence between a given civilization and the manifestation of
genius, thinks that the two are connected, confusing the slight
influence which determines the hatching of the chicks with the act of
fecundation--which, on the contrary, depends on race, atmospheric
influences, nutrition, &c.

This, too, is what takes place in our own day. Hypnotism exists to prove
how many times, even under our very eyes, a scientific notion may be
renewed, and each time taken for a new discovery. Every age is not
equally ripe for inventions without precedents, or with too few; and
those which are not ripe, are incapable of perceiving their inaptitude
for adopting them. In Italy, for twenty years, the man who had
discovered pellagrozeine was looked upon by the authorities as a madman.
At the present day the academic world, always composed of intelligent
mediocrities, laughs at criminal anthropology, is mildly sarcastic
towards hypnotism, and looks on homœopathy as a joke. Perhaps even my
friends and myself, in laughing at spiritualism, are misled by the
misoneism latent in us all, and, like hypnotised persons, are utterly
unable even to perceive that such is the case.

Misery is often the stimulus of genius. It was necessity rather than
natural inclination which drove Dryden to become an author. Goldsmith,
when he had knocked at every door in vain, took to writing. And so again
and again.

It is true also that extreme misery frequently ruins genius. It placed
immense difficulties in the way of Columbus. George Stephenson’s steam
engine would have been an abortion, if he had not been enabled at great
sacrifice to educate his son. Meyerbeer, who produced so laboriously,
and whose genius cannot be explained apart from his Italian journeys and
life, would have been in a deplorable condition without wealth.

Many men of genius, on the other hand, have been spoilt by wealth and
power. Jacoby has shown that unlimited power hastens degeneration, and
tends to produce megalomania and dementia in those who possess it.

The influence of education has been investigated less than it deserves.
Without the school, many believe there would be no genius. What, it is
said, would have become of Metastasio, if he had not been picked up and
educated? Giotto would merely have amazed the shepherds of his native
valleys by daubing the walls of some chapel. Paganini would have been
unheard of. Pitré, in his admirable book, _Usi e costumi della Sicilia_,
writes at length of certain wonderful poetasters, who narrate fantastic
lays of knighthood to the people of Palermo, yet they can neither read
nor write. Who knows what they would do if they were educated?

Those who have been among the mountains know the works produced by
certain shepherds. They are made with coarse instruments, yet they
reveal marvellous taste and delicacy. Such men give us the impression of
so many aborted Michelangelos; they are men of genius who have lacked
the opportunity of manifesting themselves.

But these facts do not neutralize others which show the pernicious
influence of the school on genius. Hazlitt well said that whoever has
passed through all the grades of classical instruction without having
become a fool, may consider himself to have escaped by miracle. Darwin
feared to send his sons to school. Who can describe the martyrdom of the
child of genius compelled to spend his brains over a quagmire of things
in which he will succeed the less the more he is attracted in other
directions? He rebels, and then begins a fierce struggle between the
pupil of genius and the professor of mediocrity, who cannot understand
his fury and his instincts, and who represses and punishes them. Balzac,
who proved this, and was driven away from school after school, has
minutely analyzed this bitterness of the college in his wonderful study,
_Louis Lambert_. One shudders on thinking of the youth of such lofty and
serene intelligence, treated with contempt as stupid and idle, and his
discourse on will which had cost him so much labour destroyed unread by
an ignorant master. And so, also, it was with Vallès. Verdi was
unanimously rejected at the Conservatorio of Milan in 1832, even as a
paying pupil. Rossini was regarded as an idiot by his fellow-pupils, and
by his teacher, as also was Wagner. Coleridge has written with
bitterness of his schooldays, when, he says, his nature was always
repressed. Howard was considered so stupid at school that he was sent to
a druggist’s. Pestalozzi was looked upon as a silly and incapable boy,
whose spelling and writing were incorrigibly bad. Crébillon as a youth
was regarded as roguish and lazy, and when he left the university he was
labelled: _Puer ingeniosus, sed insignis nebulo_. Cabanis as a boy
showed very early signs of uncommon intelligence, but the severe
discipline of school only served to make him a dissembler, and he was
finally expelled. Diderot was regarded as the shame of his house. Verdi,
Rossini, Howard, Cabanis, would not allow themselves to be defeated, but
how many, discouraged, have lost faith in themselves! It is useless to
say that this struggle for existence results in the survival of the
fittest; for even the weakest men of genius are worth more than
mediocrities, and it is a sin to lose a single one. We are not here
dealing with a phenomenon like that presented by the struggle of lower
organisms. The case is even opposed, since their great sensibility
renders men of genius more fragile. The persecutions of the school,
tormenting these beings when they are in their first youth and most
sensitive, cause us to lose those who, being more fragile, are better.
Here, therefore, the struggle for existence suppresses the strongest, or
at all events the greatest. The worst of this is that there is no
remedy. Teachers are not men of genius, and in any case they cannot, and
should not, look to anything but the manufacture of mediocrity. At all
events, let no obstacles be put in the way of genius.




