PART IV.

_SYNTHESIS. THE DEGENERATIVE PSYCHOSIS OF GENIUS._

CHAPTER I.

CHARACTERISTICS OF INSANE MEN OF GENIUS.....314-329

Characterlessness--Vanity--Precocity--Alcoholism--Vagabondage--
Versatility--Originality--Style--Religious doubts--Sexual
abnormalities--Egoism--Eccentricity--Inspiration.

CHAPTER II.

ANALOGY OF SANE TO INSANE GENIUS.....330-335

Want of character--Pride--Precocity--Alcoholism--Degenerative
signs--Obsession--Men of genius in revolutions.

CHAPTER III.

THE EPILEPTOID NATURE OF GENIUS.....336-352

Etiology--Symptoms--Confessions of men of genius--The life of a great
epileptic--Napoleon--Saint Paul--The saints--Philanthropic hysteria.

CHAPTER IV.

SANE MEN OF GENIUS.....353-358

Their unperceived
defects--Richelieu--Sesostris--Foscolo--Michelangelo--Darwin.

CHAPTER V.

CONCLUSIONS.....359-361

APPENDIX.....363-366

INDEX.....367-370




THE MAN OF GENIUS.




PART I.

_THE CHARACTERISTICS OF GENIUS._




CHAPTER I.

HISTORY OF THE PROBLEM.

     Aristotle--Plato--Democritus--Felix Plater--Pascal--Diderot--Modern
     writers on genius.


It is a sad mission to cut through and destroy with the scissors of
analysis the delicate and iridescent veils with which our proud
mediocrity clothes itself. Very terrible is the religion of truth. The
physiologist is not afraid to reduce love to a play of stamens and
pistils, and thought to a molecular movement. Even genius, the one human
power before which we may bow the knee without shame, has been classed
by not a few alienists as on the confines of criminality, one of the
teratologic forms of the human mind, a variety of insanity.

This impious profanation is not, however, altogether the work of
doctors, nor is it the fruit of modern scepticism. The great Aristotle,
once the father, and still the friend, of philosophers, observed that,
under the influence of congestion of the head, “many persons become
poets, prophets, and sybils, and, like Marcus the Syracusan, are pretty
good poets while they are maniacal; but when cured can no longer write
verse.”[5] And again, “Men illustrious in poetry, politics, and arts,
have often been melancholic and mad, like Ajax, or misanthropic, like
Bellerophon. Even in modern times such characters have been noted in
Socrates, Empedocles, Plato, and in many others, especially poets.”[6]

In the _Phædo_, Plato affirms that “delirium is by no means an evil,
but, on the contrary, when it comes by the gift of the gods, a very
great benefit. In delirium, the prophetesses of Delphi and Dodona
performed a thousand services for the citizens of Greece; while in cold
blood they were of little use, or rather of none. It often happened
that, when the gods afflicted men with fatal epidemics, a sacred
delirium took possession of some mortal, and inspired him with a remedy
for those misfortunes. Another kind of delirium, that inspired by the
Muses, when a simple and pure soul is excited to glorify with poetry the
deeds of heroes, serves for the instruction of future generations.”

Democritus was more explicit, and would not believe that there could be
a good poet who was not out of his mind:--

    “_Excludit sanos Helicone poetas_
     _Democritus._”[7]

It was, evidently, the observation of these facts, wrongly interpreted
and, according to a common habit, transformed into superstitions, which
caused ancient nations to venerate the insane as beings inspired from on
high. We possess not only the witness of history to this effect, but
also that of the words _navi_ and _mesugan_ in Hebrew and _nigrata_ in
Sanscrit, in which the ideas of insanity and prophecy are confused and
assimilated.

Felix Plater affirmed that he had known persons who, although they
excelled in certain arts, were yet mad, and betrayed their infirmity by
a curious seeking for praise, and by strange and indecent acts. He had
known at Court an architect, a celebrated sculptor, and a distinguished
musician, who were mad.[8]

Pascal, later on, repeated that extreme intelligence was very near to
extreme madness, and himself offered an example of it. Diderot wrote: “I
conjecture that these men of sombre and melancholy temperament only owed
that extraordinary and almost Divine penetration which they possessed at
intervals, and which led them to ideas, sometimes so mad and sometimes
so sublime, to a periodical derangement of the organism. They then
believed themselves inspired, and were insane. Their attacks were
preceded by a kind of brutish apathy, which they regarded as the natural
condition of fallen man. Lifted out of this lethargy by the tumult
within them, they imagined that it was Divinity, which came down to
visit and exercise them.... Oh! how near are genius and madness! Those
whom heaven has branded for evil or for good are more or less subject to
these symptoms; they reveal them more or less frequently, more or less
violently. Men imprison them and chain them, or raise statues to
them.”[9]

Many examples of men who were at once mad and highly intelligent were
offered by Hécart in his _Stultitiana, ou petite bibliographie des Fous
de Valenciennes, par un homme en démence_; by Delepierre, an
enthusiastic bibliophile, in his curious _Histoire littéraire des Fous_
(1860); by Forgues, in _Revue de Paris_ (1826); and by an anonymous
writer in _Sketches of Bedlam_ (London, 1873).

On the other hand, it was shown in Lélut’s _Démon de Socrate_ (1836) and
_Amulette de Pascal_ (1846), in Verga’s _Lipemania del Tasso_ (1850) and
in my own _Pazzia di Cardano_ (1856), that there are men of genius who
have long been subject to hallucinations, and even to monomania. Other
proofs, the more precious because impartial, were supplied by
Réveillé-Parise, in his _Physiologie et Hygiène des hommes livrés aux
travaux de l’esprit_ (1856). Moreau (de Tours), who delighted in the
least verisimilar aspects of truth, in his solid monograph, _Psychologie
Morbide_ (1859), and J. A. Schilling, in his _Psychiatrische Briefe_
(1863), endeavoured to show, by researches that were very copious
although not very strict in method, that genius is always a neurosis,
and often a true insanity. Hagen has more recently sought to prove a
thesis which is partly the same in his _Verwandtschaft des Genies mit
dem Irrsinn_ (Berlin, 1877), and, indirectly, Jürgen-Meyer, in his
admirable monograph, _Genie und Talent_ (from the _Zeitschrift für
Völker-psychologie_, 1879). These two writers have tried to explain the
physiology of genius, and, singularly, they have reached conclusions
which were reached, more by intuition than through close observation, by
an Italian Jesuit, now quite forgotten--Bettinelli--in his book, _Dell’
entusiasmo nelle belle Arti_ (Milan, 1769).

Radestock, in his _Genie und Wahnsinn_ (Breslau, 1884), added little to
the solution of the problem, as he merely copied, for the most part,
from his predecessors, without profiting greatly by their work.

Among recent writers, I note Tarnowski and Tchukinova, who to the
Russian translation of my book (St. Petersburg, 1885) have added many
new documents from the history of Russian literature; Maxime du Camp,
who in his curious _Souvenirs Littéraires_ (1887), has shown how many
modern French writers have concealed within them the sorrowful seed of
insanity; Ramos Mejia, who, in his _Neurosis de los Hombres Celebres de
la Historia Argentina_ (Buenos Ayres, 1885), shows how nearly all the
great men of the South American Republics were inebriate, neurotic, or
insane; A. Tebaldi, who, in his book _Ragione e Pazzia_ (Milan, 1884),
brings fresh documents to the literature of insanity; and, finally, that
acute thinker and brilliant writer, Pisani-Dossi, who has given us a
curious study,[10] which is a monograph on madness in art; as in my _Tre
Tribuni_ (1889) I have attempted to do with the insane and semi-insane
in their relation to politics.




