CHAPTER III.

THE EPILEPTOID NATURE OF GENIUS.

     Etiology--Symptoms--Confessions of men of genius--The life of a
     great epileptic--Napoleon--Saint Paul--The saints--Philanthropic
     hysteria.


We may, however, enter more deeply into the study of the phenomena of
genius by the light of modern theories on epilepsy. According to the
entirely harmonious researches of clinical and experimental observers,
this malady resolves itself into localised irritation of the cerebral
cortex, manifesting itself in attacks which are sometimes instantaneous,
sometimes of longer duration, but always intermittent and always resting
on a degenerative basis--either hereditary or predisposed to irritation
by alcoholic influence, by lesions of the skull, &c.[459] In this way we
catch a glimpse of another conclusion, viz., that the creative power of
genius may be a form of degenerative psychosis belonging to the family
of epileptic affections.

The fact that genius is frequently derived from parents either addicted
to drink, of advanced age, or insane, certainly points to this
conclusion, as also does the appearance of genius subsequently to
lesions of the head. It is also indicated by frequent anomalies,
especially of cranial asymmetry; the capacity of the skull being
sometimes excessive, sometimes abnormally small; by the frequency of
moral insanity, and of hallucinations; by sexual and intellectual
precocity, and not rarely by somnambulism. To these we may add the
prevalence of suicide, which is, on the other hand, very common among
epileptic patients; the intermittence of bodily and mental functions,
more particularly the occurrence of amnesia and analgesia; the frequent
tendency to vagabondage; religious feeling, manifesting itself even in
the case of atheists, as with Comte; the strange terrors by which they
are often seized (W. Scott, Byron, Haller); the double personality, the
multiplicity of simultaneous delusions, so common in epileptic
cases;[460] the frequent recurrence of delusions produced by the most
trifling causes; the same misoneism; and the same relation to
criminality, which finds its point of union in moral insanity. Add to
this the origin and ancestry of criminals and imbeciles, which
constantly show traces both of genius and epilepsy, as may be seen in
the genealogical charts given of the families of the Cæsars and Charles
V.;[461] and the strange passion for wandering, and for animals, which I
have also often found in degenerated, and especially in epileptic,
subjects.[462]

The distractions of mind for which great men are so famous, are often,
writes Tonnini, nothing else but epileptic absences.[463]

The greatest proof of all, however, is that affective insensibility,
that loss of moral sense, common to all men of genius, whether sane or
insane, which makes of great conquerors, even in the most recent times,
nothing else than brigands on a large scale.

Such conclusions may seem strange to persons unacquainted with the way
in which the region of epilepsy has been extended in modern times, so
that many cases of headache (hemicrania) or simple loss of memory, are
now recognized as forms of epilepsy, though in disguise; their
manifestation--as Savage has observed--causing the disappearance of
every trace of the pre-existing epilepsy. It is sufficient, however, to
recall to the reader the numerous men of genius of the first order who
have been seized by motory epilepsy, or by that kind of morbid
irritability which is well known to supply its place. Among these we
find such names as Napoleon, Molière, Julius Cæsar, Petrarch, Peter the
Great, Mahomet, Handel, Swift, Richelieu, Charles V., Flaubert,
Dostoïeffsky, and St. Paul.[464]

To those acquainted with the so-called binomial or serial law, according
to which no phenomenon occurs singly--each one being, on the contrary,
the expression of a series of less well-defined but analogous
facts--such frequent occurrence of epilepsy among the most distinguished
of distinguished men can but indicate a greater prevalence of this
disease among men of genius than was previously thought possible, and
suggests the hypothesis of the epileptoid nature of genius itself.

In this connection, it is important to note how, in these men, the
convulsion made its appearance but rarely in the course of their lives.
Now it is well known that, in such cases, the psychic equivalent (here
the exercise of creative power) is more frequent and intense.[465]

But, above all, the identity is proved to us by the analogy of the
epileptic seizure with the moment of inspiration. This active and
violent unconsciousness in the one case manifests itself by creation,
and in the other by motory agitation.

The demonstration is completed when we come to analyse this creative
inspiration or _œstrus_ which has often suggested epilepsy, even to
those ignorant of the recent discoveries with regard to its nature. And
this, not only on account of its frequent association with insensibility
to pain, with irregularity of the pulse, and with an unconsciousness
which is often that of a somnambulist, of its instantaneous occurrence
and intermittent character; but also because it is not seldom
accompanied by convulsive movements of the limbs, followed by amnesia,
and provoked by substances or conditions which cause or increase the
excessive flow of blood to the brain; or by powerful sensations; and
also because it may succeed or pass into hallucinations.

This resemblance between inspiration and the epileptic seizure,
moreover, is demonstrated by an even directer and more cogent proof--the
confessions of eminent men of genius, which show how completely the one
may be confounded with the other. Such confessions are those of
Goncourt[466] and Buffon, and especially of Mahomet and Dostoïeffsky.

“There are moments,” writes the latter (in _Besi_)--“and it is only a
matter of five or six seconds--when you suddenly feel the presence of
the eternal harmony. This phenomenon is neither terrestrial nor
celestial, but it is an indescribable something, which man, in his
mortal body, can scarcely endure--he must either undergo a physical
transformation or die. It is a clear and indisputable feeling: all at
once, you feel as though you were placed in contact with the whole of
nature, and you say, ‘Yes! this is true.’ When God created the world, He
said, at the end of every day of creation, ‘Yes! this is true! this is
good!’ ... And it is not tenderness, nor yet joy. You do not forgive
anything, because there is nothing to forgive. Neither do you love--oh!
this feeling is higher than love! The terrible thing is the frightful
clearness with which it manifests itself, and the rapture with which it
fills you. If this state were to last more than five seconds, the soul
could not endure it, and would have to disappear. During those five
seconds, I live a whole human existence, and for that I would give my
whole life and not think I was paying it too dearly.’

“‘You are not epileptic?’

“‘No.’

“‘You will become so. I have heard that it begins just in that way. A
man subject to this malady[467] has minutely described to me the
sensation which precedes the attack; and in listening to you, I thought
I heard him speaking. He, too, spoke of a period of five seconds, and
said it was impossible to endure this condition longer. Remember
Mahomet’s water-jar; for the space of time it took to empty it, the
prophet was rapt into Paradise. Your five seconds are the jar--Paradise
is your harmony--and Mahomet was epileptic! Take care you do not become
so also, Kiriloff!’”[468]

And in the _Idiot_ (vol. i. p. 296):--

“ ... I remember, among other things, a phenomenon which used to precede
his epileptic attacks, when they came on in a waking state. In the midst
of the dejection, the mental marasmus, the anxiety, which the madman
experienced, there were moments in which, all of a sudden, his brain
became inflamed, and all his vital forces suddenly rose to a prodigious
degree of intensity. The sensation of life, of conscious existence, was
multiplied almost tenfold in these swiftly-passing moments.

“A strange light illuminated his heart and mind. All agitation was
calmed, all doubt and perplexity resolved itself into a superior
harmony, a serene and tranquil gaiety, which yet was completely
rational. But these radiant moments were only a prelude to the last
instant--that immediately succeeded by the attack. That instant was, in
truth, ineffable. When, at a later time, after his recovery, the prince
reflected on this subject, he said to himself, ‘Those fleeting moments,
in which our highest consciousness of ourselves--and therefore our
highest life--is manifested, are due only to disease, to the suspension
of normal conditions; and, if so, it is not a higher life, but, on the
contrary, one of a lower order.’ This, however, did not prevent his
reaching a most paradoxical conclusion. ‘What matter, after all, though
it be a disease--an abnormal tension--if the result, as I with recovered
health remember and analyze it, includes the very highest degree of
harmony and beauty; if at this moment I have an unspeakable, hitherto
unsuspected feeling of harmony, of peace, of my whole nature being
fused in the impetus of a prayer, with the highest synthesis of life?’

“This farrago of nonsense seemed to the prince perfectly comprehensible;
and the only fault it had in his eyes was that of being too feeble a
rendering of his thoughts. He could not doubt, or even admit the
possibility of a doubt, of the real existence of this condition of
‘beauty and prayer,’ or of its constituting ‘the highest synthesis of
life.’

“But did he not in these moments experience visions analogous to the
fantastic and debasing dreams produced by the intoxication of opium,
haschisch, or wine? He was able to form a sane judgment on this point
when the morbid condition had ceased. These moments were only
distinguished--to define them in a word--by the extraordinary
heightening of the inward sense. If in that instant--that is to say, in
the last moment of consciousness which precedes the attack--the patient
was able to say clearly, and with full consciousness of the import of
his words, ‘Yes, for this moment one would give a whole lifetime,’ there
is no doubt that, as far as he alone was concerned, that moment was
worth a lifetime.

“No doubt, too, it is to this same instant that the epileptic Mahomet
alluded, when he said that he used to visit all the abodes of Allah in
less time than it would take to empty his water-jar.”

I will add here some lines from the _Correspondance_ of Flaubert:--

“If sensitive nerves are enough to make a poet, I should be worth more
than Shakespeare and Homer.... I who have heard through closed doors
people talking in low tones thirty paces away, across whose abdomen one
may see all the viscera throbbing, and who have sometimes felt in the
space of a minute a million thoughts, images, and combinations of all
kinds throwing themselves into my brain at once, as it were the lighted
squibs of fireworks.”

Let us now compare these descriptions of an attack, which might be
called one of _psychic epilepsy_ (and which corresponds exactly to the
physiological idea of epilepsy--_i.e._, cortical irritation), with all
the descriptions given us by authors themselves of the inspiration of
genius. We shall then see how perfect is the correspondence between the
two sets of phenomena.

In order the better to illustrate these strange displacements of
function in epileptic subjects, I should call attention to an example,
cited by Dr. Frigerio, of an epileptic patient who, at the moment of
seizure, felt the venereal desire awaken, not in the generative organs,
but in the epigastrium, accompanied by ejaculation.[469]

Let me add that, in certain cases, it is not only isolated paroxysms
which recall the psychic phenomenology of the epileptic, but the whole
life. Bourget remarks that, “for the Goncourts, life reduces itself to a
series of epileptic attacks, preceded and followed by a blank.” And what
the Goncourts wrote has always been autobiography. Zola in his
_Romanciers Naturalistes_ gives us this confession by Balzac: “He works
under the influence of circumstances, of which the union is a mystery;
he does not belong to himself; he is the plaything of a force which is
eminently capricious; on some days he would not touch his brush, he
would not write a line for an empire. In the evening when dreaming, in
the morning when rising, in the midst of some joyous feast, it happens
that a burning coal suddenly touches this brain, these hands, this
tongue: a word awakens ideas that are born, grow, ferment. Such is the
artist, the humble instrument of a despotic will; he obeys a master.”

Let us glance at the pictures which Taine has given us of the greatest
of modern conquerors, and Renan of the greatest of the apostles:--

“The principal characteristics of Napoleon’s genius,” says Taine, “are
its originality and comprehensiveness. No detail escapes him. The
quantity of facts which his mind stores up and retains, the number of
ideas which he elaborates and utters, seem to surpass human capacity.

“In the art of ruling men his genius was supreme. His method of
procedure--which is that of the experimental sciences--consisted in
controlling every theory by a precise application observed under
definite conditions. All his sayings are fire-flashes. ‘Adultery,’ said
he to the Conseil d’Etat, when the question of divorce was under
discussion, ‘is not exceptional; it is very common--_c’est une affaire
de canapé_.’ ‘Liberty,’ he exclaimed, on another occasion (and he
remained faithful all his life to the spirit of this exclamation), ‘is
the necessity of a small and privileged class, endowed by nature with
faculties higher than those of the mass of mankind; _it may therefore be
abridged with impunity_. Equality, on the contrary, pleases the
multitude.”

“He possesses a faculty which carries us back to the Middle Ages--an
astounding _constructive_ imagination. What he accomplished is
surprising; but he undertook far more, and dreamed much more even than
that. However vigorous his practical faculties may have been, his poetic
faculty was still stronger; it was even greater than it ought to have
been in a statesman. We see greatness in him exaggerated into immensity,
and immensity degenerating into madness. What aspiring, monstrous
conceptions revolved, accumulated, superseded each other in that
marvellous brain! ‘Europe,’ he said, ‘is a mole-hill; there have never
been great empires or great revolutions save in the East, where there
are six hundred millions of men.’”

In Egypt, he was thinking of conquering Syria, re-establishing the
Eastern Empire at Constantinople, and returning to Paris by way of
Adrianople and Vienna. The East allured him with the mirage of
omnipotence; in the East he caught a glimpse of the possibility that, a
new Mahomet, he might found a new religion. Confined to Europe, his
dream was to re-create the empire of Charlemagne; to make Paris the
physical, intellectual, and religious capital of Europe, and assemble
within its precincts the princes, kings, and popes, who should have
become his vassals. By way of Russia, he would then advance towards the
Ganges, and the supremacy of India. “The artist enclosed within the
politician has issued from his sheath; he creates in the region of the
ideal and the impossible. We know him for what he is--a posthumous
brother of Dante and Michelangelo; only these two worked on paper and in
marble; it was living man, sensitive and suffering flesh, that formed
his material.”

“Napoleon differs from modern men in character as much as do the
contemporaries of Dante and Michelangelo. The sentiments, habits, and
morality professed by him are the sentiments, habits, and morality of
the fifteenth century. ‘I am not a man like other men,’ he exclaimed;
‘the laws of morality and decorum were not made for me.’

“Mme. de Staël and Stendhal compare Napoleon psychologically to the
lesser tyrants of the fourteenth century--Sforza and Castruccio
Castracani. Such, in fact, he was.

“On the evening of the 12th Vendemiaire, being present at the
preparations made by the Sections, he said to Junot, ‘Ah! if the
Sections would only place me at their head, I would answer for it that
they should be in the Tuileries within two hours, and all these wretched
Conventionnels out of it!’ Five hours later, being called to the
assistance of Barras and the Convention, he opened fire on the
Parisians, like a good _condottiere_, who does not give but lends
himself to the first who offers, to the highest bidder, reserving for
himself full liberty of action, and the power of seizing everything,
should the occasion present itself....

“Never, even among the Borgias and Malatestas, was there a more
sensitive and impulsive brain, capable of such electric accumulations
and discharges.... In him, no idea remained purely speculative; each
one, as it occurred, had a tendency to embody itself in action, and
would have done so, if not prevented by force.... Sometimes the outburst
was so sudden that restraint did not come in time. One day, in Egypt, he
upset a decanter of water over a lady’s dress, and, taking her into his
own room, under the pretext of remedying the accident, remained there
with her for some time--too long--while the other guests, seated around
the table, waited, gazing at each other. On another occasion he threw
Prince Louis violently out of the room; on yet another, he kicked
Senator Volney in the stomach.

“At Campo-Formio, he threw down and broke a china ornament, to put an
end to the resistance of the Austrian plenipotentiary. At Dresden, in
1813, when Prince Metternich was most necessary to him, he asked him,
brutally, how much he received from England for defending her interests.

“Never was there a more impatient sensibility. He throws garments that
do not fit him into the fire. His writing--when he tries to write--is a
collection of disconnected and indecipherable characters. He dictates so
quickly that his secretaries can scarcely follow him--if the pen is
behindhand, so much the worse for it; if a volley of oaths and
exclamations give it time to catch up, so much the better. His heart and
intellect are full to overflowing; under pressure like this, the
extempore orator and the excited controversialist take the place of the
statesman.”

“My nerves are irritable,” he said of himself; and, in fact, the tension
of accumulated impressions sometimes produced a physical convulsion; he
was not seldom seen to shed tears under strong emotion. Napoleon wept,
not on account of true and deep feeling, but because “a word--an idea by
itself is a stimulus which reaches the inmost depth of his nature.”
Hence, certain distractions, consequent upon vomitings or fainting fits,
which caused, it is said, the loss of General Vandamme’s corps, after
the battle of Dresden. Though the regulator is so powerful, the balance
of the works is, from time to time, in danger of being deranged.

“An enormous degree of strength was necessary, to co-ordinate, to guide
and to dominate passions of such vitality. In Napoleon, this strength is
an instinct of extraordinary force and harshness--an egoism, not inert,
but active and aggressive, and so far developed as to set up in the
midst of human society a colossal _I_, which can tolerate no life that
is not an appendix, or instrument of its own. Even as a child, he showed
the germs of this personality; he was impatient of all restraint, and
had no trace of conscience; he could brook no rivals, beat those who
refused to render homage to him, and then accused his victims of having
beaten him.

“He looks upon the world as a great banquet, open to every comer, but
where, to be well served, it is necessary for a man to have long arms,
help himself first, and let others take what he leaves.

“‘One has a hold over man through his selfish passions--fear, greed,
sensuality, self-esteem, emulation. If there are some hard particles in
the heap, all one has to do is to crush them.’ Such was the final
conception arrived at by Napoleon; and nothing could induce him to
change it, because this conception is conditioned by his character; he
saw man as he needed to see him. His egoism is reflected in his
ambition--‘so much a part of his inmost nature that he cannot
distinguish it from himself; it makes his head swim. France is a
mistress who is his to enjoy.’ In the exercise of his power he
acknowledges neither intermediaries, nor rivals, nor limits, nor
hindrances.

“To fill his office with zeal and success is not enough for him; above
and beyond the functionary, he vindicates the rights of the man. All who
serve him must extinguish the critical sense in themselves; their
scarcely audible whispers are a conspiracy, or an attack on his majesty.
He requires of them anything and everything--from the manufacture of
false Austrian and Russian bank-notes in 1809 and 1812, to the
preparation of an infernal machine, to blow up the Bourbons in 1814. He
knows nothing of gratitude; when a man is of no further use to him as a
tool, he throws him away....

“During a dance, he would walk about among the ladies, in order to shock
them with unpleasant witticisms; he was always prying into their private
life, and related to the empress herself the favours which, more or less
spontaneously, they granted him.

“What is still stranger, he carried the same methods of proceeding into
his relations with sovereigns and ambassadors of foreign states. In his
correspondence, in his proclamations, in his audiences, he provoked,
threatened, challenged, offended; he divulged their real or supposed
amorous intrigues (the bulletins 9, 17, 18, 19, after the battle of
Jena, evidently accuse the Queen of Prussia of having had an intrigue
with the Emperor Alexander), and reproaches them with a personal insult
to himself, in the employment of such or such a man. He requires of
them, in short, to modify their fundamental laws: he has but a poor
opinion of a government without the power of prohibiting things which
may displease foreign governments.”[470]

This is the completest view of Napoleon ever given by any historian. To
any one acquainted with the psychological constitution of the epileptic,
it becomes clear that Taine has here given us the subtlest and precisest
pathological diagnosis of a case of psychic epilepsy, with its gigantic
megalomaniacal illusions, its impulses, and complete absence of moral
sense.

It is not, therefore, only in moments of inspiration that genius
approaches epilepsy; and the same thing may be said of St. Paul.

St. Paul[471] was of low stature, but stoutly made. His health was
always poor, on account of a strange infirmity which he calls “a thorn
in the flesh,” and which was probably a serious neurosis.

His moral character was anomalous; naturally kind and courteous, he
became ferocious when excited by passion. In the school of Gamaliel, a
moderate Pharisee, he did not learn moderation; as the enthusiastic
leader of the younger Pharisees, he was among the fiercest persecutors
of the Christians.... Hearing that there was a certain number of
disciples at Damascus, he demanded of the high priest a warrant for
arresting them, and left Jerusalem in a disturbed state of mind. On
approaching the plain of Damascus at noon, he had a seizure, evidently
of an epileptic nature, in which he fell to the ground unconscious. Soon
after this, he experienced a hallucination, and saw Jesus himself, who
said to him in Hebrew, “Paul, Paul, why persecutest thou me?” For three
days, seized with fever, he neither ate nor drank, and saw the phantom
of Ananias, whom, as head of the Christian community, he had come to
arrest, making signs to him. The latter was summoned to his bed, and
calm immediately returned to the spirit of Paul, who from that day
forward became one of the most fervid Christians. Without desiring any
more special instruction--as having received a direct revelation from
Christ himself--he regarded himself as one of the apostles, and acted as
such, to the enormous advantage of the Christians. The immense dangers
occasioned by his haughty and arrogant spirit were compensated a
thousand times over by his boldness and originality, which would not
allow the Christian idea to remain within the bounds of a small
association of people “poor in spirit,” who would have let it die out
like Hellenism, but, so to speak, steered boldly out to sea with it. At
Antioch he had a hallucination similar to that of Mahomet at a later
period; he felt himself rapt into the third heaven, where he heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.

Anomalies are also observable in his writings. “He lets himself be
guided by words rather than ideas; some one word which he has in his
mind overpowers him and draws him off into a series of ideas very far
removed from his main subject. His digressions are abrupt, the
development of his ideas is suddenly cut short, his sentences are often
unfinished. No writer was ever so unequal; no literature in the world
presents a sublime passage like 1 Corinthians xiii., side by side with
futile arguments and wearisome detail.”[472]

Epilepsy in men of genius, therefore, is not an accidental phenomenon,
but a true _morbus totius substantiæ_, to express it in medical
language. Hence we gather a fresh indication of the epileptoid nature of
genius.

If, as seems certain, Dostoïeffsky described himself in the _Idiot_, we
have another example of an epileptic genius, whose whole course of life
is determined by the psychology peculiar to the epileptic--impulsivity,
double personality, childishness, which goes back even to the earliest
periods of human life, and alternates with a prophetic penetration, and
with morbid altruism and the exaggerated affectivity of the saint. This
last fact is most important, as bearing on the objection that the usual
immorality of the epileptic would forbid us to connect this type with
that of the saintly character. This objection, however, has been partly
eliminated by the researches of Bianchi, Tonnini, Filippi, according to
whom there are cases, though rare (16 per cent.), of epileptic patients
of good character, who even manifest an exaggerated altruism, though
accompanied by excessive emotionalism.[473]

Hysteria, which is closely related to epilepsy, and similarly connected
with the loss of affectivity, often shows us, side by side with an
exaggerated egoism, certain bursts of excessive altruism, which, at the
same time, have their source in, and depend on, a degree of moral
insanity, and show us the morbid phenomenon in excessive charity.

“There are some ladies,” justly observes Legrand du Saulle,[474] “who,
though remaining in the world, take an ostentatious part in all the good
works going on in their parish; they collect for the poor, work for the
orphans, visit the sick, give alms, watch by the dead, ardently solicit
the benevolence of others, and do a great deal of really helpful work,
while at the same time neglecting their husbands, children, and
household affairs.

“These women ostentatiously and noisily proclaim their benevolence. They
set on foot a work of charity with as much ardour as bogus
company-promoters launch a financial enterprise which is to result in
hyperbolical dividends.

“They go and come, in constantly increasing numbers; they instinctively
act with a charming tact and delicacy, think of everything necessary to
be done, whether in the midst of private mourning or public catastrophe,
and affect to blush on receiving tributes of admiration from grateful
sufferers, or deeply moved spectators.... Their ready tact and sympathy
are surprising, and the greater the trouble, the more admirably do they
seem to rise to the occasion--while the paroxysm lasts. When their
feelings are calmed, the benevolent impulse passes away; being
essentially mobile and spasmodic, they cannot do good deliberately and
on reflection.

“The ‘charitable hysteric’ is capable of achieving feats of courage
which have been quoted and repeated, and even become legendary.

“They have been known to show extraordinary presence of mind, resource,
and courage in saving the inmates of a burning house, or in facing an
armed mob during a riot. If questioned on the following day, these
heroines will be found in a state of complete prostration; and some of
them candidly avow that they do not know what they have done, and were
at the time unconscious of danger.

“At a time of cholera epidemic, when fear causes such ill-advised and
reprehensible derelictions of duty, hysterical women have been known to
show an extraordinary devotion; nothing is repugnant to them, nothing
revolts their modesty or wearies out their endurance....

“For such persons, devotion to others has become a need, a necessary
expenditure of energy, and, without knowing it, they pathologically play
the part of virtue. People in general are taken in by it, and, for the
sake of example, it is just as well. It was this consideration which
induced me to ask and obtain a public acknowledgment of the services of
a hysterical patient--at one time an inmate of a lunatic asylum--whose
deeds of charity in the district where she lives are truly touching.
While constantly active in attendance on the sick, and spending
liberally on their behalf, she confines her personal expenditure to what
is strictly necessary, her dress being the same at all seasons of the
year. Now this lady shows a great variety of hysterical symptoms,
becomes intensely excited on the slightest occasion, sleeps very badly,
and is a serious invalid.

“Lastly, in private sorrows, the hysteric patient often departs from the
normal manifestations of grief. At the loss of her children, she remains
calm, serene, resigned; does not shed a tear, thinks of everything that
ought to be done, gives numerous orders, forgets none of the most
painful details, imposes on all around her the most dignified attitude,
and attends the funeral without breaking down. People think that this
mother is exceptionally gifted, and has a courage superior to others.
This is a mistake; she is weaker than they--she is ‘suffering from
disease.’”

In order fully to grasp the seeming paradoxes contained in these
conclusions, we must remember that many philanthropists love their
neighbours, but only at a distance, and nearly always at the expense of
the more physiological, more general, affections--love for their family,
their country, &c. We must remember Dostoïeffsky’s remark (in _The
Brothers Karamanzov_, i. p. 325) that “What one can love in one’s fellow
is a hidden and invisible man; as soon as he shows his face, love
disappears. One can love one’s fellow-men in spirit, but only at a
distance; never close at hand.” One also recalls Sterne, who was
overcome with emotion at the sight of a dead ass, and deserted his wife
and his mother.

The greatest philanthropists--such men as Beccaria and Howard--have been
harsh fathers and masters; even the Divine Philanthropist was, as we
have seen, hard towards his own family.[475]

St. Paul, before his conversion, distinguished himself by his vehement
and cruel persecution of the Christians.

It is well known how, only too often, the man of real and fervent
religion has to forget his family and make a duty of celibacy and hatred
to the other sex. Thus St. Liberata was angry with her husband for
weeping at parting from their children; and, according to the legend,
the mother of Baruch replied to her son when, during his martyrdom, he
implored her for water in his anguish, “Thou shouldst desire no water
now save that of heaven.”[476]

These cases, moreover, show that, very often, exaggerated altruism is
itself only a pathological phenomenon, a hypertrophy of sentiment
accompanied--as always happens in cases of hypertrophy--by loss and
atrophy in other directions.[477]

We have seen in Juan de Dios, in Lazzaretti, Loyola, and St. Francis, of
Assisi, saintliness showing itself, in true psychic polarization, as a
perfect contrast to their former life in which the tendency to evil was
strongly pronounced.

If we add to these phenomena, so frequent in epileptic and hysteric
patients, all those others, of clairvoyance, thought-transference,
transposition of the senses, fakirism, mental vision, temporary
manifestations of genius, and monoideism, so frequently observed in
these maladies, phenomena so strange that many scientists, unable to
explain, endeavour to deny them, we can demonstrate the hysterical
character of saintliness, even in its least explicable manifestations--those
of miracles.[478]




