PART IV.

_SYNTHESIS. THE DEGENERATIVE PSYCHOSIS OF GENIUS._




CHAPTER I.

CHARACTERISTICS OF INSANE MEN OF GENIUS.

     Characterlessness--Vanity--Precocity--Alcoholism--Vagabondage--Versatility--Originality--Style--Religious
     doubts--Sexual abnormalities--Egoism--Eccentricity--Inspiration.


The conception of the morbid and degenerative character of genius is
confirmed and completed more and more when its isolated phenomena are
subjected to a more rigorous examination, and, as in chemical reactions,
to mutual contact. If, in fact, we analyze the lives and works of those
great diseased minds which have become famous in history, we find that
they can at once be distinguished by many characteristic traits from the
average man, and also, in part, from other geniuses, who have completed
their life’s orbit without trace of madness.

I. These insane geniuses have scarcely any character. The full, complete
character, “which bends not for any winds that blow,” is the distinctive
mark of honest and sound-minded men.

Tasso, on the contrary, declaims against courts, and yet, even to his
last hour, we find him perpetually coming back to beg their grudging
favours. Cardan accuses himself of lying, evil-speaking, and gambling.
Rousseau, though so sensitive, abandons to want the tenderest and
kindest of friends, casts off his children, calumniates others and
himself, and apostatizes three times over--from Catholicism, from
Protestantism, and, what is worse, from the religion of philosophy.

Swift, though an ecclesiastic, wrote the obscene poem of the loves of
Strephon and Chloe, and belittled the church of which he was a
dignitary, though his pride reached the proportions of delirium.

Lenau, religious to fanaticism in _Savonarola_, shows himself in the
_Albigenses_ even cynically sceptical; he knows it, confesses it, and
laughs at it.

Schopenhauer denounced women, and at the same time was too warm an
admirer of the sex; he professed to believe in the happiness of Nirvana,
and then predicted for himself more than a hundred years of life.

II. Genius is conscious of itself, appreciates itself, and, certainly,
has no monkish humility. Yet the conceit seething in diseased brains
passes the limits of all truth and probability. Tasso and Cardan
covertly, and Mahomet openly, declared themselves inspired by God, and
the slightest criticism, therefore, appeared to them as deadly
persecution. Cardan wrote of himself, “My nature is placed on the very
limits of human substance and conditions, and within the confines of the
immortals.”[434] Rousseau believed that all men, and sometimes even the
elements, were in a conspiracy against him. Perhaps it is on this very
account that we have seen almost all these unhappy great spirits fly
from association with other men. Swift humiliated and insulted cabinet
ministers, and wrote to a duchess desirous of making his acquaintance
that the greater men were, the lower must they bow before him. Lenau had
inherited the pride of rank from his mother, and in his delirium
believed himself king of Hungary.

III. Some of these unfortunate men have given strangely precocious
proofs of their genius. Tasso could speak when six months old, and knew
Latin at the age of seven. Lenau, at a very early age, composed most
touching sermons, and played the bagpipes and the violin with
astonishing skill. Cardan at eight had apparitions and revelations of
genius. Ampère was a mathematician at thirteen. Pascal, at ten, inspired
by the noise made by a plate struck with a knife, worked out a theory
of sound, and at fifteen composed his celebrated treatise on Conic
Sections. Haller preached at four, and devoured books at five.

IV. Many of them have been excessive in their abuse of narcotics, or of
stimulants and intoxicants. Haller was in the habit of taking enormous
doses of opium, and Rousseau was excessive in his use of coffee. Tasso
was renowned as a drinker, as also the modern poets Kleist, Gérard de
Nerval, Musset, Murger, Majláth, Praga, and Rovani, as well as the very
original Chinese writer Li-Tai-Pô, who was inspired by alcohol, and died
of it. Lenau also, in his latter years, was an immoderate consumer of
wine, coffee, and tobacco. Baudelaire abused opium, tobacco, and wine.
Cardan confessed himself an indefatigable drinker. Poe was a
dipsomaniac; so was Hoffmann.

V. Nearly all of these great men, moreover, showed anomalies of the
reproductive functions. Tasso, who was guilty of exaggerated
licentiousness in his youth, was rigidly chaste after his thirty-eighth
year. On the other hand, Cardan, impotent in his youth, gave himself up
to excess at thirty-five. Pascal, sensual in his early youth, afterwards
believed even a mother’s kiss to be a crime. Rousseau was affected by
hypospadias and spermatorrhœa, and, like Baudelaire, was subject to a
sexual perversion. Newton and Charles XII., so far as is known, were
absolutely continent. Lenau wrote, “I have the painful conviction that I
am unsuitable for marriage.”[435]

VI. Instead of preferring the quiet seclusion of the study, they cannot
rest in any place, and have to be continually travelling. Lenau removed
from Vienna to Stokerau, and then to Gmünden, and finally emigrated to
America. “I need,” he said, “a change of climate every now and then to
stir up my blood.”[436] Tasso was continually travelling from Ferrara to
Urbino, Mantua, Naples, Paris, Bergamo, Rome, and Turin. Poe was the
despair of his editors, because he was continually wandering about
between Boston, New York, Richmond, Philadelphia, and Baltimore.
Giordano Bruno wandered to Padua, Oxford, Wittenberg, Magdeburg,
Helmstädt, Prague, and Geneva.

Rousseau, Cardan, Cellini were constantly staying now at Turin, now at
Paris, now at Florence, Rome, Bologna, or Lausanne. “Change of place,”
says Rousseau,[437] “is a necessity for me. In the fine season, I find
it impossible to remain for more than two or three days in one place
without suffering.”

VII. Sometimes they change their career and course of study several
times in succession, as though the mighty intellect could not find rest
and relief in a single science.[438] Swift, in addition to his satiric
poems, wrote on the manufactures of Ireland, on theology, on politics,
and on the history of the reign of Queen Anne. Cardan was at the same
time a mathematician, physician, theologian, and literary man. Rousseau
was painter, music-master, charlatan, philosopher, botanist, and poet;
and Hoffmann, magistrate, caricaturist, musician, romance-writer, and
dramatist.

Tasso--as did Gogol after him--attempted all varieties of poetry, epic,
dramatic, and didactic, in all metres. Newton and Pascal, in moments of
aberration, abandoned physics for theology. Lenau cultivated medicine,
agriculture, law, poetry, and theology.

VIII. These energetic and terrible intellects are the true pioneers of
science; they rush forward regardless of danger, facing with eagerness
the greatest difficulties--perhaps because it is these which best
satisfy their morbid energy. They seize the strangest connections, the
newest and most salient points; and here I may mention that originality,
carried to the point of absurdity, is the principal characteristic of
insane poets and artists. Ampère always sought out the most difficult
problems in mathematics--the abysses--as Arago has noted.

Rousseau, in the _Devin du Village_, had attempted the music of the
future, afterwards tried again by another insane genius, Schumann. Swift
used to say that he only felt at his ease when treating the most
difficult subjects, and those most out of the line of his habitual
occupations. In fact, in his _Directions to Servants_, he seems, not a
theologian or a politician, but a servant himself. His _Confession of a
Thief_ was believed to have been really written by a well-known
criminal, so that the latter’s accomplices, thinking that they were
discovered, gave themselves up to justice. In the prophecies of
Bickerstaff, he assumed the character of a Catholic, and succeeded in
deceiving the Roman Inquisition.

Walt Whitman is the creator of a rhymeless poetry, which the
Anglo-Saxons regard as the poetry of the future, and which certainly
bears the imprint of strange and wild originality.

Poe’s compositions (says Baudelaire, one of his greatest admirers) seem
to have been produced in order to show that strangeness may enter into
the elements of the beautiful; and he collected them under the title of
_Arabesques and Grotesques_, because these exclude the human
countenance, and his literature was _extra-human_. Here, too, we note
the predilection of insane artists for arabesques, and, moreover, for
arabesques which suggest the human figure.[439]

Baudelaire himself created the prose poem, and carried to the highest
point the adoration of artificial beauty. He was the first to find new
poetic associations in the olfactory sense.[440]

IX. These morbid geniuses have a style peculiar to
themselves--passionate, palpitating, vividly coloured--which
distinguishes them from all other writers, perhaps because it could only
arise under maniacal influences. So much so that all of them confess
their inability to compose, or even to think, outside the moments of
inspiration. Tasso wrote, in one of his letters, “I am unsuccessful, and
find difficulty in everything, especially in composition.”[441] “My
ideas,” Rousseau confesses, “are confused, slow in arising and
developing themselves, nor can I express myself well except in moments
of passion.” The eloquent and vivid exordiums of Cardan’s works, so
different from the rest of his tedious books, show what a difference
there was between the first and last moments of his inspiration. Haller,
though a successful poet himself, used to say that the whole art of
poetry consisted in its difficulty. Pascal began his 18th _Provincial
Letter_ thirteen times.

Perhaps it was this analogy in character and style that was the cause of
Swift’s and Rousseau’s predilection for Tasso, and drew the severe
Haller towards Swift; while Ampère was inspired by Rousseau’s
eccentricities, and Baudelaire by those of Poe (whose works he
translated) and of Hoffmann, whom he idolized.[442]

X. Nearly all these great men were painfully preoccupied by religious
doubts, raised by the intellect, and combated, as a crime, by the timid
conscience and morbid emotions. Tasso was tormented by the fear of being
a heretic. Ampère often said that doubts are the worst torture of man.
Haller wrote in his journal, “My God! give me--oh! give me one drop of
faith: my mind believes in Thee, but my heart refuses--this is my
crime.” Lenau used to repeat, towards the end of his life, “In those
hours when my heart is suffering, the idea of God passes away from me.”
In fact, the real hero of his _Savonarola_ is Doubt,[443] as is now
admitted by all critics.

XI. All insane men of genius, moreover, are much preoccupied with their
own _Ego_. They sometimes know and proclaim their own disease, and seem
as though they wished, by confessing it, to get relief from its
inexorable attacks.

It is quite natural that, being men of great intellect and therefore
acute observers, they should at last notice their own cruel anomalies
and be struck by the spectacle of the _Ego_ which obtruded itself so
painfully on their notice. Men in general, but more particularly the
insane, love to speak of themselves, and on this theme they even become
eloquent. All the more should we expect it in those whose genius is
accompanied and quickened by mania. It is thus we get those wonderful
records of passion and grief, monuments of phrenopathic poetry, which
reveal the great and unhappy personality of the writer. Cardan wrote,
not only his autobiography, but also poems on his misfortunes, and the
work _De Somniis_, entirely composed of his dreams and hallucinations.
The poems of Whitman are the glorification of the _Ego_. Rousseau, in
his _Confessions, Dialogues, Rêveries_, like De Musset in his
_Confessions_, and Hoffmann in _Kreisler_,[444] only give a minute
description of themselves and their own madness.

Thus also Poe, as Baudelaire has well remarked, took as his text the
exceptions of human life, the hallucination which, at first doubtful,
afterwards becomes a reasoned conviction; absurdity enthroned in the
region of intellect and governing it with a terrible logic; hysteria
occupying the place of the will; the contradiction between the nerves
and the mind carried so far that grief is driven to utter itself in
laughter.

Pascal, who was driven by delirium into exaggerated humility, who said
that Christianity suppressed the _Ego_, has not written his
autobiography; yet he, too, showed traces of his hallucinations in the
celebrated Amulet, and, in his _Pensées_, subtly described himself when
speaking of others. It is certain that he was alluding to himself when
he wrote that “extreme genius is close to extreme folly, and men are so
mad that he who should not be so would be a madman of a new kind;” and
when he observed that “maladies influence our judgment and sense; and
while great ones perceptibly alter them, even slight ones cannot but
influence them in proportion;” and that “men of genius have their heads
higher, but their feet lower than the rest of us; they are all on the
same level, and stand on the same clay as ourselves, children, and
brutes.”

Haller, in his diary, gives detailed notes of his own religious
delusions, and often confesses to having completely changed his
character in the course of twenty-four hours, and being “giddy, mad,
persecuted by God, and scorned and despised by men.”

Lessmann who, at a later time, hanged himself, wrote the humorous _Diary
of a Melancholiac_ (1834). Tasso, in his letter to the Duke of Urbino,
and in the stanza already quoted, clearly depicted his own insanity.
“Francesco,” he says elsewhere, “O Francesco, within my infirm limbs I
have an infirm soul.”[445] It is a curious fact that, shortly before his
first attack of mania, he wrote these words, “As I do not deny that I am
mad, I must believe that my madness has been caused by drunkenness or
love, since I know well that I drink to excess,” &c.[446]

Dostoïeffsky continually introduces semi-insane characters, and
especially epileptics, in _Besi_ and _The Idiot_, and moral lunatics in
_Crime and Punishment_.

Gérard de Nerval was the author of _Aurelia_, which has been well called
the “Song of Songs of Fever,” and is a mixture of poetry and gibberish.
Barbara wrote _Les Détraqués_. Buston described his own hallucinations.
Allix, though not a medical man, wrote on the treatment of the insane.
Lenau, twelve years before he actually succumbed to the attacks of
insanity, had foreseen and described it. All his poems depict, in
colours painfully vivid, suicidal and melancholic tendencies. The reader
may judge of this from the mere titles of some of his lyrics, “To a
Hypochrondriac,” “The Madman,” “The Diseased in Soul,” “The Violence of
a Dream,” “The Moon of Melancholy.”

I do not think that it is possible to find, in the most doleful pages of
J. Ortis so accurate and vividly coloured a description of suicidal
tendencies as in the following extract from the _Seelenkranke_, “I carry
a deep wound in my heart, and will carry it in silence to the grave; my
life is broken from hour to hour. One alone could comfort me, ... but
she lies in the grave.... O my mother! let thyself be moved by my
entreaties, if thy love still survives death, if it is still permitted
thee to care for thy child.... Oh! let me soon escape from life! I long
for the night of death! Oh! only help thy crazy son to lay aside his
grief.” His _Traumgewalten_ is, as I have already observed, a terribly
truthful picture of that hallucination which preceded or accompanied the
first attack of suicidal mania; and here the reader can easily trace in
the phrases and ideas that disconnected and fragmentary character which
is the mark of the delirious paralytic.

Here is a specimen--“The dream was so terrible, so wild, so frightful,
that I wish I could tell myself it was nothing but a dream; ... yet I
continue to weep, and to feel that my heart beats; I awaken, and find
the sheets and the pillow wet.... Did I seize them in my dream and wipe
my face? I do not know.... While I was sleeping, my hostile guests have
been holding an orgy here.... Now they are gone, those savages, they are
gone, but I find their traces in my tears. They have fled, and left the
wine on the table,” &c.

He had previously, in the _Albigenses_, dropped some allusions to the
terrible impression made on him by his dreams: “Terrible, often, is the
might of dreams; it shakes, pains, presses, threatens, and if the
sleeper does not awaken in time, in the twinkling of an eye, he is a
corpse.”[447]

XII. The principal trace of the delusions of great minds is found in the
very construction of their works and speeches, in their illogical
deductions, absurd contradictions, and grotesque and inhuman fantasies.
Thus Socrates was clearly of unsound mind when, after having all but
arrived, intuitively, at Christian morality and Judaic monotheism, he
directed his steps in accordance with a sneeze, or the voice and signs
of his imaginary genius. Thus Cardan, who had anticipated Newton in
discovering the laws of gravitation, and Dupuis in theology--who, in his
book _De Subtilitate_, explains as hallucinations the strange and
portentous symptoms of the possessed, and also of some of those hermits
who were accounted saints, comparing them to the delirium of quartan
fever--Cardan was insane, when he attributed to the influence of a
genius, not only his scientific inspirations, but the creaking of the
table and the vibration of the pen, when he declared that he had been
several times bewitched, and when he produced his book _On Dreams_,
which speaks to the mental pathologist as a pseudo-membrane would to the
physical. In this, at first, he puts on record the most accurate and
curious observations on the phenomena of dreams--_e.g._, how severe
physical pains act with less energy, slight ones with greater--a fact
recently confirmed by psychiatrists; that the insane are much given to
dreaming; that in a dream, as on the stage, a long series of ideas
passes in a very short space of time; and finally (and this is a remark
of much justice) that men have dreams either entirely analogous to, or
entirely at variance with, their own habits. But, after these clear and
undoubted proofs of genius, he re-affirms one of the most absurd and
contemptible theories ever held by the populace of ancient times,
namely, that the slightest accidental circumstance of a dream must be
the revelation of a more or less distant future. Thus he draws up, with
the sincerest conviction, a dictionary, identical in form and origin
(which last is undoubtedly pathological) with Cabalistic productions.
Every object, every word, which may find a place in a dream, is there
attached to a series of allusions which serve to interpret each other.
_Father_ may signify author, husband, son, commander. _Feet_, foundation
of a house, arts, workmen, &c. A _horse_, appearing in a dream, may
signify flight, riches, or a wife. _Shoemaker_ and _physician_ are
interchangeable in meaning. In short, it is not actual analogies which
prevail, but analogies in words, in sounds, even in terminations.
_Orior_ and _morior_ have an equal prophetic value, because “since they
differ from each other only by a single letter, the one passes over to
the other.” We are seized with compassion for human nature and for
ourselves, when we find him relating that a knight who suffered from the
stone always, if he dreamed of food, had an attack on the following day,
and adding _cibos enim et dolores degustare dicimus_--as though nature
were in the habit of amusing herself by making puns in Latin. Yet this
was the man who had intuitively divined the admirable theory of painful
sensations in sleep already alluded to, and who, a physician, and one of
no mean distinction, had clearly conceived the sympathetic action of the
solar plexus.

Newton himself can scarcely be said to have been sane when he demeaned
his intellect to the interpretation of the Apocalypse, or the horns of
Daniel; nor, again, when he wrote to Bentley, “By means of the law of
attraction, one can very well understand the elongated orbits of comets;
but as to the nearly circular orbits of planets, I see no possibility of
obtaining their lateral difference, and this can only be accomplished by
God.” Yet in his _Optics_, Newton had inveighed against those who, after
the manner of the Aristotelians admit occult properties in matter, thus
arresting the researches of natural philosophers, without leading to any
conclusion. In fact, a century later, the true cause, which had escaped
Newton’s observations, was discovered by La Place.

Ampère believed, in all sincerity, that he had found the method of
squaring the circle.

Pascal, though he had been the first to study the laws of probability,
believed that the touch of a relic had power to cure a lachrymal
fistula--a statement which he printed in one of his works.

Rousseau makes of his own maniacal savagery the ideal type of man, and
believes that every natural production, if agreeable to the sight or
taste, must be innocuous, so that arsenic, according to him, could not
be harmful. His life is made up of contradictions: he prefers the
country, and lives in the Rue Platonière; he writes a treatise on
education, and sends his children to the foundling hospital; he
adjudicates on the claims of the various religions with the acuteness
of an unbiassed sceptic, and throws stones at trees in order to divine
the future and decide the question of his own salvation; nay, he writes
to the Deity, and lays his letters on the altars of churches, as though
they were His exclusive abode.

Baudelaire finds the sublime in the artificial--“like the rouge which
enhances the beauty of a handsome woman.” He carries out an insane idea
by describing a metallic landscape, with neither water nor vegetation.
“All is rigid, polished, shining; without heat and without sun; in the
midst of the eternal silence the blue water is enclosed, like the
ancient mirrors, in a golden basin.” He finds his ideal in the Latin of
the Decadence, “the only tongue which can thoroughly render the language
of passion,” and adores cats to such a degree as to address three poems
to them.

Lenau, in his “Moon of the Hypochondriàc,” sees, contrary to the usual
practice of poets, in the cold moon, without water and without
atmosphere, “the sexton of the planets, who, with a silver thread
entwined, enchains the sleepers and draws them to death; she beckons
with her finger, leads sleep-walkers astray, and counsels the thief.”
Though, as a young man, he had frequently expressed his opinion that
“mysticism is a symptom of insanity,” he often showed mystical
tendencies, especially in his later poems.

In the Koran, there is not a single chapter which has any connection
with another; on the contrary, it often happens that, in the course of a
single _sura_, the ideas are interrupted, and follow each other almost
at random. “On Mahomet,” writes Morkos, “the most contradictory verdicts
may be pronounced, for it is impossible to deny his great excellence,
while at the same time there is no disguising the fact that we find in
him the most signal artifices of imposture, the grossest ignorance, and
the greatest imprudence.”

It appears to me, moreover, that the great writers who have been under
the dominion of alcohol, have a style peculiar to themselves, whose
characteristics are a deliberate eroticism, and an inequality which is
rather grotesque than beautiful, owing to too unrestrained fancy,
frequent imprecations and abrupt transitions from the deepest melancholy
to obscene gaiety, and a marked preference for such subjects as madness,
drink, and the gloomiest scenes of death. “Poe,” says Baudelaire, “likes
to place his figures against greenish or violet backgrounds, surrounded
by the phosphorescence of decay, and the atmosphere of storms and
orgies. He throws himself into grotesquery for the love of the
grotesque, into horror for the love of the horrible.”

The same thing is done by Baudelaire himself, who loves to describe the
effects of alcohol or opium.

“There are days when my heart faints in me, and the mud overwhelms
me,”[448] sang poor Praga, who killed himself with alcohol, and who,
singing the praises of wine, blasphemed thus:

“Let it come--the reproach of the sober man; come--the contempt of the
human race,--come, the hell of the Eternal Father: I will go down into
it with my glass in hand.”[449]

Steen, the drunken painter, usually painted drinking scenes. Hoffmann’s
drawings ended in caricatures, his tales in extra-human extravagancies,
his music in a senseless succession of sounds.

Alfred de Musset saw in the ladies of Madrid,

                “_sous un col de cigne_
    _Un sein vierge et doré comme la jeune vigne._”

Murger admired women with green lips and yellow cheeks--no doubt through
a species of colour-blindness, such as we have already met with among
painters.

XIII. Nearly all of these great men--for instance, Cardan, Lenau, Tasso,
Socrates, Pascal--attached great importance to their dreams, which, no
doubt, assumed a more vivid and powerful colouring than those of sane
persons.

XIV. Many presented voluminous but very irregular skulls; and, like
madmen, have ended by serious alterations of the nervous centres.
Pascal’s cerebral substance was harder than is normally the case, and
the left lobe had suppurated. The brain of Rousseau revealed dropsy in
the ventricles. Byron and Foscolo, great but eccentric geniuses, both
showed premature ossification of the sutures. Schumann died of chronic
meningitis and cerebral atrophy.

XV. The insane characters of men of genius are scarcely ever found
alone. Thus melancholia was associated and alternated with exaggerated
self-esteem in Chopin, Comte, Tasso, Cardan, Schopenhauer; with
alcoholic mania, impulsive insanity, or sexual perversion in Baudelaire
and Rousseau; with erratic and alcoholic mania and that of self-esteem,
in Gérard de Nerval. In Coleridge, the mania of morphia was associated
with _folie du doute_.

XVI. But the most special characteristic of this form of insanity
appears to reduce itself to an extreme exaggeration of two alternating
phases, viz., erethism and atony, inspiration and exhaustion, which we
see physiologically manifested in nearly all great intellects, even the
sanest--phases to which they, all alike, give a wrong interpretation,
according as their pride is gratified or offended. “An indolent soul,
afraid of every kind of business, a bilious temperament, which suffers
easily and is sensitive to every discomfort, seem as though they could
not be combined in one character--yet they form the groundwork of mine.”
Such is Rousseau’s confession in Letter II. Therefore, as the ignorant
man explains the modifications of his own _ego_ by means of material and
external objects, they often attribute to a devil, a genius, or a God,
the happy inspiration of their exalted moments. Tasso, speaking of his
familiar spirit, genius, or messenger, says, “It cannot be a devil,
since it does not inspire me with a horror for sacred things; nor yet a
natural creature, for it causes to arise in me ideas which I never had
before.” A genius inspires Cardan with his written works, his knowledge
of spiritual matters, his medical opinions; Tartini with his Sonata,
Mahomet with the pages of the Koran. Van Helmont asserted that he had
seen a genius appear before him at all the most important moments of his
life; and, in 1633, he discovered his own soul under the form of a
shining crystal. William Blake often retired to the sea-shore to
converse with Moses, Homer, Virgil, and Milton, with whom he believed
himself to have been previously acquainted. When questioned as to their
appearance, he replied, “They are shades full of majesty--grey, but
luminous, and much taller than the generality of men.” Socrates was
counselled in his actions by a genius who, as he expressed it, was
better than ten thousand teachers; and he often advised his friends as
to what they ought, or ought not to do, according as he had received
instructions from his δαιμονἱον.

It is certain that the vivid and richly-coloured style of all these
great men--the clearness with which they describe their most grotesque
eccentricities, such as the Liliputian Academies, or the horrors of
Tartarus, denote that they saw and touched, as it were, with the
certainty of hallucination, all that they describe; that, in short, in
them inspiration and insanity became fused, and resulted in a single
product.

It may be said, indeed, of some--as of Luther, Mahomet, Savonarola,
Molinos, and, in modern times, the chief of the Taeping rebels--that
this false explanation of the _afflatus_ was of great service to them,
giving to their speeches and prophecies that air of truth only resulting
from a profound conviction, which alone can shake the popular ignorance
and carry it in the wake of a new doctrine. This characteristic is
common to the insanity of genius and the most trivial aberrations of
eccentricity.

When inspiration and high spirits fail together, and depression of mind
prevails, then these great unfortunate ones, interpreting their own
condition still more strangely, believe themselves to have been
poisoned, like Cardan; or to be condemned to eternal fire, like Haller
and Ampère; or persecuted by inveterate enemies, like Newton, Swift,
Barthez, Cardan, and Rousseau.

Moreover, in all these cases, religious doubt, raised by the intellect
in despite of the heart, appears to the subject himself as a crime, and
becomes both cause and instrument of new and real misfortunes.

XVII. Yet the temper of these men is so different from that of average
people that it gives a special character to the different psychoses
(melancholia, monomania, &c.) from which they suffer, so as to
constitute a special psychosis, which might be called the psychosis of
genius.




