
Transcriber's note:

    Some typographical and punctuation errors have been corrected.
    A complete list follows the text.

    Words italicized in the original are surrounded by
    _underscores_.

    Letters superscripted in the original have been placed in {}
    brackets.

    The Arabic letter Ain is represented by ‘ and the Arabic letter
    Hamza is represented by ’.

    This text has a lot of Unicode characters, many fonts do not
    provide support for them. A list of these characters follows,
    separated by commas, if you do not see them properly please
    use a different font.

    Single letters: ā, Ā, ī, Ī, ū, Ū, ṣ, Ṣ, ḥ, Ḥ, ṭ, Ṭ, ẓ, Ẓ, ḍ, ś,
    Ś, ‘, ’, ⁂.

    Combined Letters (macron or two dots below): ḏ, Ḏ, g̱, G̱, ẖ,
    ḵ, Ḵ, s̱, S̱, d̤.




                     THE
         DEVELOPMENT OF METAPHYSICS
                     IN
                   PERSIA:

        A CONTRIBUTION TO THE HISTORY
            OF MUSLIM PHILOSOPHY

                     BY

             SHAIKH MUHAMMAD IQBAL
  B. A. (Cantab) M. A. (Pb.) Ph. D. (Munich).

                   LONDON
  LUZAC & Co. 46, Great Russell Street W. C.
                    1908

  Printed by E. J. BRILL. — LEIDEN (Holland).




                 DEDICATION
                    TO
         Professor T. W. ARNOLD M. A.


    My dear MR. ARNOLD,

This little book is the first-fruit of that literary and philosophical
training which I have been receiving from you for the last ten years,
and as an expression of gratitude I beg to dedicate it to your name. You
have always judged me liberally; I hope you will judge these pages in
the same spirit.

                                        Your affectionate pupil

                                                IQBAL.




INTRODUCTION.


The most remarkable feature of the character of the Persian people is
their love of Metaphysical speculation. Yet the inquirer who approaches
the extant literature of Persia expecting to find any comprehensive
systems of thought, like those of Kapila or Kant, will have to turn back
disappointed, though deeply impressed by the wonderful intellectual
subtlety displayed therein. It seems to me that the Persian mind is
rather impatient of detail, and consequently destitute of that
organising faculty which gradually works out a system of ideas, by
interpreting the fundamental principles with reference to the ordinary
facts of observation. The subtle Brahman sees the inner unity of things;
so does the Persian. But while the former endeavours to discover it in
all the aspects of human experience, and illustrates its hidden presence
in the concrete in various ways, the latter appears to be satisfied
with a bare universality, and does not attempt to verify the richness of
its inner content. The butterfly imagination of the Persian flies,
half-inebriated as it were, from flower to flower, and seems to be
incapable of reviewing the garden as a whole. For this reason his
deepest thoughts and emotions find expression mostly in disconnected
verses (G̱ẖazal) which reveal all the subtlety of his artistic soul.
The Hindū, while admitting, like the Persian, the necessity of a higher
source of knowledge, yet calmly moves from experience to experience,
mercilessly dissecting them, and forcing them to yield their underlying
universality. In fact the Persian is only half-conscious of Metaphysics
as a _system_ of thought; his Brahman brother, on the other hand, is
fully alive to the need of presenting his theory in the form of a
thoroughly reasoned out system. And the result of this mental difference
between the two nations is clear. In the one case we have only partially
worked out systems of thought; in the other case, the awful sublimity of
the searching Vedānta. The student of Islamic Mysticism who is anxious
to see an all-embracing exposition of the principle of Unity, must look
up the heavy volumes of the Andalūsian Ibn al-‘Arabī, whose profound
teaching stands in strange contrast with the dry-as-dust Islam of his
countrymen.

The results, however, of the intellectual activity of the different
branches of the great Aryan family are strikingly similar. The outcome
of all Idealistic speculation in India is Buddha, in Persia Bahāullah,
and in the west Schopenhauer whose system, in Hegelian language, is the
marriage of free oriental universality with occidental determinateness.

But the history of Persian thought presents a phenomenon peculiar to
itself. In Persia, due perhaps to semitic influences, philosophical
speculation has indissolubly associated itself with religion, and
thinkers in new lines of thought have almost always been founders of new
religious movements. After the Arab conquest, however, we see pure
Philosophy severed from religion by the Neo-Platonic Aristotelians of
Islam, but the severance was only a transient phenomenon. Greek
philosophy, though an exotic plant in the soil of Persia, eventually
became an integral part of Persian thought; and later thinkers, critics
as well as advocates of Greek wisdom, talked in the philosophical
language of Aristotle and Plato, and were mostly influenced by religious
presuppositions. It is necessary to bear this fact in mind in order to
gain a thorough understanding of post-Islamic Persian thought.

The object of this investigation is, as will appear, to prepare a
ground-work for a future history of Persian Metaphysics. Original
thought cannot be expected in a review, the object of which is purely
historical; yet I venture to claim some consideration for the following
two points:--

(a) I have endeavoured to trace the logical continuity of Persian
thought, which I have tried to interpret in the language of modern
Philosophy. This, as far as I know, has not yet been done.

(b) I have discussed the subject of Ṣūfīism in a more scientific manner,
and have attempted to bring out the intellectual conditions which
necessitated such a phenomenon. In opposition, therefore, to the
generally accepted view I have tried to maintain that Ṣūfīism is a
necessary product of the play of various intellectual and moral forces
which would necessarily awaken the slumbering soul to a higher ideal of
life.

Owing to my ignorance of Zend, my knowledge of Zoroaster is merely
second-hand. As regards the second part of my work, I have been able to
look up the original Persian and Arabic manuscripts as well as many
printed works connected with my investigation. I give below the names of
Arabic and Persian manuscripts from which I have drawn most of the
material utilized here. The method of transliteration adopted is the one
recognised by the Royal Asiatic Society.

     1. Tārīḵẖ al-Ḥukamā, by Al-Baihaqī.--Royal Library of Berlin.

     2. S̱ẖarḥi Anwāriyya, (with the original text) by Muḥammad
        S̱ẖarīf of Herāt. Royal Library of Berlin.

     3. Ḥikmat al-‘Ain, by al-Kātibī. Royal Library of Berlin.

     4. Commentary on Ḥikmat al-‘Ain, by Muḥammad ibn Mubārak
        al-Buḵẖārī. India Office Library.

     5. Commentary on Ḥikmat al-‘Ain by Ḥusainī. India Office
        Library.

     6. ‘Awārif al-Ma‘ārif, by S̱ẖahāb al-Dīn. India Office Library.


     7. Mis̱ẖkāt al-Anwār, by Al-G̱ẖazālī. India Office Library.


     8. Kas̱ẖf al-Maḥjūb, by ‘Alī Hajverī. India Office Library.

     9. Risālahi Nafs translated from Aristotle, by Afḍal Kāshī.
        India Office Library.

    10. Risālahi Mīr Sayyid S̱ẖarīf. India Office Library.

    11. Ḵẖātima, by Sayyid Muḥammad Gisūdarāz. India Office
        Library.

    12. Manāzilal-sā’rīn, by ‘Abdullah Ismāi’l of Herāt. India
        Office Library.

    13. Jāwidān Nāma, by Afḍal Kās̱ẖī. India Office Library.

    14. Tārīḵẖ al-Ḥukamā, by S̱ẖahrzūrī. British Museum Library.

    15. Collected works of Avicenna. British Museum Library.

    16. Risalah fi’l-Wujūd, by Mīr Jurjānī. British Museum Library.

    17. Jāwidāni Kabīr. Cambridge University Library.

    18. Jāmi Jahān Numā. Cambridge University Library.

    19. Majmu‘ai Fārsī Risālah No: 1, 2, of Al-Nasafī. Trinity
        College Library.

                                        S. M. IQBAL.




CONTENTS.


  PART I.
  Pre-Islamic Persian Philosophy.
                                                             Page
  Chapter I. Persian Dualism                                    1
    Sec: I.   Zoroaster                                         1
    Sec: II.  Mānī and Mazdak                                   12
    Sec: III. Retrospect                                       20

  PART II.
  Greek Dualism.

  Chapter II. Neo-Platonic Aristotelians of Persia             22
    Sec: I.   Ibn Maskawaih                                    26
    Sec: II.  Avicenna                                         38

  Chapter III. Islamic Rationalism                             45
    Sec: I.   Metaphysics of Rationalism--Materialism          45
    Sec: II.  Contemporary movements of thought                55
    Sec: III. Reaction against Rationalism--The As̱ẖ‘arite      65

  Chapter IV. Controversy between Realism and Idealism         81

  Chapter V. Ṣūfīism.
    Sec: I.   The origin and Quranic justification of Ṣūfīism   96
    Sec: II.  Aspects of Ṣūfī Metaphysics                      111
         A. Reality as Self-conscious Will                    112
         B. Reality as Beauty                                 112
         C. (1) Reality as Light                              120
                (Return to Persian Dualism--Al-Is̱ẖrāqī).
            (2) Reality as Thought--Al-Jīlī                    121

  Chapter VI. Later Persian Thought                           174

  Conclusion                                                  192




PART I.

Pre-Islamic Persian Philosophy.




CHAP. I.

PERSIAN DUALISM.


§ I.

Zoroaster.

To Zoroaster--the ancient sage of Iran--must always be assigned the
first place in the intellectual history of Iranian Aryans who, wearied
of constant roaming, settled down to an agricultural life at a time when
the Vedic Hymns were still being composed in the plains of Central Asia.
This new mode of life and the consequent stability of the institution of
property among the settlers, made them hated by other Aryan tribes who
had not yet shaken off their original nomadic habits, and occasionally
plundered their more civilised kinsmen. Thus grew up the conflict
between the two modes of life which found its earliest expression in the
denunciation of the deities of each other--the Devas and the Ahuras. It
was really the beginning of a long individualising process which
gradually severed the Iranian branch from other Aryan tribes, and
finally manifested itself in the religious system of Zoroaster[2:1]--the
great prophet of Iran who lived and taught in the age of Solon and
Thales. In the dim light of modern oriental research we see ancient
Iranians divided between two camps--partisans of the powers of good, and
partisans of the powers of evil--when the great sage joins their furious
contest, and with his moral enthusiasm stamps out once for all the
worship of demons as well as the intolerable ritual of the Magian
priesthood.

    [2:1] Some European Scholars have held Zoroaster to be nothing
    more than a mythical personage. But since the publication of
    Professor Jackson's admirable Life of Zoroaster, the Iranian
    Prophet has, I believe, finally got out of the ordeal of modern
    criticism.

It is, however, beside our purpose to trace the origin and growth of
Zoroaster's religious system. Our object, in so far as the present
investigation is concerned, is to glance at the metaphysical side of
his revelation. We, therefore, wish to fix our attention on the sacred
trinity of philosophy--God, Man and Nature.

Geiger, in his "Civilisation of Eastern Iranians in Ancient Times",
points out that Zoroaster inherited two fundamental principles from his
Aryan ancestry.--(1) There is law in Nature. (2) There is conflict in
Nature. It is the observation of law and conflict in the vast panorama
of being that constitutes the philosophical foundation of his system.
The problem before him was to reconcile the existence of evil with the
eternal goodness of God. His predecessors worshipped a plurality of good
spirits all of which he reduced to a unity and called it Ahuramazda. On
the other hand he reduced all the powers of evil to a similar unity and
called it Druj-Ahriman. Thus by a process of unification he arrived at
two fundamental principles which, as Haug shows, he looked upon not as
two independent activities, but as two parts or rather aspects of the
same Primary Being. Dr. Haug, therefore, holds that the Prophet of
ancient Iran was theologically a monotheist and philosophically a
dualist.[4:1] But to maintain that there are "twin"[4:2]
spirits--creators of reality and nonreality--and at the same time to
hold that these two spirits are united in the Supreme Being,[4:3] is
virtually to say that the principle of evil constitutes a part of the
very essence of God; and the conflict between good and evil is nothing
more than the struggle of God against Himself. There is, therefore, an
inherent weakness in his attempt to reconcile theological monotheism
with philosophical dualism, and the result was a schism among the
prophet's followers. The Zendiks[4:4] whom Dr. Haug calls heretics, but
who were, I believe, decidedly more consistent than their opponents,
maintained the independence of the two original spirits from each other,
while the Magi upheld their unity. The upholders of unity endeavoured,
in various ways, to meet the Zendiks; but the very fact that they tried
different phrases and expressions to express the unity of the "Primal
Twins", indicates dissatisfaction with their own philosophical
explanations, and the strength of their opponent's position.
S̱ẖahrastānī[5:1] describes briefly the different explanations of the
Magi. The Zarwānians look upon Light and Darkness as the sons of
Infinite Time. The Kiyūmarṯẖiyya hold that the original principle was
Light which was afraid of a hostile power, and it was this thought of an
adversary mixed with fear that led to the birth of Darkness. Another
branch of Zarwānians maintain that the original principle doubted
concerning something and this doubt produced Ahriman. Ibn Ḥazm[5:2]
speaks of another sect who explained the principle of Darkness as the
obscuration of a part of the fundamental principle of Light itself.

    [4:1] Essays, p. 303.

    [4:2] "In the beginning there was a pair of twins, two spirits,
    each of a peculiar activity". Yas. XXX. 1.

    [4:3] "The more beneficial of my spirits has produced, by
    speaking it, the whole rightful creation". Yas. XIX. 9.

    [4:4] The following verse from Buudahish Chap. I. will indicate
    the Zendik view:-- "And between them (the two principles) there
    was empty space, that is what they call "air" in which is now
    their meeting".

    [5:1] S̱ẖahrastānī; ed. Cureton, London, 1846, pp. 182–185.

    [5:2] Ibn Ḥazm--Kitāb al-Milal w’al-Niḥal. Ed. Cairo. Vol. II,
    p. 34.

Whether the philosophical dualism of Zoroaster can be reconciled with
his monotheism or not, it is unquestionable that, from a metaphysical
standpoint, he has made a profound suggestion in regard to the ultimate
nature of reality. The idea seems to have influenced ancient Greek
Philosophy[6:1] as well as early Christian Gnostic speculation, and
through the latter, some aspects of modern western thought.[6:2] As a
thinker he is worthy of great respect not only because he approached the
problem of objective multiplicity in a philosophical spirit; but also
because he endeavoured, having been led to metaphysical dualism, to
reduce his Primary Duality to a higher unity. He seems to have
perceived, what the mystic shoemaker of Germany perceived long after
him, that the diversity of nature could not be explained without
postulating a principle of negativity or self-differentiation in the
very nature of God. His immediate successors did not, however, quite
realise the deep significance of their master's suggestions; but we
shall see, as we advance, how Zoroaster's idea finds a more
spiritualised expression in some of the aspects of later Persian
thought.

    [6:1] In connection with the influence of Zoroastrian ideas on
    Ancient Greek thought, the following statement made by Erdmann
    is noteworthy, though Lawrence Mills (American Journal of
    Philology Vol. 22) regards such influence as improbable:--"The
    fact that the handmaids of this force, which he (Heraclitus)
    calls the seed of all that happens and the measure of all order,
    are entitled the "tongues" has probably been slightly ascribed
    to the influence of the Persian Magi. On the other hand he
    connects himself with his country's mythology, not indeed
    without a change of exegesis when he places Apollo and Dionysus
    beside Zeus, i.e. The ultimate fire, as the two aspects of his
    nature". History of Philosophy Vol. I, p. 50.

    It is, perhaps, owing to this doubtful influence of
    Zoroastrianism on Heraclitus that Lassalle (quoted by Paul Janet
    in his History of the Problems of Philosophy Vol. II, p. 147)
    looks upon Zoroaster as a precursor of Hegel.

    Of Zoroastrian influence on Pythagoras Erdmann says:--

    "The fact that the odd numbers are put above the even has been
    emphasised by Gladisch in his comparison of the Pythagorian with
    the Chinese doctrine, and the fact, moreover, that among the
    oppositions we find those of light and darkness, good and evil,
    has induced many, in ancient and modern times, to suppose that
    they were borrowed from Zoroastrianism." Vol. I, p. 33.

    [6:2] Among modern English thinkers Mr. Bradley arrives at a
    conclusion similar to that of Zoroaster. Discussing the ethical
    significance of Bradley's Philosophy, Prof. Sorley says:--"Mr.
    Bradley, like Green, has faith in an eternal reality which might
    be called spiritual, inasmuch as it is not material; like Green
    he looks upon man's moral activity as an appearance--what Green
    calls a reproduction--of this eternal reality. But under this
    general agreement there lies a world of difference. He refuses
    by the use of the term self-conscious, to liken his Absolute to
    the personality of man, and he brings out the consequence which
    in Green is more or less concealed, that the evil equally with
    the good in man and in the world are appearances of the
    Absolute". Recent tendencies in Ethics, pp. 100–101.

Turning now to his Cosmology, his dualism leads him to bifurcate, as it
were, the whole universe into two departments of being--reality i.e.
the sum of all good creations flowing from the creative activity of the
beneficial spirit, and non-reality[8:1] i.e. the sum of all evil
creations proceeding from the hostile spirit. The original conflict of
the two spirits is manifested in the opposing forces of nature, which,
therefore, presents a continual struggle between the powers of Good and
the powers of Evil. But it should be remembered that nothing intervenes
between the original spirits and their respective creations. Things are
good and bad because they proceed from good or bad creative agencies, in
their own nature they are quite indifferent. Zoroaster's conception of
creation is fundamentally different from that of Plato and Schopenhauer
to whom spheres of empirical reality reflect non-temporal or temporal
ideas which, so to speak, mediate between Reality and Appearance. There
are, according to Zoroaster, only two categories of existence, and the
history of the universe is nothing more than a progressive conflict
between the forces falling respectively under these categories. We are,
like other things, partakers of this struggle, and it is our duty to
range ourselves on the side of Light which will eventually prevail and
completely vanquish the spirit of Darkness. The metaphysics of the
Iranian Prophet, like that of Plato, passes on into Ethics, and it is in
the peculiarity of the Ethical aspect of his thought that the influence
of his social environment is most apparent.

    [8:1] This should not be confounded with Plato's non-being. To
    Zoroaster all forms of existence proceeding from the creative
    agency of the spirit of darkness are unreal; because,
    considering the final triumph of the spirit of Light, they have
    a temporary existence only.

Zoroaster's view of the destiny of the soul is very simple. The soul,
according to him, is a creation, not a part of God as the votaries of
Mithra[9:1] afterwards maintained. It had a beginning in time, but can
attain to everlasting life by fighting against Evil in the earthly scene
of its activity. It is free to choose between the only two courses of
action--good and evil; and besides the power of choice the spirit of
Light has endowed it with the following faculties:--

    1. Conscience[10:1].

    2. Vital force.

    3. The Soul--The Mind.

    4. The Spirit--Reason.

    5. The Farāwas̱ẖi[10:2].--A kind of tutelary spirit which acts
        as a protection of man in his voyage towards God.

The last three[10:3] faculties are united together after death, and form
an indissoluble whole. The virtuous soul, leaving its home of flesh, is
borne up into higher regions, and has to pass through the following
planes of existence:--

    1. The Place of good thoughts.

    2. The Place of good words.

    3. The Place of good works.

    4. The Place of Eternal Glory[11:1].--Where the individual soul
       unites with the principle of Light without losing its
       personality.

    [9:1] Mithraism was a phase of Zoroastrianism which spread over
    the Roman world in the second century. The partisans of Mithra
    worshipped the sun whom they looked upon as the great advocate
    of Light. They held the human soul to be a part of God, and
    maintained that the observance of a mysterious cult could bring
    about the souls' union with God. Their doctrine of the soul, its
    ascent towards God by torturing the body and finally passing
    through the sphere of Aether and becoming pure fire, offers some
    resemblance with views entertained by some schools of Persian
    Ṣūfīism.

    [10:1] Geiger's Civilisation of Eastern Iranians, Vol. I,
    p. 124.

    [10:2] Dr. Haug (Essays p. 206) compares these protecting
    spirits with the ideas of Plato. They, however, are not to be
    understood as models according to which things are fashioned.
    Plato's ideas, moreover, are eternal, non-temporal and
    non-spatial. The doctrine that everything created by the spirit
    of Light is protected by a subordinate spirit has only an
    outward resemblance with the view that every spirit is fashioned
    according to a perfect supersensible model.

    [10:3] The Ṣūfī conception of the soul is also tripartite.
    According to them the soul is a combination of Mind, heart and
    spirit (Nafs, Qalb, Rūḥ). The "heart" is to them both material
    and immaterial or, more properly, neither--standing midway
    between soul and mind (Nafs and Rūḥ), and acting as the organ of
    higher knowledge. Perhaps Dr. Schenkel's use of the word
    "conscience" would approach the ṣūfī idea of "heart".

    [11:1] Geiger Vol. I, p. 104. (The ṣūfī Cosmology has a similar
    doctrine concerning the different stages of existence through
    which the soul has to pass in its journey heavenward. They
    enumerate the following five Planes; but their definition of the
    character of each plane is slightly different:--

        1. The world of body. (Nāsūt).

        2. The world of pure intelligence. (Malakūt).

        3. The world of power. (Jabrūt).

        4. The world of negation. (Lāhūt).

        5. The world of Absolute Silence. (Hāhūt).

    The ṣūfīs probably borrowed this idea from the Indian Yogīs who
    recognise the following seven Planes:--(Annie Besant:
    Reincarnation, p. 30).

        1. The Plane of Physical Body.

        2. The Plane of Etherial double.

        3. The Plane of Vitality.

        4. The Plane of Emotional Nature.

        5. The Plane of Thought.

        6. The Plane of Spiritual soul--Reason.

        7. The Plane of Pure Spirit.)




§ II.

Mānī[12:1] and Mazdak[12:2].

We have seen Zoroaster's solution of the problem of diversity, and the
theological or rather philosophical controversy which split up the
Zoroastrian Church. The half-Persian Mānī--"the founder of Godless
community" as Christians styled him afterwards--agrees with those
Zoroastrians who held the Prophet's doctrine in its naked form, and
approaches the question in a spirit thoroughly materialistic.
Originally Persian his father emigrated from Hamadān to Babylonia where
Mānī was born in 215 or 216 A.D.--the time when Buddhistic Missionaries
were beginning to preach Nirvāna to the country of Zoroaster. The
eclectic character of the religious system of Mānī, its bold extension
of the Christian idea of redemption, and its logical consistency in
holding, as a true ground for an ascetic life, that the world is
essentially evil, made it a real power which influenced not only Eastern
and Western Christian thought[13:1], but has also left some dim marks on
the development of metaphysical speculation in Persia. Leaving the
discussion of the sources[13:2] of Mānī's religious system to the
orientalist, we proceed to describe and finally to determine the
philosophical value of his doctrine of the origin of the Phenomenal
Universe.

    [12:1] Sources used:--

        (a) The text of Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq, edited by Flügel, pp.
            52–56.

        (b) Al-Ya‘qūbī: ed. Houtsma, 1883, Vol. I, pp. 180–181.

        (c) Ibn Ḥazm: Kitāb al-Milal w’al-Niḥal: ed. Cairo, Vol. II,
            p. 36.

        (d) S̱ẖahrastānī: ed. Cureton, London, 1846, pp. 188–192.

        (e) Encyclopaedia Britannica, Article on Mānī.

        (f) Salemann: Bulletin de l'Académie des Sciences de St.
            Petersburg Series IV, 15 April 1907, pp. 175--184. F. W.
            K. Müller: Handschriften--Reste in Estrangelo--Schrift
            aus Turfan, Chinesisch--Turkistan, Teil I, II; Sitzungen
            der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
            11 Feb. 1904, pp. 348–352; und Abhandlungen etc. 1904.

    [12:2] Sources used:--

        (a) Siyāsat Nāmah Nizām al-Mulk: ed. Charles Schefer,
            Paris, 1897, pp. 166–181.

        (b) S̱ẖahrastānī: ed. Cureton, pp. 192–194.

        (c) Al-Ya‘qūbī: ed. Houtsma, 1883, Vol. I, p. 186.

        (d) Al-Bīrūnī: Chronology of Ancient Nations: tr. E. Sachau,
            London, 1879, p. 192.

    [13:1] "If I see aright, five different conceptions can be
    distinguished for the period about 400 A.D. First we have the
    Manichaean which insinuated its way in the darkness, but was
    widely extended even among the clergy". (Harnack's History of
    Christian Dogma, Vol. V, p. 56). "From the anti-Manichaean
    controversy sprang the desire to conceive all God's attributes
    as identical i.e. the interest in the indivisibility of God",
    (Harnack's History of Christian Dogma, Vol V, p. 120).

    [13:2] Some Eastern sources of information about Mānī's
    Philosophy (e.g. Ephraim Syrus mentioned by Prof. A. A. Bevan in
    his Introduction to the Hymn of the Soul) tell us that he was a
    disciple of Bardesanes, the Syrian gnostic. The learned author
    of "al-Fihrist", however, mentions some books which Mānī wrote
    against the followers of the Syrian gnostic. Burkitt, in his
    lectures on Early Eastern Christianity, gives a free translation
    of Bardesanes' De Fato, the spirit of which I understand, is
    fully Christian, and thoroughly opposed to the teaching of Mānī.
    Ibn Ḥazm, however, in his Kitāb al-Milal w’al-Niḥal (Vol. II, p.
    36) says, "Both agreed in other respects, except that Mānī
    believed darkness to be a living principle."

The Paganising gnostic, as Erdmann calls him, teaches that the variety
of things springs from the mixture of two eternal Principles--Light and
Darkness--which are separate from and independent of each other. The
Principle of Light connotes ten ideas--Gentleness, Knowledge,
Understanding, Mystery, Insight, Love, Conviction, Faith, Benevolence
and Wisdom. Similarly the Principle of Darkness connotes five eternal
ideas--Mistiness, Heat, Fire, Venom, Darkness. Along with these two
primordial principles and connected with each, Mānī recognises the
eternity of space and earth, each connoting respectively the ideas of
knowledge, understanding, mystery, insight, breath, air, water, light
and fire. In darkness--the feminine Principle in Nature--were hidden
the elements of evil which, in course of time, concentrated and resulted
in the composition, so to speak, of the hideous looking Devil--the
principle of activity. This first born child of the fiery womb of
darkness, attacked the domain of the King of Light who, in order to ward
off his malicious onslaught, created the Primal man. A serious conflict
ensued between the two creatures, and resulted in the complete
vanquishment of the Primal Man. The evil one, then, succeeded in mixing
together the five elements of darkness with the five elements of light.
Thereupon the ruler of the domain of light ordered some of his angels to
construct the Universe out of these mixed elements with a view to free
the atoms of light from their imprisonment. But the reason why darkness
was the first to attack light, is that the latter, being in its essence
good, could not proceed to start the process of admixture which was
essentially harmful to itself. The attitude of Mānī's Cosmology,
therefore, to the Christian doctrine of Redemption is similar to that of
Hegelian Cosmology to the doctrine of the Trinity. To him redemption is
a physical process, and all procreation, because it protracts the
imprisonment of light, is contrary to the aim and object of the
Universe. The imprisoned atoms of light are continually set free from
darkness which is thrown down in the unfathomable ditch round the
Universe. The liberated light, however, passes on to the sun and the
moon whence it is carried by angels to the region of light--the eternal
home of the King of Paradise--"Pîd i vazargîî"--Father of greatness.

This is a brief account of Mānī's fantastic Cosmology.[16:1] He rejects
the Zoroastrian hypothesis of creative agencies to explain the problem
of objective existence. Taking a thoroughly materialistic view of the
question, he ascribes the phenomenal universe to the _mixture_ of two
independent, eternal principles, one of which (darkness) is not only a
part of the universe--stuff, but also the source wherein activity
resides, as it were, slumbering, and starts up into being when the
favourable moment arrives. The essential idea of his cosmology,
therefore, has a curious resemblance with that of the great Hindū
thinker Kapila, who accounts for the production of the universe by the
hypothesis of three gunas, i.e. Sattwa (goodness), Tamas (darkness), and
Rajas (motion or passion) which mix together to form Nature, when the
equilibrium of the primordial matter (Prakritī) is upset. Of the various
solutions[17:1] of the problem of diversity which the Vedāntist solved
by postulating the mysterious power of "Māyā", and Leibniz, long
afterwards, explained by his doctrine of the Identity of Indiscernibles,
Mānī's solution, though childish, must find a place in the historical
development of philosophical ideas. Its philosophical value may be
insignificant; but one thing is certain, i.e. Mānī was the first to
venture the suggestion that the Universe is due to the activity of the
Devil, and hence essentially evil--a proposition which seems to me to be
the only logical justification of a system which preaches renunciation
as the guiding principle of life. In our own times Schopenhauer has been
led to the same conclusion; though, unlike Mānī, he supposes the
principle of objectification or individuation--"the sinful bent" of the
will to life--to exist in the very nature of the Primal Will and not
independent of it.

    [16:1] It is interesting to compare Mānī's Philosophy of Nature
    with the Chinese notion of Creation, according to which all that
    exists flows from the Union of Yin and Yang. But the Chinese
    reduced these two principles to a higher unity:--Tai Keih. To
    Mānī such a reduction was not possible; since he could not
    conceive that things of opposite nature could proceed from the
    same principle.

    [17:1] Thomas Aquinas states and criticises Mānī's contrariety
    of Primal agents in the following manner:--

    (a) What all things seek even a principle of evil would seek.
        But all things seek their own self-preservation.
      ⁂ Even a principle of evil would seek its own self-preservation.

    (b) What all things seek is good.
        But self-preservation is what all things seek.
      ⁂ Self-preservation is good.
        But a principle of evil would seek its own self-preservation.
      ⁂ A principle of evil would seek some good--which shows that it
        is self-contradictory.

              God and His Creatures, Book II, p. 105. Rickaby's Tr.

Turning now to the remarkable socialist of ancient Persia--_Mazdak_.
This early prophet of communism appeared during the reign of
Anūs̱ẖīrwān the Just (531–578 A.D.), and marked another dualistic
reaction against the prevailing Zarwānian doctrine[18:1]. Mazdak, like
Mānī, taught that the diversity of things springs from the mixture of
two independent, eternal principles which he called S̱ẖīd (Light) and
Tār (Darkness). But he differs from his predecessor in holding that the
fact of their mixture as well as their final separation, are quite
accidental, and not at all the result of choice. Mazdak's God is endowed
with sensation, and has four principal energies in his eternal
presence--power of discrimination, memory, understanding and bliss.
These four energies have four personal manifestations who, assisted by
four other persons, superintend the course of the Universe. Variety in
things and men is due to the various combinations of the original
principles.

    [18:1] The Zarwānian doctrine prevailed in Persia in the 5th
    century B.C. (See Z. D. M. G., Vol. LVII, p. 562).

But the most characteristic feature of the Mazdakite teaching is its
communism, which is evidently an inference from the cosmopolitan spirit
of Mānī's Philosophy. All men, said Mazdak, are equal; and the notion of
individual property was introduced by the hostile demons whose object is
to turn God's Universe into a scene of endless misery. It is chiefly
this aspect of Mazdak's teaching that was most shocking to the
Zoroastrian conscience, and finally brought about the destruction of his
enormous following, even though the master was supposed to have
miraculously made the sacred Fire talk, and bear witness to the truth of
his mission.


§ III.

Retrospect.

We have seen some of the aspects of Pre-Islamic Persian thought; though,
owing to our ignorance of the tendencies of Sāssānīde thought, and of
the political, social, and intellectual conditions that determined its
evolution, we have not been able fully to trace the continuity of ideas.
Nations as well as individuals, in their intellectual history, begin
with the objective. Although the moral fervour of Zoroaster gave a
spiritual tone to his theory of the origin of things, yet the net result
of this period of Persian speculation is nothing more than a
materialistic dualism. The principle of Unity as a philosophical ground
of all that exists, is but dimly perceived at this stage of intellectual
evolution in Persia. The controversy among the followers of Zoroaster
indicates that the movement towards a monistic conception of the
Universe had begun; but we have unfortunately no evidence to make a
positive statement concerning the pantheistic tendencies of Pre-Islamic
Persian thought. We know that in the 6{th} century A.D., Diogenes,
Simplicius and other Neo-Platonic thinkers, were driven by the
persecution of Justinian, to take refuge in the court of the tolerant
Anūs̱ẖīrwān. This great monarch, moreover, had several works translated
for him from Sanskrit and Greek, but we have no historical evidence to
show how far these events actually influenced the course of Persian
thought. Let us, therefore, pass on to the advent of Islām in Persia,
which completely shattered the old order of things, and brought to the
thinking mind the new concept of an uncompromising monotheism as well as
the Greek dualism of God and matter, as distinguished from the purely
Persian dualism of God and Devil.




