CHAPTER XIX

THE JUST


A man is not just if he carries a matter by violence; no, he who
distinguishes both right and wrong, who is learned and guides others,
not by violence, but by the same law, being a guardian of the law and
intelligent, he is called just.

A man is not learned because he talks much; he who is patient, free from
hatred and fear, he is called learned.

A man is not a supporter of the law because he talks much; even if a man
has learnt little, but sees the law bodily, he is a supporter of the
law, a man who never neglects the law.

A man is not an elder because his head is gray; his age may be ripe, but
he is called "Old-in-vain."

He in whom there is truth, virtue, pity, restraint, moderation, he who
is free from impurity and is wise, he is called an elder.

An envious, stingy, dishonest man does not become respectable by means
of much talking only, or by the beauty of his complexion.

He in whom all this is destroyed, and taken out with the very root, he,
when freed from hatred, is called respectable.

Not by tonsure does an undisciplined man who speaks falsehood become a
Samana; can a man be a Samana who is still held captive by desire and
greediness?

He who always quiets the evil, whether small or large, he is called a
Samana (a quiet man), because he has quieted all evil.

A man is not a mendicant (Bhikshu) simply because he asks others for
alms; he who adopts the whole law is a Bhikshu, not he who only begs.

He who is above good and evil, who is chaste, who with care passes
through the world, he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

A man is not a Muni because he observes silence if he is foolish and
ignorant; but the wise who, as with the balance, chooses the good and
avoids evil, he is a Muni, and is a Muni thereby; he who in this world
weighs both sides is called a Muni.

A man is not an elect (Ariya) because he injures living creatures;
because he has pity on all living creatures, therefore is a man called
Ariya.

Not only by discipline and vows, not only by much learning, not by
entering into a trance, not by sleeping alone, do I earn the happiness
of release which no worldling can know. O Bhikshu, he who has obtained
the extinction of desires has obtained confidence.



CHAPTER XX

THE WAY


The best of ways is the eightfold; the best of truths the four words;
the best of virtues passionlessness; the best of men he who has eyes to
see.

This is the way, there is no other that leads to the purifying of
intelligence. Go on this path! This is the confusion of Mâra, the
tempter.

If you go on this way, you will make an end of pain! The way preached by
me, when I had understood the removal of the thorns in the flesh.

You yourself must make an effort. The Tathâgatas (Buddhas) are only
preachers. The thoughtful who enter the way are freed from the bondage
of Mâra.

"All created things perish," he who knows and sees this becomes passive
in pain; this is the way to purity.

"All created things are grief and pain," he who knows and sees this
becomes passive in pain; this is the way that leads to purity.

"All forms are unreal," he who knows and sees this becomes passive in
pain; this is the way that leads to purity.

He who does not rouse himself when it is time to rise, who, though young
and strong, is full of sloth, whose will and thought are weak, that lazy
and idle man never finds the way to knowledge.

Watching his speech, well restrained in mind, let a man never commit any
wrong with his body! Let a man but keep these three roads of action
clear, and he will achieve the way which is taught by the wise.

Through zeal knowledge is gained, through lack of zeal knowledge is
lost; let a man who knows this double path of gain and loss thus place
himself that knowledge may grow.

Cut down the whole forest of desires, not a tree only! Danger comes out
of the forest of desires. When you have cut down both the forest of
desires and its undergrowth, then, Bhikshus, you will be rid of the
forest and of desires!

So long as the desire of man towards women, even the smallest, is not
destroyed, so long is his mind in bondage, as the calf that drinks milk
is to its mother.

Cut out the love of self, like an autumn lotus, with thy hand! Cherish
the road of peace. Nirvâna has been shown by Sugata (Buddha).

"Here I shall dwell in the rain, here in winter and summer," thus the
fool meditates, and does not think of death.

Death comes and carries off that man, honored for his children and
flocks, his mind distracted, as a flood carries off a sleeping village.

Sons are no help, nor a father, nor relations; there is no help from
kinsfolk for one whom death has seized.

A wise and well-behaved man who knows the meaning of this should quickly
clear the way that leads to Nirvâna.



