CHAPTER IV

Entitled, Women[63]--Revealed at Medina

_In the Name of the Most Merciful God._


O men, fear your Lord, who hath created you out of one man, and out of
him created his wife, and from them two hath multiplied many men and
women: and fear God by whom ye beseech one another; and respect women
who have borne you, for God is watching over you. And give the orphans
when they come to age their substance; and render them not in exchange
bad for good: and devour not their substance, by adding it to your
substance; for this is a great sin. And if ye fear that ye shall not act
with equity towards orphans of the female sex, take in marriage of such
other women as please you, two, or three, or four, and not more. But if
ye fear that ye cannot act equitably towards so many, marry one only, or
the slaves which ye shall have acquired. This will be easier, that ye
swerve not from righteousness. And give women their dowry freely; but if
they voluntarily remit unto you any part of it, enjoy it with
satisfaction and advantage. And give not unto those who are weak of
understanding, the substance which God hath appointed you to preserve
for them; but maintain them thereout, and clothe them, and speak kindly
unto them. And examine the orphans until they attain the age of
marriage: but if ye perceive they are able to manage their affairs well,
deliver their substance unto them; and waste it not extravagantly, or
hastily, because they grow up. Let him who is rich abstain entirely from
the orphan's estates; and let him who is poor take thereof according to
what shall be reasonable. And when ye deliver their substance unto them,
call witnesses thereof in their presence: God taketh sufficient account
of your actions. Men ought to have a part of what their parents and
kindred leave behind them when they die: and women also ought to have a
part of what their parents and kindred leave, whether it be little, or
whether it be much; a determinate part is due to them. And when they who
are of kin are present at the dividing of what is left, and also the
orphans, and the poor; distribute unto them some part thereof; and if
the estate be too small, at least speak comfortably unto them. And let
those fear to abuse orphans, who if they leave behind them a weak
offspring, are solicitous for them: let them therefore fear God, and
speak that which is convenient. Surely they who devour the possessions
of orphans unjustly, shall swallow down nothing but fire into their
bellies, and shall broil in raging flames. God hath thus commanded you
concerning your children. A male shall have as much as the share of two
females: but if they be females only, and above two in number, they
shall have two third-parts of what the deceased shall leave; and if
there be but one, she shall have the half. And the parents of the
deceased shall have each of them a sixth part of what he shall leave, if
he have a child: but if he have no child, and his parents be his heirs,
then his mother shall have the third part. And if he have brethren, his
mother shall have a sixth part, after the legacies[64] which he shall
bequeath, and his debts be paid. Ye know not whether your parents or
your children be of greater use unto you. This is an ordinance from God,
and God is knowing and wise. Moreover, ye may claim half of what your
wives shall leave, if they have no issue; but if they have issue, then
ye shall have the fourth part of what they shall leave, after the
legacies which they shall bequeath, and the debts be paid. They also
shall have the fourth part of what ye shall leave, in case ye have no
issue; but if ye have issue, then they shall have the eighth part of
what ye shall leave, after the legacies which ye shall bequeath and your
debts be paid. And if a man or woman's substance be inherited by a
distant relation, and he or she have a brother or sister; each of them
two shall have a sixth part of the estate. But if there be more than
this number, they shall be equal sharers in a third part, after payment
of the legacies which shall be bequeathed, and the debts, without
prejudice to the heirs. This is an ordinance from God: and God is
knowing and gracious. These are the statutes of God. And whoso obeyeth
God and his apostle, God shall lead him into gardens wherein rivers
flow, they shall continue therein forever; and this shall be great
happiness. But whoso disobeyeth God, and his apostle, and transgresseth
his statutes, God shall cast him into hell fire; he shall remain therein
forever, and he shall suffer a shameful punishment. If any of your women
be guilty of whoredom, produce four witnesses from among you against
them, and if they bear witness against them, imprison them in separate
apartments until death release them, or God affordeth them a way to
escape.[65] And if two of you commit the like wickedness, punish them
both: but if they repent and amend, let them both alone; for God is easy
to be reconciled and merciful. Verily repentance will be accepted with
God, from those who do evil ignorantly, and then repent speedily; unto
them will God be turned: for God is knowing and wise. But no repentance
shall be accepted from those who do evil until the time when death
presenteth itself unto one of them, and he saith, Verily, I repent now;
nor unto those who die unbelievers: for them have we prepared a grievous
punishment. O true believers, it is not lawful for you to be heirs of
women against their will, nor to hinder them from marrying others, that
ye may take away part of what ye have given them in dowry; unless they
have been guilty of a manifest crime: but converse kindly with them. And
if ye hate them, it may happen that ye may hate a thing wherein God hath
placed much good. If ye be desirous to exchange a wife for another wife,
and ye have already given one of them a talent; take not away anything
therefrom: will ye take it by slandering her, and doing her manifest
injustice? And how can ye take it, since the one of you hath gone in
unto the other, and they have received from you a firm covenant? Marry
not women whom your fathers have had to wife (except what is already
past): for this is uncleanness, and an abomination, and an evil way. Ye
are forbidden to marry your mothers, and your daughters, and your
sisters, and your aunts both on the father's and on the mother's side,
and your brother's daughters, and your sister's daughters, and your
mothers who have given you suck, and your foster-sisters, and your
wives' mothers, and your daughters-in-law which are under your tuition,
born of your wives unto whom ye have gone in (but if ye have not gone in
unto them, it shall be no sin in you to marry them), and the wives of
your sons who proceed out of your loins; and ye are also forbidden to
take to wife two sisters; except what is already past: for God is
gracious and merciful. Ye are also forbidden to take to wife free women
who are married, except those women whom your right hands shall possess
as slaves.[66] This is ordained you from God. Whatever is beside this,
is allowed you; that ye may with your substance provide wives for
yourselves, acting that which is right, and avoiding whoredom. And for
the advantage which ye receive from them, give them their reward,
according to what is ordained: but it shall be no crime in you to make
any other agreement among yourselves, after the ordinance shall be
complied with; for God is knowing and wise. Whoso among you hath not
means sufficient that he may marry free women, who are believers, let
him marry with such of your maid-servants whom your right hands possess,
as are true believers; for God well knoweth your faith. Ye are the one
from the other; therefore marry them with the consent of their masters;
and give them their dower according to justice; such as are modest, not
guilty of whoredom, nor entertaining lovers. And when they are married,
if they be guilty of adultery, they shall suffer half the punishment
which is appointed for the free women.[67] This is allowed unto him
among you, who feareth to sin by marrying free women; but if ye abstain
from marrying slaves, it will be better for you; God is gracious and
merciful. God is willing to declare these things unto you, and to direct
you according to the ordinances of those who have gone before you, and
to be merciful unto you. God is knowing and wise. God desireth to be
gracious unto you; but they who follow their lusts, desire that ye
should turn aside from the truth with great deviation. God is minded to
make his religion light unto you: for man was created weak. O true
believers, consume not your wealth among yourselves in vanity; unless
there be merchandising among you by mutual consent: neither slay
yourselves; for God is merciful towards you: and whoever doth this
maliciously and wickedly, he will surely cast him to be broiled in hell
fire; and this is easy with God. If ye turn aside from the grievous
sins,[68] of those which ye are forbidden to commit, we will cleanse you
from your smaller faults; and will introduce you into paradise with an
honorable entry. Covet not that which God hath bestowed on some of you
preferably to others.[69] Unto the men shall be given a portion of what
they shall have gained, and unto the women shall be given a portion of
what they shall have gained: therefore ask God of his bounty; for God is
omniscient. We have appointed unto everyone kindred, to inherit part of
what their parents and relations shall leave at their deaths. And unto
those with whom your right hands have made an alliance, give their part
of the inheritance; for God is witness of all things. Men shall have the
preeminence above women, because of those advantages wherein God hath
caused the one of them to excel the other, and for that which they
expend of their substance in maintaining their wives. The honest women
are obedient, careful in the absence of their husbands, for that God
preserveth them, by committing them to the care and protection of the
men. But those, whose perverseness ye shall be apprehensive of, rebuke;
and remove them into separate apartments, and chastise them.[70] But if
they shall be obedient unto you, seek not an occasion of quarrel against
them; for God is high and great. And if ye fear a breach between the
husband and wife, send a judge out of his family, and a judge out of her
family: if they shall desire a reconciliation, God will cause them to
agree; for God is knowing and wise. Serve God, and associate no creature
with him; and show kindness unto parents, and relations, and orphans,
and the poor, and your neighbor who is of kin to you, and also your
neighbor who is a stranger, and to your familiar companion, and the
traveller, and the captives whom your right hands shall possess; for God
loveth not the proud or vain-glorious, who are covetous, and recommend
covetousness unto men, and conceal that which God of his bounty hath
given them (we have prepared a shameful punishment for the unbelievers);
and who bestow their wealth in charity to be observed of men, and
believe not in God, nor in the last day; and whoever hath Satan for a
companion, an evil companion hath he! And what harm would befall them if
they should believe in God and the last day, and give alms out of that
which God hath bestowed on them? since God knoweth them who do this.
Verily God will not wrong anyone even the weight of an ant: and if it be
a good action, he will double it, and will recompense it in his sight
with a great reward. How will it be with the unbelievers when we shall
bring a witness out of each nation against itself, and shall bring thee,
O Mohammed, a witness against these people? In that day they who have
not believed, and have rebelled against the apostle of God, shall wish
the earth was levelled with them; and they shall not be able to hide any
matter from God. O true believers, come not to prayers when ye are
drunk, until ye understand what ye say; nor when ye are polluted by
emission of seed, unless ye be travelling on the road, until ye wash
yourselves. But if ye be sick, or on a journey, or any of you come from
easing nature, or have touched women, and find no water; take fine clean
sand and rub your faces and your hands therewith; for God is merciful
and inclined to forgive. Hast thou not observed those unto whom part of
the scriptures was delivered? they sell error, and desire that ye may
wander from the right way; but God well knoweth your enemies. God is a
sufficient patron, and God is a sufficient helper. Of the Jews there are
some who pervert words from their places; and say, We have heard, and
have disobeyed; and do thou hear without understanding our meaning, and
look upon us: perplexing with their tongues, and reviling the true
religion. But if they had said, We have heard, and do obey; and do thou
hear, and regard us: certainly it were better for them, and more right.
But God hath cursed them by reason of their infidelity; therefore a few
of them only shall believe. O ye to whom the scriptures have been given,
believe in the revelation which we have sent down, confirming that which
is with you; before we deface your countenances, and render them as the
back parts thereof; or curse them, as we cursed those who transgressed
on the Sabbath day; and the command of God was fulfilled. Surely God
will not pardon the giving him an equal; but will pardon any other sin,
except that, to whom he pleaseth; and whoso giveth a companion unto God,
hath devised a great wickedness. Hast thou not observed those who
justify themselves? But God justifieth whomsoever he pleaseth, nor shall
they be wronged a hair. Behold, how they imagine a lie against God; and
therein is iniquity sufficiently manifest. Hast thou not considered
those to whom part of the scripture hath been given? They believe in
false gods and idols,[71] and say of those who believe not, These are
more rightly directed in the way of truth than they who believe on
Mohammed. Those are the men whom God hath cursed; and unto him whom God
shall curse, thou shalt surely find no helper. Shall they have a part of
the kingdom, since even then they would not bestow the smallest matter
on men? Do they envy other men that which God of his bounty hath given
them? We formerly gave unto the family of Abraham a book of revelations
and wisdom; and we gave them a great kingdom. There is of them who
believeth on him; and there is of them who turneth aside from him: but
the raging fire of hell is a sufficient punishment. Verily, those who
disbelieve our signs, we will surely cast to be broiled in hell fire; so
often as their skins shall be well burned, we will give them other skins
in exchange, that they may taste the sharper torment; for God is mighty
and wise. But those who believe and do that which is right, we will
bring into gardens watered by rivers: therein shall they remain forever,
and there shall they enjoy wives free from all impurity; and we will
lead them into perpetual shades. Moreover, God commandeth you to restore
what ye are trusted with, to the owners; and when ye judge between men,
that ye judge according to equity: and surely an excellent virtue it is
to which God exhorteth you; for God both heareth and seeth. O true
believers, obey God, and obey the apostle, and those who are in
authority among you: and if ye differ in anything, refer it unto God[72]
and the apostle, if ye believe in God and the last day: this is better,
and a fairer method of determination. Hast thou not observed those who
pretend they believe in what hath been revealed unto thee, and what hath
been revealed before thee? They desire to go to judgment before Taghût,
although they have been commanded not to believe in him; and Satan
desireth to seduce them into a wide error. And when it is said unto
them, Come unto the book which God hath sent down, and to the apostle;
thou seest the ungodly turn aside from thee, with great aversion. But
how will they behave when a misfortune shall befall them, for that which
their hands have sent before them? Then will they come unto thee, and
swear by God, saying, We intended no other than to do good, and to
reconcile the parties. God knoweth what is in the hearts of these men;
therefore let them alone, and admonish them, and speak unto them a word
which may affect their souls. We have not sent any apostle, but that he
might be obeyed by the permission of God: but if they, after they have
injured their own souls, come unto thee, and ask pardon of God, and the
apostle ask pardon for them, they shall surely find God easy to be
reconciled and merciful. And by thy Lord they will not perfectly
believe, until they make thee judge of their controversies; and shall
not afterwards find in their own minds any hardship in what thou shalt
determine, but shall acquiesce therein with entire submission. And if we
had commanded them, saying, Slay yourselves, or depart from your houses,
they would not have done it, except a few of them. And if they had done
what they were admonished, it would certainly have been better for them,
and more efficacious for confirming their faith; and we should then have
surely given them in our sight an exceeding great reward, and we should
have directed them in the right way. Whoever obeyeth God and the
apostle, they shall be with those unto whom God hath been gracious, of
the prophets, and the sincere, and the martyrs, and the righteous; and
these are the most excellent company. This is bounty from God; and God
is sufficiently knowing. O true believers, take your necessary
precaution against your enemies, and either go forth to war in separate
parties, or go forth all together in a body. There is of you who
tarrieth behind; and if a misfortune befall you, he saith, Verily God
hath been gracious unto me, that I was not present with them: but if
success attend you from God, he will say (as if there was no friendship
between you and him), Would to God I had been with them, for I should
have acquired great merit. Let them therefore fight for the religion of
God, who part with the present life in exchange for that which is to
come; for whosoever fighteth for the religion of God, whether he be
slain, or be victorious, we will surely give him a great reward. And
what ails you, that ye fight not for God's true religion, and in defence
of the weak among men, women, and children, who say, O Lord, bring us
forth from this city, whose inhabitants are wicked; grant us from before
thee a protector, and grant us from thee a defender. They who believe
fight for the religion of God; but they who believe not fight for the
religion of Taghût. Fight therefore against the friends of Satan, for
the stratagem of Satan is weak. Hast thou not observed those unto whom
it was said, Withhold your hands from war, and be constant at prayers,
and pay the legal alms? But when war is commanded them, behold, a part
of them fear men as they should fear God, or with a greater fear, and
say, O Lord, wherefore hast thou commanded us to go to war, and hast not
suffered us to wait our approaching end? Say unto them, The provision of
this life is but small; but the future shall be better for him who
feareth God; and ye shall not be in the least injured at the day of
judgment. Wheresoever ye be, death will overtake you, although ye be in
lofty towers. If good befall them, they say, This is from God; but if
evil befall them, they say, This is from thee, O Mohammed: say, All is
from God; and what aileth these people, that they are so far from
understanding what is said unto them? Whatever good befalleth thee, O
man, it is from God; and whatever evil befalleth thee, it is from
thyself.[73] We have sent thee an apostle unto men, and God is a
sufficient witness thereof. Whoever obeyeth the apostle, obeyeth God;
and whoever turneth back, we have not sent thee to be a keeper over
them. They say, Obedience: yet when they go forth from thee, part of
them meditate by night a matter different from what thou speakest; but
God shall write down what they meditate by night: therefore let them
alone, and trust in God, for God is a sufficient protector. Do they not
attentively consider the Koran? If it had been from any besides God,
they would certainly have found therein many contradictions. When any
news cometh unto them, either of security or fear, they immediately
divulge it; but if they told it to the apostle and to those who are in
authority among them, such of them would understand the truth of the
matter, as inform themselves thereof from the apostle and his chiefs.
And if the favor of God and his mercy had not been upon you, ye had
followed the devil, except a few of you. Fight therefore for the
religion of God, and oblige not any to what is difficult, except
thyself; however, excite the faithful to war, perhaps God will restrain
the courage of the unbelievers; for God is stronger than they, and more
able to punish. He who intercedeth between men with a good intercession
shall have a portion thereof; and he who intercedeth with an evil
intercession shall have a portion thereof; for God overlooketh all
things. When ye are saluted with a salutation, salute the person with a
better salutation, or at least return the same; for God taketh an
account of all things. God! there is no God but he; he will surely
gather you together on the day of resurrection; there is no doubt of it:
and who is more true than God in what he saith? Why are ye divided
concerning the ungodly into two parties; since God hath overturned them
for what they have committed? Will ye direct him whom God hath led
astray; since for him whom God shall lead astray, thou shalt find no
true path? They desire that ye should become infidels, as they are
infidels, and that ye should be equally wicked with themselves.
Therefore take not friends from among them, until they fly their country
for the religion of God; and if they turn back from the faith, take
them, and kill them wherever ye find them; and take no friend from among
them, nor any helper, except those who go unto a people who are in
alliance with you, for those who come unto you, their hearts forbidding
them either to fight against you, or to fight against their own people.
And if God pleased he would have permitted them to have prevailed
against you, and they would have fought against you. But if they depart
from you, and fight not against you and offer you peace, God doth not
allow you to take or kill them. Ye shall find others who are desirous to
enter into a confidence with you, and at the same time to preserve a
confidence with their own people: so often as they return to sedition,
they shall be subverted therein; and if they depart not from you, and
offer you peace, and restrain their hands from warring against you, take
them and kill them wheresoever ye find them; over these have we granted
you a manifest power. It is not lawful for a believer to kill a
believer, unless it happen by mistake; and whoso killeth a believer by
mistake, the penalty shall be the freeing of a believer from slavery,
and a fine to be paid to the family of the deceased,[74] unless they
remit it as alms: and if the slain person be of a people at enmity with
you, and be a true believer, the penalty shall be the freeing of a
believer; but if he be of a people in confederacy with you, a fine to be
paid to his family, and the freeing of a believer. And he who findeth
not wherewith to do this, shall fast two months consecutively, as a
penance enjoined from God; and God is knowing and wise. But whoso
killeth a believer designedly, his reward shall be hell; he shall remain
therein forever; and God shall be angry with him, and shall curse him,
and shall prepare for him a great punishment. O true believers, when ye
are on a march in defence of the true religion, justly discern such as
ye shall happen to meet, and say not unto him who saluteth you, Thou art
not a true believer; seeking the accidental goods of the present life;
for with God is much spoil. Such have ye formerly been, but God hath
been gracious unto you; therefore make a just discernment, for God is
well acquainted with that which ye do. Those believers who sit still at
home, not having any hurt, and those who employ their fortunes and their
persons for the religion of God, shall not be held equal. God hath
preferred those who employ their fortunes and their persons in that
cause, to a degree of honor above those who sit at home: God hath indeed
promised everyone paradise, but God hath preferred those who fight for
the faith before those who sit still, by adding unto them a great
reward, by degrees of honor conferred on them from him, and by granting
them forgiveness and mercy; for God is indulgent and merciful. Moreover,
unto those whom the angels put to death, having injured their own
souls,[75] the angels said, Of what religion were ye? they answered, We
were weak in the earth. The angels replied, Was not God's earth wide
enough, that ye might fly therein to a place of refuge? Therefore their
habitation shall be hell; and an evil journey shall it be thither:
except the weak among men, and women, and children, who were not able to
find means, and were not directed in the way; these peradventure God
will pardon, for God is ready to forgive and gracious. Whosoever flieth
from his country for the sake of God's true religion, shall find in the
earth many forced to do the same, and plenty of provisions. And whoever
departeth from his house, and flieth unto God and his apostle, if death
overtake him in the way, God will be obliged to reward him, for God is
gracious and merciful. When ye march to war in the earth, it shall be no
crime in you if ye shorten your prayers, in case ye fear the infidels
may attack you; for the infidels are your open enemy. But when thou, O
prophet, shalt be among them, and shalt pray with them, let a party of
them arise to prayer with thee, and let them take their arms; and when
they shall have worshipped, let them stand behind you, and let another
party come that hath not prayed, and let them pray with thee, and let
them be cautious and take their arms. The unbelievers would that ye
should neglect your arms and your baggage while ye pray, that they might
turn upon you at once. It shall be no crime in you, if ye be incommoded
by rain, or be sick, that ye lay down your arms; but take your necessary
precaution. God hath prepared for the unbelievers an ignominious
punishment. And when ye shall have ended your prayer, remember God,
standing, and sitting, and lying on your sides. But when ye are secure
from danger, complete your prayers; for prayer is commanded the
faithful, and appointed to be said at the stated times. Be not negligent
in seeking out the unbelieving people, though ye suffer some
inconvenience; for they also shall suffer, as ye suffer, and ye hope for
a reward from God which they cannot hope for; and God is knowing and
wise. We have sent down unto thee the book of the Koran with truth, that
thou mayest judge between men through that wisdom which God showeth thee
therein; and be not an advocate for the fraudulent; but ask pardon of
God for thy wrong intention, since God is indulgent and merciful.
Dispute not for those who deceive one another, for God loveth not him
who is a deceiver or unjust. Such conceal themselves from men, but they
conceal not themselves from God; for he is with them when they imagine
by night a saying which pleaseth him not, and God comprehendeth what
they do. Behold, ye are they who have disputed for them in this present
life; but who shall dispute with God for them on the day of
resurrection, or who will become their patron? yet he who doth evil, or
injureth his own soul, and afterwards asketh pardon of God, shall find
God gracious and merciful. Whoso committeth wickedness, committeth it
against his own soul: God is knowing and wise. And whoso committeth a
sin or iniquity, and afterwards layeth it on the innocent, he shall
surely bear the guilt of calumny and manifest injustice. If the
indulgence and mercy of God had not been upon thee, surely a part of
them had studied to seduce thee; but they shall seduce themselves only,
and shall not hurt thee at all. God hath sent down unto thee the book of
the Koran and wisdom, and hath taught thee that which thou knewest not;
for the favor of God hath been great towards thee. There is no good in
the multitude of their private discourses, unless in the discourse of
him who recommendeth alms, or that which is right, or agreement amongst
men; whoever doth this out of a desire to please God we will surely give
him a great reward. But whoso separateth himself from the apostle, after
true direction hath been manifested unto him, and followeth any other
way than that of the true believers, we will cause him to obtain that to
which he is inclined, and will cast him to be burned in hell; and an
unhappy journey shall it be thither. Verily God will not pardon the
giving him a companion, but he will pardon any crime besides that, unto
whom he pleaseth: and he who giveth a companion unto God, is surely led
aside into a wide mistake: the infidels invoke beside him only female
deities, and only invoke rebellious Satan. God cursed him; and he said,
Verily I will take of thy servants a part cut off from the rest, and I
will seduce them, and will insinuate vain desires into them, and I will
command them, and they shall cut off the ears of cattle; and I will
command them, and they shall change God's creature. But whoever taketh
Satan for his patron, besides God, shall surely perish with a manifest
destruction. He maketh them promises, and insinuateth into them vain
desires; yet Satan maketh them only deceitful promises. The receptacle
of these shall be hell, they shall find no refuge from it. But they who
believe, and do good works, we will surely lead them into gardens,
through which rivers flow; they shall continue therein forever,
according to the true promise of God; and who is more true than God in
what he saith? It shall not be according to your desires, nor according
to the desires of those who have received the scriptures. Whoso doeth
evil, shall be rewarded for it; and shall not find any patron or helper,
beside God; but whoso doeth good works, whether he be male or female,
and is a true believer, they shall be admitted into paradise, and shall
not in the least be unjustly dealt with. Who is better in point of
religion than he who resigneth himself unto God, and is a worker of
righteousness, and followeth the law of Abraham the orthodox? since God
took Abraham for his friend: and to God belongeth whatsoever is in
heaven and on earth; God comprehendeth all things. They will consult
thee concerning women; Answer, God instructeth you concerning them, and
that which is read unto you in the book of the Koran concerning female
orphans, to whom ye give not that which is ordained them, neither will
ye marry them, and concerning weak infants, and that ye observe justice
towards orphans: whatever good ye do, God knoweth it. If a woman fear
ill usage, or aversion, from her husband, it shall be no crime in them
if they agree the matter amicably between themselves; for a
reconciliation is better than a separation. Men's souls are naturally
inclined to covetousness: but if ye be kind towards women, and fear to
wrong them, God is well acquainted with what ye do. Ye can by no means
carry yourselves equally between women in all respects, although ye
study to do it; therefore turn not from a wife with all manner of
aversion, nor leave her like one in suspense: if ye agree, and fear to
abuse your wives, God is gracious and merciful; but if they separate,
God will satisfy them both of his abundance; for God is extensive and
wise, and unto God belongeth whatsoever is in heaven and on earth. We
have already commanded those unto whom the scriptures were given before
you, and we command you also, saying, Fear God; but if ye disbelieve,
unto God belongeth whatsoever is in heaven and on earth; and God is
self-sufficient, and to be praised; for unto God belongeth whatsoever is
in heaven and on earth, and God is a sufficient protector. If he
pleaseth he will take you away, O men, and will produce others in your
stead; for God is able to do this. Whoso desireth the reward of this
world, verily with God is the reward of this world, and also of that
which is to come; God both heareth and seeth. O true believers, observe
justice when ye bear witness before God, although it be against
yourselves, or your parents, or relations; whether the party be rich, or
whether he be poor; for God is more worthy than them both: therefore
follow not your own lust in bearing testimony, so that ye swerve from
justice. And whether ye wrest your evidence, or decline giving it, God
is well acquainted with that which ye do. O true believers, believe in
God and his apostle, and the book which he hath caused to descend unto
his apostle, and the book which he hath formerly sent down. And
whosoever believeth not in God, and his angels, and his scriptures, and
his apostles, and the last day, he surely erreth in a wide mistake.
Moreover, they who believed, and afterwards became infidels, and then
believed again, and after that disbelieved, and increased in infidelity,
God will by no means forgive them, nor direct them into the right way.
Declare unto the ungodly that they shall suffer a painful punishment.
They who take the unbelievers for their protectors, besides the
faithful, do they seek for power with them? since all power belongeth
unto God. And he hath already revealed unto you, in the book of the
Koran, the following passage: When ye shall hear the signs of God, they
shall not be believed, but they shall be laughed to scorn. Therefore sit
not with them who believe not, until they engage in different discourse;
for if ye do, ye will certainly become like unto them. God will surely
gather the ungodly and the unbelievers together in hell. They who wait
to observe what befalleth you, if victory be granted you from God, say,
Were we not with you? But if any advantage happen to the infidels, they
say unto them, Were we not superior to you, and have we not defended you
against the believers? God shall judge between you on the day of
resurrection; and God will not grant the unbelievers means to prevail
over the faithful. The hypocrites act deceitfully with God, but he will
deceive them; and when they stand up to pray, they stand carelessly,
affecting to be seen of men, and remember not God, unless a little,
wavering between faith and infidelity, and adhering neither unto these
nor unto those: and for him whom God shall lead astray, thou shalt find
no true path. O true believers, take not the unbelievers for your
protectors, besides the faithful. Will ye furnish God with an evident
argument of impiety against you? Moreover, the hypocrites shall be in
the lowest bottom of hell fire, and thou shalt not find any to help them
thence. But they who repent and amend, and adhere firmly unto God, and
approve the sincerity of their religion to God, they shall be numbered
with the faithful; and God will surely give the faithful a great reward.
And how should God go about to punish you, if ye be thankful and
believe? for God is grateful and wise. God loveth not the speaking ill
of anyone in public, unless he who is injured call for assistance; and
God heareth and knoweth: whether ye publish a good action, or conceal
it, or forgive evil, verily God is gracious and powerful. They who
believe not in God and his apostles, and would make a distinction
between God and his apostles, and say, We believe in some of the
prophets, and reject others of them, and seek to take a middle way in
this matter; these are really unbelievers, and we have prepared for the
unbelievers an ignominious punishment. But they who believe in God and
his apostles, and make no distinction between any of them, unto those
will we surely give their reward; and God is gracious and merciful. They
who have received the scriptures will demand of thee, that thou cause a
book to descend unto them from heaven: they formerly asked of Moses a
greater thing than this; for they said, Show us God visibly. Wherefore a
storm of fire from heaven destroyed them, because of their iniquity.
Then they took the calf for their God: after that evident proofs of the
divine unity had come unto them; but we forgave them that, and gave
Moses a manifest power to punish them. And we lifted the mountain of
Sinai over them, when we exacted from them their covenant; and said unto
them, Enter the gate of the city worshipping. We also said unto them,
Transgress not on the Sabbath day. And we received from them a firm
covenant, that they would observe these things. Therefore for that[76]
they have made void their covenant, and have not believed in the signs
of God, and have slain the prophets unjustly, and have said, Our hearts
are uncircumcised (but God hath sealed them up, because of their
unbelief; therefore they shall not believe, except a few of them): and
for that they have not believed on Jesus, and have spoken against Mary a
grievous calumny; and have said, Verily we have slain Christ Jesus the
son of Mary, the apostle of God; yet they slew him not, neither
crucified him, but he was represented by one in his likeness; and verily
they who disagreed concerning him,[77] were in a doubt as to this
matter, and had no sure knowledge thereof, but followed only an
uncertain opinion. They did not really kill him; but God took him up
unto himself: and God is mighty and wise. And there shall not be one of
those who have received the scriptures, who shall not believe in him,
before his death;[78] and on the day of resurrection he shall be a
witness against them. Because of the iniquity of those who Judaize, we
have forbidden them good things, which had been formerly allowed them;
and because they shut out many from the way of God, and have taken
usury, which was forbidden them by the law, and devoured men's substance
vainly: we have prepared for such of them as are unbelievers a painful
punishment. But those among them who are well grounded in knowledge, and
the faithful, who believe in that which hath been sent down unto thee,
and that which hath been sent down unto the prophets before thee, and
who observe the stated times of prayer, and give alms, and believe in
God and the last day; unto these will we give a great reward. Verily we
have revealed our will unto thee, as we have revealed it unto Noah and
the prophets who succeeded him; and as we revealed it unto Abraham, and
Ismael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and unto Jesus, and Job,
and Jonas, and Aaron, and Solomon; and we have given thee the Koran, as
we gave the Psalms unto David: some apostles have we sent, whom we have
formerly mentioned unto thee; and other apostles have we sent, whom we
have not mentioned unto thee; and God spake unto Moses, discoursing with
him; apostles declaring good tidings, and denouncing threats, lest men
should have an argument of excuse against God, after the apostles had
been sent unto them; God is mighty and wise. God is witness of that
revelation which he hath sent down unto thee; he sent it down with his
special knowledge: the angels also are witnesses thereof; but God is a
sufficient witness. They who believe not, and turn aside others from the
way of God, have erred in a wide mistake. Verily those who believe not,
and act unjustly, God will by no means forgive, neither will he direct
them into any other way than the way of hell; they shall remain therein
forever: and this is easy with God. O men, now is the apostle come unto
you, with truth from your Lord; believe therefore, it will be better for
you. But if ye disbelieve, verily unto God belongeth whatsoever is in
heaven and on earth; and God is knowing and wise. O ye who have received
the scriptures, exceed not the just bounds in your religion, neither say
of God any other than the truth. Verily Christ Jesus the son of Mary is
the apostle of God, and his Word, which he conveyed into Mary, and a
spirit proceeding from him. Believe, therefore, in God, and his
apostles, and say not, There are three Gods;[79] forbear this; it will
be better for you. God is but one God. Far be it from him that he should
have a son! unto him belongeth whatsoever is in heaven and on earth; and
God is a sufficient protector. Christ doth not proudly disdain to be a
servant unto God; neither the angels who approach near to his presence:
and whoso disdaineth his service, and is puffed up with pride, God will
gather them all to himself, on the last day. Unto those who believe, and
do that which is right, he shall give their rewards, and shall
superabundantly add unto them of his liberality: but those who are
disdainful and proud, he will punish with a grievous punishment; and
they shall not find any to protect or to help them, besides God. O men,
now is an evident proof come unto you from your Lord, and we have sent
down unto you manifest light. They who believe in God and firmly adhere
to him, he will lead them into mercy from him, and abundance; and he
will direct them in the right way to himself. They will consult thee for
thy decision in certain cases; say unto them, God giveth you these
determinations, concerning the more remote degrees of kindred. If a man
die without issue, and have a sister, she shall have the half of what he
shall leave:[80] and he shall be heir to her,[81] in case she have no
issue. But if there be two sisters, they shall have between them two
third-parts of what he shall leave; and if there be several, both
brothers and sisters, a male shall have as much as the portion of two
females. God declareth unto you these precepts, lest ye err: and God
knoweth all things.


[Footnote 63: This title was given to this chapter because it chiefly
treats of matters relating to women: as marriages, divorces, dower,
prohibited degrees.]

[Footnote 64: By legacies in this and the following passages, are
chiefly meant those bequeathed to pious uses; for the Mohammedans
approve not of a person's giving away his substance from his family and
near relations on any other account.]

[Footnote 65: Their punishment, in the beginning of Mohammedanism, was
to be immured till they died, but afterwards this cruel doom was
mitigated, and they might avoid it by undergoing the punishment ordained
in its stead by the Sonna, according to which the maidens are to be
scourged with a hundred stripes, and to be banished for a full year; and
the married women to be stoned.]

[Footnote 66: According to this passage it is not lawful to marry a free
woman that is already married, be she a Mohammedan or not, unless she be
legally parted from her husband by divorce; but it is lawful to marry
those who are slaves, or taken in war, after they shall have gone
through the proper purifications, though their husbands be living. Yet,
according to the decision of Abu Hanifah, it is not lawful to marry such
whose husbands shall be taken, or in actual slavery with them.]

[Footnote 67: The reason of this is because they are not presumed to
have had so good education. A slave, therefore, in such a case, is to
have fifty stripes, and to be banished for half a year; but she shall
not be stoned, because it is a punishment which cannot be inflicted by
halves.]

[Footnote 68: These sins al Beidâwi, from a tradition of Mohammed,
reckons to be seven (equalling in number the sins called deadly by
Christians), that is to say, idolatry, murder, falsely accusing modest
women of adultery, wasting the substance of orphans, taking of usury,
desertion in a religious expedition, and disobedience to parents.]

[Footnote 69: Such as honor, power, riches, and other worldly
advantages.]

[Footnote 70: By this passage the Mohammedans are in plain terms allowed
to beat their wives, in case of stubborn disobedience; but not in a
violent or dangerous manner.]

[Footnote 71: The Arabic is, in Tibt and Taghût. The former is supposed
to have been the proper name of some idol; but it seems rather to
signify any false deity in general. The latter we have explained
already.]

[Footnote 72: That is, to the decision of the Koran.]

[Footnote 73: These words are not to be understood as contradictory to
the preceding, "That all proceeds from God," since the evil which
befalls mankind, though ordered by God, is yet the consequence of their
own wicked actions.]

[Footnote 74: Which fine is to be distributed according to the laws of
inheritance given in the beginning of this chapter.]

[Footnote 75: These were certain inhabitants of Mecca, who held with the
hare and ran with the hounds, for though they embraced Mohammedanism,
yet they would not leave that city to join the prophet, as the rest of
the Moslems did, but on the contrary went out with the idolaters, and
were therefore slain with them at the battle of Bedr.]

[Footnote 76: There being nothing in the following words of this
sentence, to answer to the causal "for that," Jallalo'ddin supposes
something to be understood to complete the sense, as "therefore we have
cursed them," or the like.]

[Footnote 77: For some maintained that he was justly and really
crucified; some insisted that it was not Jesus who suffered, but another
who resembled him in the face, pretending the other parts of his body,
and by their unlikeness plainly discovered the imposition; some said he
was taken up into heaven; and others, that his manhood only suffered,
and that his godhead ascended into heaven.]

[Footnote 78: This passage is expounded two ways. Some, referring the
relative his to the first antecedent, take the meaning to be that no Jew
or Christian shall die before he believes in Jesus: for they say, that
when one of either of those religions is ready to breathe his last, and
sees the angel of death before him, he shall then believe in that
prophet as he ought, though his faith will not then be of any avail.
According to a tradition of Hejâj, when a Jew is expiring, the angels
will strike him on the back and face, and say to him, "O thou enemy of
God, Jesus was sent as a prophet unto thee, and thou didst not believe
on him;" to which he will answer, "I now believe him to be the servant
of God"; and to a dying Christian they will say, "Jesus was sent as a
prophet unto thee, and thou hast imagined him to be God, or the son of
God," whereupon he will believe him to be the servant of God only, and
his apostle. Others, taking the above-mentioned relative to refer to
Jesus, suppose the intent of the passage to be, that all Jews and
Christians in general shall have a right faith in that prophet before
his death, that is, when he descends from heaven and returns into the
world, where he is to kill Antichrist, and to establish the Mohammedan
religion, and a most perfect tranquillity and security on earth.]

[Footnote 79: Namely, God, Jesus, and Mary--as the eastern writers
mention a sect of Christians which held the Trinity to be composed of
those three; but it is allowed that this heresy has been long since
extinct. The passage, however, is equally levelled against the Holy
Trinity, according to the doctrine of the orthodox Christians, who, as
al Beid[=a]wi acknowledges, believe the divine nature to consist of
three persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; by the Father
understanding God's essence, by the Son his knowledge, and by the Holy
Ghost his life.]

[Footnote 80: And the other half will go to the public treasury.]

[Footnote 81: That is, he shall inherit her whole substance.]



