CHAPTER XXI

MISCELLANEOUS


If by leaving a small pleasure one sees a great pleasure, let a wise man
leave the small pleasure, and look to the great.

He who, by causing pain to others, wishes to obtain pleasure for
himself, he, entangled in the bonds of hatred, will never be free from
hatred.

What ought to be done is neglected, what ought not to be done is done;
the desires of unruly, thoughtless people are always increasing.

But they whose whole watchfulness is always directed to their body, who
do not follow what ought not to be done, and who steadfastly do what
ought to be done, the desires of such watchful and wise people will come
to an end.

A true Brâhmana goes scathless, though he have killed father and mother,
and two valiant kings, though he has destroyed a kingdom with all its
subjects.

A true Brâhmana goes scathless, though he have killed father and mother,
and two holy kings, and an eminent man besides.

The disciples of Gotama (Buddha) are always well awake, and their
thoughts day and night are always set on Buddha.

The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their thoughts day
and night are always set on the law.

The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their thoughts day
and night are always set on the church.

The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their thoughts day
and night are always set on their body.

The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their mind day and
night always delights in compassion.

The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their mind day and
night always delights in meditation.

It is hard to leave the world to become a friar, it is hard to enjoy the
world; hard is the monastery, painful are the houses; painful it is to
dwell with equals to share everything in common, and the itinerant
mendicant is beset with pain. Therefore let no man be an itinerant
mendicant, and he will not be beset with pain.

A man full of faith, if endowed with virtue and glory, is respected,
whatever place he may choose.

Good people shine from afar, like the snowy mountains; bad people are
not seen, like arrows shot by night.

Sitting alone, lying down alone, walking alone without ceasing, and
alone subduing himself, let a man be happy near the edge of a forest.



CHAPTER XXII

THE DOWNWARD COURSE


He who says what is not goes to hell; he also who, having done a thing,
says I have not done it. After death both are equal: they are men with
evil deeds in the next world.

Many men whose shoulders are covered with the yellow gown are
ill-conditioned and unrestrained; such evil-doers by their evil deeds go
to hell.

Better it would be to swallow a heated iron ball, like flaring fire,
than that a bad unrestrained fellow should live on the charity of the
land.

Four things does a reckless man gain who covets his neighbor's
wife--demerit, an uncomfortable bed, thirdly, punishment, and lastly,
hell.

There is demerit, and the evil way to hell: there is the short pleasure
of the frightened in the arms of the frightened, and the king imposes
heavy punishment; therefore let no man think of his neighbor's wife.

As a grass-blade, if badly grasped, cuts the arm, badly-practised
asceticism leads to hell.

An act carelessly performed, a broken vow, and hesitating obedience to
discipline (Brâhma-kariyam), all these bring no great reward.

If anything is to be done, let a man do it, let him attack it
vigorously! A careless pilgrim only scatters the dust of his passions
more widely.

An evil deed is better left undone, for a man repents of it afterwards;
a good deed is better done, for having done it, one does not repent.

Like a well-guarded frontier fort, with defences within and without, so
let a man guard himself. Not a moment should escape, for they who allow
the right moment to pass, suffer pain when they are in hell.

They who are ashamed of what they ought not to be ashamed of, and are
not ashamed of what they ought to be ashamed of, such men, embracing
false doctrines, enter the evil path.

They who fear when they ought not to fear, and fear not when they ought
to fear, such men, embracing false doctrines, enter the evil path.

They who see sin where there is no sin, and see no sin where there is
sin, such men, embracing false doctrines, enter the evil path.

They who see sin where there is sin, and no sin where there is no sin,
such men, embracing the true doctrine, enter the good path.



