CHAPTER IX

EVIL


A man should hasten towards the good, and should keep his thought away
from evil; if a man does what is good slothfully, his mind delights in
evil.

If a man commits a sin, let him not do it again; let him not delight in
sin: the accumulation of evil is painful.

If a man does what is good, let him do it again; let him delight in it:
the accumulation of good is delightful.

Even an evil-doer sees happiness so long as his evil deed does not
ripen; but when his evil deed ripens, then does the evil-doer see evil.

Even a good man sees evil days so long as his good deed does not ripen;
but when his good deed ripens, then does the good man see good things.

Let no man think lightly of evil, saying in his heart, It will not come
nigh unto me. Even by the falling of water-drops a water-pot is filled;
the fool becomes full of evil, even if he gather it little by little.

Let no man think lightly of good, saying in his heart, It will not come
nigh unto me. Even by the falling of water-drops a water-pot is filled;
the wise man becomes full of good, even if he gather it little by
little.

Let a man avoid evil deeds, as a merchant, if he has few companions and
carries much wealth, avoids a dangerous road; as a man who loves life
avoids poison.

He who has no wound on his hand, may touch poison with his hand; poison
does not affect one who has no wound; nor is there evil for one who does
not commit evil.

If a man offend a harmless, pure, and innocent person, the evil falls
back upon that fool, like light dust thrown up against the wind.

Some people are born again; evil-doers go to hell; righteous people go
to heaven; those who are free from all worldly desires attain Nirvâna.

Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea, not if we enter into the
clefts of the mountains, is there known a spot in the whole world where
a man might be freed from an evil deed.

Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea, not if we enter into the
clefts of the mountains, is there known a spot in the whole world where
death could not overcome the mortal.



CHAPTER X

PUNISHMENT


All men tremble at punishment, all men fear death; remember that you are
like unto them, and do not kill, nor cause slaughter.

All men tremble at punishment, all men love life; remember that thou art
like unto them, and do not kill, nor cause slaughter.

He who, seeking his own happiness, punishes or kills beings who also
long for happiness, will not find happiness after death.

He who, seeking his own happiness, does not punish or kill beings who
also long for happiness, will find happiness after death.

Do not speak harshly to anyone; those who are spoken to will answer thee
in the same way. Angry speech is painful: blows for blows will touch
thee.

If, like a shattered metal plate (gong), thou utter nothing, then thou
hast reached Nirvâna; anger is not known to thee.

As a cow-herd with his staff drives his cows into the stable, so do Age
and Death drive the life of men.

A fool does not know when he commits his evil deeds: but the wicked man
burns by his own deeds, as if burnt by fire.

He who inflicts pain on innocent and harmless persons, will soon come to
one of these ten states:--

He will have cruel suffering, loss, injury of the body, heavy
affliction, or loss of mind.

A misfortune coming from the king, or a fearful accusation, or loss of
relations, or destruction of treasures.

Lightning-fire will burn his houses; and when his body is destroyed, the
fool will go to hell.

Not nakedness, not platted hair, not dirt, not fasting, or lying on the
earth, not rubbing with dust, not sitting motionless, can purify a
mortal who has not overcome desires.

He who, though dressed in fine apparel, exercises tranquillity, is
quiet, subdued, restrained, chaste, and has ceased to find fault with
all other beings, he indeed is a Brâhmana, an ascetic (Sramana), a friar
(Bhikshu).

Is there in this world any man so restrained by shame that he does not
provoke reproof, as a noble horse the whip?

Like a noble horse when touched by the whip, be ye strenuous and eager,
and by faith, by virtue, by energy, by meditation, by discernment of the
law, you will overcome this great pain, perfect in knowledge and in
behavior, and never forgetful.

Well-makers lead the water wherever they like; fletchers bend the arrow;
carpenters bend a log of wood; good people fashion themselves.



