CHAPTER II

ON EARNESTNESS


Earnestness is the path of immortality (Nirvâna), thoughtlessness the
path of death. Those who are in earnest do not die, those who are
thoughtless are as if dead already.

Having understood this clearly, those who are advanced in earnestness
delight in earnestness, and rejoice in the knowledge of the elect.

These wise people, meditative, steady, always possessed of strong
powers, attain to Nirvâna, the highest happiness.

If an earnest person has roused himself, if he is not forgetful, if his
deeds are pure, if he acts with consideration, if he restrains himself,
and lives according to law--then his glory will increase.

By rousing himself, by earnestness, by restraint and control, the wise
man may make for himself an island which no flood can overwhelm.

Fools follow after vanity. The wise man keeps earnestness as his best
jewel.

Follow not after vanity, nor after the enjoyment of love and lust! He
who is earnest and meditative, obtains ample joy.

When the learned man drives away vanity by earnestness, he, the wise,
climbing the terraced heights of wisdom, looks down upon the fools: free
from sorrow he looks upon the sorrowing crowd, as one that stands on a
mountain looks down upon them that stand upon the plain.

Earnest among the thoughtless, awake among the sleepers, the wise man
advances like a racer, leaving behind the hack.

By earnestness did Maghavan (Indra) rise to the lordship of the gods.
People praise earnestness; thoughtlessness is always blamed.

A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in earnestness, who looks with fear
on thoughtlessness, moves about like fire, burning all his fetters,
small or large.

A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in reflection, who looks with fear on
thoughtlessness, cannot fall away from his perfect state--he is close
upon Nirvâna.



CHAPTER III

THOUGHT


As a fletcher makes straight his arrow, a wise man makes straight his
trembling and unsteady thought, which is difficult to guard, difficult
to hold back.

As a fish taken from his watery home and thrown on the dry ground, our
thought trembles all over in order to escape the dominion of Mâra, the
tempter.

It is good to tame the mind, which is difficult to hold in and flighty,
rushing wherever it listeth; a tamed mind brings happiness.

Let the wise man guard his thoughts, for they are difficult to perceive,
very artful, and they rush wherever they list: thoughts well guarded
bring happiness.

Those who bridle their mind which travels far, moves about alone, is
without a body, and hides in the chamber of the heart, will be free from
the bonds of Mâra, the tempter.

If a man's faith is unsteady, if he does not know the true law, if his
peace of mind is troubled, his knowledge will never be perfect.

If a man's thoughts are not dissipated, if his mind is not perplexed, if
he has ceased to think of good or evil, then there is no fear for him
while he is watchful.

Knowing that this body is fragile like a jar, and making his thought
firm like a fortress, one should attack Mâra, the tempter, with the
weapon of knowledge, one should watch him when conquered, and should
never rest.

Before long, alas! this body will lie on the earth, despised, without
understanding, like a useless log.

Whatever a hater may do to a hater, or an enemy to an enemy, a
wrongly-directed mind will do him greater mischief.

Not a mother, not a father, will do so much, nor any other relatives; a
well-directed mind will do us greater service.



CHAPTER IV

FLOWERS


Who shall overcome this earth, and the world of Yama, the lord of the
departed, and the world of the gods? Who shall find out the plainly
shown path of virtue, as a clever man finds the right flower?

The disciple will overcome the earth, and the world of Yama, and the
world of the gods. The disciple will find out the plainly shown path of
virtue, as a clever man finds the right flower.

He who knows that this body is like froth, and has learnt that it is as
unsubstantial as a mirage, will break the flower-pointed arrow of Mâra,
and never see the king of death.

Death carries off a man who is gathering flowers, and whose mind is
distracted, as a flood carries off a sleeping village.

Death subdues a man who is gathering flowers, and whose mind is
distracted, before he is satiated in his pleasures.

As the bee collects nectar and departs without injuring the flower, or
its color or scent, so let a sage dwell in his village.

Not the perversities of others, not their sins of commission or
omission, but his own misdeeds and negligences should a sage take notice
of.

Like a beautiful flower, full of color, but without scent, are the fine
but fruitless words of him who does not act accordingly.

But, like a beautiful flower, full of color and full of scent, are the
fine and fruitful words of him who acts accordingly.

As many kinds of wreaths can be made from a heap of flowers, so many
good things may be achieved by a mortal when once he is born.

The scent of flowers does not travel against the wind, nor that of
sandal-wood, or of Tagara and Mallikâ flowers; but the odor of good
people travels even against the wind; a good man pervades every place.

Sandal-wood or Tagara, a lotus-flower, or a Vassikî, among these sorts
of perfumes, the perfume of virtue is unsurpassed.

Mean is the scent that comes from Tagara and sandal-wood; the perfume of
those who possess virtue rises up to the gods as the highest.

Of the people who possess these virtues, who live without
thoughtlessness, and who are emancipated through true knowledge, Mâra,
the tempter, never finds the way.

As on a heap of rubbish cast upon the highway the lily will grow full of
sweet perfume and delight, thus among those who are mere rubbish the
disciple of the truly enlightened Buddha shines forth by his knowledge
above the blinded worldling.



