CHAPTER XVI

PLEASURE


He who gives himself to vanity, and does not give himself to meditation,
forgetting the real aim of life and grasping at pleasure, will in time
envy him who has exerted himself in meditation.

Let no man ever cling to what is pleasant, or to what is unpleasant. Not
to see what is pleasant is pain, and it is pain to see what is
unpleasant.

Let, therefore, no man love anything; loss of the beloved is evil. Those
who love nothing, and hate nothing, have no fetters.

From pleasure comes grief, from pleasure comes fear; he who is free from
pleasure knows neither grief nor fear.

From affection comes grief, from affection comes fear; he who is free
from affection knows neither grief nor fear.

From lust comes grief, from lust comes fear; he who is free from lust
knows neither grief nor fear.

From love comes grief, from love comes fear; he who is free from love
knows neither grief nor fear.

From greed comes grief, from greed comes fear; he who is free from greed
knows neither grief nor fear.

He who possesses virtue and intelligence, who is just, speaks the truth,
and does what is his own business, him the world will hold dear.

He in whom a desire for the Ineffable (Nirvâna) has sprung up, who in
his mind is satisfied, and whose thoughts are not bewildered by love, he
is called ûrdhvamsrotas (carried upwards by the stream).

Kinsmen, friends, and lovers salute a man who has been long away, and
returns safe from afar.

In like manner his good works receive him who has done good, and has
gone from this world to the other;--as kinsmen receive a friend on his
return.



CHAPTER XVII

ANGER


Let a man leave anger, let him forsake pride, let him overcome all
bondage! No sufferings befall the man who is not attached to name and
form, and who calls nothing his own.

He who holds back rising anger like a rolling chariot, him I call a real
driver; other people are but holding the reins.

Let a man overcome anger by love, let him overcome evil by good; let him
overcome the greedy by liberality, the liar by truth!

Speak the truth, do not yield to anger; give, if thou art asked for
little; by these three steps thou wilt go near the gods.

The sages who injure nobody, and who always control their body, they
will go to the unchangeable place (Nirvâna), where, if they have gone,
they will suffer no more.

Those who are ever watchful, who study day and night, and who strive
after Nirvâna, their passions will come to an end.

This is an old saying, O Atula, this is not as if of to-day: "They blame
him who sits silent, they blame him who speaks much, they also blame him
who says little; there is no one on earth who is not blamed."

There never was, there never will be, nor is there now, a man who is
always blamed, or a man who is always praised.

But he whom those who discriminate praise continually day after day, as
without blemish, wise, rich in knowledge and virtue, who would dare to
blame him, like a coin made of gold from the Gambû river? Even the gods
praise him, he is praised even by Brâhman.

Beware of bodily anger, and control thy body! Leave the sins of the
body, and with thy body practise virtue!

Beware of the anger of the tongue, and control thy tongue! Leave the
sins of the tongue, and practise virtue with thy tongue!

Beware of the anger of the mind, and control thy mind! Leave the sins of
the mind, and practise virtue with thy mind!

The wise who control their body, who control their tongue, the wise who
control their mind, are indeed well controlled.



CHAPTER XVIII

IMPURITY


Thou art now like a sear leaf, the messengers of death (Yama) have come
near to thee; thou standest at the door of thy departure, and thou hast
no provision for thy journey.

Make thyself an island, work hard, be wise! When thy impurities are
blown away, and thou art free from guilt, thou wilt enter into the
heavenly world of the elect (Ariya).

Thy life has come to an end, thou art come near to death (Yama), there
is no resting-place for thee on the road, and thou hast no provision for
thy journey.

Make thyself an island, work hard, be wise! When thy impurities are
blown away, and thou art free from guilt, thou wilt not enter again into
birth and decay.

Let a wise man blow off the impurities of himself, as a smith blows off
the impurities of silver, one by one, little by little, and from time to
time.

As the impurity which springs from the iron, when it springs from it,
destroys it; thus do a transgressor's own works lead him to the evil
path.

The taint of prayers is non-repetition; the taint of houses, non-repair;
the taint of complexion is sloth; the taint of a watchman,
thoughtlessness.

Bad conduct is the taint of woman, niggardliness the taint of a
benefactor; tainted are all evil ways, in this world and in the next.

But there is a taint worse than all taints--ignorance is the greatest
taint. O mendicants! throw off that taint, and become taintless!

Life is easy to live for a man who is without shame: a crow hero, a
mischief-maker, an insulting, bold, and wretched fellow.

But life is hard to live for a modest man, who always looks for what is
pure, who is disinterested, quiet, spotless, and intelligent.

He who destroys life, who speaks untruth, who in the world takes what is
not given him, who goes to another man's wife; and the man who gives
himself to drinking intoxicating liquors, he, even in this world, digs
up his own root.

O man, know this, that the unrestrained are in a bad state; take care
that greediness and vice do not bring thee to grief for a long time!

The world gives according to their faith or according to their pleasure:
if a man frets about the food and the drink given to others, he will
find no rest either by day or by night.

He in whom that feeling is destroyed, and taken out with the very root,
finds rest by day and by night.

There is no fire like passion, there is no shark like hatred, there is
no snare like folly, there is no torrent like greed.

The fault of others is easily perceived, but that of one's self is
difficult to perceive; a man winnows his neighbor's faults like chaff,
but his own fault he hides, as a cheat hides the bad die from the
player.

If a man looks after the faults of others, and is always inclined to be
offended, his own passions will grow, and he is far from the destruction
of passions.

There is no path through the air, a man is not a Samana outwardly. The
world delights in vanity, the Tathâgatas (the Buddhas) are free from
vanity.

There is no path through the air, a man is not a Samana outwardly. No
creatures are eternal; but the awakened (Buddha) are never shaken.



