CHAPTER V

THE FOOL


Long is the night to him who is awake; long is a mile to him who is
tired; long is life to the foolish who do not know the true law.

If a traveller does not meet with one who is his better, or his equal,
let him firmly keep to his solitary journey; there is no companionship
with a fool.

"These sons belong to me, and this wealth belongs to me," with such
thoughts a fool is tormented. He himself does not belong to himself; how
much less sons and wealth?

The fool who knows his foolishness, is wise at least so far. But a fool
who thinks himself wise, he is called a fool indeed.

If a fool be associated with a wise man even all his life, he will
perceive the truth as little as a spoon perceives the taste of soup.

If an intelligent man be associated for one minute only with a wise man,
he will soon perceive the truth, as the tongue perceives the taste of
soup.

Fools of poor understanding have themselves for their greatest enemies,
for they do evil deeds which bear bitter fruits.

That deed is not well done of which a man must repent, and the reward of
which he receives crying and with a tearful face.

No, that deed is well done of which a man does not repent, and the
reward of which he receives gladly and cheerfully.

As long as the evil deed done does not bear fruit, the fool thinks it is
like honey; but when it ripens, then the fool suffers grief.

Let a fool month after month eat his food (like an ascetic) with the tip
of a blade of Ku['s]a-grass, yet is he not worth the sixteenth particle
of those who have well weighed the law.

An evil deed, like newly-drawn milk, does not turn suddenly;
smouldering, like fire covered by ashes, it follows the fool.

And when the evil deed, after it has become known, turns to sorrow for
the fool, then it destroys his bright lot, nay, it cleaves his head.

Let the fool wish for a false reputation, for precedence among the
Bhikshus, for lordship in the convents, for worship among other people!

"May both the layman and he who has left the world think that this is
done by me; may they be subject to me in everything which is to be done
or is not to be done," thus is the mind of the fool, and his desire and
pride increase.

"One is the road that leads to wealth, another the road that leads to
Nirvâna"--if the Bhikshu, the disciple of Buddha, has learnt this, he
will not yearn for honor, he will strive after separation from the
world.



CHAPTER VI

THE WISE MAN


If you see a man who shows you what is to be avoided, who administers
reproofs, and is intelligent, follow that wise man as you would one who
tells of hidden treasures; it will be better, not worse, for him who
follows him.

Let him admonish, let him teach, let him forbid what is improper!--he
will be beloved of the good, by the bad he will be hated.

Do not have evil-doers for friends, do not have low people for friends:
have virtuous people for friends, have for friends the best of men.

He who drinks in the law lives happily with a serene mind: the sage
rejoices always in the law, as preached by the elect.

Well-makers lead the water wherever they like; fletchers bend the arrow;
carpenters bend a log of wood; wise people fashion themselves.

As a solid rock is not shaken by the wind, wise people falter not amidst
blame and praise.

Wise people, after they have listened to the laws, become serene, like a
deep, smooth, and still lake.

Good men indeed walk warily under all circumstances; good men speak not
out of a desire for sensual gratification; whether touched by happiness
or sorrow wise people never appear elated or depressed.

If, whether for his own sake, or for the sake of others, a man wishes
neither for a son, nor for wealth, nor for lordship, and if he does not
wish for his own success by unfair means, then he is good, wise, and
virtuous.

Few are there among men who arrive at the other shore (become Arhats);
the other people here run up and down the shore.

But those who, when the law has been well preached to them, follow the
law, will pass over the dominion of death, however difficult to cross.

A wise man should leave the dark state of ordinary life, and follow the
bright state of the Bhikshu. After going from his home to a homeless
state, he should in his retirement look for enjoyment where enjoyment
seemed difficult. Leaving all pleasures behind, and calling nothing his
own, the wise man should purge himself from all the troubles of the
mind.

Those whose mind is well grounded in the seven elements of knowledge,
who without clinging to anything, rejoice in freedom from attachment,
whose appetites have been conquered, and who are full of light, they are
free even in this world.



