CHAPTER III

Entitled, the Family of Imran[46]--Revealed at Medina

_In the Name of the Most Merciful God_.


A.L.M.[47] There is no God but God, the living, self-subsisting: He hath
sent down unto thee the book of the Koran with truth, confirming that
which was revealed before it; for he had formerly sent down the law and
the gospel, a direction unto men; and he had also sent down the
distinction between good and evil. Verily those who believe not the
signs of God, shall suffer a grievous punishment; for God is mighty,
able to revenge. Surely nothing is hidden from God, of that which is on
earth, or in heaven: it is he who formeth you in the wombs, as he
pleaseth; there is no God but he, the mighty, the wise. It is he who
hath sent down unto thee the book, wherein are some verses clear to be
understood, they are the foundation of the book; and others are
parabolical. But they whose hearts are perverse will follow that which
is parabolical therein, out of love of schism, and a desire of the
interpretation thereof; yet none knoweth the interpretation thereof,
except God. But they who are well grounded in knowledge say, We believe
therein, the whole is from our Lord; and none will consider except the
prudent. O Lord, cause not our hearts to swerve from truth, after thou
hast directed us: and give us from thee mercy, for thou art he who
giveth. O Lord, thou shalt surely gather mankind together, unto a day of
resurrection: there is no doubt of it, for God will not be contrary to
the promise. As for the infidels, their wealth shall not profit them
anything, nor their children, against God: they shall be the fuel of
hell fire. According to the wont of the people of Pharaoh, and of those
who went before them, they charged our signs with a lie; but God caught
them in their wickedness, and God is severe in punishing. Say unto those
who believe not, Ye shall be overcome, and thrown together into hell; an
unhappy couch shall it be. Ye have already had a miracle shown you in
two armies, which attacked each other:[48] one army fought for God's
true religion, but the other were infidels; they saw the faithful twice
as many as themselves in their eyesight; for God strengthened with his
help whom he pleaseth. Surely herein was an example unto men of
understanding. The love and eager desire of wives, and children, and
sums heaped up of gold and silver, and excellent horses, and cattle, and
land, is prepared for men: this is the provision of the present life;
but unto God shall be the most excellent return. Say, Shall I declare
unto you better things than this? For those who are devout are prepared
with their Lord, gardens through which rivers flow; therein shall they
continue forever: and they shall enjoy wives free from impurity, and the
favor of God; for God regardeth his servants; who say, O Lord, we do
sincerely believe; forgive us therefore our sins, and deliver us from
the pain of hell fire: the patient, and the lovers of truth, and the
devout, and the alms-givers, and those who ask pardon early in the
morning. God hath borne witness that there is no God but he; and the
angels, and those who are endowed with wisdom, profess the same; who
executed righteousness; there is no God but he; the mighty, the wise.
Verily the true religion in the sight of God, is Islam;[49] and they who
had received the scriptures dissented not therefrom, until after the
knowledge of God's unity had come unto them, out of envy among
themselves; but whosoever believeth not in the signs of God, verily God
will be swift in bringing him to account. If they dispute with thee,
say, I have resigned myself unto God, and he who followeth me doth the
same: and say unto them who have received the scriptures, and to the
ignorant, Do ye profess the religion of Islam? Now if they embrace
Islam, they are surely directed; but if they turn their backs, verily
unto thee belongeth preaching only; for God regardeth his servants. And
unto those who believe not in the signs of God, and slay the prophets
without a cause, and put those men to death who teach justice; denounce
unto them a painful punishment. These are they whose works perish in
this world, and in that which is to come; and they shall have none to
help them. Hast thou not observed those unto whom part of the scripture
was given? They were called unto the book of God, that it might judge
between them; then some of them turned their backs, and retired
afar-off. This they did because they said, The fire of hell shall by no
means touch us, but for a certain number of days: and that which they
had falsely devised, hath deceived them in their religion. How then will
it be with them, when we shall gather them together at the day of
judgment,[50] of which there is no doubt; and every soul shall be paid
that which it hath gained, neither shall they be treated unjustly? Say,
O God, who possessest the kingdom; thou givest the kingdom unto whom
thou wilt, and thou takest away the kingdom from whom thou wilt: thou
exaltest whom thou wilt, and thou humblest whom thou wilt: in thy hand
is good, for thou art almighty. Thou makest the night to succeed the
day: thou bringest forth the living out of the dead, and thou bringest
forth the dead out of the living; and providest food for whom thou wilt
without measure. Let not the faithful take the infidels for their
protectors, rather than the faithful: he who doth this shall not be
protected of God at all; unless ye fear any danger from them: but God
warneth you to beware of himself; for unto God must ye return. Say,
Whether ye conceal that which is in your breasts, or whether ye declare
it, God knoweth it: for he knoweth whatever is in heaven, and whatever
is on earth: God is almighty. On the last day every soul shall find the
good which it hath wrought, present; and the evil which it hath wrought,
it shall wish that between itself and that were a wide distance: but God
warneth you to beware of himself; for God is gracious unto his servants.
Say, If ye love God, follow me: then God shall love you, and forgive you
your sins; for God is gracious and merciful. Say, Obey God, and his
apostle: but if ye go back, verily God loveth not the unbelievers. God
hath surely chosen Adam, and Noah, and the family of Abraham, and the
family of Imran above the rest of the world; a race descending the one
from the other: God is he who heareth and knoweth. Remember when the
wife of Imran said, Lord, verily I have vowed unto thee that which is in
my womb, to be dedicated to thy service: accept it therefore of me; for
thou art he who heareth and knoweth. And when she was delivered of it,
she said, Lord, verily I have brought forth a female (and God well knew
what she had brought forth), and a male is not as a female: I have
called her Mary; and I commend her to thy protection, and also her
issue, against Satan driven away with stones. Therefore the Lord
accepted her with a gracious acceptance, and caused her to bear an
excellent offspring. And Zacharias took care of the child; whenever
Zacharias went into the chamber to her, he found provisions with her;
and he said, O Mary, whence hadst thou this? she answered, This is from
God: for God provideth for whom he pleaseth without measure. There
Zacharias called on his Lord, and said, Lord, give me from thee a good
offspring, for thou art the hearer of prayer. And the angels called to
him, while he stood praying in the chamber, saying, Verily God promiseth
thee a son named John, who shall bear witness to the Word which cometh
from God; an honorable person, chaste, and one of the righteous
prophets. He answered, Lord, how shall I have a son, when old age hath
overtaken me, and my wife is barren? The angel said, So God doth that
which he pleaseth. Zacharias answered, Lord, give me a sign. The angel
said, Thy sign shall be, that thou shalt speak unto no man for three
days, otherwise than by gesture: remember thy Lord often, and praise him
evening and morning. And when the angels said, O Mary, verily God hath
chosen thee, and hath purified thee, and hath chosen thee above all the
women of the world: O Mary, be devout towards thy Lord, and worship, and
bow down with those who bow down. This is a secret history: we reveal it
unto thee, although thou wast not present with them when they threw in
their rods to cast lots which of them should have the education of Mary:
neither wast thou with them, when they strove among themselves. When the
angels said, O Mary, verily God sendeth thee good tidings, that thou
shalt bear the Word, proceeding from himself; his name shall be Christ
Jesus the son of Mary, honorable in this world and in the world to come,
and one of those who approach near to the presence of God; and he shall
speak unto men in the cradle, and when he is grown up;[51] and he shall
be one of the righteous: she answered, Lord, how shall I have a son,
since a man hath not touched me? the angel said, So God createth that
which he pleaseth: when he decreeth a thing, he only saith unto it, Be,
and it is: God shall teach him the scripture, and wisdom, and the law,
and the gospel; and shall appoint him his apostle to the children of
Israel; and he shall say, Verily I come unto you with a sign from your
Lord; for I will make before you, of clay, as it were the figure of a
bird; then I will breathe thereon, and it shall become a bird, by the
permission of God: and I will heal him that hath been blind from his
birth, and the leper: and I will raise the dead by the permission of
God: and I will prophesy unto you what ye eat, and what ye lay up for
store in your houses. Verily herein will be a sign unto you, if ye
believe. And I come to confirm the Law which was revealed before me, and
to allow unto you as lawful, part of that which hath been forbidden
you:[52] and I come unto you with a sign from your Lord; therefore fear
God, and obey me. Verily God is my Lord, and your Lord: therefore serve
him. This is the right way. But when Jesus perceived their unbelief, he
said, Who will be my helpers towards God? The apostles[53] answered, We
will be the helpers of God; we believe in God, and do thou bear witness
that we are true believers. O Lord, we believe in that which thou has
sent down, and we have followed thy apostle; write us down therefore
with those who bear witness of him. And the Jews devised a stratagem
against him; but God devised a stratagem against them; and God is the
best deviser of stratagems. When God said, O Jesus, verily I will cause
thee to die, and I will take thee up unto me,[54] and I will deliver
thee from the unbelievers; and I will place those who follow thee above
the unbelievers, until the day of resurrection: then unto me shall ye
return, and I will judge between you of that concerning which ye
disagree. Moreover, as for the infidels, I will punish them with a
grievous punishment in this world, and in that which is to come; and
there shall be none to help them. But they who believe, and do that
which is right, he shall give them their reward; for God loveth not the
wicked doers. These signs and this prudent admonition do we rehearse
unto thee. Verily the likeness of Jesus in the sight of God is as the
likeness of Adam: he created him out of the dust, and then said unto
him, Be; and he was. This is the truth from thy Lord; be not therefore
one of those who doubt: and whoever shall dispute with thee concerning
him, after the knowledge which hath been given thee, say unto them,
Come, let us call together our sons, and your sons, and our wives, and
your wives, and ourselves, and yourselves; then let us make
imprecations, and lay the curse of God on those who lie. Verily this is
a true history: and there is no God but God; and God is most mighty, and
wise. If they turn back, God well knoweth the evil-doers. Say, O ye who
have received the scripture, come to a just determination between us and
you; that we worship not any except God, and associate no creature with
him; and that the one of us take not the other for lords, beside God.
But if they turn back, say, Bear witness that we are true believers. O
ye to whom the scriptures have been given, why do ye dispute concerning
Abraham, since the Law and the Gospel were not sent down until after
him? Do ye not therefore understand? Behold ye are they who dispute
concerning that which ye have some knowledge in; why therefore do ye
dispute concerning that which ye have no knowledge of? God knoweth, but
ye know not. Abraham was neither a Jew, nor a Christian; but he was of
the true religion, one resigned unto God, and was not of the number of
the idolaters. Verily the men who are the nearest of kin unto Abraham,
are they who follow him; and this prophet, and they who believe on him:
God is the patron of the faithful. Some of those who have received the
scriptures desire to seduce you; but they seduce themselves only, and
they perceive it not. O ye who have received the scriptures, why do ye
not believe in the signs of God, since ye are witnesses of them? O ye
who have received the scriptures, why do ye clothe truth with vanity,
and knowingly hide the truth? And some of those to whom the scriptures
were given, say, Believe in that which hath been sent down unto those
who believe, in the beginning of the day, and deny it in the end
thereof; that they may go back from their faith: and believe him only
who followeth your religion. Say, Verily the true direction is the
direction of God, that there may be given unto some other a revelation
like unto what hath been given unto you. Will they dispute with you
before your Lord? Say, Surely excellence is in the hand of God, he
giveth it unto whom he pleaseth; God is bounteous and wise: he will
confer peculiar mercy on whom he pleaseth; for God is endued with great
beneficence. There is of those who have received the scriptures, unto
whom if thou trust a talent, he will restore it unto thee; and there is
also of them, unto whom if thou trust a dinar,[55] he will not restore
it unto thee, unless thou stand over him continually with great urgency.
This they do because they say, We are not obliged to observe justice
with the heathen: but they utter a lie against God, knowingly. Yea;
whoso keepeth his covenant, and feareth God, God surely loveth those who
fear him. But they who make merchandise of God's covenant, and of their
oaths, for a small price, shall have no portion in the next life,
neither shall God speak to them or regard them on the day of
resurrection, nor shall he cleanse them; but they shall suffer a
grievous punishment. And there are certainly some of them, who read the
scriptures perversely, that ye may think what they read to be really in
the scriptures, yet it is not in the scripture; and they say, This is
from God; but it is not from God: and they speak that which is false
concerning God, against their own knowledge. It is not fit for a man,
that God should give him a book of revelations, and wisdom, and
prophecy; and then he should say unto men, Be ye worshippers of me,
besides God; but he ought to say, Be ye perfect in knowledge and in
works, since ye know the scriptures, and exercise yourselves therein.
God hath not commanded you to take the angels and the prophets for your
Lords: Will he command you to become infidels, after ye have been true
believers? And remember when God accepted the covenant of the prophets,
saying, This verily is the scripture and the wisdom which I have given
you: hereafter shall an apostle come unto you, confirming the truth of
that scripture which is with you; ye shall surely believe on him, and ye
shall assist him. God said, Are ye firmly resolved, and do ye accept my
covenant on this condition? They answered, We are firmly resolved: God
said, Be ye therefore witnesses; and I also bear witness with you: and
whosoever turneth back after this, they are surely the transgressors. Do
they therefore seek any other religion but God's? since to him is
resigned whosoever is in heaven or on earth, voluntarily, or of force:
and to him shall they return. Say, We believe in God, and that which
hath been sent down unto us, and that which was sent down unto Abraham,
and Ismael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and that which was
delivered to Moses, and Jesus, and the prophets from their Lord; we make
no distinction between any of them; and to him are we resigned. Whoever
followeth any other religion than Islam, it shall not be accepted of
him: and in the next life he shall be of those who perish. How shall God
direct men who have become infidels after they had believed, and borne
witness that the apostle was true, and manifest declarations of the
divine will had come unto them? for God directeth not the ungodly
people. Their reward shall be, that on them shall fall the curse of God,
and of angels, and of all mankind: they shall remain under the same
forever; their torment shall not be mitigated, neither shall they be
regarded; except those who repent after this, and amend; for God is
gracious and merciful. Moreover they who become infidels after they have
believed, and yet increase in infidelity, their repentance shall in no
wise be accepted, and they are those who go astray. Verily they who
believe not, and die in their unbelief, the world full of gold shall in
no wise be accepted from any of them, even though he should give it for
his ransom; they shall suffer a grievous punishment, and they shall have
none to help them. Ye will never attain unto righteousness, until ye
give in alms of that which ye love: and whatever ye give, God knoweth
it. All food was permitted unto the children of Israel, except what
Israel forbade unto himself before the Pentateuch was sent down. Say
unto the Jews, Bring hither the Pentateuch and read it, if ye speak
truth. Whoever therefore contriveth a lie against God after this, they
will be evil-doers. Say, God is true: follow ye therefore the religion
of Abraham the orthodox; for he was no idolater. Verily the first house
appointed unto men to worship in was that which is in Becca;[56]
blessed, and a direction to all creatures. Therein are manifest signs:
the place where Abraham stood; and whoever entereth therein, shall be
safe. And it is a duty towards God, incumbent on those who are able to
go thither, to visit this house; but whosoever disbelieveth, verily God
needeth not the service of any creature. Say, O ye who have received the
scriptures, why do ye not believe in the signs of God? Say, O ye who
have received the scriptures, why do ye keep back from the way of God
him who believeth? Ye seek to make it crooked, and yet are witnesses
that it is the right: but God will not be unmindful of what ye do. O
true believers, if ye obey some of those who have received the
scripture, they will render you infidels, after ye have believed: and
how can ye be infidels, when the signs of God are read unto you, and his
apostle is among you? But he who cleaveth firmly unto God, is already
directed into the right way. O believers, fear God with his true fear;
and die not unless ye also be true believers. And cleave all of you unto
the covenant of God, and depart not from it, and remember the favor of
God towards you: since ye were enemies, and he reconciled your hearts,
and ye became companions and brethren by his favor: and ye were on the
brink of a pit of fire, and he delivered you thence. Thus God declareth
unto you his signs, that ye may be directed. Let there be people among
you, who invite to the best religion; and command that which is just,
and forbid that which is evil; and they shall be happy. And be not as
they who are divided, and disagree in matters of religion, after
manifest proofs have been brought unto them: they shall suffer a great
torment. On the day of resurrection some faces shall become white, and
other faces shall become black. And unto them whose faces shall become
black, God will say, Have ye returned unto your unbelief, after ye had
believed? therefore taste the punishment, for that ye have been
unbelievers: but they whose faces shall become white shall be in the
mercy of God, therein shall they remain forever. These are the signs of
God: we recite them unto thee with truth. God will not deal unjustly
with his creatures. And to God belongeth whatever is in heaven and on
earth; and to God shall all things return. Ye are the best nation that
hath been raised up unto mankind: ye command that which is just, and ye
forbid that which is unjust, and ye believe in God. And if they who have
received the scriptures had believed, it had surely been the better for
them: there are believers among them, but the greater part of them are
transgressors. They shall not hurt you, unless with a slight hurt; and
if they fight against you, they shall turn their backs to you, and they
shall not be helped. They are smitten with vileness wheresoever they are
found; unless they obtain security by entering into a treaty with God,
and a treaty with men: and they draw on themselves indignation from God,
and they are afflicted with poverty. This they suffer, because they
disbelieved the signs of God, and slew the prophets unjustly; this,
because they were rebellious, and transgressed. Yet they are not all
alike: there are of those who have received the scriptures, upright
people; they meditate on the signs of God in the night season, and
worship; they believe in God and the last day; and command that which is
just, and forbid that which is unjust, and zealously strive to excel in
good works: these are of the righteous. And ye shall not be denied the
reward of the good which ye do; for God knoweth the pious. As for the
unbelievers, their wealth shall not profit them at all, neither their
children, against God: they shall be the companions of hell fire; they
shall continue therein forever. The likeness of that which they lay out
in this present life, is as a wind wherein there is a scorching cold: it
falleth on the standing corn of those men who have injured their own
souls, and destroyeth it. And God dealeth not unjustly with them; but
they injure their own souls. O true believers, contract not an intimate
friendship with any besides yourselves: they will not fail to corrupt
you. They wish for that which may cause you to perish: their hatred hath
already appeared from out of their mouths; but what their breasts
conceal is yet more inveterate. We have already shown you signs of their
ill-will towards you, if ye understand. Behold, ye love them, and they
do not love you: ye believe in all the scriptures, and when they meet
you, they say, We believe; but when they assemble privately together,
they bite their fingers' ends out of wrath against you. Say unto them,
Die in your wrath: verily God knoweth the innermost part of your
breasts. If good happen unto you, it grieveth them; and if evil befall
you, they rejoice at it. But if ye be patient, and fear God, their
subtlety shall not hurt you at all; for God comprehendeth whatever they
do. Call to mind when thou wentest forth early from thy family, that
thou mightest prepare the faithful a camp for war; and God heard and
knew it; when two companies of you were anxiously thoughtful, so that ye
became faint-hearted; but God was the supporter of them both; and in God
let the faithful trust. And God had already given you the victory at
Bedr, when ye were inferior in number; therefore fear God, that ye may
be thankful. When thou saidst unto the faithful, Is it not enough for
you, that your Lord should assist you with three thousand angels, sent
down from heaven? Verily if ye persevere, and fear God, and your enemies
come upon you suddenly, your Lord will assist you with five thousand
angels, distinguished by their horses and attire. And this God designed
only as good tidings for you that your hearts might rest secure: for
victory is from God alone, the mighty, the wise. That he should cut off
the uttermost part of the unbelievers, or cast them down, or that they
should be overthrown and unsuccessful, is nothing to thee. It is no
business of thine; whether God be turned unto them, or whether he punish
them; they are surely unjust doers. To God belongeth whatsoever is in
heaven and on earth: he spareth whom he pleaseth, and he punisheth whom
he pleaseth; for God is merciful. O true believers, devour not usury,
doubling it twofold; but fear God, that ye may prosper: and fear the
fire which is prepared for the unbelievers; and obey God, and his
apostle, that ye may obtain mercy. And run with emulation to obtain
remission from your Lord, and paradise, whose breath equalleth the
heavens and the earth, which is prepared for the godly; who give alms in
prosperity and adversity; who bridle their anger and forgive men: for
God loveth the beneficent.[57] And who, after they have committed a
crime, or dealt unjustly with their own souls, remember God, and ask
pardon for their sins (for who forgiveth sins except God?) and persevere
not in what they have done knowingly: their reward shall be pardon from
their Lord, and gardens wherein rivers flow, they shall remain therein
forever: and how excellent is the reward of those who labor! There have
already been before you examples of punishment of infidels, therefore go
through the earth, and behold what hath been the end of those who accuse
God's apostles of imposture. This book is a declaration unto men, and a
direction and an admonition to the pious. And be not dismayed, neither
be ye grieved; for ye shall be superior to the unbelievers if ye
believe. If a wound hath happened unto you in war, a like wound hath
already happened unto the unbelieving people: and we cause these days of
different success interchangeably to succeed each other among men; that
God may know those who believe, and may have martyrs from among you (God
loveth not the workers of iniquity); and that God might prove those who
believe, and destroy the infidels. Did ye imagine that ye should enter
paradise, when as yet God knew not those among you who fought
strenuously in his cause; nor knew those who persevered with patience?
Moreover ye did some time wish for death before that ye met it; but ye
have now seen it, and ye looked on, but retreated from it. Mohammed is
no more than an apostle; the other apostles have already deceased before
him: if he die therefore, or be slain, will ye turn back on your heels?
but he who turneth back on his heels, will not hurt God at all; and God
will surely reward the thankful. No soul can die unless by the
permission of God, according to what is written in the book containing
the determinations of things. And whoso chooseth the reward of this
world, we will give him thereof: but whoso chooseth the reward of the
world to come, we will give him thereof; and we will surely reward the
thankful. How many prophets have encountered those who had many myriads
of troops: and yet they desponded not in their mind for what had
befallen them in fighting for the religion of God, and were not
weakened, neither behaved themselves in an abject manner? God loveth
those who persevere patiently. And their speech was no other than that
they said, Our Lord forgive us our offences, and our transgressions in
our business; and confirm our feet, and help us against the unbelieving
people. And God gave them the reward of this world, and a glorious
reward in the life to come; for God loveth the well-doers. O ye who
believe, if ye obey the infidels, they will cause you to turn back on
your heels, and ye will be turned back and perish: but God is your Lord;
and he is the best helper. We will surely cast a dread into the hearts
of the unbelievers, because they have associated with God that
concerning which he sent them down no power: their dwelling shall be the
fire of hell; and the receptacle of the wicked shall be miserable. God
had already made good unto you his promise, when ye destroyed them by
his permission, until ye became faint-hearted, and disputed concerning
the command of the apostle, and were rebellious; after God had shown you
what ye desired. Some of you chose this present world, and others of you
chose the world to come. Then he turned you to flight from before them,
that he might make trial of you (but he hath now pardoned you; for God
is endued with beneficence towards the faithful); when ye went up as ye
fled, and looked not back on any; while the apostle called you, in the
uttermost part of you. Therefore God rewarded you with affliction on
affliction, that ye be not grieved hereafter for the spoils which ye
fail of, nor for that which befalleth you; for God is well acquainted
with whatever ye do. Then he sent down upon you after affliction
security; soft sleep which fell on some part of you; but other parts
were troubled by their own souls; falsely thinking of God a foolish
imagination, saying, Will anything of the matter happen unto us? Say,
Verily the matter belongeth wholly unto God. They concealed in their
minds what they declared not unto thee; saying, If anything of the
matter had happened unto us, we had not been slain here. Answer, If ye
had been in your houses, verily they would have gone forth to fight,
whose slaughter was decreed, to the places where they died, and this
came to pass that God might try what was in your breasts, and might
discern what was in your hearts; for God knoweth the innermost parts of
the breasts of men. Verily they among you who turned their backs on the
day whereon the two armies met each other at Ohod, Satan caused them to
slip, for some crime which they had committed: but now hath God forgiven
them; for God is gracious and merciful. O true believers, be not as they
who believe not, and said of their brethren, when they had journeyed in
the land or had been at war, If they had been with us, those had not
died, nor had these been slain: whereas what befell them was so ordained
that God might make it matter of sighing in their hearts. God giveth
life, and causeth to die: and God seeth that which ye do. Moreover, if
ye be slain, or die in defence of the religion of God; verily pardon
from God, and mercy, is better than what they heap together of worldly
riches. And if ye die, or be slain, verily unto God shall ye be
gathered. And as to the mercy granted unto the disobedient from God,
thou, O Mohammed, hast been mild towards them; but if thou hadst been
severe and hard-hearted, they had surely separated themselves from about
thee. Therefore forgive them, and ask pardon for them: and consult them
in the affair of war; and after thou hast deliberated, trust in God; for
God loveth those who trust in him. If God help you, none shall conquer
you; but if he desert you, who is it that will help you after him?
Therefore in God let the faithful trust. It is not the part of a prophet
to defraud, for he who defraudeth, shall bring with him what he hath
defrauded anyone of, on the day of the resurrection.[58] Then shall
every soul be paid what he hath gained; and they shall not be treated
unjustly. Shall he therefore who followeth that which is well pleasing
unto God, be as he who bringeth on himself wrath from God, and whose
receptacle is hell? an evil journey shall it be thither. There shall be
degrees of rewards and punishments with God, for God seeth what they do.
Now hath God been gracious unto the believers when he raised up among
them an apostle of their own nation,[59] who should recite his signs
unto them, and purify them, and teach them the book of the Koran and
wisdom; whereas they were before in manifest error. After a misfortune
hath befallen you at Ohod (ye had already obtained two equal
advantages), do ye say, Whence cometh this? Answer, This is from
yourselves: for God is almighty. And what happened unto you, on the day
whereon the two armies met, was certainly by the permission of God; and
that he might know the faithful, and that he might know the ungodly. It
was said unto them, Come, fight for the religion of God, or drive back
the enemy: they answered, If we had known ye went out to fight, we had
certainly followed you. They were on that day nearer unto unbelief than
they were to faith; they spake with their mouths what was not in their
hearts; but God perfectly knew what they concealed; who said of their
brethren, while themselves stayed at home, if they had obeyed us, they
had not been slain. Say, Then keep back death from yourselves, if ye say
truth. Thou shalt in no wise reckon those who have been slain at Ohod in
the cause of God, dead; nay, they are sustained alive with their Lord,
rejoicing for what God of his favor hath granted them; and being glad
for those who, coming after them, have not as yet overtaken them,
because there shall no fear come on them, neither shall they be grieved.
They are filled with joy for the favor which they have received from
God, and his bounty; and for that God suffereth not the reward of the
faithful to perish. They who hearkened unto God and his apostle, after a
wound had befallen them at Ohod, such of them as do good works, and fear
God, shall have a great reward; unto whom certain men said, Verily the
men of Mecca have already gathered forces against you, be ye therefore
afraid of them: but this increaseth their faith, and they said, God is
our support, and the most excellent patron. Wherefore they returned with
favor from God, and advantage; no evil befell them: and they followed
what was well pleasing unto God; for God is endowed with great
liberality. Verily that devil would cause you to fear his friends: but
be ye not afraid of them; but fear me, if ye be true believers. They
shall not grieve thee, who emulously hasten unto infidelity; for they
shall never hurt God at all. God will not give them a part in the next
life, and they shall suffer a great punishment. Surely those who
purchase infidelity with faith, shall by no means hurt God at all, but
they shall suffer a grievous punishment. And let not the unbelievers
think, because we grant them lives long and prosperous, that it is
better for their souls: we grant them long and prosperous lives only
that their iniquity may be increased; and they shall suffer an
ignominious punishment. God is not disposed to leave the faithful in the
condition which ye are now in, until he sever the wicked from the good;
nor is God disposed to make you acquainted with what is a hidden secret,
but God chooseth such of his apostles as he pleaseth, to reveal his mind
unto: believe, therefore, in God, and his apostles; and if ye believe,
and fear God, ye shall receive a great reward. And let not those who are
covetous of what God of his bounty hath granted them, imagine that their
avarice is better for them: nay, rather it is worse for them. That which
they have covetously reserved shall be bound as a collar about their
neck,[60] on the day of the resurrection; unto God belongeth the
inheritance of heaven and earth; and God is well acquainted with what ye
do. God hath already heard the saying of those who said, Verily God is
poor, and we are rich: we will surely write down what they have said,
and the slaughter which they have made of the prophets without a cause;
and we will say unto them, Taste ye the pain of burning. This shall they
suffer for the evil which their hands have sent before them, and because
God is not unjust towards mankind; who also say, Surely God hath
commanded us, that we should not give credit to any apostle, until one
should come unto us with a sacrifice, which should be consumed by fire.
Say, Apostles have already come unto you before me, with plain proofs,
and with the miracle which ye mention: why therefore have ye slain them,
if ye speak truth? If they accuse thee of imposture, the apostles before
thee have also been accounted impostors, who brought evident
demonstrations, and the scriptures, and the book which enlightened the
understanding. Every soul shall taste of death, and ye shall have your
rewards on the day of resurrection; and he who shall be far removed from
hell fire, and shall be admitted into paradise, shall be happy: but the
present life is only a deceitful provision. Ye shall surely be proved in
your possessions, and in your persons; and ye shall bear from those unto
whom the scripture was delivered before you, and from the idolaters,
much hurt: but if ye be patient, and fear God, this is a matter that is
absolutely determined. And when God accepted the covenant of those to
whom the book of the law was given, saying, Ye shall surely publish it
unto mankind, ye shall not hide it; yet they threw it behind their
backs, and sold it for a small price; but woful is the price for which
they have sold it.[61] Think not that they who rejoice at what they have
done, and expect to be praised for what they have not done; think not, O
prophet, that they shall escape from punishment, for they shall suffer a
painful punishment; and unto God belongeth the kingdom of heaven and
earth; God is almighty. Now in the creation of heaven and earth, and the
vicissitude of night and day, are signs unto those who are endued with
understanding; who remember God standing, and sitting, and lying on
their sides; and meditate on the creation of heaven and earth, saying, O
Lord, thou hast not created this in vain; far be it from thee: therefore
deliver us from the torment of hell fire. O Lord, surely whom thou shalt
throw into the fire, thou wilt also cover with shame; nor shall the
ungodly have any to help them. O Lord, we have heard of a preacher[62]
inviting us to the faith, and saying, Believe in your Lord: and we
believed. O Lord, forgive us therefore our sins, and expiate our evil
deeds from us, and make us to die with the righteous. O Lord, give us
also the reward which thou hast promised by thy apostles; and cover us
not with shame on the day of resurrection; for thou art not contrary to
the promise. Their Lord therefore answereth them, saying, I will not
suffer the work of him among you who worketh to be lost, whether he be
male or female: the one of you is from the other. They therefore who
have left their country, and have been turned out of their houses, and
have suffered for my sake, and have been slain in battle; verily I will
expiate their evil deeds from them, and I will surely bring them into
gardens watered by rivers; a reward from God: and with God is the most
excellent reward. Let not the prosperous dealing of the unbelievers in
the land deceive thee: it is but a slender provision; and then their
receptacle shall be hell; an unhappy couch shall it be. But they who
fear their Lord shall have gardens through which rivers flow, they shall
continue therein forever: this is the gift of God; for what is with God
shall be better for the righteous than short-lived worldly prosperity.
There are some of those who have received the scriptures, who believe in
God, and that which hath been sent down unto you, and that which hath
been sent down to them, submitting themselves unto God; they tell not
the signs of God for a small price: these shall have their reward with
their Lord; for God is swift in taking an account. O true believers, be
patient, and strive to excel in patience, and be constant-minded, and
fear God, that ye may be happy.


[Footnote 46: This name is given in the Koran to the father of the
Virgin Mary.]

[Footnote 47: The word Koran, derived from the verb _Karaa_, i.e., to
read, signifies in Arabic "the reading," or rather "that which is to be
read." The syllable _Al_, in the words Al Koran, is only the Arabic
article signifying "the," and ought to be omitted when the English
article is prefixed.]

[Footnote 48: The miracle, it is said, consisted in three things: (1.)
Mohammed, by the direction of the angel Gabriel, took a handful of
gravel and threw it towards the enemy in the attack, saying, "May their
faces be confounded"; whereupon they immediately turned their backs and
fled. But, though the prophet seemingly threw the gravel himself, yet it
is told in the Koran that it was not he, but God, who threw it, that is
to say, by the ministry of his angel. (2.) The Mohammedan troops seemed
to the infidels to be twice as many in number as themselves, which
greatly discouraged them. (3.) God sent down to their assistance first a
thousand, and afterwards three thousand angels, led by Gabriel, mounted
on his horse Haizum; and, according to the Koran, these celestial
auxiliaries really did all the execution, though Mohammed's men imagined
themselves did it, and fought stoutly at the same time.]

[Footnote 49: The proper name of the Mohammedan religion, which
signifies the resigning or devoting one's self entirely to God and his
service. This they say is the religion which all the prophets were sent
to teach, being founded on the unity of God.]

[Footnote 50: The Mohammedans have a tradition that the first banner of
the infidels that shall be set up, on the day of judgment, will be that
of the Jews; and that God will first reproach them with their
wickedness, over the heads of those who are present, and then order them
to hell.]

[Footnote 51: This phrase signifies a man in full age, that is, between
thirty and thirty-four.]

[Footnote 52: Such as the eating of fish that have neither fins nor
scales, the caul and fat of animals, and camel's flesh, and to work on
the Sabbath.]

[Footnote 53: In Arabic, _al Hawâriyûn_: which word they derive from
_Hâra_, "to be white," and suppose the apostles were so-called either
from the candor and sincerity of their minds, or because they were
princes and wore white garments, or else because they were by trade
fullers.]

[Footnote 54: Some Mohammedans say this was done by the ministry of
Gabriel; but others that a strong whirlwind took him up from Mount
Olivet.]

[Footnote 55: A gold coin worth about $2.50.]

[Footnote 56: Becca is another name of Mecca. Al Beidâwi observes that
the Arabs used the "M" and "B" promiscuously in several words.]

[Footnote 57: It is related of Hasan the son of Ali that a slave having
once thrown a dish on him boiling hot, as he sat at table, and fearing
his master's resentment, fell immediately on his knees, and repeated
these words, "Paradise is for those who bridle their anger." Hasan
answered, "I am not angry." The slave proceeded, "and for those who
forgive men." "I forgive you," said Hasan. The slave, however, finished
the verse, adding, "for God loveth the beneficent." "Since it is so,"
replied Hasan, "I give you your liberty, and four hundred pieces of
silver." A noble instance of moderation and generosity.]

[Footnote 58: According to a tradition of Mohammed, whoever cheateth
another will on the day of judgment carry his fraudulent purchase
publicly on his neck.]

[Footnote 59: Some copies, instead of _min anfosihim_, i.e., of
themselves, read _min anfasihim_, i.e., of the noblest among them; for
such was the tribe of Koreish, of which Mohammed was descended.]

[Footnote 60: Mohammed is said to have declared, that whoever pays not
his legal contribution of alms duly shall have a serpent twisted about
his neck at the resurrection.]

[Footnote 61: That is, dearly shall they pay hereafter for taking bribes
to stifle the truth. "Whoever concealeth the knowledge which God has
given him," says Mohammed, "God shall put on him a bridle of fire on the
day of resurrection."]

[Footnote 62: Namely, Mohammed, with the Koran.]



