CHAPTER XIV

THE BUDDHA--THE AWAKENED


He whose conquest cannot be conquered again, into whose conquest no one
in this world enters, by what track can you lead him, the Awakened, the
Omniscient, the trackless?

He whom no desire with its snares and poisons can lead astray, by what
track can you lead him, the Awakened, the Omniscient, the trackless?

Even the gods envy those who are awakened and not forgetful, who are
given to meditation, who are wise, and who delight in the repose of
retirement from the world.

Difficult to obtain is the conception of men, difficult is the life of
mortals, difficult is the hearing of the True Law, difficult is the
birth of the Awakened (the attainment of Buddhahood).

Not to commit any sin, to do good, and to purify one's mind, that is the
teaching of all the Awakened.

The Awakened call patience the highest penance, long-suffering the
highest Nirvâna; for he is not an anchorite (Pravra-gita) who strikes
others, he is not an ascetic (Sramana) who insults others.

Not to blame, not to strike, to live restrained under the law, to be
moderate in eating, to sleep and sit alone, and to dwell on the highest
thoughts--this is the teaching of the Awakened.

There is no satisfying lusts, even by a shower of gold pieces; he who
knows that lusts have a short taste and cause pain, he is wise; even in
heavenly pleasures he finds no satisfaction, the disciple who is fully
awakened delights only in the destruction of all desires.

Men, driven by fear, go to many a refuge, to mountains and forests, to
groves and sacred trees.

But that is not a safe refuge, that is not the best refuge; a man is not
delivered from all pains after having gone to that refuge.

He who takes refuge with Buddha, the Law, and the Church; he who, with
clear understanding, sees the four holy truths: pain, the origin of
pain, the destruction of pain, and the eightfold holy way that leads to
the quieting of pain;--that is the safe refuge, that is the best refuge;
having gone to that refuge, a man is delivered from all pain.

A supernatural person (a Buddha) is not easily found: he is not born
everywhere. Wherever such a sage is born, that race prospers.

Happy is the arising of the Awakened, happy is the teaching of the True
Law, happy is peace in the church, happy is the devotion of those who
are at peace.

He who pays homage to those who deserve homage, whether the awakened
(Buddha) or their disciples, those who have overcome the host of evils,
and crossed the flood of sorrow, he who pays homage to such as have
found deliverance and know no fear, his merit can never be measured by
anyone.



CHAPTER XV

HAPPINESS


We live happily indeed, not hating those who hate us! among men who hate
us we dwell free from hatred! We live happily indeed, free from ailments
among the ailing! among men who are ailing let us dwell free from
ailments!

We live happily indeed, free from greed among the greedy! among men who
are greedy let us dwell free from greed!

We live happily indeed, though we call nothing our own! We shall be like
the bright gods, feeding on happiness!

Victory breeds hatred, for the conquered is unhappy. He who has given up
both victory and defeat, he, the contented, is happy.

There is no fire like passion; there is no losing throw like hatred;
there is no pain like this body; there is no happiness higher than rest.

Hunger is the worst of diseases, the elements of the body the greatest
evil; if one knows this truly, that is Nirvâna, the highest happiness.

Health is the greatest of gifts, contentedness the best riches; trust is
the best of relationships, Nirvâna the highest happiness.

He who has tasted the sweetness of solitude and tranquillity, is free
from fear and free from sin, while he tastes the sweetness of drinking
in the law.

The sight of the elect (Ariya) is good, to live with them is always
happiness; if a man does not see fools, he will be truly happy.

He who walks in the company of fools suffers a long way; company with
fools, as with an enemy, is always painful; company with the wise is
pleasure, like meeting with kinsfolk.

Therefore, one ought to follow the wise, the intelligent, the learned,
the much enduring, the dutiful, the elect; one ought to follow such a
good and wise man, as the moon follows the path of the stars.



