CHAPTER IV.

THE LAW OF PERFECTNESS.


§1. Among the several characteristics of great treatment which in the
last chapter were alluded to without being enlarged upon, one will be
found several times named;--reserve.

It is necessary for our present purpose that we should understand this
quality more distinctly. I mean by it the power which a great painter
exercises over himself in fixing certain limits, either of force, of
color, or of quantity of work;--limits which he will not transgress in
any part of his picture, even though here and there a painful sense of
incompletion may exist, under the fixed conditions, and might tempt an
inferior workman to infringe them. The nature of this reserve we must
understand in order that we may also determine the nature of true
completion or perfectness, which is the end of composition.

§ 2. For perfectness, properly so called, means harmony. The word
signifies, literally, the doing our work _thoroughly_. It does not mean
carrying it up to any constant and established degree of finish, but
carrying the whole of it up to a degree determined upon. In a chalk or
pencil sketch by a great master, it will often be found that the deepest
shades are feeble tints of pale gray; the outlines nearly invisible, and
the forms brought out by a ghostly delicacy of touch, which, on looking
close to the paper, will be indistinguishable from its general texture.
A single line of ink, occurring anywhere in such a drawing, would of
course destroy it; placed in the darkness of a mouth or nostril, it
would turn the expression into a caricature; on a cheek or brow it would
be simply a blot. Yet let the blot remain, and let the master work up to
it with lines of similar force; and the drawing which was before
perfect, in terms of pencil, will become, under his hand, perfect in
terms of ink; and what was before a scratch on the cheek will become a
necessary and beautiful part of its gradation.

All great work is thus reduced under certain conditions, and its right
to be called complete depends on its fulfilment of them, not on the
nature of the conditions chosen. Habitually, indeed, we call a colored
work which is satisfactory to us, finished, and a chalk drawing
unfinished; but in the mind of the master, all his work is, according to
the sense in which you use the word, equally perfect or imperfect.
Perfect, if you regard its purpose and limitation; imperfect, if you
compare it with the natural standard. In what appears to you consummate,
the master has assigned to himself terms of shortcoming, and marked with
a sad severity the point up to which he will permit himself to contend
with nature. Were it not for his acceptance of such restraint, he could
neither quit his work, nor endure it. He could not quit it, for he would
always perceive more that might be done; he could not endure it, because
all doing ended only in more elaborate deficiency.

§ 3. But we are apt to forget, in modern days, that the reserve of a man
who is not putting forth half his strength is different in manner and
dignity from the effort of one who can do no more. Charmed, and justly
charmed, by the harmonious sketches of great painters, and by the
grandeur of their acquiescence in the point of pause, we have put
ourselves to produce sketches as an end instead of a means, and thought
to imitate the painter's scornful restraint of his own power, by a
scornful rejection of the things beyond ours. For many reasons,
therefore, it becomes desirable to understand precisely and finally what
a good painter means by completion.

§ 4. The sketches of true painters may be classed under the following
heads:--

I. _Experimental._--In which they are assisting an imperfect conception
of a subject by trying the look of it on paper in different ways.

By the greatest men this kind of sketch is hardly ever made; they
conceive their subjects distinctly at once, and their sketch is not to
try them, but to fasten them down. Raphael's form the only important
exception--and the numerous examples of experimental work by him are
evidence of his composition being technical rather than imaginative. I
have never seen a drawing of the kind by any great Venetian. Among the
nineteen thousand sketches by Turner--which I arranged in the National
Gallery--there was, to the best of my recollection, _not one_. In
several instances the work, after being carried forward a certain
length, had been abandoned and begun again with another view; sometimes
also two or more modes of treatment had been set side by side with a
view to choice. But there were always two distinct imaginations
contending for realization--not experimental modifications of one.

§ 5. II. _Determinant._--The fastening down of an idea in the simplest
terms, in order that it may not be disturbed or confused by after work.
Nearly all the great composers do this, methodically, before beginning a
painting. Such sketches are usually in a high degree resolute and
compressive; the best of them outlined or marked calmly with the pen,
and deliberately washed with color, indicating the places of the
principal lights.

Fine drawings of this class never show any hurry or confusion. They are
the expression of concluded operations of mind, are drawn slowly, and
are not so much sketches, as maps.

§ 6. III. _Commemorative._--Containing records of facts which the master
required. These in their most elaborate form are "studies," or drawings,
from Nature, of parts needed in the composition, often highly finished
in the part which is to be introduced. In this form, however, they never
occur by the greatest imaginative masters. For by a truly great inventor
everything is invented; no atom of the work is unmodified by his mind;
and no study from nature, however beautiful, could be introduced by him
into his design without change; it would not fit with the rest. Finished
studies for introduction are therefore chiefly by Leonardo and Raphael,
both technical designers rather than imaginative ones.

Commemorative sketches, by great masters, are generally hasty, merely to
put them in mind of motives of invention, or they are shorthand
memoranda of things with which they do not care to trouble their memory;
or, finally, accurate notes of things which they must _not_ modify by
invention, as local detail, costume, and such like. You may find
perfectly accurate drawings of coats of arms, portions of dresses,
pieces of architecture, and so on, by all the great men; but you will
not find elaborate studies of bits of their pictures.

[Illustration: FIG. 97.]

§ 7. When the sketch is made merely as a memorandum, it is impossible to
say how little, or what kind of drawing, may be sufficient for the
purpose. It is of course likely to be hasty from its very nature, and
unless the exact purpose be understood, it may be as unintelligible as a
piece of shorthand writing. For instance, in the corner of a sheet of
sketches made at sea, among those of Turner, at the National Gallery,
occurs this one, Fig. 97. I suppose most persons would not see much use
in it. It nevertheless was probably one of the most important sketches
made in Turner's life, fixing for ever in his mind certain facts
respecting the sunrise from a clear sea-horizon. Having myself watched
such sunrise, occasionally, I perceive this sketch to mean as follows:--

(Half circle at the top.) When the sun was only half out of the sea, the
horizon was sharply traced across its disk, and red streaks of vapor
crossed the lower part of it.

(Horseshoe underneath.) When the sun had risen so far as to show
three-quarters of its diameter, its light became so great as to conceal
the sea-horizon, consuming it away in descending rays.

(Smaller horseshoe below.) When on the point of detaching itself from
the horizon, the sun still consumed away the line of the sea, and looked
as if pulled down by it.

(Broken oval.) Having risen about a fourth of its diameter above the
horizon, the sea-line reappeared; but the risen orb was flattened by
refraction into an oval.

(Broken circle.) Having risen a little farther above the sea-line, the
sun, at last, got itself round, and all right, with sparkling reflection
on the waves just below the sea-line.

This memorandum is for its purpose entirely perfect and efficient,
though the sun is not drawn carefully round, but with a dash of the
pencil; but there is no affected or desired slightness. Could it have
been drawn round as instantaneously, it would have been. The purpose is
throughout determined; there is no scrawling, as in vulgar sketching.[1]

§ 8. Again, Fig. 98 is a facsimile of one of Turner's "memoranda," of a
complete subject,[2] Lausanne, from the road to Fribourg.

[Illustration: FIG. 98. _To face page 184._]

This example is entirely characteristic of his usual drawings from
nature, which unite two characters, being _both_ commemorative and
determinant:--Commemorative, in so far as they note certain facts about
the place: determinant, in that they record an impression received from
the place there and then, together with the principal arrangement of the
composition in which it was afterwards to be recorded. In this mode of
sketching, Turner differs from all other men whose work I have studied.
He never draws accurately on the spot, with the intention of modifying
or composing afterwards from the materials; but instantly modifies as he
draws, placing his memoranda where they are to be ultimately used, and
taking exactly what he wants, not a fragment or line more.

§ 9. This sketch has been made in the afternoon. He had been impressed
as he walked up the hill, by the vanishing of the lake in the golden
horizon, without end of waters, and by the opposition of the pinnacled
castle and cathedral to its level breadth. That must be drawn! and from
this spot, where all the buildings are set well together. But it
lucklessly happens that, though the buildings come just where he wants
them in situation, they don't in height. For the castle (the square mass
on the right) is in reality higher than the cathedral, and would block
out the end of the lake. Down it goes instantly a hundred feet, that we
may see the lake over it; without the smallest regard for the military
position of Lausanne.

§ 10. Next: The last low spire on the left is in truth concealed behind
the nearer bank, the town running far down the hill (and climbing
another hill) in that direction. But the group oi spires, without it,
would not be rich enough to give a proper impression of Lausanne, as a
spiry place. Turner quietly sends to fetch the church from round the
corner, places it where he likes, and indicates its distance only by
aërial perspective (much greater in the pencil drawing than in the
woodcut).

§ 11. But again: Not only the spire of the lower church, but the peak of
the Rochers d'Enfer (that highest in the distance) would in reality be
out of sight; it is much farther round to the left. This would never do
either; for without it, we should have no idea that Lausanne was
opposite the mountains, nor should we have a nice sloping line to lead
us into the distance.

With the same unblushing tranquillity of mind in which he had ordered up
the church, Turner sends also to fetch the Rochers d'Enfer; and puts
_them_ also where he chooses, to crown the slope of distant hill, which,
as every traveller knows, in its decline to the west, is one of the most
notable features of the view from Lausanne.

§ 12. These modifications, easily traceable in the large features of the
design, are carried out with equal audacity and precision in every part
of it. Every one of those confused lines on the right indicates
something that is really there, only everything is shifted and sorted
into the exact places that Turner chose. The group of dark objects near
us at the foot of the bank is a cluster of mills, which, when the
picture was completed, were to be the blackest things in it, and to
throw back the castle, and the golden horizon; while the rounded touches
at the bottom, under the castle, indicate a row of trees, which follow a
brook coming out of the ravine behind us; and were going to be made very
round indeed in the picture (to oppose the spiky and angular masses of
castle) and very consecutive, in order to form another conducting line
into the distance.

§ 13. These motives, or motives like them, might perhaps be guessed on
looking at the sketch. But no one without going to the spot would
understand the meaning of the vertical lines in the left-hand lowest
corner.

They are a "memorandum" of the artificial verticalness of a low
sandstone cliff, which has been cut down there to give space for a bit
of garden belonging to a public-house beneath, from which garden a path
leads along the ravine to the Lausanne rifle ground. The value of these
vertical lines in repeating those of the cathedral is very great; it
would be greater still in the completed picture, increasing the sense of
looking down from a height, and giving grasp of, and power over, the
whole scene.

§ 14. Throughout the sketch, as in all that Turner made, the observing
and combining intellect acts in the same manner. Not a line is lost, nor
a moment of time; and though the pencil flies, and the whole thing is
literally done as fast as a piece of shorthand writing, it is to the
full as purposeful and compressed, so that while there are indeed dashes
of the pencil which are unintentional, they are only unintentional as
the form of a letter is, in fast writing, not from want of intention,
but from the accident of haste.

§ 15. I know not if the reader can understand,--I myself cannot, though
I see it to be demonstrable,--the simultaneous occurrence of idea which
produces such a drawing as this: the grasp of the whole, from the laying
of the first line, which induces continual modifications of all that is
done, out of respect to parts not done yet. No line is ever changed or
effaced: no experiment made; but every touch is placed with reference to
all that are to succeed, as to all that have gone before; every addition
takes its part, as the stones in an arch of a bridge; the last touch
locks the arch. Remove that keystone, or remove any other of the stones
of the vault, and the whole will fall.

§ 16. I repeat--the power of mind which accomplishes this, is yet wholly
inexplicable to me, as it was when first I defined it in the chapter on
imagination associative, in the second volume. But the grandeur of the
power impresses me daily more and more; and, in quitting the subject of
invention, let me assert finally, in clearest and strongest terms, that
no painting is of any true imaginative perfectness at all, unless it has
been thus conceived.

One sign of its being thus conceived may be always found in the
straightforwardness of its work. There are continual disputes among
artists as to the best way of doing things, which may nearly all be
resolved into confessions of indetermination. If you know precisely what
you want, you will not feel much hesitation in setting about it; and a
picture may be painted almost any way, so only that it can be a straight
way. Give a true painter a ground of black, white, scarlet, or green,
and out of it he will bring what you choose. From the black, brightness;
from the white, sadness; from the scarlet, coolness; from the green,
glow: he will make anything out of anything, but in each case his method
will be pure, direct, perfect, the shortest and simplest possible. You
will find him, moreover, indifferent as to succession of process. Ask
him to begin at the bottom of the picture instead of the top,--to finish
two square inches of it without touching the rest, or to lay a separate
ground for every part before finishing any;--it is all the same to him!
What he will do if left to himself, depends on mechanical convenience,
and on the time at his disposal. If he has a large brush in his hand,
and plenty of one color ground, he may lay as much as is wanted of that
color, at once, in every part of the picture where it is to occur; and
if any is left, perhaps walk to another canvas, and lay the rest of it
where it will be wanted on that. If, on the contrary, he has a small
brush in his hand, and is interested in a particular spot of the
picture, he will, perhaps, not stir from it till that bit is finished.
But the absolutely best, or centrally, and entirely _right_ way of
painting is as follows:--

§ 17. A light ground, white, red, yellow, or gray, not brown, or black.
On that an entirely accurate, and firm black outline of the whole
picture, in its principal masses. The outline to be exquisitely correct
as far as it reaches, but not to include small details; the use of it
being to limit the masses of first color. The ground-colors then to be
laid firmly, each on its own proper part of the picture, as inlaid work
in a mosaic table, meeting each other truly at the edges: as much of
each being laid as will get itself into the state which the artist
requires it to be in for his second painting, by the time he comes to
it. On this first color, the second colors and subordinate masses laid
in due order, now, of course, necessarily without previous outline, and
all small detail reserved to the last, the bracelet being not touched,
nor indicated in the last, till the arm is finished.[3]

§ 18. This is, as far as it can be expressed in few words, the right, or
Venetian way of painting; but it is incapable of absolute definition,
for it depends on the scale, the material, and the nature of the object
represented, _how much_ a great painter will do with his first color; or
how many after processes he will use. Very often the first color, richly
blended and worked into, is also the last; sometimes it wants a glaze
only to modify it; sometimes an entirely different color above it.
Turner's storm-blues, for instance, were produced by a black ground,
with opaque blue, mixed with white, struck over it.[4] The amount of
detail given in the first color will also depend on convenience. For
instance, if a jewel _fastens_ a fold of dress, a Venetian will lay
probably a piece of the jewel color in its place at the time he draws
the fold; but if the jewel _falls upon_ the dress, he will paint the
folds only in the ground color, and the jewel afterwards. For in the
first case his hand must pause, at any rate, where the fold is fastened;
so that he may as well mark the color of the gem: but he would have to
check his hand in the sweep with which he drew the drapery, if he
painted a jewel that fell upon it with the first color. So far, however,
as he can possibly use the under color, he will, in whatever he has to
superimpose. There is a pretty little instance of such economical work
in the painting of the pearls on the breast of the elder princess, in
our best Paul Veronese (Family of Darius). The lowest is about the size
of a small hazel-nut, and falls on her rose-red dress. Any other but a
Venetian would have put a complete piece of white paint over the dress,
for the whole pearl, and painted into that the colors of the stone. But
Veronese knows beforehand that all the dark side of the pearl will
reflect the red of the dress. He will not put white over the red, only
to put red over the white again. He leaves the actual dress for the dark
side of the pearl, and with two small separate touches, one white,
another brown, places its high light and shadow. This he does with
perfect care and calm; but in two decisive seconds. There is no dash,
nor display, nor hurry, nor error. The exactly right thing is done in
the exactly right place, and not one atom of color, nor moment of time
spent vainly. Look close at the two touches,--you wonder what they mean.
Retire six feet from the picture--the pearl is there!

§ 19. The degree in which the ground colors are extended over his
picture, as he works, is to a great painter absolutely indifferent. It
is all the same to him whether he grounds a head, and finishes it at
once to the shoulders, leaving all round it white; or whether he grounds
the whole picture. His harmony, paint as he will, never can be complete
till the last touch is given; so long as it remains incomplete, he does
not care how little of it is suggested, or how many notes are missing.
All is wrong till all is right; and he must be able to bear the
all-wrongness till his work is done, or he cannot paint at all. His mode
of treatment will, therefore, depend on the nature of his subject; as is
beautifully shown in the water-color sketches by Turner in the National
Gallery. His general system was to complete inch by inch; leaving the
paper quite white all round, especially if the work was to be delicate.
The most exquisite drawings left unfinished in the collection--those at
Rome and Naples--are thus outlined accurately on pure white paper, begun
in the middle of the sheet, and worked out to the side, finishing as he
proceeds. If, however, any united effect of light or color is to embrace
a large part of the subject, he will lay it in with a broad wash over
the whole paper at once; then paint into it using it as a ground, and
modifying it in the pure Venetian manner. His oil pictures were laid
roughly with ground colors, and painted into with such rapid skill, that
the artists who used to see him finishing at the Academy sometimes
suspected him of having the picture finished underneath the colors he
showed, and removing, instead of adding, as they watched.

§ 20. But, whatever the means used may be, the certainty and directness
of them imply absolute grasp of the whole subject, and without this
grasp there is no good painting. This, finally, let me declare, without
qualification--that partial conception is no conception. The whole
picture must be imagined, or none of it is. And this grasp of the whole
implies very strange and sublime qualities of mind. It is not possible,
unless the feelings are completely under control; the least excitement
or passion will disturb the measured equity of power; a painter needs to
be as cool as a general; and as little moved or subdued by his sense of
pleasure, as a soldier by the sense of pain. Nothing good can be done
without intense feeling; but it must be feeling so crushed, that the
work is set about with mechanical steadiness, absolutely untroubled, as
a surgeon,--not without pity, but conquering it and putting it
aside--begins an operation. Until the feelings can give strength enough
to the will to enable it to conquer them, they are not strong enough. If
you cannot leave your picture at any moment;--cannot turn from it and go
on with another, while the color is drying;--cannot work at any part of
it you choose with equal contentment--you have not firm enough grasp of
it.

§ 21. It follows also, that no vain or selfish person can possibly
paint, in the noble sense of the word. Vanity and selfishness are
troublous, eager, anxious, petulant:--painting can only be done in calm
of mind. Resolution is not enough to secure this; it must be secured by
disposition as well. You may resolve to think of your picture only; but,
if you have been fretted before beginning, no manly or clear grasp of it
will be possible for you. No forced calm is calm enough. Only honest
calm,--natural calm. You might as well try by external pressure to
smoothe a lake till it could reflect the sky, as by violence of effort
to secure the peace through which only you can reach imagination. That
peace must come in its own time; as the waters settle themselves into
clearness as well as quietness; you can no more filter your mind into
purity than you can compress it into calmness; you must keep it pure, if
you would have it pure; and throw no stones into it, if you would have
it quiet. Great courage and self-command may, to a certain extent, give
power of painting without the true calmness underneath; but never of
doing first-rate work. There is sufficient evidence of this, in even
what we know of great men, though of the greatest, we nearly always know
the least (and that necessarily; they being very silent, and not much
given to setting themselves forth to questioners; apt to be
contemptuously reserved, no less than unselfishly). But in such writings
and sayings as we possess of theirs, we may trace a quite curious
gentleness and serene courtesy. Rubens' letters are almost ludicrous in
their unhurried politeness. Reynolds, swiftest of painters, was gentlest
of companions; so also Velasquez, Titian, and Veronese.

§ 22. It is gratuitous to add that no shallow or petty person can paint.
Mere cleverness or special gift never made an artist. It is only
perfectness of mind, unity, depth, decision, the highest qualities, in
fine, of the intellect, which will form the imagination.

§ 23. And, lastly, no false person can paint. A person false at heart
may, when it suits his purposes, seize a stray truth here or there; but
the relations of truth,--its perfectness,--that which makes it wholesome
truth, he can never perceive. As wholeness and wholesomeness go
together, so also sight with sincerity; it is only the constant desire
of, and submissiveness to truth, which can measure its strange angles
and mark its infinite aspects; and fit them and knit them into the
strength of sacred invention.

Sacred, I call it deliberately; for it is thus, in the most accurate
senses, humble as well as helpful; meek in its receiving, as magnificent
in its disposing; the name it bears being rightly given to invention
formal, not because it forms, but because it finds. For you cannot find
a lie; you must make it for yourself. False things may be imagined, and
false things composed; but only truth can be invented.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The word in the uppermost note, to the right of the sun, is
    "red;" the others, "yellow," "purple," "cold" light gray. He always
    noted the colors of the skies in this way.

  [2] It is not so good a facsimile as those I have given from Durer,
    for the original sketch is in light pencil; and the thickening and
    delicate emphasis of the lines, on which nearly all the beauty of the
    drawing depended, cannot be expressed in the woodcut, though marked
    by a double line as well as I could. But the figure will answer its
    purpose well enough in showing Turner's mode of sketching.

  [3] Thus, in the Holy Family of Titian, lately purchased for the
    National Gallery, the piece of St. Catherine's dress over her
    shoulders is painted on the under dress, after that was dry. All its
    value would have been lost, had the slightest tint or trace of it
    been given previously. This picture, I think, and certainly many of
    Tintoret's, are painted on dark grounds; but this is to save time,
    and with some loss to the future brightness of the color.

  [4] In cleaning the "Hero and Leander," now in the National
    collection, these upper glazes were taken off, and only the black
    ground left. I remember the picture when its distance was of the most
    exquisite blue. I have no doubt the "Fire at Sea" has had its
    distance destroyed in the same manner.




