CHAPTER II.

THE TASK OF THE LEAST.


§ 1. The reader has probably been surprised at my assertions made often
before now, and reiterated here, that the _minutest_ portion of a great
composition is helpful to the whole. It certainly does not seem easily
conceivable that this should be so. I will go farther, and say that it
is inconceivable. But it is the fact.

We shall discern it to be so by taking one or two compositions to
pieces, and examining the fragments. In doing which, we must remember
that a great composition always has a leading emotional purpose,
technically called its motive, to which all its lines and forms have
some relation. Undulating lines, for instance, are expressive of action;
and would be false in effect if the motive of the picture was one of
repose. Horizontal and angular lines are expressive of rest and
strength; and would destroy a design whose purpose was to express
disquiet and feebleness. It is therefore necessary to ascertain the
motive before descending to the detail.

§ 2. One of the simplest subjects, in the series of the Rivers of
France, is "Rietz, near Saumur." The published Plate gives a better
rendering than usual of its tone of light; and my rough etching, Plate
73, sufficiently shows the arrangement of its lines. What is their
motive?

To get at it completely, we must know something of the Loire.

The district through which it here flows is, for the most part, a low
place, yet not altogether at the level of the stream, but cut into steep
banks of chalk or gravel, thirty or forty feet high, running for miles
at about an equal height above the water.

[Illustration: 73. Loire-side.]

These banks are excavated by the peasantry, partly for houses, partly
for cellars, so economizing vineyard space above; and thus a kind of
continuous village runs along the river-side, composed half of caves,
half of rude buildings, backed by the cliff, propped against it,
therefore always leaning away from the river; mingled with overlappings
of vineyard trellis from above, and little towers or summer-houses for
outlook, when the grapes are ripe, or for gossip over the garden wall.

§ 3. It is an autumnal evening, then, by this Loire side. The day has
been hot, and the air is heavy and misty still; the sunlight warm, but
dim; the brown vine-leaves motionless: all else quiet. Not a sail in
sight on the river,[1] its strong, noiseless current lengthening the
stream of low sunlight.

The motive of the picture, therefore, is the expression of rude but
perfect peace, slightly mingled with an indolent languor and
despondency; the peace between intervals of enforced labor; happy, but
listless, and having little care or hope about the future; cutting its
home out of this gravel bank, and letting the vine and the river twine
and undermine as they will; careless to mend or build, so long as the
walls hold together, and the black fruit swells in the sunshine.

§ 4. To get this repose, together with rude stability, we have therefore
horizontal lines and bold angles. The grand horizontal space and sweep
of Turner's distant river show perhaps better in the etching than in the
Plate; but depend wholly for value on the piece of near wall. It is the
vertical line of its dark side which drives the eye up into the
distance, right against the horizontal, and so makes it felt, while the
flatness of the stone prepares the eye to understand the flatness of the
river. Farther: hide with your finger the little ring on that stone, and
you will find the river has stopped flowing. That ring is to repeat the
curved lines of the river bank, which express its line of current, and
to bring the feeling of them down near us. On the other side of the road
the horizontal lines are taken up again by the dark pieces of wood,
without which we should still lose half our space.

Next: The repose is to be not only perfect, but indolent: the repose of
out-wearied people: not caring much what becomes of them.

You see the road is covered with litter. Even the crockery is left
outside the cottage to dry in the sun, after being washed up. The steps
of the cottage door have been too high for comfort originally, only it
was less trouble to cut three large stones than four or five small. They
are now all aslope and broken, not repaired for years. Their weighty
forms increase the sense of languor throughout the scene, and of
stability also, because we feel how difficult it would be to stir them.
The crockery has its work to do also;--the arched door on the left being
necessary to show the great thickness of walls and the strength they
require to prevent falling in of the cliff above;--as the horizontal
lines must be diffused on the right, so this arch must be diffused on
the left; and the large round plate on one side of the steps, with the
two small ones on the other, are to carry down the element of circular
curvature. Hide them, and see the result.

As they carry the arched group of forms down, the arched window-shutter
diffuses it upwards, where all the lines of the distant buildings
suggest one and the same idea of disorderly and careless strength,
mingling masonry with rock.

§ 5. So far of the horizontal and curved lines. How of the radiating
ones? What has the black vine trellis got to do?

Lay a pencil or ruler parallel with its lines. You will find that they
point to the massive building in the distance. To which, as nearly as is
possible without at once showing the artifice, every other radiating
line points also; almost ludicrously when it is once pointed out; even
the curved line of the top of the terrace runs into it, and the last
sweep of the river evidently leads to its base. And so nearly is it in
the exact centre of the picture, that one diagonal from corner to corner
passes through it, and the other only misses the base by the twentieth
of an inch.

If you are accustomed to France, you will know in a moment by its
outline that this massive building is an old church.

Without it, the repose would not have been essentially the laborer's
rest--rest as of the Sabbath. Among all the groups of lines that point
to it, two are principal: the first, those of the vine trellis: the
second, those of the handles of the saw left in the beam:--the blessing
of human life and its labor.

Whenever Turner wishes to express profound repose, he puts in the
foreground some instrument of labor cast aside. See, in Roger's Poems,
the last vignette, "Datur hora quieti," with the plough in the furrow;
and in the first vignette of the same book, the scythe on the shoulder
of the peasant going home. (There is nothing about the scythe in the
passage of the poem which this vignette illustrates.)

§ 6. Observe, farther, the outline of the church itself. As our
habitations are, so is our church, evidently a heap of old, but massive,
walls, patched, and repaired, and roofed in, and over and over, until
its original shape is hardly recognizable. I know the kind of church
well--can tell even here, two miles off, that I shall find some Norman
arches in the apse, and a flamboyant porch, rich and dark, with every
statue broken out of it; and a rude wooden belfry above all; and a
quantity of miserable shops built in among the buttresses; and that I
may walk in and out as much as I please, but that how often soever, I
shall always find some one praying at the Holy Sepulchre, in the darkest
aisle, and my going in and out will not disturb them. For they _are_
praying, which in many a handsomer and highlier-furbished edifice might,
perhaps, not be so assuredly the case.

§ 7. Lastly: What kind of people have we on this winding road? Three
indolent ones, leaning on the wall to look over into the gliding water;
and a matron with her market panniers, by her figure, not a fast rider.
The road, besides, is bad, and seems unsafe for trotting, and she has
passed without disturbing the cat, who sits comfortably on the block of
wood in the middle of it.

§ 8. Next to this piece of quietness, let us glance at a composition in
which the motive is one of tumult: that of the Fall of Schaffhausen. It
is engraved in the Keepsake. I have etched in Plate 74, at the top, the
chief lines of its composition,[2] in which the first great purpose is
to give swing enough to the water. The line of fall is straight and
monotonous in reality. Turner wants to get the great concave sweep and
rush of the river well felt, in spite of the unbroken form. The column
of spray, rocks, mills, and bank, all radiate like a plume, sweeping
round together in grand curves to the left, where the group of figures,
hurried about the ferry boat, rises like a dash of spray; they also
radiating: so as to form one perfectly connected cluster, with the two
gens-d'armes and the millstones; the millstones at the bottom being the
root of it; the two soldiers laid right and left to sustain the branch
of figures beyond, balanced just as a tree bough would be.

§ 9. One of the gens-d'armes is flirting with a young lady in a round
cap and full sleeves, under pretence of wanting her to show him what she
has in her bandbox. The motive of which flirtation is, so far as Turner
is concerned in it, primarily the bandbox: this and the millstones
below, give him a series of concave lines, which, concentrated by the
recumbent soldiers, intensify the hollow sweep of the fall, precisely as
the ring on the stone does the Loire eddies. These curves are carried
out on the right by the small plate of eggs, laid to be washed at the
spring; and, all these concave lines being a little too quiet and
recumbent, the staggering casks are set on the left, and the
ill-balanced milk-pail on the right, to give a general feeling of things
being rolled over and over. The things which are to give this sense of
rolling are dark, in order to hint at the way in which the cataract
rolls boulders of rock; while the forms which are to give the sense of
its sweeping force are white. The little spring, splashing out of its
pine-trough, is to give contrast with the power of the fall,--while it
carries out the general sense of splashing water.

[Illustration: 74. The Mill-stream.]

[Illustration: Painted by J. N. W. Turner. Drawn by J. Ruskin. Engraved
by R. P. Cuff.

75. The Castle of Lauffen.]

§ 10. This spring exists on the spot, and so does everything else in the
picture; but the combinations are wholly arbitrary; it being Turner's
fixed principle to collect out of any scene whatever was characteristic,
and put it together just as he liked. The changes made in this instance
are highly curious. The mills have no resemblance whatever to the real
group as seen from this spot; for there is a vulgar and formal
dwelling-house in front of them. But if you climb the rock behind them,
you find they form on that side a towering cluster, which Turner has put
with little modification into the drawing. What he has done to the
mills, he has done with still greater audacity to the central rock. Seen
from this spot, it shows, in reality, its greatest breadth, and is heavy
and uninteresting; but on the Lauffen side, exposes its consumed base,
worn away by the rush of water, which Turner resolving to show, serenely
draws the rock as it appears from the other side of the Rhine, and
brings that view of it over to this side. I have etched the bit with the
rock a little larger below; and if the reader knows the spot, he will
see that this piece of the drawing, reversed in the etching, is almost a
bonâ fide unreversed study of the fall from the Lauffen side.[3]

Finally, the castle of Lauffen itself, being, when seen from this spot,
too much foreshortened to show its extent, Turner walks a quarter of a
mile lower down the river, draws the castle accurately there, brings it
back with him, and puts it in all its extent, where he chooses to have
it, beyond the rocks.

I tried to copy and engrave this piece of the drawing of its real size,
merely to show the forms of the trees, drifted back by the breeze from
the fall, and wet with its spray; but in the endeavor to facsimile the
touches, great part of their grace and ease has been lost; still, Plate
75 may, if compared with the same piece in the Keepsake engraving, at
least show that the original drawing has not yet been rendered with
completeness.

§ 11. These two examples may sufficiently serve to show the mode in
which minor details, both in form and spirit, are used by Turner to aid
his main motives; of course I cannot, in the space of this volume, go on
examining subjects at this length, even if I had time to etch them; but
every design of Turner's would be equally instructive, examined in a
similar manner. Thus far, however, we have only seen the help of the
parts to the whole: we must give yet a little attention to the mode of
combining the smallest details.

I am always led away, in spite of myself, from my proper subject here,
invention formal, or the merely pleasant placing of lines and masses,
into the emotional results of such arrangement.

The chief reason of this is that the emotional power can be explained;
but the perfection of formative arrangement, as I said, cannot be
explained, any more than that of melody in music. An instance or two of
it, however, may be given.

§ 12. Much fine formative arrangement depends on a more or less
elliptical or pear-shaped balance of the group, obtained by arranging
the principal members of it on two opposite curves, and either
centralizing it by some powerful feature at the base, centre, or summit;
or else clasping it together by some conspicuous point or knot. A very
small object will often do this satisfactorily.

If you can get the complete series of Lefèbre's engravings from Titian
and Veronese, they will be quite enough to teach you, in their dumb way,
everything that is teachable of composition; at all events, try to get
the Madonna, with St. Peter and St. George under the two great pillars;
the Madonna and Child, with mitred bishop on her left, and St. Andrew on
her right; and Veronese's Triumph of Venice. The first of these Plates
unites two formative symmetries; that of the two pillars, clasped by the
square altar-cloth below and cloud above, catches the eye first; but the
main group is the fivefold one rising to the left, crowned by the
Madonna. St. Francis and St. Peter form its two wings, and the kneeling
portrait figures, its base. It is clasped at the bottom by the key of
St. Peter, which points straight at the Madonna's head, and is laid on
the steps solely for this purpose; the curved lines, which enclose the
group, meet also in her face; and the straight line of light, on the
cloak of the nearest senator, points at her also. If you have Turner's
Liber Studiorum, turn to the Lauffenburg, and compare the figure group
there: a fivefold chain, one standing figure, central; two recumbent,
for wings; two half-recumbent, for bases; and a cluster of weeds to
clasp. Then turn to Lefèbre's Europa (there are two in the series--I
mean the one with the two tree trunks over her head). It is a wonderful
ninefold group. Europa central; two stooping figures, each surmounted by
a standing one, for wings; a cupid on one side, and dog on the other,
for bases; a cupid and trunk of tree, on each side, to terminate above;
and a garland for clasp.

[Illustration: FIG. 94.]

§ 13. Fig. 94, page 171, will serve to show the mode in which similar
arrangements are carried into the smallest detail. It is magnified four
times from a cluster of leaves in the foreground of the "Isis" (Liber
Studiorum). Figs. 95 and 96, page 172, show the arrangement of the two
groups composing it; the lower is purely symmetrical, with trefoiled
centre and broad masses for wings; the uppermost is a sweeping
continuous curve, symmetrical, but foreshortened. Both are clasped by
arrow-shaped leaves. The two whole groups themselves are, in turn,
members of another larger group, composing the entire foreground, and
consisting of broad dock-leaves, with minor clusters on the right and
left, of which these form the chief portion on the right side.

[Illustration: FIG. 95.]

[Illustration: FIG. 96.]

§ 14. Unless every leaf, and every visible point or object, however
small, forms a part of some harmony of this kind (these symmetrical
conditions being only the most simple and obvious), it has no business
in the picture. It is the necessary connection of all the forms and
colors, down to the last touch, which constitutes great or inventive
work, separated from all common work by an impassable gulf.

By diligently copying the etchings of the Liber Studiorum, the reader
may, however, easily attain the perception of the existence of these
relations, and be prepared to understand Turner's more elaborate
composition. It would take many figures to disentangle and explain the
arrangements merely of the leaf cluster, Fig. 78, facing page 97; but
that there _is_ a system, and that every leaf has a fixed value and
place in it, can hardly but be felt at a glance.

It is curious that, in spite of all the constant talkings of
"composition" which goes on among art students, true composition is just
the last thing which appears to be perceived. One would have thought
that in this group, at least, the value of the central black leaf would
have been seen, of which the principal function is to point towards, and
continue, the line of bank above. See Plate 62. But a glance at the
published Plate in the England series will show that no idea of the
composition had occurred to the engraver's mind. He thought any leaves
would do, and supplied them from his own repertory of hack vegetation.

§ 15. I would willingly enlarge farther on this subject--it is a
favorite one with me; but the figures required for any exhaustive
treatment of it would form a separate volume. All that I can do is to
indicate, as these examples do sufficiently, the vast field open to the
student's analysis if he cares to pursue the subject; and to mark for
the general reader these two strong conclusions:--that nothing in great
work is ever either fortuitous or contentious.

It is not fortuitous; that is to say, not left to fortune. The "must do
it by a kind of felicity" of Bacon is true; it is true also that an
accident is often suggestive to an inventor. Turner himself said, "I
never lose an accident." But it is this not _losing_ it, this taking
things out of the hands of Fortune, and putting them into those of force
and foresight, which attest the master. Chance may sometimes help, and
sometimes provoke, a success; but must never rule, and rarely allure.

And, lastly, nothing must be contentious. Art has many uses and many
pleasantnesses; but of all its services, none are higher than its
setting forth, by a visible and enduring image, the nature of all true
authority and freedom; Authority which defines and directs the action of
benevolent law; and Freedom which consists in deep and soft consent of
individual[4] helpfulness.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The sails in the engraving were put in to catch the public eye.
    There are none in the drawing.

  [2] These etchings of compositions are all reversed, for they are
    merely sketches on the steel, and I cannot sketch easily except
    straight from the drawing, and without reversing. The looking-glass
    plagues me with cross lights. As examples of composition, it does not
    the least matter which way they are turned; and the reader may see
    this Schaffhausen subject from the right side of the Rhine, by
    holding the book before a glass. The rude indications of the figures
    in the Loire subject are nearly facsimiles of Turner's.

  [3] With the exception of the jagged ledge rising out of the foam
    below which comes from the north side, and is admirable in its
    expression of the position of the limestone-beds, which, rising from
    below the drift gravel of Constance, are the real cause of the fall
    of Schaffhausen.

  [4] "Individual," that is to say, distinct and separate in character,
    though joined in purpose. I might have enlarged on this head, but
    that all I should care to say has been already said admirably by Mr.
    J. S. Mill in his essay on _Liberty_.




