PART VIII.

OF IDEAS OF RELATION:--FIRST, OF INVENTION FORMAL.




CHAPTER I.

THE LAW OF HELP.


§ 1. We have now reached the last and the most important part of our
subject. We have seen, in the first division of this book, how far art
may be, and has been, consistent with physical or material facts. In its
second division, we examined how far it may be and has been obedient to
the laws of physical beauty. In this last division we have to consider
its relations of art to God and man. Its work in the help of human
beings, and service of their Creator.

We have to inquire into the various Powers, Conditions, and Aims of mind
involved in the conception or creation of pictures; in the choice of
subject, and the mode and order of its history;--the choice of forms,
and the modes of their arrangement.

And these phases of mind being concerned, partly with choice and
arrangement of incidents, partly with choice and arrangement of forms
and colors, the whole subject will fall into two main divisions, namely,
expressional or spiritual invention; and material or formal invention.

They are of course connected;--all good formal invention being
expressional also; but as a matter of convenience it is best to say what
may be ascertained of the nature of formal invention, before attempting
to illustrate the faculty in its higher field.

§ 2. First, then, of INVENTION FORMAL, otherwise and most commonly
called technical composition; that is to say, the arrangement of lines,
forms, or colors, so as to produce the best possible effect.[1]

I have often been accused of slighting this quality in pictures; the
fact being that I have avoided it only because I considered it too great
and wonderful for me to deal with. The longer I thought, the more
wonderful it always seemed; and it is, to myself personally, the
quality, above all others, which gives me delight in pictures. Many
others I admire, or respect; but this one I rejoice in. Expression,
sentiment, truth to nature, are essential; but all these are not enough.
I never care to look at a picture again, if it be ill composed; and if
well composed I can hardly leave off looking at it.

"Well composed." Does that mean according to rule?

No. Precisely the contrary. Composed as only the man who did it could
have done it; composed as no other picture is, or was, or ever can be
again. Every great work stands alone.

§ 3. Yet there are certain elementary laws of arrangement traceable a
little way; a few of these only I shall note, not caring to pursue the
subject far in this work, so intricate it becomes even in its first
elements: nor could it be treated with any approach to completeness,
unless I were to give many and elaborate outlines of large pictures. I
have a vague hope of entering on such a task, some future day. Meantime
I shall only indicate the place which technical composition should hold
in our scheme.

And, first, let us understand what composition is, and how far it is
required.

§ 4. Composition may be best defined as the help of everything in the
picture by everything else.

I wish the reader to dwell a little on this word "Help." It is a grave
one.

In substance which we call "inanimate," as of clouds, or stones, their
atoms may cohere to each other, or consist with each other, but they do
not help each other. The removal of one part does not injure the rest.

But in a plant, the taking away of any one part does injure the rest.
Hurt or remove any portion of the sap, bark, or pith, the rest is
injured. If any part enters into a state in which it no more assists the
rest, and has thus become "helpless," we call it also "dead."

The power which causes the several portions of the plant to help each
other, we call life. Much more is this so in an animal. We may take away
the branch of a tree without much harm to it; but not the animal's limb.
Thus, intensity of life is also intensity of helpfulness--completeness
of depending of each part on all the rest. The ceasing of this help is
what we call corruption; and in proportion to the perfectness of the
help, is the dreadfulness of the loss. The more intense the life has
been, the more terrible is its corruption.

The decomposition of a crystal is not necessarily impure at all. The
fermentation of a wholesome liquid begins to admit the idea slightly;
the decay of leaves yet more; of flowers, more; of animals, with greater
painfulness and terribleness in exact proportion to their original
vitality; and the foulest of all corruption is that of the body of man;
and, in his body, that which is occasioned by disease, more than that of
natural death.

§ 5. I said just now, that though atoms of inanimate substance could not
help each other, they could "consist" with each other. "Consistence" is
their virtue. Thus the parts of a crystal are consistent, but of dust,
inconsistent. Orderly adherence, the best help its atoms can give,
constitutes the nobleness of such substance.

When matter is either consistent, or living, we call it pure, or clean;
when inconsistent, or corrupting (unhelpful), we call it impure, or
unclean. The greatest uncleanliness being that which is essentially most
opposite to life.

Life and consistency, then, both expressing one character (namely,
helpfulness, of a higher or lower order), the Maker of all creatures and
things, "by whom all creatures live, and all things consist," is
essentially and for ever the Helpful One, or in softer Saxon, the "Holy"
One.

The word has no other ultimate meaning: Helpful, harmless, undefiled:
"living" or "Lord of life."

The idea is clear and mighty in the cherubim's cry: "Helpful, helpful,
helpful, Lord God of Hosts;" _i.e._ of all the hosts, armies, and
creatures of the earth.[2]

§ 6. A pure or holy state of anything, therefore, is that in which all
its parts are helpful or consistent. They may or may not be homogeneous.
The highest or organic purities are composed of many elements in an
entirely helpful state. The highest and first law of the universe--and
the other name of life, is, therefore, "help." The other name of death
is "separation." Government and co-operation are in all things and
eternally the laws of life. Anarchy and competition, eternally, and in
all things, the laws of death.

§ 7. Perhaps the best, though the most familiar example we could take of
the nature and power of consistence, will be that of the possible
changes in the dust we tread on.

Exclusive of animal decay, we can hardly arrive at a more absolute type
of impurity than the mud or slime of a damp over-trodden path, in the
outskirts of a manufacturing town. I do not say mud of the road, because
that is mixed with animal refuse; but take merely an ounce or two of the
blackest slime of a beaten footpath on a rainy day, near a large
manufacturing town.

§ 8. That slime we shall find in most cases composed of clay (or
brickdust, which is burnt clay) mixed with soot, a little sand, and
water. All these elements are at helpless war with each other, and
destroy reciprocally each other's nature and power, competing and
fighting for place at every tread of your foot;--sand squeezing out
clay, and clay squeezing out water, and soot meddling everywhere and
defiling the whole. Let us suppose that this ounce of mud is left in
perfect rest, and that its elements gather together, like to like, so
that their atoms may get into the closest relations possible.

§ 9. Let the clay begin. Ridding itself of all foreign substance, it
gradually becomes a white earth, already very beautiful; and fit, with
help of congealing fire, to be made into finest porcelain, and painted
on, and be kept in kings' palaces. But such artificial consistence is
not its best. Leave it still quiet to follow its own instinct of unity,
and it becomes not only white, but clear; not only clear, but hard; not
only clear and hard, but so set that it can deal with light in a
wonderful way, and gather out of it the loveliest blue rays only,
refusing the rest. We call it then a sapphire.

Such being the consummation of the clay, we give similar permission of
quiet to the sand. It also becomes, first, a white earth, then proceeds
to grow clear and hard, and at last arranges itself in mysterious,
infinitely fine, parallel lines, which have the power of reflecting not
merely the blue rays, but the blue, green, purple, and red rays in the
greatest beauty in which they can be seen through any hard material
whatsoever. We call it then an opal.

In next order the soot sets to work; it cannot make itself white at
first, but instead of being discouraged, tries harder and harder, and
comes out clear at last, and the hardest thing in the world; and for the
blackness that it had, obtains in exchange the power of reflecting all
the rays of the sun at once in the vividest blaze that any solid thing
can shoot. We call it then a diamond.

Last of all the water purifies or unites itself, contented enough if it
only reach the form of a dew-drop; but if we insist on its proceeding to
a more perfect consistence, it crystallizes into the shape of a star.

And for the ounce of slime which we had by political economy of
competition, we have by political economy of co-operation, a sapphire,
an opal, and a diamond, set in the midst of a star of snow.

§ 10. Now invention in art signifies an arrangement, in which everything
in the work is thus consistent with all things else, and helpful to all
else.

It is the greatest and rarest of all the qualities of art. The power by
which it is effected is absolutely inexplicable and incommunicable; but
exercised with entire facility by those who possess it, in many cases
even unconsciously.[3]

In work which is not composed, there may be many beautiful things, but
they do not help each other. They at the best only stand beside, and
more usually compete with and destroy, each other. They may be connected
artificially in many ways, but the test of there being no invention is,
that if one of them be taken away, the others are no worse than before.
But in true composition, if one be taken away, all the rest are helpless
and valueless. Generally, in falsely composed work, if anything be taken
away, the rest will look better; because the attention is less
distracted. Hence the pleasure of inferior artists in sketching, and
their inability to finish; all that they add destroys.

§ 11. Also in true composition, everything not only helps everything
else a _little_, but helps with its utmost power. Every atom is in full
energy; and _all_ that energy is kind. Not a line, nor spark of color,
but is doing its very best, and that best is aid. The extent to which
this law is carried in truly right and noble work is wholly
inconceivable to the ordinary observer, and no true account of it would
be believed.

§ 12. True composition being entirely easy to the man who can compose,
he is seldom proud of it, though he clearly recognizes it. Also, true
composition is inexplicable. No one can explain how the notes of a
Mozart melody, or the folds of a piece of Titian's drapery, produce
their essential effect on each other. If you do not feel it, no one can
by reasoning make you feel it. And, the highest composition is so
subtle, that it is apt to become unpopular, and sometimes seem insipid.

§ 13. The reader may be surprised at my giving so high a place to
invention. But if he ever come to know true invention from false, he
will find that it is not only the highest quality of art, but is simply
the most wonderful act or power of humanity. It is pre-eminently the
deed of human creation; [Greek: poiêsis], otherwise, poetry.

If the reader will look back to my definition of poetry, he will find it
is "the suggestion, by the imagination, of noble grounds for the noble
emotions" (Vol. III. p. 10), amplified below (§ 14) into "assembling by
help of the imagination;" that is to say, imagination associative,
described at length in Vol. II., in the chapter just referred to. The
mystery of the power is sufficiently set forth in that place. Of its
dignity I have a word or two to say here.

§ 14. Men in their several professed employments, looked at broadly, may
be properly arranged under five classes:--

1. Persons who see. These in modern language are sometimes called
sight-seers, that being an occupation coming more and more into vogue
every day. Anciently they used to be called, simply, seers.

2. Persons who talk. These, in modern language, are usually called
talkers, or speakers, as in the House of Commons, and elsewhere. They
used to be called prophets.

3. Persons who make. These, in modern language, are usually called
manufacturers. Anciently they were called poets.

4. Persons who think. There seems to be no very distinct modern title
for this kind of person, anciently called philosophers; nevertheless we
have a few of them among us.

5. Persons who do: in modern language, called practical persons;
anciently, believers.

Of the first two classes I have only this to note,--that we ought
neither to say that a person sees, if he sees falsely, nor speaks, if he
speaks falsely. For seeing falsely is worse than blindness, and speaking
falsely, than silence. A man who is too dim-sighted to discern the road
from the ditch, may feel which is which;--but if the ditch appears
manifestly to him to be the road, and the road to be the ditch, what
shall become of him? False seeing is unseeing,--on the negative side of
blindness; and false speaking, unspeaking,--on the negative side of
silence.

To the persons who think, also, the same test applies very shrewdly.
Theirs is a dangerous profession; and from the time of the Aristophanes
thought-shop to the great German establishment, or thought-manufactory,
whose productions have, unhappily, taken in part the place of the older
and more serviceable commodities of Nuremberg toys and Berlin wool, it
has been often harmful enough to mankind. It should not be so, for a
false thought is more distinctly and visibly no thought than a false
saying is no saying. But it is touching the two great productive classes
of the doers and makers, that we have one or two important points to
note here.

§ 15. Has the reader ever considered, carefully, what is the meaning of
"doing" a thing?

Suppose a rock falls from a hill-side, crushes a group of cottages, and
kills a number of people. The stone has produced a great effect in the
world. If any one asks, respecting the broken roofs, "What did it?" you
say the stone did it. Yet you don't talk of the deed of the stone. If
you inquire farther, and find that a goat had been feeding beside the
rock, and had loosened it by gnawing the roots of the grasses beneath,
you find the goat to be the active cause of the calamity, and you say
the goat did it. Yet you don't call the goat the doer, nor talk of its
evil deed. But if you find any one went up to the rock, in the night,
and with deliberate purpose loosened it, that it might fall on the
cottages, you say in quite a different sense, "It is his deed: he is the
doer of it."

§ 16. It appears, then, that deliberate purpose and resolve are needed
to constitute a deed or doing, in the true sense of the word; and that
when, accidentally or mechanically, events take place without such
purpose, we have indeed effects or results, and agents or causes, but
neither deeds nor doers.

Now it so happens, as we all well know, that by far the largest part of
things happening in practical life _are_ brought about with no
deliberate purpose. There are always a number of people who have the
nature of stones; they fall on other persons and crush them. Some again
have the nature of weeds, and twist about other people's feet and
entangle them. More have the nature of logs, and lie in the way, so that
every one falls over them. And most of all have the nature of thorns,
and set themselves by waysides, so that every passer-by must be torn,
and all good seed choked; or perhaps make wonderful crackling under
various pots, even to the extent of practically boiling water and
working pistons. All these people produce immense and sorrowful effect
in the world. Yet none of them are doers: it is their nature to crush,
impede, and prick: but deed is not in them.[4]

§ 17. And farther, observe, that even when some effect is finally
intended, you cannot call it the person's deed, unless it is _what_ he
intended.

If an ignorant person, purposing evil, accidentally does good, (as if a
thief's disturbing a family should lead them to discover in time that
their house was on fire); or _vice versâ_, if an ignorant person
intending good, accidentally does evil (as if a child should give
hemlock to his companions for celery), in neither case do you call them
the doers of what may result. So that in order to be a true deed, it is
necessary that the effect of it should be foreseen. Which, ultimately,
it cannot be, but by a person who knows, and in his deed obeys, the laws
of the universe, and of its Maker. And this knowledge is in its highest
form, respecting the will of the Ruling Spirit, called Trust. For it is
not the knowledge that a thing is, but that, according to the promise
and nature of the Ruling Spirit, a thing will be. Also obedience in its
highest form is not obedience to a constant and compulsory law, but a
persuaded or voluntary yielded obedience to an issued command; and so
far as it was a _persuaded_ submission to command, it was anciently
called, in a passive sense, "persuasion," or [Greek: pistis], and in so
far as it alone assuredly did, and it alone _could_ do, what it meant to
do, and was therefore the root and essence of all human deed, it was
called by the Latins the "doing," or _fides_, which has passed into the
French _foi_ and the English _faith_. And therefore because in His
doing always certain, and in His speaking always true, His name who
leads the armies of Heaven is "Faithful and True,"[5] and all deeds
which are done in alliance with those armies, be they small or great,
are essentially deeds of faith, which therefore, and in this one stern,
eternal, sense, subdues all kingdoms, and turns to flight the armies of
the aliens, and is at once the source and the substance of all human
deed, rightly so called.

§ 18. Thus far then of practical persons, once called believers, as set
forth in the last word of the noblest group of words ever, so far as I
know, uttered by simple man concerning his practice, being the final
testimony of the leaders of a great practical nation, whose deed
thenceforward became an example of deed to mankind:

  [Greek: Ô xein', angellein Lakedaimoniois, hoti têde Keimetha, tois
          keinôn rhêmasi peithomenoi.]

"O stranger! (we pray thee), tell the Lacedæmonians that we are lying
here, having _obeyed_ their words."

§ 19. What, let us ask next, is the ruling character of the person who
produces--the creator or maker, anciently called the poet?

We have seen what a deed is. What then is a "creation"? Nay, it may be
replied, to "create" cannot be said of man's labor.

On the contrary, it not only can be said, but is and must be said
continually. You certainly do not talk of creating a watch, or creating
a shoe; nevertheless you _do_ talk of creating a feeling. Why is this?

Look back to the greatest of all creation, that of the world. Suppose
the trees had been ever so well or so ingeniously put together, stem and
leaf, yet if they had not been able to grow, would they have been well
created? Or suppose the fish had been cut and stitched finely out of
skin and whalebone; yet, cast upon the waters, had not been able to
swim? Or suppose Adam and Eve had been made in the softest clay, ever so
neatly, and set at the foot of the tree of knowledge, fastened up to
it, quite unable to fall, or do anything else, would they have been well
created, or in any true sense created at all?

§ 20. It will, perhaps, appear to you, after a little farther thought,
that to create anything in reality is to put life into it.

A poet, or creator, is therefore a person who puts things together, not
as a watchmaker steel, or a shoemaker leather, but who puts life into
them.

His work is essentially this: it is the gathering and arranging of
material by imagination, so as to have in it at last the harmony or
helpfulness of life, and the passion or emotion of life. Mere fitting
and adjustment of material is nothing; that is watchmaking. But helpful
and passionate harmony, essentially choral harmony, so called from the
Greek word "rejoicing,"[6] is the harmony of Apollo and the Muses; the
word Muse and Mother being derived from the same root, meaning
"passionate seeking," or love, of which the issue is passionate finding,
or sacred INVENTION. For which reason I could not bear to use any baser
word than this of invention. And if the reader will think over all these
things, and follow them out, as I think he may easily with this much of
clue given him, he will not any more think it wrong in me to place
invention so high among the powers of man.[7]

Or any more think it strange that the last act of the life of
Socrates[8] should have been to purify himself from the sin of having
negligently listened to the voice within him, which, through all his
past life, had bid him "labor, and make harmony."


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The word composition has been so much abused, and is in itself so
    inexpressive, that when I wrote the first part of this work I
    intended always to use, in this final section of it, the word
    "invention," and to reserve the term "composition" for that false
    composition which can be taught on principles; as I have already so
    employed the term in the chapter on "Imagination Associative," in the
    second volume. But, in arranging this section, I find it is not
    conveniently possible to avoid the ordinary modes of parlance; I
    therefore only head the section as I intended (and as is, indeed,
    best), using in the text the ordinarily accepted term; only, the
    reader must be careful to note that what I spoke of shortly as
    "composition" in the chapters on "Imagination," I here always call,
    distinctly, "false composition;" using here, as I find most
    convenient, the words "invention" or "composition" indifferently for
    the true faculty.

  [2] "The cries of them which have reaped have entered into the ears
    of the Lord of Sabaoth (of all the creatures of the earth)." You will
    find a wonderful clearness come into many texts by reading,
    habitually, "helpful" and "helpfulness" for "holy" and "holiness," or
    else "living," as in Rom. xi. 16. The sense "dedicated" (the Latin
    _sanctus_), being, of course, inapplicable to the Supreme Being, is
    an entirely secondary and accidental one.

  [3] By diligent study of good compositions it is possible to put work
    together so that the parts shall help each other, a little, or at all
    events do no harm; and when some tact and taste are associated with
    this diligence, semblances of real invention are often produced,
    which, being the results of great labor, the artist is always proud
    of; and which, being capable of learned explanation and imitation,
    the spectator naturally takes interest in. The common precepts about
    composition all produce and teach this false kind, which, as true
    composition is the noblest, being the corruption of it, is the
    ignoblest condition of art.

  [4] We may, perhaps, expediently recollect as much of our botany as
    to teach us that there may be sharp and rough persons, like spines,
    who yet have good in them, and are essentially branches, and can bud.
    But the true thorny person is no spine, only an excrescence; rootless
    evermore,--leafless evermore. No crown made of such can ever meet
    glory of Angel's hand. (In Memoriam, lxviii.)

  [5] "True," means, etymologically, not "consistent with fact," but
    "which may be trusted." "This is a true saying, and worthy of all
    acceptation," &c., meaning a trusty saying,--a saying to be rested
    on, leant upon.

  [6] [Greek: Chorous te ônomakenai para tês charas emphyton onoma].
    (Dé leg. II. 1.)

  [7] This being, indeed, among the visiblest signs of the Divine or
    immortal life. We have got a base habit of opposing the word "mortal"
    or "deathful" merely to "_im_-mortal;" whereas it is essentially
    contrary to "divine" (to [Greek: theios], not to [Greek: athanatos],
    Phaedo, 66), that which is deathful being anarchic or disobedient,
    and that which is divine ruling and obedient; this being the true
    distinction between flesh and spirit.

  [8] [Greek: Pollakis moi phoitôn to auto enypnion en tô parelthonti
    biô, allot' en allê opsei phainomenon, ta auta de legon, Ô Sôkra tes,
    ephê, mousikên poiei kai ergazou]. (Phaedo, 11.)




