CHAPTER VII

THE ETHICAL IDEALS OF INDIA


PART I. THE ETHICS OF BRAHMANISM--A CLASS MORALITY


I. HISTORICAL AND SPECULATIVE BASIS OF THE SYSTEM


[Sidenote: The conception of the
First Cause--Brahma]

As in Judea so in India the conception formed of the Supreme Being
reacted potently upon morality. Hence in naming the influences under
which the moral ideal of Brahmanism was molded we must speak first of
the Indian conception of the First Cause.

The Aryan conquerors of India originally held notions of the gods in
general like those held by their kinsmen, the early Greeks and Romans.
When they entered India they were ancestor worshipers and polytheists.
They had earth gods and sky gods. The gods of the celestial phenomena
gradually acquired ascendancy. Then, as in Egypt, there came a tendency
toward unity. The various gods came to be looked upon by the loftier
minds as merely different manifestations of one primal being.[225]

It is right at this point that we find the great antithesis between
Indian modes of thought and those of all or almost all other peoples.
When the thinkers of Egypt, of the Semitic lands, of Persia, of Greece
and Rome, had at last through reflection evolved the lofty conception
of a single great First Cause, they endowed this cause with conscious
personal life. This mode of thought is our heritage from the past. It
is to us almost or quite impossible to conceive of conscious personal
life as springing from an unconscious impersonal cause. Hence we place
behind the manifold phenomena of the universe a conscious personal
being as the origin and source of all things and all life.[226]

It is wholly different with the thinkers of India. They seem to be able
to postulate as the beginning of things an impersonal cause, a cause
without perception, thought, or consciousness. They affirm that out of
unconsciousness consciousness arises. They teach that out of Brahma,
the unconscious, impersonal, passionless One, emanate all material
worlds and sentient beings, gods as well as men.

How profoundly this conception of the First Cause has reacted on the
ethical speculations of the Hindu sages and on the moral life of India
will appear a little further on.


[Sidenote: The god Brahma
(Brahman)]

But this incomprehensible, unconscious, passionless Brahma is not the
Brahma of the popular faith. The masses and even the philosophers
themselves must have something more concrete. So this impersonal,
neuter Brahma is conceived as giving existence to the personal,
masculine God Brahma (Brahman), “the progenitor of all worlds, the
first-born among beings.”[227]

It is very necessary for the student of Brahmanic ethics to keep in
mind the distinction between the uncreated, unconditioned, impersonal
Brahma and the created, conditioned, personal Brahma, since there
is here laid the foundation of a double goal for rational moral
striving: the goal of the ascetic whose ultimate aim is deliverance
from individual existence and absorption into the absolute,
unchangeable, impersonal Brahma, which means a state of eternal
unconsciousness--dreamless sleep; and the goal of the multitude, whose
hope and aim is blissful, though temporary, union with the personal
Brahma in the heaven of the mortal, conditioned gods.[228]


[Sidenote: The system of castes]

The ethical evolution in India was also profoundly influenced by a
prehistoric event, namely, the subjection of the original non-Aryan
population of the land by an intruding Aryan people. As a result of
the long and bitter struggle the two races became separated by a sharp
line of race prejudice and hatred. The dark-skinned natives were
reduced to a state of servitude or dependence upon their conquerors.
Intermarriages between the two races were strictly prohibited, and
thus the population of the conquered districts of the peninsula became
divided into two sharply defined classes. These constituted a model
upon which Indian society was framed. Other classes were formed, and
these gradually hardened into castes, that is, into classes between
which marriages were prohibited. Four great castes arose: namely,
priests or Brahmans, warriors and rulers, peasants and merchants, and
sudras. Below these castes were the pariahs, or outcasts, made up of
the most degraded of the natives. As time passed, still other divisions
were formed, every occupation coming to constitute the basis of a new
caste, till society was stratified like a geologic deposit.

Religion came in to consecrate this division of the people into
privileged and nonprivileged classes.[229] The sacred scriptures
declare that the Brahmans sprang from the mouth of Brahma, the
warriors from his arms, the peasants and traders from his thighs, and
the sudras from his feet.[230]

No institution known among men ever exercised a more fateful and
sinister influence upon morality than this caste system has exercised
upon the morality of the peoples of India. The rooted belief and dogma
of the natural inequality of men has made Brahmanic ethics a thing of
grades and classes, and has thus rendered impossible the evolution of
a true morality, which requires for its basis genuine sentiments of
equality and brotherhood.


[Sidenote: The doctrine of
transmigration]

We easily realize the importance for morality of a belief in a
life after death. But a belief in preëxistence may exert an even
greater influence upon the moral code of a people than a belief in
post-existence.[231] Now the morality of the Hindus has been molded
by both these doctrines, for according to the teachings of Brahmanism
a man has lived through many lives before his “birth,” and may wander
through “ten thousand millions of existences” after death has freed
him from his present body.[232] The class and the condition into which
he is born here on earth is believed to be determined by the sum total
of his merits or demerits earned in preceding existences. As a result
of sin he may in his next birth be reborn in a lower caste, or may be
imprisoned in some animal or vegetable form. He may pass a thousand
times through the bodies of spiders, snakes, and lizards, and hundreds
of times through the forms of grasses, shrubs, and creepers. And all
this experience may come after the soul has passed through dreadful and
innumerable hells for vast cycles of years.[233]

This transmigration theory was framed by the thinkers of India to
explain among other things the seemingly unjust inequalities of human
life.[234] It afforded an explanation why one man should be born a
Brahman and another a sudra, one born in a hovel and another in a
palace, by conceiving the place of every person born into the world as
being determined by the manner of his life in former existences.[235]

It is unnecessary to dwell upon the profound influence which this
doctrine of transmigration, or round of births, has exerted upon
the moral life of India. The tendency of this theory, as soon as
elaborated, was to render still more intolerable the position of the
lower castes, particularly that of the sudras, since it made their low
place and hard lot to be the merited punishment of crimes and misdoings
in previous lives; while at the same time it fed the pride and enhanced
the arrogance of the Brahmans, since their superior lot was, according
to the theory, attributable to merit acquired in other existences. Thus
did the theory tend to give a more sinister aspect to the baneful caste
system, to make it appear a part of the unchangeable order of things,
and to render impossible the growth of any other than a class morality.


[Sidenote: Indian pessimism]

Hardly less important than the doctrine of transmigration for Hindu
morality is the Indian conception of life--of all individual, conscious
existence whether here on earth or in other worlds--as inseparable from
misery, pain, decay, and death.

The Aryan immigrants into India seem to have been, like their kinsmen
the Greeks, a light-hearted folk, filled with a strong joy in life.
But as in their journeyings they pressed southward into the valleys
of the Indus and the Ganges and came under the influences of the
hot, depressing climate, and of an oppressive social and political
system,[236] they appeared to have lost their buoyant spirits. The
skies seemed less bright and life less worth living, and, weary of it
all, they at last came to regard eternal death, annihilation, as the
greatest of boons.

This pessimistic view of the world and of life, as we shall see a
little further on, forms the basis of large sections of Indian ethics,
since it makes the ultimate goal of rational or moral effort to be the
getting rid of conscious existence.


[Sidenote: The conception of
sacrifice]

Another conception which has exerted a profound influence upon the
religious ethics of Brahmanism is that respecting sacrifice. This
conception is that the gods need sustenance, and can only exist through
the gifts and offerings made to them by men.[237] “The gods live by
sacrifice” say the sacred scriptures; “the sun would not rise if the
priests did not make sacrifice.”

To understand this teaching we must connect it with the belief of
primitive man that the spirits of the dead have absolute need of meat
and drink offerings at the hands of the living, and remember that in
India there is no sharp distinction drawn between the gods and the
souls of men. The gods, like the spirits of the dead, are dependent
for life and strength upon the offerings laid on their altars. Without
these gifts they would die or pine away, and all the movements of the
universe controlled by them would cease.[238]

From this conception of the gods came the emphasis laid by Brahmanism
upon sacrifice, and the prominence given the religious duty of bringing
rich gifts to the priests and keeping the altars of the gods heaped
with food.[239]


II. THE VARIOUS MORAL STANDARDS


[Sidenote: A class morality]

The fundamental fact of Brahmanic morality is that as a result of the
caste system it is a class morality; that is, there is a different
moral standard or code for each of the different castes.

In the account given in the _Laws of Manu_ of the origin of the
four chief castes, the occupation and the duties of each class are
carefully prescribed. To the Brahman was assigned teaching and offering
sacrifice; to the warriors and rulers the protection of the people;
to the peasants and merchants the tilling of the ground and trading;
and to the sudras--“One occupation only,” reads the sacred law, “is
prescribed to the sudra, to serve meekly the other three castes.”[240]

The Brahman is by right the lord of the whole creation.[241] His name
must express something auspicious, but the first part of the sudra’s
name must express something contemptible, and the second part must be a
word denoting service.[242]

For a man of a lower caste to affect equality with a person of a higher
caste is a crime: “If a man of an inferior caste, proudly affecting an
equality with a man of superior caste, should travel by his side on the
road, or sit or sleep upon the same carpet with him, the magistrate
shall take a fine from the man of inferior caste to the extent of his
ability.”[243]

For a Brahman to explain to a sudra the sacred Vedas is a sin: “Let him
[the Brahman] not give to a sudra advice nor the remnants of his meal
...; nor let him explain the sacred law to such a man; ... for he who
explains the sacred law to such ... will sink together with that man
into hell.”[244]

In the matter of punishments for crimes the laws are grossly unequal,
the punishment of a person of inferior caste being always more severe
than that of a person of a superior caste for the same offense.
Thus for a crime punishable with death if committed by a person
of an inferior caste, tonsure only is ordained if committed by a
Brahman;[245] for a Brahman must never be slain, “though he have
committed all horrible crimes.”[246] There is no crime in all the world
as great as that of slaying a Brahman.[247]

A knowledge of the inequality of these sacred laws of the Brahmans and
the burdensomeness of this caste morality as it pressed upon the lower
classes is necessary to an understanding of the rise and rapid spread
of Buddhism, and the fervor with which its teachings of equality and
brotherhood were embraced by the masses of Brahmanic India.


[Sidenote: The highest moral
excellence attainable in general
only by Brahmans]

Of the different standards of morality of the several castes that of
the Brahman is of course the highest. The study of the sacred books is
for him the chief duty. “Let him,” says the sacred law, “without tiring
daily mutter the Veda at the proper time; for that is one’s highest
duty; all other observances are secondary duties.”[248] Knowledge
of the Veda destroys guilt as fire consumes fuel.[249] Among the
secondary duties are observance of the rules of purification, the
practice of austerities, and doing no injury to created beings.[250]

By austerities, that is, by ascetic practices, by hideous self-torture,
the Brahman may atone for all sins of whatsoever kind and may become
so holy that at death, having conquered all desires, save only the
desire for union with the Universal One, he may hope to fall away
into unawakening unconsciousness and be absorbed into the absolute,
impersonal Brahma, and thus escape forever from the weary round of
births. This way of full salvation, and it is the only one, is open
only to Brahmans and to the chosen few from other castes who, having
gone forth “from home into homelessness,” as mendicants or forest
hermits, follow this life of complete renunciation of all that is
earthly.


[Sidenote: The moral code for
inferior castes]

The duties, the faithful performance of which avail most for persons of
inferior castes, are those that have to do with religion, and chiefly
with sacrifice. These duties are the bringing of gifts and offerings
for the sacrifices and the giving of generous fees to the priests.
Through the faithful performance of his assigned duties the man of
inferior caste can make sure of salvation--not the full and perfect
salvation attained by the Brahman through his austerities, but a
qualified salvation. He may hope for rebirth in some higher caste or in
some better state either on earth or in some other world.[251]


[Sidenote: Animal ethics]

Duty to animals seems to have formed no part of the moral code of the
early Indian Aryans. But chiefly through the influence of the doctrine
of transmigration respect for every living thing became a high moral
requirement. To take life wantonly became a crime. To kill a kine, a
horse, a camel, a deer, an elephant, a goat, a sheep, a fish, a snake,
a buffalo, insects, or birds is an offense which must be expiated by
penances.[252]

In order that he may not harm any living creature, the ascetic is
enjoined “always by day and by night, even with pain to his body, to
walk carefully, scanning the ground.”[253] Should he unintentionally
injure any creature he must expiate its death by penitent
austerities.[254]

Animals may, however, be slain for food[255] and for sacrifices,
since they were created for these special purposes. And then there is
compensation for the victims of the altars: “Herbs, trees, cattle,
birds, and all animals that have been destroyed for sacrifices receive,
being reborn, higher existences.”[256]

The killing of animals for sport is an inexpiable sin: “He who injures
innoxious beings from a wish to (give) himself pleasure never finds
happiness, neither living nor dead.”[257]

Under the influence of Buddhism we shall see this consideration for
animal life deepening into a genuine tenderness for every living
creature, and duties toward the inferior animals becoming one of the
most beautiful and characteristic features of the ethical ideal.


[Sidenote: War ethics]

In Brahmanic as in Confucian ethics the military virtues are assigned
a low place. Brahmanism, however, concedes the legitimacy of war
and permits the employment of force by the king in augmenting his
possessions,[258] even enjoining upon him to be ever ready to strike;
for “of him who is always ready to strike, the whole world stands in
awe.”[259]

But the genuine spirit of Brahmanism is opposed to the fierce war
spirit of the Aryan conquerors of India, and the sacred law attempts
to ameliorate the cruelties and atrocities of primeval warfare,
instilling in the warrior a spirit of magnanimity and chivalry. Thus
the “blameless law for the warrior” forbids to him the use of barbed or
poisoned weapons; he must spare the suppliant for mercy; he must not
strike an enemy who has lost his armor or whose weapons are broken,
or who has received a wound, or who has turned in flight. He must do
no harm to the onlooker. The king must conduct war without guile or
treachery.[260]


[Sidenote: Natural morality versus
ritualism]

At the heart of Brahmanism, as at the heart of every other great
religion of the world, there is a core of lofty spiritual teachings and
true morality. The sacred scriptures of the Brahmans declare, “The soul
itself is the witness of the soul, and the soul is the refuge of the
soul; despise not thy own soul, the supreme witness of men.”[261]

The sacred law teaches that he is pure who is pure in thought and in
deed: “Among all modes of purification, purity in (the acquisition of)
wealth is declared to be the best; for he is pure who gains wealth with
clean hands, not he who purifies himself with earth and water.”[262]

Repentance and resolutions of amendment free the soul from its
transgressions: “He who has committed a sin and has repented, is freed
from that sin, but he is purified only by the resolution of ceasing to
sin and thinking I will do so no more.”[263]

Brahmanism teaches the duty of forgiving injuries and of returning
blessings for curses: “Against an angry man let him [the ascetic] not
in return show anger; let him bless when he is cursed.”[264] “A king
must always forgive litigants, infants, aged and sick men, who inveigh
against him.”[265] “He who, being abused by men in pain, pardons them,
will in reward of that act be exalted in heaven.”[266]

Here is a morality as pure and lofty as any taught by Hebrew prophets.
But as in Judaism, so in Brahmanism, such was the stress laid by the
priests upon sacrifice, upon the observance of the rites and ceremonies
of the temple, and upon the performance of a thousand and one morally
indifferent acts, that as time passed there resulted an almost complete
overshadowing of natural by ritual morality. It was such a triumph of
ritualism as marked the postexilic period in the history of Israel. As
there came a protest and reaction in Judea issuing in Christianity, so
did there come a protest and reaction in Brahmanic India issuing in
Buddhism.


