CHAPTER III

THE MORAL LIFE IN ANCIENT EGYPT: AN IDEAL OF SOCIAL JUSTICE


I. CIRCUMSTANCES AND IDEAS WHICH MOLDED AND MOTIVED MORALITY


[Sidenote: A homogeneous
population and a comparatively
static civilization]

Egypt was the China of the ancient Mediterranean world. Like the
Chinese, the Egyptians were a comparatively unmixed people. During the
historic period no new elements of importance were incorporated with
the native population. Again, like the civilization of China, that
of Egypt throughout a great part of the historic age was singularly
static. After having made wonderful advance in early times the
Egyptians ceased to make further noteworthy progress.

Both these fundamental facts of Egyptian history had great significance
for Egyptian morals; for since when races mingle their blood they
mingle also their moralities, it is a matter of supreme importance
to the moral life of a people whether on the one hand it has, as the
centuries have passed, undergone a change in physical type through
the incorporation of new racial elements, or on the other hand has
preserved unchanged its racial type and physical characteristics.

Equally important for the moral ideal is it whether the civilization
of which it forms one element is progressive or unprogressive; for
changes in the moral standard are largely dependent on changes in the
other elements of civilization. Where the intellectual life and the
religious ideas remain unmodified, and where all political, social,
and industrial institutions remain essentially unchanged, we need not
look for fundamental changes in ethical ideas and convictions. How
the history of conscience in ancient Egypt illustrates these truths we
shall see a little further on.


[Sidenote: The teaching that
immortality is conditioned on
righteousness]

We have seen how potent an influence the notion of a life beyond the
tomb exercised upon the conduct of the members of the primitive kinship
group, giving birth to some of the noblest virtues of their simple code
of morals. Now this idea of continued existence after death dominated
the life of no other civilized people of antiquity so completely as it
dominated the life of the Egyptians; and probably in the case of no
other people ancient or modern has the belief exerted so profound an
influence upon conduct. This was so for the reason that the conception
was here early moralized and represented the blessed life in the
hereafter as dependent upon rightdoing in the present life. No soul
that had done evil was admitted to the bark of the ferryman at the
Egyptian Styx. In this discrimination we find “the earliest traces in
the history of man of an ethical test at the close of life.”[69]


[Sidenote: The ethical qualities
of the sun-god Ra]

It is the sun-god Ra who in the remotest times is most intimately
associated with these moral requirements for participation in the
felicities of the celestial hereafter. The latest reading and analysis
of the texts of the Pyramid Age has thrown new light upon the relations
of the rival divinities Ra and Osiris to the development of the moral
consciousness in ancient Egypt. In his latest work Professor Breasted
says: “The later rapid growth of ethical teaching in the Osiris
faith and the assumption of the rôle of judge by Osiris is not yet
discernible in the Pyramid Age, and the development which made these
elements so prominent in the Middle Kingdom took place in the obscure
period after the development of the Pyramid Age. Contrary to the
conclusions generally accepted at present, it was the sun-god ... who
was the earliest champion of moral worthiness and the great judge in
the hereafter.”[70]

The conception of Ra as the righteous judge, as the father and
protector of the reigning Pharaoh, and as the guardian divinity of
the Egyptian state, influenced profoundly the moral development in
prefeudal Egypt, and was seemingly the inspiration of the great social
reform movement which marked the history of the Eleventh and Twelfth
Dynasties. In the words of Professor Breasted, “The moral obligations
emerging in the Solar theology thus wrought the earliest social
regeneration and won the earliest battle for social justice of which we
know anything in history.”[71]


[Sidenote: Religious dualism]

In our introductory chapter we spoke of the influence of physical
environment upon the moral life of a people. The history of the
formation of the ethical type of ancient Egypt affords an excellent
illustration of this; for it was probably out of the striking physical
dualism of the Egyptian lands--the antagonism between the life-giving
Nile and the ever-encroaching desert--that grew Egyptian religious
dualism, embodied in the myth of the struggle between Osiris and
Set.[72] At first the tale was a pure nature myth reflecting simply the
conflict between two physical elements; but as the moral consciousness
of the people who recited the story deepened, there was gradually read
into it an ethical meaning. The conflict was now conceived as a mighty
struggle between the powers of good and evil, between the beneficent
Osiris (and his son and avenger, Horus) and the malignant Set.[73]

This world philosophy reacted powerfully upon Egyptian morality,
keeping as it did in the foreground of the moral consciousness the
truth that the moral life is a battle against evil. “The triumph of
right over wrong ... is the burden of nine tenths of the Egyptian texts
which have come down to us.”[74]


[Sidenote: The Osirian myth in its
special development]

Acted upon by the moral feelings, the Osirian myth underwent a special
development. It came to represent not simply the eternal opposition
between good and evil, but the whole moral order of the present and
the future world. It told of the beneficent life of Osiris as king of
Egypt, his death and resurrection, and of his office as king and judge
in the realms of the dead.

After having been given this rich moral content, the myth reacted
powerfully upon the moral consciousness and became a chief agency in
the formation of the moral character of the Egyptian race. Osiris, as
reflected in the Osirian myth, became the incarnation of the ethical
ideal. It is a great advantage to morality when the ideal of goodness
is thus embodied in a divine exemplar. Osiris held some such relation
to the moral life of ancient Egypt as Christ holds to the moral life of
the Christian world.


II. THE IDEAL


[Sidenote: A homogeneous and
unchanging conscience]

By the dawn of history there had been developed in ancient Egypt
an enlightened and discriminating conscience.[75] There are two
aspects of this conscience which we need to note. First, it was a
comparatively homogeneous conscience; that is, the morality of the
ancient Egyptians was not a mixture of moralities like that of the
modern European nations whose morality is a blend of the moralities
of different races--Greek, Roman, Celtic, and Teutonic; of different
religions--pagan and Christian; and of different civilizations--Greek,
Latin, Celtic, and German.

Second, it was a comparatively unchanging conscience. The moral
consciousness which we find in pre-Christian Roman Egypt is
fundamentally the same as that which emerged in the Pyramid Age more
than three thousand years before. During this long period the Egyptian
conscience, although it gained in depth and sensitiveness as the
millenniums passed, underwent less change in its essential qualities
than the moral consciousness underwent in less than ten centuries in
all the other great nations, save China, of the ancient world.


[Sidenote: Evidences of moral
progress during early times]

But though the moral development, like the development of all other
phases of Egyptian civilization, was early checked and thereafter made
but slow progress, the essential refinement and clarification of the
moral sense during prehistoric times, or in the obscure period of the
earliest dynasties, is shown by various testimonies, as, for instance,
in the moralization of the Osirian myth, to which we have already
referred, in the abandonment of the practice of human sacrifices at
the tomb, and in the transition, concerning the conception of the life
after death, from the continuance to the retribution theory.


[Sidenote: Substitution of
ka-statues for human sacrifices]

The early Egyptians, after the manner of savages, killed and buried
with the dead master a number of his slaves, that their souls
might attend him in the spirit land. But after a time the growing
humanitarian and ethical feelings of the Egyptians forbade human
sacrifices, and then merely the portrait-statues of the slaves were
placed in the tomb.[76] These, it was thought,--in consonance with the
belief which led to the substitution of pictures or of clay and wood
models for the real articles at first buried with the dead,--would take
the place of the actual bodies of the servants.

But as time passed, the deepening moral feelings of the Egyptians would
not permit them to do even this thing. It did not now seem right to
them that because a man was a slave in the earthly Egypt he should be
a slave forever in the Osirian fields.[77] So they ceased to place in
the tomb of the master these portrait-statues of his servants, and in
their stead put in statuettes of nobody in particular. The doubles of
these, it was conceived, would appear as newly created souls in the
underworld, and, being indebted for life itself to the master of the
tomb, would, it was naïvely assumed, gratefully labor for him through
all eternity.[78]

The history of the ka-statues, as these substitutes are called, thus
bears testimony similar to that of the Osirian myth as to the upward
trend of ethical thought and humanitarian feeling in prehistoric
Egypt.[79]


[Sidenote: Transition from the
continuance to the retribution
theory]

Still further evidence of the advance on moral lines in early Egypt is
afforded by the character of the belief held by the Egyptians at the
beginning of the second millennium B.C. and perhaps earlier respecting
the fate of souls in the world beyond the tomb. To understand this we
need to cast our glance a little aside and observe how the world of
shades, in its social and ethical classifications, has ever been a
register of the changing moral feelings of men. As Oscar Peschel finely
says, “The other world has ever answered to this as spectrum to the
source of light.”

Edward B. Tylor happily names the two chief theories which have
been held in regard to the state of souls in the hereafter as the
continuance and the retribution theory. The first theory is that of
primitive man while his moral sense is yet undeveloped. According to
this theory the same fate is allotted to all who go down to death.
There is no such thing as rewards and punishments. This is the
conception of the after-life which is held by all races on the lower
levels of culture, and it is a view which often lingers on as a
survival among peoples far advanced in civilization. But as the moral
judgment becomes more discriminating, then this view of the other
world is very certain to undergo a change. The quickened sense of
justice demands that the allotments after death shall be in accordance
with merit and demerit. This ethical feeling gradually transforms
the topography of the underworld and organizes the as yet undivided
community of shades. The hitherto common abode of the dead is usually
divided into two distinct compartments or regions, heaven and hell,
and souls are separated, according to their deeds on earth, into two
classes, the good and the bad, those to be welcomed to the abode of
the blessed and these consigned to the place of torment. Sometimes,
however, the lot conceived for the wicked is simply annihilation.

The incoming of this theory of rewards and punishments after death
constitutes a great landmark in the moral evolution of mankind. In the
words of Tylor, this transition from the continuance to the retribution
theory “for deep import to human life has scarcely its rival in the
history of religion.”[80] The sanctions of morality are doubled.

Now in ancient Egypt by the beginning of the second millennium B.C. the
transition from the continuance to the retribution theory had already
been effected, as will appear in the following account of the Egyptian
Judgment of the Dead. Thus here, as in the change of practices at the
tomb, we have indisputable evidence of the progress of moral ideas in
early Egypt.


[Sidenote: The Judgment of the
Dead]

The Judgment of the Dead was the trial which every soul had to undergo
before Osiris and his forty-two assessors in the great tribunal hall of
the underworld. The astonishing thing about this tribunal, as we have
just intimated, is that at a time when the oldest monuments raised in
Egypt were yet recent this whole conception of the moral order in all
its details was already fully matured.[81] Osiris had been raised to
the judgment seat in the other world, and the moral standard in some
departments of life, particularly in the relations of man to man in the
everyday social and business spheres, was as high and true as is the
standard in many of the civilized nations of to-day. This admirable
code of social morals points unmistakably to long periods of organized
society and moral training in prefeudal Egypt.


[Sidenote: The Negative Confession]

This early standard of goodness is embodied in the so-called Negative
Confession, in which the soul before the Osirian tribunal pleaded his
innocence of the forty-two sins condemned by the Egyptian code of
morality. This confession, previous to the discovery of the Babylonian
code of Hammurabi, constituted the oldest known code of morality of the
ancient world. These are some of the declarations of the soul: “I did
not steal”; “I did not get any man treacherously killed”; “I did not
utter any lie”;[82] “I did not make any one weep”; “I did not kill any
sacred animals”; “I did not damage any cultivated land”; “I was angry
only when there was reason [for being angry]”; “I did not turn a deaf
ear to the words of truth”; “I did not commit any act of rebellion”;
“I did not do any witchcraft”; “I did not blaspheme a god”; “I did not
make the slave to be misused by his master”; “I was not imperious”; “I
did not strip the mummies of their stuff.”[83]

After this confession to the forty-two assessors in the hall of
judgment, the soul made the following affirmative declaration, which
makes a singularly close approach to Christian morality: “I gave bread
to the hungry, water to the thirsty, garments to the naked, a bark to
the one who was without one [that is, a boat to the detained traveler],
offerings to the gods, and funeral conservations to the shades.”[84]

After this confession and declaration the heart of the man was placed
in one scale of a balance and the image of Truth in the other. If
the heart was not found wanting, but weighed just equal to the
image, Osiris pronounced the soul justified, and it was welcomed to
the company of the blessed. The punishment meted out to the soul
found lacking seems to have been of a negative nature--a denial of
immortality.[85]


[Sidenote: Comparison of the
morality of the Negative
Confession with that of the Hebrew
Decalogue and other codes]

It is instructive to compare this ancient code, both in its contents
and in its omissions, with the moral codes of other peoples and other
ages. The similarity of the morality of the Negative Confession to that
of the Hebrew Decalogue forces itself at once upon the attention.[86]
The Egyptian code, however, lays less emphasis than the Hebrew upon
religious duties. In the forty-two duties named only seven are duties
toward the gods, while of the Ten Commandments five concern religious
duties. As we have already observed, the duties of the Egyptian code
are those due from man to man; that is, they are social as opposed to
religious duties.

In striking contrast to the Confucian code of the Chinese, the
Egyptian code gives very little place to the duties of children to
their parents. These duties are noticed, it is true, by the Egyptian
moralists, but no emphasis is laid upon them. They are mentioned only
once in the Negative Confession before Osiris. As the stress laid
by Chinese moralists upon filial piety came about largely through
the supposed need of the spirits of the dead for regular offerings
at the grave, so it may be that the neglect of this virtue by the
Egyptian teachers is to be explained, as Flinders Petrie suggests,
by the circumstance that “the provision of offerings in semblance by
the Egyptians in the tomb left little place for the urgency of filial
duties in maintaining continual supplies for the deceased.”[87]

Another defect of Egyptian morality is its lack of depth and
seriousness. There is no hungering and thirsting after righteousness,
no passionate yearning for holiness. There is no call to lofty
self-sacrifice. It is a calm, prudent, worldly-wise, practical
morality. Its spirit and temper are well set forth by Petrie when, in
speaking of its virtues and vices, he says that “these belong far more
to the tone of Chesterfield and Gibbon than to that of Kingsley and
Carlyle.”[88]

But in spite of the limitations and defects of the code, it was one
of the purest and loftiest framed by the moral consciousness of the
races of antiquity. The Negative Confession shows that Egypt had early
learned the lesson that blessedness in the hereafter is conditioned on
the practice of justice, truth, and righteousness in the present life
on earth.[89]


[Sidenote: The moral precepts of
Ptah-hotep; an ethical conception
of kinship]

After the Negative Confession the most valuable memorial of the
character of the Egyptian conscience is found in the precepts of the
moralist Ptah-hotep,[90] who lived probably in the time of the Twelfth
Dynasty. This moralist laid particular emphasis upon the duties of
rulers and of the rich and great. His maxims are intended as a sort
of “Manual of the Perfect Official.” “If, having been of no account,
thou hast become great, and if, having been poor, thou hast become
rich, and if thou hast become governor of the city, be not hard-hearted
on account of thy advancement, because thou hast become merely the
guardian of the things which God has provided.”[91] In like words
emphasis is laid upon the duties of gentleness and considerateness on
the part of the administrator and the judge. In truth the doctrine
of trusteeship of wealth and of office has never been more zealously
taught than in these precepts of the early Egyptian moralist.[92]

The teachings of Ptah-hotep respecting the duties of rulers would seem
to have made effective appeal to the heart and conscience of even
the holders of the royal office. In any event we find these lofty
conceptions of the duties of kingship incarnated in the lives and
deeds of several of the Pharaohs of the Old Kingdom. The view held by
these monarchs respecting the nature of the royal office was almost
exactly like that entertained by the so-called benevolent despots of
the eighteenth century of our era. The inscriptions on the royal
tomb boast not alone of exploits and triumphs in war, but the prince
vaunts himself for having put no ward in mourning, for having made
no distinction between the great and the humble, for having been the
protector of the widow and the asylum of the orphan, and for having
laid no unjust taxes.[93]


[Sidenote: Slavery approved by the
Egyptian conscience]

The Egyptian conscience, like the conscience of the ancient world in
general, did not condemn the institution of slavery. The relation of
master and slave was looked upon by the Egyptians as perfectly natural
and legitimate.

The slave class, which included both whites and blacks, was recruited
not only from the prisoners of war brought back by the Pharaohs from
their numerous foreign conquests, but also from captives secured on
regular man-hunting expeditions into the negro regions of the Upper
Nile.

The treatment of the slave was usually mild, and the development of
the moral feelings had already in early times placed him under the
protection of the gods. Thus in the judgment hall of Osiris the soul
repudiates the sin of oppression by affirming, “I did not cause the
slave to be misused by his master.”[94]

Respecting the moral side, in general, of the slave system of
antiquity, which we encounter now for the first time here among the
Egyptians, the following observation may be made. If we except the
Hebrews, we shall not find among the peoples of the ancient world
whose ethical standards we shall pass in review any fundamental change
throughout their history in the common conscience regarding the
rightfulness of slavery. Indeed any radical and permanent change in
the moral feelings of men on this subject was hardly possible till
after the incoming of Christianity with its teachings of a common
Father-God and the brotherhood of man.


[Sidenote: The ethics of war]

One of the most striking phenomena of the moral evolution of mankind is
the unequal rate of movement on different lines. Thus while morality
has made great progress in some departments of life, in the domain of
war it has remained comparatively stationary from the dawn of history
down almost to the present day. The war code of the modern nations,
notwithstanding improvements and ameliorations to which our attention
will be drawn later in our study, is still in large part an unchanged
heritage from the ages of primitive savagery.

Bearing this in mind, it will not be a matter of surprise to us that
the laws of war of the Egyptians showed little advance the practices of
the negro savages of Africa; indeed it seems probable that this part of
the moral code of Egypt was actually of African origin.[95] There is
not a word in Egyptian literature in reprobation of war.[96]

While in their relations to their own people the Pharaohs observed a
comparatively enlightened code of ethics, being in general humane,
considerate, and clement, still in their treatment of the vanquished
they seem to have been wholly insensible to all humanitarian feelings.
Like the Assyrian kings they “immortalized their cruelty in their art.”
Numerous scenes upon the monuments celebrate the Pharaoh’s inhumanity;
not one celebrates his compassion or mercy. He is constantly
represented in the act of slaying in heaps with his own hands his bound
and suppliant captives.[97]


[Sidenote: Influence of the moral
ideal upon Egyptian life and
history]

Taken altogether, the moral standard of ancient Egypt, as disclosed in
the foregoing brief account of what the Egyptian conscience condemned
and what it approved, was not a high one, but it was, in so far as
it concerned the everyday life of the people, wholly practical, and
probably was as well lived up to by the masses as our higher ideal of
character is lived up to by ourselves. We have a right to infer this
from the persistence of Egyptian institutions through two thirds of
the historic millenniums; for no nation or society can long endure
where the relations of man to man and of subject to ruler are not in
substantial agreement with the real convictions of the age as to what
constitutes essential justice and righteousness.

The moral standard of the Egyptians has been compared to that of the
Romans after it had felt the influence of Stoicism and Christianity.
Like the Roman ideal of excellence at its best, the Egyptian ideal
tended to develop a strong and manly type of character, particularly
in the ruling class. We think it not an illusion which causes us to
see the influence of the ideal in the face of Rameses the Great. This
face bears the stamp of strength, resolution, indomitable energy. We
may believe that it was the moral ideal which had something to do in
creating such a type of character as we see here, just as it was the
primitive Roman ideal which helped to create that admirable type of
character which lives in the legends of early Rome.

Further, the moral ideal tended to ameliorate the autocratic government
of the Pharaohs by holding constantly before the ruler the example of
the righteous and beneficent king-gods Ra and Osiris. The influence of
the ideal in this relation may be likened to the influence of the moral
ideal of Christianity upon the government of the later Cæsars.

Again, the practical moral ideal of Egypt, laying its emphasis upon the
fundamental social virtues, helped to establish and maintain relations
of justice and equity between man and man, and thus contributed to the
general well-being of Egyptian society and to the stability of Egyptian
institutions.

Nor was the influence of the moral ideal of Egypt confined to the
Egyptian land. For, as Amélineau truly says, the wonderful edifice of
morality is the collective work of all peoples and all ages.[98] In the
uprearing of this edifice Egypt played a great rôle. Her contributions
to the morality of the first nations were as helpful, we may believe,
as were those she made to the other domains--material, artistic, and
intellectual--of the civilization of the early world.

Later she made a rich bequest to European morality, a bequest only less
important perhaps than that made by Judea. Her ideas of the future
life, her meditations on death and the final judgment, reënforced the
teachings of Christianity and thus contributed to create that deep
conviction of a life hereafter and a coming retribution which for
eighteen hundred years and more has furnished sanction and stimulus
to the moral life of Christendom.[99] It is not without significance
that Christian monasticism, with all its otherworldliness, had its
beginnings in Egypt. “The first Christian monk [Pachomius] had been a
pagan monk of Serapis.”[100]




