CHAPTER VI

JAPANESE MORALS: AN IDEAL OF LOYALTY


I. FORMATIVE AND MODIFYING INFLUENCES


[Sidenote: Introductory: a
practically independent evolution
in morals]

In their moral evolution the Japanese people have developed a system
of morals which, notwithstanding certain defects and limitations, is
one of the noblest created by any of the great races. A study of this
system is especially interesting and instructive for the reason that it
shows how a very admirable moral ideal may be created by a people in
comparative isolation and under influences wholly different from those
which have shaped and molded our own ideal of moral goodness. This
compels a recognition of the fact that the historian of morals can no
longer overlook or ignore the moral phenomena of the Far East.

A second reason that a study of the Japanese code of morals is
important and interesting is because this ideal of worthiness and duty
has been indubitably a main factor in lifting the Japanese nation to
the high place it holds to-day among the great nations of the earth.

In our examination of this system of morality we must first note the
nature of the agencies which lent to the moral ideal its characteristic
cast. Among the various forces molding and modifying the ethical type
we shall find the most important to have been the family and clan
system, ancestor worship, the monarchy of supposed divine origin,
feudalism, Confucianism, Buddhism, and Western civilization.


[Sidenote: The family and clan
system]

As in China, so in Old Japan the family rather than the individual
was the social unit. Through the expansion of the family arose the
clan, which in the sentiments and feelings which governed its members
was simply a large patriarchal household. This organization of early
Japanese society, with the family and its outgrowth, the clan, forming
the basis of the fabric, was, as we shall learn, a potent force in the
creation of the moral type of the nation. The relationships of the
kinship group determined the duties and virtues of its members and
constituted the chief sphere of their moral activity. Here was the
nursery of Japanese morality.


[Sidenote: Shinto, or ancestor
worship]

The influence of religion has mingled with that of the family
sentiment. Throughout all the past the vital religious element in the
life of the Japanese peoples has been the Shinto cult, and this is now
the established religion of the state. The system in its essence is
ancestor and hero worship, the spirits of the dead being revered as
guardian divinities. This cult has created moral feelings and family
duties like those called into existence by the same cult in China.
Out of these rudimentary family virtues, as from a central root, have
sprung many of those virtues of wider relationships which have helped
to give to the Japanese type of moral excellence its essential features.


[Sidenote: The monarchy of divine
origin]

The central teaching of Shinto is that the Emperor is of divine descent
and that his person is sacred and inviolate.[191] This doctrine of the
divine nature of the monarchy[192] has exerted a profound influence
upon the moral ideal of Japan and has had consequences of great moment.
It has made unquestioning obedience and absolute loyalty to the Emperor
the religious duties and preëminent virtues of the subject.


[Sidenote: Feudalism]

In times preceding the twelfth century there grew up in Japan a feudal
system which in many respects was remarkably like the feudal system of
medieval Europe. The unit of the system was the clan, the members of
which, forming a close brotherhood, were bound to their lord by ties of
affection and fidelity like those which in Europe theoretically bound
the retainer to his lord.[193] This system exerted a great influence
upon the moral type. It developed a martial ideal of character known
as Bushido, many of the virtues of which are almost identical with
corresponding virtues in the European ideal of chivalry. Probably this
system has had more to do with creating in Japan a moral consciousness
in many respects like our own than has any other single agency. To the
lack in the Chinese social system of any institution like Japanese
feudalism may be ascribed in part at least the wide difference which
exists between the moral ideals of the two peoples, especially in
regard to the rank assigned the military virtues.


[Sidenote: Confucianism]

Along with the Chinese classics Confucianism was introduced into Japan
about the middle of the sixth century of our era, and being in perfect
accord with the native system of Shinto and with the Japanese ways of
thinking, this cult of ancestors tended to reënforce native ethical
tendencies and thus contributed essentially to make the virtues of
filial obedience and reverence for superiors prominent in the growing
type of character.


[Sidenote: Buddhism]

Buddhism was introduced into Japan in the sixth century of our era. Its
incoming had deep import for the moral life of the Japanese people.
It inculcated the gentler virtues, exerting here in this respect, as
elsewhere in the Far East,--save in China, where it too quickly became
shockingly degenerate,--an influence like that exerted by Christianity
in the Western world. It helped to make gentleness, courtesy, and
tenderness distinctive traits of the Japanese character. Through the
regard which it instilled for dumb animals it placed the whole lower
world of animal life under the protection of the moral sentiment.[194]


[Sidenote: Western civilization]

A little more than a generation ago the civilization of Japan came into
vital contact with the civilization of the West. Almost every element
of the old Japanese culture has felt the modifying effect of this
contact. The political, the economic, the social, the domestic, and the
religious institutions have undergone or are undergoing great changes.
These changes in these departments of life and thought have caused, as
such changes always do, important modifications in ethical sentiments
and convictions. Of all the influences which for more than two thousand
years have been at work shaping and molding the moral ideal of the
Japanese nation, those now entering from the Occidental world will
doubtless leave the deepest impress upon the ethical type.

In a still more direct way is this contact of Japan with Western
civilization resulting in important consequences for Japanese morality.
Christian ethics, like Buddhist ethics, is making a strong appeal to
certain classes of Japanese society. The result is what in an earlier
chapter was designated as a “mingling of moralities” and the creation
of a new composite conscience.


II. THE IDEAL


[Sidenote: Bushido]

The heart of Japanese morality is to be sought in Bushido,[195] the
ethics of the samurai. We shall best understand this moral code by
thinking of it as the Japanese ideal of chivalry or, perhaps better,
as a blending of the Western chivalric, Spartan, and Stoic ideals of
goodness and nobility, since in the list of virtues making up the
Bushido ideal we find several of the cardinal virtues entering into
each of these three distinct types of character.

As we have already intimated, Bushido is an ideal of excellence
which grew up out of the root of Japanese feudalism, just as the
Western ideal of chivalry developed out of European feudalism. It was
essentially an ideal of knighthood, the prime virtue of which was
personal loyalty to one’s superior. Fealty to one’s chief was made
so dominant a virtue that it overshadowed all other virtues. In the
defense or in the service of his lord a samurai might commit, without
offense to his sense of moral right, practically any crime, such as
blackmailing, lying, treachery, or even murder.

Grouped about this cardinal virtue of loyalty were the other knightly
virtues of courage, fidelity to the plighted word, liberality,
self-sacrifice, gratitude, courtesy, and benevolence. Liberality, or
free-handedness, was carried to such an extreme as to become a defect
of character. The true samurai must have no thought of economy and
money-making. “Ignorance of the value of different coins was a token of
good breeding.”[196] To handle money was thought degrading.

In one respect the code of honor of the Japanese knight was wholly
unlike that of the Western knight. It did not include any special duty
to woman. “Neither God nor the ladies inspired any enthusiasm in the
samurai’s breast.”

The Spartan element in the samurai code appears particularly in the
training of the youth. The boy was taught always to act from motives
of duty. He was denied every comfort. His clothing and his diet were
coarse. He was allowed no fire in the winter. “If his feet were numbed
by frost, he would be told to run about in the snow to make them
warm.” To accustom him to the sight of blood, he was taken to see the
execution of criminals; and to banish foolish fear from his mind, he
was forced to visit alone at night the place of execution.[197]

The Stoic element in the ideal appears in the high place assigned to
the virtue of self-control. The samurai, like the Stoic, must suppress
all signs of his emotions. Like the Stoic, too, he must have courage
to live or courage to die, as enjoined by duty. And his code of honor
taught him what true courage is: “It is true courage to live when it is
right to live, and to die only when it is right to die.”[198]

This samurai ideal of character constitutes, as we shall see, a molding
force in the moral life of Japan. Bushido, it is true, died with the
passing of feudalism,[199] but the spirit of Bushido lived on. The
samurai’s sense of honor and of duty became the inheritance of the
Japanese people. This great bequest of honor and valor and of all
samurai virtues is, in the words of the author of the _Soul of Japan_,
but “a trust to the nation, and the summons of the present is to guard
this heritage, nor to bate one jot of the ancient spirit; the summons
of the future will be so to widen its scope as to apply it in all walks
and relations of life.”[200]


[Sidenote: The virtue of loyalty
to the Emperor, or patriotism]

The belief in the divine origin of the imperial house of Japan makes
loyalty to the Emperor the supreme duty.[201] During the ascendancy
of feudalism this duty, in so far as the samurai class was concerned,
was, it is true, overshadowed by the duty of loyalty to one’s immediate
feudal superior. The sentiment due the Emperor was intercepted by the
daimyos. But in theory loyalty to the imperial house has ever been
the paramount virtue of the Japanese. The Emperor’s command is to his
subjects as the command of God to us, and obedience must be perfect and
unquestioning. So dominant is the place assigned this virtue of loyalty
to the head of the nation that the Japanese moralist seems almost to
make morality consist in this single virtue, as if “to fear the Emperor
and to keep his commandments” were the full duty of man.[202]

This sentiment of the people toward the imperial family renders the
government a sort of theocracy. Hence patriotism with the Japanese
is in large measure a religious feeling. Indeed, patriotism has been
called the religion of the Japanese. It is this virtue, exalted to a
degree which the world has never seen surpassed, which has contributed
more than any other quality of the Japanese character to make Japan a
great nation and to give her the victory over a powerful foe in one of
the most gigantic wars of modern times.


[Sidenote: Family ethics]

If the first duty of the Japanese is to his Emperor, his second is to
his parents. In Japanese phrase, the two virtues of loyalty and filial
piety are “the two wheels of the chariot of Japanese ethics.”[203]
Shinto and Confucianism, as we have seen, have both contributed to
the fostering in children of the moral sentiments of grateful love,
reverence, and obedience toward parents and all ancestors living and
dead. The Japanese regard the high place assigned to these filial
duties in the standard of character as a mark of the vast superiority
of their morality to ours.[204] The sentiments of filial affection and
reverence, coloring as they do the whole moral life, lend to Japanese
society an ethical cast which places it in many respects in strong
contrast to the social order of the Western nations, and makes it
difficult for the Japanese to understand us and for us to understand
them.[205]


[Sidenote: Woman as wife and as
mother]

As respects the position of woman the family ethics of Japan are
the family ethics of the East. In a work from every page of which
breathes the spirit of the Orient, a Japanese writer, dwelling
upon the difference between the ethical sentiments respecting
family relationships which have been evoked by the different social
environments of the East and the West, says: “In the East woman has
always been worshiped as the mother, and all those honors which the
Christian knight brought in homage to his ladylove, the samurai laid at
his mother’s feet.”[206]

Lafcadio Hearn, touching upon this same feature of the family ethics
of the Japanese, declares that the Bible text, “For this cause shall a
man leave his father and mother and shall cleave unto his wife,” is, to
their way of thinking and feeling, “one of the most immoral sentences
ever written.”[207]

In another important respect does the domestic morality of the Japanese
differ essentially from that of the Christian West. The family is not
strictly monogamous, as with us. The moral sense of the Japanese
discerns nothing wrong in polygamy or concubinage.[208] As respects the
whole relation of marriage, the Japanese appear to be in about the same
stage of evolution as had been reached by the Hebrews at the time of
Abraham.

A chief virtue of the Japanese women in all their relations is
obedience to the one--whether father, or husband, or son--to whom
obedience is due. It is the setting of this duty before all other
duties that causes the Japanese women sometimes to do what appears
to us immoral, but which seems to them truest piety and noblest
self-sacrifice.[209] In loyalty to duty, as they interpret duty, they
maintain a standard rarely surpassed by the women of any land.[210]


[Sidenote: Suicide regarded as a
virtuous act]

Suicide is infrequent among savage and barbarian races, but is common
among all peoples in an advanced stage of civilization. It is not so
much the fact itself of self-destruction that claims the attention of
the historian of morals, as the light in which the act is viewed; that
is, whether it is considered a virtuous or a reprehensible deed.

Now the Japanese regard suicide, if prompted by a good motive, as a
justifiable and noble act. The motives with them for the deed are
various, as in the case of other peoples, but among these motives is
one which discloses the existence among the Japanese of a sentiment
unknown or almost unknown among ourselves. The deed is often committed
in the way of making a solemn protest against something disapproved of
in the conduct or acts of others. Thus when the Japanese government
after war with China in 1898 acceded to the demands of Russia, France,
and Germany respecting the recession to China of certain territories
on the Continent, forty men in the Japanese army, by way of protest,
committed suicide “in the ancient way.”[211]

Tyrannicide is also looked upon by the Japanese as an heroic and
praiseworthy deed, provided the person committing the act makes clear
the self-sacrificing and patriotic character of his motives by at once
taking his own life.


[Sidenote: Low estimation of the
virtue of truthfulness]

A marked defect of the moral standard of the Japanese is the low place
assigned to the virtue of truthfulness. Among the Japanese, to call a
person a liar is not to apply to him a term of reproach, but rather to
pay him a pleasant compliment as a person of tact and shrewdness.

This lack of reverence for truth probably springs in part from the
virtue of politeness as a root. The extreme emphasis laid upon courtesy
as the sign and expression of reverence and loyalty toward superiors
fosters the general habit of saying things which are pleasant and
agreeable whether they are true or not. This complacent disregard of
truth in social intercourse would seem to have dulled the sense of
obligation of truth-speaking in other relations.


III. SOME SIGNIFICANT FACTS IN THE MORAL HISTORY OF JAPAN


[Sidenote: General influence of
the ideal of Bushido]

The Japanese knightly ideal, which, as we have said, constitutes the
heart and core of theoretical Japanese morality, has a history somewhat
like that of the ideal of European knighthood. It was a lofty ideal
very imperfectly realized, yet realized to such a degree as to make
it a chief motive force in the political and social life of Japan for
several centuries.[212] It left a permanent impress upon the moral
consciousness of the Japanese nation, an impress certainly deeper and
more enduring than that left by the ideal of European chivalry upon
the moral consciousness of the peoples of Western Europe. New Japan is
directly or indirectly the creation of Japanese knighthood.

We have seen that loyalty to his chief was the preëminent virtue of the
samurai. Upon the downfall of feudalism this loyalty was transferred
to the Emperor. The spirit of the samurai came to inspire the Japanese
nation. Since the time when the loyalty of Scottish clansmen to their
chief was transferred to Scottish royalty, there has not been seen a
more remarkable example of the absolute devotion of a people to their
sovereign than that exhibited to-day by the people of Japan.

The samurai were taught to despise the love of gain, and thus these
knights of Japan were strangers to those vices which spring from the
love of money. To this circumstance may be ascribed the fact that the
statesmen of Japan, who almost invariably are of the samurai class,
have been so notably free from venality and corruption.[213]

Finally, Bushido held aloft a high standard of truthfulness. The true
samurai regarded an oath as a derogation of his honor. It cannot be
affirmed that this Bushido virtue of veracity has yet become the
inheritance of the mercantile and peasant classes of Japan, but it has
at least been retained by the samurai as a class, and is working to-day
like leaven in the mass of Japanese society.


[Sidenote: The Bushido code in
action]

There are two remarkable passages in recent Japanese history which
well illustrate in what way and to what degree the spirit of the
samurai, “the spirit of not living unto one’s self,” has become an
inspiration to the whole Japanese nation. The first passage has to do
with the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905, which on the part of Japan
was a struggle for national existence. It was the samurai morality, a
morality of loyalty, of valor, of selflessness, of fidelity to duty,
that formed a chief element of the strength of Japan in that critical
juncture of the nation’s life. The Bushido code of honor showed itself
equal to the Spartan code in creating a race of invincible warriors.
Since the Spartan Leonidas and his companions died for Greece in the
pass of Thermopylæ there has been no sublimer exhibition of fortitude
and self-devotion in a great cause than that shown by Japanese soldiers
in the trenches before Port Arthur and on the battlefields of Manchuria.

This war for national independence also afforded proof of how the
gentle virtue of Japanese knighthood, courteous generosity to the
vanquished, has passed as a noble legacy to the nation at large; for
as an eminent Japanese statesman affirms, “In the tender care bestowed
upon our stricken adversary of the battlefield will be found the
ancient courtesy of the samurai.”[214]


[Sidenote: The moral standard of
the samurai in competition with
that of the plebeian trader]

The second passage shows the morality of the samurai in competition
with the morality of the common Japanese shopman. Now the morality
of the plebeian Japanese trader is about on a level with that of the
ancient Greek shopkeeper.[215] And a chief cause of his low moral
standard is the same, namely, the general disesteem in which the
trader’s business has been held. This social stigma has resulted in
the mercantile business being left in the hands of the lowest class
socially, intellectually, and morally.[216] The great mass of the
people have from time immemorial been engaged in the honorable business
of agriculture; while the samurai class, as we have seen, regarded
it as degrading to engage in trade or even to handle money. In these
circumstances it was inevitable that the mercantile class should evolve
a very low code of business ethics; for, as the author of _Bushido_
very justly observes, “put a stigma on a calling and its followers
adjust their morals to it.”

The strictly class character of this loose commercial morality is shown
by the experience of the samurai after the abolition of feudalism in
1868. Upon that event many of them engaged in mercantile business,
carrying with them their high moral standard, with results pathetically
depicted by Nitobé in these words: “Those who had eyes to see could
not weep enough, those who had hearts to feel could not sympathize
enough, with the fate of many a noble and honest samurai who signally
and irrevocably failed in his new and unfamiliar field of trade and
industry, through sheer lack of shrewdness in coping with his artful
plebeian rival.... It will be long before it will be recognized how
many fortunes were wrecked in the attempt to apply Bushido ethics to
business methods, but it was soon apparent to every observing mind that
the ways of wealth were not the ways of honor.”[217] About ninety-nine
out of every hundred samurai who ventured into business are said to
have failed.

This passage out of the history of New Japan carries with it various
lessons, but particularly does it teach how unjust it is to judge the
morality of a people by the morality of a class.[218]

Notwithstanding the disastrous outcome of their first venture into the
mercantile field, the samurai still remain in business, so that there
is going on to-day in Japan in the commercial domain a competition
between two moral standards. The triumph of the standard of the samurai
over that of the plebeian trader would mean the development in Japan
of a matchless business morality, which, in the increasing closeness
of commercial relations between the East and the West, might well act
cleansingly on our own business ethics.[219]


[Sidenote: Moral education in the
schools; the Imperial Rescript]

The rapid transformation in the institutions and ideas of Old Japan
after the revolution of 1868 created a crisis in the moral life of
the Japanese people. The old basis of the national morality was
destroyed. Reverence for the Confucian teachings was lost. Respect
for ancestral customs was seriously impaired. Moral anarchy impended.
In this critical juncture some proposed that Buddhism, others that
Christianity, should be made the basis of the moral code.

Especially in the schools was the urgency of the need of some new
sanction for morality felt, because moral instruction and training
have always formed an essential part of the education of the youth of
Japan. The Japanese have ever believed that it is possible to mold
the character of the nation by education. “With us,” says a native
writer, “education has meant moral education more than anything else
for centuries.”[220] “The object of teaching,” says the official
regulations for teaching in elementary schools, “is to cultivate
the moral nature of children and to guide them in the practice of
virtues.”[221] Because of this central place assigned moral education
in the work of the schools, the necessity for removing all uncertainty
as to what should be inculcated was all the more exigent.

To meet the crisis the following imperial rescript was
issued--certainly one of the most remarkable state papers ever
promulgated:

    “Know ye, our subjects:

    “Our imperial ancestors have founded our Empire on a basis broad
    and everlasting and have deeply and firmly implanted virtue; our
    subjects, ever united in loyalty and filial piety, have from
    generation to generation illustrated the beauty thereof. This is
    the glory and the fundamental character of our Empire, and herein
    also lies the source of our education. Ye, our subjects, be filial
    to your parents, affectionate to your brothers and sisters; as
    husbands and wives be harmonious; as friends true; bear yourselves
    in modesty and moderation; extend your benevolence to all; pursue
    learning and cultivate arts, and thereby develop intellectual
    faculties and perfect moral powers; furthermore, advance public
    good and promote common interests; always respect the Constitution
    and observe the laws; should emergency arise, offer yourselves
    courageously to the state; and thus guard and maintain the
    prosperity of our imperial throne coeval with heaven and earth. So
    shall ye not only be our good and faithful subjects, but render
    illustrious the best traditions of your forefathers.

    “The way here set forth is indeed the teaching bequeathed by our
    imperial ancestors, to be observed alike by their descendants and
    the subjects, infallible for all ages and true in all places. It is
    our wish to lay it to heart in all reverence, in common with you,
    our subjects, that we may all thus attain to the same virtue.

    “The 30th day of the 10th month of the 23d year of Meiji”
    [1890].[222]

It would be almost impossible to exaggerate the influence of this
imperial edict. “Our whole moral education,” affirms Baron Kikuchi,
“consists in instilling into the minds of our children the proper
appreciation of the spirit of this rescript.”[223] The children learn
it by heart just as the Roman children committed to memory the Twelve
Tables of the laws.

Japanese believe that the effect of this instruction upon the national
character, reënforcing the ancestral virtues of loyalty and devotion to
duty, was exhibited in the recent war with Russia.[224]

A noteworthy feature of the rescript is that it is simply a
reaffirmation of the teachings of the ancient moralists and the ethical
traditions of the fathers--an inculcation of those virtues of loyalty
and filial piety which the Japanese people have held in esteem and
practiced from generation to generation.

A second feature of the edict which arrests attention is the
universalistic and secular character of the morality inculcated. The
virtues enjoined are universal benevolence, loyalty to duty, and
self-devotion to the common good--a morality of the universal human
heart and conscience, a morality, as the edict declares, good for all
ages and for all places.


[Sidenote: Japanese morals and
Western civilization]

The foregoing anticipates and gives answer to the questions: What will
be the effect upon Japanese morality of those changes now going on in
the life and thought of Japan through contact with the civilization of
the West? What will be the effect upon Japanese public morality when
the common belief in the divine descent of the Emperor, which is the
root from which springs the primal duty of loyalty, is undermined, as
modern science is certain to undermine it? What will be the effect upon
Japanese domestic morality when Occidental conceptions of the family
and of woman’s place in it come to modify, as they seem likely to do,
those ideas and sentiments which from time immemorial have formed the
basis of the family ethics of the East? What will be the ethical
consequences when Western science renders obsolete the Shinto learning
and the Confucian classics, which have hitherto formed the basis of
so large a part of Japanese morality? What will be the effect upon
the ancient ideal of character of the adoption of Christian ideas and
teachings in place of those which have so long nourished the ethical
feelings and sentiments of the Japanese people?

That the intrusion into the ancient culture of Japan of these various
elements of Western civilization has deep import for Japanese morality
cannot be made a matter of doubt. In the new environment, so different
from that in the midst of which the ancient ideal of goodness was
developed, this ideal must inevitably undergo important changes. Some
of those qualities of character which have so long held high places in
the ideal of excellence will cease to evoke the old-time homage, while
other qualities at present assigned low places in the standard will
be exalted. Virtues now practically unrecognized by the Japanese as
virtues, but which among us are highly esteemed moral qualities, will
certainly be incorporated in the modified ideal, giving it a new cast,
yet probably without changing fundamentally the type; for the moral
life of the Japanese people is too virile and too essentially sound to
permit us to think that the new influences now coming in will produce
such radical changes in the ethical feelings and convictions of the
race as to result in a repetition of what happened upon the entrance
of Christianity into the morally decadent Greco-Roman world--the
displacement of the old ideal of character by a new and essentially
different ideal.




