CHAPTER IV

THE BABYLONIAN-ASSYRIAN CONSCIENCE


[Sidenote: The importance of
Babylonian-Assyrian morality for
the history of comparative morals]

The information which the cuneiform texts have yielded concerning the
moral life of the Babylonian and Assyrian peoples, though scanty, is
of the greatest value to the student of comparative morals, not only
because it casts light upon a moral development in some important
respects like the moral evolution of the kindred Semitic people of
Israel, but also because that later evolution was probably deeply
influenced by it. Therefore, though nothing like a connected account of
the moral evolution in the Euphratean lands can be attempted till the
thousands of cuneiform tablets recovered from the ancient libraries of
the Babylonian-Assyrian cities have been deciphered, and the ethical
character and value of their contents determined, we shall devote a
few pages to the portrayal of such manifestations of conscience as are
disclosed in the religious, literary, historical, and law tablets whose
contents are already known to us.


[Sidenote: The general
nonethical character of the
Babylonian-Assyrian religion]

Religion filled a large place in the life of the ancient Babylonians
and Assyrians, especially in that of the former; but religion with
them had at first little or nothing to do with morality. Like the
religion of savage and barbarian folk, it lacked wholly or almost
wholly the ethical spirit. Throughout the early period it was in the
main simply a system of incantations and magical rites. Scarcely any
moral element entered into the system until the later centuries of
Babylonian-Assyrian history.

This religion was in truth simply a survival from primitive savage
times when religion was merely a belief in the existence of evil
spirits, and in their disposition and power to do harm to men.[101] In
this stage of the religious evolution sickness, death, misadventure
of every kind are believed to be caused by some malignant demon or by
some offended and revengeful god. The evil spirits are supposed to
act from pure malignancy, while the great gods are conceived to be
angered especially by the nonobservance of some religious rite, by the
violation of some taboo forbidding the use of certain kinds of food, or
by some other like act.

To ward off the attacks of the evil demons, or to appease the offended
gods, recourse was had to the recital of magical formulas and
incantations. This was Shamanism in its lowest and crudest form, in
which there was at work as a motive on the part of the suppliant only
cringing fear or a desire to get rid of some present pain, without the
least trace of moral emotions, such as remorse and repentance.


[Sidenote: Ethical tendencies in
the religion]

But as time passed, this earlier nonethical religion, as is evidenced
by the texts recovered from the long-buried temple libraries,[102]
became in a measure moralized. A moral character was given to the great
gods, and they became the inspirers and guardians of a true morality.
This ethicalizing process was the same in character as that which
went on in the religion of the ancient Hebrews, gradually moralizing
the primitive conceptions and cult of Yahweh until among that people
religion and morality became wholly at one. The ethical development,
however, never went as far as this in Babylonia and Assyria, but the
movement was such as to lift these peoples far above the low moral
plane of primitive society. “In the seventh century before Christ,
if not earlier, the Babylonians and Assyrians possessed a system of
morality which in many respects resembled that of the descendants of
Abraham.”[103]


[Sidenote: Evidence afforded by
the penitential psalms of the
growth in moral feeling]

The ethical movement found its truest expression in the so-called
penitential hymns,[104] which are in spirit altogether like the
penitential psalms of the Hebrew Scriptures.[105] They exhibit the same
intense yearning of the penitent soul for reconciliation and union with
a god conceived as just and holy and piteous.

In one hymn is found the new moral conception that disease is the work
of a good spirit. This is a very lofty ethical idea, and approaches
the Hebrew conception of afflictions as the visitation in disguise of
love. But this idea seems never to have become a permanent part of the
Babylonian moral consciousness.

In these psalms and prayers we have evidence that at times the
worshipers of Marduk and Ashur attained to almost as lofty a conception
of deity as that reached by the teachers and prophets of Israel. The
great gods were conceived as the creators, the sustainers of man; as
loving, compassionate, merciful, and forgiving. The religious-moral
ideal was here verging toward the highest that man has ever been able
to form, and could this standard have been steadily upheld and the
lower abandoned, then Babylonia and Assyria like Judea might have made
precious contributions to the moral life of humanity. But this was not
done. The tablets holding magical formulas and incantations, wholly
devoid of all ethical character, outnumber a thousand to one those
exhaling the spiritual perfume of genuine moral feeling and aspiration.


[Sidenote: Ethical significance of
the conception of the after life]

Respecting the lot of the dead, the Babylonians held views like those
of the early Hebrews. This was the continuance as opposed to the
retribution theory.[106] Arallu, “the land of no return,” was a vast
underground region where were gathered all, without distinction, who
went down to the grave. It was a sad, dolorous life that the drowsing
shades lived in this dark underworld, where the bats flitted in
the twilight and the dust gathered on the lintels of the doors. An
undiscriminating fate allotted the same destiny to all. In so far as
the moral consciousness of the Babylonians demanded that a distinction
be made between the good and the bad, this demand was met by the
assumption--which was also that of the Hebrews so long as they held the
Babylonian view of the life after death--that the evil man is punished
in this life, and the good man rewarded here on earth with numerous
flocks, reputation, many children, and long life.

For four thousand years the masses in Babylonia seem to have remained
satisfied with this view of the moral government of the world. In the
later periods of Babylonian history, however, we find in the literature
traces of a protest against this nonethical conception of life in
the afterworld--a protest which shows that, in the case of the more
spiritually minded at least, the moral consciousness was deepening and
the ethical judgment becoming clearer and truer.


[Sidenote: The ethical spirit of
the laws; the code of Hammurabi]

Since the law code of a people embraces all those duties the
performance of which the state or public authority attempts to
enforce, the ethical spirit of an age or people finds one of its
truest embodiments in its laws. It is this fact which renders of such
extraordinary interest to the student of the history of morals the
recent discovery of the code of the Babylonian king Hammurabi,[107]
the oldest known code of public and private morality. This law system
exhibits in some departments of life an enlightened and advanced
morality, yet one with serious limitations and defects, a morality
in many respects like that of the Mosaic code of the kindred Semitic
nation of Israel.

The code informs us that the Babylonian feeling as to what is right
and wrong, just and unjust, in the ordinary business relations of life
was much like the average conscience of to-day. In some matters the
Babylonian law held ground morally in advance of that held by modern
codes, as, for instance, in providing that in case of misfortune
the debtor should have both his rent and the interest on his debt
remitted.[108]

But in its provisions touching the family relations the code reveals
ethical conceptions very different from our own. As in other Oriental
law systems, ancient and modern, polygamy was regarded as a moral
institution. A man in debt could bind his wife and children out to
service or sell them as slaves, but not for a longer period than three
years.

The punishments meted out to offenders were harsh and cruel, yet not
much more atrociously cruel than those provided by the English laws of
three hundred years ago. Impaling, burning, cutting out the tongue,
gouging out the eyes, cutting off the fingers, breaking the bones of
the hands were common penalties.

Sometimes the punishment was measured by the primitive principle of
the _Lex talionis_; it was eye for eye, bone for bone, tooth for
tooth.[109] This law of retaliation was carried out so rigorously as
to result in the punishment of the innocent for the guilty. Thus if a
man caused the death of another man’s daughter, the law required that
his own daughter should be put to death.[110] If a builder, through
the faulty construction of a house, caused the death of the son of the
owner through the falling of the house, the son of the builder was
to be put to death.[111] It is in these provisions of the code that
we find the greatest divergence between the Babylonian feeling and
our own as to what is right and just. Yet this Babylonian conscience
which sanctioned the visiting of the iniquity of the father upon the
children is a conscience which we shall meet with in societies much
more advanced than that for which the Hammurabi code was formulated.

The Babylonian conscience in regard to slavery as embodied in the
code was about like our own conscience respecting negro slavery of a
generation or two ago. The slave was viewed as a mere chattel, and the
master possessed over him the power of life and death. Kind treatment,
however, was enjoined by the law. There was a fugitive-slave law which
reads curiously like our negro-slave laws of two generations ago, in
which the aiding and harboring of a fugitive slave is made a crime
punishable with death.[112]

The slave class was recruited, as in other lands of the ancient world,
from prisoners of war, foundlings, debtors, criminals, and through the
sale by fathers and husbands of their children and wives. The system
seems to have undergone no essential changes or ameliorations, such
as we shall see effected in the Hebrew system, by growth in ethical
feeling during the four thousand years of Babylonian history. It is
true that enfranchisement of slaves was not uncommon, the freed man
becoming the dependent of his old master, but it does not appear that
moral sentiment afforded the motive for manumission.[113]


[Sidenote: International morality;
war ethics]

The international ethics of the Babylonians and Assyrians was in every
essential respect the international ethics of their age in the Semitic
world. It was the character of the religion of these peoples which
determined in large measure international relations in the Mesopotamian
lands throughout the period of Semitic ascendancy. “The conception
of religion as an alliance between God and man against other peoples
and their gods never ceased in Mesopotamia.”[114] This conception was
essentially the same as that held by the Hebrews down to the time of
the great prophets. “Let us go up against them, for our god is greater
than their god,” is the war cry of four thousand years of history of
the Semitic world.

The Assyrians far surpassed the Babylonians in their ferocious cruelty
in the treatment of war captives. Notwithstanding their advanced
morality in some departments of life, in this domain they stood, if
we except the practice of cannibalism, on practically the same level
as savages. Witness the following inscription of Assur-natsir-pal,
in which he tells of his treatment of certain prisoners of war: “The
nobles, as many as had revolted, I flayed; with their skins I covered
the pyramid. Some [of these] I immured in the midst of the pyramid;
others above the pyramid I impaled on stakes.... Three thousand of
their captives I burned with fire. I left not one alive among them to
become a hostage.... I cut off the hands [and] feet of some; I cut
off the noses, the ears [and] the fingers of others; the eyes of the
numerous soldiers I put out. In the middle [of them] I suspended their
heads on vine stems in the neighborhood of their city. Their young men
[and] their maidens I burned as a holocaust.”[115]

The significant thing here is not so much the fact that these things
were done, as the fact that the king exults in having done them and
thinks to immortalize himself by portraying them upon imperishable
stone. The careful way in which to-day all reference to atrocities of
this character, when in the fury of battle they are inflicted upon a
savage enemy, are suppressed by those responsible for them, and the
indignant condemnation of them by the public opinion of the civilized
world, measures the moral progress humanity has made even along those
lines on which progress has been so painfully slow and halting.[116]




