CHAPTER II

THE DAWN OF MORALITY: CONSCIENCE IN THE KINSHIP GROUP


I. INSTITUTIONS, IDEAS, AND CONDITIONS OF LIFE DETERMINING THE RULES OF
CONDUCT


[Sidenote: The kinship group]

The most important social product of the human evolution on the lower
levels of civilization was the patriarchal family or clan. This
community of kinsfolk is the great history-making group. It was the
seed plot and nursery not only of almost every social and political
institution of the historic peoples, but of their morality as well.
In the bosom of this group were born and nurtured the chief of those
affections and sentiments into which enters an ethical element and
which form the basis of the moral life.[26]

The fundamental bond uniting this group was the bond of blood. The
members of the group were, or believed themselves to be, the actual
descendants of a common ancestor. It was this tie of blood, this
physical relationship real or assumed, that rendered the clan such a
closely knit body and created its feeling of corporate oneness. “The
members of one kindred,” says W. Robertson Smith in describing this
characteristic of the Semitic clan, “looked on themselves as one living
whole, a single animated mass of blood, flesh, and bones, of which no
member could be touched without all the members suffering.... If one of
the clan has been murdered, they say ‘Our blood has been shed.’”[27]
Compared with this sense of solidarity as it is found among certain
of the negro clans in Africa, the feeling of solidarity of the family
among European peoples “is thin and feeble.”[28]

It was this corporate consciousness of the primitive clan that created
its moral solidarity. It naturally called into existence those
altruistic sentiments that formed the ground out of which grew man’s
earliest feelings of moral obligation.


[Sidenote: The religious
bond--ancestor worship]

There was a second bond uniting the members of the kinship group.
They were united not only by the ties of physical kinship but also
by the bonds of a common cult. This was the worship of ancestors. To
realize the ethical educative value of this worship we must recall
the remarkable constitution of the clan. This group of kinsmen has a
visible and an invisible side. There are the earthly members of the
group and the spirit members--the souls of the dead. These spirit
members are the protectors of the little group, the punishers of
wrongdoing, the conservators of morals. Among the most sacred duties of
the earthly members are the duties they owe to these spirit members;
for these spirits have need of many things, especially of meat and
drink at the grave, and it is the duty of their earthly kinsmen to
supply all these wants. The earth group is thus enveloped in a sort of
sacred atmosphere, and in this atmosphere are nurtured those ethical
sentiments which form the most precious product of history.

As an agency in the moralizing of the life of the race it would be
difficult to exaggerate the importance of ancestor worship. To no other
form of religion, save ethical monotheism, does morality owe so large
a debt. In this cult religion and morality are at one almost at the
outset,[29] whereas in nature cults, or the cults of nature gods, it
is generally only at a late period that these elements are united. It
was this cult of ancestors which formed the basis of an essential part
of the morality of the Greeks and Romans, particularly the latter, at
the first appearance of these peoples in history, and which to-day, as
the chief religion of the Chinese, Japanese, and other peoples of the
Far East, fosters the best virtues of a third of the human race.


[Sidenote: Conceptions of the god
world]

Another influence determining the moral code of primitive man is his
ideas of the god world. It is true that the conceptions formed of the
gods by the untutored mind are for the most part crude and unethical.
But man ever makes and remakes his gods in his own image; therefore
as soon as an ethical element begins to enter into his own life he
begins to moralize the character of his gods. At this stage the god
world begins to react favorably upon the moral life of man. The gods
are now conceived as taking notice of the conduct of men and as
approving certain acts as right and disapproving certain other acts as
wrong. Especially are they believed to punish atrocious crimes, such
as the slaying of a kinsman and the breaking of the word sworn by the
oath-god. In this way primitive man’s ideas of deity react favorably
upon his morality.

The gods further advance morality by being invoked as the witnesses and
guardians of treaties between clans and tribes. By thus giving an added
sanctity to solemn engagements mutually entered into by communities
they widen the moral domain and become the promoters of intertribal
morality.[30]


[Sidenote: The fact that
competition is between communities
and not between individuals]

In nothing perhaps does primitive society differ more widely from
modern than in the fact that the competition or struggle for existence
is between communities and not between individuals. Within the
kinship group life is almost wholly communistic. There is practically
no competition between the individuals of the community such as
characterizes societies advanced in civilization. The only real
competition is that between communities. And here the struggle for
existence or for superiority is generally habitual and ruthless, often
being carried to the point of the complete destruction of one of the
competing communities.

These conditions of existence have vast significance for morality. Just
as the individual competition in cultured societies molds an essential
part of their moral code, so does the group competition of races still
in the clan or tribal stage of civilization determine what qualities of
character shall be developed among them. As we shall see in a moment,
it makes them strong in the clan virtues.


II. ESSENTIAL FACTS OF KINSHIP OR INTRATRIBAL MORALITY


[Sidenote: The life of primitive
peoples largely unmoral]

As students of morals our chief interest in primeval man as he emerges
from the obscurity of prehistoric times is not concerning the degree
of skill he has developed in making his weapons or in constructing
for himself a shelter, nor concerning what advance he has made in the
arts of weaving and pottery, nor yet concerning what kind of social
arrangements he has worked out; our main interest in this primeval man
as he appears on the threshold of the historic day is not concerning
these or any like things, but rather respecting what kind of a
conscience has grown up within him during those long prehistoric ages
of struggle, privation, watch and ward.

The first fact that compels our notice here is that the life of the
savage is largely _un_moral.[31] His activities to secure food,
shelter, and clothing arise from purely animal impulses, such as hunger
and cold. Into all of these activities, however, there enters as time
passes an ethical element.[32] The economic life, in a word, comes
more and more under the dominance of moral feelings and motives.[33]
Conscience becomes more and more involved in all these matters. This
gradual moralization of these at first nonmoral activities of primitive
man constitutes one of the most important phases of the moral evolution
of the race.


[Sidenote: The “goodness” of
uncivilized races largely a
negative goodness]

A second fact in the moral life of savages that claims our attention
is that much that is counted unto them for “goodness” is a purely
negative goodness. Failure in discrimination here often results in a
wrong estimate of their morality as compared with that of advanced
communities. Thus in portraying the manners and customs of primitive
peoples, some writers, like Tacitus in his account of the early German
folk, laud their morals as superior to those of civilized men. This
opinion is based rather on the absence among such peoples of the usual
vices and crimes of civilized societies than on the practice by them
of the higher positive virtues.[34] But the absence of the vices which
characterize civilization is to be explained, of course, by the simpler
organization of society and the fewer temptations to wrongdoing. Thus
the single circumstance that the institution of individual property has
not yet come into existence, or at least has not as yet received any
great extension, accounts for the comparative absence of crimes against
property, which constitute probably the greater number of criminal acts
in civilized society.


[Sidenote: The true starting
point of the historic ethical
development]

But notwithstanding that so much of the life of primitive man is
lived on the nonmoral plane, and that much which is reckoned unto
him for goodness is merely negative goodness, still in certain of
his activities growing out of his clan relationships we discover the
beginnings of all human morality. For as we have already said, the true
starting point of the moral evolution of mankind is to be sought in the
altruistic sentiments nourished in the atmosphere of the kinship group.
There is scarcely an ethical sentiment which does not appear here
at least in a rudimentary form. Out of the most sacred and intimate
relationships of the group we find springing up the maternal virtues
of patience, tenderness, and self-denial,[35] and the filial virtues
of love, obedience, and reverence; out of the fellowship of the men in
hunting and in war[36] we see developing the manly virtues of courage,
fortitude, self-control, and, above all, self-devotion to the common
good; out of the hearth worship of ancestors[37] we observe springing
up many of those religious-ethical feelings and sentiments which form
one of the chief moral forces in civilization; out of the sacrificial
meal shared with the gods and the spirits of the dead through
offerings of portions of the food and drink, we see forming customs
of incalculable moral value in the ethical training of the race.[38]
A great part of the history of morals consists in the record of how
these earliest forms of social virtues, first nourished by the customs,
habits, and practices of the kinship group, have been gradually refined
and developed into wider and richer forms of ethical sentiment and
feeling.


[Sidenote: Custom as the maker of
group morality]

There is one special feature of this germinal morality to which our
attention must now be directed. It is what is often called customary
morality. That is to say, the standard of right and wrong in the
kinship community is custom. Custom is the lawgiver, and morality
consists in following custom. The individual, in a word, follows
the tribal or group conscience rather than the dictates of his own
conscience. Indeed there is practically no such thing here as a private
conscience. Individualism has not yet arisen. No one ordinarily has
private notions of right and wrong which he feels impelled to set up
against the immemorial customs and usages of the community.[39]

But there is really nothing in this fact which sets this nascent
morality apart from our own. It differs from ours not in kind but
only in degree. The morality of the masses is still largely customary
morality. Most persons in their social relations, in business, and
in religion, follow unthinkingly the tribal conscience, that is,
the conventional morality of the society of which they are members,
rather than their own individual sense of right and wrong. “Reflective
morality” is still the morality of the few. The ever-renewed moral task
of man is to change the customary tribal conscience into a reflective
individual conscience.


[Sidenote: Collective
responsibility]

There is still another phase of the incipient morality of the kinship
group which claims our attention because of its significance for the
history of the evolution of morals. It is a group morality, that is, a
morality based on the idea of collective responsibility.

This conception presents one of the most striking phenomena in the
history of the moral evolution of mankind. Among peoples in the earlier
stages of moral development the family or clan group rather than the
individual is regarded as the ethical unit, and the act of any member
of this group, when such act concerns a member or members of another
social group, is looked upon as the act of the whole body to which he
belongs.[40] For the wrongdoing of one all are held responsible.[41]

This group morality, with which the true history of the unfolding
moral consciousness of the race begins, we shall meet with as a sort
of survival in every stage of the moral progress of humanity from
the lowest to the highest level of culture. “It is,” in the words of
Hobhouse, “one of the dominant facts, if not _the_ dominant fact,
ethically considered, in the evolution of human society.”[42] The
account of that slow change in the moral consciousness of man which has
gradually caused group morality, in most spheres of life and thought,
to give place to individual morality, that is, to that conception of
moral responsibility which holds every man responsible for his own act,
and only for his own act, makes up one of the most instructive chapters
in the moral history of the world.[43] We shall find significant
survivals of this idea of collective responsibility, particularly in
the religious domain. In truth, a large part of religious history is
nothing more nor less than an account of the influence and outworkings
of this notion. Men making their gods like unto themselves have
imagined them as acting on this principle of communal responsibility,
and as bringing upon a whole people pestilence, famine, war, or other
calamity in revenge or punishment for some neglect in worship or act of
sacrilege on the part of perhaps a single member of the tribe or nation.

By the early Fathers of the Church this idea of collective
responsibility, embodied in the doctrine of the imputation of the guilt
of the transgression of the first man Adam to all his descendants to
the end of the world, was given a prominent place in Christian theology
and has been a great force in molding the morality of the Western world.

Again, we find this idea of group morality embodied in the war ethics
of the modern nations, which, regarded from one point of view, is
largely group ethics, that is to say, the survival in the domain of
international relations of ethical ideas that had their birth on the
low intellectual and moral levels of barbarism.

As we follow the upward trend of the lines of the moral evolution of
the race we shall hear louder and louder protests against this notion
of communal responsibility, especially when this form of human morality
has been transferred to the heavens and made a fundamental principle of
the divine government.


[Sidenote: The duty of revenge;
the blood feud]

In primitive society if a man slay a kinsman, he is punished by
outlawry, that is, by expulsion from the family or clan.[44] The
story of Cain, the first murderer of a kinsman in Hebrew legend, is
typical.[45] If, however, a member of a clan is slain by an outsider,
it is the duty of the nearest kinsman of the person killed, or of the
collective body of his kinsfolk, to kill in revenge the slayer or some
relative of his.[46] To ignore this obligation or to forgive the slayer
of one’s kinsman is regarded as base and cowardly.

As, through the advance of society, the ties of the clan become relaxed
and this group becomes more and more perfectly merged with the larger
group of the tribe or state of which it has become a part, and justice
comes to be administered by the tribal head or by regular tribunals,
then blood revenge on the part of the kinsmen of the slain gradually
ceases to be a duty and private vengeance becomes a crime. But this is
a slow evolution, and within societies far advanced in civilization
we often find belated groups still following with good conscience the
ancient custom of blood revenge. The vendetta in Italy and the feud in
some sections of our Southern states[47] are survivals or degenerate
forms of this primitive virtue.


[Sidenote: The _Lex talionis_]

Closely related to the punishment of homicide in primitive society is
punishment of lesser offenses, especially the infliction of bodily
injury, within the social group. Here, too, private vengeance rules.
The person wronged or injured inflicts such punishment upon the
offender as passion or resentment may dictate. As time passes, however,
and the sense of justice grows more discriminating, there are limits
set to this private vengeance. There is established what is called
the rule of equivalence. The avenger is not allowed to wreak upon the
offender indiscriminate and unmeasured punishment, but is restricted
to the infliction upon him of exactly such injury and pain as he has
inflicted upon his victim. Hence arose the _Lex talionis_, limb for
limb, eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.[48] This regulation thus
registers an advance in moral feeling, and may be regarded as probably
the first rule of the criminal code of the nations.


[Sidenote: The virtue of courage;
its altruistic element]

In early society those virtues are most highly esteemed which are of
service to the clan or tribe. Thus courage comes to hold a first place
among the virtues. What is especially important to be noted here is
that under courage is hidden the virtue of self-sacrifice, which we
give the highest place in our ideal of character. It is this altruistic
element in courage which lends to it its real ethical quality. In
primitive society this virtue finds expression chiefly in the ready
self-devotion of the individual in battle for the common good.

Throughout pagan antiquity this virtue held a central place in
practically every ideal of excellence. In the words of Robertson
Smith, “This devotion to the common weal was, as every one knows, the
mainspring of ancient morality and the source of all the heroic virtues
of which ancient history presents so many illustrious examples.”[49]


III. THE BEGINNINGS OF INTERTRIBAL MORALITY


[Sidenote: Primitive man’s double
standard of morality]

The accounts given by travelers and observers of the morals of savages
often present a perplexing contrariety of opinion. Some writers
represent such people as absolutely without a moral sense, while
others, as has already been remarked, hold them up as models for
imitation by ourselves.

This contrariety in view results in part from an overlooking of the
fact, just pointed out, that the moral goodness of the savage is
largely a negative goodness, but chiefly from a failure to observe
that the shield has two sides, that is to say, that savages have a
double standard of morality--one standard regulating conduct within
the social group, and another regulating conduct toward outsiders.
Thus the command, “Thou shalt not kill,” means to the savage merely
that he shall not kill a kinsman. It has in his mind no application to
strangers, just as in our minds it has no application to animals.

It is the same in regard to lying. Savages in general have a high
regard for truthfulness, as they understand this virtue. The plighted
word among them is probably as sacredly kept as by the average of
civilized men.[50] The repute of many savage folk for untruthfulness
comes about from the fact that they do not think that a stranger has
any right to the truth. “Among themselves,” writes Professor Starr of
certain Congo tribes, “lying is not commended and truth is appreciated;
but to deceive a stranger or a white man is commendable.”[51]

And so it is with stealing. Many uncivilized peoples are charged, and
in a certain sense rightly, with making of theft a virtue. But it must
be borne in mind that to the savage all persons not members of his own
group are strangers and enemies. To steal from such is looked upon as a
most praiseworthy exploit, while to steal from the members of one’s own
group is regarded as a crime.[52]


[Sidenote: This dual morality a
survival in civilization]

Now the important thing to note here is that this double morality is
not something peculiar to the ethics of savages. This dualism runs
through the whole moral history of the race, from the beginning to the
present day, and constitutes one of the most important facts in the
moral evolution of humanity. We too, like the savage, have our double
standard of morality. The chief difference between us and the savage
is this: he puts his double standard in practice all the time, we only
occasionally. On occasion we fling aside our ordinary standard of
morality, lift the savage’s war standard, and then like the savage lie
and steal and kill--outside the tribe. To deceive the stranger now is
commendable; to steal from him proper and right; to kill him a glorious
exploit.

The great task of this century is to put an end to this scandal of
civilization, to teach men the oneness and universality of the moral
law, to get them to understand that right and wrong are right and wrong
everywhere--outside the tribe as well as within.

The history of intertribal or international morality, then, is the
record of its gradual assimilation to intratribal morality.[53] It is a
record of how the stranger, the outsider, has come, or is coming, to be
regarded as a kinsman, as a neighbor.


[Sidenote: Hospitality, or the
guest right; the first step beyond
kinship morality[54]]

The duty of hospitality, to which a high place is assigned in the code
of primitive peoples, shows morality taking a step, the first step,
beyond the narrow circle of the original group of kinsmen. As we have
seen, in the beginning the feeling of duty and obligation is restricted
to the little group of fellow clansmen or tribesmen. Every one outside
this social circle is an enemy, and is without rights. But necessity
forces men to go beyond the limits of their own clan or tribe, and
in time there grows up a rule that the defenseless stranger shall be
kindly received, entertained for a certain period, and then allowed to
depart unharmed. It is easy to see how among clans scattered thinly
over a wide territory, and where the earlier isolation is beginning to
be broken by trade relations, this duty of hospitality should come to
be regarded as a very sacred one, and the person of the stranger guest
as inviolable.[55]

Thus in the development of the guest right we see morality broadening,
the circle of moral obligation enlarged, and the stranger, ordinarily
counted as an enemy and as rightless, brought for a moment within the
sacred pale of ethical sentiment and duty.[56] A new ground of moral
obligation other than that of kinship has been established. Morality
is now something more than clan morality. We witness the rise of
intertribal morality. The first step in the moral unification of the
human race has been taken.


[Sidenote: Beginnings of the
ethics of war]

Even in the domain of war we discover traces of the awakening of an
intertribal conscience in races that are still in what we may regard as
the kinship stage of culture. Speaking broadly, primitive man, whose
chief occupations are hunting and fighting,[57] makes no distinction
between war and the hunt. All persons not belonging to his own group
are regarded by him just as he regards wild game. In his efforts to
kill or capture them, all means are right. Once in his power, he may
do with them as he likes; he may make slaves of them, he may torture
them, or he may eat their flesh as he would that of animals taken in
the chase. Conscience lays upon him not the least restraint. Only
slowly do the moral feelings make conquests in this province.

One of the earliest mitigations of the barbarities of primitive warfare
is probably to be found in the discontinuance of the practice of
eating the bodies of the slain.[58] It is this practice of cannibalism
as a concomitant of war by peoples in the earlier stages of their
development that perhaps more than any other circumstance gives such a
repellent aspect to human life on the lower levels of culture. But as
Montaigne observes, the wrong consists in killing men, not in eating
them after they are dead[59]--a very just observation, and one which
should awaken reflection in us who, while piously abstaining from
eating our enemies, still persist in killing them.

The discontinuance of the practice of cannibalism--the practice seems
invariably to be left behind by all peoples as soon as they have
made any considerable advance in civilization[60]--may with little
hesitation be attributed in part at least to the growth and refinement
of the moral feelings. In one case at least we have historical evidence
that among a wide reach of savage tribes the custom was abolished by
the action of a more civilized people, who did just what the more
advanced European nations, under the impulsion of moral feeling, are
doing in regard to the slave trade and cannibalism in Africa to-day.
The Incas of Peru, before granting to conquered tribes terms of peace,
forced them to abandon the practice of cannibalism.[61]

The disuse of poisoned arrows marks another significant mitigation of a
common barbarity of early warfare. We know that in the Greek world by
the opening of the historic period there were communities that had come
to look on the use of poisoned weapons with abhorrence, and to regard
the practice as a crime that aroused the anger of the gods. Thus Homer
represents Ilus of Ephyra, when asked by Odysseus for the fatal poison
wherewith to smear the tips of his arrows, as refusing his request
because he feared the immortal gods.[62]

In these mitigations and prohibitions of the barbarities of war on
the lower levels of savagery we have probably the earliest articles
of the war code of the nations. They mark the first steps taken in
the humanization of war. They indicate the birth of those sympathetic
and moral feelings which, though of painfully slow growth and of
intermittent action, have during the course of the historic ages
effected great ameliorations of the cruelties of primitive warfare, and
foreshadow a time when war between civilized nations shall have become
an inconceivable thing.


[Sidenote: The reaction of
intertribal upon intratribal
morality]

There is a heart of good in things evil. Even the habitual intertribal
wars of primitive communities contain a germ of good. The pressure
exerted by these life-and-death struggles upon the clan or tribe has
a good effect upon the inner relationships of the group. Many of the
social virtues, such as loyalty to comrades and self-devotion to the
common weal, are called into constant and keen activity. For this
reason we usually find these social virtues well developed among
peoples in the clan or tribal stage of civilization. Such peoples may
even be stronger in these special virtues than civilized peoples.

But there is another side to this. Intertribal wars, though they may
in the very earliest stages of human culture be positively promotive
of some of the social virtues, in later and more advanced stages exert
a decidedly unfavorable influence upon the moral development. The low
backward standard of intertribal ethics, reacting upon the higher and
more advanced intratribal standard, tends to make it like unto itself.
As Spencer expresses it, the life of internal amity is assimilated to
the life of external enmity. “Taken in the mass the evidence shows,”
he says, “as we might expect, that in proportion as intertribal and
international antagonisms are great and constant, the ideas and
feelings belonging to the ethics of enmity predominate; and conflicting
as they do with the ideas and feelings belonging to the ethics of amity
proper to the internal life of a society, they in greater or less
degree suppress these, or fill with aggressions the conduct of man
to man.”[63] Thus tribes engaged habitually in war are characterized
by the frequency of homicide within the group. Tribes that regard
the robbery of strangers as honorable come to regard stealing within
the tribe as irreproachable.[64] Revengefulness, inhumanity, and
untruthfulness within each tribe characterize warlike communities.[65]
On the other hand, peaceful tribes are characterized by their superior
intratribal morality. Tribes among whom war is infrequent or unknown
are scrupulously honest.[66] Among such people crimes of violence are
rare.[67]

Thus war, a heritage (as a phase of the “struggle for existence”) of
the human from the lower animal world, becomes early in the human stage
of the cosmic evolution a drag upon the moral progress of the race.[68]




