CHAPTER V

CHINESE MORALS: AN IDEAL OF FILIAL PIETY


I. IDEAS, INSTITUTIONS, AND HISTORICAL CIRCUMSTANCES DETERMINING THE
CAST OF THE MORAL IDEAL


[Sidenote: Introductory]

With the exception of the teachers of the ancient Hebrews, the leaders
of thought of no people have so insistently interpreted life and
history in terms of ethics as have the sages of the Chinese race. And,
excepting the Hebrew teachers, no moralists have so emphasized duties
while leaving rights--upon which the Western world in modern times has
laid such stress--to take care of themselves.[117]

It cannot fail to enhance our interest in a study of the ideal
upheld by these teachers of morality, if we recall that this ideal
of character has for upwards of three thousand years exercised an
incalculable influence upon the moral life of probably a fourth of the
human race and is the cement of a social structure that has outlasted
all others of the ancient world.

The cast of this moral ideal affords a good illustration of the
way in which the moral type of a people is molded by religious and
philosophical ideas, social institutions, race experiences, and
physical environment. Following our usual method of exposition we shall
begin our examination of Chinese morality by first casting a glance
at some of the agencies which have been especially influential in the
creation of the ethical standard.


[Sidenote: Confucianism: the state
worship of Heaven and the popular
worship of ancestors]

There are two religious elements in Confucianism which have special
significance for Chinese morality. These are, first, the state worship
of Heaven and of the lesser gods of the sky and earth; and second, the
popular cult of ancestral spirits.

The worship of Heaven, the supreme deity, is a state function; that
is, it is a matter which is left entirely to the Emperor and the
magistrates. Consequently those duties to God, that is, to a being
looked upon as Creator and Father,--duties of reverence, love, and
worship, which fill so large a place in the moral ideals of Judaism and
Christianity,--find scarcely any place among the duties enjoined upon
the multitude by Confucianism.[118]

The worship of ancestors is the essential and popular element of
Confucianism. Commenting on the ethical value of this cult, Dr.
Martin affirms that “in respect to moral efficiency, it would appear
to be only second to that of faith in the presence of an all-seeing
Deity.”[119] The constant and reverent dwelling upon the virtues of
their ancestors has exalted the virtue of filial piety among the
Chinese to the highest place in their ideal of character and has helped
to make respect for what is old, for what has been handed down from
ancestral ages, a highly prized virtue and a distinguishing trait of
the race character.

In an indirect way also ancestor worship has exerted a great influence
upon the moral life of the Chinese people, for this worship is
necessarily a family cult and must be cared for by the head of the
family. This has prevented the growth of a priestly caste in Confucian
China. The absence of a powerful national priesthood has been a great
boon to Chinese morality. The place thus left vacant has been filled
by the _literati_, or learned class,[120] whose influence upon the
ethical life of the people has, without question, been more beneficent
than that of a priestly class would have been.[121]


[Sidenote: Demonism: evil spirits
the ministers of retributive
justice]

Besides peopling the invisible world with beneficent ancestral spirits,
the Chinese have filled heaven and earth with innumerable demons or
evil spirits. Even the souls of dead men, if they have been wronged on
earth or if their wants since death have been undutifully neglected,
may become malignant, revengeful spirits. These demons are believed to
be the cause of all kinds of diseases, of blight and famine, and of
every misfortune befalling men.[122]

The thing about this Chinese demonism which is of interest to the
student of morals is that, unlike the demonism of Babylonia (p. 46),
or that of the Middle Ages in Europe, it contains a distinct ethical
element. There was little or nothing ethical in the Babylonian or the
medieval belief in the existence of evil spirits because the good
man and the bad were indifferently the victims of their malignant
activity. But the Chinese have moralized their demonism and conceive
these spirits as under the control of Heaven and without power to
do harm without Heaven’s commission or consent. They thus represent
retributive justice and become the ministers of the Supreme Power to
punish evildoers, like Nemesis and the Erinyes of the Greeks. It is
this ethical side of the Chinese belief in evil spirits which causes De
Groot, in emphasizing the import of this demonism for Chinese morality,
to say that “it occupies the rank of moral educator of the people, and
has fulfilled a great mission to many thousands of millions who have
lived and died on Asiatic soil. Demonism, the lowest form of religion,
in China a source of ethics and moral education--this certainly may be
called a singular phenomenon, perhaps the only one of its kind to be
found on this terrestrial globe.” [123]


[Sidenote: Taoism: nature the
exemplar]

Next to Confucianism and demonism, Taoism has been the most important
moral force in the life of the Chinese people. Taoism was originally a
lofty philosophical ethical system out of which was developed later a
religion.[124] The philosophy, however, has always remained something
quite distinct from the religious system.

The essence of Taoism is the pantheistic doctrine that the universe,
or nature, is God. The ethical character of the universe is revealed
in its way or method, which is _Tao_. Now the characteristics of
nature as disclosed in its method of operation are constancy--“heaven
never diverges from its course”; unselfishness--“the earth nourishes
all things”; impartiality--“the earth brings forth its fruits for all
alike”; placidity--“heaven is calm, serene, passionless”; humility--the
sun which “after shining sets,” the moon which “after fullness, wanes,”
the warmth of summer which “when it has finished its work retires,”
water which “seeks the lowest place,” all these are symbols of
“nature’s humility.”[125]

What gives these interpretations of the ethical qualities of nature
their importance for human morality is that man’s highest duty is to
imitate the universe, to behave as nature behaves.[126] “Taoism is the
exhibition of a way or method of living which men should cultivate as
the brightest and purest development of their nature.”[127] “The true
Taoist then is the man who unites in himself [the] virtues or qualities
of the universe, including the constant virtues.”[128] Man’s way must
be nature’s way (Tao). The perfect man must cultivate constancy,
unselfishness, impartiality, benevolence, impassibility, serenity,
humility, and quietness, for these are the characteristics of the
universe.[129]

This Taoist code is designed especially for rulers.[130] He who has
assimilated all his virtues to the virtues of nature is qualified
to administer government.[131] It is in the qualities of character
cultivated by the highest-minded ministers and mandarins, and in the
state worship and official customs that we are to look for the main
ethical influence of the doctrines of Taoism.[132]


[Sidenote: The conception of human
nature as good]

“The tendency of man’s nature to good,” says Mencius, “is like the
tendency of water to flow downwards.”[133] Just as the theological
dogma that man’s nature is hereditarily corrupt, with a proneness to
evil, has shaped and colored a large part of Christian ethics, so has
this opposing conception of human nature as good exercised a tremendous
influence upon the ethical ideal of the Chinese race.[134] For if
man’s nature is good, then for him to live conformably to his nature
is to live rationally, that is, morally. “To nourish one’s nature,”
declared Mencius, “is the way to secure heaven.”[135]

Objections to this view of human nature, based on the fact that men are
actually very different in moral character, are met by saying that this
difference is the effect of environment, just as the inequalities in
the yield of barley seed are due not to a difference in the nature of
the grain but to the different qualities of the soil.[136] In a word,
it is the social environment--instruction and example--which determines
the character of men. “By nature,” says Confucius, “men are nearly
alike; by practice they get to be far apart.”[137]

As we shall see, it makes a vast difference in a man’s conception as to
what he ought to do,--as to how he should regulate his life,--whether
he believes his nature to be inclined to virtue and all his instincts,
impulses, and appetites to be good, or believes his nature to be
corrupt and all his instincts and appetencies to be evil.


[Sidenote: Conception of the past
as perfect]

Another conception that has had a molding influence upon the moral
ideal of China is the conception of the past as perfect without any
historic lapse from this perfection. To understand the import of
this in the ethical history of China we must compare it with the
theological conception of the fall of man. This conception determined
what should be the saving virtues of the historic ethical ideal of the
Western world, making them to be theological in character and having to
do with man’s restoration from an hereditary fallen state.

Now the Chinese, instead of believing in the lapse of man from a
state of original innocence, conceive the past as perfect. This
interpretation of history has had the effect of making reverence for
the past, for the customs, institutions, and teachings of the fathers,
a chief virtue of the moral ideal.[138] The far-reaching consequences
for Chinese life and history which the emphasis laid upon this virtue
has had will be the subject of remark a little further on.


[Sidenote: Geographical and
intellectual isolation]

Again, the moral development of the Chinese people has been profoundly
influenced by the geographical isolation of China. From the earliest
times down almost to the present day China was shut out from
intercourse with the civilized and progressive nations of the West,
and was surrounded by neighbors greatly her inferior in intellectual,
social, and moral culture. The effect of this isolation upon the
Chinese was to foster in them an exaggerated self-esteem and a feeling
of contempt for foreigners. In this respect the masses are still
ethically in that stage of development that the Greeks were in when
they looked contemptuously upon all non-Greeks as “barbarians.”

In still another way has the physical and intellectual isolation of
the Chinese people reacted upon their ethical life. This isolation
has prevented progress beyond a certain stage, and where there is no
progress or very slow progress there is likely to grow up an undue
attachment to ways and customs that are old. This is what has happened
in China, and this has worked together with the worship of ancestors
to create one of the main requirements of the ideal of character,
namely, reverence for the past.


[Sidenote: The appearance of great
men: Confucius and Mencius]

Besides the various agencies already passed under review, the teachings
of two great moralists, Confucius and Mencius, have been a vital force
in the shaping of the moral ideal of China. The greater of these sages
was Confucius (551–478 B.C.) He was unimaginative and practical.
He was not an original thinker. His mission was not to found a new
religion or hold up a new ideal of character, but to give new force
and effectiveness to the already existing moral code of his time and
people.[139] His teachings were especially effective in giving filial
piety the fixed place it holds in the moral ideal of his countrymen.

The influence of Mencius (371–288 B.C.), whose teachings are
characterized by an emphatic denunciation of the wickedness of war, is
to be traced particularly in the low place which is assigned in the
Chinese standard of character to the martial virtues, and the general
disesteem in which the military life is held.


II. THE IDEAL


[Sidenote: The four cardinal
virtues]

Chiefly under the molding influence of the agencies noticed in the
preceding sections, there was shaped in early times in China one of
the most remarkable moral ideals of history, an ideal which has been a
guiding and controlling force in the moral life of probably more of the
human race than any other of the ethical ideals of mankind.

The duties given the highest place in this standard of character are
filial obedience, reverence for superiors, a conforming to ancient
custom, and the maintenance of the just medium. The man who is
carefully observant of these duties is looked upon in China as a man
of superior excellence. In the following pages we shall speak with some
detail of each of these requirements of the ethical ideal.


[Sidenote: Filial obedience or
piety]

In an analysis of the symbols used in the Chinese system of writing
Dr. Legge points out the significant fact that one of the oldest of
these characters, the one standing for filial piety, was originally the
picture of a youth upholding on his shoulders an old man.[140] In this
worn-down symbol is embodied the fundamental fact in the moral life
of the Chinese people. It tells us that the first of family virtues,
filial piety, the virtue that formed the basis of the strength and
greatness of early Rome, constituted also the firm foundation upon
which the enduring fabric of Chinese society was raised. The whole
framework of the social structure is modeled on the family, and all
relations and duties are assimilated, in so far as possible, to those
of the domestic circle.

In no other of the moral ideals of history do we find a more prominent
place given the duties of children toward their parents. It was
ancestor worship, doubtless, as we have already said, which gave these
duties this foremost place in the moral code, and which through all
the millenniums of Chinese history has maintained for them the highest
place in the Chinese standard of moral excellence.[141] The Classic of
Filial Piety declares: “The services of love and reverence to parents
when alive, and those of grief and sorrow to them when dead--these
completely discharge the fundamental duty of living men.”[142] “The
Master said: ‘There are three thousand offenses against which the five
punishments are directed, and there is not one of them greater than
being unfilial.’”[143]

The punishments which the Chinese laws enjoin for unfilial conduct
bear witness to the high estimation in which the Chinese moralists and
rulers hold the virtue of filial obedience and reverence. Thus a parent
may, with the consent of the maternal uncle, require a magistrate to
whip to death an unfilial son.[144] A parricide is beheaded, his body
cut in pieces, his house torn down, his neighbors are punished, his
chief teacher is put to death, and the magistrates of the district in
which he lived are degraded or deposed.[145]


[Sidenote: Reverence toward
superiors]

Filial piety is regarded by Chinese moralists as the root out of
which grow all other virtues. Immediately out of this root springs
the duty of obedience and reverence toward all superiors. This is the
corner stone of the Chinese system of political ethics. “In the family
life,” in the words of Jernigan, “may be seen the larger life of the
empire.”[146]


[Sidenote: A conforming to ancient
custom]

We have here the third of the cardinal duties, the duty which in
practice constitutes the heart and core of Chinese morality.[147]
The commandment is, Follow the ancients; walk in the trodden paths;
let to-day be like yesterday. This duty, as we have already noticed,
springs from the Chinese conception of the past as perfect. If that
past be perfect, then of course it becomes the duty of living men
to make the present like unto it, and in no case to depart from the
customs and practices of the fathers.

We can easily make the Chinese view in this matter intelligible to
ourselves by recalling how we have been wont to regard the religious
past of that Hebrew world of which we are the heirs. Sanctity in our
minds has attached to it all, and we regard any departure from the
teachings and commandments of that past to be a fault, even a species
of wickedness deserving eternal punishment.

Now in China this idea of sanctity, which among ourselves attaches
only to the religious side of life, has attached to all phases of
life, to government, to society, to art, to science, to trade and
commerce--to all of the ideas, ways, and customs of antiquity. As their
fathers did, so must the children do. They must deem worthy what their
fathers deemed worthy and love what their fathers loved.[148] He who
departs from the beliefs and practices of the ancients is regarded as
irreverent and immoral, just as he who with us departs from the beliefs
and customs of the fathers in religion is looked upon as presumptuous
and irreligious.


[Sidenote: The maintenance of the
just medium]

The virtue with which we here have to do is akin to the Greek virtue of
moderation. It consists in never going to extremes, in avoiding excess
in everything, in being always well balanced, standing in the middle,
and leaning not to either side; “to go beyond is as wrong as to fall
short.”[149] One of the sacred books of the Chinese, called _Chung
Yung_, which is ascribed to a grandson of Confucius, and in which is
portrayed an ideally perfect character, The Princely Man, celebrates
this virtue of the just medium.[150] This portraiture of the perfect
man, held up as a pattern for imitation to the successive generations
of Chinese youth, has been a molding force in the moral life of the
Chinese race.[151]


[Sidenote: The duty of
intellectual self-culture]

Having now spoken of the four cardinal virtues of the Chinese standard
of excellence, we shall next proceed to speak more briefly of several
other virtues, which, though not given the most prominent place in
the ideal, are nevertheless assigned a high place among the virtues
exemplified by the perfect man.

First among these we note that of intellectual self-culture. Concerning
this virtue and duty the Chinese sages have thoughts like those of the
Greek teachers. Confucius taught that true morality is practically
dependent upon learning. “It is not easy,” he says, “to find a man who
has learned for three years without coming to be good.”[152] Here we
have, as in the teachings of the Greek philosophers, knowledge made
almost identical with goodness. Intellectual culture and good morals
run together. Again the Master, speaking of the ancients, says: “Their
knowledge being complete, their thoughts were sincere; their thoughts
being sincere, their hearts were then rectified.”[153] “How would it
be possible,” asks Lao-tsze, “to go forward in one’s knowledge and go
backward in one’s morals?”[154]

This commendation of learning by the sages, as we shall see further on,
gave a great impulse to the educational system of China.


[Sidenote: The duties of rulers]

The teachings of Chinese moralists are especially marked by the
emphasis laid upon the duties of rulers. In the times of Confucius
there was lack of union between the different provinces, and China was
in a state bordering on political anarchy. A chief aim of the teachings
of the Master was to correct this condition of things by laying stress
upon the duties of those in authority. Never have the duties of rulers
been more insistently inculcated.

In the first place Confucius set a high aim for the state, an aim
altogether like that set by Plato for the ideal Greek city. He makes
the end of government to be virtue and not wealth. Its aim should be
to promote goodness and not merely material prosperity: “In a state,
pecuniary gain is not to be considered to be prosperity, but prosperity
will be found in righteousness.”[155]

The indispensable qualification in the ruler is goodness. “The love
of what is good,” declares Mencius, “is more than a sufficient
qualification for the government of the empire.”[156] The ruler should
be a father to his people, kind and benevolent, should instruct them,
should follow the laws of the ancient kings, should be a model for his
subjects, should leave a good example to future ages.

Much is said by the Master respecting the influence of the example
set by the ruler: “When the ruler as a father, a son, a brother, is
a model, then the people imitate him.”[157] The relation between
superior and inferior is like that between the wind and the grass:
“The grass must bend when the wind blows across it.”[158] “Never has
there been a case of the sovereign loving benevolence and the people
not loving righteousness.”[159] “If good men were to govern a country
in succession for a hundred years, they would be able to transform the
violently bad and dispense with capital punishment.”[160]

But there has never been such a succession of good rulers in China.
Respecting the influences and circumstances which have brought about
a great discrepancy between the ideal and practice we shall have
something to say in the last division of this chapter.


[Sidenote: Disesteem of the heroic
or martial virtues]

The Chinese ideal of goodness and nobility allows no place among its
virtues to the qualities of the warrior, which have in general been
given such a prominent place in the moral ideals of almost all other
peoples throughout all periods of history. Soldiers hold a very low
place in the social scale; they are looked upon as a “pariah class,”
and their life is regarded as degrading. The Emperor of China, “alone
among the great secular rulers of the world, never wears a sword.”[161]

This spirit of opposition to militarism is embodied in the teachings
of the great moralist Mencius. “The warlike Western world has scarcely
known a more vigorous and sweeping protest against warfare and
everything connected with it and every principle upon which it is
based.”[162] To gain territory by the slaughter of men Mencius declared
to be contrary to the principles of benevolence and righteousness.[163]
He speaks as follows of the military profession: “There are men who
say, I am skillful at marshaling troops. I am skillful in conducting
a battle. They are great criminals.”[164] In _Spring and Autumn_,
a chronicle of early Chinese history, he declares, “There are no
righteous wars,” though he admits that one might be better than
another.[165]

Confucius also, though he did not lay the stress upon the inherent
wickedness of war that was placed upon it by Mencius, maintained that
the same rules of morality apply in the relations of nations as in
those of individuals, and taught that differences between nations
should be settled by arbitration and by considerations of equity and
justice, not by brute force.


[Sidenote: Principles and inner
disposition]

It is often affirmed that the teachings of Chinese moralists are
defective in that they consist in moral precepts rather than in moral
principles, that they lay stress upon the observance of minute rules
of conduct rather than upon the inner disposition. There is, however,
in the body of ethical teachings of the sages no lack of insistence
upon principles of conduct and upon states and dispositions of mind and
heart. All must be right within the heart, says Confucius, for “what
truly is within will be manifested without.”[166] “Let the prince be
benevolent,” says Mencius, “and all his acts will be benevolent; let
the prince be righteous and all his acts will be righteous.”[167] Have
no depraved thoughts, sums up the contents of the three hundred pieces
in the Book of Poetry. “In the ceremony of mourning,” says Confucius
again, “it is better that there be deep sorrow than a minute attention
to observances.”[168]

And it is the same teaching as to what constitutes true morality
which we find in such sayings as these: “The doctrine of our Master
is to be true to the principles of our nature.”[169] “Man is born for
uprightness,”[170] and he should love virtue as he loves beauty,[171]
for its own sake.

In reciprocity Confucius found that same comprehensive rule of conduct
which is rightly regarded as one of the noblest principles of Christian
morality. Being asked if there was one word which may serve as a rule
of practice for all one’s life, the Master said: “Is not reciprocity
such a word? What you do not want done to yourself, do not do to
others.”[172]

And surely nothing could be farther from mere preceptorial teaching
than these words of Mencius: “Let a man not do what his own sense of
righteousness tells him not to do;... To act thus is all he has to
do.”[173] And in the following utterances the sages of China speak with
an accent strangely like that of the Great Prophet of Israel: “The
great man is he who does not lose his child heart.”[174] Again, “I like
life; I also like righteousness. If I cannot keep the two together, I
will let life go and choose righteousness.”[175] Still again: “With
coarse rice to eat, with water to drink, and my bended arm for a
pillow--I have still joy in the midst of these things.”[176]

In the following Mencius shows that he understood the moral use of
dark things: “When Heaven is about to confer a great office on any
man, it first exercises his mind with suffering and his sinews and
bones with toil. It exposes his body to hunger and subjects him
to extreme poverty. It confounds his undertakings. By all these
methods it stimulates his mind, hardens his nature, and supplies
his incompetencies.”[177] And again: “Life springs from sorrow and
calamity, and death from ease and pleasure.”[178] “Men who are
possessed of intelligent virtue and prudence in affairs will generally
be found to have been in sickness and trouble.”[179]


[Sidenote: Defects of the ideal:
no duties to God, and the duties
of parents to children not
emphasized]

Regarded from our point of view the Confucian ideal of moral character
has serious limitations and defects. First, it omits practically all
duties to God. In the words of Dr. Legge, “man’s duty to God is left to
take care of itself.” God or Heaven was a subject of which Confucius
seldom spoke, and the Chinese have in this matter followed the example
of the Master. Heaven is not in all their thoughts.

If we recall what an influence the conception of a supreme being as
Creator and Father has exerted upon the morality of all the races that
have accepted as their creed the ethical monotheism of the Hebrew
teachers, we shall realize how fundamentally the Chinese ideal of
excellence has been modified by the omission of all those duties which
have entered into our own moral code as duties owed to God.[180]

Second, while laying such stress upon the duties of children to their
parents, Confucianism is almost silent regarding the duty of parents
to their children. At this point there is a wide divergence between
the Christian and the Chinese conception of duty. Commenting upon
this matter, Dr. Legge says: “I never quoted in a circle of Chinese
friends the words of Paul in Corinthians--‘The children ought not to
lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children’--without
their encountering a storm of opposition. When I tried to show that the
sentiment was favorable to the progress of society, and would enable
each generation to start from a higher standpoint, I found it difficult
to obtain a hearing.”[181]

The effects of the family ethics of Confucianism upon the moral
practice of the Chinese in the domestic sphere will be noted in the
following division of this chapter.


III. EFFECTS OF THE IDEAL UPON CHINESE LIFE AND HISTORY


[Sidenote: Degree of accordance
between theory and practice;
mandarin morality]

No people have ever lived up to their ideal of moral excellence. The
Chinese like others have obviously fallen far short of embodying in
actual practice the high standard of their sages. But it is certainly
a gross misjudgment of Chinese morality to say, as some writers on
things Chinese have said, that the ideal and the standard maintained
are wholly disconnected.[182] This depreciatory opinion, however,
admits of little dispute if its application be confined to the mandarin
class. In public or official morality there is a deplorable divergence
between theory and practice. Probably the Chinese official class, in
spite of the stress which is laid by moralists upon the duties of
magistrates and rulers, is the most corrupt in the world. Peculation
in office is universal. Bribery is as rife as it was in Rome under the
later Republic. Justice is almost universally bought and sold. This
very general lack of integrity in office is attributable in part at
least to the inadequate salaries. This inevitably calls into existence
a system of fees and presents, which as inevitably grows into a system
of extortion, oppression, and corruption. But, as a well-informed
writer affirms, “Whatever laxity Chinese morality may permit in
official relations, from the workingman, the tradesman, and the servant
it exacts most scrupulous honesty.”[183] The average man in China, it
may be confidently affirmed, is as moral--defining morality as loyalty
to an ideal--as the average man in any other country of the world.


[Sidenote: Favorable effects of
the ideal]

But this general loyalty to the ideal, since this has serious defects,
has brought it about that the ideal has been an efficient force for
evil as well as for good. In some respects it has promoted a true
morality, while in others it has marred and cramped the moral life of
the Chinese people.

Prominent among the favorable effects of the ideal is its exaltation
of the family life. Through the emphasis laid upon special domestic
virtues, particularly that of filial piety, the ideal has given the
family such a place in the fabric of Chinese society as has probably
been given it in no other society ancient or modern, except in that
of early Rome. As the family is the connecting link between the
generations, and consequently as a true family life must characterize
every society that shall live long on the earth, we may without
reserve accept that interpretation of Chinese history which finds in
the exaltation of filial virtue by the sages of China one secret of
that longevity of the Chinese nation which makes it the sole survivor
among the nations from the ancient world of culture.

Like the maxim of filial piety, the Confucian teaching which makes
virtue and not material prosperity the aim and end of government has
been a conservative force in Chinese life and society. “It would be
hard to overestimate,” says Dr. Martin, “the influence which has been
exerted by this little schedule of political ethics [the Great Study],
occupying, as it has, so prominent a place in the Chinese mind for
four and twenty centuries, teaching the people to regard the Empire as
a vast family, and the Emperor to rule by moral influence, making the
goal of his ambition not the wealth but the virtue of his subjects.
It is certain that the doctrines which it embodies have been largely
efficient in rendering China what she is, the most ancient and the most
populous of existing nations.”[184]

In still another way has the moral ideal reacted favorably upon
Chinese civilization. We have noted the high place in the standard of
excellence assigned by the Chinese sages to the duty of intellectual
self-culture. It is scarcely to be doubted that this emphasis laid upon
learning as an important factor in the formation of moral character has
greatly fostered learning and has been a chief agency in the creation
of the Chinese educational system with its competitive literary
examinations, which from the earliest times down almost to the present
day formed the sole gateway to public office.


[Sidenote: Unfavorable effects of
the ideal]

But Confucius, while inculcating the duty of seeking wisdom, taught his
people to look for it in the past. He enjoined them to seek the moral
ideal in the life and deeds of the ancients.

Never in the moral history of the world has the inculcation of a
specific duty had a profounder influence upon the destinies of a
people than this requirement of conformity to the ways of the fathers
has had upon the destinies of the Chinese race. It has been one of
the chief causes of the unchanging, stereotyped character of Chinese
civilization. In obedience to the requirements of this ideal of
goodness the Chinese for two millenniums and more have made to-day like
yesterday. Hence the cycling, goalless movement of Chinese history.

Just as the undue emphasis laid by the Chinese moralists upon the duty
of conforming to the ways of the ancients has reacted in some respects
unfavorably upon Chinese life, so has the exaggerated stress laid by
them upon the doctrine of the just medium exerted a similar unfavorable
influence. This has tended to produce a dull uniformity in Chinese life
and thought. The lack of lofty ideal aims has caused Chinese history to
be singularly barren in chivalric and heroic elements. The everlasting
round of routine makes life a treadmill. It is “the prose of existence.”

Again, the Confucian system tends to produce a formal morality. While
it is not true, as we have seen, that Confucianism neglects to deal
with general principles, right feelings, and motives of action, still
it is true that instead of relying upon these there is an immense
multitude of precepts and minute rules covering the smallest details
of conduct. There are three thousand rules of deportment. This has
resulted, and naturally, in the substitution of the letter for the
spirit. Even the Master has come to serve as a pattern rather in the
outer form of his life than in its informing spirit.[185]

Never was there a better illustration of how the letter killeth;
for a reliance on exact rules and instructions as to conduct in
all conceivable relations and situations has made much of Chinese
morality a formal and lifeless thing. The Chinese are governed by a
sense of propriety rather than by a sense of duty. Their morality is
largely etiquette.[186] It has justly been likened to the morality of
the ancient Romans in that it makes manners and morals to be almost
interchangeable terms. Especially have the hundreds of rules prescribed
for the expression of reverence for superiors tended to empty this
part of Chinese morality of reality and sincerity, and to make Chinese
official ceremonialism one of the most curious phases of Chinese life.

It would seem, further, that the very great emphasis laid by the
Chinese moralists upon the duties of children toward their parents has
prevented the normal development among the Chinese of that ethical
sentiment which among ourselves assigns the duties of parents to infant
children an important place in the code of domestic morality. This lack
among the Chinese of any deep feeling of parental obligation results in
a widespread practice condemned by the conscience of Christian nations.
The exposure or destruction of infants prevails in almost every
province of the Republic. It is the girl babies that are the victims of
this practice.[187] They are often drowned or buried alive.

In this practice the subsistence motive of course is active. It is in
general the extreme poverty of the people which causes them thus to
destroy their offspring. But what renders this practice significant
for the student of morality is the fact that these things are done with
little or no scruple of conscience,[188] showing that acts respecting
which the conscience of Christian nations has become very sensitive
have not yet among the Chinese been brought generally within the circle
covered by the moral feelings.


[Sidenote: Impending changes in
the moral ideal]

We have seen how the moral ideal of a people is modified by all the
changing circumstances of their life and history. The moral ideal
of the Chinese has undergone little modification for upward of two
millenniums, such, for instance, as the ideal of the European peoples
has undergone in a like period, because throughout this long term
the influences acting upon the national life have been practically
unchanged. There have been in Chinese history no such interminglings of
races, revivals in learning, religious reformations, and political and
industrial revolutions as mark the history of the Western nations, and
responding to which the moral evolution of these peoples has gone on
apace.

But now that the long-continued isolation of China has been broken,
and she is being subjected to all the potent influences of the
civilization of the West, it is certain that her social and mental life
will be remolded and cast in new forms. Sooner or later constitutional
government must supersede, has already superseded, the patriarchal
government of the past; the whole social fabric must necessarily be
reconstructed and the individual instead of the family or clan be made
the social and ethical unit;[189] the science of the Western nations
will displace, is already displacing, the obsolete learning of the
Four Classics; Christianity will quicken the atrophied religious
consciousness of the race; and in place of the isolation of the
past there will be established those international relations and
intellectual exchanges which perhaps more than all other agencies
combined have been the motive force of European civilization and
progress.

This new environment, these new influences molding afresh Chinese
social, intellectual, and religious life and institutions, cannot fail
to react powerfully upon the moral ideal of the nation. It too must
inevitably undergo a great change. There will be a shifting in the
standard of character of the different virtues, for the moral ideal
of a simple patriarchal community cannot serve as the model for a
complex modern society, and doubtless some of those virtues--as, for
instance, reverence for the past--which now hold the highest rank in
the code will exchange places with others at present held in little
esteem. Changes in the feelings and beliefs of the people in regard to
ancestor worship, which changes are inevitable, will effect important
modifications in family ethics. The substitution of Western science for
the lore of the classics will introduce evolutionary ethics and the
philosophical virtues of the Western world; while the substitution of
popular government for the patriarchal autocracy will necessarily bring
in the ethics of democracy.

These certain changes in the form and content of the ancestral ideal of
goodness will not only assimilate it to the ethical standard of the
Western world, but, correcting some of its obvious shortcomings, will
render it a still more effective force in the guidance and control of
the moral life of a great and ancient people, whose day apparently is
still in the future.[190]




