CHAPTER XIV

THINGS THAT MONEY WON’T BUY


Everything depends on something else. There is no such thing as
absolute independence, and those who think differently are simply
asleep at the switch. Of all things sought for in this world happiness
stands first, and to be sure of this estatic state of being the common
mistake is made in selecting the path supposed to lead most directly
thereto.

Wealth--choice No. 1. _The common error_ of the human family.

Wealth is the great destroyer of happiness, for it breeds _discontent
and worry_. In the first place comes the worry of accumulating wealth
and once possessed of it comes the worry of hanging on to it. It is but
a step from worry to discontent.

But take away the doubt, for the sake of argument, and analyze wealth
from the standpoint of possession. Now that we have wealth let’s go
ahead and enjoy it. Let us make of our lives an elysian dream. All
right, here goes.

But first, just what is an _elysian dream_? Answer--an elysian dream
is most quickly defined by the word _naught_. It is a figure of speech
and only useful in poetic flights--no transfers issued. The iridescent
dream is the nearest high-sounding vagary that can be bought for cash
and that has a rainbow finish. It soon fades and is lost from view.

[Illustration: Alone with the Grand Canyon]

So we come quickly back to the proposition that wealth, while useful
to the stomach and the back, has no purchasing power with the soul.
Happiness is a _soul quality_--how to reach it is a quandary.

Of things earthly we only require a certain amount; an overplus takes
away zest. The sport of the hunt is no more, when the quarry is tied
up by the heels. Anticipations are happier far than realizations. When
we aspired we looked forward, and up. When we indulged to the full our
eyes fell to the ground.

“_The fun of gettin’ money is the gettin’ of it, son._” This line is
the wind-up of a wild Western solo one of the boys in camp used to sing
with banjo accompaniment. That is all I remember of the song. It struck
me as funny and also as being gospel truth. After having satiated one’s
utmost desires, every luxury seems trivial and vain. Anticipation,
which is a species of joy, no longer dwells in the heart. Thereafter
we hunger for the unattainable--_contentment_. Very seldom do we
change our ways when we have waxed fat and soft--and money won’t buy
everything. Note the “if” in old Aunt Dinah’s Camp Meeting ditty:--

    “If Heaven was a place that money could buy
     The rich would live and the po’r would die----”

And there we are, blockaded with a measley “if.” There are things
that money won’t buy--for instance, a _good night’s sleep_. Our “open
sesame” to the higher level is via the _Self-Denial line_. Money won’t
buy a ticket--only the good and faithful servant may pass through the
turnstile.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV

THE BOY ACROSS THE SEA


Paraphrasing a well-known song to fit a new emergency one of my good
friends, on learning the title of my new book, sends the following
lines which he hopes may find a place in _Making Life Worth While_. And
so they shall, with many, many thanks to the contributor.

    Keep the home fires burning,
    For our boy across the sea,
    Then he’ll know, when he comes home
    Things are as he hoped they’d be.

    Loving hearts are yearning,
    Eager eyes grow dim,
    Many are there bowed down in prayer--
    Hoping--longing--calling for him.

There is a wonderful pathos in this lyric. Al Jolson, in a serious
moment, could put enough soul stirring melody in the last line to bring
an audience to its feet. And wouldn’t “Rodey” make a Billy Sunday
meeting fairly ring with it?

There is more than sentiment in the verse quoted--there is _duty_,
_loyalty_, _fidelity_. Our boys have a right to expect that nothing
untoward shall be allowed to disturb their dear ones while they are
absent, and that whatever the misfortune to themselves over there, the
welcome home will be whole-hearted and genuine.

If ever there was need of cheerful sympathy, the genuine article, it
should come forth now for distribution among the homes from which
husband, son, or brother has gone forward in defense of civilization.
One need not fear to show an interest, which is heartfelt, to any
wife, mother, father, or other relatives of an American soldier. It
is a relief to them to share their hopes and fears with friendly
neighbors. They are brave as they never were before. They are
_fortified_ by the spirit of the manly fellow who went forth to war
through the very gate you lean upon as they tell what they know.

One very dear mother, much too young in appearance to suggest the idea
of having sent a son to the front, told me as she smiled through tears
that he had _brought down two_ in a single action, but unfortunately
was forced to land on enemy soil and was made a prisoner.

“I hope they don’t starve him,” said she sweetly, “nor treat him
cruelly. He is so gentle and kindly himself. I believe they will be
good to him.”

“Of course they will,” said I, joining my hope with her own and
wishing with all my might that I could really share in her belief. Then
her wistful look changed into one of confident expectancy. I had added
to her _store of hopefulness_ and left her laughing heartily at my
prophecy that her boy would probably “_kidnap his guard some night and
ride him back to camp_.”

No doubt about her keeping the home fires burning, nor of the
strong heart within her--“_hoping, longing, calling for him_.”

[Illustration]




