CHAPTER VI

HALF-BAKED KNOWLEDGE


It will take more than a _star shell_ to light up the pathway of a
man who clutters his brain with half-baked knowledge. Pitfalls galore
are ahead of him no matter which way he may turn. Such people are, by
nature, of the cocksure variety, going in where angels fear to tread,
and gaining nothing for certain by reason of their experiences. In time
they earn the reputation of being _bull-headed_ and sooner or later are
on their way downstream without a rudder.

Sometimes the strong-willed fellow of fragmentary knowledge isn’t to
blame for his affliction. Every little circumstance has something to
do with his future course and if he happens to be born “on the wrong
side of the moon,” his course is more or less _predestined_. He views
things through a film--hazy-like, and inaccurate. To him investigation
means nothing. His mind is like a sieve that will not retain the fine
particles which must accumulate until a firm foundation forms upon
which to bear _a permanent housing for his reasoning powers_.

The worst phase of the ever-ready reckoner of uncertain statistics is
that he usually circulates among the credulous. Who of us is there that
hasn’t at some time in our variegated careers sat across from him at an
old-fashioned boarding house _table d’hote_? Even now we can hear him
saying, “_My notion of that is this!_” And wasn’t it fun to watch those
who drank it all in and gulped it down with their coffee? The green
cheese story about the moon would have been swallowed by some of them
if our _half-baked know-it-all_ persisted in its truth.

For such as him, no doubt, was composed Kipling’s wonderfully cynical
line, “alas, we know he never could know and never could understand.”
And also for such as him it was ordained that he should never stay
in one place long. Something tells him to keep moving--perhaps the
giggling that breaks out in the midst of a lofty peroration; a snort
of derision at some observation intended to be philosophical but which
fell far short of the mark.

While it doesn’t take long to pack up and locate elsewhere, it must
be tedious work to have continually the task on hand of making new
friends--_only to lose them_. But that is the penalty of becoming the
butt of the jokester, who will not be denied. Once he finds a victim
it’s time for that victim to move. The jokester has no pity, and in
lofty speech he tells his victim so--accompanied by shouts of approval
from those who hear and understand.

[Illustration: “What ho!” says the King. “Ho hum!” replied his guest.]

The ego of ignorance which stands by its false assumptions from sheer
lack of correct understanding invites pity that it seldom receives. In
due course of human events the distributor of half-baked wisdom will be
grafted with a twig from the tree of learning and thus the species will
become extinct. This, as Shakespeare says, “is devoutly to be wished,”
and while wishing it seems perfectly all right to express the hope that
those who read this short chapter will make a point of sowing a few
seeds in certain gardens where tall weeds now grow, “just for the
lack of the rake and the hoe.” A little sarcasm will turn the trick.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII

HARNESSING THE BRAIN


To make life truly worth while one would, if possible, follow his
natural bent, having trained himself accordingly, otherwise no
matter how successful he might become in _a material sense_, regrets
would be inevitable and likely to lead to a _surly old age_. It is a
vast mistake to believe that the possession of great wealth insures
happiness--and _without happiness_ whose life is worth while?

The makings of many a good butcher, baker, or candlestick-maker have
gone to waste when a youngster walked through the _wrong doorway_
in search of his _first job_. That is the initial lottery ticket we
buy--and sometimes pay for most dearly.

The situation is better now than heretofore, particularly if the
youngster has, on starting out, the advantage of at least a high school
education. To that extent he has a _trained mind_. If he could have
gone on through _college or technical school_ his success would be
practically assured. To get through would mean that he had acquired
proper _mental balance_.

Nevertheless, the great majority still go forth into the world of
affairs with small educational equipment, just when their minds are
least prepared, which accounts for the old saying--“_a little knowledge
is a dangerous thing_.”

So, when John Henry Jones, the hat-maker’s son, shows a disinclination
to go to school his father is pretty sure to take a shot at him
something like this:

“Either go to school, or go to work. _You can’t lay around and loaf._”

Now there was where John’s father got off on the wrong foot. There
and then he missed his chance for a real heart to heart talk and at a
time when his boy, from pure lack of reasoning ability, had worked his
mind into a bad state. Then was the time to have dropped his tools and
straightened out the kinks in the youngster’s noggin. A little friendly
counsel might easily have shown the folly of going out into the world
without _brain tools_ to work with.

As for the boy, his whole future most likely hung upon the result of
an interview inside _the first doorway he entered_. Not possessing a
proper amount of mental training his natural tendency became his sole
guardian at the supreme moment of his career--_the start_. Surely it
would be a matter of luck how he came through. His future, in a sense,
was in the hands of strangers and a strange environment.

In these days people are employed to fill a certain niche. If they
fill it, they are allowed to _keep on filling it_. There’s little
chance to look up from the job--and when the day’s work ends there’s
little chance to look around for another. Thus if John Henry was set to
work in a menial position at the beginning he might never be regarded
as eligible for a position leading toward real advancement. He came
without knowledge and for lack of opportunity he gained none. Being a
perfectly good _sweeper_ and _duster_ he remained to sweep and dust
until, in despair, he tries for a job at another place.

[Illustration: Tweedle-dee--Tweedle-dum]

“But,” you say, “the example is not trustworthy. Look at the great
men who started out in a small way. They are now the bulwark of the
nation.”

Perhaps true, but times have changed radically. It is the _boy
graduate_ that is being sought after now. “Big Business” is bidding for
the annual graduating classes long in advance. It wants _trained minds_
to fill _brain positions_--and that’s why the college man and the
graduates of technical schools forge ahead so quickly. They literally
run over the half-educated, untrained workers who sit and wonder at
their own lack of advancement.

It’s not a matter to pout about. There’s only one thing to do--_work
out of it_. A special course in the thing the mind and talent is best
fitted for is the way out. Why wait for “lightning” to strike us? Night
schools abound in all branches of learning. Many a man has turned
himself into a brilliant lawyer, expert accountant, or famous editor,
through _night school work_. Diligence and perseverance is the price of
success, and only through success do we find life entirely worth while.

I have received many letters from boys and young men who had read
_Laugh and Live_, asking me to name the requisites for success. I have
made but one answer to all such inquiries:--_A healthy, clean body and
a trained, clean mind._ There is no other answer.

[Illustration]




