Chapter V.

In 1875 he told Madame Novikoff that his task was done so far as Inkerman
was concerned, and was proud to think that he had rescued from oblivion
the heroism of the Russian troops in what he calls the “Third Period” of
the great fight, ignored as it was by all Russian historians of the war.
He made fruitless inquiries after a paper said to have been left behind
him by Skobeleff, explaining that “India is a cherry to be eaten by
Russia, but in two bites”; it was contrary to the general’s recorded
utterances and probably apocryphal.  Russophobe as regarded Turkey, he
sneered at England’s sentimental support of nationalities as “Platonic”:
a capital epithet he called it, and envied the Frenchman who applied it
to us, declaring that it had turned all the women against us.  He was
moved by receiving Korniloff’s portrait with a kind message from the dead
hero’s family, seeing in the features a confirmation of the ideal which
he had formed in his own mind and had tried to convey to others.  Readers
of his book will recall the fine tribute to Korniloff’s powers, and the
description of his death, in Chapters VI. and XIII. of Vol. IV. (Cabinet
Edition).

Many of his comments on current events are preserved in the notes or in
the memories of his friends.  Sometimes these were characteristically
cynical.  He ridiculed the newspaper parade of national sympathy with the
Prince of Wales’s illness: “We are represented as all members of the
royal family, and all in family hysterics.”  Dizzy’s orientalization of
Queen Victoria into an Empress angered him, as it angered many more.  The
last Empress Regnant, he said, was Catherine II. and it seems to be
thought that by advising the Queen to take that great monarch’s title, we
shall exercise a wholesome influence on the morals of our women.  He
would quote Byron’s

             “Russia’s mighty Empress
    Behaved no better than a common sempstress;”

“there was an old-fashioned sacredness, which, however foolish
intrinsically, was still useful, in our title of ‘The Queen’; nor do we
see the policy of adding a _Suprême de Volaille_ to the bread and wine of
our Sacrament.”

He chuckled over the indignation of the _haute volée_, when on the visit
to England of President Grant’s daughter in 1872, Americans in London
sent out cards of invitation headed “To meet Miss Grant,” as at a profane
imitation of a practice hitherto confined to royalties; laughing not at
the legitimate American mimicry of European consequence, but at the silly
formalists in Society who fumed over the imagined presumption.  Consulted
by an invalid as to the charm of Ostend for a seaside residence, he
limited it to persons of gregarious habits; “the people are all driven
down to the beach like a flock of sheep in the morning, and in the
evening they are all driven back to their folds.”  He reported a feeble
drama written by his ancient idol, Lord Stratford de Redcliffe; “it is a
painful thing to see a man of his quality and of his age unduly detained
in the world; when the Emperor Nicholas died, the Eltchi lost his _raison
d’être_.”  He disparaged the wild fit of morality undergone by the “Pall
Mall Gazette” during the scandalous “Maiden Tribute” revelation,
pronouncing its protegées to be “clever little devils.”  He was greatly
startled by Gortschakoff’s famous circular, annulling the Black Sea
clause in the Treaty of Paris, and much relieved by Bismarck’s dexterous
interposition, which saved the susceptibility of Europe, and especially
of England, by yielding as a favour to the demand of Russia what no one
was in a position to refuse; but he maintained, and Lord Stratford agreed
with him, that Gortschakoff’s precipitate act was governed by
circumstances never revealed to mankind.  He learned, too, that it caused
the Chancellor to be _déconsideré_ in high Russian circles; he was called
“_un Narcisse qui se mire dans son encrier_.”  Kinglake used to say that
in conceding the right of the Sultan to exclude any war-flag from the
Bosphorus and the Dardanelles, Russia was treating Turkey as a bag-fox,
to be gently hunted occasionally, but not mangled or killed; and he felt
keenly the ridicule resting on the allies, who were compelled to
surrender the neutralization purchased at the cost of so much blood and
treasure.  He watched with much amusement the restoration of Turkish
self-confidence.  “Turkey believes that he is no longer a sick man, and
is turning all his doctors out of the house, to the immense astonishment
of the English doctor, so conscious of his own rectitude that he cannot
understand being sent off with the quacks.  You know in our beautiful
Liturgy we have a prayer for the Turks; it looks as if our supplications
had become successful.”  His interest in Turkey never flagged.  “I am in
a great fright,” he said in 1877, “about my dear Turks, because Russia
gives virtual command of the army before Plevna to Todleben, a really
great _homme de guerre_.”

Russophobia was at that time so strong in London that Madame Novikoff
hesitated to visit England, and he himself feared that she might find it
uncomfortable.  Her alarm, however, was ridiculed by Hayward, “most
faithful of the Russianisers, ready to do battle for Russia at any
moment, declaring her to be quite virtuous, with no fault but that of
being _incomprise_.”  But he groaned over the humiliation of England
under Russia’s bold stroke, noting frequently a decay of English
character which he ascribed to chronic causes.  The Englishman taken
separately, he said, seems much the same as he used to be; but there is a
softening of the aggregate brain which affects Englishmen when acting
together.  He hailed the great Liberal victory of 1880, and watched with
interest, as one behind the scenes, the negotiations which led to Lord
Hartington’s withdrawal and Mr. Gladstone’s resumption of power; for in
these his friend Hayward was an active go-between, removing by his tact
and frankness “hitches” which might otherwise have been disastrous.  He
thought W. E. Forster’s attack on Mr. Gladstone’s Irish policy in 1882
ill-managed for his own position, his famous speech not sufficiently
“clenching.”  Had he separated from his chief on broader grounds,
refusing complicity with a Minister who consented to parley with the
imprisoned Irishmen, he would, Kinglake thought, have occupied a highly
commanding position.  At present his difference from his colleagues was
one only of degree.

He was once beguiled, amongst friends very intimate, into telling a
dream.  He dreamed that he was attending an anatomical lecture—which, as
a fact, he had never done—and that his own body, from which he found
himself entirely separated, was the dissected subject on which the
lecturer discoursed.  The body lay on a table beside the lecturer, but he
himself, his entity, was at the other end of the room, on the furthest or
highest of a set of benches raised one above the other as at a theatre.
He imagined himself in a vague way to be disagreeing with the lecturer;
but the strongest impression on his mind was annoyance at being so badly
placed, so far from the professor and from his own body that he could not
see or hear without an effort.  The dream, he pointed out, showed this
curious fact, that without any conscious design or effort of the will a
man may conceive himself to be in perfect possession of his identity,
whilst separated from his own body by a distance of several feet.  “The
highest concept,” said Jowett, “which man forms of himself is as detached
from the body.”  (“Life,” ii. 241.)  The lecture-room which he imagined
was one of the lower school-rooms at Eton, with which he had been
familiar in early days.

After Hayward’s death in 1884, his own habits began to change.  He still
dined at the Athenæum “corner,” but increasing deafness began to make
society irksome, and, his solitary meal ended, he spent his evenings
reading in the Library.  By-and-by that too became impossible.  His voice
grew weak, throat and tongue were threatened with disease.  In 1888 he
went to Brighton with a nurse, returned to rooms on Richmond Hill, then
to Bayswater Terrace.  An operation was performed and he seemed to
recover, but relapsed.  Old friends tended him: Madame Novikoff, Mr.
Froude and Mr. Lecky, Madame de Quaire and Mrs. Brookfield, Lord
Mexborough his ancient fellow-traveller, Mrs. Craven, Sir William and
Lady Gregory, with a few more, cheered him by their visits so long as he
was able to bear them; and his brother and sister, Dr. and Mrs. Hamilton
Kinglake, were with him at the end.  Patient to the last, kind and gentle
to all about him, he passed away quietly on New Year’s Day, 1891:

             “being merry-hearted,
    Shook hands with flesh and blood, and so departed.”

His remains were cremated at Woking, after a special service at
Christchurch, Lancaster Gate, attended by Dr. and Mrs. Kinglake with
their son Captain Kinglake, the Duke of Bedford, Mr. and Mrs. Lecky, Mrs.
W. H. Brookfield and her son Charles.

                                * * * * *

No good portrait of him has been published.  That prefixed to Blackwood’s
“Eothen” of 1896 was furnished by Dr. Kinglake, who, however, looked upon
it as unsatisfactory.  The “Not an M.P.” of “Vanity Fair,” 1872, is a
grotesque caricature.  The photograph here reproduced (p. 128), by far
the best likeness extant, he gave to Madame Novikoff in 1870, receiving
hers in return, but pronouncing the transaction “an exchange between the
personified months of May and November.”  The face gives expression to
the shy aloofness which, amongst strangers, was characteristic of him
through life.  He had even a horror of hearing his name pealed out by
servants, and came early to parties that the proclamation might be
achieved before as few auditors as possible.  Visiting the newly married
husband of his friend Adelaide Kemble, and being the first guest to
arrive, he encountered in Mr. Sartoris a host as contentedly
undemonstrative as himself.  Bows passed, a seat by the fire was
indicated, he sat down, and the pair contemplated one another for ten
minutes in absolute silence, till the lady of the house came in, like the
prince in “The Sleeping Beauty,” though not by the same process, to break
the charm.  He gave up calling at a house where he was warmly
appreciated, because father, mother, daughter, bombarded him with
questions.  “I never came away without feeling sure that I had in some
way perjured myself.”

                [Picture: Kinglake in the early Seventies]

On his shyness waited swiftly ensuing boredom; if his neighbour at table
were garrulous or _banale_, his face at once betrayed conversational
prostration; a lady who often watched him used to say that his pulse
ought to be felt after the first course; and that if it showed languor he
should be moved to the side of some other partner.  “He had great charm,”
writes to me another old friend, “in a quiet winning way, but was ‘dark’
with rough and noisy people.”  So it came to pass that his manner was
threefold; icy and repellent with those who set his nerves on edge;
good-humoured, receptive, intermittently responsive in general and
congenial company; while, at ease with friends trusted and beloved, the
lines of the face became gracious, indulgent, affectionate, the _sourire
des yeux_ often inexpressibly winning and tender.  “Kinglake,” says Eliot
Warburton in his unpublished diary, “talked to us to-day about his
travels; pessimistic and cynical to the rest of the world, he is always
gentle and kind to us.”  To this dear friend he was ever faithful,
wearing to the day of his death an octagonal gold ring engraved “Eliot.
Jan: 1852.”  He would never play the _raconteur_ in general company, for
he had a great horror of repeating himself, and, latterly, of being
looked upon as a bore by younger men; but he loved to pour out
reminiscences of the past to an audience of one or two at most: “Let an
old man gather his recollections and glance at them under the right
angle, and his life is full of pantomime transformation scenes.”  The
chief characteristic of his wit was its unexpectedness; sometimes acrid,
sometimes humorous, his sayings came forth, like Topham Beauclerk’s in
Dr. Johnson’s day, like Talleyrand’s in our own, poignant without effort.
His calm, gentle voice, contrasted with his startling caustic utterance,
reminded people of Prosper Mérimée: terse epigram, felicitous _apropos_,
whimsical presentment of the topic under discussion, emitted in a low
tone, and without the slightest change of muscle:

    “All the charm of all the Muses
    Often flowering in a lonely word.” {130}

Questions he would suavely and often wittily parry or repel: to an
unhistorical lady asking if he remembered Madame Du Barry, he said, “my
memory is very imperfect as to the particulars of my life during the
reign of Lous XV. and the Regency; but I know a lady who has a teapot
which belonged, she says, to Madame Du Barry.”  Madame Novikoff, however,
records his discomfiture at the query of a certain Lady E—, who, when all
London was ringing with his first Crimean volumes, asked him if he were
not an admirer of Louis Napoleon.  “_Le pauvre Kinglake, décontenancé_,
_repondit tout bas intimidé comme un enfant qu’on met dates le coin_:
_Oui—non—pas précisément_.”

He had no knowledge of or liking for music.  Present once by some
mischance at a _matinée __musicale_, he was asked by the hostess what
kind of music he preferred.  His preference, he owned, was for the drum.
One thinks of the “Bourgeois Gentilhomme,” “_la trompette marine est un
instrument qui me plait, el qui est harmonieux_”; we are reminded, too,
of Dean Stanley, who, absolutely tone-deaf, and hurrying away whenever
music was performed, once from an adjoining room in his father’s house
heard Jenny Lind sing “I know that my Redeemer liveth.”  He went to her
shyly, and told her that she had given him an idea of what people mean by
music.  Once before, he said in all seriousness, the same feeling had
come over him, when before the palace at Vienna he had heard a tattoo
rendered by four hundred drummers.

                                * * * * *

Kinglake used to regret the disuse of duelling, as having impaired the
higher tone of good breeding current in his younger days, and even blamed
the Duke of Wellington for proscribing it in the army.  He had himself on
one occasion sent a cartel, and stood waiting for his adversary, like Sir
Richard Strachan at Walcheren, eight days on the French coast; but the
adversary never came.  Hayward once referred to him, as a counsellor, and
if necessary a second, a quarrel with Lord R—.  Lord R—’s friend called
on him, a Norfolk squire, “broad-faced and breathing port wine,” after
the fashion of uncle Phillips in “Pride and Prejudice,” who began in a
boisterous voice, “I am one of those, Mr. Kinglake, who believe R— to be
a gentleman.”  In his iciest tones and stoniest manner Kinglake answered:
“That, Sir, I am quite willing to assume.”  The effect, he used to say,
as he told and acted the scene, was magical; “I had frozen him sober, and
we settled everything without a fight.”  Of all his friends Hayward was
probably the closest; an association of discrepancies in character,
manner, temperament, not complementary, but opposed and hostile;
irreconcilable, one would say, but for the knowledge that in love and
friendship paradox reigns supreme.  Hayward was arrogant, overbearing,
loud, insistent, full of strange oaths and often unpardonably coarse;
“our dominant friend,” Kinglake called him; “odious” is the epithet I
have heard commonly bestowed upon him by less affectionate acquaintances.
Kinglake was reserved, shy, reticent, with the high breeding, grand
manner, quiet urbanity, _grata protervitas_, of a waning epoch;
restraint, concentration, tact of omission, dictating alike his silence
and his speech; his well-weighed words “crystallizing into epigrams as
they touched the air.” {133}  When Hayward’s last illness came upon him
in 1884, Kinglake nursed him tenderly; spending the morning in his
friend’s lodgings at 8, St. James’s Street, the house which Byron
occupied in his early London days; and bringing on the latest bulletin to
the club.  The patient rambled towards the end; “we ought to be getting
ready to catch the train that we may go to my sister’s at Lyme.” Kinglake
quieted his sick friend by an assurance that the servants, whom he would
not wish to hurry, were packing.  “On no account hurry the servants, but
still let us be off.”  The last thought which he articulated while dying
was, “I don’t exactly know what it is, but I feel it is something grand.”
“Hayward is dead,” Kinglake wrote to a common friend; “the devotion shown
to him by all sorts and conditions of men, and, what is better, of women,
was unbounded.  Gladstone found time to be with him, and to engage him in
a conversation of singular interest, of which he has made a memorandum.”

Another of Kinglake’s life-long familiars was Charles Skirrow, Taxing
Master in Chancery, with his accomplished wife, from whose memorable fish
dinners at Greenwich he was seldom absent, adapting himself no less
readily to their theatrical friends—the Bancrofts, Burnand, Toole,
Irving—than to the literary set with which he was more habitually at
home.  He was religiously loyal to his friends, speaking of them with
generous admiration, eagerly defending them when attacked.  He lauded
Butler Johnstone as the most gifted of the young men in the House of
Commons; would not allow Bernal Osborne to be called untrue; “he offends
people if you like, but he is never false or hollow.”  A clever
_sobriquet_ fathered on him, burlesquing the monosyllabic names of a
well-known diarist and official, he repelled indignantly.  “He is my
friend, and had I been guilty of the _jeu_, I should have broken two of
my commandments; that which forbids my joking at a friend’s expense, and
that which forbids my fashioning a play upon words.”  He entreated Madame
Novikoff to visit and cheer Charles Lever, dying at Trieste; deeply
lamented Sir H. Bulwer’s death: “I used to think his a beautiful
intellect, and he was wonderfully _simpatico_ to me.”  But he was shy of
condoling with bereaved mourners, believing words used on such occasions
to be utterly untrue.  He loved to include husband and wife in the same
meed of admiration, as in the case of Dean Stanley and Lady Augusta, or
of Sir Robert and Lady Emily Peel.  Peel, he said, has the _radiant_
quality not easy to describe; Lady Emily is always beauteous, bright,
attractive.  Lord Stanhope he praised as a historian, paying him the
equivocal compliment that his books were much better than his
conversation.  So, too, he qualified his admiration of Lady Ashburton,
dwelling on her beauty, silver voice, ready enthusiasm apt to disperse
itself by flying at too many objects.

He was wont to speak admiringly of Lord Acton, relating how, a Roman
Catholic, yet respecting enlightenment and devoted to books, he once set
up and edited a “Quarterly Review,” with a notion of reconciling the
Light and the Dark as well as he could; but the “Prince of Darkness, the
Pope,” interposed, and ordered him to stop the “Review.”  He was
compelled to obey; not, he told people, on any religious ground, but
because relations and others would have made his life a bore to him if he
had been contumacious against the Holy Father.

Kinglake was strongly attracted by W. E. Forster, a “rough diamond,”
spoken of at one time as a possible Prime Minister.  Beginning life, he
said, as a Quaker, with narrow opinions, his vigour of character and
brain-power shook them off.  Powerful, robust, and perfectly honest, yet
his honesty inflicted on him a doubleness of view which caused him to be
described as engaging his two hands in two different pursuits.  His
estimate of Sir R. Morier would have gladdened Jowett’s heart; he loved
him as a private friend; eulogized his public qualities; rejoiced over
his appointment as Ambassador at St. Petersburg, seeing in him a
diplomatist with not only a keen intellect and large views, but vibrating
with the warmth, animation, friendliness, that are charmingly
_un_-diplomatic.  Of Carlyle, his life-long, though not always congenial
intimate, he used to speak as having great graphic power, but being
essentially a humourist; a man who, with those he could trust, never
pretended to be in earnest, but used to roar with glorious laughter over
the fun of his own jeremiads; “so far from being a prophet he is a bad
Scotch joker, and knows himself to be a wind-bag.”  He blamed Froude’s
revelations of Carlyle in “The Reminiscences,” as injurious and
offensive.  Froude himself he often likened to Carlyle; the thoughts of
both, he said, ran in the same direction, but of the two, Froude was by
far the more intellectual man.

Staunch friend to the few, polite, though never effusive, to the many, he
also nourished strong antipathies.  The appearance in Madame Novikoff’s
rooms of a certain Scotch bishop invariably drove him out of them, “Peter
Paul, Bishop of Claridge’s,” he called him.  To Von Beust (the Austrian
Chancellor), who spoke English in a rapid half-intelligible falsetto, he
gave the name of _Mirliton_ (penny trumpet).  His allusions to Mirliton
and to the Bishop frequently mystified Madame Novikoff’s guests.  For he
loved to talk in cypher.  Canon Warburton, kindly searching on my behalf
his brother Eliot’s journals, tells me that he and Kinglake, meeting
almost daily, lived in a cryptic world of jokes, confidences,
colloquialisms, inexplicable to all but their two selves.

He cordially disliked “The Times” newspaper, alleging instances of the
unfairness with which its columns had been used to spite and injure
persons who had offended it, chuckling over Hayward’s compact
anathema,—“‘The Times,’ which as usual of late supplied its lack of
argument and proof by assumption, misrepresentation, and personality.”
He thought that its attacks upon himself had helped his popularity.  “One
of the main causes,” he said in 1875, “of the interest which people here
were good enough to take in my book was the fight between ‘The Times’ and
me.  In 1863 it raged, in 1867 it was renewed with great violence, and
now I suppose the flame kindles once more, though probably with
diminished strength.  In 1863 the storm of opinion generally waxed fierce
against me, but now, as I hear, ‘The Times’ is alone, journals of all
politics being loud in my praise.  But I never look at any comment on my
volumes till long afterwards, and I never in my life wrote to a
newspaper.”  Once, when Chenery, the editor, came to join the table at
the Athenæum where he and Mr. Cartwright were dining, Kinglake rose, and
removed to another part of the room.  “The Times” had inserted a
statement that Madame Novikoff was ordered to leave England, and he thus
publicly resented it.  “So unlike me,” he said, relating the story, “but
somehow a savagery as of youth came over me in my ancient days; it was
like being twenty years old again.”  It came out, however, that “our
indiscreet friend Froude” had written something which justified the
paragraph, and Kinglake sent his _amende_ to Chenery, with whom
ordinarily he was on most friendly terms.

He disliked Irishmen “in the lump,” saying that human nature is the same
everywhere except in Ireland.  Parnell he personally admired, though
hating Home Rule; and stigmatized as gross hypocrisy the desertion of him
by Liberals after the divorce trial.  He was wont to speak irreverently
of Lord Beaconsfield, whom he had known well at Lady Blessington’s in
early days.  He would have found himself in accord with Huxley, who used
to thank God, his friend Mr. Fiske tells us, that he had never bowed the
knee either to Louis Napoleon or Benjamin Disraeli.  He poured scorn on
the Treaty of Berlin.  Russia, he said, defeating the Turks in war, has
defeated Beaconsfield in diplomacy.  If Englishmen understood such things
they would see that the Congress was a comedy; anyone who will satisfy
himself as to what Russia was really anxious to obtain, and then look at
the Salisbury-Schouvaloff treaty, will see that, thanks to Beaconsfield’s
imbecility, Schouvaloff obtained one of the most signal diplomatic
triumphs that was ever won. {140}  A sound _entente_ between Russia and
England he thought both possible and desirable; but conceived it to be
rendered difficult by the want of steadiness and capacity which, for
international purposes, were the real faults of Lord Beaconsfield and
Lord Salisbury.  He repeated with much amusement the current anecdote of
Lord Beaconsfield’s conquest of Mrs. Gladstone.  Meeting her in society,
he was said to have inquired with tenderness after Mr. Gladstone’s
health, and then after receiving the loving wife’s report of her William,
to have rejoined in his most dulcet tones, “Ah! take care of him, for he
is very _very_ precious.”  He always attributed Dizzy’s popularity to the
feeling of Englishmen that he had “shown them sport,” an instinct, he
thought, supreme in all departments of the English mind.

Towards his old schoolfellow Gladstone he never felt quite cordially,
believing, rightly or wrongly, that the great statesman nourished enmity
towards himself.  He called him, as has been said, “a good man in the
worst sense of the term, conscientious with a diseased conscience.”  He
watched with much amusement, as illustrating the moral twist in
Gladstone’s temperament, the “Colliery explosion,” as it was called, when
Sir R. Collier, the Attorney-General, was appointed to a Puisne
Judgeship, which he held only for a day or two, in order to qualify him
for a seat on a new Court of Appeal; together with a very similar trick,
by which Ewelme Rectory, tenable only by an Oxonian, was given to a
Cambridge man.  The responsibility was divided between Gladstone and Lord
Hatherley the Chancellor, with the mutual idea apparently that each of
the two became thereby individually innocent.  But Sir F. Pollock, in his
amusing “Reminiscences,” recalls the amicable halving of a wicked word
between the Abbess of Andouillet and the Novice Margarita in “Tristram
Shandy.”  It answered in neither case.  “‘They do not understand us,’
cried Margarita.  ‘_But the Devil does_,’ said the Abbess of Andouillet.”
The Collier scandal narrowly escaped by two votes in the Lords,
twenty-seven in the Commons, a Parliamentary vote of censure, and gave
unquestionably a downward push to the Gladstone Administration.  Mr.
Gladstone, on the other hand, cordially admired Kinglake’s speeches,
saying that few of those he had heard in Parliament could bear so well as
his the test of publication.

To the great Prime Minister’s absolute fearlessness he did full justice,
as one of the finest features in his character; and loved to quote an
epigram by Lord Houghton, to whom Gladstone had complained in a moment of
weariness that he led the life of a dog.  “Yes,” said Houghton, “but of a
St. Bernard dog, ever busied in saving life.”  He loved to contrast the
twofold biographical paradox in the careers of the two famous rivals,
Gladstone and Disraeli; the dreaming Tory mystic, incarnation of Oxford
exclusiveness and Puseyite reserve, passing into the Radical iconoclast;
the Jew clerk in a city lawyer’s office, “bad specimen of an inferior
dandy,” coming to rule the proudest aristocracy and lead the most
fastidious assembly in the world.

He was not above broad farce when the fancy seized him.  At the time when
a certain kind of nonsense verse was popular, he, with Sir Noel Paton and
others, added not a few facetious sonnets to Edward Lear’s book, which
lay on Madame Novikoff’s table.  His authorship is betrayed by the
introduction of familiar Somersetshire names, Taunton, Wellington, Curry
Rivel, Creech, Trull, Wilton:

    “There was a young lady of Wilton,
       Who read all the poems of Milton:
    And, when she had done,
    She said, ‘What bad fun!’
       This prosaic young lady of Wilton.”

There were many more, but this will perhaps suffice; _ex ungue leonem_.
They were addressed to the “Fair Lady of Claridge’s,” Madame Novikoff’s
hotel when in London, and were signed “Peter Paul, Bishop of Claridge’s.”

    “There is a fair lady at Claridge’s,
    Whose smile is more charming to me,
    Than the rapture of ninety-nine marriages
       Could possibly, possibly, be;—”

is the final dedicatory stanza.  It is the gracious fooling of a
philosopher who understood his company.  “There are folks,” says Mr.
Counsellor Pleydell, “before whom a man should take care how he plays the
fool, because they have either too much malice or too little wit.”
Kinglake knew his associates, and was not ashamed _desipere in loco_, to
frolic in their presence.

                                * * * * *

One point there was on which he never touched himself or suffered others
to interrogate him, his conception of and attitude towards the Unseen.
He wore his religion as Sir William Gull wore the fur of his coat,
_inside_.  Outwardly he died as he had lived, a Stoic; that on the most
personal and sacred of all topics he should consult the Silences was in
keeping with his idiosyncrasy.  Another famous man, questioned as to his
religious creed, made answer that he believed what all wise men believe.
And what do all wise men believe?  “That all wise men keep to
themselves?”




INDEX


Abdu-l-Medjid, 66.

Aberdeen, Lord, 70.

Acton, Lord, 135.

Acton, Mrs., 7.

Adams, J. Quincy, 66.

Airey, General, 63, 72.

Alma, 39, 48, 59, 64, 73.

Ampère, M., 102.

Anastasius, 34.

Ancelot, Mme., 99.

Arnold, Matthew, 88.

Ashburton, Lady, 135.

Ashburton, Lord, 33.

Athanasian Creed, 104.

                                * * * * *

Bachaumont, M., 87.

Balaclava, 74–77.

Bazancourt, Baron de, 48.

Beaconsfield.  _See_ Disraeli.

Beauclerk, T., 129.

Beaufort, Duke of, 39.

Bedford, Duke of, 127.

Berlin Congress, 139, etc.

Beust, Count, 96, 137.

Bismarck, 105, 116–118, 140, 141.

Blackwood, 46, 49, 52, 127.

Blaygon Hills, 25.

Boissy, Marquis de, 18.

Bosquet, General, 74, 76.

Boyle, Dean, 3.

Bridgewater, 40, 43, 45.

Bright, John, 68.

Brocas Clump, 22.

Brookfield, Mrs., 11, 18, 126, 127.

Browning, R., 15.

Buller, Charles, 11.

Bulwer-Lytton, 19.

Bulwer, Sir H., 135.

Bunbury, Sir H., 111, 112.

Burghersh, Lord, 65.

Burnaby, Captain, 78.

Burton.  _See_ Carrigaholt.

Bury, Lord, 118.

Byron, 11, 15, 22, 29.

                                * * * * *

Cabinet, Sleeping, 61.

Cagliari, 41.

Campbell, Colin, 62, 72.

Cambridge, 10, 13.

Canning, Lady, 66.

Canning, Sir S.  _See_ Stratford.

Canrobert, 71, 78, 79.

“Caradoc,” 60.

Carlisle, Lord, 2.

Carlyle, 15, 33, 63, 136–137.

Carrigaholt, 21, 38.

Cartwright, Mr., 138.

Cathcart, General, 60, 76, 77.

Catherine II., 121.

Charles et George, 41.

Chatham, Lady, 6.

Chenery, Mr., 98, 111, 138–139.

Chesterfield, Lord, 58.

Chiffney, 24, 25.

Chorley, Mr., 17.

Clarendon, Lord, 50, 69.

Claridge’s Hotel, 100, 137, 146.

Clarke, Major, 64.

Codrington, General, 63, 74.

Coleridge, G., 9.

Collier, Sir R., 144.

“Corner,” the, 112, 126.

Cornwall, Barry.  _See_ Procter.

“Cosmo,” the, 115.

Cour, M. de la, 69.

Crosse, Mrs., 3, 19.

Crimea, 39, 48, 54, 57, etc.

Crump, 51.

Curzon, 2.

                                * * * * *

Daubeny, Col., 78.

D’Aurelle, 63.

Delane, 70.

Dilke, Sir Charles, 114.

Dilke, Lady, 87.

Disraeli, B., 41, 42, 121, 139, 140.

Dollinger, Dr., 104.

Doyle, Sir F., 22.

Dream, 125.

Du Barry, Mme., 130.

Duff, Sir M. E. Grant, 4, 44.

                                * * * * *

Ellenborough, Lord, 50.

Ellis, Mrs., 35.

Eothen, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20–32, 38, 41, 58,
85–88, 127.

Estcott, Mr., 4.

Etchingham Letters, 130.

Eton, 10, 21, 28.

Everett, Mr., 25–26.

                                * * * * *

Fane, Violet, 102.

Ffoulkes, Rev. E. S., 104.

“Filioque,” 104.

Fiske, Mr., 139.

Fitzgerald, E., 54.

Flowers, Jemmy, 22.

Forster, W. E., 124, 136.

Froude, J. A., 95, 99, 102, 126, 137.

                                * * * * *

Gallifet, M., 117.

Gambetta, 118.

Gatty, Dr., 10.

Gerontaion, 101.

Gladstone, W. E., 10, 70, 94, 95, 99, 107, 115, 124, 143–145.

Gladstone, Mrs., 143.

Gortschakoff, 57, 97, 105–108, 122.

Grant, Miss, 121.

Gregory, Sir W., 112, 126.

Gregory, Lady, 3, 38, 111, 126, 133.

Greville Memoirs, 60.

Grey, Earl, 93, 108.

Grundy, Mrs., 110.

Guiccioli, Mme., 18.

Gull, Sir W., 147.

                                * * * * *

Hallam, A., 11.

Hamley, Sir E., 118.

Hampden, J., 46.

Harrington, Lord, 18.

Harrison, F., 114.

Harrington, Lord, 124.

Hatherley, Lord, 144.

Hay, Mr., 66.

Hayward, Abraham, 3, 19, 33, 95, 100, 102, 112, 124, 126, 131–133.

Herbert, Auberon, 115.

Holland, Lady, 99.

Homer, 7, 10, 24, 27, 61.

Hood, Thomas, 17.

Hook, Theodore, 112.

Hoseason, 10.

Houghton, Lord, 3, 11, 13, 16, 17, 34–36, 99, 145.

Howard, Mrs., 82.

Huxley, Professor, 139.

                                * * * * *

Inglis, Sir R., 23–24.

Inkerman, 77–79.

Irby, Miss, 98.

                                * * * * *

Jelf, W. E., 26.

Johnstone, Butler, 134.

Jowett, B., 125, 136.

                                * * * * *

Karabelnaya, 72, 85.

Keate, Dr., 10, 21, 22.

Kemble, Adelaide, 128.

Kemble, J. M., 11, 13.

Kenyon, J., 39.

Kinglake, A. W., parentage and birth, 5; school at Ottery, 9; Eton, 10;
Cambridge, 11–13; tour in the East, 14; called to the Bar, 17; further
travel, 18; shyness in society, 18; manners and appearance, 19; “Eothen”
published, 20; its popularity, 26–32; writes in “Quarterly Review,” 33;
accompanies Lord Raglan to the Crimea, 39; enters Parliament for
Bridgewater, 40; first failure in the House, and subsequent speeches, 41,
etc.; unseated for bribery, 45; publishes the first two volumes of
“Invasion of the Crimea,” 48; further volumes, 55; the book discussed,
56–86; and compared with “Eothen,” 86–89; his first acquaintance with
Madame Novikoff, his tribute to her brother, M. Kiréeff, 91; her history,
character, literary work, 92–95, 99; Kinglake’s review of her book
“Russia and England,” 95–98; his letters to her when abroad, 100, etc.;
his later years, friends, daily habits, 111; the Athenæum “Corner,” 112;
his comment on Sir Charles Dilke’s Civil List motion, 114; on the French
character, 116; on Gortschakoff’s circular, 122; his singular dream, 125;
increasing deafness, 126; sickness and death, 127; his traits of manner,
temperament, speech, as reported by surviving friends, 127, etc.;
attendance on Hayward’s last hours, 133; antipathies and likings, 137,
etc.; opinion of Gladstone and Disraeli, 139, etc.; reserve as to his own
religious feelings, 147.

Kinglake, Captain, 127.

Kinglake, Dr. Hamilton, 5, 6, 7, 9, 126–127.

Kinglake, Mr. Robert, 5, 6.

Kinglake, Mr. William, 5, 6.

Kinglake, Mrs. Hamilton, 4, 126–127.

Kinglake, Mrs. William (the elder), 6, 8.

Kinglake, Mr. Serjeant, 5, 6.

Kinglake, Mrs. Serjeant, 48.

Kinglake, Rev. W. C., 5, 6.

Kiréeff, Alexander, 92, 96.

Kiréeff, Nicholas, 90.

Knox, Alexander, 7.

Korniloff, 73, 120.

                                * * * * *

Lafayette, Mme. de, 46.

“Lama, The,” 16.

Lamb, Charles, 34.

Landseer, Edwin, 17.

Lane-Poole, Mr., 66, 67.

Laveleye, M., 98.

Layard, A. H., 49.

Lear, Edward, 146.

Le Brun, Mme., 99.

Lecky, Mr., 126.

Lever, Charles, 134.

Lewis, Sir G. Cornewall, 87.

Liddon, Canon, 104.

Lieven, Princess, 93, 108.

Lind, Jenny, 13.

Lockhart, J. G., 33.

Lucas, Mr., 49.

Lucan, Lord, 72, 76.

Lyons, Lord, 114.

                                * * * * *

Macaulay, 13, 33, 48, 51.

MacCarthy, 34.

Marie of Anjou, 23.

Marlen Bells, 13, 25.

Martineau, Miss, 2.

Massey, Mr., 112.

Maurice, F. D., 11.

Menschikoff, Prince, 67–68.

Mérimée, Prosper, 129.

Methley, 10, 14, 21.

Mexborough, Lord, 10, 126.

Miller, Captain, 64.

Miller, Larrey, 21–22.

Milman, Dean, 33.

“Minden Yell,” 62, 78.

Mirliton, 137.

Monckton Milnes.  _See_ Houghton.

Montalembert, M. de, 44.

Morier, Sir Robert, 99, 102, 136.

“Most, Mr.,” 45.

Motley, Mr., 17.

Murray, John, 20.

Murray, Messrs., 97.

                                * * * * *

Napier, Macvey, 33.

Napoleon I., 34–35, 54, 69, 82, 117.

Napoleon, Louis, 41, 43, 71, 81, etc., 117, 119, 130.

Napoleon, Prince, 74.

Newcastle, Duke of, 48, 61, 70, 72.

Nicholas, Czar, 62, 68, 79–81, 93, 122.

Nolan, Captain, 62.

Norton, Mrs., 19.

“Nouvelle Revue,” 4, 97.

Novikoff, Mme., 4, 90–110, 118–119, 126–127, 130, 134, 137–138, 146.

Nugent, Lord, 2.

Nurses, The Lady, 85.

                                * * * * *

Okes, Dr., 21–22.

Oliphant, L., 46, 112.

Ollivier, Mr., 20.

Osborne, Bernal, 18, 99, 134.

Ostend, 122.

Ottery St. Mary, 9.

Ourusoff, Prince, 119.

“Owl, The,” 46–47.

                                * * * * *

Padwick, Henry, 42.

“Pall Mall Gazette,” 122.

Palmerston, Lord, 41, 70.

Panmure, Lord, 60, 70.

Parnell, C. S., 139.

Paton, Sir N., 146.

Peel, Lady E., 135.

Peel, Sir R. (senior), 23.

Peel, Sir R. (junior), 41, 102, 135.

Pelissier, Marshal, 71–72.

Pennefather, General, 73, 77.

Pere Enfantin, 23.

Pharisees, the, 103.

Platonic, 38, 120.

Pleydell, Counsellor, 146.

Poitier, M., 38.

Pollington, Lord, 10, 14, 21.

Pollock, Sir F., 113, 145.

Poole, Mrs., 35.

Portraits, 127.

Praed, Mackworth, 10.

Prince Consort, 60.

Procter, Adelaide, 17.

Procter, B. W., 15, 16, 23.

Procter, Mrs., 15, 16, 17, 21.

                                * * * * *

Quaire, Mme. de, 126.

                                * * * * *

Raglan, Lord, 39, 40, 59, etc.

Raglan, Lady, 40, 58.

Rawlinson, Sir H., 33, 112.

Récamier, Mme., 99.

Reeve, H., 50.

Robespierre, 46.

Robinson, Crabb, 16.

Rogers, Thorold, 104.

Ruskin, J., 88.

                                * * * * *

Salisbury, Lord, 97, 143.

Salvation Army, 14.

Sartoris, Mr., 128.

Savile, Mr., 10.

Scarlett, General, 74–75.

Schwetschke, G., 140.

Schouvaloff, Count, 140.

Sidmouth, 110.

Simpson, Mrs., 19, 53, 82.

Skene, Miss, 1.

Skepper, Anne, 15.

Skirrow, Ch., 134.

Skobeleff, General, 98, 99, 120.

Smith, Dr. Wm., 95.

Smith, Sydney, 7, 8.

Spedding, J., 11.

Spring Rice, Hon. S., 11.

St. Arnaud, 18, 65, 116.

St. Simon, 23.

Stanhope, Lady H., 6.

Stanhope, Lord, 135.

Stanley, Dean, 2, 65, 104, 131, 135.

Stanley, Lady A., 135.

Stansfeld, Rt. Hon. J., 102.

Sterling, J., 11.

Steyne, Lord, 103.

Stirling, Sir W., 112.

Storks, Mr., 112.

Stratford de Redcliffe, Lord, 61, 62, 65, etc., 101, 122.

Strachan, Sir R., 131.

Strzelecki, Count, 112.

Swift, Dean, 100.

                                * * * * *

Talleyrand, 129.

Tangier, 8.

Taunton, 4, 5, 8, 9, 13.

Tennyson, 11, 12, 16, 22, 58, 69.

Thackeray, 11, 7, 15, 33.

Thiers, M., 113.

Thompson, Dr., 11.

Ticknor, G., 112.

“Timbuctoo,” 12.

“Times, The,” 49, 98, 99, 137, 138.

Todleben, 49, 73, 78–79, 119, 123.

Tower, Tom, 86.

Trench, R. C., 11.

Trevelyan, Sir G., 47.

“Tristram Shandy,” 145.

Twisleton, E., 112.

Tyndall, Professor, 102.

Tynte, Colonel, 40.

                                * * * * *

“Vanity Fair,” 127.

Vathek, 34.

Venables, G., 17, 33, 112.

Verg, Count de, 17.

Victoria, Queen, 80, 84, 121.

Villiers, Charles, 99.

Voltaire, 84.

                                * * * * *

Waddy, Colonel, 78.

Wales, Prince of (Regent), 24–25.

Wales, Prince of (late), 120.

Warburton, Canon, 3, 137.

Warburton, Eliot, 2, 14, 17, 20, 21, 34–35, 129, 137.

Waverley, 58.

Wellington, Duke of, 80, 108, 131.

Westbrook, Colonel, 42.

Wilberforce, Samuel, 33.

Wolff, Drummond, 112.

Woodforde, Dr., 6.

Woodforde, Mary, 6.

Wordsworth, W., 11, 34, 56.

Wordsworth, Charles, 12.

Wynter, Dr., 26.

                                * * * * *

Yea, Lacy, 60, 63.

Yonge, Miss, 1.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

               CHISWICK PRESS: CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
                   TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.

                                * * * * *




ADVERTISEMENTS


            _On Hand-made Paper_, _small_ 8_vo_, 4_s._ _net_.



EOTHEN


                         BY ALEXANDER W. KINGLAKE

                     REPRINTED FROM THE FIRST EDITION

                           WITH AN INTRODUCTION

                         BY THE REV. W. TUCKWELL

                _The original Illustrations_, _and a Map_.

“The Text is an accurate reprint of the first edition of 1844, and
Kinglake’s subsequent alterations are omitted and his omissions restored.
Even the singularly erratic and illogical punctuation is rigidly
preserved.  Thus in the words of the editor, the Rev. W. Tuckwell, ‘we
are brought nearer to the author, whom we love, by the intermediate
transference into book form of his creations, fresh from his devising and
correcting pen, and reflecting his joy in their production.’”—_Athenæum_.

“The present one appeals to a different class of reader from those who
like the modern _format_ with fresh illustrations, inasmuch as it is an
exact reprint, with title-page, of the first edition, preserving ‘the
eccentric punctuation of an ungrammatical Etonian in pre-local
examination days,’ and the original form of a good many passages which
were afterwards omitted or altered.  The value of the reprint is much
enhanced by an excellent introduction from the pen of the Rev. W.
Tuckwell, who remembers the sensation ‘Eothen’ caused at Oxford—even
among the scouts—on its first appearance.”—_Literature_.

“Alone of the famous books on Oriental sightseeing, it is again and again
reproduced, and ‘is devoured _senibus puerisque_ with unflagging
freshness of enjoyment.’”—_Speaker_.

                      LONDON: GEORGE BELL AND SONS,
                       YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.



RECENT PUBLICATIONS BY MESSRS. BELL.


                            _Just published_.


THE LIFE OF NAPOLEON I.


Including new materials from the British Official Records, by JOHN
HOLLAND ROSE, M.A., late Scholar of Christ’s College, Cambridge, author
of “The Revolutionary and Napoleonic Era,” and “A Century of Continental
History.”  With many maps and plans and numerous illustrations from
contemporary paintings, rare prints and engravings, medals, etc.; also a
facsimile from a letter of Napoleon.  In two volumes, large post 8vo,
handsomely bound, 18_s._ net.


MEMOIRS AND CORRESPONDENCE OF COVENTRY PATMORE.


Compiled and Edited by BASIL CHAMPNEYS.  With numerous Photogravure
Portraits and other Illustrations in Collotype, etc.  Two vols., demy
8vo, 32_s._ net.

—A CHEAPER EDITION of the above work, with two Portraits.  Two vols.,
demy 8vo, 15_s._


THE WORKS OF C. S. CALVERLEY.


With a Memoir by SIR WALTER J. SENDALL, G.C.M.G., Governor of British
Guiana, and Portrait.  Complete in one volume.  _Second Impression_,
crown 8vo, 6_s._ net.

                             LIBRARY EDITION.

With binding designed by GLEESON WHITE.  In four vols., crown 8vo, 5_s._
each.

Vol. I.  Literary Remains.  With a Memoir by SIR WALTER J. SENDALL,
K.C.M.G., and Portrait.

Vol. II.  Verses and Fly-Leaves.

Vol. III.  Translations into English and Latin.

Vol. IV.  Theocritus Translated into English Verse.


HANDBOOKS TO THE GREAT PUBLIC SCHOOLS.


Crown 8vo, 3_s._ 6_d._ net each.

ETON.

By A. CLUTTON-BROCK.  With 46 Illustrations.

CHARTERHOUSE.

By A. H. TOD, M.A., Assistant Master at Charterhouse.  With 58
Illustrations.

RUGBY.

By H. C. BRADBY, B.A., Assistant Master at Rugby School.  With 44
Illustrations.

WINCHESTER.

By R. TOWNSEND WARNER, New College, Oxford, late Scholar of Winchester
College.  With 46 Illustrations.

HARROW.

By J. FISCHER WILLIAMS, M.A., late Fellow of New College, Oxford.  With
48 Illustrations.

WESTMINSTER.

By REGINALD AIRY, B.A., Trinity College, Cambridge.  With 47
Illustrations.

                                * * * * *

                      LONDON: GEORGE BELL AND SONS,

                       YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

                                * * * * *




FOOTNOTES


{1}  When “Heartsease” first appeared, Percy Fotheringham was believed to
be a portrait; but the accomplished authoress in a letter written not
long before her death told me that the character was wholly imaginary.

{6}  Pedigrees are perplexing unless tabulated; so here is Kinglake’s
genealogical tree.

Kinglakes of Saltmoor had sons ROBERT KINGLAKE and WILLIAM KINGLAKE.

ROBERT KINGLAKE had sons SERJEANT JOHN KINGLAKE and Rev. W. C. KINGLAKE.

Woodfordes of Castle Cary had a daughter MARY WOODFORDE.

WILLIAM KINGLAKE married MARY WOODFORDE and had sons A. W. KINGLAKE
(“Eothen”) and Dr. HAMILTON KINGLAKE.

{12a}  “Eothen,” p. 33.  Reading “Timbuctoo” to-day one is amazed it
should have gained the prize.  Two short passages adumbrate the coming
Tennyson, the rest is mystic nonsense.  “What do you think of Tennyson’s
prize poem?” writes Charles Wordsworth to his brother Christopher.  “Had
it been sent up at Oxford, the author would have had a better chance of
spending a few months at a lunatic asylum than of obtaining the Prize.”
A current Cambridge story at the time explained the selection.  There
were three examiners, the Vice-Chancellor, a man of arbitrary temper,
with whom his juniors hesitated to disagree; a classical professor
unversed in English Literature; a mathematical professor indifferent to
all literature.  The letter _g_ was to signify approval, the letter _b_
to brand it with rejection.  Tennyson’s manuscript came from the
Vice-Chancellor scored all over with _g_’s.  The classical professor
failed to see its merit, but bowed to the Vice-Chancellor, and added his
_g_.  The mathematical professor could not admire, but since both his
colleagues ordained it, good it must be, and his _g_ made the award
unanimous.  The three met soon after, and the Vice-Chancellor, in his
blatant way, attacked the other two for admiring a trashy poem.  “Why,”
they remonstrated, “you covered it with _g_’s yourself.”  “_G_’s,” said
he, “they were _q_’s for queries; I could not understand a line of it.”

{12b}  “Enoch Arden,” p. 34.

{13}  “Eothen,” p. 169.  Reprint by Bell and Sons, 1898.

{14a}  “Eothen,” p. 17.

{14b}  His deferential regard for army rank was like that of Johnson for
bishops.  Great was his indignation when the “grotesque Salvation Army,”
as he called it, adopted military nomenclature.  “I would let those
ragamuffins call themselves saints, angels, prophets, cherubim, Olympian
gods and goddesses if they like; but their pretension in taking the rank
of officers in the army is to me beyond measure repulsive.”

{14c}  “Eothen,” p. 190 in first edition.  It was struck out in the
fourth edition.

{22}  “Eothen,” p. 18.  Reprint by Bell and Sons, 1898.

{28}  He is very fond of this word; it occurs eleven times.

{37}  “Quarterly Review,” December, 1844.

{38a}  “Eothen,” p. 46.

{38b}  Poitier’s “Vaudeville.”

{40}  One characteristic anecdote he omits.  Two French officers were
attached to our headquarters; and the staff were partly embarrassed and
partly amused by Lord Raglan’s inveterate habit, due to old Peninsular
associations, of calling the enemy “the French” in the presence of our
foreign guests.

{47}  Some of us can recall the lines in which Sir G. Trevelyan
commemorated “The Owl’s” nocturnal flights:

    “When at sunset, chill and dark,
    Sunset thins the swarming park,
    Bearing home his social gleaning—
    Jests and riddles fraught with meaning,
    Scandals, anecdotes, reports,—
    Seeks The Owl a maze of courts
    Which, with aspect towards the west,
       Fringe the street of Sainted James,
    Where a warm, secluded nest
       As his sole domain he claims;
    From his wing a feather draws,
       Shapes for use a dainty nib,
       Pens his parody or squib;
    Combs his down and trims his claws,
    And repairs where windows bright
    Flood the sleepless Square with light.”

{60} Greville, vii. 223, quotes from a letter written after Inkerman to
the Prince Consort by Colonel Steele, saying “that he had no idea how
great a mind Raglan really had, but that he now saw it, for in the midst
of distresses and difficulties of every kind in which the army was
involved, he was perfectly serene and undisturbed.”

{63}  “Go quietly” might have been his motto: even on horseback he seemed
never to be in a hurry.  Airey used to come in from their rides round the
outposts shuddering with cold, and complaining that the Chief would never
move his horse out of a walk.  “I daresay,” said Carlyle, “Lord Raglan
will rise quite quietly at the last trump, and remain entirely composed
during the whole day, and show the most perfect civility to both
parties.”

{64}  The first death! out of how many he nowhere reckons: he shrinks
from estimates of carnage, and we thank him for it.  But an accomplished
naturalist tells me that the vulture, a bird unknown in the Crimea before
hostilities began, swarmed there after the Alma fight, and remained till
the war was over, disappearing meanwhile from the whole North African
littoral.

{66}  “D—n your eyes!” he said once, in a moment of irritation, to his
_attaché_, Mr. Hay.  “D—n your Excellency’s eyes!” was the answer,
delivered with deep respect but with sufficient emphasis.  Dismissed on
the spot, the candid _attaché_ went in great anger to pack up, but was
followed after a time by Lady Canning, habitual peacemaker in the
household, who besought him if not to apologize at least to bid his Chief
good-bye.  After much persuasion he consented.  “Hardly had he entered
the room when Sir Stratford had him by the hand.  ‘My dear Hay, this will
never do; what a devil of a temper you have!’  The two were firmer
friends than ever after this” (LANE POOLE’S _Life of Lord Stratford_,
chapter xiii.).

{68}  The story of an old quarrel between Sir Stratford Canning and the
then Grand Duke Nicholas at St. Petersburg in 1825 is disproved by
Canning’s own statement.  The two met once only in their lives, at a
purely formal reception at Paris in 1814.

{82}  _La Femme_ was a “Miss” or “Mrs.” Howard.  She followed Louis
Napoleon to France in 1848, and lived openly with him as his mistress.
In the once famous “Letters of an Englishman” we are told how shortly
after the December massacre the _élite_ of English visitors in Paris were
not ashamed to dine at her house in the President’s company: and in 1860,
Mrs. Simpson, in France with her father, Nassau Senior, found her,
decorated with the title of Madame de Beauregard, inhabiting La Celle,
near Versailles, once the abode of Madame de Pompadour, “with the
national flag flying over it, to the great scandal of the neighbourhood.”

{87}  Bachaumont’s criticism of Latour.  Lady Dilke’s “French Painters,”
p. 165.

{96}  Here is one of the stanzas:

    “L’Autriche—dit-on—et la Russie
    Se brouillent pour la Turquie.
    Dès aujourd’hui il n’en est plus question.
    En invitant une femme charmante,
    Le Turc—et je l’en complimente—
    Est devenu pour nous un trait d’union.”

{111}  “Blackwood’s Magazine,” December, 1895, p. 802.

{130}  I inserted this quotation before reading the “Etchingham Letters.”
Sir Richard would wish me to erase it as hackneyed; but it applies to
Kinglake’s talk as accurately as to Virgil’s writing, and I refuse to be
defrauded of it.

{133}  This delightful phrase is Lady Gregory’s.  One would wish, like
Lord Houghton, though suppressing his presumptuous rider, to have been
its author.

{140}  Of course Kinglake was not alone in this opinion.  It was voiced
in a delightful _jeu d’esprit_, now forgotten, which it is worth while to
reproduce:

                            “THE BERLIN CONGRESS.

    “The following Latin poem, from the pen of the well-known German
    poet, Gustave Schwetschke, was distributed by Prince Bismarck’s
    special request amongst the Plenipotentiaries immediately after the
    last sitting on Saturday:

    “‘GAUDEAMUS CONGRESSIBILE.

    “‘Gaudeamus igitur
       Socii congressus,
    Post dolores bellicosos,
    Post labores gloriosos,
       Nobis fit decessus.

    “‘Ubi sunt, qui ante nos
       Quondam consedere,
    Viennenses, Parisienses
    Tot per annos, tot per menses?
       Frustra decidere.

    “‘Mundus heu! vult decipi,
       Sed non decipiatur,
    Non plus ultra inter gentes
    Litigantes et frementes
       Manus conferatur.

    ‘Vivat Pax! et comitent
       Dii nunc congressum,
    Ceu Deus ex machinâ
    Ipsa venit Cypria
       Roborans successum.

    “‘Pereat discordia!
       Vincat semper litem
    Proxenetae probitas, {141}
    Fides, spes, et charitas,
       Gaudeamus item!

                                                                   “G. S.”

                                * * * * *

                             “THE OTHER VERSION.

                       (From the “Pall Mall Gazette.”)

    “A correspondent informs us that the version given in ‘The Standard’
    of yesterday of the congratulatory ode (‘Gaudeamus igitur,’ etc.)
    addressed to the Congress by ‘the well-known German poet Gustave
    Schwetschke,’ and ‘distributed by Prince Bismarck’s request among the
    Plenipotentiaries,’ is incorrect.  The true version, we are assured,
    is as follows:

    “‘Rideamus igitur,
       Socii Congressus;
    Post dolores bellicosos,
    Post labores bumptiosos,
       Fit mirandus messus.

    “Ubi sunt qui apud nos
       Causas litigâre,
    Moldo-Wallachæ frementes,
    Græculi esurientes?
       Heu! absquatulâre.

    “‘Ubi sunt provinciæ
       Quas est laus pacâsse?
    Totæ, totæ, sunt partitæ:
    Has tulerunt Muscovitæ,
       Illas Count Andrassy.

    “‘Et quid est quod Angliæ
       Dedit hic Congressus?
    Jus pro aliis pugnandi,
    Mortuum vivificandi—
       Splendidi successus!

    “‘Vult Joannes decipi
       Et bamboosulatur.
    Io Beacche!  Quæ majestas!
    Ostreæ reportans testas
       Domum gloriatur!’”

    “This version, which from internal evidence will be seen to be the
    true one, may be roughly Englished thus:

    “Let us have our hearty laugh,
       Greatest of Congresses!
    After days and weeks pugnacious,
    After labours ostentatious,
       See how big the mess is!

    “‘Where are those who at our bar
       Their demands have stated:
    Robbed Roumanians rampaging,
    Greeklings with earth-hunger raging?
       Where?  Absquatulated!

    “‘Where the lands we’ve pacified,
       With their rebel masses?
    All are gone; yes, all up-gobbled:
    These the Muscovite has nobbled,
       Those are Count Andrassy’s.

    “‘And what does England carry off
       To add to her possessions?
    The right to wage another’s strife,
    The right to raise the dead to life—
       Glorious concessions!

    “‘Well, let John Bull bamboozled be
       If he’s so fond of sells!
    Io Beacche!  Hark the cheering!
    See him home in triumph bearing
       _Both_ {143} the oyster shells!’”

{141} “Der ehrlich Miikler.”

{143} Peace and Honour.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A. W. KINGLAKE***


******* This file should be named 539-0.txt or 539-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/3/539



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

