CHAPTER VI
LATER DAYS, AND DEATH


FOR twenty years Kinglake lived in Hyde Park Place, in bright cheerful
rooms looking in one direction across the Park, but on another side into
a churchyard.  The churchyard, Lady Gregory tells us, gave him pause on
first seeing the rooms.  “I should not like to live here, I should be
afraid of ghosts.”  “Oh no, sir, there is always a policeman round the
corner.” {111}  “Pleaceman X.” has not, perhaps, before been revered as
the Shade-compelling son of Maia:

    “Tu pias lætis animas reponis
    Sedibus, _virgaque levem coerces_
    _Aurea turbam_.”

Here he worked through the morning; the afternoon took him to the
“Travellers,” where his friends, Sir Henry Bunbury and Mr. Chenery,
usually expected him; then at eight o’clock, if not, as Shylock says, bid
forth, he went to dine at the Athenæum.  His dinner seat was in the
left-hand corner of the coffee-room, where, in the thirties, Theodore
Hook had been wont to sit, gathering near him so many listeners to his
talk, that at Hook’s death in 1841 the receipts for the club dinners fell
off to a large amount.  Here, in the “Corner,” as they called it, round
Kinglake would be Hayward, Drummond Wolff, Massey, Oliphant, Edward
Twisleton, Strzelecki, Storks, Venables, Wyke, Bunbury, Gregory, American
Ticknor, and a few more; Sir W. Stirling Maxwell, when in Scotland,
sending hampers of pheasants to the company.  “Hurried to the Athenæum
for dinner,” says Ticknor in 1857, “and there found Kinglake and Sir
Henry Rawlinson, to whom were soon added Hayward and Stirling.  We pushed
our tables together and had a jolly dinner. . . . To the Athenæum; and
having dined pleasantly with Merivale, Kinglake, and Stirling, I hurried
off to the House.”  In later years, when his voice grew low and his
hearing difficult, he preferred that the diners should resolve themselves
into little groups, assigning to himself a _tête-à-tête_, with whom at
his ease he could unfold himself.

No man ever fought more gallantly the encroachments of old age—_on sut
être jeune jusque dans ses vieux jours_.  At seventy-four years old,
staying with a friend at Brighton, he insisted on riding over to
Rottingdean, where Sir Frederick Pollock was staying.  “I mastered,” he
said, in answer to remonstrances, “I mastered the peculiarities of the
Brighton screw before you were born, and have never forgotten them.”
Vaulting into his saddle he rode off, returning with a schoolboy’s
delight at the brisk trot he had found practicable when once clear of the
King’s Road.  Long after his hearing had failed, his sight become
grievously weakened, and his limbs not always trustworthy, he would never
allow a cab to be summoned for him after dinner, always walking to his
lodgings.  But he had to give up by and by his daily canter in Rotten
Row, and more reluctantly still his continental travel.  Foreign railways
were closed to him by the _Salle d’Attente_; he could not stand
incarceration in the waiting-rooms.

The last time he crossed the Channel was at the close of the
Franco-Prussian war, on a visit to his old friend M. Thiers, then
President.  It was a dinner to deputies of the Extreme Left, and Kinglake
was the only Englishman; “so,” he said, “among the servants there was a
sort of reasoning process as to my identity, ending in the conclusion,
‘_il doit être Sir Dilke_.’”  Soon the inference was treated as a fact;
and in due sequence came newspaper paragraphs declaring that the British
Ambassador had gravely remonstrated with the President for inviting Sir
Charles Dilke to his table.  Then followed articles defending the course
taken by the President, and so for some time the ball was kept up.  The
remonstrance of the Ambassador was a myth, Lord Lyons was a friend of Sir
Charles; but the latter was suspect at the time both in England and
France; in England for his speeches and motion on the Civil List; in
France, because, with Frederic Harrison, he had helped to get some of the
French Communists away from France; and the French Government was
watching him with spies.  In Sir Charles’s motion Kinglake took much
interest, refusing to join in the cry against it as disloyal.  Sir
Charles, he said, spoke no word against the Queen; and only brought the
matter before the House because challenged to repeat in Parliament the
statements he had made in the country.  As a matter of policy he thought
it mistaken: “Move in such a matter openly, and party discipline compels
your defeat; bring pressure to bear on a Cabinet, some of its members are
on your side, and you may gain your point.”  Sir Charles’s speech was
calmly argumentative, and to many minds convincing; it provoked a
passionate reply from Gladstone; and when Mr. Auberon Herbert following
declared himself a Republican, a tumult arose such as in those
pre-Milesian days had rarely been witnessed in the House.  But the wisdom
of Kinglake’s counsel is sustained by the fact that many years
afterwards, as a result of more private discussion, Mr. Gladstone
pronounced his conversion to the two bases of the motion, publicity, and
the giving of the State allowance to the head of the family rather than,
person by person, to the children and grandchildren of the Sovereign.
Action pointing in this direction was taken in 1889 and 1901 on the
advice of Tory ministers.

Amongst Frenchmen of the highest class, intellectually and socially, he
had many valued friends, keeping his name on the “Cosmopolitan” long
after he had ceased to visit it, since “one never knows when the
distinguished foreigner may come upon one, and of such the Cosmo is the
London Paradise.”  But he used to say that in the other world a good
Frenchman becomes an Englishman, a bad Englishman becomes a Frenchman.
He saw in the typical Gaul a compound of the tiger and the monkey; noted
their want of individuality, their tendency to go in flocks, their
susceptibility to panic and to ferocity, to the terror that makes a man
kill people, and “the terror that makes him lie down and beg.”  We
remember, too, his dissection of St. Arnaud, as before all things a type
of his nation; “he impersonated with singular exactness the idea which
our forefathers had in their minds when they spoke of what they called ‘a
Frenchman;’ for although (by cowing the rich and by filling the poor with
envy), the great French Revolution had thrown a lasting gloom on the
national character, it left this one man untouched.  He was bold, gay,
reckless, vain; but beneath the mere glitter of the surface there was a
great capacity for administrative business, and a more than common
willingness to take away human life.”

“I relish,” Kinglake said in 1871, “the spectacle of Bismarck teaching
the A B C of Liberal politics to the hapless French.  His last _mot_,
they tell me, is this.  Speaking of the extent to which the French
Emperor had destroyed his own reputation and put an end to the worship of
the old Napoleon, he said: ‘He has killed himself and buried his uncle.’”
Again, in 1874, noting the _contre coup_ upon France resulting from the
Bismarck and Arnim despatches, he said: “What puzzles the poor dear
French is to see that truth and intrepid frankness consist with sound
policy and consummate wisdom.  How funny it would be, if the French some
day, as a novelty, or what they would call a _caprice_, were to try the
effect of truth; “though not naturally honest,” as Autolycus says, “were
to become so by chance.”

He thought M. Gallifet _dans sa logique_ in liking the Germans and hating
Bismarck; for the Germans, in having their own way, would break up into
as many fragments as the best Frenchman could desire, and Bismarck is the
real suppressor of France.  Throughout the Franco-Prussian war he sided
strongly with the Prussians, refusing to dine in houses where the
prevailing sympathy with France would make him unwelcome as its declared
opponent; but he felt “as a nightmare” the attack on prostrate Paris, “as
a blow” the capitulation of Metz; denouncing Gambetta and his colleagues
as meeting their disasters only with slanderous shrieks, “possessed by
the spirit of that awful Popish woman.”  Bismarck as a statesman he
consistently admired, and deplored his dismissal.  I see, he said, all
the peril implied by Bismarck’s exit, and the advent of his ambitious
young Emperor.  It is a transition from the known to the unknown, from
wisdom, perhaps, to folly.

His Crimean volumes continued to appear; in 1875, 1880, finally in 1887;
while the Cabinet Edition was published in 1887–8.  This last contained
three new Prefaces; in Vol. I. as we have seen, the memorial of Nicholas
Kiréeff; in Vol. II. the latter half of the original Preface to Vol. I.,
cancelled thence at Madame Novikoff’s request, though now carefully
modified so as to avoid anything which might irritate Russia at a moment
when troubles seemed to be clearing away.  In his Preface to Vol. VII. he
had three objects, to set right the position of Sir E. Hamley, who had
been neglected in the despatches; to demolish his friend Lord Bury, who
had “questioned my omniscience” in the “Edinburgh Review”; and to
exonerate England at large from absurd self-congratulations about the
“little Egypt affair,” the blame of such exaggeration resting with those
whom he called State Showmen.

Silent to acquaintances about the progress of his work, he was
communicative to his few intimates, though never reading aloud extracts
or allowing them to be seen.  In 1872 he would speak pathetically of his
“Crimean muddle,” perplexed, as he well might be, by the intricacies of
Inkerman.  Asked if he will not introduce a Te Deum on the fall of Louis
Napoleon, he answered that to write without the stimulus of combat would
be a task beyond his energy; “when I took the trouble to compose that
fourteenth chapter, the wretched Emperor and his gang were at the height
of their power in Europe and the world; but now!” He was insatiate as to
fresh facts: utilized his acquaintance with Todleben, whom he had first
met on his visit to England in 1864; sought out Prince Ourusoff at a
later time, and inserted particulars gleaned from him in Vol. IX.,
