CHAPTER I
THE CITY OF PURE GOLD


“BLIND eyes, blind eyes!” sang the dancer.

Hilarius woke with a start.  He had fallen asleep on a bench in the sunny
courtyard and his dream had carried him back to the forest.  He sat
rubbing his eyes and only half-awake, the sun kissing his hair into a
halo against the old grey wall.  A falcon near fretted restlessly on her
perch, and a hound asleep by the fountain rose, and, slowly stretching
its great limbs, came towards him.

It was four o’clock on a warm day in September; the courtyard was
deserted save for a few busied serving men, and the knight and his
household, were at a tilting in the Outer Bailey, all but the Lady
Eleanor, Hilarius’ mistress, for, as Martin had foreseen, Sir John had so
appointed it.

It was now two months since Hilarius had come to the city which had
seemed to him in the distance as the New Jerusalem full of promise; but
he had found no angels at the gates, nor were the streets full of the
righteous; nay, the place seemed nearer of kin to the Babylon of Blessed
John’s Vision—with a few holy ones who would surely be caught up ere
judgment fell, amongst them Sir John and Lady Eleanor.

A good knight and a God-fearing man was Sir John, tender to his children,
gentle with his people, a faithful servant to God and King Edward; shrewd
withal, and an apt reader of men.  Therefore, and because of the love he
bore to Prior Stephen, he set Hilarius to attend his eldest daughter, who
seemed to belong as little to this world as the lad himself; and felt
that in so doing he had achieved the best possible for his old friend,
according to his asking.

Hilarius for his part served the Lady Eleanor as an acolyte tends the
chapel of a saint, only she was further removed from him than a saint, by
reason of her pale humanity.  He soon perceived, as he watched her at
banquet, tourney, or pageant, that she went to a revel as to the
Sacrament, and sat at a mummers’ show with eyes fixed on the Unseen.  She
moved through the gay vivid world of Court gallants and joyous maidens
like a shadow, and the rout grew graver at her coming.

It was much the same with her lover, Guy de Steyning—brother of that Hugh
de Steyning men wot of as Brother Ambrosius—a gentle knight with mild
blue eyes, a peaked red beard, and great fervour for heavenly things.
The pair liked one another well; but their time was taken up with
preparation for Paradise rather than with earthly business, and their
speech lent itself more readily to devout phrases than to lovers’ vows.
It was small wonder, therefore, that another year saw them both by glad
consent in the cloister, he at Oxford, and Eleanor in the Benedictine
House of which her aunt was Prioress.

Hilarius had written of his saintly mistress to Prior Stephen just as he
had written of the wondrous beauty of St Peter’s Abbey: “With all its
straight, slender, upstanding pillars, methinks ’tis like the forest at
home” (forgetting that his more intimate knowledge of the forest partook
of the nature of sin).  “The Lady Eleanor, my honoured mistress,” he
wrote, “is a most saintly and devout maiden, full of heavenly lore, and
caring nought for the things of this world;” and he added, “’tis
beautiful to see such devotion where for the most part are sinful and
light-minded persons.”

The Prior laid the script aside with a smile and a sigh; and when Brother
Bernard asked news of the lad, answered a little sadly, “Nay, Brother, he
still sleeps;” and indeed there seemed no waking him to a world of
men—living, striving, sorely-tried men.

He dwelt in a land of his own making—a land of colour and light and
shadow in which much that he saw played a part; only the gorgeous
pageants turned to hosts of triumphant saints heralded by angels; while
the knights at a tourney in their brave armour pictured St George, St
Michael, or St Martin in his dreams.

It was a limner he longed to be, far away from the stir and stress, not a
page attending a great lady to the Court functions.  He yearned ever
after the Scriptorium, with its busied monks and stores of colour and
gold.  It lay but a stone’s throw away behind the jealous Monastery
walls, but it was no part of Prior Stephen’s plan that the lad should go
straight from one cloister to another.

To Hilarius sitting on the bench in the sun, came one of Eleanor’s
tirewomen to bid him wait on her mistress.  He rose at once and followed
her through the hall and up the winding stair, along a gallery hung with
wondrous story-telling tapestry, to the bower where Eleanor sat with two
of her women busied with their needle.

Hilarius found his mistress, her hands idle on her knee.  He louted low,
and she bade him bring a stool and sit beside her.

“I am weary,” she said; “this life is weariness.  Tell me of the
Monastery and the forest—stay, tell me rather of the New Jerusalem that
Brother Ambrose saw and limned.”

Hilarius, nothing loth, settled himself at her feet, elbow on knee, and
chin on his open hands, his dreamy blue eyes gazing away out of the
window at the cloud-flecked sky above the Abbey pinnacles.

“The Brother Ambrose,” he began, “was ever a saintly man, approved of God
and beloved by the Brethren; ay, and a crafty limner, save that of late
his eyesight failed him.  To him one night, as he lay a-bed in the
dormitory, came the word of the Lord, saying: “Come, and I will show thee
the Bride, the Lamb’s wife.”  And Brother Ambrose arose and was carried
to a great and high mountain, even as in the Vision of Blessed John.
’Twas a still night of many stars, and Brother Ambrose, looking up, saw a
radiant path in the heavens; and lo! the stars gathered themselves
together on either side until they stood as walls of light, and the four
winds lapped him about as in a mantle and bore him towards the wondrous
gleaming roadway.  Then between the stars came the Holy City with roof
and pinnacle aflame, and walls aglow with such colours as no earthly
limner dreams of, and much gold.  Brother Ambrose beheld the Gates of
Pearl, and by every gate an angel, with wings of snow and fire, and a
face no man dare look on, because of its exceeding radiance.

“Then as Brother Ambrose stretched out his arms because of his great
longing, a little grey cloud came out of the north and hung between the
walls of light, so that he no longer beheld the Vision, but heard only a
sound as of a great multitude crying, ‘Alleluia’; and suddenly the winds
came about him again, and lo! he found himself in bed in the dormitory,
and it was midnight, for the bell was ringing to Matins; and he rose and
went down with the rest; but when the Brethren left the choir, Brother
Ambrose stayed fast in his place, hearing and seeing nothing because of
the Vision of God; and at Lauds they found him and told the Prior.

“He questioned Brother Ambrose of the matter, and when he heard the
Vision, bade him limn the Holy City even as he had seen it; and the
Precentor gave him uterine vellum and much fine gold and what colours he
asked for the work.  Then Brother Ambrose limned a wondrous fair city of
gold with turrets and spires; and he inlaid blue for the sapphire, and
green for the emerald, and vermilion where the city seemed aflame with
the glory of God; but the angels he could not limn, nor could he set the
rest of the colours as he saw them, nor the wall of stars on either hand;
and Brother Ambrose fell sick because of the exceeding great longing he
had to limn the Holy City, and was very sad; but our Prior bade him thank
God and remember the infirmity of the flesh, which, like the little grey
cloud, veiled Jerusalem to his sight.”

There was silence.  Lady Eleanor clasped her shadowy blue-veined hands
under her chin, and in her eyes too was a great longing.

“It seemeth to me small wonder that Brother Ambrose fell sick,” she said,
at length.

Hilarius nodded:

“He had ever a patient, wistful look as of one from home; and often he
would sit musing in the cloister and scarce give heed to the Office
bell.”

“Methinks, Hilarius, it will be passing sweet to dwell in that Holy
City.”

“Nay, lady,” said her page tenderly, “surely thou hast had a vision even
as Brother Ambrose, for thine eyes wait always, like unto his.”

Eleanor shook her head, and two tears crept slowly from the shadow of her
eyes.

“Nay, not to such as I am is the vision vouchsafed; though my desire is
great, ’tis ever clogged by sin; and for this same reason I would get me
to a cloister where I might fast and pray unhindered.”

Hilarius looked at her with great compassion.

“Sweet lady, the Lord fulfil all thy desires; yet, methinks, thou art
already as one of His saints.”

“Nay, but a poor sinner in an evil world,” she answered.  “Sing to me,
Hilarius.”

And he sang her the _Salve Regina_, and when it was ended she bade him
go, for she would fain spend some time in prayer upon her primer.

“Our Lady and all Saints be with thee, sweet mistress!” he said, and left
her to sob out once more the sins and sorrows of her tender childlike
heart.



