CHAPTER VII
THE COMING OF HUNGER AND LOVE


HILARIUS fared but slowly; it was ill travelling on a high-road in good
weather, but on a cross-road in the spring!—that was a time to commend
oneself body and soul to the Saints.  He walked warily, picking his way
in and out of the bog between fence and ditch, which was all that
remained to show where the piety of the past once kept a road.  The low
land to his left was submerged, a desolate tract giving back a sullen
grey sky, lifeless, barren, save where a gaunt poplar like the mast of a
sunken ship broke the waste of waters.

The sight brought Hilarius’ thoughts sharply back to the events of the
evening before.  Wonderful indeed were the judgments of God!  A
witch—plainly proved to be such—had been struck dead in the midst of her
sins; and London, that light-minded, reprobate city, was a heap of
graves.  Now he, Hilarius, having seen much evil and the justice of the
Almighty, would get him in peace to Wymondham, there to learn to be a
cunning limner; and having so learnt would joyfully hie him back to Prior
Stephen and his own monastery.

Presently the way led somewhat uphill, and he saw to his right a small
hamlet.  It lay some distance off his road, but he was sharp-set, for the
shepherd’s fare had been meagre; and so turned aside in the hope of an
ale-house.  There was no side road visible, and he struck across the
dank, marshy fields until he lighted on a rude track which led to the
group of cottages.  The place struck him as strangely quiet; no smoke
rose from the chimneys; no dogs rushed out barking furiously at a
stranger’s advent.  The first hovel he passed was empty, the open door
showed a fireless hearth.  At the second he knocked and heard a sound of
scuffling within.  As no one answered his repeated summons he pushed the
door open; the low room was desolate, but two bright eyes peered at him
from a corner,—’twas a rat.  Hilarius turned away, sudden fear at his
heart, and passed on, finding in each hovel only empty silence.

Apart from the rest, standing alone in a field, was a somewhat larger
cottage; a bush swung from the projecting pole above the door: it was the
ale-house that he sought; here, at least, he would find some one.  As he
came up he heard a child crying, and lo! on the doorstep sat a dirty
little maid of some four summers, sobbing away for dear life.

Hilarius approached diffidently, and stooped down to wipe away the grimy
tears.

The child regarded him, round eyes, open mouth; then with a shrill cry of
joy, she held out her thin arms.

At the sound of her cry the door opened; on the threshold stood a woman
still young but haggard and weary-eyed; at her breast was a little babe.
She stared at Hilarius, and then pulling the child to her in the doorway,
waved him away.

“Stand off, fool!—’tis the Plague.”

Hilarius shrank back.

“And thy neighbours?” he asked.

“Nay, they were light-footed eno’ when they saw what was to do, and left
us three to die like rats in a hole.”  Then eagerly: “Hast thou any
bread?”

He shook his head.

“Nay, I came here seeking some.  Art thou hungry?”

She threw out her hands.

“’Tis two days sin’ I had bite or sup.”

“Where lies the nearest village? and how far?”

“A matter of an hour, over yonder.”

“See, goodwife,” said Hilarius, “I will go buy thee food and come again.”

She looked at him doubtfully.

“So said another, and he never came back.”

“Nay, but perchance some evil befell him,” said gentle Hilarius.

“Well, I will trust thee.”  She went in and returned with a few small
coins.  “’Tis all I have.  Tell no man whence thou art, else they will
hunt thee from their doors.”

Hilarius nodded, took the money, and ran as fast as he could go in the
direction of the village.

The woman watched him.

“Is it fear or love that lends him that pace?” she muttered, as she sat
down to wait.

It was love.

Hilarius entered the village discreetly, and adding the little money he
had to the woman’s scanty store, bought bread, a flask of wine, flour and
beans, and a jug of milk.

“’Tis for a sick child,” he said when he asked for it, and the woman
pushed back the money, bidding him God-speed.

The return journey was accomplished much more slowly, because of his
precious burden; and as he crossed a field, there, dead in a snare, lay a
fine coney.

“Now hath Our Lady herself had thought for the poor mother!” cried
Hilarius joyously, and added it to his store.

When he reached the cottage, and the woman saw the food, she broke into
loud weeping, for her need had been great; then, as if giving up the
struggle to another and a stronger, she sank on the bed with her
fast-failing babe in her arms.

Hilarius fed her carefully with bread and wine—not for nothing had he
served the Infirmarian when blood-letting had proved too severe for some
weak Brother—and then turned his attention to the little maid who sat
patient, eyeing the food.

For her, bread and milk.  He sat down on a low stool, and taking the
child on his knee slowly supplied the gaping, bird-like mouth.  At last
the little maid heaved a sigh of content, leant her flaxen head against
her nurse’s shoulder, and fell fast asleep.

Hilarius, cradling her carefully in gentle arms, crooned softly to her,
thrilling with tenderness.  She was his own, his little sister, the child
he had found and saved.  Surely Our Lady had guided him to her, and her
great Mother-love would shield this little one from a foul and horrid
death.  In that dirty, neglected room, the child warm against his breast,
Hilarius lived the happiest moments of his life.

Presently he rose, for there was much to be done, kissed the little pale
cheek, noted fearfully the violet shadows under the closed eyes, and laid
his new-found treasure on the bed by her mother.

The woman was half-asleep, but started awake.

“Art thou going?” she said, and despair gazed at him from her eyes.

“Nay, nay, surely not until we all go together,” he said soothingly.  “I
would but kindle a fire, for the cold is bitter.”

Wood was plentiful, and soon a bright fire blazed on the hearth.  The
poor woman, heartened by her meal, rose and came to sit by it, and
stretching out her thin hands to the grateful warmth, told her tale.

“’Twas Gammer Harden’s son who first heard tell of a strange new sickness
at Caxton’s; and then Jocell had speech with a herd from those parts, who
was fleeing to a free town, because of some ill he had done.  Next day
Jocell fell sick with vomitings, and bleeding, and breaking out of boils,
and in three days he lay dead; and Gammer Harden fell sick and died
likewise.  Then one cried ’twas the Plague, and the wrath of God; and
they fled—the women to the nuns at Bungay, and the men to seek work or
shelter on the Manor; but us they left, for I was with child.”

“And thy husband?’ said Hilarius.

“Nay, he was not my husband, but these are his children, his and mine.
Some hold ’tis a sin to live thus, and perhaps because of it this evil
hath fallen upon me.”

She looked at the babe lying on her lap, its waxen face drawn and shrunk
with the stress of its short life.

Hilarius spoke gently:—

“It is indeed a grievous sin against God and His Church to live together
out of holy wedlock, and perchance ’tis true that for this very thing
thou hast been afflicted, even as David the great King.  But since thou
didst sin ignorantly the Lord in His mercy sent me to serve thee in thy
sore need; ay, and in very truth, Our Lady herself showed me where the
coney lay snared.  Let us pray God by His dear Mother to forgive us our
sins and to have mercy on these little ones.”

And kneeling there in the firelight he besought the great Father for his
new-found family.

Five days passed, and despite extreme care victuals were short.  Hilarius
dug up roots from the hedgerows, and went hungry, but at last the pinch
came; the woman was too weak and ill to walk, the babe scarce in
life—there could be no thought of flight—and the little maid grew white,
and wan and silent.  Then it came to Hilarius that he would once again
beg food in the village where he had sought help before.

He went slowly, for he had eaten little that his maid might be the better
fed, and he was very sad.  When he reached the village he found his
errand like to be vain.  News of the Plague was coming from many parts,
and each man feared for his own skin.  At every house they questioned
him: “Art thou from a hamlet where the Plague hath been?” and when he
answered “Yea,” the door was shut.

Very soon men, angry and afraid, came to drive him from the place.  He
gained the village cross, and prayed them for love of the Saviour and His
holy Rood to give him bread for his little maid and her mother.  Let them
set it in the street, he would take it and cross no man’s threshold.
Surely they could not; for shame, let a little child die of want?

“Nay, ’tis better they die, so are we safe,” cried a voice; then they
fell upon him and beat him, and drove him from the village with blows and
curses.

Bruised and panting, he ran from them, and at last the chase ceased;
breathless and exhausted he flung himself under a hedge.

A hawk swooped, struck near him, and rose again with its prey.  Hilarius
shuddered; but perhaps the hawk had nestlings waiting open-mouthed for
food?  His little maid!  His eyes filled with tears as he thought of
those who awaited him.  He picked up a stone, and watched if perchance a
coney might show itself.  He had never killed, but were not his nestlings
agape?

Nothing stirred, but along the road came a waggon of strange shape and
gaily painted.

He rose to his feet, praying the great Mother to send him help in his
awful need.

The waggon drew near; the driver sat asleep upon the shaft, the horse
took his own pace.  It passed him before he could pluck up heart to ask
an alms, and from the back dangled a small sack and a hen.  If he begged
and was refused his little maid must die.  A minute later the sack and
the hen had changed owners—but not unobserved; a clear voice called a
halt; the waggon stood fast; two figures sprang out, a girl and a boy:
and Hilarius stood before them on the white highway—a thief.

“Seize the knave!” cried the girl sharply.

Hilarius stared at her and she at him.  It was his dancer, and she knew
him, ay, despite the change of dress and scene, she knew him.

“What!  The worthy novice turned worldling and thief!  Nay, ’tis a rare
jest.  What of thy fine sermons now, good preacher?”

But Hilarius answered never a word; overcome by shame, grief, and hunger,
sudden darkness fell upon him.

When he came to himself he was sitting propped against the hedge; the
waggon was drawn up by the roadside, and the dancer and her brother stood
watching him.

“Fetch bread and wine,” said the girl, and to Hilarius who tried to
speak, “Peace, ’til thou hast eaten.”

Hilarius ate eagerly, and when he had made an end the dancer said:—

“Now tell thy tale.  Prithee, since when didst thou leave thy Saints and
thy nursery for such an ill trade as this?”

Hilarius told her all, and when he had finished he wept because of his
little maid, and his were not the only tears.

The dancer went to the waggon and came back with much food taken from her
store, to which she added the hen; the sack held but fodder.

“But, Gia,” grumbled her brother, “there will be naught for us to-night.”

“Thou canst eat bread, or else go hungry,” she retorted, and filled a
small sack with the victuals.

Hilarius watched her, hardly daring to hope.  She held it out to him:
“Now up and off to thy little maid.”

Hilarius took the sack, but only to lay it down again.  Kneeling, he took
both her little brown hands, and his tears fell fast as he kissed them.

“Maid, maid, canst forgive my theft, ay, and my hard words in the forest?
God help me for a poor, blind fool!”

“Nay,” she answered, “there is naught to forgive; and see, thou hast
learnt to hunger and to love!  Farewell, little brother, we pass here
again a fortnight hence, and I would fain have word of thy little maid.
Ay, and shouldst thou need a home for her, bring her to us; my old
grandam is in the other waggon and she will care for her.”

Hilarius ran across the fields, full of sorrow for his sin, and yet
greatly glad because of the wonderful goodness of God.

When he got back his little maid sat alone by the fire.  He hastened to
make food ready, but the child was far spent and would scarcely eat.
Then he went out to find the woman.

He saw her standing in the doorway of an empty hovel, and she cried to
him to keep back.

“My babe is dead, and I feel the sickness on me.  I went to the houses
seeking meal, even to Gammer Harden’s; and I must die.  As for thee, thou
shalt not come near me, but bide with the child; so maybe God will spare
the innocent.”

Hilarius besought her long that she would at least suffer him to bring
her food, but she would not.

“Nay, I could not eat, the fever burns in my bones; let me alone that I
may die the sooner.”

Hilarius went back with a heavy heart, and lay that night with the little
maid in his arms on the settle by the hearth.  Despite his fear he slept
heavily and late: when he rose the sun was high and the child awake.

He fed her, and, bidding her bide within, went out to gain tidings of the
poor mother.  He called, but no one answered; and the door of the hovel
in which she had taken shelter stood wide.  Then, as he searched the
fields, fearing the fever had driven her abroad, he saw the flutter of
garments in a ditch; and lo! there lay the woman, dead, with her dead
babe on her breast.  She had lain down to die alone with God in the
silence, that haply the living might escape; and on her face was peace.

Later, Hilarius laid green boughs tenderly over mother and babe, and
covered them with earth, saying many prayers.  Then he went back to his
fatherless, motherless maid.

She ailed naught that he could see, and there was food and to spare; but
each day saw her paler and thinner, until at last she could not even sit,
but lay white and silent in Hilarius’ tender arms; and he fought with
death for his little maid.

Then on a day she would take no food, and when Hilarius put tiny morsels
in her mouth she could not swallow; and so he sat through the long hours,
his little maid in his arms, with no thought beside.  The darkness came,
and he waited wide-eyed, praying for the dawn.  When the new day broke
and the east was pale with light he carried the child out that he might
see her, for a dreadful fear possessed him.  And it came to pass that
when the light kissed her little white face she opened her eyes and
smiled at Hilarius, and so smiling, died.

The dancer, true to her promise, scanned the road as the waggon drew near
the place of Hilarius’ first and last theft: he was standing by the
wayside alone.  The waggon passed on carrying him with it; and the dancer
looked but once on his face and asked no question.




_PART III_
THE FRUIT


