CHAPTER VI
A DARK FINDING


IT is a far cry from St Alban’s to Bungay—which village of the good ford
lies somewhat south-east of Norwich, five leagues distant—and the journey
is doubled in the winter time.  Hilarius and the Friar were long on the
road, for January’s turbulent mood had imprisoned them many days, and
early February had proved little kinder.  They had companied with folk,
light women and brutal men; but, for the most part, coarse word and foul
jest were hushed in the presence of the blind friar and the lad with the
wondering eyes.  In every village the Friar preached and called on men to
repent and be saved, for Death’s shadow was already upon them.  Folk
wondered and gaped—the Plague was still only a name ten leagues east of
London—but many repented and confessed and made restitution, though some
heard with idle ears, remembering the prophecy of Brother Robert who had
come with the same message half a man’s lifetime before, and that no evil
had followed his preaching.

At last St Matthias’ Eve saw Hilarius and the Friar at St Edmund’s Abbey.
There were many guests for the Convent’s hospitality that night, and as
Hilarius entered the hall of the guest-house—a brother had charged
himself with the care of the Friar—he heard the sound of the vielle, and
a rich voice which sang in good round English against the fashion of the
day.

“Martin, Martin!” he cried.

The vielle was instantly silent.

“Holà, lad!” cried the Minstrel, springing to his feet; he caught
Hilarius to him and embraced him heartily.

“Why, lad, not back in thy monastery?  Nay, but I made sure the Plague
would send thee flying home, and instead I find thee strayed farther
afield.”  Then seeing the injured faces round him for that the song was
not ended, he drew Hilarius to the bench beside him and took up his
vielle.  “Be still now, lad, ’til I have finished my ditty for this
worshipful company; then, an’t please thee to tell it, I will hear thy
tale.”

The guests, who had looked somewhat sour at the interruption, unpursed
their lips, and settled to listen as the minstrel took up his song:—

    “The fair maid came to the old oak tree
    (Sun and wind and a bird on the bough),
    The throstle he sang merrily—merrily—merrily,
    But the fair maid wept, for sad was she, sad was she,
    Her sweet knight—Oh! where was he?

    He lay dead in the cold, cold ground
    (Moon and stars and rain on the hill),
    In his side and breast were bloody wounds.
    Woe, woe is me for the fair ladye, and the poor knight he,
    The poor knight—Ah! cold was he.

    The maiden sat her down to die
    (Cold, cold earth on her lover’s breast),
    And the little birds rang mournfully,
    And the moonshine kissed her tenderly,
    And the stars looked down right pityingly
    On the poor fair maid and the poor cold knight.
    Ah misery, dear misery, sweet misery!”

This mournful song was no sooner ended than supper was served; and the
company proved themselves good trenchermen.  Hilarius caught sight of the
seditious friar making short work of the Convent’s victuals, and
marvelled to see him in a place to which he had given so evil a name.

Martin was unfeignedly glad to see the lad, and listened intently to his
tale.  He nodded his head as Hilarius related how the friar he companied
with preached in each village that men should repent ere the scourge of
God fell upon them; “but there is naught of it as yet,” said the lad.

“Nay, nay, it is like a thief in the night.  One day it is not; and then
the next, men sicken and fall like blasted wheat.  I heard a bruit of
London that it was but a heap of graves—nay, one grave rather, for they
flung the bodies into a great trench; there was no time to do otherwise:
Black Death is swift with his stroke.”

Then Hilarius told of Piping Hugh and the Friar’s death-words to the
guests.

Martin swore a round oath and slapped his thigh.

“Now know I that thy Friar is a proper man an he has set a curse on
Piping Hugh of Mildenhall!  A foul-mouthed knave, with many a black deed
to his name and blood on his hands, if men say truth; and yet there was
never a bird that would not come at his call, and I never heard tell that
he harmed one.  What will thy Friar in Bungay, lad?”

When he had heard the story of the Friar’s twice-repeated vision and
quest, the Minstrel sat silent awhile with knitted brow and head sunk on
his breast; then he eyed Hilarius half humorously, half tenderly.

“Methinks, lad, an thy Friar alloweth it, I will even go to Bungay with
thee; for I love thee well, lad, and would have thy company.  Also I like
not the matter of the vision and would fain see the end of it.”

That night the dream came again to the Friar, and a voice cried: “Haste,
haste, ere it be too late.”  And so Hilarius and Martin came to Bungay,
the Friar guiding them, for the way was his own.  None of the three ever
saw St Edmund’s Abbey again, for in one short month the minster with its
sister churches was turned to be a spital-house, while the dead lay in
heaps, silently waiting to summon to their ghastly company the living
that sought to make them a bed.

Quaint little Bungay lay snug enough in the embrace of the low
vine-crowned hills which half encircled common and town.  The Friar
strode forward, straining in his pace like a leashed hound; Martin and
Hilarius following.  Once he stopped and turned a stricken face on his
companions.

“What is that?” he said shrilly.

A magpie went ducking across the road, and Hilarius crossed himself
fearfully.

“Let us make haste,” cried the Friar when they told him; and so at full
pace they came to Bungay town.

The place looked empty and deserted, but from the distance came the roar
and hum of an angry crowd.

“The people are abroad,” said Martin, and his face was very grave, “no
doubt some knight is here, and there is a bear-baiting on the common.
Prithee, where is thy mother’s dwelling, good Father, and I will go and
ask news of her?”

“’Tis a lonely hovel by the waterside not far from the Cattle Gate; Goody
Wooten thou shalt ask for.”

Martin went swiftly forward over the Common; Hilarius and the Friar
followed more slowly, and when they came to the Cattle Gate they stood
fast and waited, the Friar turning his head anxiously and straining to
make his ears do a double service.

Hilarius, who had hitherto regarded Bungay and the Friar’s business as
the last stage of his journey to Wymondham and Brother Andreas, was full
of foreboding; he watched Martin on the outskirts of the crowd, saw him
throw up his hands with an angry gesture and point to the Friar.  Then he
fell to parleying with the people, but Hilarius was too far off to catch
what was said.

“See there, ’tis her son,” Martin was saying vehemently; “yon holy friar
hath seen this thing in a vision, but alack! he reads it otherwise; yea,
and hath hasted hither from overseas to wrestle with the Evil One for his
mother’s soul—and now, and now—”

The crowd parted, and he saw the most miserable sight.  An old woman lay
on the ground by the river’s edge; a bundle of filthy water-logged rags
crowned by a bruised, vindictive face and grey hair smeared with filth
and slime.  She lay on her back a shapeless huddle; her right thumb tied
to her left toe and so across: there was a rope about her middle, but in
their hot haste they had not stayed to strip her.

Martin pressed forward, and then turning to the jeering, vengeful crowd:

“By Christ’s Rood, this is an evil work ye have wrought,” he said.

“Nay,” said one of the bystanders, “but it was fair judgment, Minstrel.
For years she hath worked her spells and black arts in this place, ay,
and cattle have perished and women gone barren through her means.  Near
two days agone a child was lost and seen last near her door, ay, and
never seen again.  When we came to question her she cursed at us for
meddling mischief-makers, and would but glare and spit, and swear she
knew naught of the misbegotten brat.”

“Maybe ’twas true eno’,” said Martin.  “I hate these rough-cast
witch-findings—’tis not a matter for man’s judgment, unless ’tis sworn
and proven in court before the Justiciary.”

“Nay,” joined in an old man, “what need of a Justice when God speaks?  We
did but thole her to the river to see if she would sink or swim.  The
witch did swim, as all can testify, her Master helping her; and seeing
that, we drew her under—ay, and see her now as she lies, and say whether
the Devil hath not set a mark on his own?”

Martin wrung his hands.

“For the love of Christ, lay her decently on her pallet, and say no word
of this to yon holy man.”

Moved by his earnest manner, one or two more kindly folk busied
themselves unfastening the ropes and thongs which bound the witch, and
bore her to her wretched bed.

The people, in their previous eagerness, had torn down the front of the
miserable hovel she called home, so all men could see the poor place and
its dead dishonoured mistress.

Martin, finding his bidding accomplished, turned to meet Hilarius and the
Friar who were now coming slowly across the windswept common.  March
mists gathered and draped the sluggish river; the dry reeds rattled
dismally in the ooze and sedge.  Hilarius shivered, and the Friar started
nervously when Martin spoke.

“Friar,” he said, “God comfort thee!  After all thy pains thou art too
late to speed thy mother’s soul; she passed to-day, and lies even now
awaiting burial at thy faithful hands.”

The Friar drew a quick breath, and Hilarius questioned Martin with a
look.  The crowd parted to let them through, and hung their heads abashed
in painful silence as the Friar, led by Hilarius, gave his blessing.

They were close to the mean hovel now, and he turned to Martin.

“Didst thou hear of her end, or did she die alone, for the people feared
her?”

“Ay, she died alone,” answered Martin, and muttered, “now God forgive
me!” under his breath.

As they went into the wretched shed the setting sun broke through the
lowering grey clouds and shone full on the dead woman.  It lighted each
vicious line and hideous trait of the wrinkled, toothless face, and
betrayed the mark of an evil life, surcharged with horrid fear.

Hilarius shrank back shuddering.  Could this hideousness be death?  The
Friar stepped forward, but Martin stayed him.

“Nay, touch her not, Father, it may be the pestilence as thou didst read
in thy dream.”

The Friar fell on his knees; and, in the silence that followed was heard
the drip, drip, drip, from the sodden rags on the beaten earth floor.
The people without, staring, open-mouthed and silent, saw the Friar look
up; his hand hastily outstretched touched the dank, muddy hair; then he
knew all, and fell on his face with an exceeding bitter cry.  It was
answered by another cry—the glad cry of a lost child that is found.

                                * * * * *

The Friar, standing in front of that hovel of death, preached to the
cringing, terrified people, many of whom knelt and crouched in the
down-trodden grass and quag.  He threw up his arms, and turned his blind,
anguished face to the setting sun.

“Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel but
not of Me, that they may add sin to sin.  Darkness shall come upon them;
Death shall overtake them; their place shall know them no more.  Let them
bare their backs to the scourge, let them confess and repent ere I visit
them as I visited Sodom and Gomorrah, cities of the Plain.

“O ye people, ye have taken judgment in your hands and judged falsely
withal; but ye shall be judged in truth, yea, even according to your
measure.  Repent, repent, for Death cometh swiftly and maketh no long
tarrying.  It shall come; it shall snatch men’s souls away, even as ye
have torn away my mother’s soul, leaving no space for repentance.”

He stretched his hands out over the common, and pointed to the little
town.

“Your dwellings shall be desolate, and this place a place of heaps.  Ye
shall run hither and thither, seeking safety and finding none; for the
arm of the Lord is stretched out still because of the wickedness of the
earth.  Woe, woe, woe, a disobedient and gainsaying people!  Woe, woe,
woe, a people hating righteousness and loving iniquity!  The Lord shall
straightway destroy them from off the face of the earth.”

He made an imperative gesture of dismissal, and first one and then
another in the crowd turned to slink home like beaten dogs, snarling,
growling, but afraid.

Hilarius and Martin buried the witch at the back of her wretched den; and
the Friar, the priest lost in the son, prayed long by the else unhallowed
grave, and Martin prayed beside him.

Hilarius stood apart, his lips set straight, and said no prayer; for what
availed it to pray for an unassoilzied witch who had met her due, damned
alike by God and man?

Martin came up to him.

“She was his mother,” he said, as if making excuse.

Hilarius stared in bewilderment.  His mother?  Ay, but an evil liver; and
the people of Bungay had wrought a good work in sending her to her own
place.  He crossed himself piously at the thought of the near
neighbourhood of devils busied with a thrice-damned soul.

Martin led them out of Bungay by the Earsham road, and the Friar clung to
him like a little child, for the strength of his vision was spent.  They
lay that night with a friendly shepherd; but only one slept, and that one
Hilarius.  He lay on a truss of sweet-smelling hay, and dreamt of
Wymondham and Brother Andreas; of gold, vermilion and blue; of wondrous
pictures, and a great name: and the scent of the pine forest at home
swept across his quiet sleep.

On the morrow came the parting of the ways, for Hilarius was all aglow
for Wymondham, and Martin had charged himself with the Friar at least as
far as Norwich.

“As well lead a blind friar as sing blindly at another’s bidding,” he
said whimsically, and so they bade one another farewell never to meet
again in this world: for Martin and the Friar went to Yarmouth, not
Norwich, and there they perished among the first when the east wind swept
the Plague thither in a boat-load of sickened shipmen.  And Hilarius—once
again the Angel of the Lord stood in the path of his desires.



