CHAPTER IV
THE PASSING OF PRIOR STEPHEN


THE Convent welcomed Hilarius gladly, and on the Feast of St Michael he
made his profession, for the Prior deemed that he had served his
noviciate and been found faithful; and the Brethren assented eagerly, for
they were fain to keep this wondrous limner for the service of their own
Church.

Then, by the Prior’s command, Hilarius set himself to limn a great
picture for the High Altar.  It was a Crucifixion, and all his heart and
all his love were in it.  When the Brethren first saw the fair proportion
and fine colours that Hilarius brought to the work, they rejoiced in that
their Church should be glorified above other Churches of the Order; but
when the picture was near completing, and they gazed up into the wondrous
face of the Great King who looked down from the throne of His triumphant
suffering, with a world of hunger and love in His eyes for those who had
so enthroned Him, they hung their heads for shame because of the
emulation in their hearts; and lo! the Cellarer, for very love, was
careful for the needs of the elder Brethren; and the monks, for very
love, laid hold gladly of suffering, and so the Convent was blessed, and
lived together in unity.

In one of the groups very near the Cross, Hilarius set a grey-eyed girl,
a woman with a babe at the breast, and clinging to her skirts, a little
flaxen-headed maid.  None but the Prior knew the meaning of these three,
and their names, with that of a poor light-o’-love, were ever on his lips
when he offered the Holy Sacrifice.

Gentle Brother Hilarius painted and loved, and was beloved of all his
world.  The years sped, and he became in turn Almoner, Novice-master, and
Sub-Prior: and no man envied him, for he reckoned himself ever as least
of all and servant of all.

Prior Stephen attained his fourscore years, ruling the Convent wisely and
well to the very end: ay, and never ailed aught, his call coming as it
might be straight from the mouth of the Lord.

On the Feast of Blessed Stephen he went into the chapter and said as
always: “_The souls of the deceased brethren and believers rest in
peace_!” to which the Convent replied, “_Amen_.”  Then with his hands
raised to bless he cried, “_Benedicite_,” and again with loud and joyful
voice “_Domine_,” and again, “_Domine_!” as of one who answers to his
name—and so passed to his place in the Kingdom of Christ.

The Convent elected Hilarius to be Prior in his stead, which election the
Abbat of Cluny confirmed with good grace.

Time passed, and the fame of the Monastery grew because of the exceeding
beauty of the Church, for Hilarius, with those whom he taught, set fair
pictures on the walls, and blazoned the roof with the blue of heaven and
gold of the wakeful stars.  In the span over the High Altar he set
Blessed Benedict himself with the face of Prior Stephen, and round him
the angel virtues; even as one Giotto, a shepherd lad, had limned them in
the Church of the Little Brothers.

Now Prior Hilarius desired greatly to set a picture of Our Lady above the
Altar in her Chapel.  Long did he pray with ever-increasing fervour and
much fasting that this boon might be vouchsafed him for her glory and the
Convent’s greater good.  And one day—’twas her Nativity—he set his hand
to the work, for it seemed to him that she would have it so; and he was
greatly humbled that such heavenly kindness should attend so vile a
sinner.  Day by day he set apart some hours for this service; and he
limned a face so fair and radiant, with woman’s love and light of heaven,
that it was whispered in the cloister walks that the Prior had surely
been blessed by a vision, else had he never pictured the Maid-Mother in
so wondrous a fashion: and of a truth a man might well give credence to
such a story, for the joy that shone in the Prior’s eyes and might not be
hid.

Many other tales did the Brethren tell of Hilarius, but softly, for he
would hear no word of his own deeds or the favours vouchsafed him.

When he walked in the garth the pigeons circled round him crooning their
peace-note; and it was told that the kine in the meadows ceased browsing
when he passed, and needs must company with him a little way.

Once it befell that a lay-brother was afflicted with heavy sickness by
reason of the sun’s great heat; and Satan strove with him for his
undoing, so that the poor soul foamed at the mouth and roared out
blasphemy; yea, verily, and must be held with cords also, lest he do
himself or his fellows some grievous hurt.  But when the Prior laid his
hand between the man’s troubled eyes sweet sleep came upon him, and his
madness forsook him.

The poor also crowded to the Monastery gate and were fed, ay, even if the
Brethren went hungry; and if any man in all the villages round had aught
against his neighbour he would come to the Prior for a just hearing.

Nevertheless, despite these things the Convent’s peace began to be
troubled.  Men sought the Monastery for its famous name, caring but
little for religion; there were many young novices within its walls, and
the strong hand of Prior Stephen was lacking.  Hilarius was of gentler
build; he would speak ever in love, thinking no evil, whereas it is not
given to all men to understand that tongue.  So it came to pass that the
younger Brethren waxed fat and kicked, and the elder Brethren murmured.



