CHAPTER III
THE KING’S SONG-BIRD


MARTIN THE MINSTREL sat under a wayside oak singing softly to himself as
he tuned his vielle.  He was a long lanky fellow with straight black
locks flat against his sallow face, and dark eyes that smouldered in
hollow cavities.  He wore the King’s colours, and broke a manchet of
white bread with his mid-day repast.

“Heigh-ho!” sighed Martin, and laid the vielle lovingly beside him,
“another four leagues to Westminster, and I weary enough of shoe-leather
already, and not another penny piece in my pocket ’til I win back to good
King Ned.  A brave holiday I have had, from Candlemas to Midsummer; free
to sing or to be silent, to smile or frown; wide England instead of
palace walls; a crust of bread and a jug of cider instead of a king’s
banquet.  Now but another few leagues and the cage again.  Money in my
pocket, true; but a song here and a song there, such as suit the fancy of
the Court gentles, not of Martin the Minstrel.  Heigh-ho, heigh-ho! ’tis
a poor bird sings at the word of a king, and a poor enough song too, if
Edward did but know it.

“Who comes here?  Faith, the lad goes a steady pace and carries a light
heart from his song; and no ill voice either.”

It was Hilarius, and he sang the _Alma Redemptoris_ as he sped along the
green grass which bordered the highway.

When Martin hailed him he turned aside gladly, and his face lit up at the
sight of the vielle.

“Whence dost thou come, lad?” said Martin, eyeing him with interest.

“Many days’ journey from the Monastery of Prior Stephen,” answered
Hilarius.

“But thou art no monk!”

“Nay, a novice scarcely; but the Prior hath bidden me go forth to see the
world.  It is wondrous fair,” he added sincerely.

“He who speaks thus is cloister-bred,” said Martin, and as Hilarius made
sign of assent, “’tis writ on thy face as well.  Thy Prior gave thee
letters to the Abbat of St Peter’s, I doubt not; thy face is set for
Westminster.”

“Ay, for Westminster, but my letters are for that good knight, Sir John
Maltravers.  I should have made an end of my journeying ere now but that
two days ago I met strange company.  They took my purse and hat and
shoes, and kept me with them all night until the late dawn.  Then they
gave me my goods again, and bade me God-speed.’

“But kept thy purse?” Martin laughed.

“Nay, it is here, and naught is missing.  It was all passing strange, and
I feared them, for they looked evil men; yet they did me no wrong, and
set me on my way gently enough, giving me provision, which I lacked.”

“Pick-purses and cut-throats afraid of God’s judgments for once,”
muttered Martin; then aloud, “Well, young sir, we shall do well if we win
Westminster before night-fall; shall we journey together since our way is
the same?”

Hilarius assented gladly; and as they went, Martin told him of Court and
King, and the wondrous doings when the Princess Isabel was wed.  He
listened open-eyed to tales of joust and revel and sport; and heard
eagerly all the minstrel could tell of Sir John Maltravers himself, a man
of great and good reputation, and no mean musician; “and,” added Martin,
“three fair daughters he hath, the eldest Eleanor, fairest of them all,
of whom men say she would fain be a nun.  Thou art a pretty lad, I wager
one or other will claim thee for page.”

“I will strive to serve well,” said Hilarius soberly, “but I have never
spoken but to one maid ’til yesterday, when a woman gave me good-morrow.”

Martin looked at his companion queerly.

“And thou art for Westminster!  Nay, but by all the Saints this Prior of
thine is a strange master!”

“It is but for a time,” said Hilarius, “then I shall go back to the
Monastery again.  But first I would learn to be a real limner; I have
some small skill with the brush,” he added simply.

Martin stared.

“Back to the cloister?  Nay, lad, best turn about and get back now, not
wait till thou hast had a taste of Court life.  Joust and banquet and
revel, revel, banquet, and joust, much merry-making and little reason,
much love and few marryings: a gay round, but not such as makes a monk.”

Hilarius smiled.

“Nay, that life will not be for me.  I am to serve my lord, write for
him, methinks.  But tell me, good Martin, dost thou love the Court?  It
seems a fine thing to be the King’s Minstrel.”

“Nay, lad, nay,” said the other hastily, “give me the open country and
the greenwood, and leave to sing or be silent.  Still, the King is a good
master, and lets me roam as I list if I will but come back; ’tis
ill-faring in winter, so back I go to pipe in my cage and follow the
Court until next Lady-day lets the sun in on us again.”

He struck his vielle lightly, and the two fell into a slower pace as the
minstrel sang.  Hilarius’ eyes filled with tears, for he was still
heart-sore, and Martin’s voice rose and fell like the wind in the tossing
tree-tops which had beckoned him over the Monastery wall.  The song
itself was sad—of a lover torn from his mistress and borne away captive
to alien service.  When it was ended they took a brisker pace in silence;
then, after a while, Hilarius said timidly:—

“Did’st thou sing of thyself, good Martin?”

“Ay, lad, and of my mistress.”  He stopped suddenly, louted low to the
sky, and with comprehensive gesture took in the countryside.  “A fair
mistress, lad, and a faithful one, though of many moods.  A man suns
himself in the warmth of her caresses by day, and at night she is cold,
chaste, unattainable; at one time she is all smiles and tears, then with
boisterous gesture she bids one seek shelter from her buffets.  She gives
all and yet nothing; she trails the very traces of her hair across a
man’s face only to elude him.  She holds him fast, for she is mother of
all his children; yet he must seek as though he knew her not, or she
flouts him.”

Hilarius listened eagerly.  Was this what the dancer had meant—the “wide
wide world, hunger and love”?

“Did’st thou ever hunger, good Martin?”

“Ay, lad,” said the minstrel, surprised, “and ’tis good sauce for the
next meal”

“Did’st thou ever love?”

Martin broke into a great laugh.

“Ay, marry I have more times than I count years.  But see, here comes one
who knows little enough of hunger or love.”  Round the bend of the road
came a man in hermit’s dress carrying a staff and a well-filled wallet.
His carriage seemed suddenly to become less upright, and he leaned
heavily on his stick as he besought an alms from the two travellers.

Hilarius felt for his purse, but Martin stayed him.

“Nay, lad, better have left thy money with the pick-purses than help to
fill the skin of this lazy rogue; ’tis not the first time we have met.
See here,” and with a dexterous jerk he caught the hermit’s wallet.

This one was too quick for him; with uplifted staff and a mouthful of
oaths, sorely at variance with his habit, he snatched it back, flung the
bag across his shoulder, and made off at a round pace down the road,
while Martin roared after him to wait an alms laid on with a cudgel.

Hilarius gazed horrified from the retreating figure to his laughing
companion, who answered the unspoken question.

“A rascal, lad, yon carrion, and no holy father.  They are the pest of
every country-side, these lazy rogues, who never do a hand’s turn and yet
live better than many a squire.  I warrant he has good stuff in that
larder of his to make merry with.”

Hilarius walked on for some time in silence with bent head.

“I fear the world is an ill place and far from godliness,” he said at
last.

“It will look thus to one cloister-bred, and ’tis true enough that
godliness is far from most men; but if a hermit’s robe may cover a
rascal, often enough a good heart lies under an ill-favoured face and
tongue.  See, lad,” as another turn in the road brought them in sight of
Westminster, “there lies thy new world, God keep thee in it!”

He pointed to a grey-walled city rising from the water’s edge, with roof
and pinnacle, gable and turret, aflame in the light of the western sky;
in front flowed the river like a stream of molten gold.

Hilarius gave a little cry.

“’Tis like the New Jerusalem!” he said, and Martin smiled grimly.

An hour later they stood within the walls of Westminster city, and
Hilarius, amazed and weary, clung close to Martin’s side.  Around him he
saw russet-clad archers, grooms, men on horseback, pedlars, pages,
falconers, scullions with meats, gallant knights, gaily dressed ladies;
it was like a tangled dream.  The gabled fronts of the houses were richly
blazoned or hung with scarlet cloth; it was a shifting scene of colour,
life, and movement, and to Hilarius’ untutored eyes, wild confusion.
Outside the taverns clustered all sorts and conditions of men, drinking,
gossiping, singing, for the day’s work was done.  In the courtyard of the
“Black Boar” a chained bear padded restlessly to and fro, and Hilarius
crossed himself anxiously—was the devil about to beset him under all
guises at once?  He raised a fervent _Ora __pro me_ to St Benedict as he
hurried past.  A string of pack-horses in the narrow street sent folk
flying for refuge to the low dark doorways, and a buxom wench, seeing the
pretty lad, bussed him soundly.  This was too much, only the man in him
stayed the indignant tears.  “Martin, Martin!” he cried; but the minstrel
was on his own ground now, and was hailed everywhere with acclamations,
and news given and demanded in a breath.  Hilarius, shrinking, aghast,
his ears scourged with rough oaths and rude jests, his eyes offended by
the easy manners round him, his cheek hot from the late salute, took
refuge under a low archway, and waited with anxious heart until the
minstrel should have done with the crowd.

Martin did not forget him.

“Holà, lad!” he cried, “see how they welcome the King’s bird back to his
cage!  As for thee, thou hast gone straight to thy cot like a homing
pigeon; through that archway, lad, lies thy journey’s end.”  Then,
apprehending for the first time Hilarius’ white face and piteous eyes,
Martin strode across, swept him under the archway into a quiet courtyard
where a fountain rippled, and, having handed him over to Sir John’s
steward, left him with a friendly slap on the back and the promise of
speedy meeting.

Hilarius delivered the Prior’s letter, and followed the steward into a
rush-strewn hall where scullions and serving-men were busy with
preparations for the evening meal; and sat there, lonely and dejected,
his curiosity quenched, his heart sore, his whole being crying out for
the busied peace and silent orderliness of his cloister home.  The
servants gibed at him, but he was too weary to heed; indeed he hardly
noticed when the household swept in to supper, until a page-boy tweaked
him slyly by the ear and bade him come to table.  He ate and drank
thankfully, too dazed to take note of the meal; and the pages and squires
among whom he sat left him alone, abashed at his gentleness.  At last,
something restored by the much-needed food, Hilarius looked round the
hall.

It reminded him of the Refectory at home, save that it was far loftier
and heavily timbered.  The twilight stealing in through high lancet
windows served but to emphasize the upper gloom, which the morrow’s sun
would dissipate into cunningly carved woodwork—a man’s thought in every
quaintly wrought boss and panel, grotesque beast and guarding saint.  A
raised table stood at the upper end of the hall, and here gaily dressed
pages waited on the master of the house and his honoured guests.
Hilarius rightly guessed the tall, careworn man of distinguished presence
to be no other than Sir John himself, and he liked him well; but his eyes
wandered carelessly over the rest of the company until they were caught
and held by a woman’s face.  It was Eleanor, the fairest of the knight’s
three fair daughters; and when Hilarius saw her he felt as a weary
traveller feels who meets a fellow citizen in a far-off land.

“Even such a face must the Blessed Agnes have had,” he thought, his mind
reverting to his favourite Saint; “she is like the lilies in the garth at
home.”

It was a strange comparison, for the girl was extravagantly dressed in
costly materials and brilliant colours, her hair coifed in the foolish
French fashion of the day; and yet, despite it all, she looked a nun.
Her face was pale, her brows set straight; her eyes, save when she was
much moved, were like grey shadows veiling an unknown soul; her mouth,
delicately curved, was scarcely reddened; her head drooped slightly on
her long, slender neck, a gesture instinct with gracious humility.  She
was like a pictured saint: Hilarius’ gaze clung to her, followed her as
she left the hall, and saw her still as he sat apart while the serving
men cleared the lower tables and brought in the sleeping gear for the
night.  He lay down with the rest, and through the high, lancet windows
the moonlight kissed his white and weary face as it was wont to do on
bright nights in the cloister dormitory.  Around him men lay sleeping
soundly after the day’s toils; there was none to heed, and he sobbed like
a little homesick child, until his tired youth triumphed, and he fell
asleep, to dream of Martin and the Prior, the lady at the raised table,
and the pale, sweet lilies in the cloister garth.




_PART II_
THE FLOWER


