CHAPTER II
THE CITY THAT HILARIUS SAW


HILARIUS went back to the courtyard, his soul full of trouble.  He leant
against the fountain, playing with the cool water which fell with
monotonous rhythm into the shallow timeworn basin.  The cloudless sky
smiled back at him from the broken mirror into which he gazed, and the
glory of its untroubled blue thrilled him strangely.  He too had a vision
which he longed to limn; but it was of earth, not Heaven, like that
vouchsafed to Brother Ambrose; and yet none the less precious, for was it
not the Monastery at home which so haunted him, the grey, familiar walls
with their girdle of sunlit pasture, and the mantling forest which bowed
and swayed at the will of the whispering wind?

“As well seek Heaven’s gate in yon fair reflection as learn to love in
this light-minded, deceitful city,” Hilarius said to himself a little
bitterly.  He deemed that he had plumbed its hollowness and learnt the
full measure of its vanity.  Already he shunned the company and
diversions of his fellow pages, though he was ever ready to serve them.
A prentice lad’s homely brawl set him shivering; a woman’s jest painted
his cheeks ’til they rivalled a young maid’s at her first wooing.  He
plucked aside his skirts and walked in judgment; only wherever mountebank
or juggler held the crowd enthralled, there Hilarius, half-ashamed, would
push his way, in the unacknowledged hope of seeing again the maid whose
mother, like his own, was light o’ love: a strange link truly to bind
Hilarius in his blindness to the rest of poor sinful humanity.

Suddenly there broke on his musing the clatter of horse-hoofs, and a gay
young page came spurring with bent head under the low archway.  He reined
up by Hilarius:

“Dear lad, kind lad, wilt thou do me a service?”

“That will I, Hal, an it be in my power.”

“Take this purse, then, to the Cock Tavern and give it mine host.  ’Tis
Luke Langland’s reckoning; he left it with me yesternight, but my head
was full of feast and tourney, and ’tis yet undelivered.  Mine host will
not let the serving men and the two horses go ’til he hath seen Luke’s
money, and I cannot stay, for my lord will need me.”

Hilarius took the purse; and his fellow page, blessing him for a good
comrade, clattered back through the gateway.

The streets were full of life and colour; serving men in the livery of
Abbat and Knight, King and Cardinal, lounged at the tavern doors dicing,
gaming, and drinking.  Hilarius walked delicately and strove to shut eyes
and ears to the sights and sounds of sin.  He delivered the purse, only
to hear mine host curse roundly because it was lighter than the
reckoning; and after being hustled and jeered at for a milk-faced varlet
by the men who stood drinking, he sought with scarlet cheeks for a less
frequented way.

The quiet of a narrow street invited him; he turned aside, and suddenly
traffic and turmoil died away.  He was in a city within a city; a place
of mean tenements, wretched hovels, ruined houses, and, keeping guard
over them all, a grim square tower, blind save for two windowed eyes.
Men, ill-favoured, hang-dog, or care-worn, stood about the house doors
silent and moody; a white-faced woman crossing the street with a bucket
gave no greeting; the very children rolling in the foul gutters neither
laughed nor chattered nor played.  The city without seemed very far from
this dismal sordid place.

Hilarius felt a touch on his shoulder, and a kindly voice said:—

“How now, young sir, for what crime dost thou take sanctuary?”

He looked up and saw an old man in the black dress of an ecclesiastic,
the keys of St Peter broidered on his arm.

“Sanctuary,” stammered Hilarius, “nay, good sir, I—”

The other laughed.

“Wert thou star-gazing, then, that thou could’st stray into these
precincts and know it not?  This is the City of Refuge to which a man may
flee when he has robbed or murdered his fellow, or been guilty of
treason, seditious talk, or slander—a strange place in which to see such
a face as thine.”

“I did but seek a quiet way home and lost the turning,” said Hilarius;
“in sooth, ’tis a fearful place.”

“Ay, boy, ’tis a place of darkness and despair, despite its safety—even
the King’s arm falls short when a man is in these precincts: but from
himself and the knowledge of his crime, a man cannot flee; hence I say
’tis a place of darkness and despair.”

The unspoken question shone in Hilarius’ eyes, and the other answered it.

“Nay, there is no blood on my soul, young sir.  ’Twas good advice I gave,
well meant but ill received, so here I dwell to learn the wisdom of fools
and the foolishness of wisdom.”

“Does the Abbat know what evil men these are that seek the shelter of
Holy Church?” asked Hilarius, perplexed.

“Most surely he knows; but what would’st thou have?  It hath ever been
the part of the Church to embrace sinners with open arms lest they
repent.  A man leaves wrath behind him when he flees hither; but should
he set foot in the city without, he is the law’s, and no man may gainsay
it.”

“Nay, sir, but these look far from repentance,” said Hilarius.

“Ay, ay, true eno’,” rejoined the other cheerfully, “but then ’tis not
for nothing Mother Church holds the keys.  Man’s law may fail to reach,
but there is ever hell-fire for the unrepented sinner.”

Hilarius nodded, and his eyes wandered over the squalid place with the
North Porch of the Abbey for its sole beauty.

“It must be as hell here, to live with robbers and men with bloody
hands.”

“Nay,” said the old man hastily, “many of them are kindly folk, and many
have slain in anger without thought.  ’Tis a sad place, though, and thy
young face is like a sunbeam on a winter’s day.  Come, I will show thee
thy road.”

He led Hilarius through the winding alleys and set him once more on the
edge of the city’s stir and hum.

“I can no further,” he said.  “Farewell, young sir, and God keep thee!
An old man’s blessing ne’er harmed any one.”

Hilarius gave him godden, and sped swiftly back through the streets
crowded with folks returning from the tourney.  The Abbey bell rang out
above the shouts and din.

“’Tis an evil, evil world,” quoth young Hilarius.



