CHAPTER IV
BLIND EYES WHICH COULD SEE


It is, for the most part, the moneyed man who flees from the face of
Death; the poor man awaits him quietly, with patient indifference, in the
field or under his own roof-tree; ay, and often flings the door wide for
the guest, or hastens his coming.  Thus it came to pass that while the
stricken poor agonised in the grip of unknown horror, bishop and
merchant, prince and chapman, fine ladies in gorgeous litters, abbesses
with their train of nuns, and many more, fled north, east, and west, from
the pestilent cities, and encumbered the roads with much traffic.  One
procession, and one only, did Hilarius meet making its way to London.

It was a keen frosty day; there had been little previous rain or snow,
and the roads were dry; the trees in the hedgerows, bare and stricken
skeletons, stood out sharp and black against a cold grey sky.  Suddenly
the sound of a mournful chant smote upon the still air, music and words
alike strange.  The singers came slowly up the roadway, men of foreign
aspect walking with bent heads, their dark, matted locks almost hiding
their wild, fixed eyes and thin, haggard faces.  They were stripped to
the waist, their backs torn and bleeding, and carried each a bloody
scourge wherewith to strike his fellow.  At the third step they signed
the sign of the Cross with their prostrate bodies on the ground; and thus
in blood and penitence they went towards London.

Hilarius was familiar with the exercise but not the manner of it.  These
strange, wild men filled him with horror, and he shrank back with the
rest.  Then a man sprang from among the watching crowd, tore off jerkin
and shirt, and flung up his arms to heaven with a great sob.

“I left wife and children to perish alone,” he cried, “and fled to save
my miserable skin.  Now may God have mercy on my soul, for I go back.
Smite, and smite hard, brother!” and he stepped in front of the first
flagellant.

At this there arose a cry from the folk that looked on, and many fell on
their knees and confessed their sins, accusing themselves with groanings
and tears; but Hilarius, seized with sudden terror, turned and fled
blindly, without thought of direction, his eyes wide, the blood drumming
in his ears, a great horror at his heels—a horror that could drive a man
from wife and child, that had driven brave Martin to flee against the
wind, and all this folk to leave house and home to save that which most
men count dearer than either.

At last, exhausted and panting, he stayed to rest, and saw, coming
towards him, a blind friar.  Hilarius had turned into a by-way in the
hurry of his terror, and they two were alone.  The friar was a small,
mean-looking man, feeling his way by the aid of hand and staff; his face
upturned, craving the light.  He stopped when he came up with Hilarius,
and turned his sightless eyes on him; a fire burnt in the dead ashes.

“Art thou that son of Christ waiting to guide my steps, as the Lord
promised me?”

Hilarius started back, afraid at the strange address; but the friar laid
one lean hand on his arm, and, letting the staff slip back against his
shoulder, felt Hilarius’ face, not with the light and practised touch of
the blind, but slowly and carefully, frowning the while.

“Son, thou wilt come with me?”

“Nay, good Father, I may not; I am for St Alban’s.”

“Whence, my son?”

“From Westminster, good Father.”

“Nay, then, thou mayest spare shoe-leather.  I left the Monastery but
now, and, I warrant thee, they promise small welcome to those from the
pestilent cities.  What would’st thou with the Abbat?”

Hilarius told him.

The friar flung up his hands.

“_Laus Deo_!  _Laus Deo_!” he cried, “now I know thou art in very truth
the lad of my dream.  Listen, my son, and I will tell thee all.  Thrice
has the vision come to me; I see the mother who bore me carried away,
struggling and cursing, by men in black apparel, and Hell is near at
hand, belching out smoke and flame, and many hideous devils; yet the
place is little Bungay, where my mother hath a cot by the river.  When
first the dream came I lay at Mechlin in the Monastery there; my flesh
quaked and my hair stood up by reason of the awfulness of the vision;
then as I mused and prayed I saw in it the call of the Lord, that I might
wrestle with Satan for my mother’s soul, for she was ever inclined to
evil arts and spells, and thought little of aught save gain.

“Forthwith I suffered no man to stay me, and set off, the Plague at my
heels; but ever out-stripping it, I was careful to preach its coming in
every place, that men might turn and repent.  Then as I tarried on the
seaboard for a ship the Plague came; and because I had preached its
coming, the people rose in wrath, and, falling upon me, roughly handled
me.  They beat me full sore in the market-place; then, piercing my
eyeballs, set me adrift in a small boat.

“Two days and two nights I lay at the mercy of the sea, darkness and
light alike to me, and with no thought of time; for the flames of hell
burnt in my eyes, and a worse anguish in my heart because of my mother’s
soul.”

“And then, and then?” tried Hilarius breathlessly, tears of pure pity in
his eyes.

“Then the Lord cared for me even as He cared for the Prophet Jonas, and
sent a ship that His message might not be hindered.  The shipmen were
kindly folk, but we were driven out of our course by a great wind, and at
last came ashore in Lincolnshire.  I have come south thus far by the aid
of Christian men, but time presses; and now, lo! thou art here to guide
me.”

“But, my Father,” said poor Hilarius, seeing yet another barrier in the
way of his desires, “’tis a limner I would be; and I am from Westminster,
not London, and then there is Prior Stephen’s letter—”

The friar held up his hand:

“Thou shalt be a limner, my son, the Lord hath revealed it to me.  Last
night the vision came again, and a voice cried: ‘Speed, for a son of
Christ waits by the way to guide thy steps,’ and lo! thou art here,
waiting by the way, as the voice said.  And now, son, an thou wilt come
thou shalt take thy letter to Wymondham—’tis a cell of this Abbey—for
there is Brother Andreas from overseas who hath wondrous skill with the
brush; he will teach thee, for thou shalt say to him that Brother Amadeus
sent thee, who is now as Bartimeus, waiting for the light of the Lord;
but first thou shalt set me in that village of Bungay, where my mother
dwelleth.”

Hilarius listened, gazing awestruck at the withered eyes that vainly
questioned his face.  He had forgotten plague, death, flagellants, in
this absorbing tale of the man of God, who was even as one of the blessed
martyrs.  Brother Andreas!  A skilled limner!  How should he, Hilarius,
gainsay one with a vision from the Lord?

“I obey, my Father,” he cried joyously, taking the friar’s hand; and they
two passed swiftly down the road, their faces to the east.



