The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Gathering of Brother Hilarius, by Michael
Fairless


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Gathering of Brother Hilarius


Author: Michael Fairless



Release Date: November 11, 2014  [eBook #789]
[This file was first posted on January 25, 1997]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GATHERING OF BROTHER
HILARIUS***


Transcribed from the 1912 John Murray edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

FIRST EDITION,                 _October_ 1901.
Reprinted,                     _January_ 1902.
Reprinted,                     _January_ 1903.
Reprinted,                     _January_ 1905.
Reprinted,                      _August_ 1908.
Reprinted,                      _August_ 1910.
POPULAR EDITION, (1/-)        _February_ 1912.

                             THE GATHERING OF
                             BROTHER HILARIUS


                           By MICHAEL FAIRLESS
                        AUTHOR OF “THE ROADMENDER”

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                  LONDON
                      JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET
                                   1912

                                * * * * *

                               A. M. D. G.

    “To those dearworthy ones
       to whom I owe all;
    I give that which is theirs already.”

                                * * * * *




PREFACE


THROUGH this little book runs the road of life, the common road of men,
the white highway that Hilarius watched from the monastery gate and
Brother Ambrose saw nearing its end in the Jerusalem of his heart.

The book is a romance.  It may be read as a romance of the Black Death
and a monk with an artist’s eyes; but for the author it is a romance of
the Image of God.  While the Divine Face is being unveiled for Hilarius
in the masque that shocks and bewilders him, and the secret of sorrow and
sin, of death and life and love, is told by his speechless and dying
“little maid,” we, if we choose, may hear again the Road mender’s
epilogue to the story of the man of this earth, the man of the common
highway:—“‘Dust and ashes and a house of devils,’ he cries; and there
comes back for answer, ‘_Rex concupiscet decorem tuum_.’”




CONTENTS

                               _PART I_
                               THE SEED
CHAP.                                                             PAGE
       I.  BLIND EYES IN THE FOREST                                  3
      II.  THE LOVE OF PRIOR STEPHEN                                15
     III.  THE KING’S SONG-BIRD                                     22
                              _PART II_
                              THE FLOWER
       I.  THE CITY OF PURE GOLD                                    39
      II.  THE CITY THAT HILARIUS SAW                               49
     III.  A SENDING FROM THE LORD                                  55
      IV.  BLIND EYES WHICH COULD SEE                               64
       V.  THE WHITE WAY AND WHERE IT LED                           72
      VI.  A DARK FINDING                                           82
     VII.  THE COMING OF HUNGER AND LOVE                            97
                              _PART III_
                              THE FRUIT
       I.  HOW LONG, O LORD, HOW LONG!                             117
      II.  MARY’S LILIES                                           124
     III.  OPEN EYES AT THE GATE                                   133
      IV.  THE PASSING OF PRIOR STEPHEN                            141
       V.  “GABRIEL, MAKE THIS MAN TO UNDERSTAND THE               147
           VISION.”—DAN. viii. 16.
      VI.  THE HUNGER OF DICKON THE WOODMAN                        154
     VII.  THE VISION OF THE EVENING AND THE MORNING               160
    VIII.  “BEHOLD THE FIELDS ARE WHITE”                           165




_PART I_
THE SEED


CHAPTER I
BLIND EYES IN THE FOREST


HILARIUS stood at the Monastery gate, looking away down the smooth,
well-kept road to the highway beyond.  It lay quiet and serene in the
June sunshine, the white way to the outer world, and not even a dust
cloud on the horizon promised the approach of the train of sumpter mules
laden with meats for the bellies and cloth for the backs of the good
Brethren within.  The Cellarer lacked wine, the drug stores in the
farmery were running low; last, but not least, the Precentor had bespoken
precious colours, rich gold, costly vellum, and on these the thoughts of
Hilarius tarried with anxious expectation.

On his left lay the forest, home of his longing imaginings.  The
Monastery wall crept up one side of it, and over the top the great trees
peered and beckoned with their tossing, feathery branches.  Twice had
Hilarius walked there, attending the Prior as he paced slowly and
silently along the mossy ways, under the strong, springing pines; and the
occasions were stored in his memory with the glories of St Benedict’s Day
and Our Lady’s Festivals.  Away to the right, within the great enclosure,
stretched the Monastery lands, fair to the eye, with orchard and fruitful
field, teeming with glad, unhurried labour.

At a little elevation, overlooking the whole domain, rose the Priory
buildings, topped by the Church, crown and heart of the place, signing
the sign of the Cross over the daily life and work of the Brethren,
itself the centre of that life, the object of that work, ever unfinished
because love knows not how to make an end.  To the monks it was a page in
the history of the life of the Order, written in stone, blazoned with
beauty of the world’s treasure; a page on which each generation might
spell out a word, perchance add a line, to the greater glory of God and
St Benedict.  They were always at work on it, stretching out eager hands
for the rare stuffs and precious stones devout men brought from overseas,
finding a place for the best of every ordered craft; their shame an
uncouth line or graceless arch, their glory each completed pinnacle and
fretted spire; ever restoring, enlarging, repairing, spendthrift of money
and time in the service of the House of the Lord.

The sun shone hot on grey wall and green garth; the spirit of insistent
peace brooded over the place.  The wheeling white pigeons circling the
cloister walls cried peace; the sculptured saints in their niches over
the west door gave the blessing of peace; an old, blind monk crossed the
garth with the hesitating gait of habit lately acquired—on his face was
great peace.  It rested everywhere, this peace of prayerful service,
where the clang of the blacksmith’s hammer smote the sound of the Office
bell.

Hilarius, at the gate, questioned the road again and again for sign of
the belated train.  It was vexatious; the Prior’s lips would take a
thinner line, for the mules were already some days overdue; and it was
ill to keep the Prior waiting.  The soft June wind swept the fragrance of
Mary’s lilies across to the lad; he turned his dreamy, blue eyes from the
highway to the forest.  The scent of the pinewoods rushed to meet his
sudden thought.  Should he, dare he, break cloister, and taste the
wondrous delight of an unwalled world?  It were a sin, a grave sin, in a
newly-made novice, cloister-bred.  The sweet, pungent smell overpowered
him; the trees beckoned with their long arms and slender fingers; the
voice of the forest called, and Hilarius, answering, walked swiftly away,
with bowed head and beating heart, between the sunburnt pine-boles.

At last he ventured to stop and look around him, his fair hair aflame in
the sunlight, his eyes full of awe of this arched and pillared city of
mystery and wonder.

It was very silent.  Here and there a coney peeped out and fled, and a
woodpecker toiled with sharp, effective stroke.  Hilarius’ eyes shone as
he lifted his head and caught sight of the sunlit blue between the great,
green-fringed branches: it was as if Our Lady trailed her gracious robe
across the tree-tops.  Then, as he bathed his thirsty soul in the great
sea of light and shade, cool depths and shifting colours, the sense of
his wrong-doing slipped from him, and joy replaced it—joy so great that
his heart ached with it.  He went on his way, singing _Lauda Syon_, his
eyes following the pine-boles, and presently, coming out into an open
glade, halted in amazement.

A flower incarnate stood before him; stood—nay, danced in the wind.  Over
the sunny sward two little scarlet-clad feet chased each other in
rhythmic maze; dainty little brown hands spread the folds of the deep
blue skirt; a bodice, silver-laced, served as stalk, on which balanced,
lightly swaying, the flower of flowers itself.  Hilarius’ eyes travelled
upwards and rested there.  Cheeks like a sunburnt peach, lips, a scarlet
bow; shimmering, tender, laughing grey eyes curtained by long curling
lashes; soft tendrils of curly hair, blue black in the shadows, hiding
the low level brow.  A sight for gods, but not for monks; above all, not
for untutored novices such as Hilarius.

His sin had found him out; it was the Devil, the lovely lady of St
Benedict; he drew breath and crossed himself hastily with a murmured
“_Apage Sataas_!”

The dancer stopped, conscious perhaps of a chill in the wind.

“O what a pretty boy!” she cried gaily.  “Playing truant, I dare wager.
Come and dance!”

Hilarius crimsoned with shame and horror.  “Woman,” he said, and his
voice trembled somewhat, “art thou not shamed to deck thyself in this
devil’s guise?”

The dancer bit her lip and stamped her little red shoe angrily.

“No more devil’s guise than thine own,” she retorted, eyeing his
semi-monastic garb with scant favour.  “Can a poor maid not practise her
steps in the heart of a forest, but a cloister-bred youngster must cry
devil’s guise?”

As she spoke her anger vanished like a summer cloud, and she broke into
peal on peal of joyous laughter.  “Poor lad, with thy talk of devils;
hast thou never looked a maid in the eyes before?”

Shrewdly hit, mistress; never before has Hilarius looked a maid in the
eyes, and now he drops his own.

“Dost thou not know it is sin to deck the body thus, and entice men’s
souls to their undoing?”

“An what is the matter with my poor body, may it please you, kind sir?”
she asked demurely, and stood with downcast eyes, like a scolded child.

“It is wrong to deck the body,” began Hilarius, softening at her
attitude, “because, because—”

Again the merry laugh rang out.

“Because, because—nay, Father” (with a mock reverence), “methinks thy
sermon is not ready; let it simmer awhile, and _I_ will catechise.  How
old art thou?”  She held up her small finger admonishingly.

“Seventeen,” replied Hilarius, surprised into reply.

“Art thou a monk?”

“Nay, a novice only.”

“Hast thou ever loved?”

Hilarius threw up his hands in shocked indignation, but she went on
unconcerned—

“’Twas a foolish question; the answer’s writ large for any maid to read.
But tell me, why art thou angry at the thought of love?”

Hilarius felt the ground slipping from under his feet.

“There is an evil love, and a holy love; it is good to love God and the
Saints and the Brethren—”

“But not the sisters?” the wicked little laugh pealed out.  “Poor
sisters!  Why, boy, the world is full of love, and not all for the Saints
and the Brethren, and it is good—good—good!”  She opened her arms wide.
“’Tis the devil and the monks who call it evil.  Hast thou never seen the
birds mate in the springtime, nor heard the nightingale sing?”

“It is well for a husband to love his wife, and a mother her child.  That
is love in measure, but not so high as the love we bear to God and the
Saints!” quoth Hilarius sententiously, mindful of yesterday’s homily in
the Frater.

“But how can’st thou know that thou lovest the Saints?” the dancer
persisted.

How did he know?

“How dost thou know that thou lovest thy mother?” he cried triumphantly,
forgetting the reprobate nature of the catechist, and anxious only to
come well out of the wordy war.

But the unexpected happened.

“Dost thou dare speak to me of my mother?  _I_, love her?—I _hate_ her;”
and she flung herself down on the grass in a passion of weeping.

Even a master of theology is helpless before a woman’s tears.

“Maid, maid,” said Hilarius, in deep distress, “indeed I did not mean to
vex thee;” and he came up and laid his hand on her shoulder.

So successfully can the Prince of Darkness simulate grief!

The dancer sat up and brushed away her tears; she looked fairer and more
flowerlike than before, sitting on the green sward, looking up at him
through shining lashes.

“There, boy, ’tis naught.  How could’st thou know?  But what of thine own
mother?”

“I know not.”

“Nay, what is this?  And thy father?”

“He was a gentle knight who died in battle ere I knew him.  I came a
little child to the Monastery, and know no other place.”

“Ah,”—vindictively,—“then _thy_ mother may have been a light o’ love.”

“Light of love; it has a wondrous fair sound,” said Hilarius with a
smile.

The maid looked at him speechless.

“_Go home_, _Boy_,” she said at last emphatically.

Just then a lad, a tumbler by his dress, pushed a way through the
undergrowth, and stood grinning at the pair.

“So, Gia!” he said.  “We must make haste; the others wait.”

“’Tis my brother,” said the dancer, “and”—pointing to the bag slung
across the youth’s shoulder—“I trust he hath a fine fat hen from thy
Monastery for our meal.”

Hilarius broke into a cold sweat.

The Convent’s hens!  The Saints preserve us!  Was nothing sacred, and
were the Ten Commandments written solely for use in the Monasteries?

“’Tis stealing,” he said feebly.

“’Tis stealing,” the dancer mocked.  “Hast thou another sermon ready, Sir
Preacher?”

“Empty bellies make light fingers,” quoth the youth.  “Did’st thou ever
hunger, master?”

“There is the fast of Lent which presses somewhat,” said Hilarius.

“But ever a meal certain once in the day?” queried the girl.

“Ay, surely, and collation also; and Sunday is no fast.”

The mischievous apes laughed—how they laughed!

“So, good Preacher,” said the dancer at last, rising to her feet, “thou
dost know it is wrong to steal; but hast never felt hunger.  Thou dost
know it is wrong to love any but God, the Saints, and thy mother; but
thou hast never known a mother, nor felt what it was to love.  Blind
eyes!  Blind eyes! the very forest could teach thee these things an thou
would’st learn.  Farewell, good novice, back to thy Saints and thy
nursery; for me the wide wide world; hunger and love—love—love!”

She seized her brother’s hand and together they danced away like two
bright butterflies among the trees.

Hilarius stared after them until they disappeared, and then with dazed
eyes and drooping head took his way back to the Monastery.  The train of
mules had just arrived; all was stir, bustle, and explanation; and in the
thick of it he slipped in unseen, unquestioned; but he was hardly
conscious of this mercy vouchsafed him, for in his heart reigned
desolation and doubt, and in his ears rang the dancer’s parting cry,
“Hunger and love—love—love!”



