CHAPTER V
THE WHITE WAY AND WHERE IT LED


IT was a bitterly cold night and St Agnes’ Eve; the snow fell heavily,
caught into whirling eddies by the keen north wind.  Hilarius and the
Friar, crossing an empty waste of bleak unprotected heath, met the full
force of the blast, and each moment the snow grew denser, the darkness
more complete.  They struggled on, breathless, beaten, exhausted and
lost; Hilarius, leading the Friar by one hand, held the other across his
bent head to shield himself from the buffets of the wind.

Suddenly he stood fast.

“I can no more, Father,” he said, “the snow is as a wall; there is naught
to see or to hear; I deem we are far from our right way.”  His voice was
very weak, and he caught at the Friar for support.

“I will pray the Lord, my son, that He open thine eyes, even as He opened
the eyes of the prophet’s servant in the besieged city; so shalt thou see
a host of angels encompassing us, for we are about the Lord’s business.”

“Nay, my Father,” said Hilarius feebly, “I see no angels, and I perish.”
He tottered, and would have fallen, but the Friar caught him in his arms.
A moment he stood irresolute, the boy on his breast, then flung away his
staff and lifted him to his shoulder.

With unerring, confident step he went forward through the snow, a white
figure bearing a white burden in a white world.  All at once the wind
dropped, the blinding shower ceased, and Hilarius, rested and comforted,
spoke:—

“Is it thou, my Father?”

“It is I, my son, but angels are on either hand and go before to guide.
The snow hath ceased, canst thou walk?”

He set Hilarius gently on his feet, and lo! he found the stars alight!

The boy gave a cry, and forgetting his companion’s darkness, pointed to
the left where lay a snow-clad village.

“A miracle, a miracle, my Father!”

“A miracle, i’ faith, my son: the Lord hath given guidance to the blind
as He promised.  Let us go down.”

They went by the white way under the stars; and Hilarius was full of awe
and comfort because of the angels of God which attended on a poor friar.

At the village hostel they found rough but friendly entertainment and
several guests.  They dried themselves at a roaring fire, and Hilarius
made a hearty meal; the Friar would eat nothing save a morsel of bread.

A messenger was there, a short stout man with stubbly beard, bright black
eyes like beads, and a high colour.  He was riding with despatches from
the King to the Abbat at Bury, and had fearful tales to tell of the
Plague; how in London they piled the dead in trenches, while many who
escaped the pest died of want and cold; it was a city of the dead rather
than the living.  One great lord, travelling post-haste from Westminster,
had been found by his servants to have the disorder, and they fled,
leaving him by the wayside to perish.

Hilarius heard horror-struck.

“’Tis a grievous shame so to desert a sick master,” he said.

“Nay, lad,” said a chapman in the corner, “but a man loves his own skin
best.”

“Ay, ay,” said a fat ruddy-faced miller, overtaken by the storm on his
way to a neighbouring village, “a man’s own skin before all.  Fill your
belly first and your neighbour’s afterwards.  Live and let live.”

“Ay, let live,” chimed in mine host, bustling in with a stoop of cider
for the chapman, “but, by the Rood, ’tis cruel work when two lone women
are murdered for a bit of mouldy bacon and a lump of bread; for I’se
warrant ’tis a long day sin’ they had more than that at best.”

The chapman took his cider.

“Where was this work done?” he said.

“Nay, where but here on the bruary!  The women were found Wednesday
se’n-night by the herd as he went folding.  They lay on the floor in
their blood.”

Hilarius turned sick.  In Westminster, by some miracle, he had been
spared the sight of violent death—ay, or of death in any form—and had
seen nothing worse than a rogue in the stocks, for which sight he had
thanked Heaven piously.

“’Tis the fault of the rich,” said a voice, and Hilarius saw, to his
surprise, that there was a second friar in the room; a tall,
bullet-headed man, with a heavy, obstinate jaw ornamented with a scanty
fringe of black hair.

“The rich grow fat, and the poor starve,” he went on, “’tis hunger makes
a man kill his brother for a mouthful of mouldy bacon.”

“Nay,” said the miller, “there was no need to kill, Father.  A man could
have taken the meat from two lone women and left them their lives.”

“Why take from folk as poor as themselves?” said mine host.  “Let them
rob the rich an they must rob.”

“Ay,” said the friar, “rob the rich, say you, take their own, say I.  God
did not make this world that one man should be over full and another go
empty; nor is it religion that the monks’ should live on the fat o’ the
land and grind the faces of the poor.  How many manors, think you, has
the Abbat of St Edmund’s, and how many on his land lack bread?”

Hilarius listened, scarlet with indignation, a flood of wrathful defence
pent at his lips, for the blind friar laid a restraining hand on his
sleeve.

Mine host scratched his head doubtfully.  The teaching was seditious, and
made a man liable to stocks and pillory; but it tickled the ears of the
common folk and ’twas ill to quarrel with the Mendicants.  Help came to
him in his perplexity: a loud knocking on the barred door made the guests
within start.

“’Tis eight o’ the clock,” said the miller, affrighted, for he had a
heavy purse on him.

“Let them knock and cool their hot heads,” said the seditious friar
composedly.

The rest nodded approval.

Then a man’s voice threatened without.

“What ho! unbar the door.  Is this a night to keep a man without?  Open,
open, or, by the Mass, thou shalt smart for it.”

Mine host shook his head fearfully, and his fat cheeks trembled; he moved
slowly and unwillingly to the door and took down the stout wooden bar.
As it swung back the door flew open, and a man burst in, at sight of whom
mine host turned yet paler.

“Food and drink,” said the new-comer sharply, flinging himself on a bench
by the fire.

Hilarius thought he had never seen so strange a fellow.  His hair was
close cropped; ay, and his ears also.  His eyes were very small and near
together; his nose a shapeless lump; his lip drawn up showed two rat-like
teeth.  Silence fell on the company, and the chapman who had been
searching amongst his goods for something wherewith to pay his
hospitality, was hastily putting them back, when the man, looking up,
caught sight of a bundle of oaten pipes among the miscellaneous wares.
He plucked one to him, and in a moment the air was full of tender liquid
notes—a thrush’s roundelay.  Then a blackbird called and his mate
answered; a cuckoo cried the spring-song; a linnet mourned with lifting
cadence; a nightingale poured forth her deathless love.

Mine host came in with a dish piled high and a stoop of mead; the man
threw the pipe from him with a rough oath and fell to ravenously on the
victuals.  He held his head low and ate brutishly amid dead silence; then
he looked up and cursed at them for their sorry mood.

“What!  Hugh pipes and never a word of thanks nor a jest?  Damn you all
for dull dogs!”

The blind friar rose and fixed his withered eyes on the man’s dreadful
face.

“Piping Hugh of Mildenhall,” he said, and at his voice the man leapt to
his feet and thrust his arm out as if for protection.  “Piping Hugh of
Mildenhall,” said the Friar again, “I have a message for thee from the
Lord God.  I cried thee damned in my own name once, when thou did’st take
my little sister to shame and death; now I cry thee thrice damned in the
name of the Lord, for the cup of thine iniquity is full and thy hands red
with blood.  Man hath branded thee; now God will set His mark on thee and
all men shall see it.  The Plague will come and come swiftly, but it
shall not touch thee; many shall die in their sins; thou shalt live on
with thine.  A brute thou art, and with brutes thou shalt herd; thou
shalt howl as a ravening wolf, and as such men shall hunt thee from their
doors.  Thou shalt seek death, even as Cain sought and found it not,
because of the mark of the Lord.  Thou art damned, thrice damned; thy
speech shall go from thee, thy sight fail thee, thy mind be darkened;
thou art given over to the Evil One, and he shall torment thee with
remembrance.”

There was dead silence; then with a long shrill howl the man tore open
the door, dashed from the house, and fled, a black blotch upon the
whiteness of the night.

The guests huddled together aghast, and no man moved, until Hilarius,
full of pride at his Friar’s powers, stepped forward to close the door.
He was too late; it swung to with a loud crash like the sound of doom.
The Friar sank back composedly on the bench, and the company began in
silence to make preparation for the night.  When all was ordered,
Hilarius bade the Friar come, and he rose at the lad’s voice and touch.
Then he crossed to where the others stood apart eyeing him fearfully.

He laid his hand on the miller’s breast and said in a clear, low voice:
“Thou wilt die, brother.”

He laid his hand on the messenger’s breast: “Thou wilt die, brother.”

He laid his hand on the chapman’s breast: “Thou wilt die, brother.”

He laid his hand on mine host’s breast: “Thou wilt die, brother.”

Then he came to the other Friar who stood at a little distance, his face
dark with anger and fear, and laid his hand on his breast: “Thou wilt
live, my brother—and repent.”



