CHAPTER I
HOW LONG, O LORD, HOW LONG!


THE Monastery by the forest pursued an even existence, with no great
event to trouble its serenity, for it lay too far west for the Plague to
be more than a terrible name.

True, there had been dissension when Prior Stephen, summoned to Cluny by
the Abbat, had perforce left the dominion to the Sub-Prior.  For lo! the
Sub-Prior, a mild and most amiable man in his own estate, had proved
harsh and overbearing in government.  Ay, and in an irate mood he had
fallen upon Brother William, the Sacrist, in the Frater, plucked out his
hair and beaten him sore; whereat the Convent was no little scandalized,
and counselled Brother William to resign his office.  He flouted the
Chamberlain also, and Brother Roger the Hospitaller, and so affronted the
Brethren that when he began to sing the _Verba mea_ on leaving the
chapter, the Convent—yea, even the novices—were silent, to show their
displeasure.

When Prior Stephen returned he was exceeding wroth, but said little; only
he took from the Sub-Prior his office, and all that appertained thereto,
and made him as one of the other monks; and Brother William, who was a
gentle and devout servant of God, he made Sub-Prior in his stead; and the
Convent was at peace.

Brother Ambrose, he to whom the vision was vouchsafed, had slipped
through the grey veil which once hid Jerusalem from his longing gaze;
Brother Richard was now in the land where the blind receive their sight;
and Brother Thomas the Cellarer—but of him let us say little and think
with charity; for ’tis to be feared that he greatly abused his office and
is come to judgment.

Two of the older monks, Brother Anselm and Brother Paul, who had spent
fifty years in the sheltered peace of the Monastery walls, sat warming
their tired old limbs in the south cloister, for the summer sunshine was
very pleasant to them.

“Since Brother Thomas died—” began Brother Paul.

“The Lord have mercy on his soul!” ejaculated Brother Anselm.

“Since Brother Thomas died,” said Brother Paul again—a little
impatiently, though he crossed himself piously enough—“methinks the
provisions have oft been scanty and far from tempting, Brother.”

“Ay, and the wine,” said Brother Anselm.  “Methinks our Cellarer draws
the half of it from the Convent’s well.”

They shook their heads sadly.

“No doubt,” said Brother Anselm after a short silence, “our Cellarer is
most worthy, strict, and honest in the performance of his office—while
Brother Thomas, alack—”

“Methinks Brother Edmund is somewhat remiss also in his duties,” said
Brother Paul.  “The Prior, holy man, perceives nothing of these things.
On Sunday’s feast one served him with a most unsavoury mess in the
refectory, the dish thereof being black and broken; yet he ate the meat
in great content, and seemingly with appetite.”

“He is but young, he is but young—sixty come Michaelmas—sixty, and
twenty-two years Prior—’tis a long term,” and Brother Anselm nodded his
head.

“Ay, he is still young, and of sound teeth,” said Brother Paul, “whereas
thou and I, Brother, are as babes needing pap-meat.  Brother Thomas—God
rest his soul!—was wont to give savoury mess easy of eating to the elder
Brethren.”

“Ay, he was a kind man with all his faults,” said Brother Anselm,
fingering his toothless gums.  “Think you ’twould be well to speak of
this matter to the Prior?”

“Nay, nay,” said the other, “he is ever against any store being set on
the things of this world—‘’tis well for the greater discipline of the
flesh,’ so saith he ever.  Still he hath forbidden the blood-letting to
us elder Brethren.”

“Methinks there is little to let, since Brother Thomas died,” said
Brother Anselm ruefully.

“Nay, then, let us seek out the Cellarer and admonish him—maybe he will
hear a word in season,” and the two old monks moved slowly away to the
Cellarer’s office as Prior Stephen came down the cloister walk.

He looked little older, his carriage was upright as ever, but government
sat heavy upon him; the keen, ascetic face was weary, and the line of the
lips showed care.  His thoughts were busy with Hilarius.  It was now full
six years that the lad had left the Monastery, and since the Christmas
after his going no news had come of him, save that he never reached St
Alban’s.  Had the Plague gathered him as it gathered many another
well-beloved son?  Or had the awakening proved too sudden for the lad set
blind-eyed without the gate?

He passed from the cloister into the garth where bloomed the lilies that
Hilarius had loved so well.  He looked at the row of nameless graves with
the great Rood for their common memorial; last but one lay the
resting-place of Brother Richard, and the blind monk’s dying speech had
been of the lad whose face he had strained his eyes to see.

Prior Stephen stood by the farmery door, and the scent of Mary’s flowers
came to him as it had come to Hilarius at the gate.  He stretched out his
hands with the strange pathetic gesture of a strong man helpless.  It was
all passing fair: the fields of pale young corn trembling in the gentle
breeze; the orchards and vineyards with fast maturing fruit; the meadows
where the sleek kine browsed languidly in the warm summer sunshine.
Peace and prosperity everywhere; the old Church springing into new beauty
as the spire rose slowly skywards; peace and prosperity, new glories for
the House of the Lord; and yet, and yet, his heart ached for his own
helplessness, and for the exceeding longing that he had for the boy whose
mother once held that heart in the hollow of her little hand.

Ah well, blessed be God who had called him from the things of this world
to the service of Christ and the Church!  Once again he offered himself
in the flame of his desires: he would fast and pray and wait.

The Office bell sounded sharp and clear across the still summer air
calling to Vespers, and the Prior hasted to his place.

“_Qui seminant in lachrymis in exultatione metent_,” chanted the deep
voices of the monks, and Prior Stephen’s voice trembled as he joined in
the Psalmody.

“_Euntes ibant et flebant mittentes semina sua_.  _Venientes autem
venient cum exultatione portantes manipulos suos_.”

He had sown in tears, ay, and was weary of the sowing; but the harvesting
was not yet.



