CHAPTER XII

THE VANISHING OF EMMELINE (continued)

He dropped the line, and turned with a start. There was no one visible.
He ran amongst the trees calling out her name, but only echoes
answered. Then he came back to the lagoon edge.

He felt sure that what he had heard was only fancy, but it was nearly
sunset, and more than time to be off. He pulled in his line, wrapped it
up, took his fish-spear and started.

It was just in the middle of the bad place that dread came to him.
What if anything had happened to her? It was dusk here, and never had
the weeds seemed so thick, dimness so dismal, the tendrils of the vines
so gin-like. Then he lost his way—he who was so sure of his way
always! The hunter’s instinct had been crossed, and for a time he went
hither and thither helpless as a ship without a compass. At last he
broke into the real wood, but far to the right of where he ought to
have been. He felt like a beast escaped from a trap, and hurried along,
led by the sound of the surf.

When he reached the clear sward that led down to the lagoon the sun had
just vanished beyond the sea-line. A streak of red cloud floated like
the feather of a flamingo in the western sky close to the sea, and
twilight had already filled the world. He could see the house dimly,
under the shadow of the trees, and he ran towards it, crossing the
sward diagonally.

Always before, when he had been away, the first thing to greet his eyes
on his return had been the figure of Emmeline. Either at the lagoon
edge or the house door he would find her waiting for him.

She was not waiting for him to-night. When he reached the house she was
not there, and he paused, after searching the place, a prey to the most
horrible perplexity, and unable for the moment to think or act.

Since the shock of the occurrence on the reef she had been subject at
times to occasional attacks of headache; and when the pain was more
than she could bear, she would go off and hide. Dick would hunt for her
amidst the trees, calling out her name and hallooing. A faint “halloo”
would answer when she heard him, and then he would find her under a
tree or bush, with her unfortunate head between her hands, a picture of
misery.

He remembered this now, and started off along the borders of the wood,
calling to her, and pausing to listen. No answer came.

He searched amidst the trees as far as the little well, waking the
echoes with his voice; then he came back slowly, peering about him in
the deep dusk that now was yielding to the starlight. He sat down
before the door of the house, and, looking at him, you might have
fancied him in the last stages of exhaustion. Profound grief and
profound exhaustion act on the frame very much in the same way. He sat
with his chin resting on his chest, his hands helpless. He could hear
her voice, still as he heard it over at the other side of the island.
She had been in danger and called to him, and he had been calmly
fishing, unconscious of it all.

This thought maddened him. He sat up, stared around him and beat the
ground with the palms of his hands; then he sprang to his feet and made
for the dinghy. He rowed to the reef: the action of a madman, for she
could not possibly be there.

There was no moon, the starlight both lit and veiled the world, and no
sound but the majestic thunder of the waves. As he stood, the night
wind blowing on his face, the white foam seething before him, and
Canopus burning in the great silence overhead, the fact that he stood
in the centre of an awful and profound indifference came to his
untutored mind with a pang.

He returned to the shore: the house was still deserted. A little bowl
made from the shell of a cocoa-nut stood on the grass near the doorway.
He had last seen it in her hands, and he took it up and held it for a
moment, pressing it tightly to his breast. Then he threw himself down
before the doorway, and lay upon his face, with head resting upon his
arms in the attitude of a person who is profoundly asleep.

He must have searched through the woods again that night just as a
somnambulist searches, for he found himself towards dawn in the valley
before the idol. Then it was daybreak—the world was full of light and
colour. He was seated before the house door, worn out and exhausted,
when, raising his head, he saw Emmeline’s figure coming out from amidst
the distant trees on the other side of the sward.




CHAPTER XIII

THE NEWCOMER

He could not move for a moment, then he sprang to his feet and ran
towards her. She looked pale and dazed, and she held something in her
arms; something wrapped up in her scarf. As he pressed her to him, the
something in the bundle struggled against his breast and emitted a
squall—just like the squall of a cat. He drew back, and Emmeline,
tenderly moving her scarf a bit aside, exposed a wee face. It was
brick-red and wrinkled; there were two bright eyes, and a tuft of dark
hair over the forehead. Then the eyes closed, the face screwed itself
up, and the thing sneezed twice.

“Where did you _get_ it?” he asked, absolutely lost in astonishment as
she covered the face again gently with the scarf.

“I found it in the woods,” replied Emmeline.

Dumb with amazement, he helped her along to the house, and she sat
down, resting her head against the bamboos of the wall.

“I felt so bad,” she explained; “and then I went off to sit in the
woods, and then I remembered nothing more, and when I woke up it was
there.”

“It’s a baby!” said Dick.

“I know,” replied Emmeline.

Mrs James’s baby, seen in the long ago, had risen up before their
mind’s eyes, a messenger from the past to explain what the new thing
was. Then she told him things—things that completely shattered the old
“cabbage bed” theory, supplanting it with a truth far more wonderful,
far more poetical, too, to he who can appreciate the marvel and the
mystery of life.

“It has something funny tied on to it,” she went on, as if she were
referring to a parcel she had just received.

“Let’s look,” said Dick.

“No,” she replied; “leave it alone.”

She sat rocking the thing gently, seeming oblivious to the whole world,
and quite absorbed in it, as, indeed, was Dick. A physician would have
shuddered, but, perhaps fortunately enough, there was no physician on
the island. Only Nature, and she put everything to rights in her own
time and way.

When Dick had sat marvelling long enough, he set to and lit the fire.
He had eaten nothing since the day before, and he was nearly as
exhausted as the girl. He cooked some breadfruit, there was some cold
fish left over from the day before; this, with some bananas, he served
up on two broad leaves, making Emmeline eat first.

Before they had finished, the creature in the bundle, as though it had
smelt the food, began to scream. Emmeline drew the scarf aside. It
looked hungry; its mouth would now be pinched up and now wide open, its
eyes opened and closed. The girl touched it on the lips with her
finger, and it seized upon her fingertip and sucked it. Her eyes filled
with tears, she looked appealingly at Dick, who was on his knees; he
took a banana, peeled it, broke off a bit and handed it to her. She
approached it to the baby’s mouth. It tried to suck it, failed, blew
bubbles at the sun and squalled.

“Wait a minute,” said Dick.

There were some green cocoa-nuts he had gathered the day before close
by. He took one, removed the green husk, and opened one of the eyes,
making an opening also in the opposite side of the shell. The
unfortunate infant sucked ravenously at the nut, filled its stomach
with the young cocoa-nut juice, vomited violently, and wailed. Emmeline
in despair clasped it to her naked breast, wherefrom, in a moment, it
was hanging like a leech. It knew more about babies than they did.




