CHAPTER XX

THE KEEPER OF THE LAGOON

The woods here had been less affected by the cyclone than those upon
the other side of the island, but there had been destruction enough. To
reach the place he wanted, Dick had to climb over felled trees and
fight his way through a tangle of vines that had once hung overhead.

The banana trees had not suffered at all; as if by some special
dispensation of Providence even the great bunches of fruit had been
scarcely injured, and he proceeded to climb and cut them. He cut two
bunches, and with one across his shoulder came back down through the
trees.

He had got half across the sands, his head bent under the load, when a
distant call came to him, and, raising his head, he saw the boat adrift
in the middle of the lagoon, and the figure of the girl in the bow of
it waving to him with her arm. He saw a scull floating on the water
half-way between the boat and the shore, which she had no doubt lost in
an attempt to paddle the boat back. He remembered that the tide was
going out.

He flung his load aside, and ran down the beach; in a moment he was in
the water. Emmeline, standing up in the boat, watched him.

When she found herself adrift, she had made an effort to row back, and
in her hurry shipping the sculls she had lost one. With a single scull
she was quite helpless, as she had not the art of sculling a boat from
the stern. At first she was not frightened, because she knew that Dick
would soon return to her assistance; but as the distance between boat
and shore increased, a cold hand seemed laid upon her heart. Looking at
the shore it seemed very far away, and the view towards the reef was
terrific, for the opening had increased in apparent size, and the great
sea beyond seemed drawing her to it.

She saw Dick coming out of the wood with the load on his shoulder, and
she called to him. At first he did not seem to hear, then she saw him
look up, cast the bananas away, and come running down the sand to the
water’s edge. She watched him swimming, she saw him seize the scull,
and her heart gave a great leap of joy.

Towing the scull and swimming with one arm, he rapidly approached the
boat. He was quite close, only ten feet away, when Emmeline saw behind
him, shearing through the clear, rippling water and advancing with
speed, a dark triangle that seemed made of canvas stretched upon a
sword point.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Forty years ago he had floated adrift on the sea in the form and
likeness of a small shabby pine-cone, a prey to anything that might
find him. He had escaped the jaws of the dog-fish, and the jaws of the
dog-fish are a very wide door; he had escaped the albicore and squid:
his life had been one long series of miraculous escapes from death. Out
of a billion like him born in the same year, he and a few others only
had survived.

For thirty years he had kept the lagoon to himself, as a ferocious
tiger keeps a jungle. He had known the palm tree on the reef when it
was a seedling, and he had known the reef even before the palm tree was
there. The things he had devoured, flung one upon another, would have
made a mountain; yet he was as clear of enmity as a sword, as cruel, and
as soulless. He was the spirit of the lagoon.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Emmeline screamed, and pointed to the thing behind the swimmer. He
turned, saw it, dropped the oar and made for the boat. She had seized
the remaining scull and stood with it poised, then she hurled it blade
foremost at the form in the water, now fully visible, and close on its
prey.

She could not throw a stone straight, yet the scull went like an arrow
to the mark, balking the pursuer and saving the pursued. In a moment
more his leg was over the gunwale, and he was saved.

But the scull was lost.




CHAPTER XXI

THE HAND OF THE SEA

There was nothing in the boat that could possibly be used as a paddle;
the scull was only five or six yards away, but to attempt to swim to it
was certain death, yet they were being swept out to sea. He might have
made the attempt, only that on the starboard quarter the form of the
shark, gently swimming at the same pace as they were drifting, could be
made out only half veiled by the water.

The bird perched on the gunwale seemed to divine their trouble, for he
rose in the air, made a circle, and resumed his perch with all his
feathers ruffled.

Dick stood in despair, helpless, his hands clasping his head. The shore
was drawing away before him, the surf loudening behind him, yet he
could do nothing. The island was being taken away from them by the
great hand of the sea.

Then, suddenly, the little boat entered the race formed by the
confluence of the tides, from the right and left arms of the lagoon;
the sound of the surf suddenly increased as though a door had been
flung open. The breakers were falling and the sea-gulls crying on
either side of them, and for a moment the ocean seemed to hesitate as
to whether they were to be taken away into her wastes, or dashed on the
coral strand. Only for a moment this seeming hesitation lasted; then
the power of the tide prevailed over the power of the swell, and the
little boat taken by the current drifted gently out to sea.

Dick flung himself down beside Emmeline, who was seated in the bottom
of the boat holding the child to her breast. The bird, seeing the land
retreat, and wise in its instinct, rose into the air. It circled
thrice round the drifting boat, and then, like a beautiful but
faithless spirit, passed away to the shore.




