Chapter VI

The Problem of "Preparedness"

Preparing Children to Live

THE problem of "preparedness" is the problem of preparing children for
life. All other kinds of "preparedness" fade into insignificance before
this. The history of nations shows that their strength was not in the
size of their armies and in the vastness of their population and
wealth, but in the strength and ideals of the individual citizens.

As long as the nation was young and growing--as long as the people were
struggling and overcoming--that nation was strong. It was "prepared."

But when the struggle stopped, the strength waned, for the strength
came from the struggle. When the people became materially prosperous
and surrendered to ease and indulgence, they became fat, stall-fed
weaklings. Then they fell a prey to younger, hardier peoples.

Has the American nation reached that period?

Many homes and communities have reached it.

All over America are fathers and mothers who have struggled and have
become strong men and women thru their struggles, who are saying, "Our
children shall have better chances than we had. We are living for our
children. We are going to give them the best education our money can
buy."

Then, forgetful of how they became strong, they plan to take away from
their children their birthright--their opportunity to become strong and
"prepared"--thru struggle and service and overcoming.

Most "advantages" are disadvantages. Giving a child a chance generally
means getting out of his way. Many an orphan can be grateful that he
was jolted from his life-preserver and cruelly forced to sink or swim.
Thus he learned to swim.

"We are going to give our children the best education our money can
buy."

They think they can buy an education--buy wisdom, strength and
understanding, and give it to them C. O. D! They seem to think they
will buy any brand they see--buy the home brand of education, or else
send off to New York or Paris or to "Sears Roebuck," and get a
bucketful or a tankful of education. If they are rich enough, maybe
they will have a private pipeline of education laid to their home. They
are going to force this education into them regularly until they get
them full of education. They are going to get them fully inflated with
education!

Toll the bell! There's going to be a "blow out." Those inflated
children are going to have to run on "flat tires."

Father and mother cannot buy their children education. All they can do
is to buy them some tools, perhaps, and open the gate and say, "Sic
'em, Tige!" The children must get it themselves.

A father and mother might as well say, "We will buy our children the
strength we have earned in our arms and the wisdom we have acquired in
a life of struggle." As well expect the athlete to give them his
physical development he has earned in years of exercise. As well expect
the musician to give them the technic he has acquired in years of
practice. As well expect the scholar to give them the ability to think
he has developed in years of study. As well expect Moses to give them
his spiritual understanding acquired in a long life of prayer.

They can show the children the way, but each child must make the
journey.

Here is a typical case.




The Story of "Gussie"


There was a factory town back East. Not a pretty town, but just a
great, dirty mill and a lot of little dirty houses around the mill. The
hands lived in the little dirty houses and worked six days of the week
in the big mill.

There was a little, old man who went about that mill, often saying, "I
hain't got no book l'arnin' like the rest of you." He was the man who
owned the mill. He had made it with his own genius out of nothing. He
had become rich and honored. Every man in the mill loved him like a
father.

He had an idolatry for a book.

He also had a little pink son, whose name was F. Gustavus Adolphus. The
little old man often said, "I'm going to give that boy the best
education my money can buy."

He began to buy it. He began to polish and sandpaper Gussie from the
minute the child could sit up in the cradle and notice things. He sent
him to the astrologer, the phrenologer and all other "ologers" they had
around there. When Gussie was old enough to export, he sent the boy to
one of the greatest universities in the land. The fault was not with
the university, not with Gussie, who was bright and capable.

The fault was with the little old man, who was so wise and great about
everything else, and so foolish about his own boy. In the blindness of
his love he robbed his boy of his birthright.

The birthright of every child is the opportunity of becoming great--of
going up--of getting educated.

Gussie had no chance to serve. Everything was handed to him on a silver
platter. Gussie went thru that university about like a steer from Texas
goes thru Mr. Armour's institute of packnology in Chicago. Did you ever
go over into Packingtown and see a steer receive his education?

You remember, then, that after he matriculates--after he gets the grand
bump, said steer does not have to do another thing. His education is
all arranged for in advance and he merely rides thru and receives it.
There is a row of professors with their sleeves rolled up who give him
the degrees. So as Mr. T. Steer of Panhandle goes riding thru on that
endless cable from his A-B-C's to his eternal cold storage, each
professor hits him a dab. He rides along from department to department
until he is canned.

They "canned" Gussie. He had a man hired to study for him. He rode from
department to department. They upholstered him, enameled him, manicured
him, sugar-cured him, embalmed him. Finally Gussie was done and the
paint was dry. He was a thing of beauty.





Gussie and Bill Whackem Gussie came back home with his education in the
baggage-car. It was checked. The mill shut down on a week day, the
first time in its history. The hands marched down to the depot, and
when the young lord alighted, the factory band played, "See, the
Conquering Hero Comes."

A few years later the mill shut down again on a week day. There was
crape hanging on the office door. Men and women stood weeping in the
streets. The little old man had been translated.

When they next opened up the mill, F. Gustavus Adolphus was at its
head. He had inherited the entire plant. "F. Gustavus Adolphus,
President."

Poor little peanut! He rattled. He had never grown great enough to fill
so great a place. In two years and seven months the mill was a wreck.
The monument of a father's lifetime was wrecked in two years and seven
months by the boy who had all the "advantages."

So the mill was shut down the third time on a week day. It looked as
tho it never could open. But it did open, and when it opened it had a
new kind of boss. If I were to give the new boss a descriptive name, I
would call him "Bill Whackem." He was an orphan. He had little chance.
He had a new black eye almost every day. But he seemed to fatten on
bumps. Every time he was bumped he would swell up. How fast he grew! He
became the most useful man in the community. People forgot all about
Bill's lowly origin. They got to looking up to him to start and run
things.

So when the courts were looking for somebody big enough to take charge
of the wrecked mill, they simply had to appoint Hon. William Whackem.
It was Hon. William Whackem who put the wreckage together and made the
wheels go round, and finally got the hungry town back to work.




Colleges Give Us Tools


After that a good many people said it was the college that made a fool
of Gussie. They said Bill succeeded so well because he never went to
one of "them highbrow schools." I am sorry to say I thought that way
for a good while.

But now I see that Bill went up in spite of his handicaps. If he had
had Gussie's fine equipment he might have accomplished vastly more.

The book and the college suffer at the hands of their friends. They say
to the book and the college, "Give us an education." They cannot do
that. You cannot get an education from the book and the college any
more than you can get to New York by reading a travelers' guide. You
cannot get physical education by reading a book on gymnastics.

The book and the college show you the way, give you instruction and
furnish you finer working tools. But the real education is the journey
you make, the strength you develop, the service you perform with these
instruments and tools.

Gussie was in the position of a man with a very fine equipment of tools
and no experience in using them. Bill was the man with the poor,
homemade, crude tools, but with the energy, vision and strength
developed by struggle.




The "Hard Knocks Graduates"


For education is getting wisdom, understanding, strength, greatness,
physically, mentally and morally. I believe I know some people
liberally educated who cannot write their own names. But they have
served and overcome and developed great lives with the poor, crude
tools at their command.

In almost every community are what we sometimes call "hard knocks
graduates"--people who have never been to college nor have studied many
or any books. Yet they are educated to the degree they have acquired
these elements of greatness in their lives.

They realized how they have been handicapped by their poor mental tools.

That is why they say, "All my life I have been handicapped by lack of
proper preparation. Don't make my mistake, children, go to school."

The young person with electrical genius will make an electrical machine
from a few bits of junk. But send him to Westinghouse and see how much
more he will achieve with the same genius and with finer equipment.

Get the best tools you can. But remember diplomas, degrees are not an
education, they are merely preparations. When you are thru with the
books, remember, you are having a commencement, not an end-ment. You
will discover with the passing years that life is just one series of
greater commencements.

Go out with your fine equipment from your commencements into the school
of service and write your education in the only book you ever can
know--the book of your experience.

That is what you know--what the courts will take as evidence when they
put you upon the witness stand.




The Tragedy of Unpreparedness


The story of Gussie and Bill Whackem is being written in every
community in tears, failure and heartache. It is peculiarly a tragedy
of our American civilization today.

These fathers and mothers who toil and save, who get great farms, fine
homes and large bank accounts, so often think they can give greatness
to their children--they can make great places for them in life and put
them into them.

They do all this and the children rattle. They have had no chance to
grow great enough for the places. The child gets the blame for making
the wreck, even as Gussie was blamed for wrecking his father's plant,
when the child is the victim.

A man heard me telling the story of Gussie and Bill Whackem, and he
went out of my audience very indignant. He said he was very glad his
boy was not there to hear it. But that good, deluded father now has his
head bowed in shame over the career of his spoiled son.

I rarely tell of it on a platform that at the close of the lecture
somebody does not take me aside and tell me a story just as sad from
that community.

For years poor Harry Thaw was front-paged on the newspapers and
gibbeted in the pulpits as the shocking example of youthful depravity.
He seems never to have had a fighting chance to become a man. He seems
to have been robbed of his birthright from the cradle. Yet the father
of this boy who has cost America millions in court and detention
expenses was one of the greatest business generals of the Keystone
state. He could plat great coal empires and command armies of men, but
he seems to have been pitifully ignorant of the fact that the barrel
shakes.

It is the educated, the rich and the worldly wise who blunder most in
the training of their children. Poverty is a better trainer for the
rest.

The menace of America lies not in the swollen fortunes, but in the
shrunken souls who inherit them.

But Nature's eliminating process is kind to the race in the barrel
shaking down the rattlers. Somebody said it is only three generations
from shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves.

How long this nation will endure depends upon how many Gussie boys this
nation produces. Steam heat is a fine thing, but do you notice how few
of our strong men get their start with steam heat?




Children, Learn This Early


You boys and girls, God bless you! You live in good homes. Father and
mother love you and give you everything you need. You get to thinking,
"I won't have to turn my hand over. Papa and mamma will take care of
me, and when they are gone I'll inherit everything they have. I'm fixed
for life."

No, you are unfixed. You are a candidate for trouble. You are going to
rattle. Father and mother can be great and you can be a peanut.

You must solve your own problems and carry your own loads to have a
strong mind and back. Anybody who does for you regularly what you can
do for yourself--anybody who gives you regularly what you can earn for
yourself, is robbing you of your birthright.

Father and mother can put money in your pocket, ideas in your head and
food in your stomach, but you cannot own it save as you digest it--put
it into your life.

I have read somewhere about a man who found a cocoon and put it in his
house where he could watch it develop. One day he saw a little insect
struggling inside the cocoon. It was trying to get out of the envelope.
It seemed in trouble and needed help. He opened the envelope with a
knife and set the struggling insect free. But out came a monstrosity
that soon died. It had an over-developed body and under-developed
wings. He learned that helping the insect was killing it. He took away
from it the very thing it had to have--the struggle. For it was this
struggle of breaking its own way out of that envelope that was needed
to reduce its body and develop its wings.




Not Packhorse Work


But remember there is little virtue in work unless it is getting us
somewhere. Just work that gets us three meals a day and a place to lie
down to sleep, then another day of the same grind, then a year of it
and years following until our machine is worn out and on the junkpile,
means little. "One day nearer home" for such a worker means one day
nearer the scrapheap.

Such a worker is like the packhorse who goes forward to keep ahead of
the whip. Such a worker is the horse we used to have hitched to the
sorghum mill. Round and round that horse went, seeing nothing, hearing
nothing, his head down, without ambition enough to prick up his ears.
Such work deadens and stupefies. The masses work about that way. They
regard work as a necessary evil. They are right--such work is a
necessary evil, and they make it such. They follow their nose. "Dumb,
driven cattle."

But getting a vision of life, and working to grow upward to it, that is
the work that brings the joy and the greatness.

When we are growing and letting our faculties develop, we will love
even the packhorse job, because it is our "meal ticket" that enables us
to travel upward.




"Helping" the Turkeys


One time I put some turkey eggs under the mother hen and waited day by
day for them to hatch. And sure enough, one day the eggs began to crack
and the little turkeys began to stick their heads out of the shells.
Some of the little turkeys came out from the shells all right, but some
of them stuck in the shells.

"Shell out, little turkeys, shell out," I urged, "for Thanksgiving is
coming. Shell out!"

But they stuck to the shells.

"Little turkeys, I'll have to help you. I'll have to shell you by
hand." So I picked the shells off. "Little turkeys, you will never know
how fortunate you are. Ordinary turkeys do not have these advantages.
Ordinary turkeys do not get shelled by hand."

Did I help them? I killed them, or stunted them. Not one of the turkeys
was "right" that I helped. They were runts. One of them was a regular
Harry Thaw turkey. They had too many silk socks. Too many "advantages."

Children, you must crack your own shells. You must overcome your own
obstacles to develop your own powers.

A rich boy can succeed, but he has a poorer chance than a poor boy. The
cards are against him. He must succeed in spite of his "advantages."

I am pleading for you to get a great arm, a great mind, a great
character, for the joy of having a larger life. I am pleading with you
to know the joy of overcoming and having the angels come and minister
to you.




Happiness in Our Work


Children, I am pleading with you to find happiness. All the world is
seeking happiness, but so many are seeking it by rattling down instead
of by shaking up.

The happiness is in going up--in developing a greater arm, a greater
mind, a greater character.

Happiness is the joy of overcoming. It is the delight of an expanding
consciousness. It is the cry of the eagle mounting upward. It is the
proof that we are progressing.

We find happiness in our work, not outside of our work. If we cannot
find happiness in our work, we have the wrong job. Find the work that
fits your talents, and stop watching the clock and planning vacations.

Loving friends used to warn me against "breaking down." They scared me
into "taking care" of myself. And I got to taking such good care of
myself and watching for symptoms that I became a physical wreck.

I saved myself by getting busier. I plunged into work I love. I found
my job in my work, not away from it, and the work refreshed me and
rejuvenated me. Now I do two men's work, and have grown from a skinny,
fretful, nervous wreck into a hearty, happy man. This has been a great
surprise to my friends and a great disappointment to the undertaker. I
am an editor in the daytime and a lecturer at night.

I edit all day and take a vacation lecturing at night. I lecture almost
every day of the year--maybe two or three times some days--and then
take a vacation by editing and writing. Thus every day is jam full of
play and vacation and good times. The year is one round of joy, and I
ought to pay people for the privilege of speaking and writing to them
instead of them paying me!

If I did not like my work, of course, I would be carrying a terrible
burden and would speedily collapse.

You see, I have no time nowadays to break down. I have no time to think
and grunt and worry about my body. And like Paul I am happy to be
"absent from the body and present with the Lord." Thus this old body
behaves just beautifully and wags along like the tail follows the dog
when I forget all about it. The grunter lets the tail wag the dog.





I have never known a case of genuine "overwork." I have never known of
anyone killing himself by working. But I have known of multitudes
killing themselves by taking vacations.

The people who think they are overworking are merely overworrying. This
is one species of selfishness.

To worry is to doubt God.

To work at the things you love, or for those you love, is to turn work
into play and duty into privilege.

When we love our work, it is not work, it is life.




Many Kinds of Drunkards


The world is trying to find happiness in being amused. The world is
amusement-mad. Vacations, Coca Cola and moviemania!

What a sad, empty lot of rattlers! Look over the bills of the movies,
look over the newsstands and see a picture of the popular mind, for
these places keep just what the people want to buy. What a lot of
mental frog-pond and moral slum our boys and girls wade thru!

There are ten literary drunkards to one alcoholic drunkard. There are a
hundred amusement drunkards to one victim of strong drink. And all just
as hard to cure.

We have to have amusement, but if we fill our lives with nothing but
amusement, we never grow. We go thru our lives babies with new
rattleboxes and "sugar-tits."

Almost every day as I go along the street to some hall to lecture, I
hear somebody asking, "What are they going to have in the hall tonight?"

"Going to have a lecture."

"Lecture?" said with a shiver as tho it was "small pox." "I ain't
goin.' I don't like lectures."

The speaker is perfectly honest. He has no place to put a lecture. I am
not saying that he should attend my lecture, but I am grieving at what
underlies his remark. He does not want to think. He wants to follow his
nose around. Other people generally lead his nose. The man who will not
make the effort to think is the great menace to the nation. The crowd
that drifts and lives for amusement is the crowd that finds itself back
near the caboose, and as the train of progress leaves them, they wail,
they "never had no chanct." They want to start a new party to reform
the government.




The Lure of the City


Do you ever get lonely in a city? How few men and women there. A jam of
people, most of them imitations--most of them trying to look like they
get more salary. Poor, hungry, doped butterflies of the bright
lights,--hopers, suckers and straphangers! Down the great white way
they go chasing amusement to find happiness. They must be amused every
moment, even when they eat, or they will have to be alone with their
empty lives.

The Prodigal Son came to himself afterwhile and thought upon his ways.
Then he arose and went to his father's house. Whenever one will stop
chasing amusements long enough to think upon his ways, he will arise
and go to his father's house of wisdom. But there is no hope for the
person who will not stop and think. And the devil works day and night
shifts keeping the crowd moving on.

That is why the crowd is not furnishing the strong men and women.

We must have amusement and relaxation. Study your muscles. First they
contract, then they relax. But the muscle that goes on continually
relaxing is degenerating. And the individual, the community, the nation
that goes on relaxing without contracting--without struggling and
overcoming--is degenerating.

The more you study your muscles, the more you learn that while one
muscle is relaxing another is contracting. So you must learn that your
real relaxation, vacation and amusement, are merely changing over to
contracting another set of muscles.

Go to the bank president's office, go to the railroad magnate's office,
go to the great pulpit, to the college chair--go to any place of great
responsibility in a city and ask the one who fills the place, "Were you
born in this city?"

The reply is almost a monotony. "I born in this city? No, I was born in
Poseyville, Indiana, and I came to this city forty years ago and went
to work at the bottom."

He glows as he tells you of some log-cabin home, hillside or farmside
where he struggled as a boy. Personally, I think this log-cabin
ancestry has been over-confessed for campaign purposes. Give us steam
heat and push-buttons. There is no virtue in a log-cabin, save that
there the necessity for struggle that brings strength is most in
evidence. There the young person gets the struggle and service that
makes for strength and greatness. And as that young person comes to the
city and shakes in the barrel among the weaklings of the artificial
life, he rises above them like the eagle soars above a lot of
chattering sparrows.

The cities do not make their own steam. The little minority from the
farms controls the majority. The red blood of redemption flows from the
country year by year into the national arteries, else these cities
would drop off the map.

If it were not for Poseyville, Indiana, Chicago would disappear. If it
were not for Poseyville, New York would disintegrate for lack of
leaders.




"Hep" and "Pep" for the Home Town


But so many of the home towns of America are sick. Many are dying. Many
are dead.

It is the lure of the city--and the lure-lessness of the country. The
town the young people leave is the town the young people ought to
leave. Somebody says, "The reason so many young people go to hell is
because they have no other place to go."

What is the matter with the small town? Do not blame it all upon the
city mail order house. With rural delivery, daily papers, telephones,
centralized schools, automobiles and good roads, there are no more
delightful places in the world to live than in the country or in the
small town. They have the city advantages plus sunshine, air and
freedom that the crowded cities cannot have.

I asked the keeper who was showing me thru the insane asylum at Weston,
West Virginia, "You say you have nearly two thousand insane people in
this institution and only a score of guards to keep them in. Aren't you
in danger? What is to hinder these insane people from getting together,
organizing, overpowering the few guards and breaking out?"

The keeper was not in the least alarmed at the question. He smiled.
"Many people say that. But they don't understand. If these people could
get together they wouldn't be in this asylum. They are insane. No two
of them can agree upon how to get together and how to break out. So a
few of us can hold them."

It would be almost unkind to carry this further, but I have been
thinking ever since that about three-fourths of the small towns of
America have one thing in common with the asylum folks--they can't get
together. They cannot organize for the public good. They break up into
little antagonistic social, business and even religious factions and
neutralize each other's efforts.

A lot of struggling churches compete with each other instead of massing
for the common good. And when the churches fight, the devil stays
neutral and furnishes the munitions for both sides.

So the home towns stagnate and the young people with visions go away to
the cities where opportunity seems to beckon. Ninety-nine out of a
hundred of them will jostle with the straphangers all their lives, mere
wheels turning round in a huge machine. Ninety-nine out of a hundred of
them might have had a larger opportunity right back in the home town,
had the town been awake and united and inviting.

We must make the home town the brightest, most attractive, most
promising place for the young people. No home town can afford to spend
its years raising crops of young people for the cities. That is the
worst kind of soil impoverishment--all going out and nothing coming
back. That is the drain that devitalizes the home towns more than all
the city mail order houses.

America is to be great, not in the greatness of a few crowded cities,
but in the greatness of innumerable home towns.

The slogan today should be, For God and Home and the Home Town!




A School of Struggle


Dr. Henry Solomon Lehr, founder of the Ohio Northern University at Ada,
Ohio, one of Ohio's greatest educators, used to say with pride, "Our
students come to school; they are not sent."

He encouraged his students to be self-supporting, and most of them were
working their way thru school. He made the school calendar and courses
elastic to accommodate them. He saw the need of combining the school of
books with the school of struggle. He organized his school into
competing groups, so that the student who had no struggle in his life
would at least have to struggle with the others during his schooling.


He pitted class against class. He organized great literary and debating
societies to compete with each other. He arranged contests for the
military department. His school was one surging mass of contestants.
Yet each student felt no compulsion. Rather he felt that he was
initiating an individual or class effort to win. The literary societies
vied with each other in their programs and in getting new members,
going every term to unbelievable efforts to win over the others. They
would go miles out on the trains to intercept new students, even to
their homes in other states. Each old student pledged new students in
his home country. The military companies turned the school into a
military camp for weeks each year, scarcely sleeping while drilling for
a contest flag.

Those students went out into the world trained to struggle. I do not
believe there is a school in America with a greater alumni roll of men
and women of uniformly greater achievement.

I believe the most useful schools today are schools of struggle schools
offering encouragement and facilities for young people to work their
way thru and to act upon their own initiative.




Men Needed More Than Millions


We are trying a new educational experiment today.

The old "deestrick" school is passing, and with it the small academies
and colleges, each with its handful of students around a teacher, as in
the old days of the lyceum in Athens, when the pupils sat around the
philosopher in the groves.

From these schools came the makers and the preservers of the nation.

Today we are building wonderful public schools with equally wonderful
equipment. Today we are replacing the many small colleges with a few
great centralized state normal schools and state universities. We are
spending millions upon them in laboratories, equipment and maintenance.
Today we scour the earth for specialists to sit in the chairs and speak
the last word in every department of human research.

O, how the students of the "dark ages" would have rejoiced to see this
day! Many of them never saw a germ!

But each student has the same definite effort to make in assimilation
today as then. Knowing and growing demand the same personal struggle in
the cushions of the "frat" house as back on the old oak-slab bench with
its splintered side up.

I am anxiously awaiting the results. I am hoping that the boys and
girls who come out in case-lots from these huge school plants will not
be rows of lithographed cans on the shelves of life. I am hoping they
will not be shorn of their individuality, but will have it stimulated
and unfettered. I am anxious that they be not veneered but inspired,
not denatured but discovered.

All this school machinery is only machinery. Back of it must be
men--great men. I am anxious that the modern school have the modern
equipment demanded to serve the present age. But I am more anxious that
each student come in vital touch with great men. We get life from life,
not from laboratories, and we have life more abundantly as our lives
touch greater lives.

A school is vastly more than machinery, methods, microscopes and
millions.

Many a small school struggling to live thinks that all it needs is
endowment, when the fact is that its struggle for existence and the
spirit of its teachers are its greatest endowment. And sometimes when
the money endowment comes the spiritual endowment goes in fatty
degeneration. Some schools seem to have been visited by calamities in
the financial prosperity that has engulfed them.

Can we keep men before millions, and keep our ideals untainted by
foundations? That is the question the age is asking.

You and I are very much interested in the answer.



