CHAPTER IV. How the hermit expounded to Sir Launcelot his advision, and
told him that Sir Galahad was his son.


Lo, Sir Launcelot, said the good man, there thou mightest understand
the high lineage that thou art come of, and thine advision betokeneth.
After the passion of Jesu Christ forty year, Joseph of Aramathie
preached the victory of King Evelake, that he had in the battles the
better of his enemies. And of the seven kings and the two knights: the
first of them is called Nappus, an holy man; and the second hight
Nacien, in remembrance of his grandsire, and in him dwelled our Lord
Jesu Christ; and the third was called Helias le Grose; and the fourth
hight Lisais; and the fifth hight Jonas, he departed out of his country
and went into Wales, and took there the daughter of Manuel, whereby he
had the land of Gaul, and he came to dwell in this country. And of him
came King Launcelot thy grandsire, the which there wedded the king’s
daughter of Ireland, and he was as worthy a man as thou art, and of him
came King Ban, thy father, the which was the last of the seven kings.
And by thee, Sir Launcelot, it signifieth that the angels said thou
were none of the seven fellowships. And the last was the ninth knight,
he was signified to a lion, for he should pass all manner of earthly
knights, that is Sir Galahad, the which thou gat on King Pelles’
daughter; and thou ought to thank God more than any other man living,
for of a sinner earthly thou hast no peer as in knighthood, nor never
shall be. But little thank hast thou given to God for all the great
virtues that God hath lent thee. Sir, said Launcelot, ye say that that
good knight is my son. That oughtest thou to know and no man better,
said the good man, for thou knewest the daughter of King Pelles
fleshly, and on her thou begattest Galahad, and that was he that at the
feast of Pentecost sat in the Siege Perilous; and therefore make thou
it known openly that he is one of thy begetting on King Pelles’
daughter, for that will be your worship and honour, and to all thy
kindred. And I counsel you in no place press not upon him to have ado
with him. Well, said Launcelot, meseemeth that good knight should pray
for me unto the High Father, that I fall not to sin again. Trust thou
well, said the good man, thou farest mickle the better for his prayer;
but the son shall not bear the wickedness of the father, nor the father
shall not bear the wickedness of the son, but everych shall bear his
own burden. And therefore beseek thou only God, and He will help thee
in all thy needs. And then Sir Launcelot and he went to supper, and so
laid him to rest, and the hair pricked so Sir Launcelot’s skin which
grieved him full sore, but he took it meekly, and suffered the pain.
And so on the morn he heard his mass and took his arms, and so took his
leave.




CHAPTER V. How Sir Launcelot jousted with many knights, and how he was
taken.


And then mounted upon his horse, and rode into a forest, and held no
highway. And as he looked afore him he saw a fair plain, and beside
that a fair castle, and afore the castle were many pavilions of silk
and of diverse hue. And him seemed that he saw there five hundred
knights riding on horseback; and there were two parties: they that were
of the castle were all on black horses and their trappings black, and
they that were without were all on white horses and trappings, and
everych hurtled to other that it marvelled Sir Launcelot. And at the
last him thought they of the castle were put to the worse.

Then thought Sir Launcelot for to help there the weaker party in
increasing of his chivalry. And so Sir Launcelot thrust in among the
party of the castle, and smote down a knight, horse and man, to the
earth. And then he rashed here and there, and did marvellous deeds of
arms. And then he drew out his sword, and struck many knights to the
earth, so that all those that saw him marvelled that ever one knight
might do so great deeds of arms.

But always the white knights held them nigh about Sir Launcelot, for to
tire him and wind him. But at the last, as a man may not ever endure,
Sir Launcelot waxed so faint of fighting and travailing, and was so
weary of his great deeds, but he might not lift up his arms for to give
one stroke, so that he weened never to have borne arms; and then they
all took and led him away into a forest, and there made him to alight
and to rest him.

And then all the fellowship of the castle were overcome for the default
of him.

Then they said all unto Sir Launcelot: Blessed be God that ye be now of
our fellowship, for we shall hold you in our prison; and so they left
him with few words.

And then Sir Launcelot made great sorrow, For never or now was I never
at tournament nor jousts but I had the best, and now I am shamed; and
then he said: Now I am sure that I am more sinfuller than ever I was.

Thus he rode sorrowing, and half a day he was out of despair, till that
he came into a deep valley. And when Sir Launcelot saw he might not
ride up into the mountain, he there alighted under an apple tree, and
there he left his helm and his shield, and put his horse unto pasture.
And then he laid him down to sleep. And then him thought there came an
old man afore him, the which said: Ah, Launcelot of evil faith and poor
belief, wherefore is thy will turned so lightly toward thy deadly sin?
And when he had said thus he vanished away, and Launcelot wist not
where he was become. Then he took his horse, and armed him; and as he
rode by the way he saw a chapel where was a recluse, which had a window
that she might see up to the altar. And all aloud she called Launcelot,
for that he seemed a knight errant. And then he came, and she asked him
what he was, and of what place, and where about he went to seek.




