CHAPTER IV. How Sir Launcelot was known by Dame Elaine, and was borne
into a chamber and after healed by the Sangreal.


So it befell that King Pelles had a nephew, his name was Castor; and so
he desired of the king to be made knight, and so at the request of this
Castor the king made him knight at the feast of Candlemas. And when Sir
Castor was made knight, that same day he gave many gowns. And then Sir
Castor sent for the fool—that was Sir Launcelot. And when he was come
afore Sir Castor, he gave Sir Launcelot a robe of scarlet and all that
longed unto him. And when Sir Launcelot was so arrayed like a knight,
he was the seemliest man in all the court, and none so well made. So
when he saw his time he went into the garden, and there Sir Launcelot
laid him down by a well and slept. And so at-after noon Dame Elaine and
her maidens came into the garden to play them; and as they roamed up
and down one of Dame Elaine’s maidens espied where lay a goodly man by
the well sleeping, and anon showed him to Dame Elaine. Peace, said Dame
Elaine, and say no word: and then she brought Dame Elaine where he lay.
And when that she beheld him, anon she fell in remembrance of him, and
knew him verily for Sir Launcelot; and therewithal she fell a-weeping
so heartily that she sank even to the earth; and when she had thus wept
a great while, then she arose and called her maidens and said she was
sick.

And so she yede out of the garden, and she went straight to her father,
and there she took him apart by herself; and then she said: O father,
now have I need of your help, and but if that ye help me farewell my
good days for ever. What is that, daughter? said King Pelles. Sir, she
said, thus is it: in your garden I went for to sport, and there, by the
well, I found Sir Launcelot du Lake sleeping. I may not believe that,
said King Pelles. Sir, she said, truly he is there, and meseemeth he
should be distract out of his wit. Then hold you still, said the king,
and let me deal. Then the king called to him such as he most trusted, a
four persons, and Dame Elaine, his daughter. And when they came to the
well and beheld Sir Launcelot, anon Dame Brisen knew him. Sir, said
Dame Brisen, we must be wise how we deal with him, for this knight is
out of his mind, and if we awake him rudely what he will do we all know
not; but ye shall abide, and I shall throw such an enchantment upon him
that he shall not awake within the space of an hour; and so she did.

Then within a little while after, the king commanded that all people
should avoid, that none should be in that way thereas the king would
come. And so when this was done, these four men and these ladies laid
hand on Sir Launcelot, and so they bare him into a tower, and so into a
chamber where was the holy vessel of the Sangreal, and by force Sir
Launcelot was laid by that holy vessel; and there came an holy man and
unhilled that vessel, and so by miracle and by virtue of that holy
vessel Sir Launcelot was healed and recovered. And when that he was
awaked he groaned and sighed, and complained greatly that he was
passing sore.




CHAPTER V. How Sir Launcelot, after that he was whole and had his mind,
he was ashamed, and how that Elaine desired a castle for him.


And when Sir Launcelot saw King Pelles and Elaine, he waxed ashamed and
said thus: O Lord Jesu, how came I here? for God’s sake, my lord, let
me wit how I came here. Sir, said Dame Elaine, into this country ye
came like a madman, clean out of your wit, and here have ye been kept
as a fool; and no creature here knew what ye were, until by fortune a
maiden of mine brought me unto you whereas ye lay sleeping by a well,
and anon as I verily beheld you I knew you. And then I told my father,
and so were ye brought afore this holy vessel, and by the virtue of it
thus were ye healed. O Jesu, mercy, said Sir Launcelot; if this be
sooth, how many there be that know of my woodness! So God me help, said
Elaine, no more but my father, and I, and Dame Brisen. Now for Christ’s
love, said Sir Launcelot, keep it in counsel, and let no man know it in
the world, for I am sore ashamed that I have been thus miscarried; for
I am banished out of the country of Logris for ever, that is for to say
the country of England.

And so Sir Launcelot lay more than a fortnight or ever that he might
stir for soreness. And then upon a day he said unto Dame Elaine these
words: Lady Elaine, for your sake I have had much travail, care, and
anguish, it needeth not to rehearse it, ye know how. Notwithstanding I
know well I have done foul to you when that I drew my sword to you, to
have slain you, upon the morn when I had lain with you. And all was the
cause, that ye and Dame Brisen made me for to lie by you maugre mine
head; and as ye say, that night Galahad your son was begotten. That is
truth, said Dame Elaine. Now will ye for my love, said Sir Launcelot,
go unto your father and get me a place of him wherein I may dwell? for
in the court of King Arthur may I never come. Sir, said Dame Elaine, I
will live and die with you, and only for your sake; and if my life
might not avail you and my death might avail you, wit you well I would
die for your sake. And I will go to my father and I am sure there is
nothing that I can desire of him but I shall have it. And where ye be,
my lord Sir Launcelot, doubt ye not but I will be with you with all the
service that I may do. So forthwithal she went to her father and said,
Sir, my lord, Sir Launcelot, desireth to be here by you in some castle
of yours. Well daughter, said the king, sith it is his desire to abide
in these marches he shall be in the Castle of Bliant, and there shall
ye be with him, and twenty of the fairest ladies that be in the
country, and they shall all be of the great blood, and ye shall have
ten knights with you; for, daughter, I will that ye wit we all be
honoured by the blood of Sir Launcelot.




