CHAPTER XVII. How Sir Galahad met with Sir Launcelot and Sir Percivale,
and smote them down, and departed from them.


So when Sir Galahad was departed from the Castle of Maidens he rode
till he came to a waste forest, and there he met with Sir Launcelot and
Sir Percivale, but they knew him not, for he was new disguised. Right
so Sir Launcelot, his father, dressed his spear and brake it upon Sir
Galahad, and Galahad smote him so again that he smote down horse and
man. And then he drew his sword, and dressed him unto Sir Percivale,
and smote him so on the helm, that it rove to the coif of steel; and
had not the sword swerved Sir Percivale had been slain, and with the
stroke he fell out of his saddle. This jousts was done to-fore the
hermitage where a recluse dwelled. And when she saw Sir Galahad ride,
she said: God be with thee, best knight of the world. Ah certes, said
she, all aloud that Launcelot and Percivale might hear it: An yonder
two knights had known thee as well as I do they would not have
encountered with thee. Then Sir Galahad heard her say so he was adread
to be known: therewith he smote his horse with his spurs and rode a
great pace froward them. Then perceived they both that he was Galahad;
and up they gat on their horses, and rode fast after him, but in a
while he was out of their sight. And then they turned again with heavy
cheer. Let us spere some tidings, said Percivale, at yonder recluse. Do
as ye list, said Sir Launcelot.

When Sir Percivale came to the recluse she knew him well enough, and
Sir Launcelot both. But Sir Launcelot rode overthwart and endlong in a
wild forest, and held no path but as wild adventure led him. And at the
last he came to a stony cross which departed two ways in waste land;
and by the cross was a stone that was of marble, but it was so dark
that Sir Launcelot might not wit what it was. Then Sir Launcelot looked
by him, and saw an old chapel, and there he weened to have found
people; and Sir Launcelot tied his horse till a tree, and there he did
off his shield and hung it upon a tree, and then went to the chapel
door, and found it waste and broken. And within he found a fair altar,
full richly arrayed with cloth of clean silk, and there stood a fair
clean candlestick, which bare six great candles, and the candlestick
was of silver. And when Sir Launcelot saw this light he had great will
for to enter into the chapel, but he could find no place where he might
enter; then was he passing heavy and dismayed. Then he returned and
came to his horse and did off his saddle and bridle, and let him
pasture, and unlaced his helm, and ungirt his sword, and laid him down
to sleep upon his shield to-fore the cross.




CHAPTER XVIII. How Sir Launcelot, half sleeping and half waking, saw a
sick man borne in a litter, and how he was healed with the Sangreal.


And so he fell asleep; and half waking and sleeping he saw come by him
two palfreys all fair and white, the which bare a litter, therein lying
a sick knight. And when he was nigh the cross he there abode still. All
this Sir Launcelot saw and beheld, for he slept not verily; and he
heard him say: O sweet Lord, when shall this sorrow leave me? and when
shall the holy vessel come by me, wherethrough I shall be blessed? For
I have endured thus long, for little trespass. A full great while
complained the knight thus, and always Sir Launcelot heard it. With
that Sir Launcelot saw the candlestick with the six tapers come before
the cross, and he saw nobody that brought it. Also there came a table
of silver, and the holy vessel of the Sangreal, which Launcelot had
seen aforetime in King Pescheour’s house. And therewith the sick knight
set him up, and held up both his hands, and said: Fair sweet Lord,
which is here within this holy vessel; take heed unto me that I may be
whole of this malady. And therewith on his hands and on his knees he
went so nigh that he touched the holy vessel and kissed it, and anon he
was whole; and then he said: Lord God, I thank thee, for I am healed of
this sickness.

So when the holy vessel had been there a great while it went unto the
chapel with the chandelier and the light, so that Launcelot wist not
where it was become; for he was overtaken with sin that he had no power
to rise again the holy vessel; wherefore after that many men said of
him shame, but he took repentance after that. Then the sick knight
dressed him up and kissed the cross; anon his squire brought him his
arms, and asked his lord how he did. Certes, said he, I thank God right
well, through the holy vessel I am healed. But I have marvel of this
sleeping knight that had no power to awake when this holy vessel was
brought hither. I dare right well say, said the squire, that he
dwelleth in some deadly sin whereof he was never confessed. By my
faith, said the knight, whatsomever he be he is unhappy, for as I deem
he is of the fellowship of the Round Table, the which is entered into
the quest of the Sangreal. Sir, said the squire, here I have brought
you all your arms save your helm and your sword, and therefore by mine
assent now may ye take this knight’s helm and his sword: and so he did.
And when he was clean armed he took Sir Launcelot’s horse, for he was
better than his; and so departed they from the cross.




CHAPTER XIX. How a voice spake to Sir Launcelot, and how he found his
horse and his helm borne away, and after went afoot.


Then anon Sir Launcelot waked, and set him up, and bethought him what
he had seen there, and whether it were dreams or not. Right so heard he
a voice that said: Sir Launcelot, more harder than is the stone, and
more bitter than is the wood, and more naked and barer than is the leaf
of the fig tree; therefore go thou from hence, and withdraw thee from
this holy place. And when Sir Launcelot heard this he was passing heavy
and wist not what to do, and so departed sore weeping, and cursed the
time that he was born. For then he deemed never to have had worship
more. For those words went to his heart, till that he knew wherefore he
was called so. Then Sir Launcelot went to the cross and found his helm,
his sword, and his horse taken away. And then he called himself a very
wretch, and most unhappy of all knights; and there he said: My sin and
my wickedness have brought me unto great dishonour. For when I sought
worldly adventures for worldly desires, I ever enchieved them and had
the better in every place, and never was I discomfit in no quarrel,
were it right or wrong. And now I take upon me the adventures of holy
things, and now I see and understand that mine old sin hindereth me and
shameth me, so that I had no power to stir nor speak when the holy
blood appeared afore me. So thus he sorrowed till it was day, and heard
the fowls sing: then somewhat he was comforted. But when Sir Launcelot
missed his horse and his harness then he wist well God was displeased
with him.

Then he departed from the cross on foot into a forest; and so by prime
he came to an high hill, and found an hermitage and a hermit therein
which was going unto mass. And then Launcelot kneeled down and cried on
Our Lord mercy for his wicked works. So when mass was done Launcelot
called him, and prayed him for charity for to hear his life. With a
good will, said the good man. Sir, said he, be ye of King Arthur’s
court and of the fellowship of the Round Table? Yea forsooth, and my
name is Sir Launcelot du Lake that hath been right well said of, and
now my good fortune is changed, for I am the most wretch of the world.
The hermit beheld him and had marvel how he was so abashed. Sir, said
the hermit, ye ought to thank God more than any knight living, for He
hath caused you to have more worldly worship than any knight that now
liveth. And for your presumption to take upon you in deadly sin for to
be in His presence, where His flesh and His blood was, that caused you
ye might not see it with worldly eyes; for He will not appear where
such sinners be, but if it be unto their great hurt and unto their
great shame; and there is no knight living now that ought to give God
so great thank as ye, for He hath given you beauty, seemliness, and
great strength above all other knights; and therefore ye are the more
beholding unto God than any other man, to love Him and dread Him, for
your strength and manhood will little avail you an God be against you.




