CHAPTER XLVI. Of the Fifth day, and how Sir Lamorak behaved him.


Here beginneth the fifth day. So it befell that Sir Palomides came in
the morntide, and proffered to joust thereas King Arthur was in a
castle there besides Surluse; and there encountered with him a
worshipful duke, and there Sir Palomides smote him over his horse’s
croup. And this duke was uncle unto King Arthur. Then Sir Elise’s son
rode unto Palomides, and Palomides served Elise in the same wise. When
Sir Uwaine saw this he was wroth. Then he took his horse and
encountered with Sir Palomides, and Palomides smote him so hard that he
went to the earth, horse and man. And for to make a short tale, he
smote down three brethren of Sir Gawaine, that is for to say Mordred,
Gaheris, and Agravaine. O Jesu, said Arthur, this is a great despite of
a Saracen that he shall smite down my blood. And therewithal King
Arthur was wood wroth, and thought to have made him ready to joust.

That espied Sir Lamorak, that Arthur and his blood were discomfit; and
anon he was ready, and asked Palomides if he would any more joust. Why
should I not? said Palomides. Then they hurtled together, and brake
their spears, and all to-shivered them, that all the castle rang of
their dints. Then either gat a greater spear in his hand, and they came
so fiercely together; but Sir Palomides’ spear all to-brast and Sir
Lamorak’s did hold. Therewithal Sir Palomides lost his stirrups and lay
upright on his horse’s back. And then Sir Palomides returned again and
took his damosel, and Sir Safere returned his way.

So, when he was departed, King Arthur came to Sir Lamorak and thanked
him of his goodness, and prayed him to tell him his name. Sir, said
Lamorak, wit thou well, I owe you my service, but as at this time I
will not abide here, for I see of mine enemies many about me. Alas,
said Arthur, now wot I well it is Sir Lamorak de Galis. O Lamorak,
abide with me, and by my crown I shall never fail thee: and not so
hardy in Gawaine’s head, nor none of his brethren, to do thee any
wrong. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, wrong have they done me, and to you both.
That is truth, said the king, for they slew their own mother and my
sister, the which me sore grieveth: it had been much fairer and better
that ye had wedded her, for ye are a king’s son as well as they. O
Jesu, said the noble knight Sir Lamorak unto Arthur, her death shall I
never forget. I promise you, and make mine avow unto God, I shall
revenge her death as soon as I see time convenable. And if it were not
at the reverence of your highness I should now have been revenged upon
Sir Gawaine and his brethren. Truly, said Arthur, I will make you at
accord. Sir, said Lamorak, as at this time I may not abide with you,
for I must to the jousts, where is Sir Launcelot, and the haut prince
Sir Galahalt.

Then there was a damosel that was daughter to King Bandes. And there
was a Saracen knight that hight Corsabrin, and he loved the damosel,
and in no wise he would suffer her to be married; for ever this
Corsabrin noised her, and named her that she was out of her mind; and
thus he let her that she might not be married.




CHAPTER XLVII. How Sir Palomides fought with Corsabrin for a lady, and
how Palomides slew Corsabrin.


So by fortune this damosel heard tell that Palomides did much for
damosels’ sake; so she sent to him a pensel, and prayed him to fight
with Sir Corsabrin for her love, and he should have her and her lands
of her father’s that should fall to her. Then the damosel sent unto
Corsabrin, and bade him go unto Sir Palomides that was a paynim as well
as he, and she gave him warning that she had sent him her pensel, and
if he might overcome Palomides she would wed him. When Corsabrin wist
of her deeds then was he wood wroth and angry, and rode unto Surluse
where the haut prince was, and there he found Sir Palomides ready, the
which had the pensel. So there they waged battle either with other
afore Galahalt. Well, said the haut prince, this day must noble knights
joust, and at-after dinner we shall see how ye can speed.

Then they blew to jousts; and in came Dinadan, and met with Sir Gerin,
a good knight, and he threw him down over his horse’s croup; and Sir
Dinadan overthrew four knights more; and there he did great deeds of
arms, for he was a good knight, but he was a scoffer and a japer, and
the merriest knight among fellowship that was that time living. And he
had such a custom that he loved every good knight, and every good
knight loved him again. So then when the haut prince saw Dinadan do so
well, he sent unto Sir Launcelot and bade him strike down Sir Dinadan:
And when that ye have done so bring him afore me and the noble Queen
Guenever. Then Sir Launcelot did as he was required. Then Sir Lamorak
and he smote down many knights, and raced off helms, and drove all the
knights afore them. And so Sir Launcelot smote down Sir Dinadan, and
made his men to unarm him, and so brought him to the queen and the haut
prince, and they laughed at Dinadan so sore that they might not stand.
Well, said Sir Dinadan, yet have I no shame, for the old shrew, Sir
Launcelot, smote me down. So they went to dinner, [and] all the court
had good sport at Dinadan.

Then when the dinner was done they blew to the field to behold Sir
Palomides and Corsabrin. Sir Palomides pight his pensel in midst of the
field; and then they hurtled together with their spears as it were
thunder, and either smote other to the earth. And then they pulled out
their swords, and dressed their shields, and lashed together mightily
as mighty knights, that well-nigh there was no piece of harness would
hold them, for this Corsabrin was a passing felonious knight.
Corsabrin, said Palomides, wilt thou release me yonder damosel and the
pensel? Then was Corsabrin wroth out of measure, and gave Palomides
such a buffet that he kneeled on his knee. Then Palomides arose
lightly, and smote him upon the helm that he fell down right to the
earth. And therewith he raced off his helm and said: Corsabrin, yield
thee or else thou shalt die of my hands. Fie on thee, said Corsabrin,
do thy worst. Then he smote off his head. And therewithal came a stink
of his body when the soul departed, that there might nobody abide the
savour. So was the corpse had away and buried in a wood, because he was
a paynim. Then they blew unto lodging, and Palomides was unarmed.

Then he went unto Queen Guenever, to the haut prince, and to Sir
Launcelot. Sir, said the haut prince, here have ye seen this day a
great miracle by Corsabrin, what savour there was when the soul
departed from the body. Therefore, sir, we will require you to take the
baptism upon you, and I promise you all knights will set the more by
you, and say more worship by you. Sir, said Palomides, I will that ye
all know that into this land I came to be christened, and in my heart I
am christened and christened will I be. But I have made such an avow
that I may not be christened till I have done seven true battles for
Jesu’s sake, and then will I be christened; and I trust God will take
mine intent, for I mean truly. Then Sir Palomides prayed Queen Guenever
and the haut prince to sup with him. And so they did, both Sir
Launcelot and Sir Lamorak, and many other good knights. So on the morn
they heard their mass, and blew the field, and then knights made them
ready.




