CHAPTER XIV. How a knight brought unto Sir Galahad a horse, and bade
him come from his father, Sir Launcelot.


So after, on a Monday, it befell that they arrived in the edge of a
forest to-fore a cross; and then saw they a knight armed all in white,
and was richly horsed, and led in his right hand a white horse; and so
he came to the ship, and saluted the two knights on the High Lord’s
behalf, and said: Galahad, sir, ye have been long enough with your
father, come out of the ship, and start upon this horse, and go where
the adventures shall lead thee in the quest of the Sangreal. Then he
went to his father and kissed him sweetly, and said: Fair sweet father,
I wot not when I shall see you more till I see the body of Jesu Christ.
I pray you, said Launcelot, pray ye to the High Father that He hold me
in His service. And so he took his horse, and there they heard a voice
that said: Think for to do well, for the one shall never see the other
before the dreadful day of doom. Now, son Galahad, said Launcelot,
since we shall depart, and never see other, I pray to the High Father
to conserve me and you both. Sir, said Galahad, no prayer availeth so
much as yours. And therewith Galahad entered into the forest.

And the wind arose, and drove Launcelot more than a month throughout
the sea, where he slept but little, but prayed to God that he might see
some tidings of the Sangreal. So it befell on a night, at midnight, he
arrived afore a castle, on the back side, which was rich and fair, and
there was a postern opened toward the sea, and was open without any
keeping, save two lions kept the entry; and the moon shone clear. Anon
Sir Launcelot heard a voice that said: Launcelot, go out of this ship
and enter into the castle, where thou shalt see a great part of thy
desire. Then he ran to his arms, and so armed him, and so went to the
gate and saw the lions. Then set he hand to his sword and drew it. Then
there came a dwarf suddenly, and smote him on the arm so sore that the
sword fell out of his hand. Then heard he a voice say: O man of evil
faith and poor belief, wherefore trowest thou more on thy harness than
in thy Maker, for He might more avail thee than thine armour, in whose
service that thou art set. Then said Launcelot: Fair Father Jesu
Christ, I thank thee of Thy great mercy that Thou reprovest me of my
misdeed; now see I well that ye hold me for your servant. Then took he
again his sword and put it up in his sheath, and made a cross in his
forehead, and came to the lions, and they made semblaunt to do him
harm. Notwithstanding he passed by them without hurt, and entered into
the castle to the chief fortress, and there were they all at rest. Then
Launcelot entered in so armed, for he found no gate nor door but it was
open. And at the last he found a chamber whereof the door was shut, and
he set his hand thereto to have opened it, but he might not.




CHAPTER XV. How Sir Launcelot was to-fore the door of the chamber
wherein the Holy Sangreal was.


Then he enforced him mickle to undo the door. Then he listened and
heard a voice which sang so sweetly that it seemed none earthly thing;
and him thought the voice said: Joy and honour be to the Father of
Heaven. Then Launcelot kneeled down to-fore the chamber, for well wist
he that there was the Sangreal within that chamber. Then said he: Fair
sweet Father, Jesu Christ, if ever I did thing that pleased Thee, Lord
for Thy pity never have me not in despite for my sins done aforetime,
and that Thou show me something of that I seek. And with that he saw
the chamber door open, and there came out a great clearness, that the
house was as bright as all the torches of the world had been there.

So came he to the chamber door, and would have entered. And anon a
voice said to him: Flee, Launcelot, and enter not, for thou oughtest
not to do it; and if thou enter thou shalt for-think it. Then he
withdrew him aback right heavy. Then looked he up in the midst of the
chamber, and saw a table of silver, and the Holy Vessel, covered with
red samite, and many angels about it, whereof one held a candle of wax
burning, and the other held a cross, and the ornaments of an altar. And
before the Holy Vessel he saw a good man clothed as a priest. And it
seemed that he was at the sacring of the mass. And it seemed to
Launcelot that above the priest’s hands were three men, whereof the two
put the youngest by likeness between the priest’s hands; and so he lift
it up right high, and it seemed to show so to the people. And then
Launcelot marvelled not a little, for him thought the priest was so
greatly charged of the figure that him seemed that he should fall to
the earth. And when he saw none about him that would help him, then
came he to the door a great pace, and said: Fair Father Jesu Christ, ne
take it for no sin though I help the good man which hath great need of
help.

Right so entered he into the chamber, and came toward the table of
silver; and when he came nigh he felt a breath, that him thought it was
intermeddled with fire, which smote him so sore in the visage that him
thought it brent his visage; and therewith he fell to the earth, and
had no power to arise, as he that was so araged, that had lost the
power of his body, and his hearing, and his seeing. Then felt he many
hands about him, which took him up and bare him out of the chamber
door, without any amending of his swoon, and left him there, seeming
dead to all people.

So upon the morrow when it was fair day they within were arisen, and
found Launcelot lying afore the chamber door. All they marvelled how
that he came in, and so they looked upon him, and felt his pulse to wit
whether there were any life in him; and so they found life in him, but
he might not stand nor stir no member that he had. And so they took him
by every part of the body, and bare him into a chamber, and laid him in
a rich bed, far from all folk; and so he lay four days. Then the one
said he was alive, and the other said, Nay. In the name of God, said an
old man, for I do you verily to wit he is not dead, but he is so full
of life as the mightiest of you all; and therefore I counsel you that
he be well kept till God send him life again.




