CHAPTER XXII. How King Arthur made King Mark to be accorded with Sir
Tristram, and how they departed toward Cornwall.


Now pass we our matter, and leave we Sir Gawaine, and speak of King
Arthur, that on a day said unto King Mark: Sir, I pray you give me a
gift that I shall ask you. Sir, said King Mark, I will give you
whatsomever ye desire an it be in my power. Sir, gramercy, said Arthur.
This I will ask you, that ye will be good lord unto Sir Tristram, for
he is a man of great honour; and that ye will take him with you into
Cornwall, and let him see his friends, and there cherish him for my
sake. Sir, said King Mark, I promise you by the faith of my body, and
by the faith that I owe to God and to you, I shall worship him for your
sake in all that I can or may. Sir, said Arthur, and I will forgive you
all the evil will that ever I ought you, an so be that you swear that
upon a book before me. With a good will, said King Mark; and so he
there sware upon a book afore him and all his knights, and therewith
King Mark and Sir Tristram took either other by the hands hard knit
together. But for all this King Mark thought falsely, as it proved
after, for he put Sir Tristram in prison, and cowardly would have slain
him.

Then soon after King Mark took his leave to ride into Cornwall, and Sir
Tristram made him ready to ride with him, whereof the most part of the
Round Table were wroth and heavy, and in especial Sir Launcelot, and
Sir Lamorak, and Sir Dinadan, were wroth out of measure. For well they
wist King Mark would slay or destroy Sir Tristram. Alas, said Dinadan,
that my lord, Sir Tristram, shall depart. And Sir Tristram took such
sorrow that he was amazed like a fool. Alas, said Sir Launcelot unto
King Arthur, what have ye done, for ye shall lose the most man of
worship that ever came into your court. It was his own desire, said
Arthur, and therefore I might not do withal, for I have done all that I
can and made them at accord. Accord, said Sir Launcelot, fie upon that
accord, for ye shall hear that he shall slay Sir Tristram, or put him
in a prison, for he is the most coward and the villainest king and
knight that is now living.

And therewith Sir Launcelot departed, and came to King Mark, and said
to him thus: Sir king, wit thou well the good knight Sir Tristram shall
go with thee. Beware, I rede thee, of treason, for an thou mischief
that knight by any manner of falsehood or treason, by the faith I owe
to God and to the order of knighthood, I shall slay thee with mine own
hands. Sir Launcelot, said the king, overmuch have ye said to me, and I
have sworn and said over largely afore King Arthur in hearing of all
his knights, that I shall not slay nor betray him. It were to me
overmuch shame to break my promise. Ye say well, said Sir Launcelot,
but ye are called so false and full of treason that no man may believe
you. Forsooth it is known well wherefore ye came into this country, and
for none other cause but for to slay Sir Tristram. So with great dole
King Mark and Sir Tristram rode together, for it was by Sir Tristram’s
will and his means to go with King Mark, and all was for the intent to
see La Beale Isoud, for without the sight of her Sir Tristram might not
endure.




CHAPTER XXIII. How Sir Percivale was made knight of King Arthur, and
how a dumb maid spake, and brought him to the Round Table.


Now turn we again unto Sir Lamorak, and speak we of his brethren, Sir
Tor, which was King Pellinore’s first son and begotten of Aryes, wife
of the cowherd, for he was a bastard; and Sir Aglovale was his first
son begotten in wedlock; Sir Lamorak, Dornar, Percivale, these were his
sons too in wedlock. So when King Mark and Sir Tristram were departed
from the court there was made great dole and sorrow for the departing
of Sir Tristram. Then the king and his knights made no manner of joys
eight days after. And at the eight days’ end there came to the court a
knight with a young squire with him. And when this knight was unarmed,
he went to the king and required him to make the young squire a knight.
Of what lineage is he come? said King Arthur. Sir, said the knight, he
is the son of King Pellinore, that did you some time good service, and
he is a brother unto Sir Lamorak de Galis, the good knight. Well, said
the king, for what cause desire ye that of me that I should make him
knight? Wit you well, my lord the king, that this young squire is
brother to me as well as to Sir Lamorak, and my name is Aglavale. Sir
Aglavale, said Arthur, for the love of Sir Lamorak, and for his
father’s love, he shall be made knight to-morrow. Now tell me, said
Arthur, what is his name? Sir, said the knight, his name is Percivale
de Galis. So on the morn the king made him knight in Camelot. But the
king and all the knights thought it would be long or that he proved a
good knight.

Then at the dinner, when the king was set at the table, and every
knight after he was of prowess, the king commanded him to be set among
mean knights; and so was Sir Percivale set as the king commanded. Then
was there a maiden in the queen’s court that was come of high blood,
and she was dumb and never spake word. Right so she came straight into
the hall, and went unto Sir Percivale, and took him by the hand and
said aloud, that the king and all the knights might hear it: Arise, Sir
Percivale, the noble knight and God’s knight, and go with me; and so he
did. And there she brought him to the right side of the Siege Perilous,
and said, Fair knight, take here thy siege, for that siege appertaineth
to thee and to none other. Right so she departed and asked a priest.
And as she was confessed and houselled then she died. Then the king and
all the court made great joy of Sir Percivale.




