CHAPTER I. How Sir Tristram jousted, and smote down King Arthur,
because he told him not the cause why he bare that shield.


And if so be ye can descrive what ye bear, ye are worthy to bear the
arms. As for that, said Sir Tristram, I will answer you; this shield
was given me, not desired, of Queen Morgan le Fay; and as for me, I can
not descrive these arms, for it is no point of my charge, and yet I
trust to God to bear them with worship. Truly, said King Arthur, ye
ought not to bear none arms but if ye wist what ye bear: but I pray you
tell me your name. To what intent? said Sir Tristram. For I would wit,
said Arthur. Sir, ye shall not wit as at this time. Then shall ye and I
do battle together, said King Arthur. Why, said Sir Tristram, will ye
do battle with me but if I tell you my name? and that little needeth
you an ye were a man of worship, for ye have seen me this day have had
great travail, and therefore ye are a villainous knight to ask battle
of me, considering my great travail; howbeit I will not fail you, and
have ye no doubt that I fear not you; though you think you have me at a
great advantage yet shall I right well endure you. And there withal
King Arthur dressed his shield and his spear, and Sir Tristram against
him, and they came so eagerly together. And there King Arthur brake his
spear all to pieces upon Sir Tristram’s shield. But Sir Tristram hit
Arthur again, that horse and man fell to the earth. And there was King
Arthur wounded on the left side, a great wound and a perilous.

Then when Sir Uwaine saw his lord Arthur lie on the ground sore
wounded, he was passing heavy. And then he dressed his shield and his
spear, and cried aloud unto Sir Tristram and said: Knight, defend thee.
So they came together as thunder, and Sir Uwaine brised his spear all
to pieces upon Sir Tristram’s shield, and Sir Tristram smote him harder
and sorer, with such a might that he bare him clean out of his saddle
to the earth. With that Sir Tristram turned about and said: Fair
knights, I had no need to joust with you, for I have had enough to do
this day. Then arose Arthur and went to Sir Uwaine, and said to Sir
Tristram: We have as we have deserved, for through our orgulyté we
demanded battle of you, and yet we knew not your name. Nevertheless, by
Saint Cross, said Sir Uwaine, he is a strong knight at mine advice as
any is now living.

Then Sir Tristram departed, and in every place he asked and demanded
after Sir Launcelot, but in no place he could not hear of him whether
he were dead or alive; wherefore Sir Tristram made great dole and
sorrow. So Sir Tristram rode by a forest, and then was he ware of a
fair tower by a marsh on that one side, and on that other side a fair
meadow. And there he saw ten knights fighting together. And ever the
nearer he came he saw how there was but one knight did battle against
nine knights, and that one did so marvellously that Sir Tristram had
great wonder that ever one knight might do so great deeds of arms. And
then within a little while he had slain half their horses and unhorsed
them, and their horses ran in the fields and forest. Then Sir Tristram
had so great pity of that one knight that endured so great pain, and
ever he thought it should be Sir Palomides, by his shield. And so he
rode unto the knights and cried unto them, and bade them cease of their
battle, for they did themselves great shame so many knights to fight
with one. Then answered the master of those knights, his name was
called Breuse Saunce Pité, that was at that time the most mischievoust
knight living, and said thus: Sir knight, what have ye ado with us to
meddle? and therefore, an ye be wise, depart on your way as ye came,
for this knight shall not escape us. That were pity, said Sir Tristram,
that so good a knight as he is should be slain so cowardly; and
therefore I warn you I will succour him with all my puissance.




CHAPTER II. How Sir Tristram saved Sir Palomides’ life, and how they
promised to fight together within a fortnight.


So Sir Tristram alighted off his horse because they were on foot, that
they should not slay his horse, and then dressed his shield, with his
sword in his hand, and he smote on the right hand and on the left hand
passing sore, that well-nigh at every stroke he struck down a knight.
And when they espied his strokes they fled all with Breuse Saunce Pité
unto the tower, and Sir Tristram followed fast after with his sword in
his hand, but they escaped into the tower, and shut Sir Tristram
without the gate. And when Sir Tristram saw this he returned aback unto
Sir Palomides, and found him sitting under a tree sore wounded. Ah,
fair knight, said Sir Tristram, well be ye found. Gramercy, said Sir
Palomides, of your great goodness, for ye have rescued me of my life,
and saved me from my death. What is your name? said Sir Tristram. He
said: My name is Sir Palomides. O Jesu, said Sir Tristram, thou hast a
fair grace of me this day that I should rescue thee, and thou art the
man in the world that I most hate; but now make thee ready, for I will
do battle with thee. What is your name? said Sir Palomides. My name is
Sir Tristram, your mortal enemy. It may be so, said Sir Palomides; but
ye have done over much for me this day that I should fight with you;
for inasmuch as ye have saved my life it will be no worship for you to
have ado with me, for ye are fresh and I am wounded sore, and
therefore, an ye will needs have ado with me, assign me a day and then
I shall meet with you without fail. Ye say well, said Sir Tristram, now
I assign you to meet me in the meadow by the river of Camelot, where
Merlin set the peron. So they were agreed.

Then Sir Tristram asked Sir Palomides why the ten knights did battle
with him. For this cause, said Sir Palomides; as I rode upon mine
adventures in a forest here beside I espied where lay a dead knight,
and a lady weeping beside him. And when I saw her making such dole, I
asked her who slew her lord. Sir, she said, the falsest knight of the
world now living, and he is the most villain that ever man heard speak
of and his name is Sir Breuse Saunce Pité. Then for pity I made the
damosel to leap on her palfrey, and I promised her to be her warrant,
and to help her to inter her lord. And so, suddenly, as I came riding
by this tower, there came out Sir Breuse Saunce Pité, and suddenly he
struck me from my horse. And then or I might recover my horse this Sir
Breuse slew the damosel. And so I took my horse again, and I was sore
ashamed, and so began the medley betwixt us: and this is the cause
wherefore we did this battle. Well, said Sir Tristram, now I understand
the manner of your battle, but in any wise have remembrance of your
promise that ye have made with me to do battle with me this day
fortnight. I shall not fail you, said Sir Palomides. Well, said Sir
Tristram, as at this time I will not fail you till that ye be out of
the danger of your enemies.

So they mounted upon their horses, and rode together unto that forest,
and there they found a fair well, with clear water bubbling. Fair sir,
said Sir Tristram, to drink of that water have I courage; and then they
alighted off their horses. And then were they ware by them where stood
a great horse tied to a tree, and ever he neighed. And then were they
ware of a fair knight armed, under a tree, lacking no piece of harness,
save his helm lay under his head. By the good lord, said Sir Tristram,
yonder lieth a well-faring knight; what is best to do? Awake him, said
Sir Palomides. So Sir Tristram awaked him with the butt of his spear.
And so the knight rose up hastily and put his helm upon his head, and
gat a great spear in his hand; and without any more words he hurled
unto Sir Tristram, and smote him clean from his saddle to the earth,
and hurt him on the left side, that Sir Tristram lay in great peril.
Then he walloped farther, and fetched his course, and came hurling upon
Sir Palomides, and there he struck him a part through the body, that he
fell from his horse to the earth. And then this strange knight left
them there, and took his way through the forest. With this Sir
Palomides and Sir Tristram were on foot, and gat their horses again,
and either asked counsel of other, what was best to do. By my head,
said Sir Tristram, I will follow this strong knight that thus hath
shamed us. Well, said Sir Palomides, and I will repose me hereby with a
friend of mine. Beware, said Sir Tristram unto Palomides, that ye fail
not that day that ye have set with me to do battle, for, as I deem, ye
will not hold your day, for I am much bigger than ye. As for that, said
Sir Palomides, be it as it be may, for I fear you not, for an I be not
sick nor prisoner, I will not fail you; but I have cause to have more
doubt of you that ye will not meet with me, for ye ride after yonder
strong knight. And if ye meet with him it is an hard adventure an ever
ye escape his hands. Right so Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides departed,
and either took their ways diverse.




