CHAPTER XI. How Sir Launcelot and Sir Lavaine entered in the field
against them of King Arthur’s court, and how Launcelot was hurt.


Now, said Sir Launcelot, an ye will help me a little, ye shall see
yonder fellowship that chaseth now these men in our side, that they
shall go as fast backward as they went forward. Sir, spare not, said
Sir Lavaine, for I shall do what I may. Then Sir Launcelot and Sir
Lavaine came in at the thickest of the press, and there Sir Launcelot
smote down Sir Brandiles, Sir Sagramore, Sir Dodinas, Sir Kay, Sir
Griflet, and all this he did with one spear; and Sir Lavaine smote down
Sir Lucan le Butler and Sir Bedevere. And then Sir Launcelot gat
another spear, and there he smote down Sir Agravaine, Sir Gaheris, and
Sir Mordred, and Sir Meliot de Logris; and Sir Lavaine smote Ozanna le
Cure Hardy. And then Sir Launcelot drew his sword, and there he smote
on the right hand and on the left hand, and by great force he unhorsed
Sir Safere, Sir Epinogris, and Sir Galleron; and then the knights of
the Table Round withdrew them aback, after they had gotten their horses
as well as they might. O mercy Jesu, said Sir Gawaine, what knight is
yonder that doth so marvellous deeds of arms in that field? I wot well
what he is, said King Arthur, but as at this time I will not name him.
Sir, said Sir Gawaine, I would say it were Sir Launcelot by his riding
and his buffets that I see him deal, but ever meseemeth it should not
be he, for that he beareth the red sleeve upon his head; for I wist him
never bear token at no jousts, of lady nor gentlewoman. Let him be,
said King Arthur, he will be better known, and do more, or ever he
depart.

Then the party that was against King Arthur were well comforted, and
then they held them together that beforehand were sore rebuked. Then
Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir Lionel called unto them the
knights of their blood, as Sir Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis, Sir
Aliduke, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Bellangere le Beuse. So these
nine knights of Sir Launcelot’s kin thrust in mightily, for they were
all noble knights; and they, of great hate and despite that they had
unto him, thought to rebuke that noble knight Sir Launcelot, and Sir
Lavaine, for they knew them not; and so they came hurling together, and
smote down many knights of Northgalis and of Northumberland. And when
Sir Launcelot saw them fare so, he gat a spear in his hand; and there
encountered with him all at once Sir Bors, Sir Ector, and Sir Lionel,
and all they three smote him at once with their spears. And with force
of themself they smote Sir Launcelot’s horse to the earth; and by
misfortune Sir Bors smote Sir Launcelot through the shield into the
side, and the spear brake, and the head left still in his side.

When Sir Lavaine saw his master lie on the ground, he ran to the King
of Scots and smote him to the earth; and by great force he took his
horse, and brought him to Sir Launcelot, and maugre of them all he made
him to mount upon that horse. And then Launcelot gat a spear in his
hand, and there he smote Sir Bors, horse and man, to the earth. In the
same wise he served Sir Ector and Sir Lionel; and Sir Lavaine smote
down Sir Blamore de Ganis. And then Sir Launcelot drew his sword, for
he felt himself so sore y-hurt that he weened there to have had his
death. And then he smote Sir Bleoberis such a buffet on the helm that
he fell down to the earth in a swoon. And in the same wise he served
Sir Aliduke and Sir Galihud. And Sir Lavaine smote down Sir Bellangere,
that was the son of Alisander le Orphelin.

And by this was Sir Bors horsed, and then he came with Sir Ector and
Sir Lionel, and all they three smote with swords upon Sir Launcelot’s
helmet. And when he felt their buffets and his wound, the which was so
grievous, then he thought to do what he might while he might endure.
And then he gave Sir Bors such a buffet that he made him bow his head
passing low; and therewithal he raced off his helm, and might have
slain him; and so pulled him down, and in the same wise he served Sir
Ector and Sir Lionel. For as the book saith he might have slain them,
but when he saw their visages his heart might not serve him thereto,
but left them there. And then afterward he hurled into the thickest
press of them all, and did there the marvelloust deeds of arms that
ever man saw or heard speak of, and ever Sir Lavaine, the good knight,
with him. And there Sir Launcelot with his sword smote down and pulled
down, as the French book maketh mention, mo than thirty knights, and
the most part were of the Table Round; and Sir Lavaine did full well
that day, for he smote down ten knights of the Table Round.




CHAPTER XII. How Sir Launcelot and Sir Lavaine departed out of the
field, and in what jeopardy Launcelot was.


Mercy Jesu, said Sir Gawaine to Arthur, I marvel what knight that he is
with the red sleeve. Sir, said King Arthur, he will be known or he
depart. And then the king blew unto lodging, and the prize was given by
heralds unto the knight with the white shield that bare the red sleeve.
Then came the King with the Hundred Knights, the King of Northgalis,
and the King of Northumberland, and Sir Galahad, the haut prince, and
said unto Sir Launcelot: Fair knight, God thee bless, for much have ye
done this day for us, therefore we pray you that ye will come with us
that ye may receive the honour and the prize as ye have worshipfully
deserved it. My fair lords, said Sir Launcelot, wit you well if I have
deserved thanks I have sore bought it, and that me repenteth, for I am
like never to escape with my life; therefore, fair lords, I pray you
that ye will suffer me to depart where me liketh, for I am sore hurt. I
take none force of none honour, for I had liefer to repose me than to
be lord of all the world. And therewithal he groaned piteously, and
rode a great wallop away-ward from them until he came under a wood’s
side.

And when he saw that he was from the field nigh a mile, that he was
sure he might not be seen, then he said with an high voice: O gentle
knight, Sir Lavaine, help me that this truncheon were out of my side,
for it sticketh so sore that it nigh slayeth me. O mine own lord, said
Sir Lavaine, I would fain do that might please you, but I dread me sore
an I pull out the truncheon that ye shall be in peril of death. I
charge you, said Sir Launcelot, as ye love me, draw it out. And
therewithal he descended from his horse, and right so did Sir Lavaine;
and forthwithal Sir Lavaine drew the truncheon out of his side, and he
gave a great shriek and a marvellous grisly groan, and the blood brast
out nigh a pint at once, that at the last he sank down upon his
buttocks, and so swooned pale and deadly. Alas, said Sir Lavaine, what
shall I do? And then he turned Sir Launcelot into the wind, but so he
lay there nigh half an hour as he had been dead.

And so at the last Sir Launcelot cast up his eyes, and said: O Lavaine,
help me that I were on my horse, for here is fast by within this two
mile a gentle hermit that sometime was a full noble knight and a great
lord of possessions. And for great goodness he hath taken him to wilful
poverty, and forsaken many lands, and his name is Sir Baudwin of
Brittany, and he is a full noble surgeon and a good leech. Now let see,
help me up that I were there, for ever my heart giveth me that I shall
never die of my cousin-germain’s hands. And then with great pain Sir
Lavaine halp him upon his horse. And then they rode a great wallop
together, and ever Sir Launcelot bled that it ran down to the earth;
and so by fortune they came to that hermitage the which was under a
wood, and a great cliff on the other side, and a fair water running
under it. And then Sir Lavaine beat on the gate with the butt of his
spear, and cried fast: Let in for Jesu’s sake.

And there came a fair child to them, and asked them what they would.
Fair son, said Sir Lavaine, go and pray thy lord, the hermit, for God’s
sake to let in here a knight that is full sore wounded; and this day
tell thy lord I saw him do more deeds of arms than ever I heard say
that any man did. So the child went in lightly, and then he brought the
hermit, the which was a passing good man. When Sir Lavaine saw him he
prayed him for God’s sake of succour. What knight is he? said the
hermit. Is he of the house of King Arthur, or not? I wot not, said Sir
Lavaine, what is he, nor what is his name, but well I wot I saw him do
marvellously this day as of deeds of arms. On whose party was he? said
the hermit. Sir, said Sir Lavaine, he was this day against King Arthur,
and there he won the prize of all the knights of the Round Table. I
have seen the day, said the hermit, I would have loved him the worse
because he was against my lord, King Arthur, for sometime I was one of
the fellowship of the Round Table, but I thank God now I am otherwise
disposed. But where is he? let me see him. Then Sir Lavaine brought the
hermit to him.




