CHAPTER XXXIX. How Alisander met with Alice la Beale Pilgrim, and how
he jousted with two knights; and after of him and of Sir Mordred.


Then she unwimpled her visage. And when he saw her he said: Here have I
found my love and my lady. Truly, fair lady, said he, I promise you to
be your knight, and none other that beareth the life. Now, gentle
knight, said she, tell me your name. My name is, said he, Alisander le
Orphelin. Now, damosel, tell me your name, said he. My name is, said
she, Alice la Beale Pilgrim. And when we be more at our heart’s ease,
both ye and I shall tell other of what blood we be come. So there was
great love betwixt them. And as they thus talked there came a knight
that hight Harsouse le Berbuse, and asked part of Sir Alisander’s
spears. Then Sir Alisander encountered with him, and at the first Sir
Alisander smote him over his horse’s croup. And then there came another
knight that hight Sir Hewgon, and Sir Alisander smote him down as he
did that other. Then Sir Hewgon proffered to do battle on foot. Sir
Alisander overcame him with three strokes, and there would have slain
him had he not yielded him. So then Alisander made both those knights
to swear to wear none armour in a twelvemonth and a day.

Then Sir Alisander alighted down, and went to rest him and repose him.
Then the damosel that helped Sir Alisander out of the castle, in her
play told Alice all together how he was prisoner in the castle of La
Beale Regard, and there she told her how she got him out of prison.
Sir, said Alice la Beale Pilgrim, meseemeth ye are much beholding to
this maiden. That is truth, said Sir Alisander. And there Alice told
him of what blood she was come. Sir, wit ye well, she said, that I am
of the blood of King Ban, that was father unto Sir Launcelot. Y-wis,
fair lady, said Alisander, my mother told me that my father was brother
unto a king, and I nigh cousin unto Sir Tristram.

Then this while came there three knights, that one hight Vains, and the
other hight Harvis de les Marches, and the third hight Perin de la
Montaine. And with one spear Sir Alisander smote them down all three,
and gave them such falls that they had no list to fight upon foot. So
he made them to swear to wear none arms in a twelvemonth. So when they
were departed Sir Alisander beheld his lady Alice on horseback as he
stood in her pavilion. And then was he so enamoured upon her that he
wist not whether he were on horseback or on foot.

Right so came the false knight Sir Mordred, and saw Sir Alisander was
assotted upon his lady; and therewithal he took his horse by the
bridle, and led him here and there, and had cast to have led him out of
that place to have shamed him. When the damosel that helped him out of
that castle saw how shamefully he was led, anon she let arm her, and
set a shield upon her shoulder; and therewith she mounted upon his
horse, and gat a naked sword in her hand, and she thrust unto Alisander
with all her might, and she gave him such a buffet that he thought the
fire flew out of his eyen. And when Alisander felt that stroke he
looked about him, and drew his sword. And when she saw that, she fled,
and so did Mordred into the forest, and the damosel fled into the
pavilion. So when Alisander understood himself how the false knight
would have shamed him had not the damosel been then was he wroth with
himself that Sir Mordred was so escaped his hands. But then Sir
Alisander and Alice had good game at the damosel, how sadly she hit him
upon the helm.

Then Sir Alisander jousted thus day by day, and on foot he did many
battles with many knights of King Arthur’s court, and with many knights
strangers. Therefore to tell all the battles that he did it were
overmuch to rehearse, for every day within that twelvemonth he had ado
with one knight or with other, and some day he had ado with three or
with four; and there was never knight that put him to the worse. And at
the twelvemonth’s end he departed with his lady, Alice la Beale
Pilgrim. And the damosel would never go from him, and so they went into
their country of Benoye, and lived there in great joy.




CHAPTER XL. How Sir Galahalt did do cry a jousts in Surluse, and Queen
Guenever’s knights should joust against all that would come.


But as the book saith, King Mark would never stint till he had slain
him by treason. And by Alice he gat a child that hight Bellengerus le
Beuse. And by good fortune he came to the court of King Arthur, and
proved a passing good knight; and he revenged his father’s death, for
the false King Mark slew both Sir Tristram and Alisander falsely and
feloniously. And it happed so that Alisander had never grace nor
fortune to come to King Arthur’s court. For an he had come to Sir
Launcelot, all knights said that knew him, he was one of the strongest
knights that was in Arthur’s days, and great dole was made for him. So
let we of him pass, and turn we to another tale.

So it befell that Sir Galahalt, the haut prince, was lord of the
country of Surluse, whereof came many good knights. And this noble
prince was a passing good man of arms, and ever he held a noble
fellowship together. And then he came to Arthur’s court and told him
his intent, how this was his will, how he would let cry a jousts in the
country of Surluse, the which country was within the lands of King
Arthur, and there he asked leave to let cry a jousts. I will give you
leave, said King Arthur; but wit thou well, said King Arthur, I may not
be there. Sir, said Queen Guenever, please it you to give me leave to
be at that jousts. With right good will, said Arthur; for Sir Galahalt,
the haut prince, shall have you in governance. Sir, said Galahalt, I
will as ye will. Sir, then the queen, I will take with me [Sir
Launcelot] and such knights as please me best. Do as ye list, said King
Arthur. So anon she commanded Sir Launcelot to make him ready with such
knights as he thought best.

So in every good town and castle of this land was made a cry, that in
the country of Surluse Sir Galahalt should make a joust that should
last eight days, and how the haut prince, with the help of Queen
Guenever’s knights, should joust against all manner of men that would
come. When this cry was known, kings and princes, dukes and earls,
barons and noble knights, made them ready to be at that jousts. And at
the day of jousting there came in Sir Dinadan disguised, and did many
great deeds of arms.




