CHAPTER XV. Of the sorrow that Sir Bors had for the hurt of Launcelot;
and of the anger that the queen had because Launcelot bare the sleeve.


And when Sir Bors heard that, wit ye well he was an heavy man, and so
were all his kinsmen. But when Queen Guenever wist that Sir Launcelot
bare the red sleeve of the Fair Maiden of Astolat she was nigh out of
her mind for wrath. And then she sent for Sir Bors de Ganis in all the
haste that might be. So when Sir Bors was come to-fore the queen, then
she said: Ah Sir Bors, have ye heard say how falsely Sir Launcelot hath
betrayed me? Alas madam, said Sir Bors, I am afeard he hath betrayed
himself and us all. No force, said the queen, though he be destroyed,
for he is a false traitor-knight. Madam, said Sir Bors, I pray you say
ye not so, for wit you well I may not hear such language of him. Why
Sir Bors, said she, should I not call him traitor when he bare the red
sleeve upon his head at Winchester, at the great jousts? Madam, said
Sir Bors, that sleeve-bearing repenteth me sore, but I dare say he did
it to none evil intent, but for this cause he bare the red sleeve that
none of his blood should know him. For or then we, nor none of us all,
never knew that ever he bare token or sign of maid, lady, ne
gentlewoman. Fie on him, said the queen, yet for all his pride and
bobaunce there ye proved yourself his better. Nay madam, say ye never
more so, for he beat me and my fellows, and might have slain us an he
had would. Fie on him, said the queen, for I heard Sir Gawaine say
before my lord Arthur that it were marvel to tell the great love that
is between the Fair Maiden of Astolat and him. Madam, said Sir Bors, I
may not warn Sir Gawaine to say what it pleased him; but I dare say, as
for my lord, Sir Launcelot, that he loveth no lady, gentlewoman, nor
maid, but all he loveth in like much. And therefore madam, said Sir
Bors, ye may say what ye will, but wit ye well I will haste me to seek
him, and find him wheresomever he be, and God send me good tidings of
him. And so leave we them there, and speak we of Sir Launcelot that lay
in great peril.

So as fair Elaine came to Winchester she sought there all about, and by
fortune Sir Lavaine was ridden to play him, to enchafe his horse. And
anon as Elaine saw him she knew him, and then she cried aloud until
him. And when he heard her anon he came to her, and then she asked her
brother how did my lord, Sir Launcelot. Who told you, sister, that my
lord’s name was Sir Launcelot? Then she told him how Sir Gawaine by his
shield knew him. So they rode together till that they came to the
hermitage, and anon she alighted.

So Sir Lavaine brought her in to Sir Launcelot; and when she saw him
lie so sick and pale in his bed she might not speak, but suddenly she
fell to the earth down suddenly in a swoon, and there she lay a great
while. And when she was relieved, she shrieked and said: My lord, Sir
Launcelot, alas why be ye in this plight? and then she swooned again.
And then Sir Launcelot prayed Sir Lavaine to take her up: And bring her
to me. And when she came to herself Sir Launcelot kissed her, and said:
Fair maiden, why fare ye thus? ye put me to pain; wherefore make ye no
more such cheer, for an ye be come to comfort me ye be right welcome;
and of this little hurt that I have I shall be right hastily whole by
the grace of God. But I marvel, said Sir Launcelot, who told you my
name? Then the fair maiden told him all how Sir Gawaine was lodged with
her father: And there by your shield he discovered your name. Alas,
said Sir Launcelot, that me repenteth that my name is known, for I am
sure it will turn unto anger. And then Sir Launcelot compassed in his
mind that Sir Gawaine would tell Queen Guenever how he bare the red
sleeve, and for whom; that he wist well would turn into great anger.

So this maiden Elaine never went from Sir Launcelot, but watched him
day and night, and did such attendance to him, that the French book
saith there was never woman did more kindlier for man than she. Then
Sir Launcelot prayed Sir Lavaine to make aspies in Winchester for Sir
Bors if he came there, and told him by what tokens he should know him,
by a wound in his forehead. For well I am sure, said Sir Launcelot,
that Sir Bors will seek me, for he is the same good knight that hurt
me.




CHAPTER XVI. How Sir Bors sought Launcelot and found him in the
hermitage, and of the lamentation between them.


Now turn we unto Sir Bors de Ganis that came unto Winchester to seek
after his cousin Sir Launcelot. And so when he came to Winchester, anon
there were men that Sir Lavaine had made to lie in a watch for such a
man, and anon Sir Lavaine had warning; and then Sir Lavaine came to
Winchester and found Sir Bors, and there he told him what he was, and
with whom he was, and what was his name. Now fair knight, said Sir
Bors, I require you that ye will bring me to my lord, Sir Launcelot.
Sir, said Sir Lavaine, take your horse, and within this hour ye shall
see him. And so they departed, and came to the hermitage.

And when Sir Bors saw Sir Launcelot lie in his bed pale and
discoloured, anon Sir Bors lost his countenance, and for kindness and
pity he might not speak, but wept tenderly a great while. And then when
he might speak he said thus: O my lord, Sir Launcelot, God you bless,
and send you hasty recover; and full heavy am I of my misfortune and of
mine unhappiness, for now I may call myself unhappy. And I dread me
that God is greatly displeased with me, that he would suffer me to have
such a shame for to hurt you that are all our leader, and all our
worship; and therefore I call myself unhappy. Alas that ever such a
caitiff-knight as I am should have power by unhappiness to hurt the
most noblest knight of the world. Where I so shamefully set upon you
and overcharged you, and where ye might have slain me, ye saved me; and
so did not I, for I and your blood did to you our utterance. I marvel,
said Sir Bors, that my heart or my blood would serve me, wherefore my
lord, Sir Launcelot, I ask your mercy. Fair cousin, said Sir Launcelot,
ye be right welcome; and wit ye well, overmuch ye say for to please me,
the which pleaseth me not, for why I have the same I sought; for I
would with pride have overcome you all, and there in my pride I was
near slain, and that was in mine own default, for I might have given
you warning of my being there. And then had I had no hurt, for it is an
old said saw, there is hard battle thereas kin and friends do battle
either against other, there may be no mercy but mortal war. Therefore,
fair cousin, said Sir Launcelot, let this speech overpass, and all
shall be welcome that God sendeth; and let us leave off this matter and
let us speak of some rejoicing, for this that is done may not be
undone; and let us find a remedy how soon that I may be whole.

Then Sir Bors leaned upon his bedside, and told Sir Launcelot how the
queen was passing wroth with him, because he wore the red sleeve at the
great jousts; and there Sir Bors told him all how Sir Gawaine
discovered it: By your shield that ye left with the Fair Maiden of
Astolat. Then is the queen wroth, said Sir Launcelot and therefore am I
right heavy, for I deserved no wrath, for all that I did was because I
would not be known. Right so excused I you, said Sir Bors, but all was
in vain, for she said more largelier to me than I to you now. But is
this she, said Sir Bors, that is so busy about you, that men call the
Fair Maiden of Astolat? She it is, said Sir Launcelot, that by no means
I cannot put her from me. Why should ye put her from you? said Sir
Bors, she is a passing fair damosel, and a well beseen, and well
taught; and God would, fair cousin, said Sir Bors, that ye could love
her, but as to that I may not, nor I dare not, counsel you. But I see
well, said Sir Bors, by her diligence about you that she loveth you
entirely. That me repenteth, said Sir Launcelot. Sir, said Sir Bors,
she is not the first that hath lost her pain upon you, and that is the
more pity: and so they talked of many more things. And so within three
days or four Sir Launcelot was big and strong again.




