CHAPTER XVIII. How Galahad came to King Mordrains, and of other matters
and adventures.


Now, saith the story, Galahad rode many journeys in vain. And at the
last he came to the abbey where King Mordrains was, and when he heard
that, he thought he would abide to see him. And upon the morn, when he
had heard mass, Galahad came unto King Mordrains, and anon the king saw
him, which had lain blind of long time. And then he dressed him against
him, and said: Galahad, the servant of Jesu Christ, whose coming I have
abiden so long, now embrace me and let me rest on thy breast, so that I
may rest between thine arms, for thou art a clean virgin above all
knights, as the flower of the lily in whom virginity is signified, and
thou art the rose the which is the flower of all good virtues, and in
colour of fire. For the fire of the Holy Ghost is taken so in thee that
my flesh which was all dead of oldness is become young again. Then
Galahad heard his words, then he embraced him and all his body. Then
said he: Fair Lord Jesu Christ, now I have my will. Now I require thee,
in this point that I am in, thou come and visit me. And anon Our Lord
heard his prayer: therewith the soul departed from the body.

And then Galahad put him in the earth as a king ought to be, and so
departed and so came into a perilous forest where he found the well the
which boileth with great waves, as the tale telleth to-fore. And as
soon as Galahad set his hand thereto it ceased, so that it brent no
more, and the heat departed. For that it brent it was a sign of
lechery, the which was that time much used. But that heat might not
abide his pure virginity. And this was taken in the country for a
miracle. And so ever after was it called Galahad’s well.

Then by adventure he came into the country of Gore, and into the abbey
where Launcelot had been to-forehand, and found the tomb of King
Bagdemagus, but he was founder thereof, Joseph of Aramathie’s son; and
the tomb of Simeon where Launcelot had failed. Then he looked into a
croft under the minster, and there he saw a tomb which brent full
marvellously. Then asked he the brethren what it was. Sir, said they, a
marvellous adventure that may not be brought unto none end but by him
that passeth of bounty and of knighthood all them of the Round Table. I
would, said Galahad, that ye would lead me thereto. Gladly, said they,
and so led him till a cave. And he went down upon greses, and came nigh
the tomb. And then the flaming failed, and the fire staunched, the
which many a day had been great. Then came there a voice that said:
Much are ye beholden to thank Our Lord, the which hath given you a good
hour, that ye may draw out the souls of earthly pain, and to put them
into the joys of paradise. I am of your kindred, the which hath dwelled
in this heat this three hundred winter and four-and-fifty to be purged
of the sin that I did against Joseph of Aramathie. Then Galahad took
the body in his arms and bare it into the minster. And that night lay
Galahad in the abbey; and on the morn he gave him service, and put him
in the earth afore the high altar.




CHAPTER XIX. How Sir Percivale and Sir Bors met with Sir Galahad, and
how they came to the castle of Carbonek, and other matters.


So departed he from thence, and commended the brethren to God; and so
he rode five days till that he came to the Maimed King. And ever
followed Percivale the five days, asking where he had been; and so one
told him how the adventures of Logris were enchieved. So on a day it
befell that they came out of a great forest, and there they met at
traverse with Sir Bors, the which rode alone. It is none need to tell
if they were glad; and them he saluted, and they yielded him honour and
good adventure, and everych told other. Then said Bors: It is mo than a
year and an half that I ne lay ten times where men dwelled, but in wild
forests and in mountains, but God was ever my comfort.

Then rode they a great while till that they came to the castle of
Carbonek. And when they were entered within the castle King Pelles knew
them; then there was great joy, for they wist well by their coming that
they had fulfilled the quest of the Sangreal. Then Eliazar, King
Pelles’ son, brought to-fore them the broken sword wherewith Joseph was
stricken through the thigh. Then Bors set his hand thereto, if that he
might have soldered it again; but it would not be. Then he took it to
Percivale, but he had no more power thereto than he. Now have ye it
again, said Percivale to Galahad, for an it be ever enchieved by any
bodily man ye must do it. And then he took the pieces and set them
together, and they seemed that they had never been broken, and as well
as it had been first forged. And when they within espied that the
adventure of the sword was enchieved, then they gave the sword to Bors,
for it might not be better set; for he was a good knight and a worthy
man.

And a little afore even the sword arose great and marvellous, and was
full of great heat that many men fell for dread. And anon alighted a
voice among them, and said: They that ought not to sit at the table of
Jesu Christ arise, for now shall very knights be fed. So they went
thence, all save King Pelles and Eliazar, his son, the which were holy
men, and a maid which was his niece; and so these three fellows and
they three were there, no mo. Anon they saw knights all armed came in
at the hall door, and did off their helms and their arms, and said unto
Galahad: Sir, we have hied right much for to be with you at this table
where the holy meat shall be departed. Then said he: Ye be welcome, but
of whence be ye? So three of them said they were of Gaul, and other
three said they were of Ireland, and the other three said they were of
Denmark. So as they sat thus there came out a bed of tree, of a
chamber, the which four gentlewomen brought; and in the bed lay a good
man sick, and a crown of gold upon his head; and there in the midst of
the place they set him down, and went again their way. Then he lift up
his head, and said: Galahad, Knight, ye be welcome, for much have I
desired your coming, for in such pain and in such anguish I have been
long. But now I trust to God the term is come that my pain shall be
allayed, that I shall pass out of this world so as it was promised me
long ago. Therewith a voice said: There be two among you that be not in
the quest of the Sangreal, and therefore depart ye.




