CHAPTER III. How after, Sir Gawaine’s ghost appeared to King Arthur,
and warned him that he should not fight that day.


And then the king let search all the towns for his knights that were
slain, and interred them; and salved them with soft salves that so sore
were wounded. Then much people drew unto King Arthur. And then they
said that Sir Mordred warred upon King Arthur with wrong. And then King
Arthur drew him with his host down by the seaside, westward toward
Salisbury; and there was a day assigned betwixt King Arthur and Sir
Mordred, that they should meet upon a down beside Salisbury, and not
far from the seaside; and this day was assigned on a Monday after
Trinity Sunday, whereof King Arthur was passing glad, that he might be
avenged upon Sir Mordred. Then Sir Mordred araised much people about
London, for they of Kent, Southsex, and Surrey, Estsex, and of
Southfolk, and of Northfolk, held the most part with Sir Mordred; and
many a full noble knight drew unto Sir Mordred and to the king: but
they that loved Sir Launcelot drew unto Sir Mordred.

So upon Trinity Sunday at night, King Arthur dreamed a wonderful dream,
and that was this: that him seemed he sat upon a chaflet in a chair,
and the chair was fast to a wheel, and thereupon sat King Arthur in the
richest cloth of gold that might be made; and the king thought there
was under him, far from him, an hideous deep black water, and therein
were all manner of serpents, and worms, and wild beasts, foul and
horrible; and suddenly the king thought the wheel turned up-so-down,
and he fell among the serpents, and every beast took him by a limb; and
then the king cried as he lay in his bed and slept: Help. And then
knights, squires, and yeomen, awaked the king; and then he was so
amazed that he wist not where he was; and then he fell a-slumbering
again, not sleeping nor thoroughly waking. So the king seemed verily
that there came Sir Gawaine unto him with a number of fair ladies with
him. And when King Arthur saw him, then he said: Welcome, my sister’s
son; I weened thou hadst been dead, and now I see thee alive, much am I
beholding unto Almighty Jesu. O fair nephew and my sister’s son, what
be these ladies that hither be come with you? Sir, said Sir Gawaine,
all these be ladies for whom I have foughten when I was man living, and
all these are those that I did battle for in righteous quarrel; and God
hath given them that grace at their great prayer, because I did battle
for them, that they should bring me hither unto you: thus much hath God
given me leave, for to warn you of your death; for an ye fight as
to-morn with Sir Mordred, as ye both have assigned, doubt ye not ye
must be slain, and the most part of your people on both parties. And
for the great grace and goodness that almighty Jesu hath unto you, and
for pity of you, and many more other good men there shall be slain, God
hath sent me to you of his special grace, to give you warning that in
no wise ye do battle as to-morn, but that ye take a treaty for a month
day; and proffer you largely, so as to-morn to be put in a delay. For
within a month shall come Sir Launcelot with all his noble knights, and
rescue you worshipfully, and slay Sir Mordred, and all that ever will
hold with him. Then Sir Gawaine and all the ladies vanished.

And anon the king called upon his knights, squires, and yeomen, and
charged them wightly to fetch his noble lords and wise bishops unto
him. And when they were come, the king told them his avision, what Sir
Gawaine had told him, and warned him that if he fought on the morn he
should be slain. Then the king commanded Sir Lucan the Butler, and his
brother Sir Bedivere, with two bishops with them, and charged them in
any wise, an they might, Take a treaty for a month day with Sir
Mordred, and spare not, proffer him lands and goods as much as ye think
best. So then they departed, and came to Sir Mordred, where he had a
grim host of an hundred thousand men. And there they entreated Sir
Mordred long time; and at the last Sir Mordred was agreed for to have
Cornwall and Kent, by Arthur’s days: after, all England, after the days
of King Arthur.




CHAPTER IV. How by misadventure of an adder the battle began, where
Mordred was slain, and Arthur hurt to the death.


Then were they condescended that King Arthur and Sir Mordred should
meet betwixt both their hosts, and everych of them should bring
fourteen persons; and they came with this word unto Arthur. Then said
he: I am glad that this is done: and so he went into the field. And
when Arthur should depart, he warned all his host that an they see any
sword drawn: Look ye come on fiercely, and slay that traitor, Sir
Mordred, for I in no wise trust him. In like wise Sir Mordred warned
his host that: An ye see any sword drawn, look that ye come on
fiercely, and so slay all that ever before you standeth; for in no wise
I will not trust for this treaty, for I know well my father will be
avenged on me. And so they met as their appointment was, and so they
were agreed and accorded thoroughly; and wine was fetched, and they
drank. Right soon came an adder out of a little heath bush, and it
stung a knight on the foot. And when the knight felt him stung, he
looked down and saw the adder, and then he drew his sword to slay the
adder, and thought of none other harm. And when the host on both
parties saw that sword drawn, then they blew beams, trumpets, and
horns, and shouted grimly. And so both hosts dressed them together. And
King Arthur took his horse, and said: Alas this unhappy day! and so
rode to his party. And Sir Mordred in like wise. And never was there
seen a more dolefuller battle in no Christian land; for there was but
rushing and riding, foining and striking, and many a grim word was
there spoken either to other, and many a deadly stroke. But ever King
Arthur rode throughout the battle of Sir Mordred many times, and did
full nobly as a noble king should, and at all times he fainted never;
and Sir Mordred that day put him in devoir, and in great peril. And
thus they fought all the long day, and never stinted till the noble
knights were laid to the cold earth; and ever they fought still till it
was near night, and by that time was there an hundred thousand laid
dead upon the down. Then was Arthur wood wroth out of measure, when he
saw his people so slain from him.

Then the king looked about him, and then was he ware, of all his host
and of all his good knights, were left no more alive but two knights;
that one was Sir Lucan the Butler, and his brother Sir Bedivere, and
they were full sore wounded. Jesu mercy, said the king, where are all
my noble knights become? Alas that ever I should see this doleful day,
for now, said Arthur, I am come to mine end. But would to God that I
wist where were that traitor Sir Mordred, that hath caused all this
mischief. Then was King Arthur ware where Sir Mordred leaned upon his
sword among a great heap of dead men. Now give me my spear, said Arthur
unto Sir Lucan, for yonder I have espied the traitor that all this woe
hath wrought. Sir, let him be, said Sir Lucan, for he is unhappy; and
if ye pass this unhappy day ye shall be right well revenged upon him.
Good lord, remember ye of your night’s dream, and what the spirit of
Sir Gawaine told you this night, yet God of his great goodness hath
preserved you hitherto. Therefore, for God’s sake, my lord, leave off
by this, for blessed be God ye have won the field, for here we be three
alive, and with Sir Mordred is none alive; and if ye leave off now this
wicked day of destiny is past. Tide me death, betide me life, saith the
king, now I see him yonder alone he shall never escape mine hands, for
at a better avail shall I never have him. God speed you well, said Sir
Bedivere.

Then the king gat his spear in both his hands, and ran toward Sir
Mordred, crying: Traitor, now is thy death-day come. And when Sir
Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran until him with his sword drawn in his
hand. And there King Arthur smote Sir Mordred under the shield, with a
foin of his spear, throughout the body, more than a fathom. And when
Sir Mordred felt that he had his death wound he thrust himself with the
might that he had up to the bur of King Arthur’s spear. And right so he
smote his father Arthur, with his sword holden in both his hands, on
the side of the head, that the sword pierced the helmet and the
brain-pan, and therewithal Sir Mordred fell stark dead to the earth;
and the noble Arthur fell in a swoon to the earth, and there he swooned
ofttimes. And Sir Lucan the Butler and Sir Bedivere ofttimes heaved him
up. And so weakly they led him betwixt them both, to a little chapel
not far from the seaside. And when the king was there he thought him
well eased.

Then heard they people cry in the field. Now go thou, Sir Lucan, said
the king, and do me to wit what betokens that noise in the field. So
Sir Lucan departed, for he was grievously wounded in many places. And
so as he yede, he saw and hearkened by the moonlight, how that pillers
and robbers were come into the field, to pill and to rob many a full
noble knight of brooches, and beads, of many a good ring, and of many a
rich jewel; and who that were not dead all out, there they slew them
for their harness and their riches. When Sir Lucan understood this
work, he came to the king as soon as he might, and told him all what he
had heard and seen. Therefore by my rede, said Sir Lucan, it is best
that we bring you to some town. I would it were so, said the king.




