CHAPTER LX. How Sir Tristram with his fellowship came and were with an
host which after fought with Sir Tristram; and other matters.


Then departed Sir Tristram, Gareth, and Sir Dinadan, and left Sir
Palomides in the vessel; and so Sir Tristram beheld the mariners how
they sailed overlong Humber. And when Sir Palomides was out of their
sight they took their horses and beheld about them. And then were they
ware of a knight that came riding against them unarmed, and nothing
about him but a sword. And when this knight came nigh them he saluted
them, and they him again. Fair knights, said that knight, I pray you
insomuch as ye be knights errant, that ye will come and see my castle,
and take such as ye find there; I pray you heartily. And so they rode
with him until his castle, and there they were brought into the hall,
that was well apparelled; and so they were there unarmed, and set at a
board; and when this knight saw Sir Tristram, anon he knew him. And
then this knight waxed pale and wroth at Sir Tristram. When Sir
Tristram saw his host make such cheer he marvelled and said: Sir, mine
host, what cheer make you? Wit thou well, said he, I fare the worse for
thee, for I know thee, Sir Tristram de Liones, thou slewest my brother;
and therefore I give thee summons I will slay thee an ever I may get
thee at large. Sir knight, said Sir Tristram, I am never advised that
ever I slew any brother of yours; and if ye say that I did I will make
amends unto my power. I will none amends, said the knight, but keep
thee from me.

So when he had dined Sir Tristram asked his arms, and departed. And so
they rode on their ways, and within a while Sir Dinadan saw where came
a knight well armed and well horsed, without shield. Sir Tristram, said
Sir Dinadan, take keep to yourself, for I dare undertake yonder cometh
your host that will have ado with you. Let him come, said Sir Tristram,
I shall abide him as well as I may. Anon the knight, when he came nigh
Sir Tristram, he cried and bade him abide and keep him. So they hurtled
together, but Sir Tristram smote the other knight so sore that he bare
him over his horse’s croup. That knight arose lightly and took his
horse again, and so rode fiercely to Sir Tristram, and smote him twice
hard upon the helm. Sir knight, said Sir Tristram, I pray you leave off
and smite me no more, for I would be loath to deal with you an I might
choose, for I have your meat and your drink within my body. For all
that he would not leave; and then Sir Tristram gave him such a buffet
upon the helm that he fell up-so-down from his horse, that the blood
brast out at the ventails of his helm, and so he lay still likely to be
dead. Then Sir Tristram said: Me repenteth of this buffet that I smote
so sore, for as I suppose he is dead. And so they left him and rode on
their ways.

So they had not ridden but a while, but they saw riding against them
two full likely knights, well armed and well horsed, and goodly
servants about them. The one was Berrant le Apres, and he was called
the King with the Hundred Knights; and the other was Sir Segwarides,
which were renowned two noble knights. So as they came either by other
the king looked upon Sir Dinadan, that at that time he had Sir
Tristram’s helm upon his shoulder, the which helm the king had seen
to-fore with the Queen of Northgalis, and that queen the king loved as
paramour; and that helm the Queen of Northgalis had given to La Beale
Isoud, and the queen La Beale Isoud gave it to Sir Tristram. Sir
knight, said Berrant, where had ye that helm? What would ye? said Sir
Dinadan. For I will have ado with thee, said the king, for the love of
her that owed that helm, and therefore keep you. So they departed and
came together with all their mights of their horses, and there the King
with the Hundred Knights smote Sir Dinadan, horse and all, to the
earth; and then he commanded his servant: Go and take thou his helm
off, and keep it. So the varlet went to unbuckle his helm. What helm,
what wilt thou do? said Sir Tristram, leave that helm. To what intent,
said the king, will ye, sir knight, meddle with that helm? Wit you
well, said Sir Tristram, that helm shall not depart from me or it be
dearer bought. Then make you ready, said Sir Berrant unto Sir Tristram.
So they hurtled together, and there Sir Tristram smote him down over
his horse’s tail; and then the king arose lightly, and gat his horse
lightly again. And then he struck fiercely at Sir Tristram many great
strokes. And then Sir Tristram gave Sir Berrant such a buffet upon the
helm that he fell down over his horse sore stonied. Lo, said Dinadan,
that helm is unhappy to us twain, for I had a fall for it, and now, sir
king, have ye another fall.

Then Segwarides asked: Who shall joust with me? I pray thee, said Sir
Gareth unto Dinadan, let me have this jousts. Sir, said Dinadan, I pray
you take it as for me. That is no reason, said Tristram, for this
jousts should be yours. At a word, said Dinadan, I will not thereof.
Then Gareth dressed him to Sir Segwarides, and there Sir Segwarides
smote Gareth and his horse to the earth. Now, said Sir Tristram to
Dinadan, joust with yonder knight. I will not thereof, said Dinadan.
Then will I, said Sir Tristram. And then Sir Tristram ran to him, and
gave him a fall; and so they left them on foot, and Sir Tristram rode
unto Joyous Gard, and there Sir Gareth would not of his courtesy have
gone into this castle, but Sir Tristram would not suffer him to depart.
And so they alighted and unarmed them, and had great cheer. But when
Dinadan came afore La Beale Isoud he cursed the time that ever he bare
Sir Tristram’s helm, and there he told her how Sir Tristram had mocked
him. Then was there laughing and japing at Sir Dinadan, that they wist
not what to do with him.




CHAPTER LXI. How Palomides went for to fight with two brethren for the
death of King Hermance.


Now will we leave them merry within Joyous Gard, and speak we of Sir
Palomides. Then Sir Palomides sailed evenlong Humber to the coasts of
the sea, where was a fair castle. And at that time it was early in the
morning, afore day. Then the mariners went unto Sir Palomides that
slept fast. Sir knight, said the mariners, ye must arise, for here is a
castle there ye must go into. I assent me, said Sir Palomides; and
therewithal he arrived. And then he blew his horn that the mariners had
given him. And when they within the castle heard that horn they put
forth many knights; and there they stood upon the walls, and said with
one voice: Welcome be ye to this castle. And then it waxed clear day,
and Sir Palomides entered into the castle. And within a while he was
served with many divers meats. Then Sir Palomides heard about him much
weeping and great dole. What may this mean? said Sir Palomides; I love
not to hear such a sorrow, and fain I would know what it meaneth. Then
there came afore him one whose name was Sir Ebel, that said thus: Wit
ye well, sir knight, this dole and sorrow is here made every day, and
for this cause: we had a king that hight Hermance, and he was King of
the Red City, and this king that was lord was a noble knight, large and
liberal of his expense; and in the world he loved nothing so much as he
did errant knights of King Arthur’s court, and all jousting, hunting,
and all manner of knightly games; for so kind a king and knight had
never the rule of poor people as he was; and because of his goodness
and gentleness we bemoan him, and ever shall. And all kings and
estates may beware by our lord, for he was destroyed in his own
default; for had he cherished them of his blood he had yet lived with
great riches and rest: but all estates may beware by our king. But
alas, said Ebel, that we shall give all other warning by his death.

Tell me, said Palomides, and in what manner was your lord slain, and by
whom. Sir, said Sir Ebel, our king brought up of children two men that
now are perilous knights; and these two knights our king had so in
charity, that he loved no man nor trusted no man of his blood, nor none
other that was about him. And by these two knights our king was
governed, and so they ruled him peaceably and his lands, and never
would they suffer none of his blood to have no rule with our king. And
also he was so free and so gentle, and they so false and deceivable,
that they ruled him peaceably; and that espied the lords of our king’s
blood, and departed from him unto their own livelihood. Then when these
two traitors understood that they had driven all the lords of his blood
from him, they were not pleased with that rule, but then they thought
to have more, as ever it is an old saw: Give a churl rule and thereby
he will not be sufficed; for whatsomever he be that is ruled by a
villain born, and the lord of the soil to be a gentleman born, the same
villain shall destroy all the gentlemen about him: therefore all
estates and lords, beware whom ye take about you. And if ye be a knight
of King Arthur’s court remember this tale, for this is the end and
conclusion. My lord and king rode unto the forest hereby by the advice
of these traitors, and there he chased at the red deer, armed at all
pieces full like a good knight; and so for labour he waxed dry, and
then he alighted, and drank at a well. And when he was alighted, by the
assent of these two traitors, that one that hight Helius he suddenly
smote our king through the body with a spear, and so they left him
there. And when they were departed, then by fortune I came to the well,
and found my lord and king wounded to the death. And when I heard his
complaint, I let bring him to the water side, and in that same ship I
put him alive; and when my lord King Hermance was in that vessel, he
required me for the true faith I owed unto him for to write a letter in
this manner.




