CHAPTER VI. How Sir Launcelot came in the night to the queen and lay
with her, and how Sir Meliagrance appeached the queen of treason.


Then the knights that were hurt were searched, and soft salves were
laid to their wounds; and so it passed on till supper time, and all the
cheer that might be made them there was done unto the queen and all her
knights. Then when season was, they went unto their chambers, but in no
wise the queen would not suffer the wounded knights to be from her, but
that they were laid within draughts by her chamber, upon beds and
pillows, that she herself might see to them, that they wanted nothing.

So when Sir Launcelot was in his chamber that was assigned unto him, he
called unto him Sir Lavaine, and told him that night he must go speak
with his lady, Dame Guenever. Sir, said Sir Lavaine, let me go with you
an it please you, for I dread me sore of the treason of Sir
Meliagrance. Nay, said Sir Launcelot, I thank you, but I will have
nobody with me. Then Sir Launcelot took his sword in his hand, and
privily went to a place where he had espied a ladder to-forehand, and
that he took under his arm, and bare it through the garden, and set it
up to the window, and there anon the queen was ready to meet him. And
then they made either to other their complaints of many divers things,
and then Sir Launcelot wished that he might have come into her. Wit ye
well, said the queen, I would as fain as ye, that ye might come in to
me. Would ye, madam, said Sir Launcelot, with your heart that I were
with you? Yea, truly, said the queen. Now shall I prove my might, said
Sir Launcelot, for your love; and then he set his hands upon the bars
of iron, and he pulled at them with such a might that he brast them
clean out of the stone walls, and therewithal one of the bars of iron
cut the brawn of his hands throughout to the bone; and then he leapt
into the chamber to the queen. Make ye no noise, said the queen, for my
wounded knights lie here fast by me. So, to pass upon this tale, Sir
Launcelot went unto bed with the queen, and he took no force of his
hurt hand, but took his pleasaunce and his liking until it was in the
dawning of the day; and wit ye well he slept not but watched, and when
he saw his time that he might tarry no longer he took his leave and
departed at the window, and put it together as well as he might again,
and so departed unto his own chamber; and there he told Sir Lavaine how
he was hurt. Then Sir Lavaine dressed his hand and staunched it, and
put upon it a glove, that it should not be espied; and so the queen lay
long in her bed until it was nine of the clock.

Then Sir Meliagrance went to the queen’s chamber, and found her ladies
there ready clothed. Jesu mercy, said Sir Meliagrance, what aileth you,
madam, that ye sleep thus long? And right therewithal he opened the
curtain for to behold her; and then was he ware where she lay, and all
the sheet and pillow was bebled with the blood of Sir Launcelot and of
his hurt hand. When Sir Meliagrance espied that blood, then he deemed
in her that she was false to the king, and that some of the wounded
knights had lain by her all that night. Ah, madam, said Sir
Meliagrance, now I have found you a false traitress unto my lord
Arthur; for now I prove well it was not for nought that ye laid these
wounded knights within the bounds of your chamber; therefore I will
call you of treason before my lord, King Arthur. And now I have proved
you, madam, with a shameful deed; and that they be all false, or some
of them, I will make good, for a wounded knight this night hath lain by
you. That is false, said the queen, and that I will report me unto them
all. Then when the ten knights heard Sir Meliagrance’s words, they
spake all in one voice and said to Sir Meliagrance: Thou sayest
falsely, and wrongfully puttest upon us such a deed, and that we will
make good any of us; choose which thou list of us when we are whole of
our wounds. Ye shall not, said Sir Meliagrance, away with your proud
language, for here ye may all see, said Sir Meliagrance, that by the
queen this night a wounded knight hath lain. Then were they all ashamed
when they saw that blood; and wit you well Sir Meliagrance was passing
glad that he had the queen at such an advantage, for he deemed by that
to hide his treason. So with this rumour came in Sir Launcelot, and
found them all at a great array.




CHAPTER VII. How Sir Launcelot answered for the queen, and waged battle
against Sir Meliagrance; and how Sir Launcelot was taken in a trap.


What array is this? said Sir Launcelot. Then Sir Meliagrance told them
what he had found, and showed them the queen’s bed. Truly, said Sir
Launcelot, ye did not your part nor knightly, to touch a queen’s bed
while it was drawn, and she lying therein; for I dare say my lord
Arthur himself would not have displayed her curtains, she being within
her bed, unless that it had pleased him to have lain down by her; and
therefore ye have done unworshipfully and shamefully to yourself. I wot
not what ye mean, said Sir Meliagrance, but well I am sure there hath
one of her wounded knights lain by her this night, and therefore I will
prove with my hands that she is a traitress unto my lord Arthur. Beware
what ye do, said Launcelot, for an ye say so, an ye will prove it, it
will be taken at your hands.

My lord, Sir Launcelot, said Sir Meliagrance, I rede you beware what ye
do; for though ye are never so good a knight, as ye wot well ye are
renowned the best knight of the world, yet should ye be advised to do
battle in a wrong quarrel, for God will have a stroke in every battle.
As for that, said Sir Launcelot, God is to be dread; but as to that I
say nay plainly, that this night there lay none of these ten wounded
knights with my lady Queen Guenever, and that will I prove with my
hands, that ye say untruly in that now. Hold, said Sir Meliagrance,
here is my glove that she is traitress unto my lord, King Arthur, and
that this night one of the wounded knights lay with her. And I receive
your glove, said Sir Launcelot. And so they were sealed with their
signets, and delivered unto the ten knights. At what day shall we do
battle together? said Sir Launcelot. This day eight days, said Sir
Meliagrance, in the field beside Westminster. I am agreed, said Sir
Launcelot. But now, said Sir Meliagrance, sithen it is so that we must
fight together, I pray you, as ye be a noble knight, await me with no
treason, nor none villainy the meanwhile, nor none for you. So God me
help, said Sir Launcelot, ye shall right well wit I was never of no
such conditions, for I report me to all knights that ever have known
me, I fared never with no treason, nor I loved never the fellowship of
no man that fared with treason. Then let us go to dinner, said
Meliagrance, and after dinner ye and the queen and ye may ride all to
Westminster. I will well, said Sir Launcelot.

Then Sir Meliagrance said to Sir Launcelot: Pleaseth it you to see the
estures of this castle? With a good will, said Sir Launcelot. And then
they went together from chamber to chamber, for Sir Launcelot dread no
perils; for ever a man of worship and of prowess dreadeth least always
perils, for they ween every man be as they be; but ever he that fareth
with treason putteth oft a man in great danger. So it befell upon Sir
Launcelot that no peril dread, as he went with Sir Meliagrance he trod
on a trap and the board rolled, and there Sir Launcelot fell down more
than ten fathom into a cave full of straw; and then Sir Meliagrance
departed and made no fare as that he nist where he was.

And when Sir Launcelot was thus missed they marvelled where he was
become; and then the queen and many of them deemed that he was departed
as he was wont to do suddenly. For Sir Meliagrance made suddenly to put
away aside Sir Lavaine’s horse, that they might all understand that Sir
Launcelot was departed suddenly. So it passed on till after dinner; and
then Sir Lavaine would not stint until that he ordained litters for the
wounded knights, that they might be laid in them; and so with the queen
and them all, both ladies and gentlewomen and other, went unto
Westminster; and there the knights told King Arthur how Meliagrance had
appealed the queen of high treason, and how Sir Launcelot had received
the glove of him: And this day eight days they shall do battle afore
you. By my head, said King Arthur, I am afeard Sir Meliagrance hath
taken upon him a great charge; but where is Sir Launcelot? said the
king. Sir, said they all, we wot not where he is, but we deem he is
ridden to some adventures, as he is ofttimes wont to do, for he hath
Sir Lavaine’s horse. Let him be, said the king, he will be founden, but
if he be trapped with some treason.




