CHAPTER LXIV. Of the battle between Sir Palomides and the two brethren,
and how the two brethren were slain.


Then they departed, and the two brethren came against Sir Palomides,
and he against them, as fast as their horses might run. And by fortune
Sir Palomides smote Helake through his shield and through the breast
more than a fathom. All this while Sir Helius held up his spear, and
for pride and orgulité he would not smite Sir Palomides with his spear;
but when he saw his brother lie on the earth, and saw he might not help
himself, then he said unto Sir Palomides: Help thyself. And therewith
he came hurtling unto Sir Palomides with his spear, and smote him quite
from his saddle. Then Sir Helius rode over Sir Palomides twice or
thrice. And therewith Sir Palomides was ashamed, and gat the horse of
Sir Helius by the bridle, and therewithal the horse areared, and Sir
Palomides halp after, and so they fell both to the earth; but anon Sir
Helius stert up lightly, and there he smote Sir Palomides a great
stroke upon the helm, that he kneeled upon his own knee. Then they
lashed together many sad strokes, and traced and traversed now
backward, now sideling, hurtling together like two boars, and that same
time they fell both grovelling to the earth.

Thus they fought still without any reposing two hours, and never
breathed; and then Sir Palomides waxed faint and weary, and Sir Helius
waxed passing strong, and doubled his strokes, and drove Sir Palomides
overthwart and endlong all the field, that they of the city when they
saw Sir Palomides in this case they wept and cried, and made great
dole, and the other party made as great joy. Alas, said the men of the
city, that this noble knight should thus be slain for our king’s sake.
And as they were thus weeping and crying, Sir Palomides that had
suffered an hundred strokes, that it was wonder that he stood on his
feet, at the last Sir Palomides beheld as he might the common people,
how they wept for him; and then he said to himself: Ah, fie for shame,
Sir Palomides, why hangest thou thy head so low; and therewith he bare
up his shield, and looked Sir Helius in the visage, and he smote him a
great stroke upon the helm, and after that another and another. And
then he smote Sir Helius with such a might that he fell to the earth
grovelling; and then he raced off his helm from his head, and there he
smote him such a buffet that he departed his head from the body. And
then were the people of the city the joyfullest people that might be.
So they brought him to his lodging with great solemnity, and there all
the people became his men. And then Sir Palomides prayed them all to
take keep unto all the lordship of King Hermance: For, fair sirs, wit
ye well I may not as at this time abide with you, for I must in all
haste be with my lord King Arthur at the Castle of Lonazep, the which I
have promised. Then was the people full heavy at his departing, for all
that city proffered Sir Palomides the third part of their goods so that
he would abide with them; but in no wise as at that time he would not
abide.

And so Sir Palomides departed, and so he came unto the castle thereas
Sir Ebel was lieutenant. And when they in the castle wist how Sir
Palomides had sped, there was a joyful meiny; and so Sir Palomides
departed, and came to the castle of Lonazep. And when he wist that Sir
Tristram was not there he took his way over Humber, and came unto
Joyous Gard, whereas Sir Tristram was and La Beale Isoud. Sir Tristram
had commanded that what knight errant came within the Joyous Gard, as
in the town, that they should warn Sir Tristram. So there came a man of
the town, and told Sir Tristram how there was a knight in the town, a
passing goodly man. What manner of man is he, said Sir Tristram, and
what sign beareth he? So the man told Sir Tristram all the tokens of
him. That is Palomides, said Dinadan. It may well be, said Sir
Tristram. Go ye to him, said Sir Tristram unto Dinadan. So Dinadan went
unto Sir Palomides, and there either made other great joy, and so they
lay together that night. And on the morn early came Sir Tristram and
Sir Gareth, and took them in their beds, and so they arose and brake
their fast.




CHAPTER LXV. How Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides met Breuse Saunce Pité,
and how Sir Tristram and La Beale Isoud went unto Lonazep.


And then Sir Tristram desired Sir Palomides to ride into the fields and
woods. So they were accorded to repose them in the forest. And when
they had played them a great while they rode unto a fair well; and anon
they were ware of an armed knight that came riding against them, and
there either saluted other. Then this armed knight spake to Sir
Tristram, and asked what were these knights that were lodged in Joyous
Gard. I wot not what they are, said Sir Tristram. What knights be ye?
said that knight, for meseemeth ye be no knights errant, because ye
ride unarmed. Whether we be knights or not we list not to tell thee our
name. Wilt thou not tell me thy name? said that knight; then keep thee,
for thou shalt die of my hands. And therewith he got his spear in his
hands, and would have run Sir Tristram through. That saw Sir Palomides,
and smote his horse traverse in midst of the side, that man and horse
fell to the earth. And therewith Sir Palomides alighted and pulled out
his sword to have slain him. Let be, said Sir Tristram, slay him not,
the knight is but a fool, it were shame to slay him. But take away his
spear, said Sir Tristram, and let him take his horse and go where that
he will.

So when this knight arose he groaned sore of the fall, and so he took
his horse, and when he was up he turned then his horse, and required
Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides to tell him what knights they were. Now
wit ye well, said Sir Tristram, that my name is Sir Tristram de Liones,
and this knight’s name is Sir Palomides. When he wist what they were he
took his horse with the spurs, because they should not ask him his
name, and so rode fast away through thick and thin. Then came there by
them a knight with a bended shield of azure, whose name was Epinogris,
and he came toward them a great wallop. Whither are ye riding? said Sir
Tristram. My fair lords, said Epinogris, I follow the falsest knight
that beareth the life; wherefore I require you tell me whether ye saw
him, for he beareth a shield with a case of red over it. So God me
help, said Tristram, such a knight departed from us not a quarter of an
hour agone; we pray you tell us his name. Alas, said Epinogris, why let
ye him escape from you? and he is so great a foe unto all errant
knights: his name is Breuse Saunce Pité. Ah, fie for shame, said Sir
Palomides, alas that ever he escaped mine hands, for he is the man in
the world that I hate most. Then every knight made great sorrow to
other; and so Epinogris departed and followed the chase after him.

Then Sir Tristram and his three fellows rode unto Joyous Gard; and
there Sir Tristram talked unto Sir Palomides of his battle, how he sped
at the Red City, and as ye have heard afore so was it ended. Truly,
said Sir Tristram, I am glad ye have well sped, for ye have done
worshipfully. Well, said Sir Tristram, we must forward to-morn. And
then he devised how it should be; and Sir Tristram devised to send his
two pavilions to set them fast by the well of Lonazep, and therein
shall be the queen La Beale Isoud. It is well said, said Sir Dinadan,
but when Sir Palomides heard of that his heart was ravished out of
measure: notwithstanding he said but little. So when they came to
Joyous Gard Sir Palomides would not have gone into the castle, but as
Sir Tristram took him by the finger, and led him into the castle. And
when Sir Palomides saw La Beale Isoud he was ravished so that he might
unnethe speak. So they went unto meat, but Palomides might not eat, and
there was all the cheer that might be had. And on the morn they were
apparelled to ride toward Lonazep.

So Sir Tristram had three squires, and La Beale Isoud had three
gentlewomen, and both the queen and they were richly apparelled; and
other people had they none with them, but varlets to bear their shields
and their spears. And thus they rode forth. So as they rode they saw
afore them a rout of knights; it was the knight Galihodin with twenty
knights with him. Fair fellows, said Galihodin, yonder come four
knights, and a rich and a well fair lady: I am in will to take that
lady from them. That is not of the best counsel, said one of
Galihodin’s men, but send ye to them and wit what they will say; and so
it was done. There came a squire unto Sir Tristram, and asked them
whether they would joust or else to lose their lady. Not so, said Sir
Tristram, tell your lord I bid him come as many as we be, and win her
and take her. Sir, said Palomides, an it please you let me have this
deed, and I shall undertake them all four. I will that ye have it, said
Sir Tristram, at your pleasure. Now go and tell your lord Galihodin,
that this same knight will encounter with him and his fellows.




