CHAPTER XIX. Of the great lamentation of the Fair Maid of Astolat when
Launcelot should depart, and how she died for his love.


My lord, Sir Launcelot, now I see ye will depart; now fair knight and
courteous knight, have mercy upon me, and suffer me not to die for thy
love. What would ye that I did? said Sir Launcelot. I would have you to
my husband, said Elaine. Fair damosel, I thank you, said Sir Launcelot,
but truly, said he, I cast me never to be wedded man. Then, fair
knight, said she, will ye be my paramour? Jesu defend me, said Sir
Launcelot, for then I rewarded your father and your brother full evil
for their great goodness. Alas, said she, then must I die for your
love. Ye shall not so, said Sir Launcelot, for wit ye well, fair
maiden, I might have been married an I had would, but I never applied
me to be married yet; but because, fair damosel, that ye love me as ye
say ye do, I will for your good will and kindness show you some
goodness, and that is this, that wheresomever ye will beset your heart
upon some good knight that will wed you, I shall give you together a
thousand pound yearly to you and to your heirs; thus much will I give
you, fair madam, for your kindness, and always while I live to be your
own knight. Of all this, said the maiden, I will none, for but if ye
will wed me, or else be my paramour at the least, wit you well, Sir
Launcelot, my good days are done. Fair damosel, said Sir Launcelot, of
these two things ye must pardon me.

Then she shrieked shrilly, and fell down in a swoon; and then women
bare her into her chamber, and there she made over much sorrow; and
then Sir Launcelot would depart, and there he asked Sir Lavaine what he
would do. What should I do, said Sir Lavaine, but follow you, but if ye
drive me from you, or command me to go from you. Then came Sir Bernard
to Sir Launcelot and said to him: I cannot see but that my daughter
Elaine will die for your sake. I may not do withal, said Sir Launcelot,
for that me sore repenteth, for I report me to yourself, that my
proffer is fair; and me repenteth, said Sir Launcelot, that she loveth
me as she doth; I was never the causer of it, for I report me to your
son I early ne late proffered her bounté nor fair behests; and as for
me, said Sir Launcelot, I dare do all that a knight should do that she
is a clean maiden for me, both for deed and for will. And I am right
heavy of her distress, for she is a full fair maiden, good and gentle,
and well taught. Father, said Sir Lavaine, I dare make good she is a
clean maiden as for my lord Sir Launcelot; but she doth as I do, for
sithen I first saw my lord Sir Launcelot, I could never depart from
him, nor nought I will an I may follow him.

Then Sir Launcelot took his leave, and so they departed, and came unto
Winchester. And when Arthur wist that Sir Launcelot was come whole and
sound the king made great joy of him, and so did Sir Gawaine and all
the knights of the Round Table except Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred.
Also Queen Guenever was wood wroth with Sir Launcelot, and would by no
means speak with him, but estranged herself from him; and Sir Launcelot
made all the means that he might for to speak with the queen, but it
would not be.

Now speak we of the Fair Maiden of Astolat that made such sorrow day
and night that she never slept, ate, nor drank, and ever she made her
complaint unto Sir Launcelot. So when she had thus endured a ten days,
that she feebled so that she must needs pass out of this world, then
she shrived her clean, and received her Creator. And ever she
complained still upon Sir Launcelot. Then her ghostly father bade her
leave such thoughts. Then she said, why should I leave such thoughts?
Am I not an earthly woman? And all the while the breath is in my body I
may complain me, for my belief is I do none offence though I love an
earthly man; and I take God to my record I loved never none but Sir
Launcelot du Lake, nor never shall, and a clean maiden I am for him and
for all other; and sithen it is the sufferance of God that I shall die
for the love of so noble a knight, I beseech the High Father of Heaven
to have mercy upon my soul, and upon mine innumerable pains that I
suffered may be allegeance of part of my sins. For sweet Lord Jesu,
said the fair maiden, I take Thee to record, on Thee I was never great
offencer against thy laws; but that I loved this noble knight, Sir
Launcelot, out of measure, and of myself, good Lord, I might not
withstand the fervent love wherefore I have my death.

And then she called her father, Sir Bernard, and her brother, Sir
Tirre, and heartily she prayed her father that her brother might write
a letter like as she did indite it: and so her father granted her. And
when the letter was written word by word like as she devised, then she
prayed her father that she might be watched until she were dead. And
while my body is hot let this letter be put in my right hand, and my
hand bound fast with the letter until that I be cold; and let me be put
in a fair bed with all the richest clothes that I have about me, and so
let my bed and all my richest clothes be laid with me in a chariot unto
the next place where Thames is; and there let me be put within a
barget, and but one man with me, such as ye trust to steer me thither,
and that my barget be covered with black samite over and over: thus
father I beseech you let it be done. So her father granted it her
faithfully, all things should be done like as she had devised. Then her
father and her brother made great dole, for when this was done anon she
died. And so when she was dead the corpse and the bed all was led the
next way unto Thames, and there a man, and the corpse, and all, were
put into Thames; and so the man steered the barget unto Westminster,
and there he rowed a great while to and fro or any espied it.




CHAPTER XX. How the corpse of the Maid of Astolat arrived to-fore King
Arthur, and of the burying, and how Sir Launcelot offered the
mass-penny.


So by fortune King Arthur and the Queen Guenever were speaking together
at a window, and so as they looked into Thames they espied this black
barget, and had marvel what it meant. Then the king called Sir Kay, and
showed it him. Sir, said Sir Kay, wit you well there is some new
tidings. Go thither, said the king to Sir Kay, and take with you Sir
Brandiles and Agravaine, and bring me ready word what is there. Then
these four knights departed and came to the barget and went in; and
there they found the fairest corpse lying in a rich bed, and a poor man
sitting in the barget’s end, and no word would he speak. So these four
knights returned unto the king again, and told him what they found.
That fair corpse will I see, said the king. And so then the king took
the queen by the hand, and went thither.

Then the king made the barget to be holden fast, and then the king and
the queen entered with certain knights with them; and there he saw the
fairest woman lie in a rich bed, covered unto her middle with many rich
clothes, and all was of cloth of gold, and she lay as though she had
smiled. Then the queen espied a letter in her right hand, and told it
to the king. Then the king took it and said: Now am I sure this letter
will tell what she was, and why she is come hither. So then the king
and the queen went out of the barget, and so commanded a certain man to
wait upon the barget.

And so when the king was come within his chamber, he called many
knights about him, and said that he would wit openly what was written
within that letter. Then the king brake it, and made a clerk to read
it, and this was the intent of the letter. Most noble knight, Sir
Launcelot, now hath death made us two at debate for your love. I was
your lover, that men called the Fair Maiden of Astolat; therefore unto
all ladies I make my moan, yet pray for my soul and bury me at least,
and offer ye my mass-penny: this is my last request. And a clean maiden
I died, I take God to witness: pray for my soul, Sir Launcelot, as thou
art peerless. This was all the substance in the letter. And when it was
read, the king, the queen, and all the knights wept for pity of the
doleful complaints. Then was Sir Launcelot sent for; and when he was
come King Arthur made the letter to be read to him.

And when Sir Launcelot heard it word by word, he said: My lord Arthur,
wit ye well I am right heavy of the death of this fair damosel: God
knoweth I was never causer of her death by my willing, and that will I
report me to her own brother: here he is, Sir Lavaine. I will not say
nay, said Sir Launcelot, but that she was both fair and good, and much
I was beholden unto her, but she loved me out of measure. Ye might have
shewed her, said the queen, some bounty and gentleness that might have
preserved her life. Madam, said Sir Launcelot, she would none other
ways be answered but that she would be my wife, outher else my
paramour; and of these two I would not grant her, but I proffered her,
for her good love that she shewed me, a thousand pound yearly to her,
and to her heirs, and to wed any manner knight that she could find best
to love in her heart. For madam, said Sir Launcelot, I love not to be
constrained to love; for love must arise of the heart, and not by no
constraint. That is truth, said the king, and many knight’s love is
free in himself, and never will be bounden, for where he is bounden he
looseth himself.

Then said the king unto Sir Launcelot: It will be your worship that ye
oversee that she be interred worshipfully. Sir, said Sir Launcelot,
that shall be done as I can best devise. And so many knights yede
thither to behold that fair maiden. And so upon the morn she was
interred richly, and Sir Launcelot offered her mass-penny; and all the
knights of the Table Round that were there at that time offered with
Sir Launcelot. And then the poor man went again with the barget. Then
the queen sent for Sir Launcelot, and prayed him of mercy, for why that
she had been wroth with him causeless. This is not the first time, said
Sir Launcelot, that ye had been displeased with me causeless, but,
madam, ever I must suffer you, but what sorrow I endure I take no
force. So this passed on all that winter, with all manner of hunting
and hawking, and jousts and tourneys were many betwixt many great
lords, and ever in all places Sir Lavaine gat great worship, so that he
was nobly renowned among many knights of the Table Round.




