CHAPTER VI. How Sir Launcelot told his advision to a woman, and how she
expounded it to him.


And then he told her altogether word by word, and the truth how it
befell him at the tournament. And after told her his advision that he
had had that night in his sleep, and prayed her to tell him what it
might mean, for he was not well content with it. Ah, Launcelot, said
she, as long as ye were knight of earthly knighthood ye were the most
marvellous man of the world, and most adventurous. Now, said the lady,
sithen ye be set among the knights of heavenly adventures, if adventure
fell thee contrary at that tournament have thou no marvel, for that
tournament yesterday was but a tokening of Our Lord. And not for then
there was none enchantment, for they at the tournament were earthly
knights. The tournament was a token to see who should have most
knights, either Eliazar, the son of King Pelles, or Argustus, the son
of King Harlon. But Eliazar was all clothed in white, and Argustus was
covered in black, the which were [over]come.

All what this betokeneth I shall tell you. The day of Pentecost, when
King Arthur held his court, it befell that earthly kings and knights
took a tournament together, that is to say the quest of the Sangreal.
The earthly knights were they the which were clothed all in black, and
the covering betokeneth the sins whereof they be not confessed. And
they with the covering of white betokeneth virginity, and they that
chose chastity. And thus was the quest begun in them. Then thou beheld
the sinners and the good men, and when thou sawest the sinners
overcome, thou inclinest to that party for bobaunce and pride of the
world, and all that must be left in that quest, for in this quest thou
shalt have many fellows and thy betters. For thou art so feeble of evil
trust and good belief, this made it when thou were there where they
took thee and led thee into the forest. And anon there appeared the
Sangreal unto the white knights, but thou was so feeble of good belief
and faith that thou mightest not abide it for all the teaching of the
good man, but anon thou turnest to the sinners, and that caused thy
misadventure that thou should’st know good from evil and vain glory of
the world, the which is not worth a pear. And for great pride thou
madest great sorrow that thou hadst not overcome all the white knights
with the covering of white, by whom was betokened virginity and
chastity; and therefore God was wroth with you, for God loveth no such
deeds in this quest. And this advision signifieth that thou were of
evil faith and of poor belief, the which will make thee to fall into
the deep pit of hell if thou keep thee not. Now have I warned thee of
thy vain glory and of thy pride, that thou hast many times erred
against thy Maker. Beware of everlasting pain, for of all earthly
knights I have most pity of thee, for I know well thou hast not thy
peer of any earthly sinful man.

And so she commended Sir Launcelot to dinner. And after dinner he took
his horse and commended her to God, and so rode into a deep valley, and
there he saw a river and an high mountain. And through the water he
must needs pass, the which was hideous; and then in the name of God he
took it with good heart. And when he came over he saw an armed knight,
horse and man black as any bear; without any word he smote Sir
Launcelot’s horse to the earth; and so he passed on, he wist not where
he was become. And then he took his helm and his shield, and thanked
God of his adventure.

_Here leaveth off the story of Sir Launcelot, and speak we of Sir
Gawaine, the which is the sixteenth book._




BOOK XVI.




CHAPTER I. How Sir Gawaine was nigh weary of the quest of the Sangreal,
and of his marvellous dream.


When Sir Gawaine was departed from his fellowship he rode long without
any adventure. For he found not the tenth part of adventure as he was
wont to do. For Sir Gawaine rode from Whitsuntide until Michaelmas and
found none adventure that pleased him. So on a day it befell Gawaine
met with Sir Ector de Maris, and either made great joy of other that it
were marvel to tell. And so they told everych other, and complained
them greatly that they could find none adventure. Truly, said Sir
Gawaine unto Sir Ector, I am nigh weary of this quest, and loath I am
to follow further in strange countries. One thing marvelled me, said
Sir Ector, I have met with twenty knights, fellows of mine, and all
they complain as I do. I have marvel, said Sir Gawaine, where that Sir
Launcelot, your brother, is. Truly, said Sir Ector, I cannot hear of
him, nor of Sir Galahad, Percivale, nor Sir Bors. Let them be, said Sir
Gawaine, for they four have no peers. And if one thing were not in Sir
Launcelot he had no fellow of none earthly man; but he is as we be, but
if he took more pain upon him. But an these four be met together they
will be loath that any man meet with them; for an they fail of the
Sangreal it is in waste of all the remnant to recover it.

Thus Ector and Gawaine rode more than eight days, and on a Saturday
they found an old chapel, the which was wasted that there seemed no man
thither repaired; and there they alighted, and set their spears at the
door, and in they entered into the chapel, and there made their orisons
a great while, and set them down in the sieges of the chapel. And as
they spake of one thing and other, for heaviness they fell asleep, and
there befell them both marvellous adventures. Sir Gawaine him seemed he
came into a meadow full of herbs and flowers, and there he saw a rack
of bulls, an hundred and fifty, that were proud and black, save three
of them were all white, and one had a black spot, and the other two
were so fair and so white that they might be no whiter. And these three
bulls which were so fair were tied with two strong cords. And the
remnant of the bulls said among them: Go we hence to seek better
pasture. And so some went, and some came again, but they were so lean
that they might not stand upright; and of the bulls that were so white,
that one came again and no mo. But when this white bull was come again
among these other there rose up a great cry for lack of wind that
failed them; and so they departed one here and another there: this
advision befell Gawaine that night.




