CHAPTER III. How Sir Galahad entered into the ship, and of a fair bed
therein, with other marvellous things, and of a sword.


In the meanwhile Galahad blessed him, and entered therein; and then
next the gentlewoman, and then Sir Bors and Sir Percivale. And when
they were in, it was so marvellous fair and rich that they marvelled;
and in midst of the ship was a fair bed, and Galahad went thereto, and
found there a crown of silk. And at the feet was a sword, rich and
fair, and it was drawn out of the sheath half a foot and more; and the
sword was of divers fashions, and the pommel was of stone, and there
was in him all manner of colours that any man might find, and everych
of the colours had divers virtues; and the scales of the haft were of
two ribs of divers beasts, the one beast was a serpent which was
conversant in Calidone, and is called the Serpent of the fiend; and the
bone of him is of such a virtue that there is no hand that handleth him
shall never be weary nor hurt. And the other beast is a fish which is
not right great, and haunteth the flood of Euphrates; and that fish is
called Ertanax, and his bones be of such a manner of kind that who that
handleth them shall have so much will that he shall never be weary, and
he shall not think on joy nor sorrow that he hath had but only that
thing that he beholdeth before him. And as for this sword there shall
never man begrip him at the handles but one; but he shall pass all
other. In the name of God, said Percivale, I shall assay to handle it.
So he set his hand to the sword, but he might not begrip it. By my
faith, said he, now have I failed. Bors set his hand thereto and
failed.

Then Galahad beheld the sword and saw letters like blood that said: Let
see who shall assay to draw me out of my sheath, but if he be more
hardier than any other; and who that draweth me, wit ye well that he
shall never fail of shame of his body, or to be wounded to the death.
By my faith, said Galahad, I would draw this sword out of the sheath,
but the offending is so great that I shall not set my hand thereto. Now
sirs, said the gentlewoman, wit ye well that the drawing of this sword
is warned to all men save all only to you. Also this ship arrived in
the realm of Logris; and that time was deadly war between King Labor,
which was father unto the maimed king, and King Hurlame, which was a
Saracen. But then was he newly christened, so that men held him
afterward one of the wittiest men of the world. And so upon a day it
befell that King Labor and King Hurlame had assembled their folk upon
the sea where this ship was arrived; and there King Hurlame was
discomfit, and his men slain; and he was afeard to be dead, and fled to
his ship, and there found this sword and drew it, and came out and
found King Labor, the man in the world of all Christendom in whom was
then the greatest faith. And when King Hurlame saw King Labor he
dressed this sword, and smote him upon the helm so hard that he clave
him and his horse to the earth with the first stroke of his sword. And
it was in the realm of Logris; and so befell great pestilence and great
harm to both realms. For sithen increased neither corn, nor grass, nor
well-nigh no fruit, nor in the water was no fish; wherefore men call it
the lands of the two marches, the waste land, for that dolorous stroke.
And when King Hurlame saw this sword so carving, he turned again to
fetch the scabbard, and so came into this ship and entered, and put up
the sword in the sheath. And as soon as he had done it he fell down
dead afore the bed. Thus was the sword proved, that none ne drew it but
he were dead or maimed. So lay he there till a maiden came into the
ship and cast him out, for there was no man so hardy of the world to
enter into that ship for the defence.




CHAPTER IV. Of the marvels of the sword and of the scabbard.


And then beheld they the scabbard, it seemed to be of a serpent’s skin,
and thereon were letters of gold and silver. And the girdle was but
poorly to come to, and not able to sustain such a rich sword. And the
letters said: He which shall wield me sought to be more harder than any
other, if he bear me as truly as me ought to be borne. For the body of
him which I ought to hang by, he shall not be shamed in no place while
he is girt with this girdle, nor never none be so hardy to do away this
girdle; for it ought not be done away but by the hands of a maid, and
that she be a king’s daughter and queen’s, and she must be a maid all
the days of her life, both in will and in deed. And if she break her
virginity she shall die the most villainous death that ever died any
woman. Sir, said Percivale, turn this sword that we may see what is on
the other side. And it was red as blood, with black letters as any
coal, which said: He that shall praise me most, most shall he find me
to blame at a great need; and to whom I should be most debonair shall I
be most felon, and that shall be at one time.

Fair brother, said she to Percivale, it befell after a forty year after
the passion of Jesu Christ that Nacien, the brother-in-law of King
Mordrains, was borne into a town more than fourteen days’ journey from
his country, by the commandment of Our Lord, into an isle, into the
parts of the West, that men cleped the Isle of Turnance. So befell it
that he found this ship at the entry of a rock, and he found the bed
and this sword as we have heard now. Not for then he had not so much
hardiness to draw it; and there he dwelled an eight days, and at the
ninth day there fell a great wind which departed him out of the isle,
and brought him to another isle by a rock, and there he found the
greatest giant that ever man might see. Therewith came that horrible
giant to slay him; and then he looked about him and might not flee, and
he had nothing to defend him with. So he ran to his sword, and when he
saw it naked he praised it much, and then he shook it, and therewith he
brake it in the midst. Ah, said Nacien, the thing that I most praised
ought I now most to blame, and therewith he threw the pieces of his
sword over his bed. And after he leapt over the board to fight with the
giant, and slew him.

And anon he entered into the ship again, and the wind arose, and drove
him through the sea, that by adventure he came to another ship where
King Mordrains was, which had been tempted full evil with a fiend in
the Port of Perilous Rock. And when that one saw the other they made
great joy of other, and either told other of their adventure, and how
the sword failed him at his most need. When Mordrains saw the sword he
praised it much: But the breaking was not to do but by wickedness of
thy selfward, for thou art in some sin. And there he took the sword,
and set the pieces together, and they soldered as fair as ever they
were to-fore; and there put he the sword in the sheath, and laid it
down on the bed. Then heard they a voice that said: Go out of this ship
a little while, and enter into the other, for dread ye fall in deadly
sin, for and ye be found in deadly sin ye may not escape but perish:
and so they went into the other ship. And as Nacien went over the board
he was smitten with a sword on the right foot, that he fell down
noseling to the ship’s board; and therewith he said: O God, how am I
hurt. And then there came a voice and said: Take thou that for thy
forfeit that thou didst in drawing of this sword, therefore thou
receivest a wound, for thou were never worthy to handle it, as the
writing maketh mention. In the name of God, said Galahad, ye are right
wise of these works.




