CHAPTER V. How Sir Tristram met at the peron with Sir Launcelot, and
how they fought together unknown.


Then departed Sir Tristram and rode straight unto Camelot, to the peron
that Merlin had made to-fore, where Sir Lanceor, that was the king’s
son of Ireland, was slain by the hands of Balin. And in that same place
was the fair lady Colombe slain, that was love unto Sir Lanceor; for
after he was dead she took his sword and thrust it through her body.
And by the craft of Merlin he made to inter this knight, Lanceor, and
his lady, Colombe, under one stone. And at that time Merlin prophesied
that in that same place should fight two the best knights that ever
were in Arthur’s days, and the best lovers. So when Sir Tristram came
to the tomb where Lanceor and his lady were buried he looked about him
after Sir Palomides. Then was he ware of a seemly knight came riding
against him all in white, with a covered shield. When he came nigh Sir
Tristram he said on high: Ye be welcome, sir knight, and well and truly
have ye holden your promise. And then they dressed their shields and
spears, and came together with all their might of their horses; and
they met so fiercely that both their horses and knights fell to the
earth, and as fast as they might avoided their horses, and put their
shields afore them; and they struck together with bright swords, as men
that were of might, and either wounded other wonderly sore, that the
blood ran out upon the grass. And thus they fought the space of four
hours, that never one would speak to other one word, and of their
harness they had hewn off many pieces. O Lord Jesu, said Gouvernail, I
marvel greatly of the strokes my master hath given to your master. By
my head, said Sir Launcelot’s servant, your master hath not given so
many but your master has received as many or more. O Jesu, said
Gouvernail, it is too much for Sir Palomides to suffer or Sir
Launcelot, and yet pity it were that either of these good knights
should destroy other’s blood. So they stood and wept both, and made
great dole when they saw the bright swords over-covered with blood of
their bodies.

Then at the last spake Sir Launcelot and said: Knight, thou fightest
wonderly well as ever I saw knight, therefore, an it please you, tell
me your name. Sir, said Sir Tristram, that is me loath to tell any man
my name. Truly, said Sir Launcelot, an I were required I was never
loath to tell my name. It is well said, said Sir Tristram, then I
require you to tell me your name? Fair knight, he said, my name is Sir
Launcelot du Lake. Alas, said Sir Tristram, what have I done! for ye
are the man in the world that I love best. Fair knight, said Sir
Launcelot, tell me your name? Truly, said he, my name is Sir Tristram
de Liones. O Jesu, said Sir Launcelot, what adventure is befallen me!
And therewith Sir Launcelot kneeled down and yielded him up his sword.
And therewith Sir Tristram kneeled adown, and yielded him up his sword.
And so either gave other the degree. And then they both forthwithal
went to the stone, and set them down upon it, and took off their helms
to cool them, and either kissed other an hundred times. And then anon
after they took off their helms and rode to Camelot. And there they met
with Sir Gawaine and with Sir Gaheris that had made promise to Arthur
never to come again to the court till they had brought Sir Tristram
with them.




CHAPTER VI. How Sir Launcelot brought Sir Tristram to the court, and of
the great joy that the king and other made for the coming of Sir
Tristram.


Return again, said Sir Launcelot, for your quest is done, for I have
met with Sir Tristram: lo, here is his own person! Then was Sir Gawaine
glad, and said to Sir Tristram: Ye are welcome, for now have ye eased
me greatly of my labour. For what cause, said Sir Gawaine, came ye into
this court? Fair sir, said Sir Tristram, I came into this country
because of Sir Palomides; for he and I had assigned at this day to have
done battle together at the peron, and I marvel I hear not of him. And
thus by adventure my lord, Sir Launcelot, and I met together. With this
came King Arthur, and when he wist that there was Sir Tristram, then he
ran unto him and took him by the hand and said: Sir Tristram, ye are as
welcome as any knight that ever came to this court. And when the king
had heard how Sir Launcelot and he had foughten, and either had wounded
other wonderly sore, then the king made great dole. Then Sir Tristram
told the king how he came thither for to have had ado with Sir
Palomides. And then he told the king how he had rescued him from the
nine knights and Breuse Saunce Pité; and how he found a knight lying by
a well, and that knight smote down Sir Palomides and me, but his shield
was covered with a cloth. So Sir Palomides left me, and I followed
after that knight; and in many places I found where he had slain
knights, and forjousted many. By my head, said Sir Gawaine, that same
knight smote me down and Sir Bleoberis, and hurt us sore both, he with
the covered shield. Ah, said Sir Kay, that knight smote me adown and
hurt me passing sore, and fain would I have known him, but I might not.
Jesu, mercy, said Arthur, what knight was that with the covered shield?
I know not, said Sir Tristram; and so said they all. Now, said King
Arthur, then wot I, for it is Sir Launcelot. Then they all looked upon
Sir Launcelot and said: Ye have beguiled us with your covered shield.
It is not the first time, said Arthur, he hath done so. My lord, said
Sir Launcelot, truly wit ye well I was the same knight that bare the
covered shield; and because I would not be known that I was of your
court I said no worship of your house. That is truth, said Sir Gawaine,
Sir Kay, and Sir Bleoberis.

Then King Arthur took Sir Tristram by the hand and went to the Table
Round. Then came Queen Guenever and many ladies with her, and all the
ladies said at one voice: Welcome, Sir Tristram! Welcome, said the
damosels. Welcome, said knights. Welcome, said Arthur, for one of the
best knights, and the gentlest of the world, and the man of most
worship; for of all manner of hunting thou bearest the prize, and of
all measures of blowing thou art the beginning, and of all the terms of
hunting and hawking ye are the beginner, of all instruments of music ye
are the best; therefore, gentle knight, said Arthur, ye are welcome to
this court. And also, I pray you, said Arthur, grant me a boon. It
shall be at your commandment, said Tristram. Well, said Arthur, I will
desire of you that ye will abide in my court. Sir, said Sir Tristram,
thereto is me loath, for I have ado in many countries. Not so, said
Arthur, ye have promised it me, ye may not say nay. Sir, said Sir
Tristram, I will as ye will. Then went Arthur unto the sieges about the
Round Table, and looked in every siege the which were void that lacked
knights. And then the king saw in the siege of Marhaus letters that
said: This is the siege of the noble knight, Sir Tristram. And then
Arthur made Sir Tristram Knight of the Table Round, with great nobley
and great feast as might be thought. For Sir Marhaus was slain afore by
the hands of Sir Tristram in an island; and that was well known at that
time in the court of Arthur, for this Marhaus was a worthy knight. And
for evil deeds that he did unto the country of Cornwall Sir Tristram
and he fought. And they fought so long, tracing and traversing, till
they fell bleeding to the earth; for they were so sore wounded that
they might not stand for bleeding. And Sir Tristram by fortune
recovered, and Sir Marhaus died through the stroke on the head. So
leave we of Sir Tristram and speak we of King Mark.




