CHAPTER LVI. How Sir Tristram smote down Sir Agravaine and Sir Gaheris,
and how Sir Dinadan was sent for by La Beale Isoud.


So when they had overtaken Sir Tristram, Sir Agravaine bade him: Turn,
traitor knight. That is evil said, said Sir Tristram; and therewith he
pulled out his sword, and smote Sir Agravaine such a buffet upon the
helm that he tumbled down off his horse in a swoon, and he had a
grievous wound. And then he turned to Gaheris, and Sir Tristram smote
his sword and his helm together with such a might that Gaheris fell out
of his saddle: and so Sir Tristram rode unto Joyous Gard, and there he
alighted and unarmed him. So Sir Tristram told La Beale Isoud of all
his adventure, as ye have heard to-fore. And when she heard him tell of
Sir Dinadan: Sir, said she, is not that he that made the song by King
Mark? That same is he, said Sir Tristram, for he is the best bourder
and japer, and a noble knight of his hands, and the best fellow that I
know, and all good knights love his fellowship. Alas, sir, said she,
why brought ye not him with you? Have ye no care, said Sir Tristram,
for he rideth to seek me in this country; and therefore he will not
away till he have met with me. And there Sir Tristram told La Beale
Isoud how Sir Dinadan held against all lovers. Right so there came in a
varlet and told Sir Tristram how there was come an errant knight into
the town, with such colours upon his shield. That is Sir Dinadan, said
Sir Tristram; wit ye what ye shall do, said Sir Tristram: send ye for
him, my Lady Isoud, and I will not be seen, and ye shall hear the
merriest knight that ever ye spake withal, and the maddest talker; and
I pray you heartily that ye make him good cheer.

Then anon La Beale Isoud sent into the town, and prayed Sir Dinadan
that he would come into the castle and repose him there with a lady.
With a good will, said Sir Dinadan; and so he mounted upon his horse
and rode into the castle; and there he alighted, and was unarmed, and
brought into the castle. Anon La Beale Isoud came unto him, and either
saluted other; then she asked him of whence that he was. Madam, said
Dinadan, I am of the court of King Arthur, and knight of the Table
Round, and my name is Sir Dinadan. What do ye in this country? said La
Beale Isoud. Madam, said he, I seek Sir Tristram the good knight, for
it was told me that he was in this country. It may well be, said La
Beale Isoud, but I am not ware of him. Madam, said Dinadan, I marvel of
Sir Tristram and mo other lovers, what aileth them to be so mad and so
sotted upon women. Why, said La Beale Isoud, are ye a knight and be no
lover? it is shame to you: wherefore ye may not be called a good knight
[but] if ye make a quarrel for a lady. God defend me, said Dinadan, for
the joy of love is too short, and the sorrow thereof, and what cometh
thereof, dureth over long. Ah, said La Beale Isoud, say ye not so, for
here fast by was the good knight Sir Bleoberis, that fought with three
knights at once for a damosel’s sake, and he won her afore the King of
Northumberland. It was so, said Sir Dinadan, for I know him well for a
good knight and a noble, and come of noble blood; for all be noble
knights of whom he is come of, that is Sir Launcelot du Lake.

Now I pray you, said La Beale Isoud, tell me will you fight for my love
with three knights that do me great wrong? and insomuch as ye be a
knight of King Arthur’s I require you to do battle for me. Then Sir
Dinadan said: I shall say you ye be as fair a lady as ever I saw any,
and much fairer than is my lady Queen Guenever, but wit ye well at one
word, I will not fight for you with three knights, Jesu defend me. Then
Isoud laughed, and had good game at him. So he had all the cheer that
she might make him, and there he lay all that night. And on the morn
early Sir Tristram armed him, and La Beale Isoud gave him a good helm;
and then he promised her that he would meet with Sir Dinadan, and they
two would ride together into Lonazep, where the tournament should be:
And there shall I make ready for you where ye shall see the tournament.
Then departed Sir Tristram with two squires that bare his shield and
his spears that were great and long.




CHAPTER LVII. How Sir Dinadan met with Sir Tristram, and with jousting
with Sir Palomides, Sir Dinadan knew him.


Then after that Sir Dinadan departed, and rode his way a great pace
until he had overtaken Sir Tristram. And when Sir Dinadan had overtaken
him he knew him anon, and he hated the fellowship of him above all
other knights. Ah, said Sir Dinadan, art thou that coward knight that I
met with yesterday? keep thee, for thou shalt joust with me maugre thy
head. Well, said Sir Tristram, and I am loath to joust. And so they let
their horses run, and Sir Tristram missed of him a-purpose, and Sir
Dinadan brake a spear upon Sir Tristram, and therewith Sir Dinadan
dressed him to draw out his sword. Not so, said Sir Tristram, why are
ye so wroth? I will not fight. Fie on thee, coward, said Dinadan, thou
shamest all knights. As for that, said Sir Tristram, I care not, for I
will wait upon you and be under your protection; for because ye are so
good a knight ye may save me. The devil deliver me of thee, said Sir
Dinadan, for thou art as goodly a man of arms and of thy person as ever
I saw, and the most coward that ever I saw. What wilt thou do with
those great spears that thou carriest with thee? I shall give them,
said Sir Tristram, to some good knight when I come to the tournament;
and if I see you do best, I shall give them to you.

So thus as they rode talking they saw where came an errant knight afore
them, that dressed him to joust. Lo, said Sir Tristram, yonder is one
will joust; now dress thee to him. Ah, shame betide thee, said Sir
Dinadan. Nay, not so, said Tristram, for that knight beseemeth a shrew.
Then shall I, said Sir Dinadan. And so they dressed their shields and
their spears, and they met together so hard that the other knight smote
down Sir Dinadan from his horse. Lo, said Sir Tristram, it had been
better ye had left. Fie on thee, coward, said Sir Dinadan. Then Sir
Dinadan started up and gat his sword in his hand, and proffered to do
battle on foot. Whether in love or in wrath? said the other knight. Let
us do battle in love, said Sir Dinadan. What is your name, said that
knight, I pray you tell me. Wit ye well my name is Sir Dinadan. Ah,
Dinadan, said that knight, and my name is Gareth, the youngest brother
unto Sir Gawaine. Then either made of other great cheer, for this
Gareth was the best knight of all the brethren, and he proved a good
knight. Then they took their horses, and there they spake of Sir
Tristram, how such a coward he was; and every word Sir Tristram heard
and laughed them to scorn.

Then were they ware where came a knight afore them well horsed and well
armed, and he made him ready to joust. Fair knights, said Sir Tristram,
look betwixt you who shall joust with yonder knight, for I warn you I
will not have ado with him. Then shall I, said Sir Gareth. And so they
encountered together, and there that knight smote down Sir Gareth over
his horse’s croup. How now, said Sir Tristram unto Sir Dinadan, dress
thee now and revenge the good knight Gareth. That shall I not, said Sir
Dinadan, for he hath stricken down a much bigger knight than I am. Ah,
said Sir Tristram, now Sir Dinadan, I see and feel well your heart
faileth you, therefore now shall ye see what I shall do. And then Sir
Tristram hurtled unto that knight, and smote him quite from his horse.
And when Sir Dinadan saw that, he marvelled greatly; and then he deemed
that it was Sir Tristram.

Then this knight that was on foot pulled out his sword to do battle.
What is your name? said Sir Tristram. Wit ye well, said that knight, my
name is Sir Palomides. What knight hate ye most? said Sir Tristram. Sir
knight, said he, I hate Sir Tristram to the death, for an I may meet
with him the one of us shall die. Ye say well, said Sir Tristram, and
wit ye well that I am Sir Tristram de Liones, and now do your worst.
When Sir Palomides heard him say so he was astonied. And then he said
thus: I pray you, Sir Tristram, forgive me all mine evil will, and if I
live I shall do you service above all other knights that be living; and
whereas I have owed you evil will me sore repenteth. I wot not what
aileth me, for meseemeth that ye are a good knight, and none other
knight that named himself a good knight should not hate you; therefore
I require you, Sir Tristram, take no displeasure at mine unkind words.
Sir Palomides, said Sir Tristram, ye say well, and well I wot ye are a
good knight, for I have seen ye proved; and many great enterprises have
ye taken upon you, and well achieved them; therefore, said Sir
Tristram, an ye have any evil will to me, now may ye right it, for I am
ready at your hand. Not so, my lord Sir Tristram, I will do you
knightly service in all thing as ye will command. And right so I will
take you, said Sir Tristram. And so they rode forth on their ways
talking of many things. O my lord Sir Tristram, said Dinadan, foul have
ye mocked me, for God knoweth I came into this country for your sake,
and by the advice of my lord Sir Launcelot; and yet would not Sir
Launcelot tell me the certainty of you, where I should find you. Truly,
said Sir Tristram, Sir Launcelot wist well where I was, for I abode
within his own castle.




