CHAPTER V. How a yeoman desired him to get again an horse, and how Sir
Percivale’s hackney was slain, and how he gat an horse.


And anon the yeoman came pricking after as fast as ever he might, and
asked Sir Percivale if he saw any knight riding on his black steed.
Yea, sir, forsooth, said he; why, sir, ask ye me that? Ah, sir, that
steed he hath benome me with strength; wherefore my lord will slay me
in what place he findeth me. Well, said Sir Percivale, what wouldst
thou that I did? Thou seest well that I am on foot, but an I had a good
horse I should bring him soon again. Sir, said the yeoman, take mine
hackney and do the best ye can, and I shall sewe you on foot to wit how
that ye shall speed. Then Sir Percivale alighted upon that hackney, and
rode as fast as he might, and at the last he saw that knight. And then
he cried: Knight, turn again; and he turned and set his spear against
Sir Percivale, and he smote the hackney in the midst of the breast that
he fell down dead to the earth, and there he had a great fall, and the
other rode his way. And then Sir Percivale was wood wroth, and cried:
Abide, wicked knight; coward and false-hearted knight, turn again and
fight with me on foot. But he answered not, but passed on his way.

When Sir Percivale saw he would not turn he cast away his helm and
sword, and said: Now am I a very wretch, cursed and most unhappy above
all other knights. So in this sorrow he abode all that day till it was
night; and then he was faint, and laid him down and slept till it was
midnight; and then he awaked and saw afore him a woman which said unto
him right fiercely: Sir Percivale, what dost thou here? He answered, I
do neither good nor great ill. If thou wilt ensure me, said she, that
thou wilt fulfil my will when I summon thee, I shall lend thee mine own
horse which shall bear thee whither thou wilt. Sir Percivale was glad
of her proffer, and ensured her to fulfil all her desire. Then abide me
here, and I shall go and fetch you an horse. And so she came soon again
and brought an horse with her that was inly black. When Percivale
beheld that horse he marvelled that it was so great and so well
apparelled; and not for then he was so hardy, and he leapt upon him,
and took none heed of himself. And so anon as he was upon him he thrust
to him with his spurs, and so he rode by a forest, and the moon shone
clear. And within an hour and less he bare him four days’ journey
thence, until he came to a rough water the which roared, and his horse
would have borne him into it.




CHAPTER VI. Of the great danger that Sir Percivale was in by his horse,
and how he saw a serpent and a lion fight.


And when Sir Percivale came nigh the brim, and saw the water so
boistous, he doubted to overpass it. And then he made a sign of the
cross in his forehead. When the fiend felt him so charged he shook off
Sir Percivale, and he went into the water crying and roaring, making
great sorrow, and it seemed unto him that the water brent. Then Sir
Percivale perceived it was a fiend, the which would have brought him
unto his perdition. Then he commended himself unto God, and prayed Our
Lord to keep him from all such temptations; and so he prayed all that
night till on the morn that it was day; then he saw that he was in a
wild mountain the which was closed with the sea nigh all about, that he
might see no land about him which might relieve him, but wild beasts.

And then he went into a valley, and there he saw a young serpent bring
a young lion by the neck, and so he came by Sir Percivale. With that
came a great lion crying and roaring after the serpent. And as fast as
Sir Percivale saw this he marvelled, and hied him thither, but anon the
lion had overtaken the serpent and began battle with him. And then Sir
Percivale thought to help the lion, for he was the more natural beast
of the two; and therewith he drew his sword, and set his shield afore
him, and there he gave the serpent such a buffet that he had a deadly
wound. When the lion saw that, he made no resemblaunt to fight with
him, but made him all the cheer that a beast might make a man. Then
Percivale perceived that, and cast down his shield which was broken;
and then he did off his helm for to gather wind, for he was greatly
enchafed with the serpent: and the lion went alway about him fawning as
a spaniel. And then he stroked him on the neck and on the shoulders.
And then he thanked God of the fellowship of that beast. And about noon
the lion took his little whelp and trussed him and bare him there he
came from.

Then was Sir Percivale alone. And as the tale telleth, he was one of
the men of the world at that time which most believed in Our Lord Jesu
Christ, for in those days there were but few folks that believed in God
perfectly. For in those days the son spared not the father no more than
a stranger. And so Sir Percivale comforted himself in our Lord Jesu,
and besought God no temptation should bring him out of God’s service,
but to endure as his true champion. Thus when Sir Percivale had prayed
he saw the lion come toward him, and then he couched down at his feet.
And so all that night the lion and he slept together; and when Sir
Percivale slept he dreamed a marvellous dream, that there two ladies
met with him, and that one sat upon a lion, and that other sat upon a
serpent, and that one of them was young, and the other was old; and the
youngest him thought said: Sir Percivale, my lord saluteth thee, and
sendeth thee word that thou array thee and make thee ready, for to-morn
thou must fight with the strongest champion of the world. And if thou
be overcome thou shall not be quit for losing of any of thy members,
but thou shalt be shamed for ever to the world’s end. And then he asked
her what was her lord. And she said the greatest lord of all the world:
and so she departed suddenly that he wist not where.




