CHAPTER VII. How Sir Launcelot fought against Sir Mador for the queen,
and how he overcame Sir Mador, and discharged the queen.


Then the king called to that knight, and asked him if he would fight
for the queen. Then he answered to the king: Therefore came I hither,
and therefore, sir king, he said, tarry me no longer, for I may not
tarry. For anon as I have finished this battle I must depart hence, for
I have ado many matters elsewhere. For wit you well, said that knight,
this is dishonour to you all knights of the Round Table, to see and
know so noble a lady and so courteous a queen as Queen Guenever is,
thus to be rebuked and shamed amongst you. Then they all marvelled what
knight that might be that so took the battle upon him. For there was
not one that knew him, but if it were Sir Bors.

Then said Sir Mador de la Porte unto the king: Now let me wit with whom
I shall have ado withal. And then they rode to the lists’ end, and
there they couched their spears, and ran together with all their might,
and Sir Mador’s spear brake all to pieces, but the other’s spear held,
and bare Sir Mador’s horse and all backward to the earth a great fall.
But mightily and suddenly he avoided his horse and put his shield afore
him, and then drew his sword, and bade the other knight alight and do
battle with him on foot. Then that knight descended from his horse
lightly like a valiant man, and put his shield afore him and drew his
sword; and so they came eagerly unto battle, and either gave other many
great strokes, tracing and traversing, racing and foining, and hurtling
together with their swords as it were wild boars. Thus were they
fighting nigh an hour, for this Sir Mador was a strong knight, and
mightily proved in many strong battles. But at the last this knight
smote Sir Mador grovelling upon the earth, and the knight stepped near
him to have pulled Sir Mador flatling upon the ground; and therewith
suddenly Sir Mador arose, and in his rising he smote that knight
through the thick of the thighs that the blood ran out fiercely. And
when he felt himself so wounded, and saw his blood, he let him arise
upon his feet. And then he gave him such a buffet upon the helm that he
fell to the earth flatling, and therewith he strode to him to have
pulled off his helm off his head. And then Sir Mador prayed that knight
to save his life, and so he yielded him as overcome, and released the
queen of his quarrel. I will not grant thee thy life, said that knight,
only that thou freely release the queen for ever, and that no mention
be made upon Sir Patrise’s tomb that ever Queen Guenever consented to
that treason. All this shall be done, said Sir Mador, I clearly
discharge my quarrel for ever.

Then the knights parters of the lists took up Sir Mador, and led him to
his tent, and the other knight went straight to the stair-foot where
sat King Arthur; and by that time was the queen come to the king, and
either kissed other heartily. And when the king saw that knight, he
stooped down to him, and thanked him, and in likewise did the queen;
and the king prayed him to put off his helmet, and to repose him, and
to take a sop of wine. And then he put off his helm to drink, and then
every knight knew him that it was Sir Launcelot du Lake. Anon as the
king wist that, he took the queen in his hand, and yode unto Sir
Launcelot, and said: Sir, grant mercy of your great travail that ye
have had this day for me and for my queen. My lord, said Sir Launcelot,
wit ye well I ought of right ever to be in your quarrel, and in my lady
the queen’s quarrel, to do battle; for ye are the man that gave me the
high order of knighthood, and that day my lady, your queen, did me
great worship, and else I had been shamed; for that same day ye made me
knight, through my hastiness I lost my sword, and my lady, your queen,
found it, and lapped it in her train, and gave me my sword when I had
need thereto, and else had I been shamed among all knights; and
therefore, my lord Arthur, I promised her at that day ever to be her
knight in right outher in wrong. Grant mercy, said the king, for this
journey; and wit ye well, said the king, I shall acquit your goodness.

And ever the queen beheld Sir Launcelot, and wept so tenderly that she
sank almost to the ground for sorrow that he had done to her so great
goodness where she shewed him great unkindness. Then the knights of his
blood drew unto him, and there either of them made great joy of other.
And so came all the knights of the Table Round that were there at that
time, and welcomed him. And then Sir Mador was had to leech-craft, and
Sir Launcelot was healed of his wound. And then there was made great
joy and mirths in that court.




CHAPTER VIII. How the truth was known by the Maiden of the Lake, and of
divers other matters.


And so it befell that the damosel of the lake, her name was Nimue, the
which wedded the good knight Sir Pelleas, and so she came to the court;
for ever she did great goodness unto King Arthur and to all his knights
through her sorcery and enchantments. And so when she heard how the
queen was an-angered for the death of Sir Patrise, then she told it
openly that she was never guilty; and there she disclosed by whom it
was done, and named him, Sir Pinel; and for what cause he did it, there
it was openly disclosed; and so the queen was excused, and the knight
Pinel fled into his country. Then was it openly known that Sir Pinel
enpoisoned the apples at the feast to that intent to have destroyed Sir
Gawaine, because Sir Gawaine and his brethren destroyed Sir Lamorak de
Galis, to the which Sir Pinel was cousin unto. Then was Sir Patrise
buried in the church of Westminster in a tomb, and thereupon was
written: Here lieth Sir Patrise of Ireland, slain by Sir Pinel le
Savage, that enpoisoned apples to have slain Sir Gawaine, and by
misfortune Sir Patrise ate one of those apples, and then suddenly he
brast. Also there was written upon the tomb that Queen Guenever was
appealed of treason of the death of Sir Patrise, by Sir Mador de la
Porte; and there was made mention how Sir Launcelot fought with him for
Queen Guenever, and overcame him in plain battle. All this was written
upon the tomb of Sir Patrise in excusing of the queen. And then Sir
Mador sued daily and long, to have the queen’s good grace; and so by
the means of Sir Launcelot he caused him to stand in the queen’s good
grace, and all was forgiven.

Thus it passed on till our Lady Day, Assumption. Within a fifteen days
of that feast the king let cry a great jousts and a tournament that
should be at that day at Camelot, that is Winchester; and the king let
cry that he and the King of Scots would joust against all that would
come against them. And when this cry was made, thither came many
knights. So there came thither the King of Northgalis, and King Anguish
of Ireland, and the King with the Hundred Knights, and Galahad, the
haut prince, and the King of Northumberland, and many other noble dukes
and earls of divers countries. So King Arthur made him ready to depart
to these jousts, and would have had the queen with him, but at that
time she would not, she said, for she was sick and might not ride at
that time. That me repenteth, said the king, for this seven year ye saw
not such a noble fellowship together except at Whitsuntide when Galahad
departed from the court. Truly, said the queen to the king, ye must
hold me excused, I may not be there, and that me repenteth. And many
deemed the queen would not be there because of Sir Launcelot du Lake,
for Sir Launcelot would not ride with the king, for he said that he was
not whole of the wound the which Sir Mador had given him; wherefore the
king was heavy and passing wroth. And so he departed toward Winchester
with his fellowship; and so by the way the king lodged in a town called
Astolat, that is now in English called Guildford, and there the king
lay in the castle.

So when the king was departed the queen called Sir Launcelot to her,
and said thus: Sir Launcelot, ye are greatly to blame thus to hold you
behind my lord; what, trow ye, what will your enemies and mine say and
deem? nought else but, See how Sir Launcelot holdeth him ever behind
the king, and so doth the queen, for that they would have their
pleasure together. And thus will they say, said the queen to Sir
Launcelot, have ye no doubt thereof.




