BOOK XXI.




CHAPTER I. How Sir Mordred presumed and took on him to be King of
England, and would have married the queen, his father’s wife.


As Sir Mordred was ruler of all England, he did do make letters as
though that they came from beyond the sea, and the letters specified
that King Arthur was slain in battle with Sir Launcelot. Wherefore Sir
Mordred made a parliament, and called the lords together, and there he
made them to choose him king; and so was he crowned at Canterbury, and
held a feast there fifteen days; and afterward he drew him unto
Winchester, and there he took the Queen Guenever, and said plainly that
he would wed her which was his uncle’s wife and his father’s wife. And
so he made ready for the feast, and a day prefixed that they should be
wedded; wherefore Queen Guenever was passing heavy. But she durst not
discover her heart, but spake fair, and agreed to Sir Mordred’s will.
Then she desired of Sir Mordred for to go to London, to buy all manner
of things that longed unto the wedding. And because of her fair speech
Sir Mordred trusted her well enough, and gave her leave to go. And so
when she came to London she took the Tower of London, and suddenly in
all haste possible she stuffed it with all manner of victual, and well
garnished it with men, and so kept it.

Then when Sir Mordred wist and understood how he was beguiled, he was
passing wroth out of measure. And a short tale for to make, he went and
laid a mighty siege about the Tower of London, and made many great
assaults thereat, and threw many great engines unto them, and shot
great guns. But all might not prevail Sir Mordred, for Queen Guenever
would never for fair speech nor for foul, would never trust to come in
his hands again.

Then came the Bishop of Canterbury, the which was a noble clerk and an
holy man, and thus he said to Sir Mordred: Sir, what will ye do? will
ye first displease God and sithen shame yourself, and all knighthood?
Is not King Arthur your uncle, no farther but your mother’s brother,
and on her himself King Arthur begat you upon his own sister, therefore
how may you wed your father’s wife? Sir, said the noble clerk, leave
this opinion or I shall curse you with book and bell and candle. Do
thou thy worst, said Sir Mordred, wit thou well I shall defy thee. Sir,
said the Bishop, and wit you well I shall not fear me to do that me
ought to do. Also where ye noise where my lord Arthur is slain, and
that is not so, and therefore ye will make a foul work in this land.
Peace, thou false priest, said Sir Mordred, for an thou chafe me any
more I shall make strike off thy head. So the Bishop departed and did
the cursing in the most orgulist wise that might be done. And then Sir
Mordred sought the Bishop of Canterbury, for to have slain him. Then
the Bishop fled, and took part of his goods with him, and went nigh
unto Glastonbury; and there he was as priest hermit in a chapel, and
lived in poverty and in holy prayers, for well he understood that
mischievous war was at hand.

Then Sir Mordred sought on Queen Guenever by letters and sonds, and by
fair means and foul means, for to have her to come out of the Tower of
London; but all this availed not, for she answered him shortly, openly
and privily, that she had liefer slay herself than to be married with
him. Then came word to Sir Mordred that King Arthur had araised the
siege for Sir Launcelot, and he was coming homeward with a great host,
to be avenged upon Sir Mordred; wherefore Sir Mordred made write writs
to all the barony of this land, and much people drew to him. For then
was the common voice among them that with Arthur was none other life
but war and strife, and with Sir Mordred was great joy and bliss. Thus
was Sir Arthur depraved, and evil said of. And many there were that
King Arthur had made up of nought, and given them lands, might not then
say him a good word. Lo ye all Englishmen, see ye not what a mischief
here was! for he that was the most king and knight of the world, and
most loved the fellowship of noble knights, and by him they were all
upholden, now might not these Englishmen hold them content with him. Lo
thus was the old custom and usage of this land; and also men say that
we of this land have not yet lost nor forgotten that custom and usage.
Alas, this is a great default of us Englishmen, for there may no thing
please us no term. And so fared the people at that time, they were
better pleased with Sir Mordred than they were with King Arthur; and
much people drew unto Sir Mordred, and said they would abide with him
for better and for worse. And so Sir Mordred drew with a great host to
Dover, for there he heard say that Sir Arthur would arrive, and so he
thought to beat his own father from his lands; and the most part of all
England held with Sir Mordred, the people were so new-fangle.




CHAPTER II. How after that King Arthur had tidings, he returned and
came to Dover, where Sir Mordred met him to let his landing; and of the
death of Sir Gawaine.


And so as Sir Mordred was at Dover with his host, there came King
Arthur with a great navy of ships, and galleys, and carracks. And there
was Sir Mordred ready awaiting upon his landing, to let his own father
to land upon the land that he was king over. Then there was launching
of great boats and small, and full of noble men of arms; and there was
much slaughter of gentle knights, and many a full bold baron was laid
full low, on both parties. But King Arthur was so courageous that there
might no manner of knights let him to land, and his knights fiercely
followed him; and so they landed maugre Sir Mordred and all his power,
and put Sir Mordred aback, that he fled and all his people.

So when this battle was done, King Arthur let bury his people that were
dead. And then was noble Sir Gawaine found in a great boat, lying more
than half dead. When Sir Arthur wist that Sir Gawaine was laid so low;
he went unto him; and there the king made sorrow out of measure, and
took Sir Gawaine in his arms, and thrice he there swooned. And then
when he awaked, he said: Alas, Sir Gawaine, my sister’s son, here now
thou liest; the man in the world that I loved most; and now is my joy
gone, for now, my nephew Sir Gawaine, I will discover me unto your
person: in Sir Launcelot and you I most had my joy, and mine affiance,
and now have I lost my joy of you both; wherefore all mine earthly joy
is gone from me. Mine uncle King Arthur, said Sir Gawaine, wit you well
my death-day is come, and all is through mine own hastiness and
wilfulness; for I am smitten upon the old wound the which Sir Launcelot
gave me, on the which I feel well I must die; and had Sir Launcelot
been with you as he was, this unhappy war had never begun; and of all
this am I causer, for Sir Launcelot and his blood, through their
prowess, held all your cankered enemies in subjection and daunger. And
now, said Sir Gawaine, ye shall miss Sir Launcelot. But alas, I would
not accord with him, and therefore, said Sir Gawaine, I pray you, fair
uncle, that I may have paper, pen, and ink, that I may write to Sir
Launcelot a cedle with mine own hands.

And then when paper and ink was brought, then Gawaine was set up weakly
by King Arthur, for he was shriven a little to-fore; and then he wrote
thus, as the French book maketh mention: Unto Sir Launcelot, flower of
all noble knights that ever I heard of or saw by my days, I, Sir
Gawaine, King Lot’s son of Orkney, sister’s son unto the noble King
Arthur, send thee greeting, and let thee have knowledge that the tenth
day of May I was smitten upon the old wound that thou gavest me afore
the city of Benwick, and through the same wound that thou gavest me I
am come to my death-day. And I will that all the world wit, that I, Sir
Gawaine, knight of the Table Round, sought my death, and not through
thy deserving, but it was mine own seeking; wherefore I beseech thee,
Sir Launcelot, to return again unto this realm, and see my tomb, and
pray some prayer more or less for my soul. And this same day that I
wrote this cedle, I was hurt to the death in the same wound, the which
I had of thy hand, Sir Launcelot; for of a more nobler man might I not
be slain. Also Sir Launcelot, for all the love that ever was betwixt
us, make no tarrying, but come over the sea in all haste, that thou
mayst with thy noble knights rescue that noble king that made thee
knight, that is my lord Arthur; for he is full straitly bestead with a
false traitor, that is my half-brother, Sir Mordred; and he hath let
crown him king, and would have wedded my lady Queen Guenever, and so
had he done had she not put herself in the Tower of London. And so the
tenth day of May last past, my lord Arthur and we all landed upon them
at Dover; and there we put that false traitor, Sir Mordred, to flight,
and there it misfortuned me to be stricken upon thy stroke. And at the
date of this letter was written, but two hours and a half afore my
death, written with mine own hand, and so subscribed with part of my
heart’s blood. And I require thee, most famous knight of the world,
that thou wilt see my tomb. And then Sir Gawaine wept, and King Arthur
wept; and then they swooned both. And when they awaked both, the king
made Sir Gawaine to receive his Saviour. And then Sir Gawaine prayed
the king for to send for Sir Launcelot, and to cherish him above all
other knights.

And so at the hour of noon Sir Gawaine yielded up the spirit; and then
the king let inter him in a chapel within Dover Castle; and there yet
all men may see the skull of him, and the same wound is seen that Sir
Launcelot gave him in battle. Then was it told the king that Sir
Mordred had pight a new field upon Barham Down. And upon the morn the
king rode thither to him, and there was a great battle betwixt them,
and much people was slain on both parties; but at the last Sir Arthur’s
party stood best, and Sir Mordred and his party fled unto Canterbury.




