CHAPTER XI. How Sir Bors told his dream to a priest, which he had
dreamed, and of the counsel that the priest gave to him.


Now leave we him here, said the good man, and go we to our harbour till
to-morrow; we will come here again to do him service. Sir, said Bors,
be ye a priest? Yea forsooth, said he. Then I pray you tell me a dream
that befell to me the last night. Say on, said he. Then he began so
much to tell him of the great bird in the forest, and after told him of
his birds, one white, another black, and of the rotten tree, and of the
white flowers. Sir, I shall tell you a part now, and the other deal
to-morrow. The white fowl betokeneth a gentlewoman, fair and rich,
which loved thee paramours, and hath loved thee long; and if thou warn
her love she shall go die anon, if thou have no pity on her. That
signifieth the great bird, the which shall make thee to warn her. Now
for no fear that thou hast, ne for no dread that thou hast of God, thou
shalt not warn her, but thou wouldst not do it for to be holden chaste,
for to conquer the loos of the vain glory of the world; for that shall
befall thee now an thou warn her, that Launcelot, the good knight, thy
cousin, shall die. And therefore men shall now say that thou art a
manslayer, both of thy brother, Sir Lionel, and of thy cousin, Sir
Launcelot du Lake, the which thou mightest have saved and rescued
easily, but thou weenedst to rescue a maid which pertaineth nothing to
thee. Now look thou whether it had been greater harm of thy brother’s
death, or else to have suffered her to have lost her maidenhood. Then
asked he him: Hast thou heard the tokens of thy dream the which I have
told to you? Yea forsooth, said Sir Bors, all your exposition and
declaring of my dream I have well understood and heard. Then said the
man in this black clothing: Then is it in thy default if Sir Launcelot,
thy cousin, die. Sir, said Bors, that were me loath, for wit ye well
there is nothing in the world but I had liefer do it than to see my
lord, Sir Launcelot du Lake, to die in my default. Choose ye now the
one or the other, said the good man.

And then he led Sir Bors into an high tower, and there he found knights
and ladies: those ladies said he was welcome, and so they unarmed him.
And when he was in his doublet men brought him a mantle furred with
ermine, and put it about him; and then they made him such cheer that he
had forgotten all his sorrow and anguish, and only set his heart in
these delights and dainties, and took no thought more for his brother,
Sir Lionel, neither of Sir Launcelot du Lake, his cousin. And anon came
out of a chamber to him the fairest lady than ever he saw, and more
richer beseen than ever he saw Queen Guenever or any other estate. Lo,
said they, Sir Bors, here is the lady unto whom we owe all our service,
and I trow she be the richest lady and the fairest of all the world,
and the which loveth you best above all other knights, for she will
have no knight but you. And when he understood that language he was
abashed. Not for then she saluted him, and he her; and then they sat
down together and spake of many things, in so much that she besought
him to be her love, for she had loved him above all earthly men, and
she should make him richer than ever was man of his age. When Bors
understood her words he was right evil at ease, which in no manner
would not break chastity, so wist not he how to answer her.




CHAPTER XII. How the devil in a woman’s likeness would have had Sir
Bors to have lain by her, and how by God’s grace he escaped.


Alas, said she, Bors, shall ye not do my will? Madam, said Bors, there
is no lady in the world whose will I will fulfil as of this thing, for
my brother lieth dead which was slain right late. Ah Bors, said she, I
have loved you long for the great beauty I have seen in you, and the
great hardiness that I have heard of you, that needs ye must lie by me
this night, and therefore I pray you grant it me. Truly, said he, I
shall not do it in no manner wise. Then she made him such sorrow as
though she would have died. Well Bors, said she, unto this have ye
brought me, nigh to mine end. And therewith she took him by the hand,
and bade him behold her. And ye shall see how I shall die for your
love. Ah, said then he, that shall I never see.

Then she departed and went up into an high battlement, and led with her
twelve gentlewomen; and when they were above, one of the gentlewomen
cried, and said: Ah, Sir Bors, gentle knight have mercy on us all, and
suffer my lady to have her will, and if ye do not we must suffer death
with our lady, for to fall down off this high tower, and if ye suffer
us thus to die for so little a thing all ladies and gentlewomen will
say of you dishonour. Then looked he upward, they seemed all ladies of
great estate, and richly and well beseen. Then had he of them great
pity; not for that he was uncounselled in himself that liefer he had
they all had lost their souls than he his, and with that they fell
adown all at once unto the earth. And when he saw that, he was all
abashed, and had thereof great marvel. With that he blessed his body
and his visage. And anon he heard a great noise and a great cry, as
though all the fiends of hell had been about him; and therewith he saw
neither tower, nor lady, nor gentlewoman, nor no chapel where he
brought his brother to. Then held he up both his hands to the heaven,
and said: Fair Father God, I am grievously escaped; and then he took
his arms and his horse and rode on his way.

Then he heard a clock smite on his right hand; and thither he came to
an abbey on his right hand, closed with high walls, and there was let
in. Then they supposed that he was one of the quest of the Sangreal, so
they led him into a chamber and unarmed him. Sirs, said Sir Bors, if
there be any holy man in this house I pray you let me speak with him.
Then one of them led him unto the Abbot, which was in a chapel. And
then Sir Bors saluted him, and he him again. Sir, said Bors, I am a
knight-errant; and told him all the adventure which he had seen. Sir
Knight, said the Abbot, I wot not what ye be, for I weened never that a
knight of your age might have been so strong in the grace of our Lord
Jesu Christ. Not for then ye shall go unto your rest, for I will not
counsel you this day, it is too late, and to-morrow I shall counsel you
as I can.




