CHAPTER X. How Sir Urre came into Arthur’s court for to be healed of
his wounds, and how King Arthur would begin to handle him.


Then as the French book maketh mention, there was a good knight in the
land of Hungary, his name was Sir Urre, and he was an adventurous
knight, and in all places where he might hear of any deeds of worship
there would he be. So it happened in Spain there was an earl’s son, his
name was Alphegus, and at a great tournament in Spain this Sir Urre,
knight of Hungary, and Sir Alphegus of Spain encountered together for
very envy; and so either undertook other to the utterance. And by
fortune Sir Urre slew Sir Alphegus, the earl’s son of Spain, but this
knight that was slain had given Sir Urre, or ever he was slain, seven
great wounds, three on the head, and four on his body and upon his left
hand. And this Sir Alphegus had a mother, the which was a great
sorceress; and she, for the despite of her son’s death, wrought by her
subtle crafts that Sir Urre should never be whole, but ever his wounds
should one time fester and another time bleed, so that he should never
be whole until the best knight of the world had searched his wounds;
and thus she made her avaunt, wherethrough it was known that Sir Urre
should never be whole.

Then his mother let make an horse litter, and put him therein under two
palfreys; and then she took Sir Urre’s sister with him, a full fair
damosel, whose name was Felelolie; and then she took a page with him to
keep their horses, and so they led Sir Urre through many countries. For
as the French book saith, she led him so seven year through all lands
christened, and never she could find no knight that might ease her son.
So she came into Scotland and into the lands of England, and by fortune
she came nigh the feast of Pentecost until King Arthur’s court, that at
that time was holden at Carlisle. And when she came there, then she
made it openly to be known how that she was come into that land for to
heal her son.

Then King Arthur let call that lady, and asked her the cause why she
brought that hurt knight into that land. My most noble king, said that
lady, wit you well I brought him hither for to be healed of his wounds,
that of all this seven year he might not be whole. And then she told
the king where he was wounded, and of whom; and how his mother had
discovered in her pride how she had wrought that by enchantment, so
that he should never be whole until the best knight of the world had
searched his wounds. And so I have passed through all the lands
christened to have him healed, except this land. And if I fail to heal
him here in this land, I will never take more pain upon me, and that is
pity, for he was a good knight, and of great nobleness. What is his
name? said Arthur. My good and gracious lord, she said, his name is Sir
Urre of the Mount. In good time, said the king, and sith ye are come
into this land, ye are right welcome; and wit you well here shall your
son be healed, an ever any Christian man may heal him. And for to give
all other men of worship courage, I myself will assay to handle your
son, and so shall all the kings, dukes, and earls that be here present
with me at this time; thereto will I command them, and well I wot they
shall obey and do after my commandment. And wit you well, said King
Arthur unto Urre’s sister, I shall begin to handle him, and search unto
my power, not presuming upon me that I am so worthy to heal your son by
my deeds, but I will courage other men of worship to do as I will do.
And then the king commanded all the kings, dukes, and earls, and all
noble knights of the Round Table that were there that time present, to
come into the meadow of Carlisle. And so at that time there were but an
hundred and ten of the Round Table, for forty knights were that time
away; and so here we must begin at King Arthur, as is kindly to begin
at him that was the most man of worship that was christened at that
time.




CHAPTER XI. How King Arthur handled Sir Urre, and after him many other
knights of the Round Table.


Then King Arthur looked upon Sir Urre, and the king thought he was a
full likely man when he was whole; and then King Arthur made him to be
taken down off the litter and laid him upon the earth, and there was
laid a cushion of gold that he should kneel upon. And then noble Arthur
said: Fair knight, me repenteth of thy hurt, and for to courage all
other noble knights I will pray thee softly to suffer me to handle your
wounds. Most noble christened king, said Urre, do as ye list, for I am
at the mercy of God, and at your commandment. So then Arthur softly
handled him, and then some of his wounds renewed upon bleeding. Then
the King Clarence of Northumberland searched, and it would not be. And
then Sir Barant le Apres that was called the King with the Hundred
Knights, he assayed and failed; and so did King Uriens of the land of
Gore; so did King Anguish of Ireland; so did King Nentres of Garloth;
so did King Carados of Scotland; so did the Duke Galahad, the haut
prince; so did Constantine, that was Sir Carados’ son of Cornwall; so
did Duke Chaleins of Clarance; so did the Earl Ulbause; so did the Earl
Lambaile; so did the Earl Aristause.

Then came in Sir Gawaine with his three sons, Sir Gingalin, Sir
Florence, and Sir Lovel, these two were begotten upon Sir Brandiles’
sister; and all they failed. Then came in Sir Agravaine, Sir Gaheris,
Sir Mordred, and the good knight, Sir Gareth, that was of very
knighthood worth all the brethren. So came knights of Launcelot’s kin,
but Sir Launcelot was not that time in the court, for he was that time
upon his adventures. Then Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de
Ganis, Sir Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Gahalantine,
Sir Galihodin, Sir Menaduke, Sir Villiars the Valiant, Sir Hebes le
Renoumes. All these were of Sir Launcelot’s kin, and all they failed.
Then came in Sir Sagramore le Desirous, Sir Dodinas le Savage, Sir
Dinadan, Sir Bruin le Noire, that Sir Kay named La Cote Male Taile, and
Sir Kay le Seneschal, Sir Kay de Stranges, Sir Meliot de Logris, Sir
Petipase of Winchelsea, Sir Galleron of Galway, Sir Melion of the
Mountain, Sir Cardok, Sir Uwaine les Avoutres, and Sir Ozanna le Cure
Hardy.

Then came in Sir Astamor, and Sir Gromere, Grummor’s son, Sir Crosselm,
Sir Servause le Breuse, that was called a passing strong knight, for as
the book saith, the chief Lady of the Lake feasted Sir Launcelot and
Servause le Breuse, and when she had feasted them both at sundry times
she prayed them to give her a boon. And they granted it her. And then
she prayed Sir Servause that he would promise her never to do battle
against Sir Launcelot du Lake, and in the same wise she prayed Sir
Launcelot never to do battle against Sir Servause, and so either
promised her. For the French book saith, that Sir Servause had never
courage nor lust to do battle against no man, but if it were against
giants, and against dragons, and wild beasts. So we pass unto them that
at the king’s request made them all that were there at that high feast,
as of the knights of the Table Round, for to search Sir Urre: to that
intent the king did it, to wit which was the noblest knight among them.

Then came Sir Aglovale, Sir Durnore, Sir Tor, that was begotten upon
Aries, the cowherd’s wife, but he was begotten afore Aries wedded her,
and King Pellinore begat them all, first Sir Tor, Sir Aglovale, Sir
Durnore, Sir Lamorak, the most noblest knight one that ever was in
Arthur’s days as for a worldly knight, and Sir Percivale that was
peerless except Sir Galahad in holy deeds, but they died in the quest
of the Sangreal. Then came Sir Griflet le Fise de Dieu, Sir Lucan the
Butler, Sir Bedevere his brother, Sir Brandiles, Sir Constantine, Sir
Cador’s son of Cornwall, that was king after Arthur’s days, and Sir
Clegis, Sir Sadok, Sir Dinas le Seneschal of Cornwall, Sir Fergus, Sir
Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Clarrus of Cleremont, Sir Cloddrus, Sir
Hectimere, Sir Edward of Carnarvon, Sir Dinas, Sir Priamus, that was
christened by Sir Tristram the noble knight, and these three were
brethren; Sir Hellaine le Blank that was son to Sir Bors, he begat him
upon King Brandegoris’ daughter, and Sir Brian de Listinoise; Sir
Gautere, Sir Reynold, Sir Gillemere, were three brethren that Sir
Launcelot won upon a bridge in Sir Kay’s arms. Sir Guyart le Petite,
Sir Bellangere le Beuse, that was son to the good knight, Sir Alisander
le Orphelin, that was slain by the treason of King Mark. Also that
traitor king slew the noble knight Sir Tristram, as he sat harping
afore his lady La Beale Isoud, with a trenchant glaive, for whose death
was much bewailing of every knight that ever were in Arthur’s days;
there was never none so bewailed as was Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak,
for they were traitorously slain, Sir Tristram by King Mark, and Sir
Lamorak by Sir Gawaine and his brethren. And this Sir Bellangere
revenged the death of his father Alisander, and Sir Tristram slew King
Mark, and La Beale Isoud died swooning upon the corse of Sir Tristram,
whereof was great pity. And all that were with King Mark that were
consenting to the death of Sir Tristram were slain, as Sir Andred and
many other.

Then came Sir Hebes, Sir Morganore, Sir Sentraile, Sir Suppinabilis,
Sir Bellangere le Orgulous, that the good knight Sir Lamorak won in
plain battle; Sir Neroveus and Sir Plenorius, two good knights that Sir
Launcelot won; Sir Darras, Sir Harry le Fise Lake, Sir Erminide,
brother to King Hermaunce, for whom Sir Palomides fought at the Red
City with two brethren; and Sir Selises of the Dolorous Tower, Sir
Edward of Orkney, Sir Ironside, that was called the noble Knight of the
Red Launds that Sir Gareth won for the love of Dame Liones, Sir Arrok
de Grevaunt, Sir Degrane Saunce Velany that fought with the giant of
the black lowe, Sir Epinogris, that was the king’s son of
Northumberland. Sir Pelleas that loved the lady Ettard, and he had died
for her love had not been one of the ladies of the lake, her name was
Dame Nimue, and she wedded Sir Pelleas, and she saved him that he was
never slain, and he was a full noble knight; and Sir Lamiel of Cardiff
that was a great lover. Sir Plaine de Fors, Sir Melleaus de Lile, Sir
Bohart le Cure Hardy that was King Arthur’s son, Sir Mador de la Porte,
Sir Colgrevance, Sir Hervise de la Forest Savage, Sir Marrok, the good
knight that was betrayed with his wife, for she made him seven year a
wer-wolf, Sir Persaunt, Sir Pertilope, his brother, that was called the
Green Knight, and Sir Perimones, brother to them both, that was called
the Red Knight, that Sir Gareth won when he was called Beaumains. All
these hundred knights and ten searched Sir Urre’s wounds by the
commandment of King Arthur.




