CHAPTER XV. Of the deliverance of the queen to the king by Sir
Launcelot, and what language Sir Gawaine had to Sir Launcelot.


My most redoubted king, ye shall understand, by the Pope’s commandment
and yours, I have brought to you my lady the queen, as right requireth;
and if there be any knight, of whatsomever degree that he be, except
your person, that will say or dare say but that she is true and clean
to you, I here myself, Sir Launcelot du Lake, will make it good upon
his body, that she is a true lady unto you; but liars ye have listened,
and that hath caused debate betwixt you and me. For time hath been, my
lord Arthur, that ye have been greatly pleased with me when I did
battle for my lady, your queen; and full well ye know, my most noble
king, that she hath been put to great wrong or this time; and sithen it
pleased you at many times that I should fight for her, meseemeth, my
good lord, I had more cause to rescue her from the fire, insomuch she
should have been brent for my sake. For they that told you those tales
were liars, and so it fell upon them; for by likelihood had not the
might of God been with me, I might never have endured fourteen knights,
and they armed and afore purposed, and I unarmed and not purposed. For
I was sent for unto my lady your queen, I wot not for what cause; but I
was not so soon within the chamber door, but anon Sir Agravaine and Sir
Mordred called me traitor and recreant knight. They called thee right,
said Sir Gawaine. My lord Sir Gawaine, said Sir Launcelot, in their
quarrel they proved themselves not in the right. Well well, Sir
Launcelot, said the king, I have given thee no cause to do to me as
thou hast done, for I have worshipped thee and thine more than any of
all my knights.

My good lord, said Sir Launcelot, so ye be not displeased, ye shall
understand I and mine have done you oft better service than any other
knights have done, in many divers places; and where ye have been full
hard bestead divers times, I have myself rescued you from many dangers;
and ever unto my power I was glad to please you, and my lord Sir
Gawaine; both in jousts, and tournaments, and in battles set, both on
horseback and on foot, I have often rescued you, and my lord Sir
Gawaine, and many mo of your knights in many divers places. For now I
will make avaunt, said Sir Launcelot, I will that ye all wit that yet I
found never no manner of knight but that I was overhard for him, an I
had done my utterance, thanked be God; howbeit I have been matched with
good knights, as Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak, but ever I had a favour
unto them and a deeming what they were. And I take God to record, said
Sir Launcelot, I never was wroth nor greatly heavy with no good knight
an I saw him busy about to win worship; and glad I was ever when I
found any knight that might endure me on horseback and on foot: howbeit
Sir Carados of the Dolorous Tower was a full noble knight and a passing
strong man, and that wot ye, my lord Sir Gawaine; for he might well be
called a noble knight when he by fine force pulled you out of your
saddle, and bound you overthwart afore him to his saddle bow; and
there, my lord Sir Gawaine, I rescued you, and slew him afore your
sight. Also I found his brother, Sir Turquin, in likewise leading Sir
Gaheris, your brother, bounden afore him; and there I rescued your
brother and slew that Turquin, and delivered three-score-and-four of my
lord Arthur’s knights out of his prison. And now I dare say, said Sir
Launcelot, I met never with so strong knights, nor so well fighting, as
was Sir Carados and Sir Turquin, for I fought with them to the
uttermost. And therefore, said Sir Launcelot unto Sir Gawaine,
meseemeth ye ought of right to remember this; for, an I might have your
good will, I would trust to God to have my lord Arthur’s good grace.




CHAPTER XVI. Of the communication between Sir Gawaine and Sir
Launcelot, with much other language.


The king may do as he will, said Sir Gawaine, but wit thou well, Sir
Launcelot, thou and I shall never be accorded while we live, for thou
hast slain three of my brethren; and two of them ye slew traitorly and
piteously, for they bare none harness against thee, nor none would
bear. God would they had been armed, said Sir Launcelot, for then had
they been alive. And wit ye well Sir Gawaine, as for Sir Gareth, I love
none of my kinsmen so much as I did him; and ever while I live, said
Sir Launcelot, I will bewail Sir Gareth’s death, not all only for the
great fear I have of you, but many causes cause me to be sorrowful. One
is, for I made him knight; another is, I wot well he loved me above all
other knights; and the third is, he was passing noble, true, courteous,
and gentle, and well conditioned; the fourth is, I wist well, anon as I
heard that Sir Gareth was dead, I should never after have your love,
but everlasting war betwixt us; and also I wist well that ye would
cause my noble lord Arthur for ever to be my mortal foe. And as Jesu be
my help, said Sir Launcelot, I slew never Sir Gareth nor Sir Gaheris by
my will; but alas that ever they were unarmed that unhappy day. But
thus much I shall offer me, said Sir Launcelot, if it may please the
king’s good grace, and you, my lord Sir Gawaine, I shall first begin at
Sandwich, and there I shall go in my shirt, barefoot; and at every ten
miles’ end I will found and gar make an house of religion, of what
order that ye will assign me, with an whole convent, to sing and read,
day and night, in especial for Sir Gareth’s sake and Sir Gaheris. And
this shall I perform from Sandwich unto Carlisle; and every house shall
have sufficient livelihood. And this shall I perform while I have any
livelihood in Christendom; and there nis none of all these religious
places, but they shall be performed, furnished and garnished in all
things as an holy place ought to be, I promise you faithfully. And
this, Sir Gawaine, methinketh were more fairer, holier, and more better
to their souls, than ye, my most noble king, and you, Sir Gawaine, to
war upon me, for thereby shall ye get none avail.

Then all knights and ladies that were there wept as they were mad, and
the tears fell on King Arthur’s cheeks. Sir Launcelot, said Sir
Gawaine, I have right well heard thy speech, and thy great proffers,
but wit thou well, let the king do as it pleased him, I will never
forgive my brothers’ death, and in especial the death of my brother,
Sir Gareth. And if mine uncle, King Arthur, will accord with thee, he
shall lose my service, for wit thou well thou art both false to the
king and to me. Sir, said Launcelot, he beareth not the life that may
make that good; and if ye, Sir Gawaine, will charge me with so high a
thing, ye must pardon me, for then needs must I answer you. Nay, said
Sir Gawaine, we are past that at this time, and that caused the Pope,
for he hath charged mine uncle, the king, that he shall take his queen
again, and to accord with thee, Sir Launcelot, as for this season, and
therefore thou shalt go safe as thou camest. But in this land thou
shalt not abide past fifteen days, such summons I give thee: so the
king and we were consented and accorded or thou camest. And else, said
Sir Gawaine, wit thou well thou shouldst not have come here, but if it
were maugre thy head. And if it were not for the Pope’s commandment,
said Sir Gawaine, I should do battle with mine own body against thy
body, and prove it upon thee, that thou hast been both false unto mine
uncle King Arthur, and to me both; and that shall I prove upon thy
body, when thou art departed from hence, wheresomever I find thee.




