CHAPTER XI. How Sir Percivale’s sister bled a dish full of blood for to
heal a lady, wherefore she died; and how that the body was put in a
ship.


There is in this castle a gentlewoman which we and this castle is hers,
and many other. So it befell many years agone there fell upon her a
malady; and when she had lain a great while she fell unto a measle, and
of no leech she could have no remedy. But at the last an old man said
an she might have a dish full of blood of a maid and a clean virgin in
will and in work, and a king’s daughter, that blood should be her
health, and for to anoint her withal; and for this thing was this
custom made. Now, said Percivale’s sister, fair knights, I see well
that this gentlewoman is but dead. Certes, said Galahad, an ye bleed so
much ye may die. Truly, said she, an I die for to heal her I shall get
me great worship and soul’s health, and worship to my lineage, and
better is one harm than twain. And therefore there shall be no more
battle, but to-morn I shall yield you your custom of this castle. And
then there was great joy more than there was to-fore, for else had
there been mortal war upon the morn; notwithstanding she would none
other, whether they wold or nold.

That night were the three fellows eased with the best; and on the morn
they heard mass, and Sir Percivale’s sister bade bring forth the sick
lady. So she was, the which was evil at ease. Then said she: Who shall
let me blood? So one came forth and let her blood, and she bled so much
that the dish was full. Then she lift up her hand and blessed her; and
then she said to the lady: Madam, I am come to the death for to make
you whole, for God’s love pray for me. With that she fell in a swoon.
Then Galahad and his two fellows start up to her, and lift her up and
staunched her, but she had bled so much that she might not live. Then
she said when she was awaked: Fair brother Percivale, I die for the
healing of this lady, so I require you that ye bury me not in this
country, but as soon as I am dead put me in a boat at the next haven,
and let me go as adventure will lead me; and as soon as ye three come
to the City of Sarras, there to enchieve the Holy Grail, ye shall find
me under a tower arrived, and there bury me in the spiritual place; for
I say you so much, there Galahad shall be buried, and ye also, in the
same place.

Then Percivale understood these words, and granted it her, weeping. And
then said a voice: Lords and fellows, to-morrow at the hour of prime ye
three shall depart everych from other, till the adventure bring you to
the Maimed King. Then asked she her Saviour; and as soon as she had
received it the soul departed from the body. So the same day was the
lady healed, when she was anointed withal. Then Sir Percivale made a
letter of all that she had holpen them as in strange adventures, and
put it in her right hand, and so laid her in a barge, and covered it
with black silk; and so the wind arose, and drove the barge from the
land, and all knights beheld it till it was out of their sight. Then
they drew all to the castle, and so forthwith there fell a sudden
tempest and a thunder, lightning, and rain, as all the earth would have
broken. So half the castle turned up-so-down. So it passed evensong or
the tempest was ceased.

Then they saw afore them a knight armed and wounded hard in the body
and in the head, that said: O God, succour me for now it is need. After
this knight came another knight and a dwarf, which cried to them afar:
Stand, ye may not escape. Then the wounded knight held up his hands to
God that he should not die in such tribulation. Truly, said Galahad, I
shall succour him for His sake that he calleth upon. Sir, said Bors, I
shall do it, for it is not for you, for he is but one knight. Sir, said
he, I grant. So Sir Bors took his horse, and commended him to God, and
rode after, to rescue the wounded knight. Now turn we to the two
fellows.




CHAPTER XII. How Galahad and Percivale found in a castle many tombs of
maidens that had bled to death.


Now saith the story that all night Galahad and Percivale were in a
chapel in their prayers, for to save Sir Bors. So on the morrow they
dressed them in their harness toward the castle, to wit what was fallen
of them therein. And when they came there they found neither man nor
woman that he ne was dead by the vengeance of Our Lord. With that they
heard a voice that said: This vengeance is for blood-shedding of
maidens. Also they found at the end of the chapel a churchyard, and
therein might they see a three score fair tombs, and that place was so
fair and so delectable that it seemed them there had been none tempest,
for there lay the bodies of all the good maidens which were martyred
for the sick lady’s sake. Also they found the names of everych, and of
what blood they were come, and all were of kings’ blood, and twelve of
them were kings’ daughters. Then they departed and went into a forest.
Now, said Percivale unto Galahad, we must depart, so pray we Our Lord
that we may meet together in short time: then they did off their helms
and kissed together, and wept at their departing.




CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Launcelot entered into the ship where Sir
Percivale’s sister lay dead, and how he met with Sir Galahad, his son.


Now saith the history, that when Launcelot was come to the water of
Mortoise, as it is rehearsed before, he was in great peril, and so he
laid him down and slept, and took the adventure that God would send
him. So when he was asleep there came a vision unto him and said:
Launcelot, arise up and take thine armour, and enter into the first
ship that thou shalt find. And when he heard these words he start up
and saw great clearness about him. And then he lift up his hand and
blessed him, and so took his arms and made him ready; and so by
adventure he came by a strand, and found a ship the which was without
sail or oar. And as soon as he was within the ship there he felt the
most sweetness that ever he felt, and he was fulfilled with all thing
that he thought on or desired. Then he said: Fair sweet Father, Jesu
Christ, I wot not in what joy I am, for this joy passeth all earthly
joys that ever I was in. And so in this joy he laid him down to the
ship’s board, and slept till day. And when he awoke he found there a
fair bed, and therein lying a gentlewoman dead, the which was Sir
Percivale’s sister. And as Launcelot devised her, he espied in her
right hand a writ, the which he read, the which told him all the
adventures that ye have heard to-fore, and of what lineage she was
come. So with this gentlewoman Sir Launcelot was a month and more. If
ye would ask how he lived, He that fed the people of Israel with manna
in the desert, so was he fed; for every day when he had said his
prayers he was sustained with the grace of the Holy Ghost.

So on a night he went to play him by the water side, for he was
somewhat weary of the ship. And then he listened and heard an horse
come, and one riding upon him. And when he came nigh he seemed a
knight. And so he let him pass, and went thereas the ship was; and
there he alighted, and took the saddle and the bridle and put the horse
from him, and went into the ship. And then Launcelot dressed unto him,
and said: Ye be welcome. And he answered and saluted him again, and
asked him: What is your name? for much my heart giveth unto you. Truly,
said he, my name is Launcelot du Lake. Sir, said he, then be ye
welcome, for ye were the beginner of me in this world. Ah, said he, are
ye Galahad? Yea, forsooth, said he; and so he kneeled down and asked
him his blessing, and after took off his helm and kissed him. And there
was great joy between them, for there is no tongue can tell the joy
that they made either of other, and many a friendly word spoken
between, as kin would, the which is no need here to be rehearsed. And
there everych told other of their adventures and marvels that were
befallen to them in many journeys sith that they departed from the
court.

Anon, as Galahad saw the gentlewoman dead in the bed, he knew her well
enough, and told great worship of her, that she was the best maid
living, and it was great pity of her death. But when Launcelot heard
how the marvellous sword was gotten, and who made it, and all the
marvels rehearsed afore, then he prayed Galahad, his son, that he would
show him the sword, and so he did; and anon he kissed the pommel, and
the hilt, and the scabbard. Truly, said Launcelot, never erst knew I of
so high adventures done, and so marvellous and strange. So dwelt
Launcelot and Galahad within that ship half a year, and served God
daily and nightly with all their power; and often they arrived in isles
far from folk, where there repaired none but wild beasts, and there
they found many strange adventures and perilous, which they brought to
an end; but for those adventures were with wild beasts, and not in the
quest of the Sangreal, therefore the tale maketh here no mention
thereof, for it would be too long to tell of all those adventures that
befell them.




