CHAPTER XIX. How King Arthur and Sir Gawaine made a great host ready to
go over sea to make war on Sir Launcelot.


So leave we Sir Launcelot in his lands, and his noble knights with him,
and return we again unto King Arthur and to Sir Gawaine, that made a
great host ready, to the number of threescore thousand; and all thing
was made ready for their shipping to pass over the sea, and so they
shipped at Cardiff. And there King Arthur made Sir Mordred chief ruler
of all England, and also he put Queen Guenever under his governance;
because Sir Mordred was King Arthur’s son, he gave him the rule of his
land and of his wife; and so the king passed the sea and landed upon
Sir Launcelot’s lands, and there he brent and wasted, through the
vengeance of Sir Gawaine, all that they might overrun.

When this word came to Sir Launcelot, that King Arthur and Sir Gawaine
were landed upon his lands, and made a full great destruction and
waste, then spake Sir Bors, and said: My lord Sir Launcelot, it is
shame that we suffer them thus to ride over our lands, for wit you
well, suffer ye them as long as ye will, they will do you no favour an
they may handle you. Then said Sir Lionel that was wary and wise: My
lord Sir Launcelot, I will give this counsel, let us keep our strong
walled towns until they have hunger and cold, and blow on their nails;
and then let us freshly set upon them, and shred them down as sheep in
a field, that aliens may take example for ever how they land upon our
lands.

Then spake King Bagdemagus to Sir Launcelot: Sir, your courtesy will
shende us all, and thy courtesy hath waked all this sorrow; for an they
thus over our lands ride, they shall by process bring us all to nought
whilst we thus in holes us hide. Then said Sir Galihud unto Sir
Launcelot: Sir, here be knights come of kings’ blood, that will not
long droop, and they are within these walls; therefore give us leave,
like as we be knights, to meet them in the field, and we shall slay
them, that they shall curse the time that ever they came into this
country. Then spake seven brethren of North Wales, and they were seven
noble knights; a man might seek in seven kings’ lands or he might find
such seven knights. Then they all said at once: Sir Launcelot, for
Christ’s sake let us out ride with Sir Galihud, for we be never wont to
cower in castles nor in noble towns.

Then spake Sir Launcelot, that was master and governor of them all: My
fair lords, wit you well I am full loath to ride out with my knights
for shedding of Christian blood; and yet my lands I understand be full
bare for to sustain any host awhile, for the mighty wars that whilom
made King Claudas upon this country, upon my father King Ban, and on
mine uncle King Bors; howbeit we will as at this time keep our strong
walls, and I shall send a messenger unto my lord Arthur, a treaty for
to take; for better is peace than always war.

So Sir Launcelot sent forth a damosel and a dwarf with her, requiring
King Arthur to leave his warring upon his lands; and so she start upon
a palfrey, and the dwarf ran by her side. And when she came to the
pavilion of King Arthur, there she alighted; and there met her a gentle
knight, Sir Lucan the Butler, and said: Fair damosel, come ye from Sir
Launcelot du Lake? Yea sir, she said, therefore I come hither to speak
with my lord the king. Alas, said Sir Lucan, my lord Arthur would love
Launcelot, but Sir Gawaine will not suffer him. And then he said: I
pray to God, damosel, ye may speed well, for all we that be about the
king would Sir Launcelot did best of any knight living. And so with
this Lucan led the damosel unto the king where he sat with Sir Gawaine,
for to hear what she would say. So when she had told her tale, the
water ran out of the king’s eyen, and all the lords were full glad for
to advise the king as to be accorded with Sir Launcelot, save all only
Sir Gawaine, and he said: My lord mine uncle, what will ye do? Will ye
now turn again, now ye are passed thus far upon this journey? all the
world will speak of your villainy. Nay, said Arthur, wit thou well, Sir
Gawaine, I will do as ye will advise me; and yet meseemeth, said
Arthur, his fair proffers were not good to be refused; but sithen I am
come so far upon this journey, I will that ye give the damosel her
answer, for I may not speak to her for pity, for her proffers be so
large.




CHAPTER XX. What message Sir Gawaine sent to Sir Launcelot; and how
King Arthur laid siege to Benwick, and other matters.


Then Sir Gawaine said to the damosel thus: Damosel, say ye to Sir
Launcelot that it is waste labour now to sue to mine uncle; for tell
him, an he would have made any labour for peace, he should have made it
or this time, for tell him now it is too late; and say that I, Sir
Gawaine, so send him word, that I promise him by the faith I owe unto
God and to knighthood, I shall never leave him till he have slain me or
I him. So the damosel wept and departed, and there were many weeping
eyen; and so Sir Lucan brought the damosel to her palfrey, and so she
came to Sir Launcelot where he was among all his knights. And when Sir
Launcelot had heard this answer, then the tears ran down by his cheeks.
And then his noble knights strode about him, and said: Sir Launcelot,
wherefore make ye such cheer, think what ye are, and what men we are,
and let us noble knights match them in midst of the field. That may be
lightly done, said Sir Launcelot, but I was never so loath to do
battle, and therefore I pray you, fair sirs, as ye love me, be ruled as
I will have you, for I will always flee that noble king that made me
knight. And when I may no further, I must needs defend me, and that
will be more worship for me and us all than to compare with that noble
king whom we have all served. Then they held their language, and as
that night they took their rest.

And upon the morn early, in the dawning of the day, as knights looked
out, they saw the city of Benwick besieged round about; and fast they
began to set up ladders, and then they defied them out of the town, and
beat them from the walls wightly. Then came forth Sir Gawaine well
armed upon a stiff steed, and he came before the chief gate, with his
spear in his hand, crying: Sir Launcelot, where art thou? is there none
of you proud knights dare break a spear with me? Then Sir Bors made him
ready, and came forth out of the town, and there Sir Gawaine
encountered with Sir Bors. And at that time he smote Sir Bors down from
his horse, and almost he had slain him; and so Sir Bors was rescued and
borne into the town. Then came forth Sir Lionel, brother to Sir Bors,
and thought to revenge him; and either feutred their spears, and ran
together; and there they met spitefully, but Sir Gawaine had such grace
that he smote Sir Lionel down, and wounded him there passing sore; and
then Sir Lionel was rescued and borne into the town. And this Sir
Gawaine came every day, and he failed not but that he smote down one
knight or other.

So thus they endured half a year, and much slaughter was of people on
both parties. Then it befell upon a day, Sir Gawaine came afore the
gates armed at all pieces on a noble horse, with a great spear in his
hand; and then he cried with a loud voice: Where art thou now, thou
false traitor, Sir Launcelot? Why hidest thou thyself within holes and
walls like a coward? Look out now, thou false traitor knight, and here
I shall revenge upon thy body the death of my three brethren. All this
language heard Sir Launcelot every deal; and his kin and his knights
drew about him, and all they said at once to Sir Launcelot: Sir
Launcelot, now must ye defend you like a knight, or else ye be shamed
for ever; for, now ye be called upon treason, it is time for you to
stir, for ye have slept over-long and suffered over-much. So God me
help, said Sir Launcelot, I am right heavy of Sir Gawaine’s words, for
now he charged me with a great charge; and therefore I wot it as well
as ye, that I must defend me, or else to be recreant.

Then Sir Launcelot bade saddle his strongest horse, and bade let fetch
his arms, and bring all unto the gate of the tower; and then Sir
Launcelot spake on high unto King Arthur, and said: My lord Arthur, and
noble king that made me knight, wit you well I am right heavy for your
sake, that ye thus sue upon me; and always I forbare you, for an I
would have been vengeable, I might have met you in midst of the field,
and there to have made your boldest knights full tame. And now I have
forborne half a year, and suffered you and Sir Gawaine to do what ye
would do; and now may I endure it no longer, for now must I needs
defend myself, insomuch Sir Gawaine hath appealed me of treason; the
which is greatly against my will that ever I should fight against any
of your blood, but now I may not forsake it, I am driven thereto as a
beast till a bay.

Then Sir Gawaine said: Sir Launcelot, an thou durst do battle, leave
thy babbling and come off, and let us ease our hearts. Then Sir
Launcelot armed him lightly, and mounted upon his horse, and either of
the knights gat great spears in their hands, and the host without stood
still all apart, and the noble knights came out of the city by a great
number, insomuch that when Arthur saw the number of men and knights, he
marvelled, and said to himself: Alas, that ever Sir Launcelot was
against me, for now I see he hath forborne me. And so the covenant was
made, there should no man nigh them, nor deal with them, till the one
were dead or yelden.




