CHAPTER XXIII. How Sir Launcelot behaved him at the jousts, and other
men also.


Then they blew to the field; and there the King of Northgalis
encountered with the King of Scots, and there the King of Scots had a
fall; and the King of Ireland smote down King Uriens; and the King of
Northumberland smote down King Howel of Brittany; and Sir Galahad, the
haut prince, smote down Chaleins of Clarance. And then King Arthur was
wood wroth, and ran to the King with the Hundred Knights, and there
King Arthur smote him down; and after with that same spear King Arthur
smote down three other knights. And then when his spear was broken King
Arthur did passingly well; and so therewithal came in Sir Gawaine and
Sir Gaheris, Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, and there everych of them
smote down a knight, and Sir Gawaine smote down four knights; and then
there began a strong medley, for then there came in the knights of
Launcelot’s blood, and Sir Gareth and Sir Palomides with them, and many
knights of the Table Round, and they began to hold the four kings and
the mighty duke so hard that they were discomfit; but this Duke
Galahad, the haut prince, was a noble knight, and by his mighty prowess
of arms he held the knights of the Table Round strait enough.

All this doing saw Sir Launcelot, and then he came into the field with
Sir Lavaine as it had been thunder. And then anon Sir Bors and the
knights of his blood espied Sir Launcelot, and said to them all: I warn
you beware of him with the sleeve of gold upon his head, for he is
himself Sir Launcelot du Lake; and for great goodness Sir Bors warned
Sir Gareth. I am well apaid, said Sir Gareth, that I may know him. But
who is he, said they all, that rideth with him in the same array? That
is the good and gentle knight Sir Lavaine, said Sir Bors. So Sir
Launcelot encountered with Sir Gawaine, and there by force Sir
Launcelot smote down Sir Gawaine and his horse to the earth, and so he
smote down Sir Agravaine and Sir Gaheris, and also he smote down Sir
Mordred, and all this was with one spear. Then Sir Lavaine met with Sir
Palomides, and either met other so hard and so fiercely that both their
horses fell to the earth. And then were they horsed again, and then met
Sir Launcelot with Sir Palomides, and there Sir Palomides had a fall;
and so Sir Launcelot or ever he stint, as fast as he might get spears,
he smote down thirty knights, and the most part of them were knights of
the Table Round; and ever the knights of his blood withdrew them, and
made them ado in other places where Sir Launcelot came not.

And then King Arthur was wroth when he saw Sir Launcelot do such deeds;
and then the king called unto him Sir Gawaine, Sir Mordred, Sir Kay,
Sir Griflet, Sir Lucan the Butler, Sir Bedivere, Sir Palomides, Sir
Safere, his brother; and so the king with these nine knights made them
ready to set upon Sir Launcelot, and upon Sir Lavaine. All this espied
Sir Bors and Sir Gareth. Now I dread me sore, said Sir Bors, that my
lord, Sir Launcelot, will be hard matched. By my head, said Sir Gareth,
I will ride unto my lord Sir Launcelot, for to help him, fall of him
what fall may, for he is the same man that made me knight. Ye shall not
so, said Sir Bors, by my counsel, unless that ye were disguised. Ye
shall see me disguised, said Sir Gareth; and therewithal he espied a
Welsh knight where he was to repose him, and he was sore hurt afore by
Sir Gawaine, and to him Sir Gareth rode, and prayed him of his
knighthood to lend him his shield for his. I will well, said the Welsh
knight. And when Sir Gareth had his shield, the book saith it was
green, with a maiden that seemed in it.

Then Sir Gareth came driving to Sir Launcelot all that he might and
said: Knight, keep thyself, for yonder cometh King Arthur with nine
noble knights with him to put you to a rebuke, and so I am come to bear
you fellowship for old love ye have shewed me. Gramercy, said Sir
Launcelot. Sir, said Sir Gareth, encounter ye with Sir Gawaine, and I
shall encounter with Sir Palomides; and let Sir Lavaine match with the
noble King Arthur. And when we have delivered them, let us three hold
us sadly together. Then came King Arthur with his nine knights with
him, and Sir Launcelot encountered with Sir Gawaine, and gave him such
a buffet that the arson of his saddle brast, and Sir Gawaine fell to
the earth. Then Sir Gareth encountered with the good knight Sir
Palomides, and he gave him such a buffet that both his horse and he
dashed to the earth. Then encountered King Arthur with Sir Lavaine, and
there either of them smote other to the earth, horse and all, that they
lay a great while. Then Sir Launcelot smote down Sir Agravaine, and Sir
Gaheris, and Sir Mordred; and Sir Gareth smote down Sir Kay, and Sir
Safere, and Sir Griflet. And then Sir Lavaine was horsed again, and he
smote down Sir Lucan the Butler and Sir Bedevere and then there began
great throng of good knights.

Then Sir Launcelot hurtled here and there, and raced and pulled off
helms, so that at that time there might none sit him a buffet with
spear nor with sword; and Sir Gareth did such deeds of arms that all
men marvelled what knight he was with the green shield, for he smote
down that day and pulled down mo than thirty knights. And, as the
French book saith, Sir Launcelot marvelled; when he beheld Sir Gareth
do such deeds, what knight he might be; and Sir Lavaine pulled down and
smote down twenty knights. Also Sir Launcelot knew not Sir Gareth for
an Sir Tristram de Liones, outher Sir Lamorak de Galis had been alive,
Sir Launcelot would have deemed he had been one of them twain. So ever
as Sir Launcelot Sir Gareth, Sir Lavaine fought, and on the one side
Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Lionel, Sir Lamorak de Galis, Sir
Bleoberis, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Pelleas, and with mo other
of King Ban’s blood fought upon another party, and held the King with
the Hundred Knights and the King of Northumberland right strait.




CHAPTER XXIV. How King Arthur marvelled much of the jousting in the
field, and how he rode and found Sir Launcelot.


So this tournament and this jousts dured long, till it was near night,
for the knights of the Round Table relieved ever unto King Arthur; for
the king was wroth out of measure that he and his knights might not
prevail that day. Then Sir Gawaine said to the king: I marvel where all
this day [be] Sir Bors de Ganis and his fellowship of Sir Launcelot’s
blood, I marvel all this day they be not about you: it is for some
cause said Sir Gawaine. By my head, said Sir Kay, Sir Bors is yonder
all this day upon the right hand of this field, and there he and his
blood do more worshipfully than we do. It may well be, said Sir
Gawaine, but I dread me ever of guile; for on pain of my life, said Sir
Gawaine, this knight with the red sleeve of gold is himself Sir
Launcelot, I see well by his riding and by his great strokes; and the
other knight in the same colours is the good young knight, Sir Lavaine.
Also that knight with the green shield is my brother, Sir Gareth, and
yet he hath disguised himself, for no man shall never make him be
against Sir Launcelot, because he made him knight. By my head, said
Arthur, nephew, I believe you; therefore tell me now what is your best
counsel. Sir, said Sir Gawaine, ye shall have my counsel: let blow unto
lodging, for an he be Sir Launcelot du Lake, and my brother, Sir
Gareth, with him, with the help of that good young knight, Sir Lavaine,
trust me truly it will be no boot to strive with them but if we should
fall ten or twelve upon one knight, and that were no worship, but
shame. Ye say truth, said the king; and for to say sooth, said the
king, it were shame to us so many as we be to set upon them any more;
for wit ye well, said King Arthur, they be three good knights, and
namely that knight with the sleeve of gold.

So then they blew unto lodging; but forthwithal King Arthur let send
unto the four kings, and to the mighty duke, and prayed them that the
knight with the sleeve of gold depart not from them, but that the king
may speak with him. Then forthwithal King Arthur alighted and unarmed
him, and took a little hackney and rode after Sir Launcelot, for ever
he had a spy upon him. And so he found him among the four kings and the
duke; and there the king prayed them all unto supper, and they said
they would with good will. And when they were unarmed then King Arthur
knew Sir Launcelot, Sir Lavaine, and Sir Gareth. Ah, Sir Launcelot,
said King Arthur, this day ye have heated me and my knights.

So they yede unto Arthur’s lodging all together, and there was a great
feast and great revel, and the prize was given unto Sir Launcelot; and
by heralds they named him that he had smitten down fifty knights, and
Sir Gareth five-and-thirty, and Sir Lavaine four-and-twenty knights.
Then Sir Launcelot told the king and the queen how the lady huntress
shot him in the forest of Windsor, in the buttock, with an broad arrow,
and how the wound thereof was that time six inches deep, and in like
long. Also Arthur blamed Sir Gareth because he left his fellowship and
held with Sir Launcelot. My lord, said Sir Gareth, he made me a knight,
and when I saw him so hard bestead, methought it was my worship to help
him, for I saw him do so much, and so many noble knights against him;
and when I understood that he was Sir Launcelot du Lake, I shamed to
see so many knights against him alone. Truly, said King Arthur unto Sir
Gareth, ye say well, and worshipfully have ye done and to yourself
great worship; and all the days of my life, said King Arthur unto Sir
Gareth, wit you well I shall love you, and trust you the more better.
For ever, said Arthur, it is a worshipful knight’s deed to help another
worshipful knight when he seeth him in a great danger; for ever a
worshipful man will be loath to see a worshipful man shamed; and he
that is of no worship, and fareth with cowardice, never shall he show
gentleness, nor no manner of goodness where he seeth a man in any
danger, for then ever will a coward show no mercy; and always a good
man will do ever to another man as he would be done to himself. So then
there were great feasts unto kings and dukes, and revel, game, and
play, and all manner of noblesse was used; and he that was courteous,
true, and faithful, to his friend was that time cherished.




