CHAPTER XII. How the six knights sent Sir Dagonet to joust with King
Mark, and how King Mark refused him.


And then they asked him of his adventures, and whether he had seen Sir
Tristram or Sir Launcelot. So God me help, said Sir Dinadan, I saw none
of them sithen I departed from Camelot. What knight is that, said Sir
Brandiles, that so suddenly departed from you, and rode over yonder
field? Sir, said he, it was a knight of Cornwall, and the most horrible
coward that ever bestrode horse. What is his name? said all these
knights. I wot not, said Sir Dinadan. So when they had reposed them,
and spoken together, they took their horses and rode to a castle where
dwelt an old knight that made all knights-errant good cheer. Then in
the meanwhile that they were talking came into the castle Sir Griflet
le Fise de Dieu, and there was he welcome; and they all asked him
whether he had seen Sir Launcelot or Sir Tristram. Sirs, he answered, I
saw him not sithen he departed from Camelot. So as Sir Dinadan walked
and beheld the castle, thereby in a chamber he espied King Mark, and
then he rebuked him, and asked him why he departed so. Sir, said he,
for I durst not abide because they were so many. But how escaped ye?
said King Mark. Sir, said Sir Dinadan, they were better friends than I
weened they had been. Who is captain of that fellowship? said the king.
Then for to fear him Sir Dinadan said that it was Sir Launcelot. O
Jesu, said the king, might I know Sir Launcelot by his shield? Yea,
said Dinadan, for he beareth a shield of silver and black bends. All
this he said to fear the king, for Sir Launcelot was not in his
fellowship. Now I pray you, said King Mark, that ye will ride in my
fellowship. That is me loath to do, said Sir Dinadan, because ye
forsook my fellowship.

Right so Sir Dinadan went from King Mark, and went to his own
fellowship; and so they mounted upon their horses, and rode on their
ways, and talked of the Cornish knight, for Dinadan told them that he
was in the castle where they were lodged. It is well said, said Sir
Griflet, for here have I brought Sir Dagonet, King Arthur’s fool, that
is the best fellow and the merriest in the world. Will ye do well? said
Sir Dinadan: I have told the Cornish knight that here is Sir Launcelot,
and the Cornish knight asked me what shield he bare. Truly, I told him
that he bare the same shield that Sir Mordred beareth. Will ye do well?
said Sir Mordred; I am hurt and may not well bear my shield nor
harness, and therefore put my shield and my harness upon Sir Dagonet,
and let him set upon the Cornish knight. That shall be done, said Sir
Dagonet, by my faith. Then anon was Dagonet armed him in Mordred’s
harness and his shield, and he was set on a great horse, and a spear in
his hand. Now, said Dagonet, shew me the knight, and I trow I shall
bear him down. So all these knights rode to a woodside, and abode till
King Mark came by the way. Then they put forth Sir Dagonet, and he came
on all the while his horse might run, straight upon King Mark. And when
he came nigh King Mark, he cried as he were wood, and said: Keep thee,
knight of Cornwall, for I will slay thee. Anon, as King Mark beheld his
shield, he said to himself: Yonder is Sir Launcelot; alas, now am I
destroyed; and therewithal he made his horse to run as fast as it might
through thick and thin. And ever Sir Dagonet followed after King Mark,
crying and rating him as a wood man, through a great forest. When Sir
Uwaine and Sir Brandiles saw Dagonet so chase King Mark, they laughed
all as they were wood. And then they took their horses, and rode after
to see how Sir Dagonet sped, for they would not for no good that Sir
Dagonet were shent, for King Arthur loved him passing well, and made
him knight with his own hands. And at every tournament he began to make
King Arthur to laugh. Then the knights rode here and there, crying and
chasing after King Mark, that all the forest rang of the noise.




CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Palomides by adventure met King Mark flying, and
how he overthrew Dagonet and other knights.


So King Mark rode by fortune by a well, in the way where stood a
knight-errant on horseback, armed at all points, with a great spear in
his hand. And when he saw King Mark coming flying he said: Knight,
return again for shame and stand with me, and I shall be thy warrant.
Ah, fair knight, said King Mark, let me pass, for yonder cometh after
me the best knight of the world, with the black bended shield. Fie, for
shame, said the knight, he is none of the worthy knights, and if he
were Sir Launcelot or Sir Tristram I should not doubt to meet the
better of them both. When King Mark heard him say that word, he turned
his horse and abode by him. And then that strong knight bare a spear to
Dagonet, and smote him so sore that he bare him over his horse’s tail,
and nigh he had broken his neck. And anon after him came Sir Brandiles,
and when he saw Dagonet have that fall he was passing wroth, and cried:
Keep thee, knight, and so they hurtled together wonder sore. But the
knight smote Sir Brandiles so sore that he went to the earth, horse and
man. Sir Uwaine came after and saw all this. Jesu, said he, yonder is a
strong knight. And then they feutred their spears, and this knight came
so eagerly that he smote down Sir Uwaine. Then came Ozana with the
hardy heart, and he was smitten down. Now, said Sir Griflet, by my
counsel let us send to yonder errant-knight, and wit whether he be of
Arthur’s court, for as I deem it is Sir Lamorak de Galis. So they sent
unto him, and prayed the strange knight to tell his name, and whether
he were of Arthur’s court or not. As for my name they shall not wit,
but tell them I am a knight-errant as they are, and let them wit that I
am no knight of King Arthur’s court; and so the squire rode again unto
them and told them his answer of him. By my head, said Sir Agravaine,
he is one of the strongest knights that ever I saw, for he hath
overthrown three noble knights, and needs we must encounter with him
for shame. So Sir Agravaine feutred his spear, and that other was
ready, and smote him down over his horse to the earth. And in the same
wise he smote Sir Uwaine les Avoutres and also Sir Griflet. Then had he
served them all but Sir Dinadan, for he was behind, and Sir Mordred was
unarmed, and Dagonet had his harness.

So when this was done, this strong knight rode on his way a soft pace,
and King Mark rode after him, praising him mickle; but he would answer
no words, but sighed wonderly sore, hanging down his head, taking no
heed to his words. Thus they rode well a three mile English, and then
this knight called to him a varlet, and bade him ride until yonder fair
manor, and recommend me to the lady of that castle and place, and pray
her to send me refreshing of good meats and drinks. And if she ask thee
what I am, tell her that I am the knight that followeth the glatisant
beast: that is in English to say the questing beast; for that beast
wheresomever he yede he quested in the belly with such a noise as it
had been a thirty couple of hounds. Then the varlet went his way and
came to the manor, and saluted the lady, and told her from whence he
came. And when she understood that he came from the knight that
followed the questing beast: O sweet Lord Jesu, she said, when shall I
see that noble knight, my dear son Palomides? Alas, will he not abide
with me? and therewith she swooned and wept, and made passing great
dole. And then also soon as she might she gave the varlet all that he
asked. And the varlet returned unto Sir Palomides, for he was a varlet
of King Mark. And as soon as he came, he told the knight’s name was Sir
Palomides. I am well pleased, said King Mark, but hold thee still and
say nothing. Then they alighted and set them down and reposed them a
while. Anon withal King Mark fell asleep. When Sir Palomides saw him
sound asleep he took his horse and rode his way, and said to them: I
will not be in the company of a sleeping knight. And so he rode forth a
great pace.




