CHAPTER XIII. How Launcelot was brought to an hermit for to be healed
of his wound, and of other matters.


And when the hermit beheld him, as he sat leaning upon his saddle-bow
ever bleeding piteously, and ever the knight-hermit thought that he
should know him, but he could not bring him to knowledge because he was
so pale for bleeding. What knight are ye, said the hermit, and where
were ye born? My fair lord, said Sir Launcelot, I am a stranger and a
knight adventurous, that laboureth throughout many realms for to win
worship. Then the hermit advised him better, and saw by a wound on his
cheek that he was Sir Launcelot. Alas, said the hermit, mine own lord
why lain you your name from me? Forsooth I ought to know you of right,
for ye are the most noblest knight of the world, for well I know you
for Sir Launcelot. Sir, said he, sith ye know me, help me an ye may,
for God’s sake, for I would be out of this pain at once, either to
death or to life. Have ye no doubt, said the hermit, ye shall live and
fare right well. And so the hermit called to him two of his servants,
and so he and his servants bare him into the hermitage, and lightly
unarmed him, and laid him in his bed. And then anon the hermit
staunched his blood, and made him to drink good wine, so that Sir
Launcelot was well refreshed and knew himself; for in those days it was
not the guise of hermits as is nowadays, for there were none hermits in
those days but that they had been men of worship and of prowess; and
those hermits held great household, and refreshed people that were in
distress.

Now turn we unto King Arthur, and leave we Sir Launcelot in the
hermitage. So when the kings were come together on both parties, and
the great feast should be holden, King Arthur asked the King of
Northgalis and their fellowship, where was that knight that bare the
red sleeve: Bring him afore me that he may have his laud, and honour,
and the prize, as it is right. Then spake Sir Galahad, the haut prince,
and the King with the Hundred Knights: We suppose that knight is
mischieved, and that he is never like to see you nor none of us all,
and that is the greatest pity that ever we wist of any knight. Alas,
said Arthur, how may this be, is he so hurt? What is his name? said
King Arthur. Truly, said they all, we know not his name, nor from
whence he came, nor whither he would. Alas, said the king, this be to
me the worst tidings that came to me this seven year, for I would not
for all the lands I wield to know and wit it were so that that noble
knight were slain. Know ye him? said they all. As for that, said
Arthur, whether I know him or know him not, ye shall not know for me
what man he is, but Almighty Jesu send me good tidings of him. And so
said they all. By my head, said Sir Gawaine, if it so be that the good
knight be so sore hurt, it is great damage and pity to all this land,
for he is one of the noblest knights that ever I saw in a field handle
a spear or a sword; and if he may be found I shall find him, for I am
sure he nis not far from this town. Bear you well, said King Arthur, an
ye may find him, unless that he be in such a plight that he may not
wield himself. Jesu defend, said Sir Gawaine, but wit I shall what he
is, an I may find him.

Right so Sir Gawaine took a squire with him upon hackneys, and rode all
about Camelot within six or seven mile, but so he came again and could
hear no word of him. Then within two days King Arthur and all the
fellowship returned unto London again. And so as they rode by the way
it happed Sir Gawaine at Astolat to lodge with Sir Bernard thereas was
Sir Launcelot lodged. And so as Sir Gawaine was in his chamber to
repose him Sir Bernard, the old baron, came unto him, and his daughter
Elaine, to cheer him and to ask him what tidings, and who did best at
that tournament of Winchester. So God me help, said Sir Gawaine, there
were two knights that bare two white shields, but the one of them bare
a red sleeve upon his head, and certainly he was one of the best
knights that ever I saw joust in field. For I dare say, said Sir
Gawaine, that one knight with the red sleeve smote down forty knights
of the Table Round, and his fellow did right well and worshipfully. Now
blessed be God, said the Fair Maiden of Astolat, that that knight sped
so well, for he is the man in the world that I first loved, and truly
he shall be last that ever I shall love. Now, fair maid, said Sir
Gawaine, is that good knight your love? Certainly sir, said she, wit ye
well he is my love. Then know ye his name? said Sir Gawaine. Nay truly,
said the damosel, I know not his name nor from whence he cometh, but to
say that I love him, I promise you and God that I love him. How had ye
knowledge of him first? said Sir Gawaine.




CHAPTER XIV. How Sir Gawaine was lodged with the lord of Astolat, and
there had knowledge that it was Sir Launcelot that bare the red sleeve.


Then she told him as ye have heard to-fore, and how her father betook
him her brother to do him service, and how her father lent him her
brother’s, Sir Tirre’s, shield: And here with me he left his own
shield. For what cause did he so? said Sir Gawaine. For this cause,
said the damosel, for his shield was too well known among many noble
knights. Ah fair damosel, said Sir Gawaine, please it you let me have a
sight of that shield. Sir, said she, it is in my chamber, covered with
a case, and if ye will come with me ye shall see it. Not so, said Sir
Bernard till his daughter, let send for it.

So when the shield was come, Sir Gawaine took off the case, and when he
beheld that shield he knew anon that it was Sir Launcelot’s shield, and
his own arms. Ah Jesu mercy, said Sir Gawaine, now is my heart more
heavier than ever it was to-fore. Why? said Elaine. For I have great
cause, said Sir Gawaine. Is that knight that oweth this shield your
love? Yea truly, said she, my love he is, God would I were his love. So
God me speed, said Sir Gawaine, fair damosel ye have right, for an he
be your love ye love the most honourable knight of the world, and the
man of most worship. So me thought ever, said the damosel, for never or
that time, for no knight that ever I saw, loved I never none erst. God
grant, said Sir Gawaine, that either of you may rejoice other, but that
is in a great adventure. But truly, said Sir Gawaine unto the damosel,
ye may say ye have a fair grace, for why I have known that noble knight
this four-and-twenty year, and never or that day, I nor none other
knight, I dare make good, saw nor heard say that ever he bare token or
sign of no lady, gentlewoman, ne maiden, at no jousts nor tournament.
And therefore fair maiden, said Sir Gawaine, ye are much beholden to
him to give him thanks. But I dread me, said Sir Gawaine, that ye shall
never see him in this world, and that is great pity that ever was of
earthly knight. Alas, said she, how may this be, is he slain? I say not
so, said Sir Gawaine, but wit ye well he is grievously wounded, by all
manner of signs, and by men’s sight more likelier to be dead than to be
alive; and wit ye well he is the noble knight, Sir Launcelot, for by
this shield I know him. Alas, said the Fair Maiden of Astolat, how may
this be, and what was his hurt? Truly, said Sir Gawaine, the man in the
world that loved him best hurt him so; and I dare say, said Sir
Gawaine, an that knight that hurt him knew the very certainty that he
had hurt Sir Launcelot, it would be the most sorrow that ever came to
his heart.

Now fair father, said then Elaine, I require you give me leave to ride
and to seek him, or else I wot well I shall go out of my mind, for I
shall never stint till that I find him and my brother, Sir Lavaine. Do
as it liketh you, said her father, for me sore repenteth of the hurt of
that noble knight. Right so the maid made her ready, and before Sir
Gawaine, making great dole.

Then on the morn Sir Gawaine came to King Arthur, and told him how he
had found Sir Launcelot’s shield in the keeping of the Fair Maiden of
Astolat. All that knew I aforehand, said King Arthur, and that caused
me I would not suffer you to have ado at the great jousts, for I
espied, said King Arthur, when he came in till his lodging full late in
the evening in Astolat. But marvel have I, said Arthur, that ever he
would bear any sign of any damosel, for or now I never heard say nor
knew that ever he bare any token of none earthly woman. By my head,
said Sir Gawaine, the Fair Maiden of Astolat loveth him marvellously
well; what it meaneth I cannot say, and she is ridden after to seek
him. So the king and all came to London, and there Sir Gawaine openly
disclosed to all the court that it was Sir Launcelot that jousted best.




