CHAPTER IV. How the hermit expounded their advision.


Then spake Nacien unto Ector: Sooth it is that Launcelot and ye came
down off one chair: the chair betokeneth mastership and lordship which
ye came down from. But ye two knights, said the hermit, ye go to seek
that ye shall never find, that is the Sangreal; for it is the secret
thing of our Lord Jesu Christ. What is to mean that Sir Launcelot fell
down off his horse: he hath left pride and taken him to humility, for
he hath cried mercy loud for his sin, and sore repented him, and our
Lord hath clothed him in his clothing which is full of knots, that is
the hair that he weareth daily. And the ass that he rode upon is a
beast of humility, for God would not ride upon no steed, nor upon no
palfrey; so in ensample that an ass betokeneth meekness, that thou
sawest Sir Launcelot ride on in thy sleep. And the well whereas the
water sank from him when he should have taken thereof, and when he saw
he might not have it, he returned thither from whence he came, for the
well betokeneth the high grace of God, the more men desire it to take
it, the more shall be their desire. So when he came nigh the Sangreal,
he meeked him that he held him not a man worthy to be so nigh the Holy
Vessel, for he had been so defouled in deadly sin by the space of many
years; yet when he kneeled to drink of the well, there he saw great
providence of the Sangreal. And for he had served so long the devil, he
shall have vengeance four-and-twenty days long, for that he hath been
the devil’s servant four-and-twenty years. And then soon after he shall
return unto Camelot out of this country, and he shall say a part of
such things as he hath found.

Now will I tell you what betokeneth the hand with the candle and the
bridle: that is to understand the Holy Ghost where charity is ever, and
the bridle signifieth abstinence. For when she is bridled in Christian
man’s heart she holdeth him so short that he falleth not in deadly sin.
And the candle which sheweth clearness and sight signifieth the right
way of Jesu Christ. And when he went and said: Knights of poor faith
and of wicked belief, these three things failed, charity, abstinence,
and truth; therefore ye may not attain that high adventure of the
Sangreal.




CHAPTER V. Of the good counsel that the hermit gave to them.


Certes, said Gawaine, soothly have ye said, that I see it openly. Now,
I pray you, good man and holy father, tell me why we met not with so
many adventures as we were wont to do, and commonly have the better. I
shall tell you gladly, said the good man; the adventure of the Sangreal
which ye and many other have undertaken the quest of it and find it
not, the cause is for it appeareth not to sinners. Wherefore marvel not
though ye fail thereof, and many other. For ye be an untrue knight and
a great murderer, and to good men signifieth other things than murder.
For I dare say, as sinful as Sir Launcelot hath been, sith that he went
into the quest of the Sangreal he slew never man, nor nought shall,
till that he come unto Camelot again, for he hath taken upon him for to
forsake sin. And nere that he nis not stable, but by his thought he is
likely to turn again, he should be next to enchieve it save Galahad,
his son. But God knoweth his thought and his unstableness, and yet
shall he die right an holy man, and no doubt he hath no fellow of no
earthly sinful man. Sir, said Gawaine, it seemeth me by your words that
for our sins it will not avail us to travel in this quest. Truly, said
the good man, there be an hundred such as ye be that never shall
prevail, but to have shame. And when they had heard these voices they
commended him unto God.

Then the good man called Gawaine, and said: It is long time passed sith
that ye were made knight, and never sithen thou servedst thy Maker, and
now thou art so old a tree that in thee is neither life nor fruit;
wherefore bethink thee that thou yield to Our Lord the bare rind, sith
the fiend hath the leaves and the fruit. Sir, said Gawaine an I had
leisure I would speak with you, but my fellow here, Sir Ector, is gone,
and abideth me yonder beneath the hill. Well, said the good man, thou
were better to be counselled. Then departed Gawaine and came to Ector,
and so took their horses and rode till they came to a forester’s house,
which harboured them right well. And on the morn they departed from
their host, and rode long or they could find any adventure.




CHAPTER VI. How Sir Bors met with an hermit, and how he was confessed
to him, and of his penance enjoined to him.


When Bors was departed from Camelot he met with a religious man riding
on an ass, and Sir Bors saluted him. Anon the good man knew him that he
was one of the knights-errant that was in the quest of the Sangreal.
What are ye? said the good man. Sir, said he, I am a knight that fain
would be counselled in the quest of the Sangreal, for he shall have
much earthly worship that may bring it to an end. Certes, said the good
man, that is sooth, for he shall be the best knight of the world, and
the fairest of all the fellowship. But wit you well there shall none
attain it but by cleanness, that is pure confession.

So rode they together till that they came to an hermitage. And there he
prayed Bors to dwell all that night with him. And so he alighted and
put away his armour, and prayed him that he might be confessed; and so
they went into the chapel, and there he was clean confessed, and they
ate bread and drank water together. Now, said the good man, I pray thee
that thou eat none other till that thou sit at the table where the
Sangreal shall be. Sir, said he, I agree me thereto, but how wit ye
that I shall sit there. Yes, said the good man, that know I, but there
shall be but few of your fellows with you. All is welcome, said Sir
Bors, that God sendeth me. Also, said the good man, instead of a shirt,
and in sign of chastisement, ye shall wear a garment; therefore I pray
you do off all your clothes and your shirt: and so he did. And then he
took him a scarlet coat, so that should be instead of his shirt till he
had fulfilled the quest of the Sangreal; and the good man found in him
so marvellous a life and so stable, that he marvelled and felt that he
was never corrupt in fleshly lusts, but in one time that he begat Elian
le Blank.

Then he armed him, and took his leave, and so departed. And so a little
from thence he looked up into a tree, and there he saw a passing great
bird upon an old tree, and it was passing dry, without leaves; and the
bird sat above, and had birds, the which were dead for hunger. So smote
he himself with his beak, the which was great and sharp. And so the
great bird bled till that he died among his birds. And the young birds
took the life by the blood of the great bird. When Bors saw this he
wist well it was a great tokening; for when he saw the great bird arose
not, then he took his horse and yede his way. So by evensong, by
adventure he came to a strong tower and an high, and there was he
lodged gladly.




