CHAPTER XLIII. How Sir Archade appealed Sir Palomides of treason, and
how Sir Palomides slew him.


When Palomides was unarmed he asked lodging for himself and the
damosel. Anon the haut prince commanded them to lodging. And he was not
so soon in his lodging but there came a knight that hight Archade, he
was brother unto Goneries that Palomides slew afore in the damosel’s
quarrel. And this knight, Archade, called Sir Palomides traitor, and
appealed him for the death of his brother. By the leave of the haut
prince, said Palomides, I shall answer thee. When Sir Galahalt
understood their quarrel he bade them go to dinner: And as soon as ye
have dined look that either knight be ready in the field. So when they
had dined they were armed both, and took their horses, and the queen,
and the prince, and Sir Launcelot, were set to behold them; and so they
let run their horses, and there Sir Palomides bare Archade on his spear
over his horse’s tail. And then Palomides alighted and drew his sword,
but Sir Archade might not arise; and there Sir Palomides raced off his
helm, and smote off his head. Then the haut prince and Queen Guenever
went unto supper. Then King Bagdemagus sent away his son Meliagaunce
because Sir Launcelot should not meet with him, for he hated Sir
Launcelot, and that knew he not.




CHAPTER XLIV. Of the third day, and how Sir Palomides jousted with Sir
Lamorak, and other things.


Now beginneth the third day of jousting; and at that day King
Bagdemagus made him ready; and there came against him King Marsil, that
had in gift an island of Sir Galahalt the haut prince; and this island
had the name Pomitain. Then it befell that King Bagdemagus and King
Marsil of Pomitain met together with spears, and King Marsil had such a
buffet that he fell over his horse’s croup. Then came there in a knight
of King Marsil to revenge his lord, and King Bagdemagus smote him down,
horse and man, to the earth. So there came an earl that hight Arrouse,
and Sir Breuse, and an hundred knights with them of Pomitain, and the
King of Northgalis was with them; and all these were against them of
Surluse. And then there began great battle, and many knights were cast
under horses’ feet. And ever King Bagdemagus did best, for he first
began, and ever he held on. Gaheris, Gawaine’s brother, smote ever at
the face of King Bagdemagus; and at the last King Bagdemagus hurtled
down Gaheris, horse and man.

Then by adventure Sir Palomides, the good knight, met with Sir Blamore
de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis’ brother. And either smote other with great
spears, that both their horses and knights fell to the earth. But Sir
Blamore had such a fall that he had almost broken his neck, for the
blood brast out at nose, mouth, and his ears, but at the last he
recovered well by good surgeons. Then there came in the Duke Chaleins
of Clarance; and in his governance there came a knight that hight Elis
la Noire; and there encountered with him King Bagdemagus, and he smote
Elis that he made him to avoid his saddle. So the Duke Chaleins of
Clarance did there great deeds of arms, and of so late as he came in
the third day there was no man did so well except King Bagdemagus and
Sir Palomides, that the prize was given that day to King Bagdemagus.
And then they blew unto lodging, and unarmed them, and went to the
feast. Right so came Dinadan, and mocked and japed with King Bagdemagus
that all knights laughed at him, for he was a fine japer, and well
loving all good knights.

So anon as they had dined there came a varlet bearing four spears on
his back; and he came to Palomides, and said thus: Here is a knight by
hath sent you the choice of four spears, and requireth you for your
lady’s sake to take that one half of these spears, and joust with him
in the field. Tell him, said Palomides, I will not fail him. When Sir
Galahalt wist of this, he bade Palomides make him ready. So the Queen
Guenever, the haut prince, and Sir Launcelot, they were set upon
scaffolds to give the judgment of these two knights. Then Sir Palomides
and the strange knight ran so eagerly together that their spears brake
to their hands. Anon withal either of them took a great spear in his
hand and all to-shivered them in pieces. And then either took a greater
spear, and then the knight smote down Sir Palomides, horse and man, to
the earth. And as he would have passed over him the strange knight’s
horse stumbled and fell down upon Palomides. Then they drew their
swords and lashed together wonderly sore a great while.

Then the haut prince and Sir Launcelot said they saw never two knights
fight better than they did; but ever the strange knight doubled his
strokes, and put Palomides aback; therewithal the haut prince cried:
Ho: and then they went to lodging. And when they were unarmed they knew
it was the noble knight Sir Lamorak. When Sir Launcelot knew that it
was Sir Lamorak he made much of him, for above all earthly men he loved
him best except Sir Tristram. Then Queen Guenever commended him, and so
did all other good knights make much of him, except Sir Gawaine’s
brethren. Then Queen Guenever said unto Sir Launcelot: Sir, I require
you that an ye joust any more, that ye joust with none of the blood of
my lord Arthur. So he promised he would not as at that time.




CHAPTER XLV. Of the fourth day, and of many great feats of arms.


Here beginneth the fourth day. Then came into the field the King with
the Hundred Knights, and all they of Northgalis, and the Duke Chaleins
of Clarance, and King Marsil of Pomitain, and there came Safere,
Palomides’ brother, and there he told him tidings of his mother. And
his name was called the Earl, and so he appealed him afore King Arthur:
For he made war upon our father and mother, and there I slew him in
plain battle. So they went into the field, and the damosel with them;
and there came to encounter again them Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, and Sir
Ector de Maris. Sir Palomides encountered with Sir Bleoberis, and
either smote other down. And in the same wise did Sir Safere and Sir
Ector, and the two couples did battle on foot. Then came in Sir
Lamorak, and he encountered with the King with the Hundred Knights, and
smote him quite over his horse’s tail. And in the same wise he served
the King of Northgalis, and also he smote down King Marsil. And so or
ever he stint he smote down with his spear and with his sword thirty
knights. When Duke Chaleins saw Lamorak do so great prowess he would
not meddle with him for shame; and then he charged all his knights in
pain of death that none of you touch him; for it were shame to all good
knights an that knight were shamed.

Then the two kings gathered them together, and all they set upon Sir
Lamorak; and he failed them not, but rushed here and there, smiting on
the right hand and on the left, and raced off many helms, so that the
haut prince and Queen Guenever said they saw never knight do such deeds
of arms on horseback. Alas, said Launcelot to King Bagdemagus, I will
arm me and help Sir Lamorak. And I will ride with you, said King
Bagdemagus. And when they two were horsed they came to Sir Lamorak that
stood among thirty knights; and well was him that might reach him a
buffet, and ever he smote again mightily. Then came there into the
press Sir Launcelot, and he threw down Sir Mador de la Porte. And with
the truncheon of that spear he threw down many knights. And King
Bagdemagus smote on the left hand and on the right hand marvellously
well. And then the three kings fled aback. Therewithal then Sir
Galahalt let blow to lodging, and all the heralds gave Sir Lamorak the
prize. And all this while fought Palomides, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Safere,
Sir Ector on foot; never were there four knights evener matched. And
then they were departed, and had unto their lodging, and unarmed them,
and so they went to the great feast.

But when Sir Lamorak was come into the court Queen Guenever took him in
her arms and said: Sir, well have ye done this day. Then came the haut
prince, and he made of him great joy, and so did Dinadan, for he wept
for joy; but the joy that Sir Launcelot made of Sir Lamorak there might
no man tell. Then they went unto rest, and on the morn the haut prince
let blow unto the field.




