CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Percivale met with Sir Ector, and how they fought
long, and each had almost slain other.


Sir, said Sir Persides, on my life he shall prove a noble knight as any
now is living. And when he saw Sir Kay and Sir Mordred, Sir Persides
said thus: My fair lords both, Sir Percivale greeteth you well both,
and he sent you word by me that he trusteth to God or ever he come to
the court again to be of as great noblesse as ever were ye both, and mo
men to speak of his noblesse than ever they did of you. It may well be,
said Sir Kay and Sir Mordred, but at that time when he was made knight
he was full unlike to prove a good knight. As for that, said King
Arthur, he must needs prove a good knight, for his father and his
brethren were noble knights.

And now will we turn unto Sir Percivale that rode long; and in a forest
he met a knight with a broken shield and a broken helm; and as soon as
either saw other readily they made them ready to joust, and so hurtled
together with all the might of their horses, and met together so hard,
that Sir Percivale was smitten to the earth. And then Sir Percivale
arose lightly, and cast his shield on his shoulder and drew his sword,
and bade the other knight: Alight, and do we battle unto the uttermost.
Will ye more? said that knight. And therewith he alighted, and put his
horse from him; and then they came together an easy pace, and there
they lashed together with noble swords, and sometime they struck and
sometime they foined, and either gave other many great wounds. Thus
they fought near half a day, and never rested but right little, and
there was none of them both that had less wounds than fifteen, and they
bled so much that it was marvel they stood on their feet. But this
knight that fought with Sir Percivale was a proved knight and a
wise-fighting knight, and Sir Percivale was young and strong, not
knowing in fighting as the other was.

Then Sir Percivale spoke first, and said: Sir knight, hold thy hand a
while still, for we have fought for a simple matter and quarrel
overlong, and therefore I require thee tell me thy name, for I was
never or this time matched. So God me help, said that knight, and never
or this time was there never knight that wounded me so sore as thou
hast done, and yet have I fought in many battles; and now shalt thou
wit that I am a knight of the Table Round, and my name is Sir Ector de
Maris, brother unto the good knight, Sir Launcelot du Lake. Alas, said
Sir Percivale, and my name is Sir Percivale de Galis that hath made my
quest to seek Sir Launcelot, and now I am siker that I shall never
finish my quest, for ye have slain me with your hands. It is not so,
said Sir Ector, for I am slain by your hands, and may not live.
Therefore I require you, said Sir Ector unto Sir Percivale, ride ye
hereby to a priory, and bring me a priest that I may receive my
Saviour, for I may not live. And when ye come to the court of King
Arthur tell not my brother, Sir Launcelot, how that ye slew me, for
then he would be your mortal enemy, but ye may say that I was slain in
my quest as I sought him. Alas, said Sir Percivale, ye say that never
will be, for I am so faint for bleeding that I may unnethe stand, how
should I then take my horse?




CHAPTER XIV. How by miracle they were both made whole by the coming of
the holy vessel of Sangreal.


Then they made both great dole out of measure. This will not avail,
said Sir Percivale. And then he kneeled down and made his prayer
devoutly unto Almighty Jesu, for he was one of the best knights of the
world that at that time was, in whom the very faith stood most in.
Right so there came by the holy vessel of the Sangreal with all manner
of sweetness and savour; but they could not readily see who that bare
that vessel, but Sir Percivale had a glimmering of the vessel and of
the maiden that bare it, for he was a perfect clean maiden; and
forthwithal they both were as whole of hide and limb as ever they were
in their life-days: then they gave thankings to God with great
mildness. O Jesu, said Sir Percivale, what may this mean, that we be
thus healed, and right now we were at the point of dying? I wot full
well, said Sir Ector, what it is; it is an holy vessel that is borne by
a maiden, and therein is part of the holy blood of our Lord Jesu
Christ, blessed mote he be. But it may not be seen, said Sir Ector, but
if it be by a perfect man. So God me help, said Sir Percivale, I saw a
damosel, as me thought, all in white, with a vessel in both her hands,
and forthwithal I was whole.

So then they took their horses and their harness, and amended their
harness as well as they might that was broken; and so they mounted upon
their horses, and rode talking together. And there Sir Ector de Maris
told Sir Percivale how he had sought his brother, Sir Launcelot, long,
and never could hear witting of him: In many strange adventures have I
been in this quest. And so either told other of their adventures.

_Here endeth the eleventh book. And here followeth the twelfth book._




BOOK XII.




CHAPTER I. How Sir Launcelot in his madness took a sword and fought
with a knight, and leapt in a bed.


And now leave we of a while of Sir Ector and of Sir Percivale, and
speak we of Sir Launcelot that suffered and endured many sharp showers,
that ever ran wild wood from place to place, and lived by fruit and
such as he might get, and drank water two year; and other clothing had
he but little but his shirt and his breech. Thus as Sir Launcelot
wandered here and there he came in a fair meadow where he found a
pavilion; and there by, upon a tree, there hung a white shield, and two
swords hung thereby, and two spears leaned there by a tree. And when
Sir Launcelot saw the swords, anon he leapt to the one sword, and took
it in his hand, and drew it out. And then he lashed at the shield, that
all the meadow rang of the dints, that he gave such a noise as ten
knights had foughten together.

Then came forth a dwarf, and leapt unto Sir Launcelot, and would have
had the sword out of his hand. And then Sir Launcelot took him by the
both shoulders and threw him to the ground upon his neck, that he had
almost broken his neck; and therewithal the dwarf cried help. Then came
forth a likely knight, and well apparelled in scarlet furred with
minever. And anon as he saw Sir Launcelot he deemed that he should be
out of his wit. And then he said with fair speech: Good man, lay down
that sword, for as meseemeth thou hadst more need of sleep and of warm
clothes than to wield that sword. As for that, said Sir Launcelot, come
not too nigh, for an thou do, wit thou well I will slay thee.

And when the knight of the pavilion saw that, he stert backward within
the pavilion. And then the dwarf armed him lightly; and so the knight
thought by force and might to take the sword from Sir Launcelot, and so
he came stepping out; and when Sir Launcelot saw him come so all armed
with his sword in his hand, then Sir Launcelot flew to him with such a
might, and hit him upon the helm such a buffet, that the stroke
troubled his brains, and therewith the sword brake in three. And the
knight fell to the earth as he had been dead, the blood brasting out of
his mouth, the nose, and the ears. And then Sir Launcelot ran into the
pavilion, and rushed even into the warm bed; and there was a lady in
that bed, and she gat her smock, and ran out of the pavilion. And when
she saw her lord lie at the ground like to be dead, then she cried and
wept as she had been mad. Then with her noise the knight awaked out of
his swoon, and looked up weakly with his eyes; and then he asked her,
where was that mad man that had given him such a buffet: For such a
buffet had I never of man’s hand. Sir, said the dwarf, it is not
worship to hurt him, for he is a man out of his wit; and doubt ye not
he hath been a man of great worship, and for some heartly sorrow that
he hath taken, he is fallen mad; and me beseemeth, said the dwarf, he
resembleth much unto Sir Launcelot, for him I saw at the great
tournament beside Lonazep. Jesu defend, said that knight, that ever
that noble knight, Sir Launcelot, should be in such a plight; but
whatsomever he be, said that knight, harm will I none do him: and this
knight’s name was Bliant. Then he said unto the dwarf: Go thou fast on
horseback, unto my brother Sir Selivant, that is at the Castle Blank,
and tell him of mine adventure, and bid him bring with him an horse
litter, and then will we bear this knight unto my castle.




