BOOK XX.




CHAPTER I. How Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred were busy upon Sir Gawaine
for to disclose the love between Sir Launcelot and Queen Guenever.


In May when every lusty heart flourisheth and bourgeoneth, for as the
season is lusty to behold and comfortable, so man and woman rejoice and
gladden of summer coming with his fresh flowers: for winter with his
rough winds and blasts causeth a lusty man and woman to cower and sit
fast by the fire. So in this season, as in the month of May, it befell
a great anger and unhap that stinted not till the flower of chivalry of
all the world was destroyed and slain; and all was long upon two
unhappy knights the which were named Agravaine and Sir Mordred, that
were brethren unto Sir Gawaine. For this Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred
had ever a privy hate unto the queen Dame Guenever and to Sir
Launcelot, and daily and nightly they ever watched upon Sir Launcelot.

So it mishapped, Sir Gawaine and all his brethren were in King Arthur’s
chamber; and then Sir Agravaine said thus openly, and not in no
counsel, that many knights might hear it: I marvel that we all be not
ashamed both to see and to know how Sir Launcelot lieth daily and
nightly by the queen, and all we know it so; and it is shamefully
suffered of us all, that we all should suffer so noble a king as King
Arthur is so to be shamed.

Then spake Sir Gawaine, and said: Brother Sir Agravaine, I pray you and
charge you move no such matters no more afore me, for wit you well,
said Sir Gawaine, I will not be of your counsel. So God me help, said
Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth, we will not be knowing, brother Agravaine,
of your deeds. Then will I, said Sir Mordred. I lieve well that, said
Sir Gawaine, for ever unto all unhappiness, brother Sir Mordred,
thereto will ye grant; and I would that ye left all this, and made you
not so busy, for I know, said Sir Gawaine, what will fall of it. Fall
of it what fall may, said Sir Agravaine, I will disclose it to the
king. Not by my counsel, said Sir Gawaine, for an there rise war and
wrack betwixt Sir Launcelot and us, wit you well brother, there will
many kings and great lords hold with Sir Launcelot. Also, brother Sir
Agravaine, said Sir Gawaine, ye must remember how ofttimes Sir
Launcelot hath rescued the king and the queen; and the best of us all
had been full cold at the heart-root had not Sir Launcelot been better
than we, and that hath he proved himself full oft. And as for my part,
said Sir Gawaine, I will never be against Sir Launcelot for one day’s
deed, when he rescued me from King Carados of the Dolorous Tower, and
slew him, and saved my life. Also, brother Sir Agravaine and Sir
Mordred, in like wise Sir Launcelot rescued you both, and threescore
and two, from Sir Turquin. Methinketh brother, such kind deeds and
kindness should be remembered. Do as ye list, said Sir Agravaine, for I
will lain it no longer. With these words came to them King Arthur. Now
brother, stint your noise, said Sir Gawaine. We will not, said Sir
Agravaine and Sir Mordred. Will ye so? said Sir Gawaine; then God speed
you, for I will not hear your tales ne be of your counsel. No more will
I, said Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris, for we will never say evil by that
man; for because, said Sir Gareth, Sir Launcelot made me knight, by no
manner owe I to say ill of him: and therewithal they three departed,
making great dole. Alas, said Sir Gawaine and Sir Gareth, now is this
realm wholly mischieved, and the noble fellowship of the Round Table
shall be disparpled: so they departed.




CHAPTER II. How Sir Agravaine disclosed their love to King Arthur, and
how King Arthur gave them licence to take him.


And then Sir Arthur asked them what noise they made. My lord, said
Agravaine, I shall tell you that I may keep no longer. Here is I, and
my brother Sir Mordred, brake unto my brothers Sir Gawaine, Sir
Gaheris, and to Sir Gareth, how this we know all, that Sir Launcelot
holdeth your queen, and hath done long; and we be your sister’s sons,
and we may suffer it no longer, and all we wot that ye should be above
Sir Launcelot; and ye are the king that made him knight, and therefore
we will prove it, that he is a traitor to your person.

If it be so, said Sir Arthur, wit you well he is none other, but I
would be loath to begin such a thing but I might have proofs upon it;
for Sir Launcelot is an hardy knight, and all ye know he is the best
knight among us all; and but if he be taken with the deed, he will
fight with him that bringeth up the noise, and I know no knight that is
able to match him. Therefore an it be sooth as ye say, I would he were
taken with the deed. For as the French book saith, the king was full
loath thereto, that any noise should be upon Sir Launcelot and his
queen; for the king had a deeming, but he would not hear of it, for Sir
Launcelot had done so much for him and the queen so many times, that
wit ye well the king loved him passingly well. My lord, said Sir
Agravaine, ye shall ride to-morn a-hunting, and doubt ye not Sir
Launcelot will not go with you. Then when it draweth toward night, ye
may send the queen word that ye will lie out all that night, and so may
ye send for your cooks, and then upon pain of death we shall take him
that night with the queen, and outher we shall bring him to you dead or
quick. I will well, said the king; then I counsel you, said the king,
take with you sure fellowship. Sir, said Agravaine, my brother, Sir
Mordred, and I, will take with us twelve knights of the Round Table.
Beware, said King Arthur, for I warn you ye shall find him wight. Let
us deal, said Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred.

So on the morn King Arthur rode a-hunting, and sent word to the queen
that he would be out all that night. Then Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred
gat to them twelve knights, and hid themself in a chamber in the Castle
of Carlisle, and these were their names: Sir Colgrevance, Sir Mador de
la Porte, Sir Gingaline, Sir Meliot de Logris, Sir Petipase of
Winchelsea, Sir Galleron of Galway, Sir Melion of the Mountain, Sir
Astamore, Sir Gromore Somir Joure, Sir Curselaine, Sir Florence, Sir
Lovel. So these twelve knights were with Sir Mordred and Sir Agravaine,
and all they were of Scotland, outher of Sir Gawaine’s kin, either
well-willers to his brethren.

So when the night came, Sir Launcelot told Sir Bors how he would go
that night and speak with the queen. Sir, said Sir Bors, ye shall not
go this night by my counsel. Why? said Sir Launcelot. Sir, said Sir
Bors, I dread me ever of Sir Agravaine, that waiteth you daily to do
you shame and us all; and never gave my heart against no going, that
ever ye went to the queen, so much as now; for I mistrust that the king
is out this night from the queen because peradventure he hath lain some
watch for you and the queen, and therefore I dread me sore of treason.
Have ye no dread, said Sir Launcelot, for I shall go and come again,
and make no tarrying. Sir, said Sir Bors, that me repenteth, for I
dread me sore that your going out this night shall wrath us all. Fair
nephew, said Sir Launcelot, I marvel much why ye say thus, sithen the
queen hath sent for me; and wit ye well I will not be so much a coward,
but she shall understand I will see her good grace. God speed you well,
said Sir Bors, and send you sound and safe again.




