CHAPTER XX. How Galahad and his fellows were fed of the Holy Sangreal,
and how Our Lord appeared to them, and other things.


Then King Pelles and his son departed. And therewithal beseemed them
that there came a man, and four angels from heaven, clothed in likeness
of a bishop, and had a cross in his hand; and these four angels bare
him up in a chair, and set him down before the table of silver where
upon the Sangreal was; and it seemed that he had in midst of his
forehead letters the which said: See ye here Joseph, the first bishop
of Christendom, the same which Our Lord succoured in the city of Sarras
in the spiritual place. Then the knights marvelled, for that bishop was
dead more than three hundred year to-fore. O knights, said he, marvel
not, for I was sometime an earthly man. With that they heard the
chamber door open, and there they saw angels; and two bare candles of
wax, and the third a towel, and the fourth a spear which bled
marvellously, that three drops fell within a box which he held with his
other hand. And they set the candles upon the table, and the third the
towel upon the vessel, and the fourth the holy spear even upright upon
the vessel. And then the bishop made semblaunt as though he would have
gone to the sacring of the mass. And then he took an ubblie which was
made in likeness of bread. And at the lifting up there came a figure in
likeness of a child, and the visage was as red and as bright as any
fire, and smote himself into the bread, so that they all saw it that
the bread was formed of a fleshly man; and then he put it into the Holy
Vessel again, and then he did that longed to a priest to do to a mass.
And then he went to Galahad and kissed him, and bade him go and kiss
his fellows: and so he did anon. Now, said he, servants of Jesu Christ,
ye shall be fed afore this table with sweet meats that never knights
tasted. And when he had said, he vanished away. And they set them at
the table in great dread, and made their prayers.

Then looked they and saw a man come out of the Holy Vessel, that had
all the signs of the passion of Jesu Christ, bleeding all openly, and
said: My knights, and my servants, and my true children, which be come
out of deadly life into spiritual life, I will now no longer hide me
from you, but ye shall see now a part of my secrets and of my hidden
things: now hold and receive the high meat which ye have so much
desired. Then took he himself the Holy Vessel and came to Galahad; and
he kneeled down, and there he received his Saviour, and after him so
received all his fellows; and they thought it so sweet that it was
marvellous to tell. Then said he to Galahad: Son, wottest thou what I
hold betwixt my hands? Nay, said he, but if ye will tell me. This is,
said he, the holy dish wherein I ate the lamb on Sheer-Thursday. And
now hast thou seen that thou most desired to see, but yet hast thou not
seen it so openly as thou shalt see it in the city of Sarras in the
spiritual place. Therefore thou must go hence and bear with thee this
Holy Vessel; for this night it shall depart from the realm of Logris,
that it shall never be seen more here. And wottest thou wherefore? For
he is not served nor worshipped to his right by them of this land, for
they be turned to evil living; therefore I shall disherit them of the
honour which I have done them. And therefore go ye three to-morrow unto
the sea, where ye shall find your ship ready, and with you take the
sword with the strange girdles, and no more with you but Sir Percivale
and Sir Bors. Also I will that ye take with you of the blood of this
spear for to anoint the Maimed King, both his legs and all his body,
and he shall have his health. Sir, said Galahad, why shall not these
other fellows go with us? For this cause: for right as I departed my
apostles one here and another there, so I will that ye depart; and two
of you shall die in my service, but one of you shall come again and
tell tidings. Then gave he them his blessing and vanished away.




CHAPTER XXI. How Galahad anointed with the blood of the spear the
Maimed King, and of other adventures.


And Galahad went anon to the spear which lay upon the table, and
touched the blood with his fingers, and came after to the Maimed King
and anointed his legs.

And therewith he clothed him anon, and start upon his feet out of his
bed as an whole man, and thanked Our Lord that He had healed him. And
that was not to the worldward, for anon he yielded him to a place of
religion of white monks, and was a full holy man.

That same night about midnight came a voice among them which said: My
sons and not my chief sons, my friends and not my warriors, go ye hence
where ye hope best to do and as I bade you.

Ah, thanked be Thou, Lord, that Thou wilt vouchsafe to call us, Thy
sinners. Now may we well prove that we have not lost our pains.

And anon in all haste they took their harness and departed.

But the three knights of Gaul, one of them hight Claudine, King
Claudas’ son, and the other two were great gentlemen. Then prayed
Galahad to everych of them, that if they come to King Arthur’s court
that they should salute my lord, Sir Launcelot, my father, and all them
of the Round Table; and prayed them if that they came on that part that
they should not forget it.

Right so departed Galahad, Percivale and Bors with him; and so they
rode three days, and then they came to a rivage, and found the ship
whereof the tale speaketh of to-fore. And when they came to the board
they found in the midst the table of silver which they had left with
the Maimed King, and the Sangreal which was covered with red samite.

Then were they glad to have such things in their fellowship; and so
they entered and made great reverence thereto; and Galahad fell in his
prayer long time to Our Lord, that at what time he asked, that he
should pass out of this world.

So much he prayed till a voice said to him: Galahad, thou shalt have
thy request; and when thou askest the death of thy body thou shalt have
it, and then shalt thou find the life of the soul.

Percivale heard this, and prayed him, of fellowship that was between
them, to tell him wherefore he asked such things.

That shall I tell you, said Galahad; the other day when we saw a part
of the adventures of the Sangreal I was in such a joy of heart, that I
trow never man was that was earthly. And therefore I wot well, when my
body is dead my soul shall be in great joy to see the blessed Trinity
every day, and the majesty of Our Lord, Jesu Christ.

So long were they in the ship that they said to Galahad: Sir, in this
bed ought ye to lie, for so saith the scripture. And so he laid him
down and slept a great while; and when he awaked he looked afore him
and saw the city of Sarras. And as they would have landed they saw the
ship wherein Percivale had put his sister in. Truly, said Percivale, in
the name of God, well hath my sister holden us covenant. Then took they
out of the ship the table of silver, and he took it to Percivale and to
Bors, to go to-fore, and Galahad came behind. And right so they went to
the city, and at the gate of the city they saw an old man crooked. Then
Galahad called him and bade him help to bear this heavy thing. Truly,
said the old man, it is ten year ago that I might not go but with
crutches. Care thou not, said Galahad, and arise up and shew thy good
will. And so he assayed, and found himself as whole as ever he was.
Than ran he to the table, and took one part against Galahad. And anon
arose there great noise in the city, that a cripple was made whole by
knights marvellous that entered into the city.

Then anon after, the three knights went to the water, and brought up
into the palace Percivale’s sister, and buried her as richly as a
king’s daughter ought to be. And when the king of the city, which was
cleped Estorause, saw the fellowship, he asked them of whence they
were, and what thing it was that they had brought upon the table of
silver. And they told him the truth of the Sangreal, and the power
which that God had sent there. Then the king was a tyrant, and was come
of the line of paynims, and took them and put them in prison in a deep
hole.




