CHAPTER II. How Sir Lancelot was carried in an horse litter, and how
Sir Launcelot rescued Sir Bliant, his host.


So the dwarf rode fast, and he came again and brought Sir Selivant with
him, and six men with an horse litter; and so they took up the feather
bed with Sir Launcelot, and so carried all away with them unto the
Castle Blank, and he never awaked till he was within the castle. And
then they bound his hands and his feet, and gave him good meats and
good drinks, and brought him again to his strength and his fairness;
but in his wit they could not bring him again, nor to know himself.
Thus was Sir Launcelot there more than a year and a half, honestly
arrayed and fair faren withal.

Then upon a day this lord of that castle, Sir Bliant, took his arms, on
horseback, with a spear, to seek adventures. And as he rode in a forest
there met with him two knights adventurous, the one was Breuse Saunce
Pité, and his brother, Sir Bertelot; and these two ran both at once
upon Sir Bliant, and brake their spears upon his body. And then they
drew out swords and made great battle, and fought long together. But at
the last Sir Bliant was sore wounded, and felt himself faint; and then
he fled on horseback toward his castle. And as they came hurling under
the castle whereas Sir Launcelot lay in a window, [he] saw how two
knights laid upon Sir Bliant with their swords. And when Sir Launcelot
saw that, yet as wood as he was he was sorry for his lord, Sir Bliant.
And then Sir Launcelot brake the chains from his legs and off his arms,
and in the breaking he hurt his hands sore; and so Sir Launcelot ran
out at a postern, and there he met with the two knights that chased Sir
Bliant; and there he pulled down Sir Bertelot with his bare hands from
his horse, and therewithal he wrothe his sword out of his hand; and so
he leapt unto Sir Breuse, and gave him such a buffet upon the head that
he tumbled backward over his horse’s croup. And when Sir Bertelot saw
there his brother have such a fall, he gat a spear in his hand, and
would have run Sir Launcelot through: that saw Sir Bliant, and struck
off the hand of Sir Bertelot. And then Sir Breuse and Sir Bertelot gat
their horses and fled away.

When Sir Selivant came and saw what Sir Launcelot had done for his
brother, then he thanked God, and so did his brother, that ever they
did him any good. But when Sir Bliant saw that Sir Launcelot was hurt
with the breaking of his irons, then was he heavy that ever he bound
him. Bind him no more, said Sir Selivant, for he is happy and gracious.
Then they made great joy of Sir Launcelot, and they bound him no more;
and so he abode there an half year and more. And on the morn early Sir
Launcelot was ware where came a great boar with many hounds nigh him.
But the boar was so big there might no hounds tear him; and the hunters
came after, blowing their horns, both upon horseback and some upon
foot; and then Sir Launcelot was ware where one alighted and tied his
horse to a tree, and leaned his spear against the tree.




CHAPTER III. How Sir Launcelot fought against a boar and slew him, and
how he was hurt, and brought unto an hermitage.


So came Sir Launcelot and found the horse bounden till a tree, and a
spear leaning against a tree, and a sword tied to the saddle bow; and
then Sir Launcelot leapt into the saddle and gat that spear in his
hand, and then he rode after the boar; and then Sir Launcelot was ware
where the boar set his arse to a tree fast by an hermitage. Then Sir
Launcelot ran at the boar with his spear, and therewith the boar turned
him nimbly, and rove out the lungs and the heart of the horse, so that
Launcelot fell to the earth; and, or ever Sir Launcelot might get from
the horse, the boar rove him on the brawn of the thigh up to the hough
bone. And then Sir Launcelot was wroth, and up he gat upon his feet,
and drew his sword, and he smote off the boar’s head at one stroke. And
therewithal came out the hermit, and saw him have such a wound. Then
the hermit came to Sir Launcelot and bemoaned him, and would have had
him home unto his hermitage; but when Sir Launcelot heard him speak, he
was so wroth with his wound that he ran upon the hermit to have slain
him, and the hermit ran away. And when Sir Launcelot might not overget
him, he threw his sword after him, for Sir Launcelot might go no
further for bleeding; then the hermit turned again, and asked Sir
Launcelot how he was hurt. Fellow, said Sir Launcelot, this boar hath
bitten me sore. Then come with me, said the hermit, and I shall heal
you. Go thy way, said Sir Launcelot, and deal not with me.

Then the hermit ran his way, and there he met with a good knight with
many men. Sir, said the hermit, here is fast by my place the goodliest
man that ever I saw, and he is sore wounded with a boar, and yet he
hath slain the boar. But well I wot, said the hermit, and he be not
holpen, that goodly man shall die of that wound, and that were great
pity. Then that knight at the desire of the hermit gat a cart, and in
that cart that knight put the boar and Sir Launcelot, for Sir Launcelot
was so feeble that they might right easily deal with him; and so Sir
Launcelot was brought unto the hermitage, and there the hermit healed
him of his wound. But the hermit might not find Sir Launcelot’s
sustenance, and so he impaired and waxed feeble, both of his body and
of his wit: for the default of his sustenance he waxed more wooder than
he was aforehand.

And then upon a day Sir Launcelot ran his way into the forest; and by
adventure he came to the city of Corbin, where Dame Elaine was, that
bare Galahad, Sir Launcelot’s son. And so when he was entered into the
town he ran through the town to the castle; and then all the young men
of that city ran after Sir Launcelot, and there they threw turves at
him, and gave him many sad strokes. And ever as Sir Launcelot might
overreach any of them, he threw them so that they would never come in
his hands no more; for of some he brake the legs and the arms, and so
fled into the castle; and then came out knights and squires and rescued
Sir Launcelot. And when they beheld him and looked upon his person,
they thought they saw never so goodly a man. And when they saw so many
wounds upon him, all they deemed that he had been a man of worship. And
then they ordained him clothes to his body, and straw underneath him,
and a little house. And then every day they would throw him meat, and
set him drink, but there was but few would bring him meat to his hands.




