CHAPTER V. How the queen required Sir Bors to fight for her, and how he
granted upon condition; and how he warned Sir Launcelot thereof.


So the queen departed from the king, and sent for Sir Bors into her
chamber. And when he was come she besought him of succour. Madam, said
he, what would ye that I did? for I may not with my worship have ado in
this matter, because I was at the same dinner, for dread that any of
those knights would have me in suspicion. Also, madam, said Sir Bors,
now miss ye Sir Launcelot, for he would not have failed you neither in
right nor in wrong, as ye have well proved when ye have been in danger;
and now ye have driven him out of this country, by whom ye and all we
were daily worshipped by; therefore, madam, I marvel how ye dare for
shame require me to do any thing for you, in so much ye have chased him
out of your country by whom we were borne up and honoured. Alas, fair
knight, said the queen, I put me wholly in your grace, and all that is
done amiss I will amend as ye will counsel me. And therewith she
kneeled down upon both her knees, and besought Sir Bors to have mercy
upon her: Outher I shall have a shameful death, and thereto I never
offended.

Right so came King Arthur, and found the queen kneeling afore Sir Bors;
then Sir Bors pulled her up, and said: Madam, ye do me great dishonour.
Ah, gentle knight, said the king, have mercy upon my queen, courteous
knight, for I am now in certain she is untruly defamed. And therefore,
courteous knight, said the king, promise her to do battle for her, I
require you for the love of Sir Launcelot. My lord, said Sir Bors, ye
require me the greatest thing that any man may require me; and wit ye
well if I grant to do battle for the queen I shall wrath many of my
fellowship of the Table Round. But as for that, said Bors, I will grant
my lord that for my lord Sir Launcelot’s sake, and for your sake I will
at that day be the queen’s champion unless that there come by adventure
a better knight than I am to do battle for her. Will ye promise me
this, said the king, by your faith? Yea sir, said Sir Bors, of that I
will not fail you, nor her both, but if there come a better knight than
I am, and then shall he have the battle. Then was the king and the
queen passing glad, and so departed, and thanked him heartily.

So then Sir Bors departed secretly upon a day, and rode unto Sir
Launcelot thereas he was with the hermit, Sir Brasias, and told him of
all their adventure. Ah Jesu, said Sir Launcelot, this is come happily
as I would have it, and therefore I pray you make you ready to do
battle, but look that ye tarry till ye see me come, as long as ye may.
For I am sure Mador is an hot knight when he is enchafed, for the more
ye suffer him the hastier will he be to battle. Sir, said Bors, let me
deal with him, doubt ye not ye shall have all your will. Then departed
Sir Bors from him and came to the court again. Then was it noised in
all the court that Sir Bors should do battle for the queen; wherefore
many knights were displeased with him, that he would take upon him to
do battle in the queen’s quarrel; for there were but few knights in all
the court but they deemed the queen was in the wrong, and that she had
done that treason.

So Sir Bors answered thus to his fellows of the Table Round: Wit ye
well, my fair lords, it were shame to us all an we suffered to see the
most noble queen of the world to be shamed openly, considering her lord
and our lord is the man of most worship in the world, and most
christened, and he hath ever worshipped us all in all places. Many
answered him again: As for our most noble King Arthur, we love him and
honour him as well as ye do, but as for Queen Guenever we love her not,
because she is a destroyer of good knights. Fair lords, said Sir Bors,
meseemeth ye say not as ye should say, for never yet in my days knew I
never nor heard say that ever she was a destroyer of any good knight.
But at all times as far as ever I could know she was a maintainer of
good knights; and ever she hath been large and free of her goods to all
good knights, and the most bounteous lady of her gifts and her good
grace, that ever I saw or heard speak of. And therefore it were shame,
said Sir Bors, to us all to our most noble king’s wife, an we suffered
her to be shamefully slain. And wit ye well, said Sir Bors, I will not
suffer it, for I dare say so much, the queen is not guilty of Sir
Patrise’s death, for she owed him never none ill will, nor none of the
four-and-twenty knights that were at that dinner; for I dare say for
good love she bade us to dinner, and not for no mal engine, and that I
doubt not shall be proved hereafter, for howsomever the game goeth,
there was treason among us. Then some said to Sir Bors: We may well
believe your words. And so some of them were well pleased, and some
were not so.




CHAPTER VI. How at the day Sir Bors made him ready for to fight for the
queen; and when he would fight how another discharged him.


The day came on fast until the even that the battle should be. Then the
queen sent for Sir Bors and asked him how he was disposed. Truly madam,
said he, I am disposed in likewise as I promised you, that is for to
say I shall not fail you, unless by adventure there come a better
knight than I am to do battle for you, then, madam, am I discharged of
my promise. Will ye, said the queen, that I tell my lord Arthur thus?
Do as it shall please you, madam. Then the queen went unto the king and
told him the answer of Sir Bors. Have ye no doubt, said the king, of
Sir Bors, for I call him now one of the best knights of the world, and
the most profitablest man. And thus it passed on until the morn, and
the king and the queen and all manner of knights that were there at
that time drew them unto the meadow beside Westminster where the battle
should be. And so when the king was come with the queen and many
knights of the Round Table, then the queen was put there in the
Constable’s ward, and a great fire made about an iron stake, that an
Sir Mador de la Porte had the better, she should be burnt: such custom
was used in those days, that neither for favour, neither for love nor
affinity, there should be none other but righteous judgment, as well
upon a king as upon a knight, and as well upon a queen as upon another
poor lady.

So in this meanwhile came in Sir Mador de la Porte, and took his oath
afore the king, that the queen did this treason until his cousin Sir
Patrise, and unto his oath he would prove it with his body, hand for
hand, who that would say the contrary. Right so came in Sir Bors de
Ganis, and said: That as for Queen Guenever she is in the right, and
that will I make good with my hands that she is not culpable of this
treason that is put upon her. Then make thee ready, said Sir Mador, and
we shall prove whether thou be in the right or I. Sir Mador, said Sir
Bors, wit thou well I know you for a good knight. Not for then I shall
not fear you so greatly, but I trust to God I shall be able to
withstand your malice. But this much have I promised my lord Arthur and
my lady the queen, that I shall do battle for her in this case to the
uttermost, unless that there come a better knight than I am and
discharge me. Is that all? said Sir Mador, either come thou off and do
battle with me, or else say nay. Take your horse, said Sir Bors, and as
I suppose, ye shall not tarry long but ye shall be answered.

Then either departed to their tents and made them ready to horseback as
they thought best. And anon Sir Mador came into the field with his
shield on his shoulder and his spear in his hand; and so rode about the
place crying unto Arthur: Bid your champion come forth an he dare. Then
was Sir Bors ashamed and took his horse and came to the lists’ end. And
then was he ware where came from a wood there fast by a knight all
armed, upon a white horse, with a strange shield of strange arms; and
he came riding all that he might run, and so he came to Sir Bors, and
said thus: Fair knight, I pray you be not displeased, for here must a
better knight than ye are have this battle, therefore I pray you
withdraw you. For wit ye well I have had this day a right great
journey, and this battle ought to be mine, and so I promised you when I
spake with you last, and with all my heart I thank you of your good
will. Then Sir Bors rode unto King Arthur and told him how there was a
knight come that would have the battle for to fight for the queen. What
knight is he? said the king. I wot not, said Sir Bors, but such
covenant he made with me to be here this day. Now my lord, said Sir
Bors, here am I discharged.




