CHAPTER XI. How a servant of Sir Aglovale’s was slain, and what
vengeance Sir Aglovale and Sir Percivale did therefore.


And when she was awaked she sent a squire after them with spending
enough. And so when the squire had overtaken them, they would not
suffer him to ride with them, but sent him home again to comfort their
mother, praying her meekly of her blessing. And so this squire was
benighted, and by misfortune he happened to come to a castle where
dwelled a baron. And so when the squire was come into the castle, the
lord asked him from whence he came, and whom he served. My lord, said
the squire, I serve a good knight that is called Sir Aglovale: the
squire said it to good intent, weening unto him to have been more
forborne for Sir Aglovale’s sake, than he had said he had served the
queen, Aglovale’s mother. Well, my fellow, said the lord of that
castle, for Sir Aglovale’s sake thou shalt have evil lodging, for Sir
Aglovale slew my brother, and therefore thou shalt die on part of
payment. And then that lord commanded his men to have him away and slay
him; and so they did, and so pulled him out of the castle, and there
they slew him without mercy.

Right so on the morn came Sir Aglovale and Sir Percivale riding by a
churchyard, where men and women were busy, and beheld the dead squire,
and they thought to bury him. What is there, said Sir Aglovale, that ye
behold so fast? A good man stert forth and said: Fair knight, here
lieth a squire slain shamefully this night. How was he slain, fair
fellow? said Sir Aglovale. My fair sir, said the man, the lord of this
castle lodged this squire this night; and because he said he was
servant unto a good knight that is with King Arthur, his name is Sir
Aglovale, therefore the lord commanded to slay him, and for this cause
is he slain. Gramercy, said Sir Aglovale, and ye shall see his death
revenged lightly; for I am that same knight for whom this squire was
slain.

Then Sir Aglovale called unto him Sir Percivale, and bade him alight
lightly; and so they alighted both, and betook their horses to their
men, and so they yede on foot into the castle. And all so soon as they
were within the castle gate Sir Aglovale bade the porter: Go thou unto
thy lord and tell him that I am Sir Aglovale for whom this squire was
slain this night. Anon the porter told this to his lord, whose name was
Goodewin. Anon he armed him, and then he came into the court and said:
Which of you is Sir Aglovale? Here I am, said Aglovale: for what cause
slewest thou this night my mother’s squire? I slew him, said Sir
Goodewin, because of thee, for thou slewest my brother, Sir Gawdelin.
As for thy brother, said Sir Aglovale, I avow it I slew him, for he was
a false knight and a betrayer of ladies and of good knights; and for
the death of my squire thou shalt die. I defy thee, said Sir Goodewin.
Then they lashed together as eagerly as it had been two lions, and Sir
Percivale he fought with all the remnant that would fight. And within a
while Sir Percivale had slain all that would withstand him; for Sir
Percivale dealt so his strokes that were so rude that there durst no
man abide him. And within a while Sir Aglovale had Sir Goodewin at the
earth, and there he unlaced his helm, and struck off his head. And then
they departed and took their horses; and then they let carry the dead
squire unto a priory, and there they interred him.




CHAPTER XII. How Sir Pervivale departed secretly from his brother, and
how he loosed a knight bound with a chain, and of other doings.


And when this was done they rode into many countries, ever inquiring
after Sir Launcelot, but never they could hear of him; and at the last
they came to a castle that hight Cardican, and there Sir Percivale and
Sir Aglovale were lodged together. And privily about midnight Sir
Percivale came to Aglovale’s squire and said: Arise and make thee
ready, for ye and I will ride away secretly. Sir, said the squire, I
would full fain ride with you where ye would have me, but an my lord,
your brother, take me he will slay me. As for that care thou not, for I
shall be thy warrant.

And so Sir Percivale rode till it was after noon, and then he came upon
a bridge of stone, and there he found a knight that was bound with a
chain fast about the waist unto a pillar of stone. O fair knight, said
that bound knight, I require thee loose me of my bonds. What knight are
ye, said Sir Percivale, and for what cause are ye so bound? Sir, I
shall tell you, said that knight: I am a knight of the Table Round, and
my name is Sir Persides; and thus by adventure I came this way, and
here I lodged in this castle at the bridge foot, and therein dwelleth
an uncourteous lady; and because she proffered me to be her paramour,
and I refused her, she set her men upon me suddenly or ever I might
come to my weapon; and thus they bound me, and here I wot well I shall
die but if some man of worship break my bands. Be ye of good cheer,
said Sir Percivale, and because ye are a knight of the Round Table as
well as I, I trust to God to break your bands. And therewith Sir
Percivale pulled out his sword and struck at the chain with such a
might that he cut a-two the chain, and through Sir Persides’ hauberk
and hurt him a little. O Jesu, said Sir Persides, that was a mighty
stroke as ever I felt one, for had not the chain been ye had slain me.

And therewithal Sir Persides saw a knight coming out of a castle all
that ever he might fling. Beware, sir, said Sir Persides, yonder cometh
a man that will have ado with you. Let him come, said Sir Percivale.
And so he met with that knight in midst of the bridge; and Sir
Percivale gave him such a buffet that he smote him quite from his horse
and over a part of the bridge, that, had not been a little vessel under
the bridge, that knight had been drowned. And then Sir Percivale took
the knight’s horse and made Sir Persides to mount up him; and so they
rode unto the castle, and bade the lady deliver Sir Persides’ servants,
or else he would slay all that ever he found; and so for fear she
delivered them all. Then was Sir Percivale ware of a lady that stood in
that tower. Ah, madam, said Sir Percivale, what use and custom is that
in a lady to destroy good knights but if they will be your paramour?
Forsooth this is a shameful custom of a lady, and if I had not a great
matter in my hand I should fordo your evil customs.

And so Sir Persides brought Sir Percivale unto his own castle, and
there he made him great cheer all that night. And on the morn, when Sir
Percivale had heard mass and broken his fast, he bade Sir Persides ride
unto King Arthur: And tell the king how that ye met with me; and tell
my brother, Sir Aglovale, how I rescued you; and bid him seek not after
me, for I am in the quest to seek Sir Launcelot du Lake, and though he
seek me he shall not find me; and tell him I will never see him, nor
the court, till I have found Sir Launcelot. Also tell Sir Kay the
Seneschal, and to Sir Mordred, that I trust to Jesu to be of as great
worthiness as either of them, for tell them I shall never forget their
mocks and scorns that they did to me that day that I was made knight;
and tell them I will never see that court till men speak more worship
of me than ever men did of any of them both. And so Sir Persides
departed from Sir Percivale, and then he rode unto King Arthur, and
told there of Sir Percivale. And when Sir Aglovale heard him speak of
his brother Sir Percivale, he said: He departed from me unkindly.




