CHAPTER XXI. Of great jousts done all a Christmas, and of a great
jousts and tourney ordained by King Arthur, and of Sir Launcelot.


Thus it passed on till Christmas, and then every day there was jousts
made for a diamond, who that jousted best should have a diamond. But
Sir Launcelot would not joust but if it were at a great jousts cried.
But Sir Lavaine jousted there all that Christmas passingly well, and
best was praised, for there were but few that did so well. Wherefore
all manner of knights deemed that Sir Lavaine should be made knight of
the Table Round at the next feast of Pentecost. So at-after Christmas
King Arthur let call unto him many knights, and there they advised
together to make a party and a great tournament and jousts. And the
King of Northgalis said to Arthur, he would have on his party King
Anguish of Ireland, and the King with the Hundred Knights, and the King
of Northumberland, and Sir Galahad, the haut prince. And so these four
kings and this mighty duke took part against King Arthur and the
knights of the Table Round. And the cry was made that the day of the
jousts should be beside Westminster upon Candlemas Day, whereof many
knights were glad, and made them ready to be at that jousts in the
freshest manner.

Then Queen Guenever sent for Sir Launcelot, and said thus: I warn you
that ye ride no more in no jousts nor tournaments but that your kinsmen
may know you. And at these jousts that shall be ye shall have of me a
sleeve of gold; and I pray you for my sake enforce yourself there, that
men may speak of you worship; but I charge you as ye will have my love,
that ye warn your kinsmen that ye will bear that day the sleeve of gold
upon your helmet. Madam, said Sir Launcelot, it shall be done. And so
either made great joy of other. And when Sir Launcelot saw his time he
told Sir Bors that he would depart, and have no more with him but Sir
Lavaine, unto the good hermit that dwelt in that forest of Windsor; his
name was Sir Brasias; and there he thought to repose him, and take all
the rest that he might, because he would be fresh at that day of
jousts.

So Sir Launcelot and Sir Lavaine departed, that no creature wist where
he was become, but the noble men of his blood. And when he was come to
the hermitage, wit ye well he had good cheer. And so daily Sir
Launcelot would go to a well fast by the hermitage, and there he would
lie down, and see the well spring and burble, and sometime he slept
there. So at that time there was a lady dwelt in that forest, and she
was a great huntress, and daily she used to hunt, and ever she bare her
bow with her; and no men went never with her, but always women, and
they were shooters, and could well kill a deer, both at the stalk and
at the trest; and they daily bare bows and arrows, horns and
wood-knives, and many good dogs they had, both for the string and for a
bait. So it happed this lady the huntress had abated her dog for the
bow at a barren hind, and so this barren hind took the flight over
hedges and woods. And ever this lady and part of her women costed the
hind, and checked it by the noise of the hounds, to have met with the
hind at some water; and so it happed, the hind came to the well whereas
Sir Launcelot was sleeping and slumbering. And so when the hind came to
the well, for heat she went to soil, and there she lay a great while;
and the dog came after, and umbecast about, for she had lost the very
perfect feute of the hind. Right so came that lady the huntress, that
knew by the dog that she had, that the hind was at the soil in that
well; and there she came stiffly and found the hind, and she put a
broad arrow in her bow, and shot at the hind, and over-shot the hind;
and so by misfortune the arrow smote Sir Launcelot in the thick of the
buttock, over the barbs. When Sir Launcelot felt himself so hurt, he
hurled up woodly, and saw the lady that had smitten him. And when he
saw she was a woman, he said thus: Lady or damosel, what that thou be,
in an evil time bear ye a bow; the devil made you a shooter.




CHAPTER XXII. How Launcelot after that he was hurt of a gentlewoman
came to an hermit, and of other matters.


Now mercy, fair sir, said the lady, I am a gentlewoman that useth here
in this forest hunting, and God knoweth I saw ye not; but as here was a
barren hind at the soil in this well, and I weened to have done well,
but my hand swerved. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, ye have mischieved me.
And so the lady departed, and Sir Launcelot as he might pulled out the
arrow, and left that head still in his buttock, and so he went weakly
to the hermitage ever more bleeding as he went. And when Sir Lavaine
and the hermit espied that Sir Launcelot was hurt, wit you well they
were passing heavy, but Sir Lavaine wist not how that he was hurt nor
by whom. And then were they wroth out of measure.

Then with great pain the hermit gat out the arrow’s head out of Sir
Launcelot’s buttock, and much of his blood he shed, and the wound was
passing sore, and unhappily smitten, for it was in such a place that he
might not sit in no saddle. Have mercy, Jesu, said Sir Launcelot, I may
call myself the most unhappiest man that liveth, for ever when I would
fainest have worship there befalleth me ever some unhappy thing. Now so
Jesu me help, said Sir Launcelot, and if no man would but God, I shall
be in the field upon Candlemas Day at the jousts, whatsomever fall of
it: so all that might be gotten to heal Sir Launcelot was had.

So when the day was come Sir Launcelot let devise that he was arrayed,
and Sir Lavaine, and their horses, as though they had been Saracens;
and so they departed and came nigh to the field. The King of Northgalis
with an hundred knights with him, and the King of Northumberland
brought with him an hundred good knights, and King Anguish of Ireland
brought with him an hundred good knights ready to joust, and Sir
Galahad, the haut prince, brought with him an hundred good knights, and
the King with the Hundred Knights brought with him as many, and all
these were proved good knights. Then came in King Arthur’s party; and
there came in the King of Scots with an hundred knights, and King
Uriens of Gore brought with him an hundred knights, and King Howel of
Brittany brought with him an hundred knights, and Chaleins of Clarance
brought with him an hundred knights, and King Arthur himself came into
the field with two hundred knights, and the most part were knights of
the Table Round, that were proved noble knights; and there were old
knights set in scaffolds for to judge, with the queen, who did best.




