CHAPTER XVIII. How Sir Palomides would have jousted for Sir Lamorak
with the knights of the castle.


Then forthwithal came a knight out of the castle, with a shield bended
with black and with white. And anon the Knight with the Red Shield and
he encountered so hard that he smote the knight of the castle through
the bended shield and through the body, and brake the horse’s back.
Fair knight, said Sir Palomides, ye have overmuch on hand, therefore I
pray you let me joust, for ye had need to be reposed. Why sir, said the
knight, seem ye that I am weak and feeble? and sir, methinketh ye
proffer me wrong, and to me shame, when I do well enough. I tell you
now as I told you erst; for an they were twenty knights I shall beat
them, and if I be beaten or slain then may ye revenge me. And if ye
think that I be weary, and ye have an appetite to joust with me, I
shall find you jousting enough. Sir, said Palomides, I said it not
because I would joust with you, but meseemeth that ye have overmuch on
hand. And therefore, an ye were gentle, said the Knight with the Red
Shield, ye should not proffer me shame; therefore I require you to
joust with me, and ye shall find that I am not weary. Sith ye require
me, said Sir Palomides, take keep to yourself. Then they two knights
came together as fast as their horses might run, and the knight smote
Sir Palomides sore on the shield that the spear went into his side a
great wound, and a perilous. And therewithal Sir Palomides avoided his
saddle. And that knight turned unto Sir Dinadan; and when he saw him
coming he cried aloud, and said: Sir, I will not have ado with you; but
for that he let it not, but came straight upon him. So Sir Dinadan for
shame put forth his spear and all to-shivered it upon the knight. But
he smote Sir Dinadan again so hard that he smote him clean from his
saddle; but their horses he would not suffer his squires to meddle
with, and because they were knights-errant.

Then he dressed him again to the castle, and jousted with seven knights
more, and there was none of them might withstand him, but he bare him
to the earth. And of these twelve knights he slew in plain jousts four.
And the eight knights he made them to swear on the cross of a sword
that they should never use the evil customs of the castle. And when he
had made them to swear that oath he let them pass. And ever stood the
lords and the ladies on the castle walls crying and saying: Knight with
the Red Shield, ye have marvellously well done as ever we saw knight
do. And therewith came a knight out of the castle unarmed, and said:
Knight with the Red Shield, overmuch damage hast thou done to us this
day, therefore return whither thou wilt, for here are no more will have
ado with thee; for we repent sore that ever thou camest here, for by
thee is fordone the old custom of this castle. And with that word he
turned again into the castle, and shut the gates. Then the Knight with
the Red Shield turned and called his squires, and so passed forth on
his way, and rode a great pace.

And when he was past Sir Palomides went to Sir Dinadan, and said: I had
never such a shame of one knight that ever I met; and therefore I cast
me to ride after him, and to be revenged with my sword, for a-horseback
I deem I shall get no worship of him. Sir Palomides, said Dinadan, ye
shall not meddle with him by my counsel, for ye shall get no worship of
him; and for this cause, ye have seen him this day have had overmuch to
do, and overmuch travailed. By almighty Jesu, said Palomides, I shall
never be at ease till that I have had ado with him. Sir, said Dinadan,
I shall give you my beholding. Well, said Palomides, then shall ye see
how we shall redress our mights. So they took their horses of their
varlets, and rode after the Knight with the Red Shield; and down in a
valley beside a fountain they were ware where he was alighted to repose
him, and had done off his helm for to drink at the well.




CHAPTER XIX. How Sir Lamorak jousted with Sir Palomides, and hurt him
grievously.


Then Palomides rode fast till he came nigh him. And then he said:
Knight, remember ye of the shame ye did to me right now at the castle,
therefore dress thee, for I will have ado with thee. Fair knight, said
he to Palomides, of me ye win no worship, for ye have seen this day
that I have been travailed sore. As for that, said Palomides, I will
not let, for wit ye well I will be revenged. Well, said the knight, I
may happen to endure you. And therewithal he mounted upon his horse,
and took a great spear in his hand ready for to joust. Nay, said
Palomides, I will not joust, for I am sure at jousting I get no prize.
Fair knight, said that knight, it would beseem a knight to joust and to
fight on horseback. Ye shall see what I will do, said Palomides. And
therewith he alighted down upon foot, and dressed his shield afore him
and pulled out his sword. Then the Knight with the Red Shield descended
down from his horse, and dressed his shield afore him, and so he drew
out his sword. And then they came together a soft pace, and wonderly
they lashed together passing thick the mountenance of an hour or ever
they breathed. Then they traced and traversed, and waxed wonderly
wroth, and either behight other death; they hewed so fast with their
swords that they cut in down half their swords and mails, that the bare
flesh in some place stood above their harness. And when Sir Palomides
beheld his fellow’s sword over-hylled with his blood it grieved him
sore: some while they foined, some while they struck as wild men. But
at the last Sir Palomides waxed faint, because of his first wound that
he had at the castle with a spear, for that wound grieved him wonderly
sore. Fair knight, said Palomides, meseemeth we have assayed either
other passing sore, and if it may please thee, I require thee of thy
knighthood tell me thy name. Sir, said the knight to Palomides, that is
me loath to do, for thou hast done me wrong and no knighthood to
proffer me battle, considering my great travail, but an thou wilt tell
me thy name I will tell thee mine. Sir, said he, wit thou well my name
is Palomides. Ah, sir, ye shall understand my name is Sir Lamorak de
Galis, son and heir unto the good knight and king, King Pellinore, and
Sir Tor, the good knight, is my half brother. When Sir Palomides heard
him say so he kneeled down and asked mercy, For outrageously have I
done to you this day; considering the great deeds of arms I have seen
you do, shamefully and unknightly I have required you to do battle. Ah,
Sir Palomides, said Sir Lamorak, overmuch have ye done and said to me.
And therewith he embraced him with his both hands, and said: Palomides,
the worthy knight, in all this land is no better than ye, nor more of
prowess, and me repenteth sore that we should fight together. So it
doth not me, said Sir Palomides, and yet am I sorer wounded than ye be;
but as for that I shall soon thereof be whole. But certainly I would
not for the fairest castle in this land, but if thou and I had met, for
I shall love you the days of my life afore all other knights except my
brother, Sir Safere. I say the same, said Sir Lamorak, except my
brother, Sir Tor. Then came Sir Dinadan, and he made great joy of Sir
Lamorak. Then their squires dressed both their shields and their
harness, and stopped their wounds. And thereby at a priory they rested
them all night.




