CHAPTER XLVIII. Of the sixth day, and what then was done.


Here beginneth the sixth day. Then came therein Sir Gaheris, and there
encountered with him Sir Ossaise of Surluse, and Sir Gaheris smote him
over his horse’s croup. And then either party encountered with other,
and there were many spears broken, and many knights cast under feet. So
there came in Sir Dornard and Sir Aglovale, that were brethren unto Sir
Lamorak, and they met with other two knights, and either smote other so
hard that all four knights and horses fell to the earth. When Sir
Lamorak saw his two brethren down he was wroth out of measure, and then
he gat a great spear in his hand, and therewithal he smote down four
good knights, and then his spear brake. Then he pulled out his sword,
and smote about him on the right hand and on the left hand, and raced
off helms and pulled down knights, that all men marvelled of such deeds
of arms as he did, for he fared so that many knights fled. Then he
horsed his brethren again, and said: Brethren, ye ought to be ashamed
to fall so off your horses! what is a knight but when he is on
horseback? I set not by a knight when he is on foot, for all battles on
foot are but pillers’ battles. For there should no knight fight on foot
but if it were for treason, or else he were driven thereto by force;
therefore, brethren, sit fast on your horses, or else fight never more
afore me.

With that came in the Duke Chaleins of Clarance, and there encountered
with him the Earl Ulbawes of Surluse, and either of them smote other
down. Then the knights of both parties horsed their lords again, for
Sir Ector and Bleoberis were on foot, waiting on the Duke Chaleins. And
the King with the Hundred Knights was with the Earl of Ulbawes. With
that came Gaheris and lashed to the King with the Hundred Knights, and
he to him again. Then came the Duke Chaleins and departed them.

Then they blew to lodging, and the knights unarmed them and drew them
to their dinner; and at the midst of their dinner in came Dinadan and
began to rail. Then he beheld the haut prince, that seemed wroth with
some fault that he saw; for he had a custom he loved no fish, and
because he was served with fish, the which he hated, therefore he was
not merry. When Sir Dinadan had espied the haut prince, he espied where
was a fish with a great head, and that he gat betwixt two dishes, and
served the haut prince with that fish. And then he said thus: Sir
Galahalt, well may I liken you to a wolf, for he will never eat fish,
but flesh; then the haut prince laughed at his words. Well, well, said
Dinadan to Launcelot, what devil do ye in this country, for here may no
mean knights win no worship for thee. Sir Dinadan, said Launcelot, I
ensure thee I shall no more meet with thee nor with thy great spear,
for I may not sit in my saddle when that spear hitteth me. And if I be
happy I shall beware of that boistous body that thou bearest. Well,
said Launcelot, make good watch ever: God forbid that ever we meet but
if it be at a dish of meat. Then laughed the queen and the haut prince,
that they might not sit at their table; thus they made great joy till
on the morn, and then they heard mass, and blew to field. And Queen
Guenever and all the estates were set, and judges armed clean with
their shields to keep the right.




CHAPTER XLIX. Of the seventh battle, and how Sir Launcelot, being
disguised like a maid, smote down Sir Dinadan.


Now beginneth the seventh battle. There came in the Duke Cambines, and
there encountered with him Sir Aristance, that was counted a good
knight, and they met so hard that either bare other down, horse and
man. Then came there the Earl of Lambaile and helped the duke again to
horse. Then came there Sir Ossaise of Surluse, and he smote the Earl
Lambaile down from his horse. Then began they to do great deeds of
arms, and many spears were broken, and many knights were cast to the
earth. Then the King of Northgalis and the Earl Ulbawes smote together
that all the judges thought it was like mortal death. This meanwhile
Queen Guenever, and the haut prince, and Sir Launcelot, made there Sir
Dinadan make him ready to joust. I would, said Dinadan, ride into the
field, but then one of you twain will meet with me. Per dieu, said the
haut prince, ye may see how we sit here as judges with our shields, and
always mayest thou behold whether we sit here or not.

So Sir Dinadan departed and took his horse, and met with many knights,
and did passing well. And as he was departed, Sir Launcelot disguised
himself, and put upon his armour a maiden’s garment freshly attired.
Then Sir Launcelot made Sir Galihodin to lead him through the range,
and all men had wonder what damosel it was. And so as Sir Dinadan came
into the range, Sir Launcelot, that was in the damosel’s array, gat
Galihodin’s spear, and ran unto Sir Dinadan. And always Sir Dinadan
looked up thereas Sir Launcelot was, and then he saw one sit in the
stead of Sir Launcelot, armed. But when Dinadan saw a manner of a
damosel he dread perils that it was Sir Launcelot disguised, but Sir
Launcelot came on him so fast that he smote him over his horse’s croup;
and then with great scorns they gat Sir Dinadan into the forest there
beside, and there they dispoiled him unto his shirt, and put upon him a
woman’s garment, and so brought him into the field: and so they blew
unto lodging. And every knight went and unarmed them. Then was Sir
Dinadan brought in among them all. And when Queen Guenever saw Sir
Dinadan brought so among them all, then she laughed that she fell down,
and so did all that there were. Well, said Dinadan to Launcelot, thou
art so false that I can never beware of thee. Then by all the assent
they gave Sir Launcelot the prize, the next was Sir Lamorak de Galis,
the third was Sir Palomides, the fourth was King Bagdemagus; so these
four knights had the prize, and there was great joy, and great nobley
in all the court.

And on the morn Queen Guenever and Sir Launcelot departed unto King
Arthur, but in no wise Sir Lamorak would not go with them. I shall
undertake, said Sir Launcelot, that an ye will go with us King Arthur
shall charge Sir Gawaine and his brethren never to do you hurt. As for
that, said Sir Lamorak, I will not trust Sir Gawaine nor none of his
brethren; and wit ye well, Sir Launcelot, an it were not for my lord
King Arthur’s sake, I should match Sir Gawaine and his brethren well
enough. But to say that I should trust them, that shall I never, and
therefore I pray you recommend me unto my lord Arthur, and unto all my
lords of the Round Table. And in what place that ever I come I shall do
you service to my power: and sir, it is but late that I revenged that,
when my lord Arthur’s kin were put to the worse by Sir Palomides. Then
Sir Lamorak departed from Sir Launcelot, and either wept at their
departing.




