CHAPTER LXXXI. How Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector reported to Queen
Guenever of the beauty of La Beale Isoud.


So at the seven nights’ end Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector departed from
Sir Tristram and from the queen; and these two good knights had great
gifts; and Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan abode with Sir Tristram. And when
Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector were come there as the Queen Guenever was
lodged, in a castle by the seaside, and through the grace of God the
queen was recovered of her malady, then she asked the two knights from
whence they came. They said that they came from Sir Tristram and from
La Beale Isoud. How doth Sir Tristram, said the queen, and La Beale
Isoud? Truly, said those two knights, he doth as a noble knight should
do; and as for the Queen Isoud, she is peerless of all ladies; for to
speak of her beauty, bounté, and mirth, and of her goodness, we saw
never her match as far as we have ridden and gone. O mercy Jesu, said
Queen Guenever, so saith all the people that have seen her and spoken
with her. God would that I had part of her conditions; and it is
misfortuned me of my sickness while that tournament endured. And as I
suppose I shall never see in all my life such an assembly of knights
and ladies as ye have done.

Then the knights told her how Palomides won the degree at the first day
with great noblesse; and the second day Sir Tristram won the degree;
and the third day Sir Launcelot won the degree. Well, said Queen
Guenever, who did best all these three days? So God me help, said these
knights, Sir Launcelot and Sir Tristram had least dishonour. And wit ye
well Sir Palomides did passing well and mightily; but he turned against
the party that he came in withal, and that caused him to lose a great
part of his worship, for it seemed that Sir Palomides is passing
envious. Then shall he never win worship, said Queen Guenever, for an
it happeth an envious man once to win worship he shall be dishonoured
twice therefore; and for this cause all men of worship hate an envious
man, and will shew him no favour, and he that is courteous, and kind,
and gentle, hath favour in every place.




CHAPTER LXXXII. How Epinogris complained by a well, and how Sir
Palomides came and found him, and of their both sorrowing.


Now leave we of this matter and speak we of Sir Palomides, that rode
and lodged him with the two kings, whereof the kings were heavy. Then
the King of Ireland sent a man of his to Sir Palomides, and gave him a
great courser, and the King of Scotland gave him great gifts; and fain
they would have had Sir Palomides to have abiden with them, but in no
wise he would abide; and so he departed, and rode as adventures would
guide him, till it was nigh noon. And then in a forest by a well Sir
Palomides saw where lay a fair wounded knight and his horse bounden by
him; and that knight made the greatest dole that ever he heard man
make, for ever he wept, and therewith he sighed as though he would die.
Then Sir Palomides rode near him and saluted him mildly and said: Fair
knight, why wail ye so? let me lie down and wail with you, for doubt
not I am much more heavier than ye are; for I dare say, said Palomides,
that my sorrow is an hundred fold more than yours is, and therefore let
us complain either to other. First, said the wounded knight, I require
you tell me your name, for an thou be none of the noble knights of the
Round Table thou shalt never know my name, whatsomever come of me. Fair
knight, said Palomides, such as I am, be it better or be it worse, wit
thou well that my name is Sir Palomides, son and heir unto King
Astlabor, and Sir Safere and Sir Segwarides are my two brethren; and
wit thou well as for myself I was never christened, but my two brethren
are truly christened. O noble knight, said that knight, well is me that
I have met with you; and wit ye well my name is Epinogris, the king’s
son of Northumberland. Now sit down, said Epinogris, and let us either
complain to other.

Then Sir Palomides began his complaint. Now shall I tell you, said
Palomides, what woe I endure. I love the fairest queen and lady that
ever bare life, and wit ye well her name is La Beale Isoud, King Mark’s
wife of Cornwall. That is great folly, said Epinogris, for to love
Queen Isoud, for one of the best knights of the world loveth her, that
is Sir Tristram de Liones. That is truth, said Palomides, for no man
knoweth that matter better than I do, for I have been in Sir Tristram’s
fellowship this month, and with La Beale Isoud together; and alas, said
Palomides, unhappy man that I am, now have I lost the fellowship of Sir
Tristram for ever, and the love of La Beale Isoud for ever, and I am
never like to see her more, and Sir Tristram and I be either to other
mortal enemies. Well, said Epinogris, sith that ye loved La Beale
Isoud, loved she you ever again by anything that ye could think or wit,
or else did ye rejoice her ever in any pleasure? Nay, by my knighthood,
said Palomides, I never espied that ever she loved me more than all the
world, nor never had I pleasure with her, but the last day she gave me
the greatest rebuke that ever I had, the which shall never go from my
heart. And yet I well deserved that rebuke, for I did not knightly, and
therefore I have lost the love of her and of Sir Tristram for ever; and
I have many times enforced myself to do many deeds for La Beale Isoud’s
sake, and she was the causer of my worship-winning. Alas, said Sir
Palomides, now have I lost all the worship that ever I won, for never
shall me befall such prowess as I had in the fellowship of Sir
Tristram.




CHAPTER LXXXIII. How Sir Palomides brought Sir Epinogris his lady; and
how Sir Palomides and Sir Safere were assailed.


Nay, nay, said Epinogris, your sorrow is but japes to my sorrow; for I
rejoiced my lady and won her with my hands, and lost her again: alas
that day! Thus first I won her, said Epinogris; my lady was an earl’s
daughter, and as the earl and two knights came from the tournament of
Lonazep, for her sake I set upon this earl and on his two knights, my
lady there being present; and so by fortune there I slew the earl and
one of the knights, and the other knight fled, and so that night I had
my lady. And on the morn as she and I reposed us at this well-side
there came there to me an errant knight, his name was Sir Helior le
Preuse, an hardy knight, and this Sir Helior challenged me to fight for
my lady. And then we went to battle first upon horse and after on foot,
but at the last Sir Helior wounded me so that he left me for dead, and
so he took my lady with him; and thus my sorrow is more than yours, for
I have rejoiced and ye rejoiced never. That is truth, said Palomides,
but sith I can never recover myself I shall promise you if I can meet
with Sir Helior I shall get you your lady again, or else he shall beat
me.

Then Sir Palomides made Sir Epinogris to take his horse, and so they
rode to an hermitage, and there Sir Epinogris rested him. And in the
meanwhile Sir Palomides walked privily out to rest him under the
leaves, and there beside he saw a knight come riding with a shield that
he had seen Sir Ector de Maris bear beforehand; and there came after
him a ten knights, and so these ten knights hoved under the leaves for
heat. And anon after there came a knight with a green shield and
therein a white lion, leading a lady upon a palfrey. Then this knight
with the green shield that seemed to be master of the ten knights, he
rode fiercely after Sir Helior, for it was he that hurt Sir Epinogris.
And when he came nigh Sir Helior he bade him defend his lady. I will
defend her, said Helior, unto my power. And so they ran together so
mightily that either of these knights smote other down, horse and all,
to the earth; and then they won up lightly and drew their swords and
their shields, and lashed together mightily more than an hour. All this
Sir Palomides saw and beheld, but ever at the last the knight with Sir
Ector’s shield was bigger, and at the last this knight smote Sir Helior
down, and then that knight unlaced his helm to have stricken off his
head. And then he cried mercy, and prayed him to save his life, and
bade him take his lady. Then Sir Palomides dressed him up, because he
wist well that that same lady was Epinogris’ lady, and he promised him
to help him.

Then Sir Palomides went straight to that lady, and took her by the
hand, and asked her whether she knew a knight that hight Epinogris.
Alas, she said, that ever he knew me or I him, for I have for his sake
lost my worship, and also his life grieveth me most of all. Not so,
lady, said Palomides, come on with me, for here is Epinogris in this
hermitage. Ah! well is me, said the lady, an he be alive. Whither wilt
thou with that lady? said the knight with Sir Ector’s shield. I will do
with her what me list, said Palomides. Wit you well, said that knight,
thou speakest over large, though thou seemest me to have at advantage,
because thou sawest me do battle but late. Thou weenest, sir knight, to
have that lady away from me so lightly? nay, think it never not; an
thou were as good a knight as is Sir Launcelot, or as is Sir Tristram,
or Sir Palomides, but thou shalt win her dearer than ever did I. And so
they went unto battle upon foot, and there they gave many sad strokes,
and either wounded other passing sore, and thus they fought still more
than an hour.

Then Sir Palomides had marvel what knight he might be that was so
strong and so well breathed during, and thus said Palomides: Knight, I
require thee tell me thy name. Wit thou well, said that knight, I dare
tell thee my name, so that thou wilt tell me thy name. I will, said
Palomides. Truly, said that knight, my name is Safere, son of King
Astlabor, and Sir Palomides and Sir Segwarides are my brethren. Now,
and wit thou well, my name is Sir Palomides. Then Sir Safere kneeled
down upon his knees, and prayed him of mercy; and then they unlaced
their helms and either kissed other weeping. And in the meanwhile Sir
Epinogris arose out of his bed, and heard them by the strokes, and so
he armed him to help Sir Palomides if need were.




