CHAPTER LXXII. How Sir Dinadan provoked Sir Tristram to do well.


And thou, Sir Tristram, farest all this day as though thou hadst been
asleep, and therefore I call thee coward. Well, Dinadan, said Sir
Tristram, I was never called coward or now of no earthly knight in my
life; and wit thou well, sir, I call myself never the more coward
though Sir Launcelot gave me a fall, for I outcept him of all knights.
And doubt ye not Sir Dinadan, an Sir Launcelot have a quarrel good, he
is too over good for any knight that now is living; and yet of his
sufferance, largess, bounty, and courtesy, I call him knight peerless:
and so Sir Tristram was in manner wroth with Sir Dinadan. But all this
language Sir Dinadan said because he would anger Sir Tristram, for to
cause him to awake his spirits and to be wroth; for well knew Sir
Dinadan that an Sir Tristram were thoroughly wroth Sir Palomides should
not get the prize upon the morn. And for this intent Sir Dinadan said
all this railing and language against Sir Tristram. Truly, said Sir
Palomides, as for Sir Launcelot, of his noble knighthood, courtesy, and
prowess, and gentleness, I know not his peer; for this day, said Sir
Palomides, I did full uncourteously unto Sir Launcelot, and full
unknightly, and full knightly and courteously he did to me again; for
an he had been as ungentle to me as I was to him, this day I had won no
worship. And therefore, said Palomides, I shall be Sir Launcelot’s
knight while my life lasteth. This talking was in the houses of kings.
But all kings, lords, and knights, said, of clear knighthood, and of
pure strength, of bounty, of courtesy, Sir Launcelot and Sir Tristram
bare the prize above all knights that ever were in Arthur’s days. And
there were never knights in Arthur’s days did half so many deeds as
they did; as the book saith, no ten knights did not half the deeds that
they did, and there was never knight in their days that required Sir
Launcelot or Sir Tristram of any quest, so it were not to their shame,
but they performed their desire.




CHAPTER LXXIII. How King Arthur and Sir Lancelot came to see La Beale
Isoud, and how Palomides smote down King Arthur.


So on the morn Sir Launcelot departed, and Sir Tristram was ready, and
La Beale Isoud with Sir Palomides and Sir Gareth. And so they rode all
in green full freshly beseen unto the forest. And Sir Tristram left Sir
Dinadan sleeping in his bed. And so as they rode it happed the king and
Launcelot stood in a window, and saw Sir Tristram ride and Isoud. Sir,
said Launcelot, yonder rideth the fairest lady of the world except your
queen, Dame Guenever. Who is that? said Sir Arthur. Sir, said he, it is
Queen Isoud that, out-taken my lady your queen, she is makeless. Take
your horse, said Arthur, and array you at all rights as I will do, and
I promise you, said the king, I will see her. Then anon they were armed
and horsed, and either took a spear and rode unto the forest. Sir, said
Launcelot, it is not good that ye go too nigh them, for wit ye well
there are two as good knights as now are living, and therefore, sir, I
pray you be not too hasty. For peradventure there will be some knights
be displeased an we come suddenly upon them. As for that, said Arthur,
I will see her, for I take no force whom I grieve. Sir, said Launcelot,
ye put yourself in great jeopardy. As for that, said the king, we will
take the adventure. Right so anon the king rode even to her, and
saluted her, and said: God you save. Sir, said she, ye are welcome.
Then the king beheld her, and liked her wonderly well.

With that came Sir Palomides unto Arthur, and said: Uncourteous knight,
what seekest thou here? thou art uncourteous to come upon a lady thus
suddenly, therefore withdraw thee. Sir Arthur took none heed of Sir
Palomides’ words, but ever he looked still upon Queen Isoud. Then was
Sir Palomides wroth, and therewith he took a spear, and came hurtling
upon King Arthur, and smote him down with a spear. When Sir Launcelot
saw that despite of Sir Palomides, he said to himself: I am loath to
have ado with yonder knight, and not for his own sake but for Sir
Tristram. And one thing I am sure of, if I smite down Sir Palomides I
must have ado with Sir Tristram, and that were overmuch for me to match
them both, for they are two noble knights; notwithstanding, whether I
live or I die, needs must I revenge my lord, and so will I, whatsomever
befall of me. And therewith Sir Launcelot cried to Sir Palomides: Keep
thee from me. And then Sir Launcelot and Sir Palomides rushed together
with two spears strongly, but Sir Launcelot smote Sir Palomides so hard
that he went quite out of his saddle, and had a great fall. When Sir
Tristram saw Sir Palomides have that fall, he said to Sir Launcelot:
Sir knight, keep thee, for I must joust with thee. As for to joust with
me, said Sir Launcelot, I will not fail you, for no dread I have of
you; but I am loath to have ado with you an I might choose, for I will
that ye wit that I must revenge my special lord that was unhorsed
unwarly and unknightly. And therefore, though I revenged that fall,
take ye no displeasure therein, for he is to me such a friend that I
may not see him shamed.

Anon Sir Tristram understood by his person and by his knightly words
that it was Sir Launcelot du Lake, and verily Sir Tristram deemed that
it was King Arthur, he that Sir Palomides had smitten down. And then
Sir Tristram put his spear from him, and put Sir Palomides again on
horseback, and Sir Launcelot put King Arthur on horseback and so
departed. So God me help, said Sir Tristram unto Palomides, ye did not
worshipfully when ye smote down that knight so suddenly as ye did. And
wit ye well ye did yourself great shame, for the knights came hither of
their gentleness to see a fair lady; and that is every good knight’s
part, to behold a fair lady; and ye had not ado to play such masteries
afore my lady. Wit thou well it will turn to anger, for he that ye
smote down was King Arthur, and that other was the good knight Sir
Launcelot. But I shall not forget the words of Sir Launcelot when that
he called him a man of great worship, thereby I wist that it was King
Arthur. And as for Sir Launcelot, an there had been five hundred
knights in the meadow, he would not have refused them, and yet he said
he would refuse me. By that again I wist that it was Sir Launcelot, for
ever he forbeareth me in every place, and showeth me great kindness;
and of all knights, I out-take none, say what men will say, he beareth
the flower of all chivalry, say it him whosomever will. An he be well
angered, and that him list to do his utterance without any favour, I
know him not alive but Sir Launcelot is over hard for him, be it on
horseback or on foot. I may never believe, said Palomides, that King
Arthur will ride so privily as a poor errant knight. Ah, said Sir
Tristram, ye know not my lord Arthur, for all knights may learn to be a
knight of him. And therefore ye may be sorry, said Sir Tristram, of
your unkindly deeds to so noble a king. And a thing that is done may
not be undone, said Palomides. Then Sir Tristram sent Queen Isoud unto
her lodging in the priory, there to behold all the tournament.




