CHAPTER LXVIII. How Sir Tristram and his fellowship jousted, and of the
noble feats that they did in that tourneying.


Now upon what party, said Tristram, is it best we be withal as to-morn?
Sir, said Palomides, ye shall have mine advice to be against King
Arthur as to-morn, for on his party will be Sir Launcelot and many good
knights of his blood with him. And the more men of worship that they
be, the more worship we shall win. That is full knightly spoken, said
Sir Tristram; and right so as ye counsel me, so will we do. In the name
of God, said they all. So that night they were lodged with the best.
And on the morn when it was day they were arrayed all in green
trappings, shields and spears, and La Beale Isoud in the same colour,
and her three damosels. And right so these four knights came into the
field endlong and through. And so they led La Beale Isoud thither as
she should stand and behold all the jousts in a bay window; but always
she was wimpled that no man might see her visage. And then these three
knights rode straight unto the party of the King of Scots.

When King Arthur had seen them do all this he asked Sir Launcelot what
were these knights and that queen. Sir, said Launcelot, I cannot say
you in certain, but if Sir Tristram be in this country, or Sir
Palomides, wit ye well it be they m certain, and La Beale Isoud. Then
Arthur called to him Sir Kay and said: Go lightly and wit how many
knights there be here lacking of the Table Round, for by the sieges
thou mayst know. So went Sir Kay and saw by the writings in the sieges
that there lacked ten knights. And these be their names that be not
here. Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides, Sir Percivale, Sir Gaheris, Sir
Epinogris, Sir Mordred, Sir Dinadan, Sir La Cote Male Taile, and Sir
Pelleas the noble knight. Well, said Arthur, some of these I dare
undertake are here this day against us.

Then came therein two brethren, cousins unto Sir Gawaine, the one hight
Sir Edward, that other hight Sir Sadok, the which were two good
knights; and they asked of King Arthur that they might have the first
jousts, for they were of Orkney. I am pleased, said King Arthur. Then
Sir Edward encountered with the King of Scots, in whose party was Sir
Tristram and Sir Palomides; and Sir Edward smote the King of Scots
quite from his horse, and Sir Sadok smote down the King of North Wales,
and gave him a wonder great fall, that there was a great cry on King
Arthur’s party, and that made Sir Palomides passing wroth. And so Sir
Palomides dressed his shield and his spear, and with all his might he
met with Sir Edward of Orkney, that he smote him so hard that his horse
might not stand on his feet, and so they hurtled to the earth; and then
with the same spear Sir Palomides smote down Sir Sadok over his horse’s
croup. O Jesu, said Arthur, what knight is that arrayed all in green?
he jousteth mightily. Wit you well, said Sir Gawaine, he is a good
knight, and yet shall ye see him joust better or he depart. And yet
shall ye see, said Sir Gawaine, another bigger knight, in the same
colour, than he is; for that same knight, said Sir Gawaine, that smote
down right now my four cousins, he smote me down within these two days,
and seven fellows more.

This meanwhile as they stood thus talking there came into the place Sir
Tristram upon a black horse, and or ever he stint he smote down with
one spear four good knights of Orkney that were of the kin of Sir
Gawaine; and Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan everych of them smote down a
good knight. Jesu, said Arthur, yonder knight upon the black horse doth
mightily and marvellously well. Abide you, said Sir Gawaine; that
knight with the black horse began not yet. Then Sir Tristram made to
horse again the two kings that Edward and Sadok had unhorsed at the
beginning. And then Sir Tristram drew his sword and rode into the
thickest of the press against them of Orkney; and there he smote down
knights, and rashed off helms, and pulled away their shields, and
hurtled down many knights: he fared so that Sir Arthur and all knights
had great marvel when they saw one knight do so great deeds of arms.
And Sir Palomides failed not upon the other side, but did so
marvellously well that all men had wonder. For there King Arthur
likened Sir Tristram that was on the black horse like to a wood lion,
and likened Sir Palomides upon the white horse unto a wood leopard, and
Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan unto eager wolves. But the custom was such
among them that none of the kings would help other, but all the
fellowship of every standard to help other as they might; but ever Sir
Tristram did so much deeds of arms that they of Orkney waxed weary of
him, and so withdrew them unto Lonazep.




CHAPTER LXIX. How Sir Tristram was unhorsed and smitten down by Sir
Launcelot, and after that Sir Tristram smote down King Arthur.


Then was the cry of heralds and all manner of common people: The Green
Knight hath done marvellously, and beaten all them of Orkney. And there
the heralds numbered that Sir Tristram that sat upon the black horse
had smitten down with spears and swords thirty knights; and Sir
Palomides had smitten down twenty knights, and the most part of these
fifty knights were of the house of King Arthur, and proved knights. So
God me help, said Arthur unto Sir Launcelot, this is a great shame to
us to see four knights beat so many knights of mine; and therefore make
you ready, for we will have ado with them. Sir, said Launcelot, wit ye
well that there are two passing good knights, and great worship were it
not to us now to have ado with them, for they have this day sore
travailed. As for that, said Arthur, I will be avenged; and therefore
take with you Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector, and I will be the fourth,
said Arthur. Sir, said Launcelot, ye shall find me ready, and my
brother Sir Ector, and my cousin Sir Bleoberis. And so when they were
ready and on horseback: Now choose, said Sir Arthur unto Sir Launcelot,
with whom that ye will encounter withal. Sir, said Launcelot, I will
meet with the green knight upon the black horse, that was Sir Tristram;
and my cousin Sir Bleoberis shall match the green knight upon the white
horse, that was Sir Palomides; and my brother Sir Ector shall match
with the green knight upon the white horse, that was Sir Gareth. Then
must I, said Sir Arthur, have ado with the green knight upon the
grisled horse, and that was Sir Dinadan. Now every man take heed to his
fellow, said Sir Launcelot. And so they trotted on together, and there
encountered Sir Launcelot against Sir Tristram. So Sir Launcelot smote
Sir Tristram so sore upon the shield that he bare horse and man to the
earth; but Sir Launcelot weened that it had been Sir Palomides, and so
he passed forth. And then Sir Bleoberis encountered with Sir Palomides,
and he smote him so hard upon the shield that Sir Palomides and his
white horse rustled to the earth. Then Sir Ector de Maris smote Sir
Gareth so hard that down he fell off his horse. And the noble King
Arthur encountered with Sir Dinadan, and he smote him quite from his
saddle. And then the noise turned awhile how the green knights were
slain down.

When the King of Northgalis saw that Sir Tristram had a fall, then he
remembered him how great deeds of arms Sir Tristram had done. Then he
made ready many knights, for the custom and cry was such, that what
knight were smitten down, and might not be horsed again by his fellows,
outher by his own strength, that as that day he should be prisoner unto
the party that had smitten him down. So came in the King of Northgalis,
and he rode straight unto Sir Tristram; and when he came nigh him he
alighted down suddenly and betook Sir Tristram his horse, and said
thus: Noble knight, I know thee not of what country that thou art, but
for the noble deeds that thou hast done this day take there my horse,
and let me do as well I may; for, as Jesu me help, thou art better
worthy to have mine horse than I myself. Gramercy, said Sir Tristram,
and if I may I shall quite you: look that ye go not far from us, and as
I suppose, I shall win you another horse. And therewith Sir Tristram
mounted upon his horse, and there he met with King Arthur, and he gave
him such a buffet upon the helm with his sword that King Arthur had no
power to keep his saddle. And then Sir Tristram gave the King of
Northgalis King Arthur’s horse: then was there great press about King
Arthur for to horse him again; but Sir Palomides would not suffer King
Arthur to be horsed again, but ever Sir Palomides smote on the right
hand and on the left hand mightily as a noble knight. And this
meanwhile Sir Tristram rode through the thickest of the press, and
smote down knights on the right hand and on the left hand, and raced
off helms, and so passed forth unto his pavilions, and left Sir
Palomides on foot; and Sir Tristram changed his horse and disguised
himself all in red, horse and harness.




