CHAPTER V. How King Arthur commanded to cast his sword Excalibur into
the water, and how he was delivered to ladies in a barge.


But I may not stand, mine head works so. Ah Sir Launcelot, said King
Arthur, this day have I sore missed thee: alas, that ever I was against
thee, for now have I my death, whereof Sir Gawaine me warned in my
dream. Then Sir Lucan took up the king the one part, and Sir Bedivere
the other part, and in the lifting the king swooned; and Sir Lucan fell
in a swoon with the lift, that the part of his guts fell out of his
body, and therewith the noble knight’s heart brast. And when the king
awoke, he beheld Sir Lucan, how he lay foaming at the mouth, and part
of his guts lay at his feet. Alas, said the king, this is to me a full
heavy sight, to see this noble duke so die for my sake, for he would
have holpen me, that had more need of help than I. Alas, he would not
complain him, his heart was so set to help me: now Jesu have mercy upon
his soul! Then Sir Bedivere wept for the death of his brother. Leave
this mourning and weeping, said the king, for all this will not avail
me, for wit thou well an I might live myself, the death of Sir Lucan
would grieve me evermore; but my time hieth fast, said the king.
Therefore, said Arthur unto Sir Bedivere, take thou Excalibur, my good
sword, and go with it to yonder water side, and when thou comest there
I charge thee throw my sword in that water, and come again and tell me
what thou there seest. My lord, said Bedivere, your commandment shall
be done, and lightly bring you word again.

So Sir Bedivere departed, and by the way he beheld that noble sword,
that the pommel and the haft was all of precious stones; and then he
said to himself: If I throw this rich sword in the water, thereof shall
never come good, but harm and loss. And then Sir Bedivere hid Excalibur
under a tree. And so, as soon as he might, he came again unto the king,
and said he had been at the water, and had thrown the sword in the
water. What saw thou there? said the king. Sir, he said, I saw nothing
but waves and winds. That is untruly said of thee, said the king,
therefore go thou lightly again, and do my commandment; as thou art to
me lief and dear, spare not, but throw it in. Then Sir Bedivere
returned again, and took the sword in his hand; and then him thought
sin and shame to throw away that noble sword, and so eft he hid the
sword, and returned again, and told to the king that he had been at the
water, and done his commandment. What saw thou there? said the king.
Sir, he said, I saw nothing but the waters wap and waves wan. Ah,
traitor untrue, said King Arthur, now hast thou betrayed me twice. Who
would have weened that, thou that hast been to me so lief and dear? and
thou art named a noble knight, and would betray me for the richness of
the sword. But now go again lightly, for thy long tarrying putteth me
in great jeopardy of my life, for I have taken cold. And but if thou do
now as I bid thee, if ever I may see thee, I shall slay thee with mine
own hands; for thou wouldst for my rich sword see me dead.

Then Sir Bedivere departed, and went to the sword, and lightly took it
up, and went to the water side; and there he bound the girdle about the
hilts, and then he threw the sword as far into the water as he might;
and there came an arm and an hand above the water and met it, and
caught it, and so shook it thrice and brandished, and then vanished
away the hand with the sword in the water. So Sir Bedivere came again
to the king, and told him what he saw. Alas, said the king, help me
hence, for I dread me I have tarried over long. Then Sir Bedivere took
the king upon his back, and so went with him to that water side. And
when they were at the water side, even fast by the bank hoved a little
barge with many fair ladies in it, and among them all was a queen, and
all they had black hoods, and all they wept and shrieked when they saw
King Arthur. Now put me into the barge, said the king. And so he did
softly; and there received him three queens with great mourning; and so
they set them down, and in one of their laps King Arthur laid his head.
And then that queen said: Ah, dear brother, why have ye tarried so long
from me? alas, this wound on your head hath caught over-much cold. And
so then they rowed from the land, and Sir Bedivere beheld all those
ladies go from him. Then Sir Bedivere cried: Ah my lord Arthur, what
shall become of me, now ye go from me and leave me here alone among
mine enemies? Comfort thyself, said the king, and do as well as thou
mayst, for in me is no trust for to trust in; for I will into the vale
of Avilion to heal me of my grievous wound: and if thou hear never more
of me, pray for my soul. But ever the queens and ladies wept and
shrieked, that it was pity to hear. And as soon as Sir Bedivere had
lost the sight of the barge, he wept and wailed, and so took the
forest; and so he went all that night, and in the morning he was ware
betwixt two holts hoar, of a chapel and an hermitage.




CHAPTER VI. How Sir Bedivere found him on the morrow dead in an
hermitage, and how he abode there with the hermit.


Then was Sir Bedivere glad, and thither he went; and when he came into
the chapel, he saw where lay an hermit grovelling on all four, there
fast by a tomb was new graven. When the hermit saw Sir Bedivere he knew
him well, for he was but little to-fore Bishop of Canterbury, that Sir
Mordred flemed. Sir, said Bedivere, what man is there interred that ye
pray so fast for? Fair son, said the hermit, I wot not verily, but by
deeming. But this night, at midnight, here came a number of ladies, and
brought hither a dead corpse, and prayed me to bury him; and here they
offered an hundred tapers, and they gave me an hundred besants. Alas,
said Sir Bedivere, that was my lord King Arthur, that here lieth buried
in this chapel. Then Sir Bedivere swooned; and when he awoke he prayed
the hermit he might abide with him still there, to live with fasting
and prayers. For from hence will I never go, said Sir Bedivere, by my
will, but all the days of my life here to pray for my lord Arthur. Ye
are welcome to me, said the hermit, for I know ye better than ye ween
that I do. Ye are the bold Bedivere, and the full noble duke, Sir Lucan
the Butler, was your brother. Then Sir Bedivere told the hermit all as
ye have heard to-fore. So there bode Sir Bedivere with the hermit that
was to-fore Bishop of Canterbury, and there Sir Bedivere put upon him
poor clothes, and served the hermit full lowly in fasting and in
prayers.

Thus of Arthur I find never more written in books that be authorised,
nor more of the very certainty of his death heard I never read, but
thus was he led away in a ship wherein were three queens; that one was
King Arthur’s sister, Queen Morgan le Fay; the other was the Queen of
Northgalis; the third was the Queen of the Waste Lands. Also there was
Nimue, the chief lady of the lake, that had wedded Pelleas the good
knight; and this lady had done much for King Arthur, for she would
never suffer Sir Pelleas to be in no place where he should be in danger
of his life; and so he lived to the uttermost of his days with her in
great rest. More of the death of King Arthur could I never find, but
that ladies brought him to his burials; and such one was buried there,
that the hermit bare witness that sometime was Bishop of Canterbury,
but yet the hermit knew not in certain that he was verily the body of
King Arthur: for this tale Sir Bedivere, knight of the Table Round,
made it to be written.




