CHAPTER VI. How Sir Launcelot came into the joyous Isle, and there he
named himself Le Chevaler Mal Fet.


Then went Dame Elaine unto Sir Launcelot, and told him all how her
father had devised for him and her. Then came the knight Sir Castor,
that was nephew unto King Pelles, unto Sir Launcelot, and asked him
what was his name. Sir, said Sir Launcelot, my name is Le Chevaler Mal
Fet, that is to say the knight that hath trespassed. Sir, said Sir
Castor, it may well be so, but ever meseemeth your name should be Sir
Launcelot du Lake, for or now I have seen you. Sir, said Launcelot, ye
are not as a gentle knight: I put case my name were Sir Launcelot, and
that it list me not to discover my name, what should it grieve you here
to keep my counsel, and ye be not hurt thereby? but wit thou well an
ever it lie in my power I shall grieve you, and that I promise you
truly. Then Sir Castor kneeled down and besought Sir Launcelot of
mercy: For I shall never utter what ye be, while that ye be in these
parts. Then Sir Launcelot pardoned him.

And then, after this, King Pelles with ten knights, and Dame Elaine,
and twenty ladies, rode unto the Castle of Bliant that stood in an
island beclosed in iron, with a fair water deep and large. And when
they were there Sir Launcelot let call it the Joyous Isle; and there
was he called none otherwise but Le Chevaler Mal Fet, the knight that
hath trespassed. Then Sir Launcelot let make him a shield all of sable,
and a queen crowned in the midst, all of silver, and a knight clean
armed kneeling afore her. And every day once, for any mirths that all
the ladies might make him, he would once every day look toward the
realm of Logris, where King Arthur and Queen Guenever was. And then
would he fall upon a weeping as his heart should to-brast.

So it fell that time Sir Launcelot heard of a jousting fast by his
castle, within three leagues. Then he called unto him a dwarf, and he
bade him go unto that jousting. And or ever the knights depart, look
thou make there a cry, in hearing of all the knights, that there is one
knight in the Joyous Isle, that is the Castle of Bliant, and say his
name is Le Chevaler Mal Fet, that will joust against knights that will
come. And who that putteth that knight to the worse shall have a fair
maid and a gerfalcon.




CHAPTER VII. Of a great tourneying in the Joyous Isle, and how Sir
Pervivale and Sir Ector came thither, and Sir Percivale fought with
him.


So when this cry was made, unto Joyous Isle drew knights to the number
of five hundred; and wit ye well there was never seen in Arthur’s days
one knight that did so much deeds of arms as Sir Launcelot did three
days together; for as the book maketh truly mention, he had the better
of all the five hundred knights, and there was not one slain of them.
And after that Sir Launcelot made them all a great feast.

And in the meanwhile came Sir Percivale de Galis and Sir Ector de Maris
under that castle that was called the Joyous Isle. And as they beheld
that gay castle they would have gone to that castle, but they might not
for the broad water, and bridge could they find none. Then they saw on
the other side a lady with a sperhawk on her hand, and Sir Percivale
called unto her, and asked that lady who was in that castle. Fair
knights, she said, here within this castle is the fairest lady in this
land, and her name is Elaine. Also we have in this castle the fairest
knight and the mightiest man that is I dare say living, and he called
himself Le Chevaler Mal Fet. How came he into these marches? said Sir
Percivale. Truly, said the damosel, he came into this country like a
mad man, with dogs and boys chasing him through the city of Corbin, and
by the holy vessel of the Sangreal he was brought into his wit again;
but he will not do battle with no knight, but by underne or by noon.
And if ye list to come into the castle, said the lady, ye must ride
unto the further side of the castle and there shall ye find a vessel
that will bear you and your horse. Then they departed, and came unto
the vessel. And then Sir Percivale alighted, and said to Sir Ector de
Maris: Ye shall abide me here until that I wit what manner a knight he
is; for it were shame unto us, inasmuch as he is but one knight, an we
should both do battle with him. Do ye as ye list, said Sir Ector, and
here I shall abide you until that I hear of you.

Then passed Sir Percivale the water, and when he came to the castle
gate he bade the porter: Go thou to the good knight within the castle,
and tell him here is come an errant knight to joust with him. Sir, said
the porter, ride ye within the castle, and there is a common place for
jousting, that lords and ladies may behold you. So anon as Sir
Launcelot had warning he was soon ready; and there Sir Percivale and
Sir Launcelot encountered with such a might, and their spears were so
rude, that both the horses and the knights fell to the earth. Then they
avoided their horses, and flang out noble swords, and hewed away
cantels of their shields, and hurtled together with their shields like
two boars, and either wounded other passing sore. At the last Sir
Percivale spake first when they had foughten there more than two hours.
Fair knight, said Sir Percivale, I require thee tell me thy name, for I
met never with such a knight. Sir, said Sir Launcelot, my name is Le
Chevaler Mal Fet. Now tell me your name, said Sir Launcelot, I require
you, gentle knight. Truly, said Sir Percivale, my name is Sir Percivale
de Galis, that was brother unto the good knight, Sir Lamorak de Galis,
and King Pellinore was our father, and Sir Aglovale is my brother.
Alas, said Sir Launcelot, what have I done to fight with you that art a
knight of the Round Table, that sometime was your fellow?




