CHAPTER VII. How for the despite of Sir Tristram King Mark came with
two knights into England, and how he slew one of the knights.


Then King Mark had great despite of the renown of Sir Tristram, and
then he chased him out of Cornwall: yet was he nephew unto King Mark,
but he had great suspicion unto Sir Tristram because of his queen, La
Beale Isoud; for him seemed that there was too much love between them
both. So when Sir Tristram departed out of Cornwall into England King
Mark heard of the great prowess that Sir Tristram did there, the which
grieved him sore. So he sent on his part men to espy what deeds he did.
And the queen sent privily on her part spies to know what deeds he had
done, for great love was between them twain. So when the messengers
were come home they told the truth as they had heard, that he passed
all other knights but if it were Sir Launcelot. Then King Mark was
right heavy of these tidings, and as glad was La Beale Isoud. Then in
great despite he took with him two good knights and two squires, and
disguised himself, and took his way into England, to the intent for to
slay Sir Tristram. And one of these two knights hight Bersules, and the
other knight was called Amant. So as they rode King Mark asked a knight
that he met, where he should find King Arthur. He said: At Camelot.
Also he asked that knight after Sir Tristram, whether he heard of him
in the court of King Arthur. Wit you well, said that knight, ye shall
find Sir Tristram there for a man of as great worship as is now living;
for through his prowess he won the tournament of the Castle of Maidens
that standeth by the Hard Rock. And sithen he hath won with his own
hands thirty knights that were men of great honour. And the last battle
that ever he did he fought with Sir Launcelot; and that was a
marvellous battle. And not by force Sir Launcelot brought Sir Tristram
to the court, and of him King Arthur made passing great joy, and so
made him Knight of the Table Round; and his seat was where the good
knight’s, Sir Marhaus, seat was. Then was King Mark passing sorry when
he heard of the honour of Sir Tristram; and so they departed.

Then said King Mark unto his two knights: Now will I tell you my
counsel: ye are the men that I trust most to alive, and I will that ye
wit my coming hither is to this intent, for to destroy Sir Tristram by
wiles or by treason; and it shall be hard if ever he escape our hands.
Alas, said Sir Bersules, what mean you? for ye be set in such a way ye
are disposed shamefully; for Sir Tristram is the knight of most worship
that we know living, and therefore I warn you plainly I will never
consent to do him to the death; and therefore I will yield my service,
and forsake you. When King Mark heard him say so, suddenly he drew his
sword and said: Ah, traitor; and smote Sir Bersules on the head, that
the sword went to his teeth. When Amant, the knight, saw him do that
villainous deed, and his squires, they said it was foul done, and
mischievously: Wherefore we will do thee no more service, and wit ye
well, we will appeach thee of treason afore Arthur. Then was King Mark
wonderly wroth and would have slain Amant; but he and the two squires
held them together, and set nought by his malice. When King Mark saw he
might not be revenged on them, he said thus unto the knight, Amant: Wit
thou well, an thou appeach me of treason I shall thereof defend me
afore King Arthur; but I require thee that thou tell not my name, that
I am King Mark, whatsomever come of me. As for that, said Sir Amant, I
will not discover your name; and so they departed, and Amant and his
fellows took the body of Bersules and buried it.




CHAPTER VIII. How King Mark came to a fountain where he found Sir
Lamorak complaining for the love of King Lot’s wife.


Then King Mark rode till he came to a fountain, and there he rested
him, and stood in a doubt whether he would ride to Arthur’s court or
none, or return again to his country. And as he thus rested him by that
fountain there came by him a knight well armed on horseback; and he
alighted, and tied his horse until a tree, and set him down by the
brink of the fountain; and there he made great languor and dole, and
made the dolefullest complaint of love that ever man heard; and all
this while was he not ware of King Mark. And this was a great part of
his complaint: he cried and wept, saying: O fair Queen of Orkney, King
Lot’s wife, and mother of Sir Gawaine, and to Sir Gaheris, and mother
to many other, for thy love I am in great pains. Then King Mark arose
and went near him and said: Fair knight, ye have made a piteous
complaint. Truly, said the knight, it is an hundred part more ruefuller
than my heart can utter. I require you, said King Mark, tell me your
name. Sir, said he, as for my name I will not hide it from no knight
that beareth a shield, and my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis. But when
Sir Lamorak heard King Mark speak, then wist he well by his speech that
he was a Cornish knight. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, I understand by your
tongue ye be of Cornwall, wherein there dwelleth the shamefullest king
that is now living, for he is a great enemy to all good knights; and
that proveth well, for he hath chased out of that country Sir Tristram,
that is the worshipfullest knight that now is living, and all knights
speak of him worship; and for jealousness of his queen he hath chased
him out of his country. It is pity, said Sir Lamorak, that ever any
such false knight-coward as King Mark is, should be matched with such a
fair lady and good as La Beale Isoud is, for all the world of him
speaketh shame, and of her worship that any queen may have. I have not
ado in this matter, said King Mark, neither nought will I speak
thereof. Well said, said Sir Lamorak. Sir, can ye tell me any tidings?
I can tell you, said Sir Lamorak, that there shall be a great
tournament in haste beside Camelot, at the Castle of Jagent; and the
King with the Hundred Knights and the King of Ireland, as I suppose,
make that tournament.

Then there came a knight that was called Sir Dinadan, and saluted them
both. And when he wist that King Mark was a knight of Cornwall he
reproved him for the love of King Mark a thousand fold more than did
Sir Lamorak. Then he proffered to joust with King Mark. And he was full
loath thereto, but Sir Dinadan edged him so, that he jousted with Sir
Lamorak. And Sir Lamorak smote King Mark so sore that he bare him on
his spear end over his horse’s tail. And then King Mark arose again,
and followed after Sir Lamorak. But Sir Dinadan would not joust with
Sir Lamorak, but he told King Mark that Sir Lamorak was Sir Kay, the
Seneschal. That is not so, said King Mark, for he is much bigger than
Sir Kay; and so he followed and overtook him, and bade him abide. What
will you do? said Sir Lamorak. Sir, he said, I will fight with a sword,
for ye have shamed me with a spear; and therewith they dashed together
with swords, and Sir Lamorak suffered him and forbare him. And King
Mark was passing hasty, and smote thick strokes. Sir Lamorak saw he
would not stint, and waxed somewhat wroth, and doubled his strokes, for
he was one of the noblest knights of the world; and he beat him so on
the helm that his head hung nigh on the saddle bow. When Sir Lamorak
saw him fare so, he said: Sir knight, what cheer? meseemeth you have
nigh your fill of fighting, it were pity to do you any more harm, for
ye are but a mean knight, therefore I give you leave to go where ye
list. Gramercy, said King Mark, for ye and I be not matches.

Then Sir Dinadan mocked King Mark and said: Ye are not able to match a
good knight. As for that, said King Mark, at the first time I jousted
with this knight ye refused him. Think ye that it is a shame to me?
said Sir Dinadan: nay, sir, it is ever worship to a knight to refuse
that thing that he may not attain, there fore your worship had been
much more to have refused him as I did; for I warn you plainly he is
able to beat such five as ye and I be; for ye knights of Cornwall are
no men of worship as other knights are. And because ye are no men of
worship ye hate all men of worship, for never was bred in your country
such a knight as is Sir Tristram.




