CHAPTER II. How Merlin likened the Round Table to the world, and how
the knights that should achieve the Sangreal should be known.


Also Merlin made the Round Table in tokening of roundness of the world,
for by the Round Table is the world signified by right, for all the
world, Christian and heathen, repair unto the Round Table; and when
they are chosen to be of the fellowship of the Round Table they think
them more blessed and more in worship than if they had gotten half the
world; and ye have seen that they have lost their fathers and their
mothers, and all their kin, and their wives and their children, for to
be of your fellowship. It is well seen by you; for since ye have
departed from your mother ye would never see her, ye found such
fellowship at the Round Table. When Merlin had ordained the Round Table
he said, by them which should be fellows of the Round Table the truth
of the Sangreal should be well known. And men asked him how men might
know them that should best do and to enchieve the Sangreal? Then he
said there should be three white bulls that should enchieve it, and the
two should be maidens, and the third should be chaste. And that one of
the three should pass his father as much as the lion passeth the
leopard, both of strength and hardiness.

They that heard Merlin say so said thus unto Merlin: Sithen there shall
be such a knight, thou shouldest ordain by thy crafts a siege, that no
man should sit in it but he all only that shall pass all other knights.
Then Merlin answered that he would do so. And then he made the Siege
Perilous, in the which Galahad sat in at his meat on Whitsunday last
past. Now, madam, said Sir Percivale, so much have I heard of you that
by my good will I will never have ado with Sir Galahad but by way of
kindness; and for God’s love, fair aunt, can ye teach me some way where
I may find him? for much would I love the fellowship of him. Fair
nephew, said she, ye must ride unto a castle the which is called
Goothe, where he hath a cousin-germain, and there may ye be lodged this
night. And as he teacheth you, seweth after as fast as ye can; and if
he can tell you no tidings of him, ride straight unto the Castle of
Carbonek, where the maimed king is there lying, for there shall ye hear
true tidings of him.




CHAPTER III. How Sir Percivale came into a monastery, where he found
King Evelake, which was an old man.


Then departed Sir Percivale from his aunt, either making great sorrow.
And so he rode till evensong time. And then he heard a clock smite; and
then he was ware of an house closed well with walls and deep ditches,
and there he knocked at the gate and was let in, and he alighted and
was led unto a chamber, and soon he was unarmed. And there he had right
good cheer all that night; and on the morn he heard his mass, and in
the monastery he found a priest ready at the altar. And on the right
side he saw a pew closed with iron, and behind the altar he saw a rich
bed and a fair, as of cloth of silk and gold.

Then Sir Percivale espied that therein was a man or a woman, for the
visage was covered; then he left off his looking and heard his service.
And when it came to the sacring, he that lay within that parclos
dressed him up, and uncovered his head; and then him beseemed a passing
old man, and he had a crown of gold upon his head, and his shoulders
were naked and unhilled unto his navel. And then Sir Percivale espied
his body was full of great wounds, both on the shoulders, arms, and
visage. And ever he held up his hands against Our Lord’s body, and
cried: Fair, sweet Father, Jesu Christ, forget not me. And so he lay
down, but always he was in his prayers and orisons; and him seemed to
be of the age of three hundred winter. And when the mass was done the
priest took Our Lord’s body and bare it to the sick king. And when he
had used it he did off his crown, and commanded the crown to be set on
the altar.

Then Sir Percivale asked one of the brethren what he was. Sir, said the
good man, ye have heard much of Joseph of Aramathie, how he was sent by
Jesu Christ into this land for to teach and preach the holy Christian
faith; and therefore he suffered many persecutions the which the
enemies of Christ did unto him, and in the city of Sarras he converted
a king whose name was Evelake. And so this king came with Joseph into
this land, and ever he was busy to be thereas the Sangreal was; and on
a time he nighed it so nigh that Our Lord was displeased with him, but
ever he followed it more and more, till God struck him almost blind.
Then this king cried mercy, and said: Fair Lord, let me never die till
the good knight of my blood of the ninth degree be come, that I may see
him openly that he shall enchieve the Sangreal, that I may kiss him.




CHAPTER IV. How Sir Percivale saw many men of arms bearing a dead
knight, and how he fought against them.


When the king thus had made his prayers he heard a voice that said:
Heard be thy prayers, for thou shalt not die till he have kissed thee.
And when that knight shall come the clearness of your eyes shall come
again, and thou shalt see openly, and thy wounds shall be healed, and
erst shall they never close. And this befell of King Evelake, and this
same king hath lived this three hundred winters this holy life, and men
say the knight is in the court that shall heal him. Sir, said the good
man, I pray you tell me what knight that ye be, and if ye be of King
Arthur’s court and of the Table Round. Yea forsooth, said he, and my
name is Sir Percivale de Galis. And when the good man understood his
name he made great joy of him.

And then Sir Percivale departed and rode till the hour of noon. And he
met in a valley about a twenty men of arms, which bare in a bier a
knight deadly slain. And when they saw Sir Percivale they asked him of
whence he was. And he answered: Of the court of King Arthur. Then they
cried all at once: Slay him. Then Sir Percivale smote the first to the
earth and his horse upon him. And then seven of the knights smote upon
his shield all at once, and the remnant slew his horse so that he fell
to the earth. So had they slain him or taken him had not the good
knight, Sir Galahad, with the red arms come there by adventure into
those parts. And when he saw all those knights upon one knight he
cried: Save me that knight’s life. And then he dressed him toward the
twenty men of arms as fast as his horse might drive, with his spear in
the rest, and smote the foremost horse and man to the earth. And when
his spear was broken he set his hand to his sword, and smote on the
right hand and on the left hand that it was marvel to see, and at every
stroke he smote one down or put him to a rebuke, so that they would
fight no more but fled to a thick forest, and Sir Galahad followed
them.

And when Sir Percivale saw him chase them so, he made great sorrow that
his horse was away. And then he wist well it was Sir Galahad. And then
he cried aloud: Ah fair knight, abide and suffer me to do thankings
unto thee, for much have ye done for me. But ever Sir Galahad rode so
fast that at the last he passed out of his sight. And as fast as Sir
Percivale might he went after him on foot, crying. And then he met with
a yeoman riding upon an hackney, the which led in his hand a great
steed blacker than any bear. Ah, fair friend, said Sir Percivale, as
ever I may do for you, and to be your true knight in the first place ye
will require me, that ye will lend me that black steed, that I might
overtake a knight the which rideth afore me. Sir knight, said the
yeoman, I pray you hold me excused of that, for that I may not do. For
wit ye well, the horse is such a man’s horse, that an I lent it you or
any man, that he would slay me. Alas, said Sir Percivale, I had never
so great sorrow as I have had for losing of yonder knight. Sir, said
the yeoman, I am right heavy for you, for a good horse would beseem you
well; but I dare not deliver you this horse but if ye would take him
from me. That will I not do, said Sir Percivale. And so they departed;
and Sir Percivale set him down under a tree, and made sorrow out of
measure. And as he was there, there came a knight riding on the horse
that the yeoman led, and he was clean armed.




