CHAPTER VII. How the queen desired to see Galahad; and how after, all
the knights were replenished with the Holy Sangreal, and how they
avowed the enquest of the same.


Then the king, at the queen’s request, made him to alight and to unlace
his helm, that the queen might see him in the visage. When she beheld
him she said: Soothly I dare well say that Sir Launcelot begat him, for
never two men resembled more in likeness, therefore it nis no marvel
though he be of great prowess. So a lady that stood by the queen said:
Madam, for God’s sake ought he of right to be so good a knight? Yea,
forsooth, said the queen, for he is of all parties come of the best
knights of the world and of the highest lineage; for Sir Launcelot is
come but of the eighth degree from our Lord Jesu Christ, and Sir
Galahad is of the ninth degree from our Lord Jesu Christ, therefore I
dare say they be the greatest gentlemen of the world.

And then the king and all estates went home unto Camelot, and so went
to evensong to the great minster, and so after upon that to supper, and
every knight sat in his own place as they were toforehand. Then anon
they heard cracking and crying of thunder, that them thought the place
should all to-drive. In the midst of this blast entered a sunbeam more
clearer by seven times than ever they saw day, and all they were
alighted of the grace of the Holy Ghost. Then began every knight to
behold other, and either saw other, by their seeming, fairer than ever
they saw afore. Not for then there was no knight might speak one word a
great while, and so they looked every man on other as they had been
dumb. Then there entered into the hall the Holy Grail covered with
white samite, but there was none might see it, nor who bare it. And
there was all the hall fulfilled with good odours, and every knight had
such meats and drinks as he best loved in this world. And when the Holy
Grail had been borne through the hall, then the holy vessel departed
suddenly, that they wist not where it became: then had they all breath
to speak. And then the king yielded thankings to God, of His good grace
that he had sent them. Certes, said the king, we ought to thank our
Lord Jesu greatly for that he hath shewed us this day, at the reverence
of this high feast of Pentecost.

Now, said Sir Gawaine, we have been served this day of what meats and
drinks we thought on; but one thing beguiled us, we might not see the
Holy Grail, it was so preciously covered. Wherefore I will make here
avow, that to-morn, without longer abiding, I shall labour in the quest
of the Sangreal, that I shall hold me out a twelvemonth and a day, or
more if need be, and never shall I return again unto the court till I
have seen it more openly than it hath been seen here; and if I may not
speed I shall return again as he that may not be against the will of
our Lord Jesu Christ.

When they of the Table Round heard Sir Gawaine say so, they arose up
the most part and made such avows as Sir Gawaine had made. Anon as King
Arthur heard this he was greatly displeased, for he wist well they
might not again-say their avows. Alas, said King Arthur unto Sir
Gawaine, ye have nigh slain me with the avow and promise that ye have
made; for through you ye have bereft me the fairest fellowship and the
truest of knighthood that ever were seen together in any realm of the
world; for when they depart from hence I am sure they all shall never
meet more in this world, for they shall die many in the quest. And so
it forthinketh me a little, for I have loved them as well as my life,
wherefore it shall grieve me right sore, the departition of this
fellowship: for I have had an old custom to have them in my fellowship.




CHAPTER VIII. How great sorrow was made of the king and the queen and
ladies for the departing of the knights, and how they departed.


And therewith the tears fell in his eyes. And then he said: Gawaine,
Gawaine, ye have set me in great sorrow, for I have great doubt that my
true fellowship shall never meet here more again. Ah, said Sir
Launcelot, comfort yourself; for it shall be unto us a great honour and
much more than if we died in any other places, for of death we be
siker. Ah, Launcelot, said the king, the great love that I have had
unto you all the days of my life maketh me to say such doleful words;
for never Christian king had never so many worthy men at his table as I
have had this day at the Round Table, and that is my great sorrow.

When the queen, ladies, and gentlewomen, wist these tidings, they had
such sorrow and heaviness that there might no tongue tell it, for those
knights had held them in honour and chierté. But among all other Queen
Guenever made great sorrow. I marvel, said she, my lord would suffer
them to depart from him. Thus was all the court troubled for the love
of the departition of those knights. And many of those ladies that
loved knights would have gone with their lovers; and so had they done,
had not an old knight come among them in religious clothing; and then
he spake all on high and said: Fair lords, which have sworn in the
quest of the Sangreal, thus sendeth you Nacien, the hermit, word, that
none in this quest lead lady nor gentlewoman with him, for it is not to
do in so high a service as they labour in; for I warn you plain, he
that is not clean of his sins he shall not see the mysteries of our
Lord Jesu Christ. And for this cause they left these ladies and
gentlewomen.

After this the queen came unto Galahad and asked him of whence he was,
and of what country. He told her of whence he was. And son unto
Launcelot, she said he was. As to that, he said neither yea nor nay. So
God me help, said the queen, of your father ye need not to shame you,
for he is the goodliest knight, and of the best men of the world come,
and of the strain, of all parties, of kings. Wherefore ye ought of
right to be, of your deeds, a passing good man; and certainly, she
said, ye resemble him much. Then Sir Galahad was a little ashamed and
said: Madam, sith ye know in certain, wherefore do ye ask it me? for he
that is my father shall be known openly and all betimes. And then they
went to rest them. And in the honour of the highness of Galahad he was
led into King Arthur’s chamber, and there rested in his own bed.

And as soon as it was day the king arose, for he had no rest of all
that night for sorrow. Then he went unto Gawaine and to Sir Launcelot
that were arisen for to hear mass. And then the king again said: Ah
Gawaine, Gawaine, ye have betrayed me; for never shall my court be
amended by you, but ye will never be sorry for me as I am for you. And
therewith the tears began to run down by his visage. And therewith the
king said: Ah, knight Sir Launcelot, I require thee thou counsel me,
for I would that this quest were undone, an it might be Sir, said Sir
Launcelot, ye saw yesterday so many worthy knights that then were sworn
that they may not leave it in no manner of wise. That wot I well, said
the king, but it shall so heavy me at their departing that I wot well
there shall no manner of joy remedy me. And then the king and the queen
went unto the minster. So anon Launcelot and Gawaine commanded their
men to bring their arms. And when they all were armed save their
shields and their helms, then they came to their fellowship, which were
all ready in the same wise, for to go to the minster to hear their
service.

Then after the service was done the king would wit how many had
undertaken the quest of the Holy Grail; and to accompt them he prayed
them all. Then found they by the tale an hundred and fifty, and all
were knights of the Round Table. And then they put on their helms and
departed, and recommended them all wholly unto the queen; and there was
weeping and great sorrow. Then the queen departed into her chamber and
held her, so that no man should perceive her great sorrows. When Sir
Launcelot missed the queen he went till her chamber, and when she saw
him she cried aloud: O Launcelot, Launcelot, ye have betrayed me and
put me to the death, for to leave thus my lord. Ah, madam, I pray you
be not displeased, for I shall come again as soon as I may with my
worship. Alas, said she, that ever I saw you; but he that suffered upon
the cross for all mankind, he be unto you good conduct and safety, and
all the whole fellowship.

Right so departed Sir Launcelot, and found his fellowship that abode
his coming. And so they mounted upon their horses and rode through the
streets of Camelot; and there was weeping of rich and poor, and the
king turned away and might not speak for weeping. So within a while
they came to a city, and a castle that hight Vagon. There they entered
into the castle, and the lord of that castle was an old man that hight
Vagon, and he was a good man of his living, and set open the gates, and
made them all the cheer that he might. And so on the morn they were all
accorded that they should depart everych from other; and on the morn
they departed with weeping cheer, and every knight took the way that
him liked best.




