CHAPTER VII. How Sir Mordred rode hastily to the king, to tell him of
the affray and death of Sir Agravaine and the other knights.


Now turn we again unto Sir Mordred, that when he was escaped from the
noble knight, Sir Launcelot, he anon gat his horse and mounted upon
him, and rode unto King Arthur, sore wounded and smitten, and all
forbled; and there he told the king all how it was, and how they were
all slain save himself all only. Jesu mercy, how may this be? said the
king; took ye him in the queen’s chamber? Yea, so God me help, said Sir
Mordred, there we found him unarmed, and there he slew Colgrevance, and
armed him in his armour; and all this he told the king from the
beginning to the ending. Jesu mercy, said the king, he is a marvellous
knight of prowess. Alas, me sore repenteth, said the king, that ever
Sir Launcelot should be against me. Now I am sure the noble fellowship
of the Round Table is broken for ever, for with him will many a noble
knight hold; and now it is fallen so, said the king, that I may not
with my worship, but the queen must suffer the death. So then there was
made great ordinance in this heat, that the queen must be judged to the
death. And the law was such in those days that whatsomever they were,
of what estate or degree, if they were found guilty of treason, there
should be none other remedy but death; and outher the men or the taking
with the deed should be causer of their hasty judgment. And right so
was it ordained for Queen Guenever, because Sir Mordred was escaped
sore wounded, and the death of thirteen knights of the Round Table.
These proofs and experiences caused King Arthur to command the queen to
the fire there to be brent.

Then spake Sir Gawaine, and said: My lord Arthur, I would counsel you
not to be over-hasty, but that ye would put it in respite, this
judgment of my lady the queen, for many causes. One it is, though it
were so that Sir Launcelot were found in the queen’s chamber, yet it
might be so that he came thither for none evil; for ye know my lord,
said Sir Gawaine, that the queen is much beholden unto Sir Launcelot,
more than unto any other knight, for ofttimes he hath saved her life,
and done battle for her when all the court refused the queen; and
peradventure she sent for him for goodness and for none evil, to reward
him for his good deeds that he had done to her in times past. And
peradventure my lady, the queen, sent for him to that intent that Sir
Launcelot should come to her good grace privily and secretly, weening
to her that it was best so to do, in eschewing and dreading of slander;
for ofttimes we do many things that we ween it be for the best, and yet
peradventure it turneth to the worst. For I dare say, said Sir Gawaine,
my lady, your queen, is to you both good and true; and as for Sir
Launcelot, said Sir Gawaine, I dare say he will make it good upon any
knight living that will put upon himself villainy or shame, and in like
wise he will make good for my lady, Dame Guenever.

That I believe well, said King Arthur, but I will not that way with Sir
Launcelot, for he trusteth so much upon his hands and his might that he
doubteth no man; and therefore for my queen he shall never fight more,
for she shall have the law. And if I may get Sir Launcelot, wit you
well he shall have a shameful death. Jesu defend, said Sir Gawaine,
that I may never see it. Why say ye so? said King Arthur; forsooth ye
have no cause to love Sir Launcelot, for this night last past he slew
your brother, Sir Agravaine, a full good knight, and almost he had
slain your other brother, Sir Mordred, and also there he slew thirteen
noble knights; and also, Sir Gawaine, remember you he slew two sons of
yours, Sir Florence and Sir Lovel. My lord, said Sir Gawaine, of all
this I have knowledge, of whose deaths I repent me sore; but insomuch I
gave them warning, and told my brethren and my sons aforehand what
would fall in the end, insomuch they would not do by my counsel, I will
not meddle me thereof, nor revenge me nothing of their deaths; for I
told them it was no boot to strive with Sir Launcelot. Howbeit I am
sorry of the death of my brethren and of my sons, for they are the
causers of their own death; for ofttimes I warned my brother Sir
Agravaine, and I told him the perils the which be now fallen.




CHAPTER VIII. How Sir Launcelot and his kinsmen rescued the queen from
the fire, and how he slew many knights.


Then said the noble King Arthur to Sir Gawaine: Dear nephew, I pray you
make you ready in your best armour, with your brethren, Sir Gaheris and
Sir Gareth, to bring my queen to the fire, there to have her judgment
and receive the death. Nay, my most noble lord, said Sir Gawaine, that
will I never do; for wit you well I will never be in that place where
so noble a queen as is my lady, Dame Guenever, shall take a shameful
end. For wit you well, said Sir Gawaine, my heart will never serve me
to see her die; and it shall never be said that ever I was of your
counsel of her death.

Then said the king to Sir Gawaine: Suffer your brothers Sir Gaheris and
Sir Gareth to be there. My lord, said Sir Gawaine, wit you well they
will be loath to be there present, because of many adventures the which
be like there to fall, but they are young and full unable to say you
nay. Then spake Sir Gaheris, and the good knight Sir Gareth, unto Sir
Arthur: Sir, ye may well command us to be there, but wit you well it
shall be sore against our will; but an we be there by your strait
commandment ye shall plainly hold us there excused: we will be there in
peaceable wise, and bear none harness of war upon us. In the name of
God, said the king, then make you ready, for she shall soon have her
judgment anon. Alas, said Sir Gawaine, that ever I should endure to see
this woful day. So Sir Gawaine turned him and wept heartily, and so he
went into his chamber; and then the queen was led forth without
Carlisle, and there she was despoiled into her smock. And so then her
ghostly father was brought to her, to be shriven of her misdeeds. Then
was there weeping, and wailing, and wringing of hands, of many lords
and ladies, but there were but few in comparison that would bear any
armour for to strength the death of the queen.

Then was there one that Sir Launcelot had sent unto that place for to
espy what time the queen should go unto her death; and anon as he saw
the queen despoiled into her smock, and so shriven, then he gave Sir
Launcelot warning. Then was there but spurring and plucking up of
horses, and right so they came to the fire. And who that stood against
them, there were they slain; there might none withstand Sir Launcelot,
so all that bare arms and withstood them, there were they slain, full
many a noble knight. For there was slain Sir Belliance le Orgulous, Sir
Segwarides, Sir Griflet, Sir Brandiles, Sir Aglovale, Sir Tor; Sir
Gauter, Sir Gillimer, Sir Reynolds’ three brethren; Sir Damas, Sir
Priamus, Sir Kay the Stranger, Sir Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Herminde;
Sir Pertilope, Sir Perimones, two brethren that were called the Green
Knight and the Red Knight. And so in this rushing and hurling, as Sir
Launcelot thrang here and there, it mishapped him to slay Gaheris and
Sir Gareth, the noble knight, for they were unarmed and unware. For as
the French book saith, Sir Launcelot smote Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris
upon the brain-pans, wherethrough they were slain in the field; howbeit
in very truth Sir Launcelot saw them not, and so were they found dead
among the thickest of the press.

Then when Sir Launcelot had thus done, and slain and put to flight all
that would withstand him, then he rode straight unto Dame Guenever, and
made a kirtle and a gown to be cast upon her; and then he made her to
be set behind him, and prayed her to be of good cheer. Wit you well the
queen was glad that she was escaped from the death. And then she
thanked God and Sir Launcelot; and so he rode his way with the queen,
as the French book saith, unto Joyous Gard, and there he kept her as a
noble knight should do; and many great lords and some kings sent Sir
Launcelot many good knights, and many noble knights drew unto Sir
Launcelot. When this was known openly, that King Arthur and Sir
Launcelot were at debate, many knights were glad of their debate, and
many were full heavy of their debate.




