CHAPTER LXXVII. How Sir Tristram departed with La Beale Isoud, and how
Palomides followed and excused him.


Then they blew unto lodging, and Queen Isoud was led unto her
pavilions. But wit you well she was wroth out of measure with Sir
Palomides, for she saw all his treason from the beginning to the
ending. And all this while neither Sir Tristram, neither Sir Gareth nor
Dinadan, knew not of the treason of Sir Palomides; but afterward ye
shall hear that there befell the greatest debate betwixt Sir Tristram
and Sir Palomides that might be.

So when the tournament was done, Sir Tristram, Gareth, and Dinadan,
rode with La Beale Isoud to these pavilions. And ever Sir Palomides
rode with them in their company disguised as he was. But when Sir
Tristram had espied him that he was the same knight with the shield of
silver that held him so hot that day: Sir knight, said Sir Tristram,
wit ye well here is none that hath need of your fellowship, and
therefore I pray you depart from us. Sir Palomides answered again as
though he had not known Sir Tristram: Wit you well, sir knight, from
this fellowship will I never depart, for one of the best knights of the
world commanded me to be in this company, and till he discharge me of
my service I will not be discharged. By that Sir Tristram knew that it
was Sir Palomides. Ah, Sir Palomides, said the noble knight Sir
Tristram, are ye such a knight? Ye have been named wrong, for ye have
long been called a gentle knight, and as this day ye have showed me
great ungentleness, for ye had almost brought me unto my death. But, as
for you, I suppose I should have done well enough, but Sir Launcelot
with you was overmuch; for I know no knight living but Sir Launcelot is
over good for him, an he will do his uttermost. Alas, said Sir
Palomides, are ye my lord Sir Tristram? Yea, sir, and that ye know well
enough. By my knighthood, said Palomides, until now I knew you not; I
weened that ye had been the King of Ireland, for well I wot ye bare his
arms. His arms I bare, said Sir Tristram, and that will I stand by, for
I won them once in a field of a full noble knight, his name was Sir
Marhaus; and with great pain I won that knight, for there was none
other recover, but Sir Marhaus died through false leeches; and yet was
he never yolden to me. Sir, said Palomides, I weened ye had been turned
upon Sir Launcelot’s party, and that caused me to turn. Ye say well,
said Sir Tristram, and so I take you, and I forgive you.

So then they rode into their pavilions; and when they were alighted
they unarmed them and washed their faces and hands, and so yode unto
meat, and were set at their table. But when Isoud saw Sir Palomides she
changed then her colours, and for wrath she might not speak. Anon Sir
Tristram espied her countenance and said: Madam, for what cause make ye
us such cheer? we have been sore travailed this day. Mine own lord,
said La Beale Isoud, for God’s sake be ye not displeased with me, for I
may none otherwise do; for I saw this day how ye were betrayed and nigh
brought to your death. Truly, sir, I saw every deal, how and in what
wise, and therefore, sir, how should I suffer in your presence such a
felon and traitor as Sir Palomides; for I saw him with mine eyes, how
he beheld you when ye went out of the field. For ever he hoved still
upon his horse till he saw you come in againward. And then forthwithal
I saw him ride to the hurt knight, and changed harness with him, and
then straight I saw him how he rode into the field. And anon as he had
found you he encountered with you, and thus wilfully Sir Palomides did
battle with you; and as for him, sir, I was not greatly afraid, but I
dread sore Launcelot, that knew you not. Madam, said Palomides, ye may
say whatso ye will, I may not contrary you, but by my knighthood I knew
not Sir Tristram. Sir Palomides, said Sir Tristram, I will take your
excuse, but well I wot ye spared me but little, but all is pardoned on
my part. Then La Beale Isoud held down her head and said no more at
that time.




CHAPTER LXXVIII. How King Arthur and Sir Launcelot came unto their
pavilions as they sat at supper, and of Sir Palomides.


And therewithal two knights armed came unto the pavilion, and there
they alighted both, and came in armed at all pieces. Fair knights, said
Sir Tristram, ye are to blame to come thus armed at all pieces upon me
while we are at our meat; if ye would anything when we were in the
field there might ye have eased your hearts. Not so, said the one of
those knights, we come not for that intent, but wit ye well Sir
Tristram, we be come hither as your friends. And I am come here, said
the one, for to see you, and this knight is come for to see La Beale
Isoud. Then said Sir Tristram: I require you do off your helms that I
may see you. That will we do at your desire, said the knights. And when
their helms were off, Sir Tristram thought that he should know them.

Then said Sir Dinadan privily unto Sir Tristram: Sir, that is Sir
Launcelot du Lake that spake unto you first, and the other is my lord
King Arthur. Then, said Sir Tristram unto La Beale Isoud, Madam arise,
for here is my lord, King Arthur. Then the king and the queen kissed,
and Sir Launcelot and Sir Tristram braced either other in arms, and
then there was joy without measure; and at the request of La Beale
Isoud, King Arthur and Launcelot were unarmed, and then there was merry
talking. Madam, said Sir Arthur, it is many a day sithen that I have
desired to see you, for ye have been praised so far; and now I dare say
ye are the fairest that ever I saw, and Sir Tristram is as fair and as
good a knight as any that I know; therefore me beseemeth ye are well
beset together. Sir, God thank you, said the noble knight, Sir
Tristram, and Isoud; of your great goodness and largess ye are
peerless. Thus they talked of many things and of all the whole jousts.
But for what cause, said King Arthur, were ye, Sir Tristram, against
us? Ye are a knight of the Table Round; of right ye should have been
with us. Sir, said Sir Tristram, here is Dinadan, and Sir Gareth your
own nephew, caused me to be against you. My lord Arthur, said Gareth, I
may well bear the blame, but it were Sir Tristram’s own deeds. That may
I repent, said Dinadan, for this unhappy Sir Tristram brought us to
this tournament, and many great buffets he caused us to have. Then the
king and Launcelot laughed that they might not sit.

What knight was that, said Arthur, that held you so short, this with
the shield of silver? Sir, said Sir Tristram, here he sitteth at this
board. What, said Arthur, was it Sir Palomides? Wit ye well it was he,
said La Beale Isoud. So God me help, said Arthur, that was unknightly
done of you of so good a knight, for I have heard many people call you
a courteous knight. Sir, said Palomides, I knew not Sir Tristram, for
he was so disguised. So God me help, said Launcelot, it may well be,
for I knew not Sir Tristram; but I marvel why ye turned on our party.
That was done for the same cause, said Launcelot. As for that, said Sir
Tristram, I have pardoned him, and I would be right loath to leave his
fellowship, for I love right well his company: so they left off and
talked of other things.

And in the evening King Arthur and Sir Launcelot departed unto their
lodging; but wit ye well Sir Palomides had envy heartily, for all that
night he had never rest in his bed, but wailed and wept out of measure.
So on the morn Sir Tristram, Gareth, and Dinadan arose early, and then
they went unto Sir Palomides’ chamber, and there they found him fast
asleep, for he had all night watched, and it was seen upon his cheeks
that he had wept full sore. Say nothing, said Sir Tristram, for I am
sure he hath taken anger and sorrow for the rebuke that I gave to him,
and La Beale Isoud.




