CHAPTER IX. How Dame Elaine was commanded by Queen Guenever to avoid
the court, and how Sir Launcelot became mad.


Now turn we unto Queen Guenever and to the fair Lady Elaine, that when
Dame Elaine heard the queen so to rebuke Sir Launcelot, and also she
saw how he swooned, and how he leaped out at a bay window, then she
said unto Queen Guenever: Madam, ye are greatly to blame for Sir
Launcelot, for now have ye lost him, for I saw and heard by his
countenance that he is mad for ever. Alas, madam, ye do great sin, and
to yourself great dishonour, for ye have a lord of your own, and
therefore it is your part to love him; for there is no queen in this
world hath such another king as ye have. And, if ye were not, I might
have the love of my lord Sir Launcelot; and cause I have to love him
for he had my maidenhood, and by him I have borne a fair son, and his
name is Galahad, and he shall be in his time the best knight of the
world. Dame Elaine, said the queen, when it is daylight I charge you
and command you to avoid my court; and for the love ye owe unto Sir
Launcelot discover not his counsel, for an ye do, it will be his death.
As for that, said Dame Elaine, I dare undertake he is marred for ever,
and that have ye made; for ye, nor I, are like to rejoice him; for he
made the most piteous groans when he leapt out at yonder bay window
that ever I heard man make. Alas, said fair Elaine, and alas, said the
Queen Guenever, for now I wot well we have lost him for ever.

So on the morn Dame Elaine took her leave to depart, and she would no
longer abide. Then King Arthur brought her on her way with mo than an
hundred knights through a forest. And by the way she told Sir Bors de
Ganis all how it betid that same night, and how Sir Launcelot leapt out
at a window, araged out of his wit. Alas, said Sir Bors, where is my
lord, Sir Launcelot, become? Sir, said Elaine, I wot ne’er. Alas, said
Sir Bors, betwixt you both ye have destroyed that good knight. As for
me, said Dame Elaine, I said never nor did never thing that should in
any wise displease him, but with the rebuke that Queen Guenever gave
him I saw him swoon to the earth; and when he awoke he took his sword
in his hand, naked save his shirt, and leapt out at a window with the
grisliest groan that ever I heard man make. Now farewell, Dame Elaine,
said Sir Bors, and hold my lord Arthur with a tale as long as ye can,
for I will turn again to Queen Guenever and give her a hete; and I
require you, as ever ye will have my service, make good watch and espy
if ever ye may see my lord Sir Launcelot. Truly, said fair Elaine, I
shall do all that I may do, for as fain would I know and wit where he
is become, as you, or any of his kin, or Queen Guenever; and cause
great enough have I thereto as well as any other. And wit ye well, said
fair Elaine to Sir Bors, I would lose my life for him rather than he
should be hurt; but alas, I cast me never for to see him, and the chief
causer of this is Dame Guenever. Madam, said Dame Brisen, the which had
made the enchantment before betwixt Sir Launcelot and her, I pray you
heartily, let Sir Bors depart, and hie him with all his might as fast
as he may to seek Sir Launcelot, for I warn you he is clean out of his
mind; and yet he shall be well holpen an but by miracle.

Then wept Dame Elaine, and so did Sir Bors de Ganis; and so they
departed, and Sir Bors rode straight unto Queen Guenever. And when she
saw Sir Bors she wept as she were wood. Fie on your weeping, said Sir
Bors de Ganis, for ye weep never but when there is no bote. Alas, said
Sir Bors, that ever Sir Launcelot’s kin saw you, for now have ye lost
the best knight of our blood, and he that was all our leader and our
succour; and I dare say and make it good that all kings, christian nor
heathen, may not find such a knight, for to speak of his nobleness and
courtesy, with his beauty and his gentleness. Alas, said Sir Bors, what
shall we do that be of his blood? Alas, said Sir Ector de Maris. Alas,
said Lionel.




CHAPTER X. What sorrow Queen Guenever made for Sir Launcelot, and how
he was sought by knights of his kin.


And when the queen heard them say so she fell to the earth in a dead
swoon. And then Sir Bors took her up, and dawed her; and when she was
awaked she kneeled afore the three knights, and held up both her hands,
and besought them to seek him. And spare not for no goods but that he
be found, for I wot he is out of his mind. And Sir Bors, Sir Ector, and
Sir Lionel departed from the queen, for they might not abide no longer
for sorrow. And then the queen sent them treasure enough for their
expenses, and so they took their horses and their armour, and departed.
And then they rode from country to country, in forests, and in
wilderness, and in wastes; and ever they laid watch both at forests and
at all manner of men as they rode, to hearken and spere after him, as
he that was a naked man, in his shirt, with a sword in his hand. And
thus they rode nigh a quarter of a year, endlong and overthwart, in
many places, forests and wilderness, and oft-times were evil lodged for
his sake; and yet for all their labour and seeking could they never
hear word of him. And wit you well these three knights were passing
sorry.

Then at the last Sir Bors and his fellows met with a knight that hight
Sir Melion de Tartare. Now fair knight, said Sir Bors, whither be ye
away? for they knew either other afore time. Sir, said Melion, I am in
the way toward the court of King Arthur. Then we pray you, said Sir
Bors, that ye will tell my lord Arthur, and my lady, Queen Guenever,
and all the fellowship of the Round Table, that we cannot in no wise
hear tell where Sir Launcelot is become. Then Sir Melion departed from
them, and said that he would tell the king, and the queen, and all the
fellowship of the Round Table, as they had desired him. So when Sir
Melion came to the court of King Arthur he told the king, and the
queen, and all the fellowship of the Round Table, what Sir Bors had
said of Sir Launcelot. Then Sir Gawaine, Sir Uwaine, Sir Sagramore le
Desirous, Sir Aglovale, and Sir Percivale de Galis took upon them by
the great desire of King Arthur, and in especial by the queen, to seek
throughout all England, Wales, and Scotland, to find Sir Launcelot, and
with them rode eighteen knights mo to bear them fellowship; and wit ye
well, they lacked no manner of spending; and so were they three and
twenty knights.

Now turn we to Sir Launcelot, and speak we of his care and woe, and
what pain he there endured; for cold, hunger, and thirst, he had
plenty. And thus as these noble knights rode together, they by one
assent departed, and then they rode by two, by three, and by four, and
by five, and ever they assigned where they should meet. And so Sir
Aglovale and Sir Percivale rode together unto their mother that was a
queen in those days. And when she saw her two sons, for joy she wept
tenderly. And then she said: Ah, my dear sons, when your father was
slain he left me four sons, of the which now be twain slain. And for
the death of my noble son, Sir Lamorak, shall my heart never be glad.
And then she kneeled down upon her knees to-fore Aglovale and Sir
Percivale, and besought them to abide at home with her. Ah, sweet
mother, said Sir Percivale, we may not, for we be come of king’s blood
of both parties, and therefore, mother, it is our kind to haunt arms
and noble deeds. Alas, my sweet sons, then she said, for your sakes I
shall lose my liking and lust, and then wind and weather I may not
endure, what for the death of your father, King Pellinore, that was
shamefully slain by the hands of Sir Gawaine, and his brother, Sir
Gaheris: and they slew him not manly but by treason. Ah, my dear sons,
this is a piteous complaint for me of your father’s death, considering
also the death of Sir Lamorak, that of knighthood had but few fellows.
Now, my dear sons, have this in your mind. Then there was but weeping
and sobbing in the court when they should depart, and she fell
a-swooning in midst of the court.




