CHAPTER XI. How Joseph made a cross on the white shield with his blood,
and how Galahad was by a monk brought to a tomb.


Not long after that Joseph was laid in his deadly bed. And when King
Evelake saw that he made much sorrow, and said: For thy love I have
left my country, and sith ye shall depart out of this world, leave me
some token of yours that I may think on you. Joseph said: That will I
do full gladly; now bring me your shield that I took you when ye went
into battle against King Tolleme. Then Joseph bled sore at the nose, so
that he might not by no mean be staunched. And there upon that shield
he made a cross of his own blood. Now may ye see a remembrance that I
love you, for ye shall never see this shield but ye shall think on me,
and it shall be always as fresh as it is now. And never shall man bear
this shield about his neck but he shall repent it, unto the time that
Galahad, the good knight, bear it; and the last of my lineage shall
have it about his neck, that shall do many marvellous deeds. Now, said
King Evelake, where shall I put this shield, that this worthy knight
may have it? Ye shall leave it thereas Nacien, the hermit, shall be put
after his death; for thither shall that good knight come the fifteenth
day after that he shall receive the order of knighthood: and so that
day that they set is this time that he have his shield, and in the same
abbey lieth Nacien, the hermit. And then the White Knight vanished
away.

Anon as the squire had heard these words, he alighted off his hackney
and kneeled down at Galahad’s feet, and prayed him that he might go
with him till he had made him knight.

If I would not refuse you.

Then will ye make me a knight? said the squire, and that order, by the
grace of God, shall be well set in me.

So Sir Galahad granted him, and turned again unto the abbey where they
came from; and there men made great joy of Sir Galahad. And anon as he
was alighted there was a monk brought him unto a tomb in a churchyard,
where there was such a noise that who that heard it should verily nigh
be mad or lose his strength: and sir, they said, we deem it is a fiend.




CHAPTER XII. Of the marvel that Sir Galahad saw and heard in the tomb,
and how he made Melias knight.


Now lead me thither, said Galahad. And so they did, all armed save his
helm. Now, said the good man, go to the tomb and lift it up. So he did,
and heard a great noise; and piteously he said, that all men might hear
it: Sir Galahad, the servant of Jesu Christ, come thou not nigh me, for
thou shalt make me go again there where I have been so long. But
Galahad was nothing afraid, but lifted up the stone; and there came out
so foul a smoke, and after he saw the foulest figure leap thereout that
ever he saw in the likeness of a man; and then he blessed him and wist
well it was a fiend. Then heard he a voice say Galahad, I see there
environ about thee so many angels that my power may not dere thee{sic}
Right so Sir Galahad saw a body all armed lie in that tomb, and beside
him a sword. Now, fair brother, said Galahad, let us remove this body,
for it is not worthy to lie in this churchyard, for he was a false
Christian man. And therewith they all departed and went to the abbey.
And anon as he was unarmed a good man came and set him down by him and
said: Sir, I shall tell you what betokeneth all that ye saw in the
tomb; for that covered body betokeneth the duresse of the world, and
the great sin that Our Lord found in the world. For there was such
wretchedness that the father loved not the son, nor the son loved not
the father; and that was one of the causes that Our Lord took flesh and
blood of a clean maiden, for our sins were so great at that time that
well-nigh all was wickedness. Truly, said Galahad, I believe you right
well.

So Sir Galahad rested him there that night; and upon the morn he made
the squire knight, and asked him his name, and of what kindred he was
come. Sir, said he, men calleth me Melias de Lile, and I am the son of
the King of Denmark. Now, fair sir, said Galahad, sith that ye be come
of kings and queens, now look that knighthood be well set in you, for
ye ought to be a mirror unto all chivalry. Sir, said Sir Melias, ye say
sooth. But, sir, sithen ye have made me a knight ye must of right grant
me my first desire that is reasonable. Ye say sooth, said Galahad.
Melias said: Then that ye will suffer me to ride with you in this quest
of the Sangreal, till that some adventure depart us. I grant you, sir.

Then men brought Sir Melias his armour and his spear and his horse, and
so Sir Galahad and he rode forth all that week or they found any
adventure. And then upon a Monday in the morning, as they were departed
from an abbey, they came to a cross which departed two ways, and in
that cross were letters written that said thus: Now, ye knights errant,
the which goeth to seek knights adventurous, see here two ways; that
one way defendeth thee that thou ne go that way, for he shall not go
out of the way again but if he be a good man and a worthy knight; and
if thou go on the left hand, thou shalt not lightly there win prowess,
for thou shalt in this way be soon assayed. Sir, said Melias to
Galahad, if it like you to suffer me to take the way on the left hand,
tell me, for there I shall well prove my strength. It were better, said
Galahad, ye rode not that way, for I deem I should better escape in
that way than ye. Nay, my lord, I pray you let me have that adventure.
Take it in God’s name, said Galahad.




