CHAPTER V. How Sir Launcelot came to Sir Bors, and told him how he had
sped, and in what adventure he had been, and how he had escaped.


When Sir Bors saw Sir Launcelot he was never so glad of his home-coming
as he was then. Jesu mercy, said Sir Launcelot, why be ye all armed:
what meaneth this? Sir, said Sir Bors, after ye were departed from us,
we all that be of your blood and your well-willers were so dretched
that some of us leapt out of our beds naked, and some in their dreams
caught naked swords in their hands; therefore, said Sir Bors, we deem
there is some great strife at hand; and then we all deemed that ye were
betrapped with some treason, and therefore we made us thus ready, what
need that ever ye were in.

My fair nephew, said Sir Launcelot unto Sir Bors, now shall ye wit all,
that this night I was more harder bestead than ever I was in my life,
and yet I escaped. And so he told them all how and in what manner, as
ye have heard to-fore. And therefore, my fellows, said Sir Launcelot, I
pray you all that ye will be of good heart in what need somever I
stand, for now is war come to us all. Sir, said Bors, all is welcome
that God sendeth us, and we have had much weal with you and much
worship, and therefore we will take the woe with you as we have taken
the weal. And therefore, they said all (there were many good knights),
look ye take no discomfort, for there nis no bands of knights under
heaven but we shall be able to grieve them as much as they may us. And
therefore discomfort not yourself by no manner, and we shall gather
together that we love, and that loveth us, and what that ye will have
done shall be done. And therefore, Sir Launcelot, said they, we will
take the woe with the weal. Grant mercy, said Sir Launcelot, of your
good comfort, for in my great distress, my fair nephew, ye comfort me
greatly, and much I am beholding unto you. But this, my fair nephew, I
would that ye did in all haste that ye may, or it be forth days, that
ye will look in their lodging that be lodged here nigh about the king,
which will hold with me, and which will not, for now I would know which
were my friends from my foes. Sir, said Sir Bors, I shall do my pain,
and or it be seven of the clock I shall wit of such as ye have said
before, who will hold with you.

Then Sir Bors called unto him Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir
Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Gahalantine, Sir
Galihodin, Sir Galihud, Sir Menadeuke Sir Villiers the Valiant, Sir
Hebes le Renoumes, Sir Lavaine Sir Urre of Hungary, Sir Nerounes, Sir
Plenorius. These two knights Sir Launcelot made, and the one he won
upon a bridge, and therefore they would never be against him. And Harry
le Fise du Lake, and Sir Selises of the Dolorous Tower, and Sir Melias
de Lile, and Sir Bellangere le Beuse, that was Sir Alisander’s son Le
Orphelin, because his mother Alice le Beale Pellerin and she was kin
unto Sir Launcelot, and he held with him. So there came Sir Palomides
and Sir Safere, his brother, to hold with Sir Launcelot, and Sir Clegis
of Sadok, and Sir Dinas, Sir Clarius of Cleremont. So these
two-and-twenty knights drew them together, and by then they were armed
on horseback, and promised Sir Launcelot to do what he would. Then
there fell to them, what of North Wales and of Cornwall, for Sir
Lamorak’s sake and for Sir Tristram’s sake, to the number of a
fourscore knights.

My lords, said Sir Launcelot, wit you well, I have been ever since I
came into this country well willed unto my lord, King Arthur, and unto
my lady, Queen Guenever, unto my power; and this night because my lady
the queen sent for me to speak with her, I suppose it was made by
treason, howbeit I dare largely excuse her person, notwithstanding I
was there by a forecast near slain, but as Jesu provided me I escaped
all their malice and treason. And then that noble knight Sir Launcelot
told them all how he was hard bestead in the queen’s chamber, and how
and in what manner he escaped from them. And therefore, said Sir
Launcelot, wit you well, my fair lords, I am sure there nis but war
unto me and mine. And for because I have slain this night these
knights, I wot well, as is Sir Agravaine Sir Gawaine’s brother, and at
the least twelve of his fellows, for this cause now I am sure of mortal
war, for these knights were sent and ordained by King Arthur to betray
me. And therefore the king will in his heat and malice judge the queen
to the fire, and that may I not suffer, that she should be brent for my
sake; for an I may be heard and suffered and so taken, I will fight for
the queen, that she is a true lady unto her lord; but the king in his
heat I dread me will not take me as I ought to be taken.




CHAPTER VI. Of the counsel and advice that was taken by Sir Launcelot
and his friends for to save the queen.


My lord, Sir Launcelot, said Sir Bors, by mine advice ye shall take the
woe with the weal, and take it in patience, and thank God of it. And
sithen it is fallen as it is, I counsel you keep yourself, for an ye
will yourself, there is no fellowship of knights christened that shall
do you wrong. Also I will counsel you my lord, Sir Launcelot, than an
my lady, Queen Guenever, be in distress, insomuch as she is in pain for
your sake, that ye knightly rescue her; an ye did otherwise, all the
world will speak of you shame to the world’s end. Insomuch as ye were
taken with her, whether ye did right or wrong, it is now your part to
hold with the queen, that she be not slain and put to a mischievous
death, for an she so die the shame shall be yours. Jesu defend me from
shame, said Sir Launcelot, and keep and save my lady the queen from
villainy and shameful death, and that she never be destroyed in my
default; wherefore my fair lords, my kin, and my friends, said Sir
Launcelot, what will ye do? Then they said all: We will do as ye will
do. I put this to you, said Sir Launcelot, that if my lord Arthur by
evil counsel will to-morn in his heat put my lady the queen to the fire
there to be brent, now I pray you counsel me what is best to do. Then
they said all at once with one voice: Sir, us thinketh best that ye
knightly rescue the queen, insomuch as she shall be brent it is for
your sake; and it is to suppose, an ye might be handled, ye should have
the same death, or a more shamefuler death. And sir, we say all, that
ye have many times rescued her from death for other men’s quarrels, us
seemeth it is more your worship that ye rescue the queen from this
peril, insomuch she hath it for your sake.

Then Sir Launcelot stood still, and said: My fair lords, wit you well I
would be loath to do that thing that should dishonour you or my blood,
and wit you well I would be loath that my lady, the queen, should die a
shameful death; but an it be so that ye will counsel me to rescue her,
I must do much harm or I rescue her; and peradventure I shall there
destroy some of my best friends, that should much repent me; and
peradventure there be some, an they could well bring it about, or
disobey my lord King Arthur, they would soon come to me, the which I
were loath to hurt. And if so be that I rescue her, where shall I keep
her? That shall be the least care of us all, said Sir Bors. How did the
noble knight Sir Tristram, by your good will? kept not he with him La
Beale Isoud near three year in Joyous Gard? the which was done by your
alther device, and that same place is your own; and in likewise may ye
do an ye list, and take the queen lightly away, if it so be the king
will judge her to be brent; and in Joyous Gard ye may keep her long
enough until the heat of the king be past. And then shall ye bring
again the queen to the king with great worship; and then peradventure
ye shall have thank for her bringing home, and love and thank where
other shall have maugre.

That is hard to do, said Sir Launcelot, for by Sir Tristram I may have
a warning, for when by means of treaties, Sir Tristram brought again La
Beale Isoud unto King Mark from Joyous Gard, look what befell on the
end, how shamefully that false traitor King Mark slew him as he sat
harping afore his lady La Beale Isoud, with a grounden glaive he thrust
him in behind to the heart. It grieveth me, said Sir Launcelot, to
speak of his death, for all the world may not find such a knight. All
this is truth, said Sir Bors, but there is one thing shall courage you
and us all, ye know well King Arthur and King Mark were never like of
conditions, for there was never yet man could prove King Arthur untrue
of his promise.

So to make short tale, they were all consented that for better outher
for worse, if so were that the queen were on that morn brought to the
fire, shortly they all would rescue her. And so by the advice of Sir
Launcelot, they put them all in an embushment in a wood, as nigh
Carlisle as they might, and there they abode still, to wit what the
king would do.




