CHAPTER LXXXIV. How Sir Palomides and Sir Safere conducted Sir
Epinogris to his castle, and of other adventures.


Then Sir Palomides took the lady by the hand and brought her to Sir
Epinogris, and there was great joy betwixt them, for either swooned for
joy. When they were met: Fair knight and lady, said Sir Safere, it were
pity to depart you; Jesu send you joy either of other. Gramercy, gentle
knight, said Epinogris; and much more thanks be to my lord Sir
Palomides, that thus hath through his prowess made me to get my lady.
Then Sir Epinogris required Sir Palomides and Sir Safere, his brother,
to ride with them unto his castle, for the safeguard of his person.
Sir, said Palomides, we will be ready to conduct you because that ye
are sore wounded; and so was Epinogris and his lady horsed, and his
lady behind him upon a soft ambler. And then they rode unto his castle,
where they had great cheer and joy, as great as ever Sir Palomides and
Sir Safere had in their life-days.

So on the morn Sir Safere and Sir Palomides departed, day until after
noon. And at the last they heard a great weeping and a great noise down
in a manor. Sir, said then Sir Safere, let us wit what noise this is. I
will well, said Sir Palomides. And so they rode forth till that they
came to a fair gate of a manor, and there sat an old man saying his
prayers and beads. Then Sir Palomides and Sir Safere alighted and left
their horses, and went within the gates, and there they saw full many
goodly men weeping. Fair sirs, said Palomides, wherefore weep ye and
make this sorrow? Anon one of the knights of the castle beheld Sir
Palomides and knew him, and then went to his fellows and said: Fair
fellows, wit ye well all, we have in this castle the same knight that
slew our lord at Lonazep, for I know him well; it is Sir Palomides.
Then they went unto harness, all that might bear harness, some on
horseback and some on foot, to the number of three score. And when they
were ready they came freshly upon Sir Palomides and upon Sir Safere
with a great noise, and said thus: Keep thee, Sir Palomides, for thou
art known, and by right thou must be dead, for thou hast slain our
lord; and therefore wit ye well we will slay thee, therefore defend
thee.

Then Sir Palomides and Sir Safere, the one set his back to the other,
and gave many great strokes, and took many great strokes; and thus they
fought with a twenty knights and forty gentlemen and yeomen nigh two
hours. But at the last though they were loath, Sir Palomides and Sir
Safere were taken and yolden, and put in a strong prison; and within
three days twelve knights passed upon them, and they found Sir
Palomides guilty, and Sir Safere not guilty, of their lord’s death. And
when Sir Safere should be delivered there was great dole betwixt Sir
Palomides and him, and many piteous complaints that Sir Safere made at
his departing, there is no maker can rehearse the tenth part. Fair
brother, said Palomides, let be thy dolour and thy sorrow. And if I be
ordained to die a shameful death, welcome be it; but an I had wist of
this death that I am deemed unto, I should never have been yolden. So
Sir Safere departed from his brother with the greatest dolour and
sorrow that ever made knight.

And on the morn they of the castle ordained twelve knights to ride with
Sir Palomides unto the father of the same knight that Sir Palomides
slew; and so they bound his legs under an old steed’s belly. And then
they rode with Sir Palomides unto a castle by the seaside, that hight
Pelownes, and there Sir Palomides should have justice. Thus was their
ordinance; and so they rode with Sir Palomides fast by the castle of
Joyous Gard. And as they passed by that castle there came riding out of
that castle by them one that knew Sir Palomides. And when that knight
saw Sir Palomides bounden upon a crooked courser, the knight asked Sir
Palomides for what cause he was led so. Ah, my fair fellow and knight,
said Palomides, I ride toward my death for the slaying of a knight at a
tournament of Lonazep; and if I had not departed from my lord Sir
Tristram, as I ought not to have done, now might I have been sure to
have had my life saved; but I pray you, sir knight, recommend me unto
my lord, Sir Tristram, and unto my lady, Queen Isoud, and say to them
if ever I trespassed to them I ask them forgiveness. And also I beseech
you recommend me unto my lord, King Arthur, and to all the fellowship
of the Round Table, unto my power. Then that knight wept for pity of
Sir Palomides; and therewithal he rode unto Joyous Gard as fast as his
horse might run, and lightly that knight descended down off his horse
and went unto Sir Tristram, and there he told him all as ye have heard,
and ever the knight wept as he had been mad.




CHAPTER LXXXV. How Sir Tristram made him ready to rescue Sir Palomides,
but Sir Launcelot rescued him or he came.


When Sir Tristram heard how Sir Palomides went to his death, he was
heavy to hear that, and said: Howbeit that I am wroth with Sir
Palomides, yet will not I suffer him to die so shameful a death, for he
is a full noble knight. And then anon Sir Tristram was armed and took
his horse and two squires with him, and rode a great pace toward the
castle of Pelownes where Sir Palomides was judged to death. And these
twelve knights that led Sir Palomides passed by a well whereas Sir
Launcelot was, which was alighted there, and had tied his horse to a
tree, and taken off his helm to drink of that well; and when he saw
these knights, Sir Launcelot put on his helm and suffered them to pass
by him. And then was he ware of Sir Palomides bounden, and led
shamefully to his death. O Jesu, said Launcelot, what misadventure is
befallen him that he is thus led toward his death? Forsooth, said
Launcelot, it were shame to me to suffer this noble knight so to die an
I might help him, therefore I will help him whatsomever come of it, or
else I shall die for Sir Palomides’ sake. And then Sir Launcelot
mounted upon his horse, and gat his spear in his hand, and rode after
the twelve knights that led Sir Palomides. Fair knights, said Sir
Launcelot, whither lead ye that knight? it beseemeth him full ill to
ride bounden. Then these twelve knights suddenly turned their horses
and said to Sir Launcelot: Sir knight, we counsel thee not to meddle
with this knight, for he hath deserved death, and unto death he is
judged. That me repenteth, said Launcelot, that I may not borrow him
with fairness, for he is over good a knight to die such a shameful
death. And therefore, fair knights, said Sir Launcelot, keep you as
well as ye can, for I will rescue that knight or die for it.

Then they began to dress their spears, and Sir Launcelot smote the
foremost down, horse and man, and so he served three more with one
spear; and then that spear brast, and therewithal Sir Launcelot drew
his sword, and then he smote on the right hand and on the left hand.
Then within a while he left none of those twelve knights, but he had
laid them to the earth, and the most part of them were sore wounded.
And then Sir Launcelot took the best horse that he found, and loosed
Sir Palomides and set him upon that horse; and so they returned again
unto Joyous Gard, and then was Sir Palomides ware of Sir Tristram how
he came riding. And when Sir Launcelot saw him he knew him well, but
Sir Tristram knew him not because Sir Launcelot had on his shoulder a
golden shield. So Sir Launcelot made him ready to joust with Sir
Tristram, that Sir Tristram should not ween that he were Sir Launcelot.
Then Sir Palomides cried aloud to Sir Tristram: O my lord, I require
you joust not with this knight, for this good knight hath saved me from
my death. When Sir Tristram heard him say so he came a soft trotting
pace toward them. And then Sir Palomides said: My lord, Sir Tristram,
much am I beholding unto you of your great goodness, that would proffer
your noble body to rescue me undeserved, for I have greatly offended
you. Notwithstanding, said Sir Palomides, here met we with this noble
knight that worshipfully and manly rescued me from twelve knights, and
smote them down all and wounded them sore.




