CHAPTER IV. How Sir Launcelot’s horse was slain, and how Sir Launcelot
rode in a cart for to rescue the queen.


Then Sir Launcelot rode as fast as he might, and the book saith he took
the water at Westminster Bridge, and made his horse to swim over Thames
unto Lambeth. And then within a while he came to the same place thereas
the ten noble knights fought with Sir Meliagrance. And then Sir
Launcelot followed the track until that he came to a wood, and there
was a straight way, and there the thirty archers bade Sir Launcelot
turn again, and follow no longer that track. What commandment have ye
thereto, said Sir Launcelot, to cause me that am a knight of the Round
Table to leave my right way? This way shalt thou leave, other-else thou
shalt go it on thy foot, for wit thou well thy horse shall be slain.
That is little mastery, said Sir Launcelot, to slay mine horse; but as
for myself, when my horse is slain, I give right nought for you, not an
ye were five hundred more. So then they shot Sir Launcelot’s horse, and
smote him with many arrows; and then Sir Launcelot avoided his horse,
and went on foot; but there were so many ditches and hedges betwixt
them and him that he might not meddle with none of them. Alas for
shame, said Launcelot, that ever one knight should betray another
knight; but it is an old saw, A good man is never in danger but when he
is in the danger of a coward. Then Sir Launcelot went a while, and then
he was foul cumbered of his armour, his shield, and his spear, and all
that longed unto him. Wit ye well he was full sore annoyed, and full
loath he was for to leave anything that longed unto him, for he dread
sore the treason of Sir Meliagrance.

Then by fortune there came by him a chariot that came thither for to
fetch wood. Say me, carter, said Sir Launcelot, what shall I give thee
to suffer me to leap into thy chariot, and that thou bring me unto a
castle within this two mile? Thou shalt not come within my chariot,
said the carter, for I am sent for to fetch wood for my lord, Sir
Meliagrance. With him would I speak. Thou shalt not go with me, said
the carter. Then Sir Launcelot leapt to him, and gave him such a buffet
that he fell to the earth stark dead. Then the other carter, his
fellow, was afeard, and weened to have gone the same way; and then he
cried: Fair lord, save my life, and I shall bring you where ye will.
Then I charge thee, said Sir Launcelot, that thou drive me and this
chariot even unto Sir Meliagrance’s gate. Leap up into the chariot,
said the carter, and ye shall be there anon. So the carter drove on a
great wallop, and Sir Launcelot’s horse followed the chariot, with more
than a forty arrows broad and rough in him.

And more than an hour and an half Dame Guenever was awaiting in a bay
window with her ladies, and espied an armed knight standing in a
chariot. See, madam, said a lady, where rideth in a chariot a goodly
armed knight; I suppose he rideth unto hanging. Where? said the queen.
Then she espied by his shield that he was there himself, Sir Launcelot
du Lake. And then she was ware where came his horse ever after that
chariot, and ever he trod his guts and his paunch under his feet. Alas,
said the queen, now I see well and prove, that well is him that hath a
trusty friend. Ha, ha, most noble knight, said Queen Guenever, I see
well thou art hard bestead when thou ridest in a chariot. Then she
rebuked that lady that likened Sir Launcelot to ride in a chariot to
hanging. It was foul mouthed, said the queen, and evil likened, so for
to liken the most noble knight of the world unto such a shameful death.
O Jesu defend him and keep him, said the queen, from all mischievous
end. By this was Sir Launcelot come to the gates of that castle, and
there he descended down, and cried, that all the castle rang of it:
Where art thou, false traitor, Sir Meliagrance, and knight of the Table
Round? now come forth here, thou traitor knight, thou and thy
fellowship with thee; for here I am, Sir Launcelot du Lake, that shall
fight with you. And therewithal he bare the gate wide open upon the
porter, and smote him under his ear with his gauntlet, that his neck
brast a-sunder.




CHAPTER V. How Sir Meliagrance required forgiveness of the queen, and
how she appeased Sir Launcelot; and other matters.


When Sir Meliagrance heard that Sir Launcelot was there he ran unto
Queen Guenever, and fell upon his knee, and said: Mercy, madam, now I
put me wholly into your grace. What aileth you now? said Queen
Guenever; forsooth I might well wit some good knight would revenge me,
though my lord Arthur wist not of this your work. Madam, said Sir
Meliagrance, all this that is amiss on my part shall be amended right
as yourself will devise, and wholly I put me in your grace. What would
ye that I did? said the queen. I would no more, said Meliagrance, but
that ye would take all in your own hands, and that ye will rule my lord
Sir Launcelot; and such cheer as may be made him in this poor castle ye
and he shall have until to-morn, and then may ye and all they return
unto Westminster; and my body and all that I have I shall put in your
rule. Ye say well, said the queen, and better is peace than ever war,
and the less noise the more is my worship.

Then the queen and her ladies went down unto the knight, Sir Launcelot,
that stood wroth out of measure in the inner court, to abide battle;
and ever he bade: Thou traitor knight come forth. Then the queen came
to him and said: Sir Launcelot, why be ye so moved? Ha, madam, said Sir
Launcelot, why ask ye me that question? Meseemeth, said Sir Launcelot,
ye ought to be more wroth than I am, for ye have the hurt and the
dishonour, for wit ye well, madam, my hurt is but little for the
killing of a mare’s son, but the despite grieveth me much more than all
my hurt. Truly, said the queen, ye say truth; but heartily I thank you,
said the queen, but ye must come in with me peaceably, for all thing is
put in my hand, and all that is evil shall be for the best, for the
knight full sore repenteth him of the misadventure that is befallen
him. Madam, said Sir Launcelot, sith it is so that ye been accorded
with him, as for me I may not be again it, howbeit Sir Meliagrance hath
done full shamefully to me, and cowardly. Ah madam, said Sir Launcelot,
an I had wist ye would have been so soon accorded with him I would not
have made such haste unto you. Why say ye so, said the queen, do ye
forthink yourself of your good deeds? Wit you well, said the queen, I
accorded never unto him for favour nor love that I had unto him, but
for to lay down every shameful noise. Madam, said Sir Launcelot, ye
understand full well I was never willing nor glad of shameful slander
nor noise; and there is neither king, queen, nor knight, that beareth
the life, except my lord King Arthur, and you, madam, should let me,
but I should make Sir Meliagrance’s heart full cold or ever I departed
from hence. That wot I well, said the queen, but what will ye more? Ye
shall have all thing ruled as ye list to have it. Madam, said Sir
Launcelot, so ye be pleased I care not, as for my part ye shall soon
please.

Right so the queen took Sir Launcelot by the bare hand, for he had put
off his gauntlet, and so she went with him till her chamber; and then
she commanded him to be unarmed. And then Sir Launcelot asked where
were the ten knights that were wounded sore; so she showed them unto
Sir Launcelot, and there they made great joy of the coming of him, and
Sir Launcelot made great dole of their hurts, and bewailed them
greatly. And there Sir Launcelot told them how cowardly and traitorly
Meliagrance set archers to slay his horse, and how he was fain to put
himself in a chariot. Thus they complained everych to other; and full
fain they would have been revenged, but they peaced themselves because
of the queen. Then, as the French book saith, Sir Launcelot was called
many a day after le Chevaler du Chariot, and did many deeds, and great
adventures he had. And so leave we of this tale le Chevaler du Chariot,
and turn we to this tale.

So Sir Launcelot had great cheer with the queen, and then Sir Launcelot
made a promise with the queen that the same night Sir Launcelot should
come to a window outward toward a garden; and that window was y-barred
with iron, and there Sir Launcelot promised to meet her when all folks
were asleep. So then came Sir Lavaine driving to the gates, crying:
Where is my lord, Sir Launcelot du Lake? Then was he sent for, and when
Sir Lavaine saw Sir Launcelot, he said: My lord, I found well how ye
were hard bestead, for I have found your horse that was slain with
arrows. As for that, said Sir Launcelot, I pray you, Sir Lavaine, speak
ye of other matters, and let ye this pass, and we shall right it
another time when we best may.




