CHAPTER XLI. How Sir Launcelot fought in the tournament, and how Sir
Palomides did arms there for a damosel.


Then at the request of Queen Guenever and of King Bagdemagus Sir
Launcelot came into the range, but he was disguised, and that was the
cause that few folk knew him; and there met with him Sir Ector de
Maris, his own brother, and either brake their spears upon other to
their hands. And then either gat another spear. And then Sir Launcelot
smote down Sir Ector de Maris, his own brother. That saw Sir Bleoberis,
and he smote Sir Launcelot such a buffet upon the helm that he wist not
well where he was. Then Sir Launcelot was wrothy and smote Sir
Bleoberis so sore upon the helm that his head bowed down backward. And
he smote eft another buffet, that he avoided his saddle; and so he rode
by, and thrust forth to the thickest. When the King of Northgalis saw
Sir Ector and Bleoberis lie on the ground then was he wroth, for they
came on his party against them of Surluse. So the King of Northgalis
ran to Sir Launcelot, and brake a spear upon him all to pieces.
Therewith Sir Launcelot overtook the King of Northgalis, and smote him
such a buffet on the helm with his sword that he made him to avoid his
horse; and anon the king was horsed again. So both the King Bagdemagus’
and the King of Northgalis’ party hurled to other; and then began a
strong medley, but they of Northgalis were far bigger.

When Sir Launcelot saw his party go to the worst he thrang into the
thickest press with a sword in his hand; and there he smote down on the
right hand and on the left hand, and pulled down knights and raced off
their helms, that all men had wonder that ever one knight might do such
deeds of arms. When Sir Meliagaunce, that was son unto King Bagdemagus,
saw how Sir Launcelot fared he marvelled greatly. And when he
understood that it was he, he wist well that he was disguised for his
sake. Then Sir Meliagaunce prayed a knight to slay Sir Launcelot’s
horse, either with sword or with spear. At that time King Bagdemagus
met with a knight that hight Sauseise, a good knight, to whom he said:
Now fair Sauseise, encounter with my son Meliagaunce and give him large
payment, for I would he were well beaten of thy hands, that he might
depart out of this field. And then Sir Sauseise encountered with Sir
Meliagaunce, and either smote other down. And then they fought on foot,
and there Sauseise had won Sir Meliagaunce, had there not come rescues.
So then the haut prince blew to lodging, and every knight unarmed him
and went to the great feast.

Then in the meanwhile there came a damosel to the haut prince, and
complained that there was a knight that hight Goneries that withheld
her all her lands. Then the knight was there present, and cast his
glove to her or to any that would fight in her name. So the damosel
took up the glove all heavily for default of a champion. Then there
came a varlet to her and said: Damosel, will ye do after me? Full fain,
said the damosel. Then go you unto such a knight that lieth here beside
in an hermitage, and that followeth the Questing Beast, and pray him to
take the battle upon him, and anon I wot well he will grant you.

So anon she took her palfrey, and within a while she found that knight,
that was Sir Palomides. And when she required him he armed him and rode
with her, and made her to go to the haut prince, and to ask leave for
her knight to do battle. I will well, said the haut prince. Then the
knights were ready in the field to joust on horseback; and either gat a
spear in their hands, and met so fiercely together that their spears
all to-shivered. Then they flang out swords, and Sir Palomides smote
Sir Goneries down to the earth. And then he raced off his helm and
smote off his head. Then they went to supper, and the damosel loved
Palomides as paramour, but the book saith she was of his kin. So then
Palomides disguised himself in this manner, in his shield he bare the
Questing Beast, and in all his trappings. And when he was thus ready,
he sent to the haut prince to give him leave to joust with other
knights, but he was adoubted of Sir Launcelot. The haut prince sent him
word again that he should be welcome, and that Sir Launcelot should not
joust with him. Then Sir Galahalt, the haut prince, let cry what knight
somever he were that smote down Sir Palomides should have his damosel
to himself.




CHAPTER XLII. How Sir Galahalt and Palomides fought together, and of
Sir Dinadan and Sir Galahalt.


Here beginneth the second day. Anon as Sir Palomides came into the
field, Sir Galahalt, the haut prince, was at the range end, and met
with Sir Palomides, and he with him, with great spears. And then they
came so hard together that their spears all to-shivered, but Sir
Galahalt smote him so hard that he bare him backward over his horse,
but yet he lost not his stirrups. Then they drew their swords and
lashed together many sad strokes, that many worshipful knights left
their business to behold them. But at the last Sir Galahalt, the haut
prince, smote a stroke of might unto Palomides, sore upon the helm; but
the helm was so hard that the sword might not bite, but slipped and
smote off the head of the horse of Sir Palomides. When the haut prince
wist and saw the good knight fall unto the earth he was ashamed of that
stroke. And therewith he alighted down off his own horse, and prayed
the good knight, Palomides, to take that horse of his gift, and to
forgive him that deed. Sir, said Palomides, I thank you of your great
goodness, for ever of a man of worship a knight shall never have
disworship; and so he mounted upon that horse, and the haut prince had
another anon. Now, said the haut prince, I release to you that maiden,
for ye have won her. Ah, said Palomides, the damosel and I be at your
commandment.

So they departed, and Sir Galahalt did great deeds of arms. And right
so came Dinadan and encountered with Sir Galahalt, and either came to
other so fast with their spears that their spears brake to their hands.
But Dinadan had weened the haut prince had been more weary than he was.
And then he smote many sad strokes at the haut prince; but when Dinadan
saw he might not get him to the earth he said: My lord, I pray you
leave me, and take another. The haut prince knew not Dinadan, and left
goodly for his fair words. And so they departed; but soon there came
another and told the haut prince that it was Dinadan. Forsooth, said
the prince, therefore am I heavy that he is so escaped from me, for
with his mocks and japes now shall I never have done with him. And then
Galahalt rode fast after him, and bade him: Abide, Dinadan, for King
Arthur’s sake. Nay, said Dinadan, so God me help, we meet no more
together this day. Then in that wrath the haut prince met with
Meliagaunce, and he smote him in the throat that an he had fallen his
neck had broken; and with the same spear he smote down another knight.
Then came in they of Northgalis and many strangers, and were like to
have put them of Surluse to the worse, for Sir Galahalt, the haut
prince, had ever much in hand. So there came the good knight, Semound
the Valiant, with forty knights, and he beat them all aback. Then the
Queen Guenever and Sir Launcelot let blow to lodging, and every knight
unarmed him, and dressed him to the feast.




