CHAPTER IX. How Galahad gat him a shield, and how they sped that
presumed to take down the said shield.


Now rideth Sir Galahad yet without shield, and so he rode four days
without any adventure. And at the fourth day after evensong he came to
a White Abbey, and there he was received with great reverence, and led
unto a chamber, and there was he unarmed; and then was he ware of two
knights of the Table Round, one was Sir Bagdemagus, and Sir Uwaine.

And when they saw him they went unto Galahad and made of him great
solace, and so they went unto supper. Sirs, said Sir Galahad, what
adventure brought you hither? Sir, said they, it is told us that within
this place is a shield that no man may bear about his neck but he be
mischieved outher dead within three days, or maimed for ever. Ah sir,
said King Bagdemagus, I shall it bear to-morrow for to assay this
adventure. In the name of God, said Sir Galahad. Sir, said Bagdemagus,
an I may not enchieve the adventure of this shield ye shall take it
upon you, for I am sure ye shall not fail. Sir, said Galahad, I right
well agree me thereto, for I have no shield. So on the morn they arose
and heard mass. Then Bagdemagus asked where the adventurous shield was.
Anon a monk led him behind an altar where the shield hung as white as
any snow, but in the midst was a red cross. Sir, said the monk, this
shield ought not to be hanged about no knight’s neck but he be the
worthiest knight of the world;

therefore I counsel you knights to be well advised. Well, said
Bagdemagus, I wot well that I am not the best knight of the world, but
yet I shall assay to bear it, and so bare it out of the minster. And
then he said unto Galahad: An it please you abide here still, till ye
wit how that I speed. I shall abide you, said Galahad. Then King
Bagdemagus took with him a good squire, to bring tidings unto Sir
Galahad how he sped.

Then when they had ridden a two mile and came to a fair valley afore an
hermitage, then they saw a knight come from that part in white armour,
horse and all; and he came as fast as his horse might run, and his
spear in his rest, and Bagdemagus dressed his spear against him and
brake it upon the white knight. But the other struck him so hard that
he brast the mails, and sheef him through the right shoulder, for the
shield covered him not as at that time; and so he bare him from his
horse. And therewith he alighted and took the white shield from him,
saying: Knight, thou hast done thyself great folly, for this shield
ought not to be borne but by him that shall have no peer that liveth.
And then he came to Bagdemagus’ squire and said: Bear this shield unto
the good knight Sir Galahad, that thou left in the abbey, and greet him
well by me. Sir, said the squire, what is your name? Take thou no heed
of my name, said the knight, for it is not for thee to know nor for
none earthly man. Now, fair sir, said the squire, at the reverence of
Jesu Christ, tell me for what cause this shield may not be borne but if
the bearer thereof be mischieved. Now sith thou hast conjured me so,
said the knight, this shield behoveth unto no man but unto Galahad. And
the squire went unto Bagdemagus and asked whether he were sore wounded
or not. Yea forsooth, said he, I shall escape hard from the death. Then
he fetched his horse, and brought him with great pain unto an abbey.
Then was he taken down softly and unarmed, and laid in a bed, and there
was looked to his wounds. And as the book telleth, he lay there long,
and escaped hard with the life.




CHAPTER X. How Galahad departed with the shield, and how King Evelake
had received the shield of Joseph of Aramathie.


Sir Galahad, said the squire, that knight that wounded Bagdemagus
sendeth you greeting, and bade that ye should bear this shield,
wherethrough great adventures should befall. Now blessed be God and
fortune, said Galahad. And then he asked his arms, and mounted upon his
horse, and hung the white shield about his neck, and commended them
unto God. And Sir Uwaine said he would bear him fellowship if it
pleased him. Sir, said Galahad, that may ye not, for I must go alone,
save this squire shall bear me fellowship: and so departed Uwaine.

Then within a while came Galahad thereas the White Knight abode him by
the hermitage, and everych saluted other courteously. Sir, said
Galahad, by this shield be many marvels fallen. Sir, said the knight,
it befell after the passion of our Lord Jesu Christ thirty-two year,
that Joseph of Aramathie, the gentle knight, the which took down our
Lord off the holy Cross, at that time he departed from Jerusalem with a
great party of his kindred with him. And so he laboured till that they
came to a city that hight Sarras. And at that same hour that Joseph
came to Sarras there was a king that hight Evelake, that had great war
against the Saracens, and in especial against one Saracen, the which
was King Evelake’s cousin, a rich king and a mighty, which marched nigh
this land, and his name was called Tolleme la Feintes. So on a day
these two met to do battle. Then Joseph, the son of Joseph of
Aramathie, went to King Evelake and told him he should be discomfit and
slain, but if he left his belief of the old law and believed upon the
new law. And then there he shewed him the right belief of the Holy
Trinity, to the which he agreed unto with all his heart; and there this
shield was made for King Evelake, in the name of Him that died upon the
Cross. And then through his good belief he had the better of King
Tolleme. For when Evelake was in the battle there was a cloth set afore
the shield, and when he was in the greatest peril he let put away the
cloth, and then his enemies saw a figure of a man on the Cross,
wherethrough they all were discomfit. And so it befell that a man of
King Evelake’s was smitten his hand off, and bare that hand in his
other hand; and Joseph called that man unto him and bade him go with
good devotion touch the Cross. And as soon as that man had touched the
Cross with his hand it was as whole as ever it was to-fore. Then soon
after there fell a great marvel, that the cross of the shield at one
time vanished away that no man wist where it became. And then King
Evelake was baptised, and for the most part all the people of that
city. So, soon after Joseph would depart, and King Evelake would go
with him, whether he wold or nold. And so by fortune they came into
this land, that at that time was called Great Britain; and there they
found a great felon paynim, that put Joseph into prison. And so by
fortune tidings came unto a worthy man that hight Mondrames, and he
assembled all his people for the great renown he had heard of Joseph;
and so he came into the land of Great Britain and disherited this felon
paynim and consumed him, and therewith delivered Joseph out of prison.
And after that all the people were turned to the Christian faith.




