CHAPTER III. How at a dinner that the queen made there was a knight
enpoisoned, which Sir Mador laid on the queen.


And then the queen let make a privy dinner in London unto the knights
of the Round Table. And all was for to show outward that she had as
great joy in all other knights of the Table Round as she had in Sir
Launcelot. All only at that dinner she had Sir Gawaine and his
brethren, that is for to say Sir Agravaine, Sir Gaheris, Sir Gareth,
and Sir Mordred. Also there was Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Blamore de
Ganis, Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Ector de
Maris, Sir Lionel, Sir Palomides, Safere his brother, Sir La Cote Male
Taile, Sir Persant, Sir Ironside, Sir Brandiles, Sir Kay le Seneschal,
Sir Mador de la Porte, Sir Patrise, a knight of Ireland, Aliduk, Sir
Astamore, and Sir Pinel le Savage, the which was cousin to Sir Lamorak
de Galis, the good knight that Sir Gawaine and his brethren slew by
treason. And so these four-and-twenty knights should dine with the
queen in a privy place by themself, and there was made a great feast of
all manner of dainties.

But Sir Gawaine had a custom that he used daily at dinner and at
supper, that he loved well all manner of fruit, and in especial apples
and pears. And therefore whosomever dined or feasted Sir Gawaine would
commonly purvey for good fruit for him, and so did the queen for to
please Sir Gawaine; she let purvey for him all manner of fruit, for Sir
Gawaine was a passing hot knight of nature. And this Pinel hated Sir
Gawaine because of his kinsman Sir Lamorak de Galis; and therefore for
pure envy and hate Sir Pinel enpoisoned certain apples for to enpoison
Sir Gawaine. And so this was well unto the end of the meat; and so it
befell by misfortune a good knight named Patrise, cousin unto Sir Mador
de la Porte, to take a poisoned apple. And when he had eaten it he
swelled so till he brast, and there Sir Patrise fell down suddenly dead
among them.

Then every knight leapt from the board ashamed, and araged for wrath,
nigh out of their wits. For they wist not what to say; considering
Queen Guenever made the feast and dinner, they all had suspicion unto
her. My lady, the queen, said Gawaine, wit ye well, madam, that this
dinner was made for me, for all folks that know my condition understand
that I love well fruit, and now I see well I had near been slain;
therefore, madam, I dread me lest ye will be shamed. Then the queen
stood still and was sore abashed, that she nist not what to say. This
shall not so be ended, said Sir Mador de la Porte, for here have I lost
a full noble knight of my blood; and therefore upon this shame and
despite I will be revenged to the utterance. And there openly Sir Mador
appealed the queen of the death of his cousin, Sir Patrise. Then stood
they all still, that none would speak a word against him, for they all
had great suspicion unto the queen because she let make that dinner.
And the queen was so abashed that she could none other ways do, but
wept so heartily that she fell in a swoon. With this noise and cry came
to them King Arthur, and when he wist of that trouble he was a passing
heavy man.




CHAPTER IV. How Sir Mador appeached the queen of treason, and there was
no knight would fight for her at the first time.


And ever Sir Mador stood still afore the king, and ever he appealed the
queen of treason; for the custom was such that time that all manner of
shameful death was called treason. Fair lords, said King Arthur, me
repenteth of this trouble, but the case is so I may not have ado in
this matter, for I must be a rightful judge; and that repenteth me that
I may not do battle for my wife, for as I deem this deed came never by
her. And therefore I suppose she shall not be all distained, but that
some good knight shall put his body in jeopardy for my queen rather
than she shall be brent in a wrong quarrel. And therefore, Sir Mador,
be not so hasty, for it may happen she shall not be all friendless; and
therefore desire thou thy day of battle, and she shall purvey her of
some good knight that shall answer you, or else it were to me great
shame, and to all my court.

My gracious lord, said Sir Mador, ye must hold me excused, for though
ye be our king in that degree, ye are but a knight as we are, and ye
are sworn unto knighthood as well as we; and therefore I beseech you
that ye be not displeased, for there is none of the four-and-twenty
knights that were bidden to this dinner but all they have great
suspicion unto the queen. What say ye all, my lords? said Sir Mador.
Then they answered by and by that they could not excuse the queen; for
why she made the dinner, and either it must come by her or by her
servants. Alas, said the queen, I made this dinner for a good intent,
and never for none evil, so Almighty God me help in my right, as I was
never purposed to do such evil deeds, and that I report me unto God.

My lord, the king, said Sir Mador, I require you as ye be a righteous
king give me a day that I may have justice. Well, said the king, I give
the day this day fifteen days that thou be ready armed on horseback in
the meadow beside Westminster. And if it so fall that there be any
knight to encounter with you, there mayst thou do the best, and God
speed the right. And if it so fall that there be no knight at that day,
then must my queen be burnt, and there she shall be ready to have her
judgment. I am answered, said Sir Mador. And every knight went where it
liked them.

So when the king and the queen were together the king asked the queen
how this case befell. The queen answered: So God me help, I wot not how
or in what manner. Where is Sir Launcelot? said King Arthur; an he were
here he would not grudge to do battle for you. Sir, said the queen, I
wot not where he is, but his brother and his kinsmen deem that he be
not within this realm. That me repenteth, said King Arthur, for an he
were here he would soon stint this strife. Then I will counsel you,
said the king, and unto Sir Bors: That ye will do battle for her for
Sir Launcelot’s sake, and upon my life he will not refuse you. For well
I see, said the king, that none of these four-and-twenty knights that
were with you at your dinner where Sir Patrise was slain, that will do
battle for you, nor none of them will say well of you, and that shall
be a great slander for you in this court. Alas, said the queen, and I
may not do withal, but now I miss Sir Launcelot, for an he were here he
would put me soon to my heart’s ease. What aileth you, said the king,
ye cannot keep Sir Launcelot upon your side? For wit ye well, said the
king, who that hath Sir Launcelot upon his part hath the most man of
worship in the world upon his side. Now go your way, said the king unto
the queen, and require Sir Bors to do battle for you for Sir
Launcelot’s sake.




