CHAPTER XIII. Of the adventure that Melias had, and how Galahad
revenged him, and how Melias was carried into an abbey.


And then rode Melias into an old forest, and therein he rode two days
and more. And then he came into a fair meadow, and there was a fair
lodge of boughs. And then he espied in that lodge a chair, wherein was
a crown of gold, subtly wrought. Also there were cloths covered upon
the earth, and many delicious meats set thereon. Sir Melias beheld this
adventure, and thought it marvellous, but he had no hunger, but of the
crown of gold he took much keep; and therewith he stooped down and took
it up, and rode his way with it. And anon he saw a knight came riding
after him that said: Knight, set down that crown which is not yours,
and therefore defend you. Then Sir Melias blessed him and said: Fair
lord of heaven, help and save thy new-made knight. And then they let
their horses run as fast as they might, so that the other knight smote
Sir Melias through hauberk and through the left side, that he fell to
the earth nigh dead. And then he took the crown and went his way; and
Sir Melias lay still and had no power to stir.

In the meanwhile by fortune there came Sir Galahad and found him there
in peril of death. And then he said: Ah Melias, who hath wounded you?
therefore it had been better to have ridden the other way. And when Sir
Melias heard him speak: Sir, he said, for God’s love let me not die in
this forest, but bear me unto the abbey here beside, that I may be
confessed and have my rights. It shall be done, said Galahad, but where
is he that hath wounded you? With that Sir Galahad heard in the leaves
cry on high: Knight, keep thee from me. Ah sir, said Melias, beware,
for that is he that hath slain me. Sir Galahad answered: Sir knight,
come on your peril. Then either dressed to other, and came together as
fast as their horses might run, and Galahad smote him so that his spear
went through his shoulder, and smote him down off his horse, and in the
falling Galahad’s spear brake.

With that came out another knight out of the leaves, and brake a spear
upon Galahad or ever he might turn him. Then Galahad drew out his sword
and smote off the left arm of him, so that it fell to the earth. And
then he fled, and Sir Galahad pursued fast after him. And then he
turned again unto Sir Melias, and there he alighted and dressed him
softly on his horse to-fore him, for the truncheon of his spear was in
his body; and Sir Galahad stert up behind him, and held him in his
arms, and so brought him to the abbey, and there unarmed him and
brought him to his chamber. And then he asked his Saviour. And when he
had received Him he said unto Sir Galahad: Sir, let death come when it
pleaseth him. And therewith he drew out the truncheon of the spear out
of his body: and then he swooned.

Then came there an old monk which sometime had been a knight, and
beheld Sir Melias. And anon he ransacked him; and then he said unto Sir
Galahad: I shall heal him of his wound, by the grace of God, within the
term of seven weeks. Then was Sir Galahad glad, and unarmed him, and
said he would abide there three days. And then he asked Sir Melias how
it stood with him. Then he said he was turned unto helping, God be
thanked.




CHAPTER XIV. How Sir Galahad departed, and how he was commanded to go
to the Castle of Maidens to destroy the wicked custom.


Now will I depart, said Galahad, for I have much on hand, for many good
knights be full busy about it, and this knight and I were in the same
quest of the Sangreal. Sir, said a good man, for his sin he was thus
wounded; and I marvel, said the good man, how ye durst take upon you so
rich a thing as the high order of knighthood without clean confession,
and that was the cause ye were bitterly wounded. For the way on the
right hand betokeneth the highway of our Lord Jesu Christ, and the way
of a good true good liver. And the other way betokeneth the way of
sinners and of misbelievers. And when the devil saw your pride and
presumption, for to take you in the quest of the Sangreal, that made
you to be overthrown, for it may not be enchieved but by virtuous
living. Also, the writing on the cross was a signification of heavenly
deeds, and of knightly deeds in God’s works, and no knightly deeds in
worldly works. And pride is head of all deadly sins, that caused this
knight to depart from Galahad. And where thou tookest the crown of gold
thou sinnest in covetise and in theft: all this were no knightly deeds.
And this Galahad, the holy knight, the which fought with the two
knights, the two knights signify the two deadly sins which were wholly
in this knight Melias; and they might not withstand you, for ye are
without deadly sin.

Now departed Galahad from thence, and betaught them all unto God. Sir
Melias said: My lord Galahad, as soon as I may ride I shall seek you.
God send you health, said Galahad, and so took his horse and departed,
and rode many journeys forward and backward, as adventure would lead
him. And at the last it happened him to depart from a place or a castle
the which was named Abblasoure; and he had heard no mass, the which he
was wont ever to hear or ever he departed out of any castle or place,
and kept that for a custom. Then Sir Galahad came unto a mountain where
he found an old chapel, and found there nobody, for all, all was
desolate; and there he kneeled to-fore the altar, and besought God of
wholesome counsel. So as he prayed he heard a voice that said: Go thou
now, thou adventurous knight, to the Castle of Maidens, and there do
thou away the wicked customs.




