CHAPTER VII. Of the vision that Sir Percivale saw, and how his vision
was expounded, and of his lion.


Then came forth the other lady that rode upon the serpent, and she
said: Sir Percivale, I complain me of you that ye have done unto me,
and have not offended unto you. Certes, madam, he said, unto you nor no
lady I never offended. Yes, said she, I shall tell you why. I have
nourished in this place a great while a serpent, which served me a
great while, and yesterday ye slew him as he gat his prey. Say me for
what cause ye slew him, for the lion was not yours. Madam, said Sir
Percivale, I know well the lion was not mine, but I did it for the lion
is of more gentler nature than the serpent, and therefore I slew him;
meseemeth I did not amiss against you. Madam, said he, what would ye
that I did? I would, said she, for the amends of my beast that ye
become my man. And then he answered: That will I not grant you. No,
said she, truly ye were never but my servant sin ye received the homage
of Our Lord Jesu Christ. Therefore, I ensure you in what place I may
find you without keeping I shall take you, as he that sometime was my
man. And so she departed from Sir Percivale and left him sleeping, the
which was sore travailed of his advision. And on the morn he arose and
blessed him, and he was passing feeble.

Then was Sir Percivale ware in the sea, and saw a ship come sailing
toward him; and Sir Percivale went unto the ship and found it covered
within and without with white samite. And at the board stood an old man
clothed in a surplice, in likeness of a priest. Sir, said Sir
Percivale, ye be welcome. God keep you, said the good man. Sir, said
the old man, of whence be ye? Sir, said Sir Percivale, I am of King
Arthur’s court, and a knight of the Table Round, the which am in the
quest of the Sangreal; and here am I in great duresse, and never like
to escape out of this wilderness. Doubt not, said the good man, an ye
be so true a knight as the order of chivalry requireth, and of heart as
ye ought to be, ye should not doubt that none enemy should slay you.
What are ye? said Sir Percivale. Sir, said the old man, I am of a
strange country, and hither I come to comfort you.

Sir, said Sir Percivale, what signifieth my dream that I dreamed this
night? And there he told him altogether: She which rode upon the lion
betokeneth the new law of holy church, that is to understand, faith,
good hope, belief, and baptism. For she seemed younger than the other
it is great reason, for she was born in the resurrection and the
passion of Our Lord Jesu Christ. And for great love she came to thee to
warn thee of thy great battle that shall befall thee. With whom, said
Sir Percivale, shall I fight? With the most champion of the world, said
the old man; for as the lady said, but if thou quit thee well thou
shalt not be quit by losing of one member, but thou shalt be shamed to
the world’s end. And she that rode on the serpent signifieth the old
law, and that serpent betokeneth a fiend. And why she blamed thee that
thou slewest her servant, it betokeneth nothing; the serpent that thou
slewest betokeneth the devil that thou rodest upon to the rock. And
when thou madest a sign of the cross, there thou slewest him, and put
away his power. And when she asked thee amends and to become her man,
and thou saidst thou wouldst not, that was to make thee to believe on
her and leave thy baptism. So he commanded Sir Percivale to depart, and
so he leapt over the board and the ship, and all went away he wist not
whither. Then he went up unto the rock and found the lion which always
kept him fellowship, and he stroked him upon the back and had great joy
of him.




CHAPTER VIII. How Sir Percivale saw a ship coming to him-ward, and how
the lady of the ship told him of her disheritance.


By that Sir Percivale had abiden there till mid-day he saw a ship came
rowing in the sea, as all the wind of the world had driven it. And so
it drove under that rock. And when Sir Percivale saw this he hied him
thither, and found the ship covered with silk more blacker than any
bear, and therein was a gentlewoman of great beauty, and she was
clothed richly that none might be better. And when she saw Sir
Percivale she said: Who brought you in this wilderness where ye be
never like to pass hence, for ye shall die here for hunger and
mischief? Damosel, said Sir Percivale, I serve the best man of the
world, and in his service he will not suffer me to die, for who that
knocketh shall enter, and who that asketh shall have, and who that
seeketh him he hideth him not. But then she said: Sir Percivale, wot ye
what I am? Yea, said he. Now who taught you my name? said she. Now,
said Sir Percivale, I know you better than ye ween. And I came out of
the waste forest where I found the Red Knight with the white shield,
said the damosel. Ah, damosel, said he, with that knight would I meet
passing fain. Sir knight, said she, an ye will ensure me by the faith
that ye owe unto knighthood that ye shall do my will what time I summon
you, and I shall bring you unto that knight. Yea, said he, I shall
promise you to fulfil your desire. Well, said she, now shall I tell
you. I saw him in the forest chasing two knights unto a water, the
which is called Mortaise; and they drove him into the water for dread
of death, and the two knights passed over, and the Red Knight passed
after, and there his horse was drenched, and he, through great
strength, escaped unto the land: thus she told him, and Sir Percivale
was passing glad thereof.

Then she asked him if he had ate any meat late. Nay, madam, truly I ate
no meat nigh this three days, but late here I spake with a good man
that fed me with his good words and holy, and refreshed me greatly. Ah,
sir knight, said she, that same man is an enchanter and a multiplier of
words. For an ye believe him ye shall plainly be shamed, and die in
this rock for pure hunger, and be eaten with wild beasts; and ye be a
young man and a goodly knight, and I shall help you an ye will. What
are ye, said Sir Percivale, that proffered me thus great kindness? I
am, said she, a gentlewoman that am disherited, which was sometime the
richest woman of the world. Damosel, said Sir Percivale, who hath
disherited you? for I have great pity of you. Sir, said she, I dwelled
with the greatest man of the world, and he made me so fair and clear
that there was none like me; and of that great beauty I had a little
pride more than I ought to have had. Also I said a word that pleased
him not. And then he would not suffer me to be any longer in his
company, and so drove me from mine heritage, and so disherited me, and
he had never pity of me nor of none of my council, nor of my court. And
sithen, sir knight, it hath befallen me so, and through me and mine I
have benome him many of his men, and made them to become my men. For
they ask never nothing of me but I give it them, that and much more.
Thus I and all my servants were against him night and day. Therefore I
know now no good knight, nor no good man, but I get them on my side an
I may. And for that I know that thou art a good knight, I beseech you
to help me; and for ye be a fellow of the Round Table, wherefore ye
ought not to fail no gentlewoman which is disherited, an she besought
you of help.




