CHAPTER IV. How the old man brought Galahad to the Siege Perilous and
set him therein, and how all the knights marvelled.


The king was right glad of his words, and said unto the good man: Sir,
ye be right welcome, and the young knight with you. Then the old man
made the young man to unarm him, and he was in a coat of red sendal,
and bare a mantle upon his shoulder that was furred with ermine, and
put that upon him. And the old knight said unto the young knight: Sir,
follow me. And anon he led him unto the Siege Perilous, where beside
sat Sir Launcelot; and the good man lift up the cloth, and found there
letters that said thus: This is the siege of Galahad, the haut prince.
Sir, said the old knight, wit ye well that place is yours. And then he
set him down surely in that siege. And then he said to the old man:
Sir, ye may now go your way, for well have ye done that ye were
commanded to do; and recommend me unto my grandsire, King Pelles, and
unto my lord Petchere, and say them on my behalf, I shall come and see
them as soon as ever I may. So the good man departed; and there met him
twenty noble squires, and so took their horses and went their way.

Then all the knights of the Table Round marvelled greatly of Sir
Galahad, that he durst sit there in that Siege Perilous, and was so
tender of age; and wist not from whence he came but all only by God;
and said: This is he by whom the Sangreal shall be enchieved, for there
sat never none but he, but he were mischieved. Then Sir Launcelot
beheld his son and had great joy of him. Then Bors told his fellows:
Upon pain of my life this young knight shall come unto great worship.
This noise was great in all the court, so that it came to the queen.
Then she had marvel what knight it might be that durst adventure him to
sit in the Siege Perilous. Many said unto the queen he resembled much
unto Sir Launcelot. I may well suppose, said the queen, that Sir
Launcelot begat him on King Pelles’ daughter, by the which he was made
to lie by, by enchantment, and his name is Galahad. I would fain see
him, said the queen, for he must needs be a noble man, for so is his
father that him begat, I report me unto all the Table Round.

So when the meat was done that the king and all were risen, the king
yede unto the Siege Perilous and lift up the cloth, and found there the
name of Galahad; and then he shewed it unto Sir Gawaine, and said: Fair
nephew, now have we among us Sir Galahad, the good knight that shall
worship us all; and upon pain of my life he shall enchieve the
Sangreal, right as Sir Launcelot had done us to understand. Then came
King Arthur unto Galahad and said: Sir, ye be welcome, for ye shall
move many good knights to the quest of the Sangreal, and ye shall
enchieve that never knights might bring to an end. Then the king took
him by the hand, and went down from the palace to shew Galahad the
adventures of the stone.




CHAPTER V. How King Arthur shewed the stone hoving on the water to
Galahad, and how he drew out the sword.


The queen heard thereof, and came after with many ladies, and shewed
them the stone where it hoved on the water. Sir, said the king unto Sir
Galahad, here is a great marvel as ever I saw, and right good knights
have assayed and failed. Sir, said Galahad, that is no marvel, for this
adventure is not theirs but mine; and for the surety of this sword I
brought none with me, for here by my side hangeth the scabbard. And
anon he laid his hand on the sword, and lightly drew it out of the
stone, and put it in the sheath, and said unto the king: Now it goeth
better than it did aforehand. Sir, said the king, a shield God shall
send you. Now have I that sword that sometime was the good knight’s,
Balin le Savage, and he was a passing good man of his hands; and with
this sword he slew his brother Balan, and that was great pity, for he
was a good knight, and either slew other through a dolorous stroke that
Balin gave unto my grandfather King Pelles, the which is not yet whole,
nor not shall be till I heal him.

Therewith the king and all espied where came riding down the river a
lady on a white palfrey toward them. Then she saluted the king and the
queen, and asked if that Sir Launcelot was there. And then he answered
himself: I am here, fair lady. Then she said all with weeping: How your
great doing is changed sith this day in the morn. Damosel, why say you
so? said Launcelot. I say you sooth, said the damosel, for ye were this
day the best knight of the world, but who should say so now, he should
be a liar, for there is now one better than ye, and well it is proved
by the adventures of the sword whereto ye durst not set to your hand;
and that is the change and leaving of your name. Wherefore I make unto
you a remembrance, that ye shall not ween from henceforth that ye be
the best knight of the world. As touching unto that, said Launcelot, I
know well I was never the best. Yes, said the damosel, that were ye,
and are yet, of any sinful man of the world. And, Sir king, Nacien, the
hermit, sendeth thee word, that thee shall befall the greatest worship
that ever befell king in Britain; and I say you wherefore, for this day
the Sangreal appeared in thy house and fed thee and all thy fellowship
of the Round Table. So she departed and went that same way that she
came.




CHAPTER VI. How King Arthur had all the knights together for to joust
in the meadow beside Camelot or they departed.


Now, said the king, I am sure at this quest of the Sangreal shall all
ye of the Table Round depart, and never shall I see you again whole
together; therefore I will see you all whole together in the meadow of
Camelot to joust and to tourney, that after your death men may speak of
it that such good knights were wholly together such a day. As unto that
counsel and at the king’s request they accorded all, and took on their
harness that longed unto jousting. But all this moving of the king was
for this intent, for to see Galahad proved; for the king deemed he
should not lightly come again unto the court after his departing. So
were they assembled in the meadow, both more and less. Then Sir
Galahad, by the prayer of the king and the queen, did upon him a noble
jesseraunce, and also he did on his helm, but shield would he take none
for no prayer of the king. And then Sir Gawaine and other knights
prayed him to take a spear. Right so he did; and the queen was in a
tower with all her ladies, for to behold that tournament. Then Sir
Galahad dressed him in midst of the meadow, and began to break spears
marvellously, that all men had wonder of him; for he there surmounted
all other knights, for within a while he had defouled many good knights
of the Table Round save twain, that was Sir Launcelot and Sir
Percivale.




