CHAPTER XI. How La Beale Isoud counselled Sir Tristram to go unto the
court, to the great feast of Pentecost.


Now will we leave off this matter, and speak we of Sir Tristram, and of
Sir Palomides that was the Saracen unchristened. When Sir Tristram was
come home unto Joyous Gard from his adventures, all this while that Sir
Launcelot was thus missed, two year and more, Sir Tristram bare the
renown through all the realm of Logris, and many strange adventures
befell him, and full well and manly and worshipfully he brought them to
an end. So when he was come home La Beale Isoud told him of the great
feast that should be at Pentecost next following, and there she told
him how Sir Launcelot had been missed two year, and all that while he
had been out of his mind, and how he was holpen by the holy vessel, the
Sangreal. Alas, said Sir Tristram, that caused some debate betwixt him
and Queen Guenever. Sir, said Dame Isoud, I know it all, for Queen
Guenever sent me a letter in the which she wrote me all how it was, for
to require you to seek him. And now, blessed be God, said La Beale
Isoud, he is whole and sound and come again to the court.

Thereof am I glad, said Sir Tristram, and now shall ye and I make us
ready, for both ye and I will be at the feast. Sir, said Isoud, an it
please you I will not be there, for through me ye be marked of many
good knights, and that caused you to have much more labour for my sake
than needeth you. Then will I not be there, said Sir Tristram, but if
ye be there. God defend, said La Beale Isoud, for then shall I be
spoken of shame among all queens and ladies of estate; for ye that are
called one of the noblest knights of the world, and ye a knight of the
Round Table, how may ye be missed at that feast? What shall be said
among all knights? See how Sir Tristram hunteth, and hawketh, and
cowereth within a castle with his lady, and forsaketh your worship.
Alas, shall some say, it is pity that ever he was made knight, or that
ever he should have the love of a lady. Also what shall queens and
ladies say of me? It is pity that I have my life, that I will hold so
noble a knight as ye are from his worship. So God me help, said Sir
Tristram unto La Beale Isoud, it is passing well said of you and nobly
counselled; and now I well understand that ye love me; and like as ye
have counselled me I will do a part thereafter. But there shall no man
nor child ride with me, but myself. And so will I ride on Tuesday next
coming, and no more harness of war but my spear and my sword.




CHAPTER XII. How Sir Tristram departed unarmed and met with Sir
Palomides, and how they smote each other, and how Sir Palomides forbare
him.


And so when the day came Sir Tristram took his leave at La Beale Isoud,
and she sent with him four knights, and within half a mile he sent them
again: and within a mile after Sir Tristram saw afore him where Sir
Palomides had stricken down a knight, and almost wounded him to the
death. Then Sir Tristram repented him that he was not armed, and then
he hoved still. With that Sir Palomides knew Sir Tristram, and cried on
high: Sir Tristram, now be we met, for or we depart we will redress our
old sores. As for that, said Sir Tristram, there was yet never
Christian man might make his boast that ever I fled from him; and wit
ye well, Sir Palomides, thou that art a Saracen shall never make thy
boast that Sir Tristram de Liones shall flee from thee. And therewith
Sir Tristram made his horse to run, and with all his might he came
straight upon Sir Palomides, and brast his spear upon him an hundred
pieces. And forthwithal Sir Tristram drew his sword. And then he turned
his horse and struck at Palomides six great strokes upon his helm; and
then Sir Palomides stood still, and beheld Sir Tristram, and marvelled
of his woodness, and of his folly. And then Sir Palomides said to
himself: An Sir Tristram were armed, it were hard to cease him of this
battle, and if I turn again and slay him I am ashamed wheresomever that
I go.

Then Sir Tristram spake and said: Thou coward knight, what castest thou
to do; why wilt thou not do battle with me? for have thou no doubt I
shall endure all thy malice. Ah, Sir Tristram, said Palomides, full
well thou wottest I may not fight with thee for shame, for thou art
here naked and I am armed, and if I slay thee, dishonour shall be mine.
And well thou wottest, said Sir Palomides to Sir Tristram, I know thy
strength and thy hardiness to endure against a good knight. That is
truth, said Sir Tristram, I understand thy valiantness well. Ye say
well, said Sir Palomides; now, I require you, tell me a question that I
shall say to you. Tell me what it is, said Sir Tristram, and I shall
answer you the truth, as God me help. I put case, said Sir Palomides,
that ye were armed at all rights as well as I am, and I naked as ye be,
what would you do to me now, by your true knighthood? Ah, said Sir
Tristram, now I understand thee well, Sir Palomides, for now must I say
mine own judgment, and as God me bless, that I shall say shall not be
said for no fear that I have of thee. But this is all: wit Sir
Palomides, as at this time thou shouldest depart from me, for I would
not have ado with thee. No more will I, said Palomides, and therefore
ride forth on thy way. As for that I may choose, said Sir Tristram,
either to ride or to abide. But Sir Palomides, said Sir Tristram, I
marvel of one thing, that thou that art so good a knight, that thou
wilt not be christened, and thy brother, Sir Safere, hath been
christened many a day.




CHAPTER XIII. How that Sir Tristram gat him harness of a knight which
was hurt, and how he overthrew Sir Palomides.


As for that, said Sir Palomides, I may not yet be christened for one
avow that I have made many years agone; howbeit in my heart I believe
in Jesu Christ and his mild mother Mary; but I have but one battle to
do, and when that is done I will be baptised with a good will. By my
head, said Tristram, as for one battle thou shalt not seek it no
longer. For God defend, said Sir Tristram, that through my default thou
shouldst longer live thus a Saracen, for yonder is a knight that ye,
Sir Palomides, have hurt and smitten down. Now help me that I were
armed in his armour, and I shall soon fulfil thine avows. As ye will,
said Palomides, so it shall be.

So they rode both unto that knight that sat upon a bank, and then Sir
Tristram saluted him, and he weakly saluted him again. Sir knight, said
Sir Tristram, I require you tell me your right name. Sir, he said, my
name is Sir Galleron of Galway, and knight of the Table Round. So God
me help, said Sir Tristram, I am right heavy of your hurts; but this is
all, I must pray you to lend me all your whole armour, for ye see I am
unarmed, and I must do battle with this knight. Sir, said the hurt
knight, ye shall have it with a good will; but ye must beware, for I
warn you that knight is wight. Sir, said Galleron, I pray you tell me
your name, and what is that knight’s name that hath beaten me. Sir, as
for my name it is Sir Tristram de Liones, and as for the knight’s name
that hath hurt you is Sir Palomides, brother to the good knight Sir
Safere, and yet is Sir Palomides unchristened. Alas, said Sir Galleron,
that is pity that so good a knight and so noble a man of arms should be
unchristened. So God me help, said Sir Tristram, either he shall slay
me or I him but that he shall be christened or ever we depart
in-sunder. My lord Sir Tristram, said Sir Galleron, your renown and
worship is well known through many realms, and God save you this day
from shenship and shame.

Then Sir Tristram unarmed Galleron, the which was a noble knight, and
had done many deeds of arms, and he was a large knight of flesh and
bone. And when he was unarmed he stood upon his feet, for he was
bruised in the back with a spear; yet so as Sir Galleron might, he
armed Sir Tristram. And then Sir Tristram mounted upon his own horse,
and in his hand he gat Sir Galleron’s spear; and therewithal Sir
Palomides was ready. And so they came hurtling together, and either
smote other in midst of their shields; and therewithal Sir Palomides’
spear brake, and Sir Tristram smote down the horse; and Sir Palomides,
as soon as he might, avoided his horse, and dressed his shield, and
pulled out his sword. That saw Sir Tristram, and therewithal he
alighted and tied his horse till a tree.




