CHAPTER III. How Sir Launcelot was espied in the queen’s chamber, and
how Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred came with twelve knights to slay him.


So Sir Launcelot departed, and took his sword under his arm, and so in
his mantle that noble knight put himself in great Jeopardy; and so he
passed till he came to the queen’s chamber, and then Sir Launcelot was
lightly put into the chamber. And then, as the French book saith, the
queen and Launcelot were together. And whether they were abed or at
other manner of disports, me list not hereof make no mention, for love
that time was not as is now-a-days. But thus as they were together,
there came Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, with twelve knights with them
of the Round Table, and they said with crying voice: Traitor-knight,
Sir Launcelot du Lake, now art thou taken. And thus they cried with a
loud voice, that all the court might hear it; and they all fourteen
were armed at all points as they should fight in a battle. Alas said
Queen Guenever, now are we mischieved both Madam, said Sir Launcelot,
is there here any armour within your chamber, that I might cover my
poor body withal? An if there be any give it me, and I shall soon stint
their malice, by the grace of God. Truly, said the queen, I have none
armour, shield, sword, nor spear; wherefore I dread me sore our long
love is come to a mischievous end, for I hear by their noise there be
many noble knights, and well I wot they be surely armed, and against
them ye may make no resistance. Wherefore ye are likely to be slain,
and then shall I be brent. For an ye might escape them, said the queen,
I would not doubt but that ye would rescue me in what danger that ever
I stood in. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, in all my life thus was I never
bestead, that I should be thus shamefully slain for lack of mine
armour.

But ever in one Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred cried: Traitor-knight,
come out of the queen’s chamber, for wit thou well thou art so beset
that thou shalt not escape. O Jesu mercy, said Sir Launcelot, this
shameful cry and noise I may not suffer, for better were death at once
than thus to endure this pain. Then he took the queen in his arms, and
kissed her, and said: Most noble Christian queen, I beseech you as ye
have been ever my special good lady, and I at all times your true poor
knight unto my power, and as I never failed you in right nor in wrong
sithen the first day King Arthur made me knight, that ye will pray for
my soul if that I here be slain; for well I am assured that Sir Bors,
my nephew, and all the remnant of my kin, with Sir Lavaine and Sir
Urre, that they will not fail you to rescue you from the fire; and
therefore, mine own lady, recomfort yourself, whatsomever come of me,
that ye go with Sir Bors, my nephew, and Sir Urre, and they all will do
you all the pleasure that they can or may, that ye shall live like a
queen upon my lands. Nay, Launcelot, said the queen, wit thou well I
will never live after thy days, but an thou be slain I will take my
death as meekly for Jesu Christ’s sake as ever did any Christian queen.
Well, madam, said I-auncelot, sith it is so that the day is come that
our love must depart, wit you well I shall sell my life as dear as I
may; and a thousandfold, said Sir Launcelot, I am more heavier for you
than for myself. And now I had liefer than to be lord of all
Christendom, that I had sure armour upon me, that men might speak of my
deeds or ever I were slain. Truly, said the queen, I would an it might
please God that they would take me and slay me, and suffer you to
escape. That shall never be, said Sir Launcelot, God defend me from
such a shame, but Jesu be Thou my shield and mine armour!




CHAPTER IV. How Sir Launcelot slew Sir Colgrevance, and armed him in
his harness, and after slew Sir Agravaine, and twelve of his fellows.


And therewith Sir Launcelot wrapped his mantle about his arm well and
surely; and by then they had gotten a great form out of the hall, and
therewithal they rashed at the door. Fair lords, said Sir Launcelot,
leave your noise and your rashing, and I shall set open this door, and
then may ye do with me what it liketh you. Come off then, said they
all, and do it, for it availeth thee not to strive against us all; and
therefore let us into this chamber, and we shall save thy life until
thou come to King Arthur. Then Launcelot unbarred the door, and with
his left hand he held it open a little, so that but one man might come
in at once; and so there came striding a good knight, a much man and
large, and his name was Colgrevance of Gore, and he with a sword struck
at Sir Launcelot mightily; and he put aside the stroke, and gave him
such a buffet upon the helmet, that he fell grovelling dead within the
chamber door. And then Sir Launcelot with great might drew that dead
knight within the chamber door; and Sir Launcelot with help of the
queen and her ladies was lightly armed in Sir Colgrevance’s armour.

And ever stood Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred crying: Traitor-knight,
come out of the queen’s chamber. Leave your noise, said Sir Launcelot
unto Sir Agravaine, for wit you well, Sir Agravaine, ye shall not
prison me this night; and therefore an ye do by my counsel, go ye all
from this chamber door, and make not such crying and such manner of
slander as ye do; for I promise you by my knighthood, an ye will depart
and make no more noise, I shall as to-morn appear afore you all before
the king, and then let it be seen which of you all, outher else ye all,
that will accuse me of treason; and there I shall answer you as a
knight should, that hither I came to the queen for no manner of mal
engin, and that will I prove and make it good upon you with my hands.
Fie on thee, traitor, said Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, we will have
thee maugre thy head, and slay thee if we list; for we let thee wit we
have the choice of King Arthur to save thee or to slay thee. Ah sirs,
said Sir Launcelot, is there none other grace with you? then keep
yourself.

So then Sir Launcelot set all open the chamber door, and mightily and
knightly he strode in amongst them; and anon at the first buffet he
slew Sir Agravaine. And twelve of his fellows after, within a little
while after, he laid them cold to the earth, for there was none of the
twelve that might stand Sir Launcelot one buffet. Also Sir Launcelot
wounded Sir Mordred, and he fled with all his might. And then Sir
Launcelot returned again unto the queen, and said: Madam, now wit you
well all our true love is brought to an end, for now will King Arthur
ever be my foe; and therefore, madam, an it like you that I may have
you with me, I shall save you from all manner adventures dangerous.
That is not best, said the queen; meseemeth now ye have done so much
harm, it will be best ye hold you still with this. And if ye see that
as to-morn they will put me unto the death, then may ye rescue me as ye
think best. I will well, said Sir Launcelot, for have ye no doubt,
while I am living I shall rescue you. And then he kissed her, and
either gave other a ring; and so there he left the queen, and went
until his lodging.




