CHAPTER LXII. The copy of the letter written for to revenge the king’s
death, and how Sir Palomides fought for to have the battle.


Recommending unto King Arthur and to all his knights errant, beseeching
them all that insomuch as I, King Hermance, King of the Red City, thus
am slain by felony and treason, through two knights of mine own, and of
mine own bringing up and of mine own making, that some worshipful
knight will revenge my death, insomuch I have been ever to my power
well willing unto Arthur’s court. And who that will adventure his life
with these two traitors for my sake in one battle, I, King Hermance,
King of the Red City, freely give him all my lands and rents that ever
I wielded in my life. This letter, said Ebel, I wrote by my lord’s
commandment, and then he received his Creator; and when he was dead, he
commanded me or ever he were cold to put that letter fast in his hand.
And then he commanded me to put forth that same vessel down Humber, and
I should give these mariners in commandment never to stint until that
they came unto Logris, where all the noble knights shall assemble at
this time. And there shall some good knight have pity on me to revenge
my death, for there was never king nor lord falslier nor traitorlier
slain than I am here to my death. Thus was the complaint of our King
Hermance. Now, said Sir Ebel, ye know all how our lord was betrayed, we
require you for God’s sake have pity upon his death, and worshipfully
revenge his death, and then may ye wield all these lands. For we all
wit well that an ye may slay these two traitors, the Red City and all
those that be therein will take you for their lord.

Truly, said Sir Palomides, it grieveth my heart for to hear you tell
this doleful tale; and to say the truth I saw the same letter that ye
speak of, and one of the best knights on the earth read that letter to
me, and by his commandment I came hither to revenge your king’s death;
and therefore have done, and let me wit where I shall find those
traitors, for I shall never be at ease in my heart till I be in hands
with them. Sir, said Sir Ebel, then take your ship again, and that ship
must bring you unto the Delectable Isle, fast by the Red City, and we
in this castle shall pray for you, and abide your again-coming. For
this same castle, an ye speed well, must needs be yours; for our King
Hermance let make this castle for the love of the two traitors, and so
we kept it with strong hand, and therefore full sore are we threated.
Wot ye what ye shall do, said Sir Palomides; whatsomever come of me,
look ye keep well this castle. For an it misfortune me so to be slain
in this quest I am sure there will come one of the best knights of the
world for to revenge my death, and that is Sir Tristram de Liones, or
else Sir Launcelot du Lake.

Then Sir Palomides departed from that castle. And as he came nigh the
city, there came out of a ship a goodly knight armed against him, with
his shield on his shoulder, and his hand upon his sword. And anon as he
came nigh Sir Palomides he said: Sir knight, what seek ye here? leave
this quest for it is mine, and mine it was or ever it was yours, and
therefore I will have it. Sir knight, said Palomides, it may well be
that this quest was yours or it was mine, but when the letter was taken
out of the dead king’s hand, at that time by likelihood there was no
knight had undertaken to revenge the death of the king. And so at that
time I promised to revenge his death, and so I shall or else I am
ashamed. Ye say well, said the knight, but wit ye well then will I
fight with you, and who be the better knight of us both, let him take
the battle upon hand. I assent me, said Sir Palomides. And then they
dressed their shields, and pulled out their swords, and lashed together
many sad strokes as men of might; and this fighting was more than an
hour, but at the last Sir Palomides waxed big and better winded, so
that then he smote that knight such a stroke that he made him to kneel
upon his knees. Then that knight spake on high and said: Gentle knight,
hold thy hand. Sir Palomides was goodly and withdrew his hand. Then
this knight said: Wit ye well, knight, that thou art better worthy to
have this battle than I, and require thee of knighthood tell me thy
name. Sir, my name is Palomides, a knight of King Arthur’s, and of the
Table Round, that hither I came to revenge the death of this dead king.




CHAPTER LXIII. Of the preparation of Sir Palomides and the two brethren
that should fight with him.


Well be ye found, said the knight to Palomides, for of all knights that
be alive, except three, I had liefest have you. The first is Sir
Launcelot du Lake, and Sir Tristram de Liones, the third is my nigh
cousin, Sir Lamorak de Galis. And I am brother unto King Hermance that
is dead, and my name is Sir Hermind. Ye say well, said Sir Palomides,
and ye shall see how I shall speed; and if I be there slain go ye to my
lord Sir Launcelot, or else to my lord Sir Tristram, and pray them to
revenge my death, for as for Sir Lamorak him shall ye never see in this
world. Alas, said Sir Hermind, how may that be? He is slain, said Sir
Palomides, by Sir Gawaine and his brethren. So God me help, said
Hermind, there was not one for one that slew him. That is truth, said
Sir Palomides, for they were four dangerous knights that slew him, as
Sir Gawaine, Sir Agravaine, Sir Gaheris, and Sir Mordred, but Sir
Gareth, the fifth brother was away, the best knight of them all. And so
Sir Palomides told Hermind all the manner, and how they slew Sir
Lamorak all only by treason.

So Sir Palomides took his ship, and arrived up at the Delectable Isle.
And in the meanwhile Sir Hermind that was the king’s brother, he
arrived up at the Red City, and there he told them how there was come a
knight of King Arthur’s to avenge King Hermance’s death: And his name
is Sir Palomides, the good knight, that for the most part he followeth
the beast Glatisant. Then all the city made great joy, for mickle had
they heard of Sir Palomides, and of his noble prowess. So let they
ordain a messenger, and sent unto the two brethren, and bade them to
make them ready, for there was a knight come that would fight with them
both. So the messenger went unto them where they were at a castle there
beside; and there he told them how there was a knight come of King
Arthur’s court to fight with them both at once. He is welcome, said
they; but tell us, we pray you, if it be Sir Launcelot or any of his
blood? He is none of that blood, said the messenger. Then we care the
less, said the two brethren, for with none of the blood of Sir
Launcelot we keep not to have ado withal. Wit ye well, said the
messenger, that his name is Sir Palomides, that yet is unchristened, a
noble knight. Well, said they, an he be now unchristened he shall never
be christened. So they appointed to be at the city within two days.

And when Sir Palomides was come to the city they made passing great joy
of him, and then they beheld him, and saw that he was well made,
cleanly and bigly, and unmaimed of his limbs, and neither too young nor
too old. And so all the people praised him; and though he was not
christened yet he believed in the best manner, and was full faithful
and true of his promise, and well conditioned; and because he made his
avow that he would never be christened unto the time that he had
achieved the beast Glatisant, the which was a full wonderful beast, and
a great signification; for Merlin prophesied much of that beast. And
also Sir Palomides avowed never to take full christendom unto the time
that he had done seven battles within the lists.

So within the third day there came to the city these two brethren, the
one hight Helius, the other hight Helake, the which were men of great
prowess; howbeit that they were false and full of treason, and but poor
men born, yet were they noble knights of their hands. And with them
they brought forty knights, to that intent that they should be big
enough for the Red City. Thus came the two brethren with great bobaunce
and pride, for they had put the Red City in fear and damage. Then they
were brought to the lists, and Sir Palomides came into the place and
said thus: Be ye the two brethren, Helius and Helake, that slew your
king and lord, Sir Hermance, by felony and treason, for whom that I am
come hither to revenge his death? Wit thou well, said Sir Helius and
Sir Helake, that we are the same knights that slew King Hermance; and
wit thou well, Sir Palomides Saracen, that we shall handle thee so or
thou depart that thou shalt wish that thou wert christened. It may well
be, said Sir Palomides, for yet I would not die or I were christened;
and yet so am I not afeard of you both, but I trust to God that I shall
die a better christian man than any of you both; and doubt ye not, said
Sir Palomides, either ye or I shall be left dead in this place.




