CHAPTER XXIX. How Sir Tristram overcame the battle, and how Elias
desired a man to fight body for body.


So on the morn Elias the captain came, and bade King Mark: Come out and
do battle; for now the good knight Sir Tristram is entered it will be
shame to thee, said Elias, for to keep thy walls. When King Mark
understood this he was wroth and said no word, but went unto Sir
Tristram and asked him his counsel. Sir, said Sir Tristram, will ye
that I give him his answer? I will well, said King Mark. Then Sir
Tristram said thus to the messenger: Bear thy lord word from the king
and me, that we will do battle with him to-morn in the plain field.
What is your name? said the messenger. Wit thou well my name is Sir
Tristram de Liones. Therewithal the messenger departed and told his
lord Elias all that he had heard. Sir, said Sir Tristram unto King
Mark, I pray you give me leave to have the rule of the battle. I pray
you take the rule, said King Mark. Then Sir Tristram let devise the
battle in what manner that it should be. He let depart his host in six
parties, and ordained Sir Dinas the Seneschal to have the foreward, and
other knights to rule the remnant. And the same night Sir Tristram
burnt all the Sessoins’ ships unto the cold water. Anon, as Elias wist
that, he said it was of Sir Tristram’s doing: For he casteth that we
shall never escape, mother son of us. Therefore, fair fellows, fight
freely to-morrow, and miscomfort you nought; for any knight, though he
be the best knight in the world, he may not have ado with us all.

Then they ordained their battle in four parties, wonderly well
apparelled and garnished with men of arms. Thus they within issued, and
they without set freely upon them; and there Sir Dinas did great deeds
of arms. Not for then Sir Dinas and his fellowship were put to the
worse. With that came Sir Tristram and slew two knights with one spear;
then he slew on the right hand and on the left hand, that men marvelled
that ever he might do such deeds of arms. And then he might see
sometime the battle was driven a bow-draught from the castle, and
sometime it was at the gates of the castle. Then came Elias the captain
rushing here and there, and hit King Mark so sore upon the helm that he
made him to avoid the saddle. And then Sir Dinas gat King Mark again to
horseback. Therewithal came in Sir Tristram like a lion, and there he
met with Elias, and he smote him so sore upon the helm that he avoided
his saddle. And thus they fought till it was night, and for great
slaughter and for wounded people everych party drew to their rest.

And when King Mark was come within the Castle of Tintagil he lacked of
his knights an hundred, and they without lacked two hundred; and they
searched the wounded men on both parties. And then they went to
council; and wit you well either party were loath to fight more, so
that either might escape with their worship. When Elias the captain
understood the death of his men he made great dole; and when he wist
that they were loath to go to battle again he was wroth out of measure.
Then Elias sent word unto King Mark, in great despite, whether he would
find a knight that would fight for him body for body. And if that he
might slay King Mark’s knight, he to have the truage of Cornwall
yearly. And if that his knight slay mine, I fully release my claim
forever. Then the messenger departed unto King Mark, and told him how
that his lord Elias had sent him word to find a knight to do battle
with him body for body. When King Mark understood the messenger, he
bade him abide and he should have his answer. Then called he all the
baronage together to wit what was the best counsel. They said all at
once: To fight in a field we have no lust, for had not been Sir
Tristram’s prowess it had been likely that we never should have
escaped; and therefore, sir, as we deem, it were well done to find a
knight that would do battle with him, for he knightly proffereth.




CHAPTER XXI. How Sir Elias and Sir Tristram fought together for the
truage, and how Sir Tristram slew Elias in the field.


Not for then when all this was said, they could find no knight that
would do battle with him. Sir king, said they all, here is no knight
that dare fight with Elias. Alas, said King Mark, then am I utterly
ashamed and utterly destroyed, unless that my nephew Sir Tristram will
take the battle upon him. Wit you well, they said all, he had yesterday
overmuch on hand, and he is weary for travail, and sore wounded. Where
is he? said King Mark. Sir, said they, he is in his bed to repose him.
Alas, said King Mark, but I have the succour of my nephew Sir Tristram,
I am utterly destroyed for ever.

Therewith one went to Sir Tristram where he lay, and told him what King
Mark had said. And therewith Sir Tristram arose lightly, and put on him
a long gown, and came afore the king and all the lords. And when he saw
them all so dismayed he asked the king and the lords what tidings were
with them. Never worse, said the king. And therewith he told him all,
how he had word of Elias to find a knight to fight for the truage of
Cornwall, and none can I find. And as for you, said the king and all
the lords, we may ask no more of you for shame; for through your
hardiness yesterday ye saved all our lives. Sir, said Sir Tristram, now
I understand ye would have my succour, reason would that I should do
all that lieth in my power to do, saving my worship and my life,
howbeit I am sore bruised and hurt. And sithen Sir Elias proffereth so
largely, I shall fight with him, or else I will be slain in the field,
or else I will deliver Cornwall from the old truage. And therefore
lightly call his messenger and he shall be answered, for as yet my
wounds be green, and they will be sorer a seven night after than they
be now; and therefore he shall have his answer that I will do battle
to-morn with him.

Then was the messenger departed brought before King Mark. Hark, my
fellow, said Sir Tristram, go fast unto thy lord, and bid him make true
assurance on his part for the truage, as the king here shall make on
his part; and then tell thy lord, Sir Elias, that I, Sir Tristram, King
Arthur’s knight, and knight of the Table Round, will as to-morn meet
with thy lord on horseback, to do battle as long as my horse may
endure, and after that to do battle with him on foot to the utterance.
The messenger beheld Sir Tristram from the top to the toe; and
therewithal he departed and came to his lord, and told him how he was
answered of Sir Tristram. And therewithal was made hostage on both
parties, and made it as sure as it might be, that whether party had the
victory, so to end. And then were both hosts assembled on both parts of
the field, without the Castle of Tintagil, and there was none but Sir
Tristram and Sir Elias armed.

So when the appointment was made, they departed in-sunder, and they
came together with all the might that their horses might run. And
either knight smote other so hard that both horses and knights went to
the earth. Not for then they both lightly arose and dressed their
shields on their shoulders, with naked swords in their hands, and they
dashed together that it seemed a flaming fire about them. Thus they
traced, and traversed, and hewed on helms and hauberks, and cut away
many cantels of their shields, and either wounded other passing sore,
so that the hot blood fell freshly upon the earth. And by then they had
foughten the mountenance of an hour Sir Tristram waxed faint and
for-bled, and gave sore aback. That saw Sir Elias, and followed
fiercely upon him, and wounded him in many places. And ever Sir
Tristram traced and traversed, and went froward him here and there, and
covered him with his shield as he might all weakly, that all men said
he was overcome; for Sir Elias had given him twenty strokes against
one.

Then was there laughing of the Sessoins’ party, and great dole on King
Mark’s party. Alas, said the king, we are ashamed and destroyed all for
ever: for as the book saith, Sir Tristram was never so matched, but if
it were Sir Launcelot. Thus as they stood and beheld both parties, that
one party laughing and the other party weeping, Sir Tristram remembered
him of his lady, La Beale Isoud, that looked upon him, and how he was
likely never to come in her presence. Then he pulled up his shield that
erst hung full low. And then he dressed up his shield unto Elias, and
gave him many sad strokes, twenty against one, and all to-brake his
shield and his hauberk, that the hot blood ran down to the earth. Then
began King Mark to laugh, and all Cornish men, and that other party to
weep. And ever Sir Tristram said to Sir Elias: Yield thee.

Then when Sir Tristram saw him so staggering on the ground, he said:
Sir Elias, I am right sorry for thee, for thou art a passing good
knight as ever I met withal, except Sir Launcelot. Therewithal Sir
Elias fell to the earth, and there died. What shall I do, said Sir
Tristram unto King Mark, for this battle is at an end? Then they of
Elias’ party departed, and King Mark took of them many prisoners, to
redress the harms and the scathes that he had of them; and the remnant
he sent into their country to borrow out their fellows. Then was Sir
Tristram searched and well healed. Yet for all this King Mark would
fain have slain Sir Tristram. But for all that ever Sir Tristram saw or
heard by King Mark, yet would he never beware of his treason, but ever
he would be thereas La Beale Isoud was.




