BOOK XVII.




CHAPTER I. How Sir Galahad fought at a tournament, and how he was known
of Sir Gawaine and Sir Ector de Maris.


Now saith this story, when Galahad had rescued Percivale from the
twenty knights, he yede tho into a waste forest wherein he rode many
journeys; and he found many adventures the which he brought to an end,
whereof the story maketh here no mention. Then he took his way to the
sea on a day, and it befell as he passed by a castle where was a wonder
tournament, but they without had done so much that they within were put
to the worse, yet were they within good knights enough. When Galahad
saw that those within were at so great a mischief that men slew them at
the entry of the castle, then he thought to help them, and put a spear
forth and smote the first that he fell to the earth, and the spear
brake to pieces. Then he drew his sword and smote thereas they were
thickest, and so he did wonderful deeds of arms that all they
marvelled. Then it happed that Gawaine and Sir Ector de Maris were with
the knights without. But when they espied the white shield with the red
cross the one said to the other: Yonder is the good knight, Sir
Galahad, the haut prince: now he should be a great fool which should
meet with him to fight. So by adventure he came by Sir Gawaine, and he
smote him so hard that he clave his helm and the coif of iron unto his
head, so that Gawaine fell to the earth; but the stroke was so great
that it slanted down to the earth and carved the horse’s shoulder in
two.

When Ector saw Gawaine down he drew him aside, and thought it no wisdom
for to abide him, and also for natural love, that he was his uncle.
Thus through his great hardiness he beat aback all the knights without.
And then they within came out and chased them all about. But when
Galahad saw there would none turn again he stole away privily, so that
none wist where he was become. Now by my head, said Gawaine to Ector,
now are the wonders true that were said of Launcelot du Lake, that the
sword which stuck in the stone should give me such a buffet that I
would not have it for the best castle in this world; and soothly now it
is proved true, for never ere had I such a stroke of man’s hand. Sir,
said Ector, meseemeth your quest is done. And yours is not done, said
Gawaine, but mine is done, I shall seek no further. Then Gawaine was
borne into a castle and unarmed him, and laid him in a rich bed, and a
leech found that he might live, and to be whole within a month. Thus
Gawaine and Ector abode together, for Sir Ector would not away till
Gawaine were whole.

And the good knight, Galahad, rode so long till he came that night to
the Castle of Carboneck; and it befell him thus that he was benighted
in an hermitage. So the good man was fain when he saw he was a
knight-errant. Tho when they were at rest there came a gentlewoman
knocking at the door, and called Galahad, and so the good man came to
the door to wit what she would. Then she called the hermit: Sir Ulfin,
I am a gentlewoman that would speak with the knight which is with you.
Then the good man awaked Galahad, and bade him: Arise, and speak with a
gentlewoman that seemeth hath great need of you. Then Galahad went to
her and asked her what she would. Galahad, said she, I will that ye arm
you, and mount upon your horse and follow me, for I shall show you
within these three days the highest adventure that ever any knight saw.
Anon Galahad armed him, and took his horse, and commended him to God,
and bade the gentlewoman go, and he would follow thereas she liked.




CHAPTER II. How Sir Galahad rode with a damosel, and came to the ship
whereas Sir Bors and Sir Percivale were in.


So she rode as fast as her palfrey might bear her, till that she came
to the sea, the which was called Collibe. And at the night they came
unto a castle in a valley, closed with a running water, and with strong
walls and high; and so she entered into the castle with Galahad, and
there had he great cheer, for the lady of that castle was the damosel’s
lady. So when he was unarmed, then said the damosel: Madam, shall we
abide here all this day? Nay, said she, but till he hath dined and till
he hath slept a little. So he ate and slept a while till that the maid
called him, and armed him by torchlight. And when the maid was horsed
and he both, the lady took Galahad a fair child and rich; and so they
departed from the castle till they came to the seaside; and there they
found the ship where Bors and Percivale were in, the which cried on the
ship’s board: Sir Galahad, ye be welcome, we have abiden you long. And
when he heard them he asked them what they were. Sir, said she, leave
your horse here, and I shall leave mine; and took their saddles and
their bridles with them, and made a cross on them, and so entered into
the ship. And the two knights received them both with great joy, and
everych knew other; and so the wind arose, and drove them through the
sea in a marvellous pace. And within a while it dawned.

Then did Galahad off his helm and his sword, and asked of his fellows
from whence came that fair ship. Truly, said they, ye wot as well as
we, but of God’s grace; and then they told everych to other of all
their hard adventures, and of their great temptations. Truly, said
Galahad, ye are much bounden to God, for ye have escaped great
adventures; and had not the gentlewoman been I had not come here, for
as for you I weened never to have found you in these strange countries.
Ah Galahad, said Bors, if Launcelot, your father, were here then were
we well at ease, for then meseemed we failed nothing. That may not be,
said Galahad, but if it pleased Our Lord.

By then the ship went from the land of Logris, and by adventure it
arrived up betwixt two rocks passing great and marvellous; but there
they might not land, for there was a swallow of the sea, save there was
another ship, and upon it they might go without danger. Go we thither,
said the gentlewoman, and there shall we see adventures, for so is Our
Lord’s will. And when they came thither they found the ship rich
enough, but they found neither man nor woman therein. But they found in
the end of the ship two fair letters written, which said a dreadful
word and a marvellous: Thou man, which shall enter into this ship,
beware thou be in steadfast belief, for I am Faith, and therefore
beware how thou enterest, for an thou fail I shall not help thee. Then
said the gentlewoman: Percivale, wot ye what I am? Certes, said he,
nay, to my witting. Wit ye well, said she, that I am thy sister, which
am daughter of King Pellinore, and therefore wit ye well ye are the man
in the world that I most love; and if ye be not in perfect belief of
Jesu Christ enter not in no manner of wise, for then should ye perish
the ship, for he is so perfect he will suffer no sinner in him. When
Percivale understood that she was his very sister he was inwardly glad,
and said: Fair sister, I shall enter therein, for if I be a miscreature
or an untrue knight there shall I perish.




