CHAPTER XXXI. How at a great feast that King Mark made an harper came
and sang the lay that Dinadan had made.


Now will we pass of this matter, and speak we of the harpers that Sir
Launcelot and Sir Dinadan had sent into Cornwall. And at the great
feast that King Mark made for joy that the Sessoins were put out of his
country, then came Eliot the harper with the lay that Dinadan had made
and secretly brought it unto Sir Tristram, and told him the lay that
Dinadan had made by King Mark. And when Sir Tristram heard it, he said:
O Lord Jesu, that Dinadan can make wonderly well and ill, thereas it
shall be. Sir, said Eliot, dare I sing this song afore King Mark? Yea,
on my peril, said Sir Tristram, for I shall be thy warrant. Then at the
meat came in Eliot the harper, and because he was a curious harper men
heard him sing the same lay that Dinadan had made, the which spake the
most villainy by King Mark of his treason that ever man heard.

When the harper had sung his song to the end King Mark was wonderly
wroth, and said: Thou harper, how durst thou be so bold on thy head to
sing this song afore me. Sir, said Eliot, wit you well I am a minstrel,
and I must do as I am commanded of these lords that I bear the arms of.
And sir, wit ye well that Sir Dinadan, a knight of the Table Round,
made this song, and made me to sing it afore you. Thou sayest well,
said King Mark, and because thou art a minstrel thou shalt go quit, but
I charge thee hie thee fast out of my sight. So the harper departed and
went to Sir Tristram, and told him how he had sped. Then Sir Tristram
let make letters as goodly as he could to Launcelot and to Sir Dinadan.
And so he let conduct the harper out of the country. But to say that
King Mark was wonderly wroth, he was, for he deemed that the lay that
was sung afore him was made by Sir Tristram’s counsel, wherefore he
thought to slay him and all his well-willers in that country.




CHAPTER XXXII. How King Mark slew by treason his brother Boudwin, for
good service that he had done to him.


Now turn we to another matter that fell between King Mark and his
brother, that was called the good Prince Boudwin, that all the people
of the country loved passing well. So it befell on a time that the
miscreant Saracens landed in the country of Cornwall soon after these
Sessoins were gone. And then the good Prince Boudwin, at the landing,
he raised the country privily and hastily. And or it were day he let
put wildfire in three of his own ships, and suddenly he pulled up the
sail, and with the wind he made those ships to be driven among the navy
of the Saracens. And to make short tale, those three ships set on fire
all the ships, that none were saved. And at point of the day the good
Prince Boudwin with all his fellowship set on the miscreants with
shouts and cries, and slew to the number of forty thousand, and left
none alive.

When King Mark wist this he was wonderly wroth that his brother should
win such worship. And because this prince was better beloved than he in
all that country, and that also Boudwin loved well Sir Tristram,
therefore he thought to slay him. And thus, hastily, as a man out of
his wit, he sent for Prince Boudwin and Anglides his wife, and bade
them bring their young son with them, that he might see him. All this
he did to the intent to slay the child as well as his father, for he
was the falsest traitor that ever was born. Alas, for his goodness and
for his good deeds this gentle Prince Boudwin was slain. So when he
came with his wife Anglides, the king made them fair semblant till they
had dined. And when they had dined King Mark sent for his brother and
said thus: Brother, how sped you when the miscreants arrived by you?
meseemeth it had been your part to have sent me word, that I might have
been at that journey, for it had been reason that I had had the honour
and not you. Sir, said the Prince Boudwin, it was so that an I had
tarried till that I had sent for you those miscreants had destroyed my
country. Thou liest, false traitor, said King Mark, for thou art ever
about for to win worship from me, and put me to dishonour, and thou
cherishest that I hate. And therewith he struck him to the heart with a
dagger, that he never after spake word. Then the Lady Anglides made
great dole, and swooned, for she saw her lord slain afore her face.
Then was there no more to do but Prince Boudwin was despoiled and
brought to burial. But Anglides privily gat her husband’s doublet and
his shirt, and that she kept secretly.

Then was there much sorrow and crying, and great dole made Sir
Tristram, Sir Dinas, Sir Fergus, and so did all knights that were
there; for that prince was passingly well beloved. So La Beale Isoud
sent unto Anglides, the Prince Boudwin’s wife, and bade her avoid
lightly or else her young son, Alisander le Orphelin, should be slain.
When she heard this, she took her horse and her child; and rode with
such poor men as durst ride with her.




CHAPTER XXXIII. How Anglides, Boudwin’s wife, escaped with her young
son, Alisander le Orphelin, and came to the Castle of Arundel.


Notwithstanding, when King Mark had done this deed, yet he thought to
do more vengeance; and with his sword in his hand, he sought from
chamber to chamber, to seek Anglides and her young son. And when she
was missed he called a good knight that hight Sadok, and charged him by
pain of death to fetch Anglides again and her young son. So Sir Sadok
departed and rode after Anglides. And within ten mile he overtook her,
and bade her turn again and ride with him to King Mark. Alas, fair
knight, she said, what shall ye win by my son’s death or by mine? I
have had overmuch harm and too great a loss. Madam, said Sadok, of your
loss is dole and pity; but madam, said Sadok, would ye depart out of
this country with your son, and keep him till he be of age, that he may
revenge his father’s death, then would I suffer you to depart from me,
so you promise me to revenge the death of Prince Boudwin. Ah, gentle
knight, Jesu thank thee, and if ever my son, Alisander le Orphelin,
live to be a knight, he shall have his father’s doublet and his shirt
with the bloody marks, and I shall give him such a charge that he shall
remember it while he liveth. And therewithal Sadok departed from her,
and either betook other to God. And when Sadok came to King Mark he
told him faithfully that he had drowned young Alisander her son; and
thereof King Mark was full glad.

Now turn we unto Anglides, that rode both night and day by adventure
out of Cornwall, and little and in few places she rested; but ever she
drew southward to the seaside, till by fortune she came to a castle
that is called Magouns, and now it is called Arundel, in Sussex. And
the Constable of the castle welcomed her, and said she was welcome to
her own castle; and there was Anglides worshipfully received, for the
Constable’s wife was nigh her cousin, and the Constable’s name was
Bellangere; and that same Constable told Anglides that the same castle
was hers by right inheritance. Thus Anglides endured years and winters,
till Alisander was big and strong; there was none so wight in all that
country, neither there was none that might do no manner of mastery
afore him.




