CHAPTER XX. How it was told Sir Launcelot that Dagonet chased King
Mark, and how a knight overthrew him and six knights.


Now turn we again. When Sir Ganis and Sir Brandiles with his fellows
came to the court of King Arthur they told the king, Sir Launcelot, and
Sir Tristram, how Sir Dagonet, the fool, chased King Mark through the
forest, and how the strong knight smote them down all seven with one
spear. There was great laughing and japing at King Mark and at Sir
Dagonet. But all these knights could not tell what knight it was that
rescued King Mark. Then they asked King Mark if that he knew him, and
he answered and said: He named himself the Knight that followed the
Questing Beast, and on that name he sent one of my varlets to a place
where was his mother; and when she heard from whence he came she made
passing great dole, and discovered to my varlet his name, and said: Oh,
my dear son, Sir Palomides, why wilt thou not see me? And therefore,
sir, said King Mark, it is to understand his name is Sir Palomides, a
noble knight. Then were all these seven knights glad that they knew his
name.

Now turn we again, for on the morn they took their horses, both Sir
Lamorak, Palomides, and Dinadan, with their squires and varlets, till
they saw a fair castle that stood on a mountain well closed, and
thither they rode, and there they found a knight that hight Galahalt,
that was lord of that castle, and there they had great cheer and were
well eased. Sir Dinadan, said Sir Lamorak, what will ye do? Oh sir,
said Dinadan, I will to-morrow to the court of King Arthur. By my head,
said Sir Palomides, I will not ride these three days, for I am sore
hurt, and much have I bled, and therefore I will repose me here. Truly,
said Sir Lamorak, and I will abide here with you; and when ye ride,
then will I ride, unless that ye tarry over long; then will I take my
horse. Therefore I pray you, Sir Dinadan, abide and ride with us.
Faithfully, said Dinadan, I will not abide, for I have such a talent to
see Sir Tristram that I may not abide long from him. Ah, Dinadan, said
Sir Palomides, now do I understand that ye love my mortal enemy, and
therefore how should I trust you. Well, said Dinadan, I love my lord
Sir Tristram, above all other, and him will I serve and do honour. So
shall I, said Sir Lamorak, in all that may lie in my power.

So on the morn Sir Dinadan rode unto the court of King Arthur; and by
the way as he rode he saw where stood an errant knight, and made him
ready for to joust. Not so, said Dinadan, for I have no will to joust.
With me shall ye joust, said the knight, or that ye pass this way.
Whether ask ye jousts, by love or by hate? The knight answered: Wit ye
well I ask it for love, and not for hate. It may well be so, said Sir
Dinadan, but ye proffer me hard love when ye will joust with me with a
sharp spear. But, fair knight, said Sir Dinadan, sith ye will joust
with me, meet with me in the court of King Arthur, and there shall I
joust with you. Well, said the knight, sith ye will not joust with me,
I pray you tell me your name. Sir knight, said he, my name is Sir
Dinadan. Ah, said the knight, full well know I you for a good knight
and a gentle, and wit you well I love you heartily. Then shall there be
no jousts, said Dinadan, betwixt us. So they departed. And the same day
he came to Camelot, where lay King Arthur. And there he saluted the
king and the queen, Sir Launcelot, and Sir Tristram; and all the court
was glad of Sir Dinadan, for he was gentle, wise, and courteous, and a
good knight. And in especial, the valiant knight Sir Tristram loved Sir
Dinadan passing well above all other knights save Sir Launcelot.

Then the king asked Sir Dinadan what adventures he had seen. Sir, said
Dinadan, I have seen many adventures, and of some King Mark knoweth,
but not all. Then the king hearkened Sir Dinadan, how he told that Sir
Palomides and he were afore the castle of Morgan le Fay, and how Sir
Lamorak took the jousts afore them, and how he forjousted twelve
knights, and of them four he slew, and how after he smote down Sir
Palomides and me both. t I may not believe that, said the king, for Sir
Palomides is a passing good knight. That is very truth, said Sir
Dinadan, but yet I saw him better proved, hand for hand. And then he
told the king all that battle, and how Sir Palomides was more weaker,
and more hurt, and more lost of his blood. And without doubt, said Sir
Dinadan, had the battle longer lasted, Palomides had been slain. O
Jesu, said King Arthur, this is to me a great marvel. Sir, said
Tristram, marvel ye nothing thereof, for at mine advice there is not a
valianter knight in the world living, for I know his might. And now I
will say you, I was never so weary of knight but if it were Sir
Launcelot. And there is no knight in the world except Sir Launcelot
that did so well as Sir Lamorak. So God me help, said the king, I would
that knight, Sir Lamorak, came to this Court. Sir, said Dinadan, he
will be here in short space, and Sir Palomides both, but I fear that
Palomides may not yet travel.




CHAPTER XXI. How King Arthur let do cry a jousts, and how Sir Lamorak
came in, and overthrew Sir Gawaine and many other.


Then within three days after the king let make a jousting at a priory.
And there made them ready many knights of the Round Table, for Sir
Gawaine and his brethren made them ready to joust; but Tristram,
Launcelot, nor Dinadan, would not joust, but suffered Sir Gawaine, for
the love of King Arthur, with his brethren, to win the gree if they
might. Then on the morn they apparelled them to joust, Sir Gawaine and
his four brethren, and did there great deeds of arms. And Sir Ector de
Maris did marvellously well, but Sir Gawaine passed all that
fellowship; wherefore King Arthur and all the knights gave Sir Gawaine
the honour at the beginning.

Right so King Arthur was ware of a knight and two squires, the which
came out of a forest side, with a shield covered with leather, and then
he came slyly and hurtled here and there, and anon with one spear he
had smitten down two knights of the Round Table. Then with his hurtling
he lost the covering of his shield, then was the king and all other
ware that he bare a red shield. O Jesu, said King Arthur, see where
rideth a stout knight, he with the red shield. And there was noise and
crying: Beware the Knight with the Red Shield. So within a little while
he had overthrown three brethren of Sir Gawaine’s. So God me help, said
King Arthur, meseemeth yonder is the best jouster that ever I saw. With
that he saw him encounter with Sir Gawaine, and he smote him down with
so great force that he made his horse to avoid his saddle. How now,
said the king, Sir Gawaine hath a fall; well were me an I knew what
knight he were with the red shield. I know him well, said Dinadan, but
as at this time ye shall not know his name. By my head, said Sir
Tristram, he jousted better than Sir Palomides, and if ye list to know
his name, wit ye well his name is Sir Lamorak de Galis.

As they stood thus talking, Sir Gawaine and he encountered together
again, and there he smote Sir Gawaine from his horse, and bruised him
sore. And in the sight of King Arthur he smote down twenty knights,
beside Sir Gawaine and his brethren. And so clearly was the prize given
him as a knight peerless. Then slyly and marvellously Sir Lamorak
withdrew him from all the fellowship into the forest side. All this
espied King Arthur, for his eye went never from him. Then the king, Sir
Launcelot, Sir Tristram, and Sir Dinadan, took their hackneys, and rode
straight after the good knight, Sir Lamorak de Galis, and there found
him. And thus said the king: Ah, fair knight, well be ye found. When he
saw the king he put off his helm and saluted him, and when he saw Sir
Tristram he alighted down off his horse and ran to him to take him by
the thighs, but Sir Tristram would not suffer him, but he alighted or
that he came, and either took other in arms, and made great joy of
other. The king was glad, and also was all the fellowship of the Round
Table, except Sir Gawaine and his brethren. And when they wist that he
was Sir Lamorak, they had great despite at him, and were wonderly wroth
with him that he had put him to dishonour that day.

Then Gawaine called privily in council all his brethren, and to them
said thus: Fair brethren, here may ye see, whom that we hate King
Arthur loveth, and whom that we love he hateth. And wit ye well, my
fair brethren, that this Sir Lamorak will never love us, because we
slew his father, King Pellinore, for we deemed that he slew our father,
King of Orkney. And for the despite of Pellinore, Sir Lamorak did us a
shame to our mother, therefore I will be revenged. Sir, said Sir
Gawaine’s brethren, let see how ye will or may be revenged, and ye
shall find us ready. Well, said Gawaine, hold you still and we shall
espy our time.




