CHAPTER LXX. How Sir Tristram changed his harness and it was all red,
and how he demeaned him, and how Sir Palomides slew Launcelot’s horse.


And when the queen La Beale Isoud saw that Sir Tristram was unhorsed,
and she wist not where he was, then she wept greatly. But Sir Tristram,
when he was ready, came dashing lightly into the field, and then La
Beale Isoud espied him. And so he did great deeds of arms; with one
spear, that was great, Sir Tristram smote down five knights or ever he
stint. Then Sir Launcelot espied him readily, that it was Sir Tristram,
and then he repented him that he had smitten him down; and so Sir
Launcelot went out of the press to repose him and lightly he came
again. And now when Sir Tristram came into the press, through his great
force he put Sir Palomides upon his horse, and Sir Gareth, and Sir
Dinadan, and then they began to do marvellously; but Sir Palomides nor
none of his two fellows knew not who had holpen them on horseback
again. But ever Sir Tristram was nigh them and succoured them, and they
[knew] not him, because he was changed into red armour: and all this
while Sir Launcelot was away.

So when La Beale Isoud knew Sir Tristram again upon his horse-back she
was passing glad, and then she laughed and made good cheer. And as it
happened, Sir Palomides looked up toward her where she lay in the
window, and he espied how she laughed; and therewith he took such a
rejoicing that he smote down, what with his spear and with his sword,
all that ever he met; for through the sight of her he was so enamoured
in her love that he seemed at that time, that an both Sir Tristram and
Sir Launcelot had been both against him they should have won no worship
of him; and in his heart, as the book saith, Sir Palomides wished that
with his worship he might have ado with Sir Tristram before all men,
because of La Beale Isoud. Then Sir Palomides began to double his
strength, and he did so marvellously that all men had wonder of him,
and ever he cast up his eye unto La Beale Isoud. And when he saw her
make such cheer he fared like a lion, that there might no man withstand
him; and then Sir Tristram beheld him, how that Sir Palomides bestirred
him; and then he said unto Sir Dinadan: So God me help, Sir Palomides
is a passing good knight and a well enduring, but such deeds saw I him
never do, nor never heard I tell that ever he did so much in one day.
It is his day, said Dinadan; and he would say no more unto Sir
Tristram; but to himself he said: An if ye knew for whose love he doth
all those deeds of arms, soon would Sir Tristram abate his courage.
Alas, said Sir Tristram, that Sir Palomides is not christened. So said
King Arthur, and so said all those that beheld him. Then all people
gave him the prize, as for the best knight that day, that he passed Sir
Launcelot outher Sir Tristram. Well, said Dinadan to himself, all this
worship that Sir Palomides hath here this day he may thank the Queen
Isoud, for had she been away this day Sir Palomides had not gotten the
prize this day.

Right so came into the field Sir Launcelot du Lake, and saw and heard
the noise and cry and the great worship that Sir Palomides had. He
dressed him against Sir Palomides, with a great mighty spear and a
long, and thought to smite him down. And when Sir Palomides saw Sir
Launcelot come upon him so fast, he ran upon Sir Launcelot as fast with
his sword as he might; and as Sir Launcelot should have stricken him he
smote his spear aside, and smote it a-two with his sword. And Sir
Palomides rushed unto Sir Launcelot, and thought to have put him to a
shame; and with his sword he smote his horse’s neck that Sir Launcelot
rode upon, and then Sir Launcelot fell to the earth. Then was the cry
huge and great: See how Sir Palomides the Saracen hath smitten down Sir
Launcelot’s horse. Right then were there many knights wroth with Sir
Palomides because he had done that deed; therefore many knights held
there against that it was unknightly done in a tournament to kill an
horse wilfully, but that it had been done in plain battle, life for
life.




CHAPTER LXXI. How Sir Launcelot said to Sir Palomides, and how the
prize of that day was given unto Sir Palomides.


When Sir Ector de Maris saw Sir Launcelot his brother have such a
despite, and so set on foot, then he gat a spear eagerly, and ran
against Sir Palomides, and he smote him so hard that he bare him quite
from his horse. That saw Sir Tristram, that was in red harness, and he
smote down Sir Ector de Maris quite from his horse. Then Sir Launcelot
dressed his shield upon his shoulder, and with his sword naked in his
hand, and so came straight upon Sir Palomides fiercely and said: Wit
thou well thou hast done me this day the greatest despite that ever any
worshipful knight did to me in tournament or in jousts, and therefore I
will be avenged upon thee, therefore take keep to yourself. Ah, mercy,
noble knight, said Palomides, and forgive me mine unkindly deeds, for I
have no power nor might to withstand you, and I have done so much this
day that well I wot I did never so much, nor never shall in my
life-days; and therefore, most noble knight, I require thee spare me as
at this day, and I promise you I shall ever be your knight while I
live: an ye put me from my worship now, ye put me from the greatest
worship that ever I had or ever shall have in my life-days. Well, said
Sir Launcelot, I see, for to say thee sooth, ye have done marvellously
well this day; and I understand a part for whose love ye do it, and
well I wot that love is a great mistress. And if my lady were here as
she nis not, wit you well, said Sir Launcelot, ye should not bear away
the worship. But beware your love be not discovered, for an Sir
Tristram may know it ye will repent it; and sithen my quarrel is not
here, ye shall have this day the worship as for me; considering the
great travail and pain that ye have had this day, it were no worship
for me to put you from it. And therewithal Sir Launcelot suffered Sir
Palomides to depart.

Then Sir Launcelot by great force and might gat his own horse maugre
twenty knights. So when Sir Launcelot was horsed he did many marvels,
and so did Sir Tristram, and Sir Palomides in like wise. Then Sir
Launcelot smote down with a spear Sir Dinadan, and the King of
Scotland, and the King of Wales, and the King of Northumberland, and
the King of Listinoise. So then Sir Launcelot and his fellows smote
down well a forty knights. Then came the King of Ireland and the King
of the Straight Marches to rescue Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides. There
began a great medley, and many knights were smitten down on both
parties; and always Sir Launcelot spared Sir Tristram, and he spared
him. And Sir Palomides would not meddle with Sir Launcelot, and so
there was hurtling here and there. And then King Arthur sent out many
knights of the Table Round; and Sir Palomides was ever in the foremost
front, and Sir Tristram did so strongly well that the king and all
other had marvel. And then the king let blow to lodging; and because
Sir Palomides began first, and never he went nor rode out of the field
to repose, but ever he was doing marvellously well either on foot or on
horseback, and longest during, King Arthur and all the kings gave Sir
Palomides the honour and the gree as for that day.

Then Sir Tristram commanded Sir Dinadan to fetch the queen La Beale
Isoud, and bring her to his two pavilions that stood by the well. And
so Dinadan did as he was commanded. But when Sir Palomides understood
and wist that Sir Tristram was in the red armour, and on a red horse,
wit ye well that he was glad, and so was Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan,
for they all weened that Sir Tristram had been taken prisoner. And then
every knight drew to his inn. And then King Arthur and every knight
spake of those knights; but above all men they gave Sir Palomides the
prize, and all knights that knew Sir Palomides had wonder of his deeds.
Sir, said Sir Launcelot unto Arthur, as for Sir Palomides an he be the
green knight I dare say as for this day he is best worthy to have the
degree, for he reposed him never, nor never changed his weeds, and he
began first and longest held on. And yet, well I wot, said Sir
Launcelot, that there was a better knight than he, and that shall be
proved or we depart, upon pain of my life. Thus they talked on either
party; and so Sir Dinadan railed with Sir Tristram and said: What the
devil is upon thee this day? for Sir Palomides’ strength feebled never
this day, but ever he doubled his strength.




