CHAPTER IX. How Sir Launcelot rode to Astolat, and received a sleeve to
wear upon his helm at the request of a maid.


Madam, said Sir Launcelot, I allow your wit, it is of late come since
ye were wise. And therefore, madam, at this time I will be ruled by
your counsel, and this night I will take my rest, and to-morrow by time
I will take my way toward Winchester. But wit you well, said Sir
Launcelot to the queen, that at that jousts I will be against the king,
and against all his fellowship. Ye may there do as ye list, said the
queen, but by my counsel ye shall not be against your king and your
fellowship. For therein be full many hard knights of your blood, as ye
wot well enough, it needeth not to rehearse them. Madam, said Sir
Launcelot, I pray you that ye be not displeased with me, for I will
take the adventure that God will send me.

And so upon the morn early Sir Launcelot heard mass and brake his fast,
and so took his leave of the queen and departed. And then he rode so
much until he came to Astolat, that is Guildford; and there it happed
him in the eventide he came to an old baron’s place that hight Sir
Bernard of Astolat. And as Sir Launcelot entered into his lodging, King
Arthur espied him as he did walk in a garden beside the castle, how he
took his lodging, and knew him full well. It is well, said King Arthur
unto the knights that were with him in that garden beside the castle, I
have now espied one knight that will play his play at the jousts to the
which we be gone toward; I undertake he will do marvels. Who is that,
we pray you tell us? said many knights that were there at that time. Ye
shall not wit for me, said the king, as at this time. And so the king
smiled, and went to his lodging.

So when Sir Launcelot was in his lodging, and unarmed him in his
chamber, the old baron and hermit came to him making his reverence, and
welcomed him in the best manner; but the old knight knew not Sir
Launcelot. Fair sir, said Sir Launcelot to his host, I would pray you
to lend me a shield that were not openly known, for mine is well known.
Sir, said his host, ye shall have your desire, for meseemeth ye be one
of the likeliest knights of the world, and therefore I shall shew you
friendship. Sir, wit you well I have two sons that were but late made
knights, and the eldest hight Sir Tirre, and he was hurt that same day
he was made knight, that he may not ride, and his shield ye shall have;
for that is not known I dare say but here, and in no place else. And my
youngest son hight Lavaine, and if it please you, he shall ride with
you unto that jousts; and he is of his age strong and wight, for much
my heart giveth unto you that ye should be a noble knight, therefore I
pray you, tell me your name, said Sir Bernard. As for that, said Sir
Launcelot, ye must hold me excused as at this time, and if God give me
grace to speed well at the jousts I shall come again and tell you. But
I pray you, said Sir Launcelot, in any wise let me have your son, Sir
Lavaine, with me, and that I may have his brother’s shield. All this
shall be done, said Sir Bernard.

This old baron had a daughter that was called that time the Fair Maiden
of Astolat. And ever she beheld Sir Launcelot wonderfully; and as the
book saith, she cast such a love unto Sir Launcelot that she could
never withdraw her love, wherefore she died, and her name was Elaine le
Blank. So thus as she came to and fro she was so hot in her love that
she besought Sir Launcelot to wear upon him at the jousts a token of
hers. Fair damosel, said Sir Launcelot, an if I grant you that, ye may
say I do more for your love than ever I did for lady or damosel. Then
he remembered him he would go to the jousts disguised. And because he
had never fore that time borne no manner of token of no damosel, then
he bethought him that he would bear one of her, that none of his blood
thereby might know him, and then he said: Fair maiden, I will grant you
to wear a token of yours upon mine helmet, and therefore what it is,
shew it me. Sir, she said, it is a red sleeve of mine, of scarlet, well
embroidered with great pearls: and so she brought it him. So Sir
Launcelot received it, and said: Never did I erst so much for no
damosel. And then Sir Launcelot betook the fair maiden his shield in
keeping, and prayed her to keep that until that he came again; and so
that night he had merry rest and great cheer, for ever the damosel
Elaine was about Sir Launcelot all the while she might be suffered.




CHAPTER X. How the tourney began at Winchester, and what knights were
at the jousts; and other things.


So upon a day, on the morn, King Arthur and all his knights departed,
for their king had tarried three days to abide his noble knights. And
so when the king was ridden, Sir Launcelot and Sir Lavaine made them
ready to ride, and either of them had white shields, and the red sleeve
Sir Launcelot let carry with him. And so they took their leave at Sir
Bernard, the old baron, and at his daughter, the Fair Maiden of
Astolat. And then they rode so long till that they came to Camelot,
that time called Winchester; and there was great press of kings, dukes
earls, and barons, and many noble knights. But there Sir Launcelot was
lodged privily by the means of Sir Lavaine with a rich burgess, that no
man in that town was ware what they were. And so they reposed them
there till our Lady Day, Assumption, as the great feast should be. So
then trumpets blew unto the field, and King Arthur was set on high upon
a scaffold to behold who did best. But as the French book saith, the
king would not suffer Sir Gawaine to go from him, for never had Sir
Gawaine the better an Sir Launcelot were in the field; and many times
was Sir Gawaine rebuked when Launcelot came into any jousts disguised.

Then some of the kings, as King Anguish of Ireland and the King of
Scots, were that time turned upon the side of King Arthur. And then on
the other party was the King of Northgalis, and the King with the
Hundred Knights, and the King of Northumberland, and Sir Galahad, the
haut prince. But these three kings and this duke were passing weak to
hold against King Arthur’s party, for with him were the noblest knights
of the world. So then they withdrew them either party from other, and
every man made him ready in his best manner to do what he might.

Then Sir Launcelot made him ready, and put the red sleeve upon his
head, and fastened it fast; and so Sir Launcelot and Sir Lavaine
departed out of Winchester privily, and rode until a little leaved wood
behind the party that held against King Arthur’s party, and there they
held them still till the parties smote together. And then came in the
King of Scots and the King of Ireland on Arthur’s party, and against
them came the King of Northumberland, and the King with the Hundred
Knights smote down the King of Northumberland, and the King with the
Hundred Knights smote down King Anguish of Ireland. Then Sir Palomides
that was on Arthur’s party encountered with Sir Galahad, and either of
them smote down other, and either party halp their lords on horseback
again. So there began a strong assail upon both parties. And then came
in Sir Brandiles, Sir Sagramore le Desirous, Sir Dodinas le Savage, Sir
Kay le Seneschal, Sir Griflet le Fise de Dieu, Sir Mordred, Sir Meliot
de Logris, Sir Ozanna le Cure Hardy, Sir Safere, Sir Epinogris, Sir
Galleron of Galway. All these fifteen knights were knights of the Table
Round. So these with more other came in together, and beat aback the
King of Northumberland and the King of Northgalis. When Sir Launcelot
saw this, as he hoved in a little leaved wood, then he said unto Sir
Lavaine: See yonder is a company of good knights, and they hold them
together as boars that were chafed with dogs. That is truth, said Sir
Lavaine.




