CHAPTER X. How Sir Launcelot came to the hermitage where the Archbishop
of Canterbury was, and how he took the habit on him.


But sithen I find you thus disposed, I ensure you faithfully, I will
ever take me to penance, and pray while my life lasteth, if I may find
any hermit, either gray or white, that will receive me. Wherefore,
madam, I pray you kiss me and never no more. Nay, said the queen, that
shall I never do, but abstain you from such works: and they departed.
But there was never so hard an hearted man but he would have wept to
see the dolour that they made; for there was lamentation as they had
been stung with spears; and many times they swooned, and the ladies
bare the queen to her chamber.

And Sir Launcelot awoke, and went and took his horse, and rode all that
day and all night in a forest, weeping. And at the last he was ware of
an hermitage and a chapel stood betwixt two cliffs; and then he heard a
little bell ring to mass, and thither he rode and alighted, and tied
his horse to the gate, and heard mass. And he that sang mass was the
Bishop of Canterbury. Both the Bishop and Sir Bedivere knew Sir
Launcelot, and they spake together after mass. But when Sir Bedivere
had told his tale all whole, Sir Launcelot’s heart almost brast for
sorrow, and Sir Launcelot threw his arms abroad, and said: Alas, who
may trust this world. And then he kneeled down on his knee, and prayed
the Bishop to shrive him and assoil him. And then he besought the
Bishop that he might be his brother. Then the Bishop said: I will
gladly; and there he put an habit upon Sir Launcelot, and there he
served God day and night with prayers and fastings.

Thus the great host abode at Dover. And then Sir Lionel took fifteen
lords with him, and rode to London to seek Sir Launcelot; and there Sir
Lionel was slain and many of his lords. Then Sir Bors de Ganis made the
great host for to go home again; and Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir
Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, with more other of Sir Launcelot’s kin, took on
them to ride all England overthwart and endlong, to seek Sir Launcelot.
So Sir Bors by fortune rode so long till he came to the same chapel
where Sir Launcelot was; and so Sir Bors heard a little bell knell,
that rang to mass; and there he alighted and heard mass. And when mass
was done, the Bishop Sir Launcelot, and Sir Bedivere, came to Sir Bors.
And when Sir Bors saw Sir Launcelot in that manner clothing, then he
prayed the Bishop that he might be in the same suit. And so there was
an habit put upon him, and there he lived in prayers and fasting. And
within half a year, there was come Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir
Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Villiars, Sir Clarras, and Sir Gahalantine.
So all these seven noble knights there abode still. And when they saw
Sir Launcelot had taken him to such perfection, they had no lust to
depart, but took such an habit as he had.

Thus they endured in great penance six year; and then Sir Launcelot
took the habit of priesthood of the Bishop, and a twelvemonth he sang
mass. And there was none of these other knights but they read in books,
and holp for to sing mass, and rang bells, and did bodily all manner of
service. And so their horses went where they would, for they took no
regard of no worldly riches. For when they saw Sir Launcelot endure
such penance, in prayers, and fastings, they took no force what pain
they endured, for to see the noblest knight of the world take such
abstinence that he waxed full lean. And thus upon a night, there came a
vision to Sir Launcelot, and charged him, in remission of his sins, to
haste him unto Almesbury: And by then thou come there, thou shalt find
Queen Guenever dead. And therefore take thy fellows with thee, and
purvey them of an horse bier, and fetch thou the corpse of her, and
bury her by her husband, the noble King Arthur. So this avision came to
Sir Launcelot thrice in one night.




CHAPTER XI. How Sir Launcelot went with his seven fellows to Almesbury,
and found there Queen Guenever dead, whom they brought to Glastonbury.


Then Sir Launcelot rose up or day, and told the hermit. It were well
done, said the hermit, that ye made you ready, and that you disobey not
the avision. Then Sir Launcelot took his eight fellows with him, and on
foot they yede from Glastonbury to Almesbury, the which is little more
than thirty mile. And thither they came within two days, for they were
weak and feeble to go. And when Sir Launcelot was come to Almesbury
within the nunnery, Queen Guenever died but half an hour afore. And the
ladies told Sir Launcelot that Queen Guenever told them all or she
passed, that Sir Launcelot had been priest near a twelvemonth, And
hither he cometh as fast as he may to fetch my corpse; and beside my
lord, King Arthur, he shall bury me. Wherefore the queen said in
hearing of them all: I beseech Almighty God that I may never have power
to see Sir Launcelot with my worldly eyen; and thus, said all the
ladies, was ever her prayer these two days, till she was dead. Then Sir
Launcelot saw her visage, but he wept not greatly, but sighed. And so
he did all the observance of the service himself, both the dirige, and
on the morn he sang mass. And there was ordained an horse bier; and so
with an hundred torches ever brenning about the corpse of the queen,
and ever Sir Launcelot with his eight fellows went about the horse
bier, singing and reading many an holy orison, and frankincense upon
the corpse incensed. Thus Sir Launcelot and his eight fellows went on
foot from Almesbury unto Glastonbury.

And when they were come to the chapel and the hermitage, there she had
a dirige, with great devotion. And on the morn the hermit that sometime
was Bishop of Canterbury sang the mass of Requiem with great devotion.
And Sir Launcelot was the first that offered, and then also his eight
fellows. And then she was wrapped in cered cloth of Raines, from the
top to the toe, in thirtyfold, and after she was put in a web of lead,
and then in a coffin of marble. And when she was put in the earth Sir
Launcelot swooned, and lay long still, while the hermit came and awaked
him, and said: Ye be to blame, for ye displease God with such manner of
sorrow-making. Truly, said Sir Launcelot, I trust I do not displease
God, for He knoweth mine intent. For my sorrow was not, nor is not for
any rejoicing of sin, but my sorrow may never have end. For when I
remember of her beauty, and of her noblesse, that was both with her
king and with her, so when I saw his corpse and her corpse so lie
together, truly mine heart would not serve to sustain my careful body.
Also when I remember me how by my default, mine orgule and my pride,
that they were both laid full low, that were peerless that ever was
living of Christian people, wit you well, said Sir Launcelot, this
remembered, of their kindness and mine unkindness, sank so to mine
heart, that I might not sustain myself. So the French book maketh
mention.




