CHAPTER IX. How King Mark, Sir Lamorak, and Sir Dinadan came to a
castle, and how King Mark was known there.


Then they rode forth all together, King Mark, Sir Lamorak, and Sir
Dinadan, till that they came to a bridge, and at the end thereof stood
a fair tower. Then saw they a knight on horseback well armed,
brandishing a spear, crying and proffering himself to joust. Now, said
Sir Dinadan unto King Mark, yonder are two brethren, that one hight
Alein, and the other hight Trian, that will joust with any that passeth
this passage. Now proffer yourself, said Dinadan to King Mark, for ever
ye be laid to the earth. Then King Mark was ashamed, and therewith he
feutred his spear, and hurtled to Sir Trian, and either brake their
spears all to pieces, and passed through anon. Then Sir Trian sent King
Mark another spear to joust more; but in no wise he would not joust no
more. Then they came to the castle all three knights, and prayed the
lord of the castle of harbour. Ye are right welcome, said the knights
of the castle, for the love of the lord of this castle, the which hight
Sir Tor le Fise Aries. And then they came into a fair court well
repaired, and they had passing good cheer, till the lieutenant of this
castle, that hight Berluse, espied King Mark of Cornwall. Then said
Berluse: Sir knight, I know you better than you ween, for ye are King
Mark that slew my father afore mine own eyen; and me had ye slain had I
not escaped into a wood; but wit ye well, for the love of my lord of
this castle I will neither hurt you nor harm you, nor none of your
fellowship. But wit ye well, when ye are past this lodging I shall hurt
you an I may, for ye slew my father traitorly. But first for the love
of my lord, Sir Tor, and for the love of Sir Lamorak, the honourable
knight that here is lodged, ye shall have none ill lodging; for it is
pity that ever ye should be in the company of good knights; for ye are
the most villainous knight or king that is now known alive, for ye are
a destroyer of good knights, and all that ye do is but treason.




CHAPTER X. How Sir Berluse met with King Mark, and how Sir Dinadan took
his part.


Then was King Mark sore ashamed, and said but little again. But when
Sir Lamorak and Sir Dinadan wist that he was King Mark they were sorry
of his fellowship. So after supper they went to lodging. So on the morn
they arose early, and King Mark and Sir Dinadan rode together; and
three mile from their lodging there met with them three knights, and
Sir Berluse was one, and that other his two cousins. Sir Berluse saw
King Mark, and then he cried on high: Traitor, keep thee from me for
wit thou well that I am Berluse. Sir knight, said Sir Dinadan, I
counsel you to leave off at this time, for he is riding to King Arthur;
and because I have promised to conduct him to my lord King Arthur needs
must I take a part with him; howbeit I love not his condition, and fain
I would be from him. Well, Dinadan, said Sir Berluse, me repenteth that
ye will take part with him, but now do your best. And then he hurtled
to King Mark, and smote him sore upon the shield, that he bare him
clean out of his saddle to the earth. That saw Sir Dinadan, and he
feutred his spear, and ran to one of Berluse’s fellows, and smote him
down off his saddle. Then Dinadan turned his horse, and smote the third
knight in the same wise to the earth, for Sir Dinadan was a good knight
on horseback; and there began a great battle, for Berluse and his
fellows held them together strongly on foot. And so through the great
force of Sir Dinadan King Mark had Berluse to the earth, and his two
fellows fled; and had not been Sir Dinadan King Mark would have slain
him. And so Sir Dinadan rescued him of his life, for King Mark was but
a murderer. And then they took their horses and departed and left Sir
Berluse there sore wounded.

Then King Mark and Sir Dinadan rode forth a four leagues English, till
that they came to a bridge where hoved a knight on horseback, armed and
ready to joust. Lo, said Sir Dinadan unto King Mark, yonder hoveth a
knight that will joust, for there shall none pass this bridge but he
must joust with that knight. It is well, said King Mark, for this
jousts falleth with thee. Sir Dinadan knew the knight well that he was
a noble knight, and fain he would have jousted, but he had had liefer
King Mark had jousted with him, but by no mean King Mark would not
joust. Then Sir Dinadan might not refuse him in no manner. And then
either dressed their spears and their shields, and smote together, so
that through fine force Sir Dinadan was smitten to the earth; and
lightly he rose up and gat his horse, and required that knight to do
battle with swords. And he answered and said: Fair knight, as at this
time I may not have ado with you no more, for the custom of this
passage is such. Then was Sir Dinadan passing wroth that he might not
be revenged of that knight; and so he departed, and in no wise would
that knight tell his name. But ever Sir Dinadan thought he should know
him by his shield that it should be Sir Tor.




CHAPTER XI. How King Mark mocked Sir Dinadan, and how they met with six
knights of the Round Table.


So as they rode by the way King Mark then began to mock Sir Dinadan,
and said: I weened you knights of the Table Round might not in no wise
find their matches. Ye say well, said Sir Dinadan; as for you, on my
life I call you none of the best knights; but sith ye have such a
despite at me I require you to joust with me to prove my strength. Not
so, said King Mark, for I will not have ado with you in no manner; but
I require you of one thing, that when ye come to Arthur’s court
discover not my name, for I am there so hated. It is shame to you, said
Sir Dinadan, that ye govern you so shamefully; for I see by you ye are
full of cowardice, and ye are a murderer, and that is the greatest
shame that a knight may have; for never a knight being a murderer hath
worship, nor never shall have; for I saw but late through my force ye
would have slain Sir Berluse, a better knight than ye, or ever ye shall
be, and more of prowess. Thus they rode forth talking till they came to
a fair place, where stood a knight, and prayed them to take their
lodging with him. So at the request of that knight they reposed them
there, and made them well at ease, and had great cheer. For all
errant-knights were welcome to him, and specially all those of Arthur’s
court. Then Sir Dinadan demanded his host what was the knight’s name
that kept the bridge. For what cause ask you it? said the host. For it
is not long ago, said Sir Dinadan, sithen he gave me a fall. Ah, fair
knight, said his host, thereof have ye no marvel, for he is a passing
good knight, and his name is Sir Tor, the son of Aries le Vaysher. Ah,
said Sir Dinadan, was that Sir Tor? for truly so ever me thought.

Right as they stood thus talking together they saw come riding to them
over a plain six knights of the court of King Arthur, well armed at all
points. And there by their shields Sir Dinadan knew them well. The
first was the good knight Sir Uwaine, the son of King Uriens, the
second was the noble knight Sir Brandiles, the third was Ozana le Cure
Hardy, the fourth was Uwaine les Aventurous, the fifth was Sir
Agravaine, the sixth Sir Mordred, brother to Sir Gawaine. When Sir
Dinadan had seen these six knights he thought in himself he would bring
King Mark by some wile to joust with one of them. And anon they took
their horses and ran after these knights well a three mile English.
Then was King Mark ware where they sat all six about a well, and ate
and drank such meats as they had, and their horses walking and some
tied, and their shields hung in divers places about them. Lo, said Sir
Dinadan, yonder are knights-errant that will joust with us. God forbid,
said King Mark, for they be six and we but two. As for that, said Sir
Dinadan, let us not spare, for I will assay the foremost; and therewith
he made him ready. When King Mark saw him do so, as fast as Sir Dinadan
rode toward them, King Mark rode froward them with all his menial
meiny. So when Sir Dinadan saw King Mark was gone, he set the spear out
of the rest, and threw his shield upon his back, and came, riding to
the fellowship of the Table Round. And anon Sir Uwaine knew Sir
Dinadan, and welcomed him, and so did all his fellowship.




