CHAPTER XIV. How King Mark and Sir Dinadan heard Sir Palomides making
great sorrow and mourning for La Beale Isoud.


Now turn we unto Sir Dinadan, that found these seven knights passing
heavy. And when he wist how that they sped, as heavy was he. My lord
Uwaine, said Dinadan, I dare lay my head it is Sir Lamorak de Galis. I
promise you all I shall find him an he may be found in this country.
And so Sir Dinadan rode after this knight; and so did King Mark, that
sought him through the forest. So as King Mark rode after Sir Palomides
he heard the noise of a man that made great dole. Then King Mark rode
as nigh that noise as he might and as he durst. Then was he ware of a
knight that was descended off his horse, and had put off his helm, and
there he made a piteous complaint and a dolorous, of love.

Now leave we that, and talk we of Sir Dinadan, that rode to seek Sir
Palomides. And as he came within a forest he met with a knight, a
chaser of a deer. Sir, said Sir Dinadan, met ye with a knight with a
shield of silver and lions’ heads? Yea, fair knight, said the other,
with such a knight met I with but a while agone, and straight yonder
way he yede. Gramercy, said Sir Dinadan, for might I find the track of
his horse I should not fail to find that knight. Right so as Sir
Dinadan rode in the even late he heard a doleful noise as it were of a
man. Then Sir Dinadan rode toward that noise; and when he came nigh
that noise he alighted off his horse, and went near him on foot. Then
was he ware of a knight that stood under a tree, and his horse tied by
him, and the helm off his head; and ever that knight made a doleful
complaint as ever made knight. And always he made his complaint of La
Beale Isoud, the Queen of Cornwall, and said: Ah, fair lady, why love I
thee! for thou art fairest of all other, and yet showest thou never
love to me, nor bounty. Alas, yet must I love thee. And I may not blame
thee, fair lady, for mine eyes be cause of this sorrow. And yet to love
thee I am but a fool, for the best knight of the world loveth thee, and
ye him again, that is Sir Tristram de Liones. And the falsest king and
knight is your husband, and the most coward and full of treason, is
your lord, King Mark. Alas, that ever so fair a lady and peerless of
all other should be matched with the most villainous knight of the
world. All this language heard King Mark, what Sir Palomides said by
him; wherefore he was adread when he saw Sir Dinadan, lest he espied
him, that he would tell Sir Palomides that he was King Mark; and
therefore he withdrew him, and took his horse and rode to his men,
where he commanded them to abide. And so he rode as fast as he might
unto Camelot; and the same day he found there Amant, the knight, ready
that afore Arthur had appealed him of treason; and so, lightly the king
commanded them to do battle. And by misadventure King Mark smote Amant
through the body. And yet was Amant in the righteous quarrel. And right
so he took his horse and departed from the court for dread of Sir
Dinadan, that he would tell Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides what he was.
Then were there maidens that La Beale Isoud had sent to Sir Tristram,
that knew Sir Amant well.




CHAPTER XV. How King Mark had slain Sir Amant wrongfully to-fore King
Arthur, and Sir Launcelot fetched King Mark to King Arthur.


Then by the license of King Arthur they went to him and spake with him;
for while the truncheon of the spear stuck in his body he spake: Ah,
fair damosels, said Amant, recommend me unto La Beale Isoud, and tell
her that I am slain for the love of her and of Sir Tristram. And there
he told the damosels how cowardly King Mark had slain him, and Sir
Bersules, his fellow. And for that deed I appealed him of treason, and
here am I slain in a righteous quarrel; and all was because Sir
Bersules and I would not consent by treason to slay the noble knight,
Sir Tristram. Then the two maidens cried aloud that all the court might
hear it, and said: O sweet Lord Jesu, that knowest all hid things, why
sufferest Thou so false a traitor to vanquish and slay a true knight
that fought in a righteous quarrel? Then anon it was sprung to the
king, and the queen, and to all the lords, that it was King Mark that
had slain Sir Amant, and Sir Bersules afore hand; wherefore they did
their battle. Then was King Arthur wroth out of measure, and so were
all the other knights. But when Sir Tristram knew all the matter he
made great dole and sorrow out of measure, and wept for sorrow for the
loss of the noble knights, Sir Bersules and of Sir Amant.

When Sir Launcelot espied Sir Tristram weep he went hastily to King
Arthur, and said: Sir, I pray you give me leave to return again to
yonder false king and knight. I pray you, said King Arthur, fetch him
again, but I would not that ye slew him, for my worship. Then Sir
Launcelot armed him in all haste, and mounted upon a great horse, and
took a spear in his hand and rode after King Mark. And from thence a
three mile English Sir Launcelot over took him, and bade him: Turn
recreant king and knight, for whether thou wilt or not thou shalt go
with me to King Arthur’s court. King Mark returned and looked upon Sir
Launcelot, and said: Fair sir, what is your name? Wit thou well, said
he, my name is Sir Launcelot, and therefore defend thee. And when King
Mark wist that it was Sir Launcelot, and came so fast upon him with a
spear, he cried then aloud: I yield me to thee, Sir Launcelot,
honourable knight. But Sir Launcelot would not hear him, but came fast
upon him. King Mark saw that, and made no defence, but tumbled adown
out of his saddle to the earth as a sack, and there he lay still, and
cried Sir Launcelot mercy. Arise, recreant knight and king. I will not
fight, said King Mark, but whither that ye will I will go with you.
Alas, alas, said Sir Launcelot, that I may not give thee one buffet for
the love of Sir Tristram and of La Beale Isoud, and for the two knights
that thou hast slain traitorly. And so he mounted upon his horse and
brought him to King Arthur; and there King Mark alighted in that same
place, and threw his helm from him upon the earth, and his sword, and
fell flat to the earth of King Arthur’s feet, and put him in his grace
and mercy. So God me help, said Arthur, ye are welcome in a manner, and
in a manner ye are not welcome. In this manner ye are welcome, that ye
come hither maugre thy head, as I suppose. That is truth, said King
Mark, and else I had not been here, for my lord, Sir Launcelot, brought
me hither through his fine force, and to him am I yolden to as
recreant. Well, said Arthur, ye understand ye ought to do me service,
homage, and fealty. And never would ye do me none, but ever ye have
been against me, and a destroyer of my knights; now, how will ye acquit
you? Sir, said King Mark, right as your lordship will require me, unto
my power, I will make a large amends. For he was a fair speaker, and
false thereunder. Then for great pleasure of Sir Tristram, to make them
twain accorded, the king withheld King Mark as at that time, and made a
broken love-day between them.




