CHAPTER L. How by treason Sir Tristram was brought to a tournament for
to have been slain, and how he was put in prison.


Now turn we from this matter, and speak we of Sir Tristram, of whom
this book is principally of, and leave we the king and the queen, Sir
Launcelot, and Sir Lamorak, and here beginneth the treason of King
Mark, that he ordained against Sir Tristram. There was cried by the
coasts of Cornwall a great tournament and jousts, and all was done by
Sir Galahalt the haut prince and King Bagdemagus, to the intent to slay
Launcelot, or else utterly destroy him and shame him, because Sir
Launcelot had always the higher degree, therefore this prince and this
king made this jousts against Sir Launcelot. And thus their counsel was
discovered unto King Mark, whereof he was full glad.

Then King Mark bethought him that he would have Sir Tristram unto that
tournament disguised that no man should know him, to that intent that
the haut prince should ween that Sir Tristram were Sir Launcelot. So at
these jousts came in Sir Tristram. And at that time Sir Launcelot was
not there, but when they saw a knight disguised do such deeds of arms,
they weened it had been Sir Launcelot. And in especial King Mark said
it was Sir Launcelot plainly. Then they set upon him, both King
Bagdemagus, and the haut prince, and their knights, that it was wonder
that ever Sir Tristram might endure that pain. Notwithstanding for all
the pain that he had, Sir Tristram won the degree at that tournament,
and there he hurt many knights and bruised them, and they hurt him and
bruised him wonderly sore. So when the jousts were all done they knew
well that it was Sir Tristram de Liones; and all that were on King
Mark’s party were glad that Sir Tristram was hurt, and the remnant were
sorry of his hurt; for Sir Tristram was not so behated as was Sir
Launcelot within the realm of England.

Then came King Mark unto Sir Tristram and said: Fair nephew, I am sorry
of your hurts. Gramercy my lord, said Sir Tristram. Then King Mark made
Sir Tristram to be put in an horse bier in great sign of love, and
said: Fair cousin, I shall be your leech myself. And so he rode forth
with Sir Tristram, and brought him to a castle by daylight. And then
King Mark made Sir Tristram to eat. And then after he gave him a drink,
the which as soon as he had drunk he fell asleep. And when it was night
he made him to be carried to another castle, and there he put him in a
strong prison, and there he ordained a man and a woman to give him his
meat and drink. So there he was a great while.

Then was Sir Tristram missed, and no creature wist where he was become.
When La Beale Isoud heard how he was missed, privily she went unto Sir
Sadok, and prayed him to espy where was Sir Tristram. Then when Sadok
wist how Sir Tristram was missed, and anon espied that he was put in
prison by King Mark and the traitors of Magouns, then Sadok and two of
his cousins laid them in an ambushment, fast by the Castle of Tintagil,
in arms. And as by fortune, there came riding King Mark and four of his
nephews, and a certain of the traitors of Magouns. When Sir Sadok
espied them he brake out of the bushment, and set there upon them. And
when King Mark espied Sir Sadok he fled as fast as he might, and there
Sir Sadok slew all the four nephews unto King Mark. But these traitors
of Magouns slew one of Sadok’s cousins with a great wound in the neck,
but Sadok smote the other to the death. Then Sir Sadok rode upon his
way unto a castle that was called Liones, and there he espied of the
treason and felony of King Mark. So they of that castle rode with Sir
Sadok till that they came to a castle that hight Arbray, and there in
the town they found Sir Dinas the Seneschal, that was a good knight.
But when Sir Sadok had told Sir Dinas of all the treason of King Mark
he defied such a king, and said he would give up his lands that he held
of him. And when he said these words all manner knights said as Sir
Dinas said. Then by his advice and of Sir Sadok’s, he let stuff all the
towns and castles within the country of Liones, and assembled all the
people that they might make.




CHAPTER LI. How King Mark let do counterfeit letters from the Pope, and
how Sir Percivale delivered Sir Tristram out of prison.


Now turn we unto King Mark, that when he was escaped from Sir Sadok he
rode unto the Castle of Tintagil, and there he made great cry and
noise, and cried unto harness all that might bear arms. Then they
sought and found where were dead four cousins of King Mark’s, and the
traitor of Magouns. Then the king let inter them in a chapel. Then the
king let cry in all the country that held of him, to go unto arms, for
he understood to the war he must needs. When King Mark heard and
understood how Sir Sadok and Sir Dinas were arisen in the country of
Liones he remembered of wiles and treason. Lo thus he did: he let make
and counterfeit letters from the Pope, and did make a strange clerk to
bear them unto King Mark; the which letters specified that King Mark
should make him ready, upon pain of cursing, with his host to come to
the Pope, to help to go to Jerusalem, for to make war upon the
Saracens.

When this clerk was come by the mean of the king, anon withal King Mark
sent these letters unto Sir Tristram and bade him say thus: that an he
would go war upon the miscreants, he should be had out of prison, and
to have all his power. When Sir Tristram understood this letter, then
he said thus to the clerk: Ah, King Mark, ever hast thou been a
traitor, and ever will be; but, Clerk, said Sir Tristram, say thou thus
unto King Mark: Since the Apostle Pope hath sent for him, bid him go
thither himself; for tell him, traitor king as he is, I will not go at
his commandment, get I out of prison as I may, for I see I am well
rewarded for my true service. Then the clerk returned unto King Mark,
and told him of the answer of Sir Tristram. Well, said King Mark, yet
shall he be beguiled. So he went into his chamber, and counterfeit
letters; and the letters specified that the Pope desired Sir Tristram
to come himself, to make war upon the miscreants. When the clerk was
come again to Sir Tristram and took him these letters, then Sir
Tristram beheld these letters, and anon espied they were of King Mark’s
counterfeiting. Ah, said Sir Tristram, false hast thou been ever, King
Mark, and so wilt thou end. Then the clerk departed from Sir Tristram
and came to King Mark again.

By then there were come four wounded knights within the Castle of
Tintagil, and one of them his neck was nigh broken in twain. Another
had his arm stricken away, the third was borne through with a spear,
the fourth had his teeth stricken in twain. And when they came afore
King Mark they cried and said: King, why fleest thou not, for all this
country is arisen clearly against thee? Then was King Mark wroth out of
measure.

And in the meanwhile there came into the country Sir Percivale de Galis
to seek Sir Tristram. And when he heard that Sir Tristram was in
prison, Sir Percivale made clearly the deliverance of Sir Tristram by
his knightly means. And when he was so delivered he made great joy of
Sir Percivale, and so each one of other. Sir Tristram said unto Sir
Percivale: An ye will abide in these marches I will ride with you. Nay,
said Percivale, in this country I may not tarry, for I must needs into
Wales. So Sir Percivale departed from Sir Tristram, and rode straight
unto King Mark, and told him how he had delivered Sir Tristram; and
also he told the king that he had done himself great shame for to put
Sir Tristram in prison, for he is now the knight of most renown in this
world living. And wit thou well the noblest knights of the world love
Sir Tristram, and if he will make war upon you ye may not abide it.
That is truth, said King Mark, but I may not love Sir Tristram because
he loveth my queen and my wife, La Beale Isoud. Ah, fie for shame, said
Sir Percivale, say ye never so more. Are ye not uncle unto Sir
Tristram, and he your nephew? Ye should never think that so noble a
knight as Sir Tristram is, that he would do himself so great a villainy
to hold his uncle’s wife; howbeit, said Sir Percivale, he may love your
queen sinless, because she is called one of the fairest ladies of the
world.

Then Sir Percivale departed from King Mark. So when he was departed
King Mark bethought him of more treason: notwithstanding King Mark
granted Sir Percivale never by no manner of means to hurt Sir Tristram.
So anon King Mark sent unto Sir Dinas the Seneschal that he should put
down all the people that he had raised, for he sent him an oath that he
would go himself unto the Pope of Rome to war upon the miscreants; and
this is a fairer war than thus to arise the people against your king.
When Sir Dinas understood that King Mark would go upon the miscreants,
then Sir Dinas in all the haste put down all the people; and when the
people were departed every man to his home, then King Mark espied where
was Sir Tristram with La Beale Isoud; and there by treason King Mark
let take him and put him in prison, contrary to his promise that he
made unto Sir Percivale.

When Queen Isoud understood that Sir Tristram was in prison she made as
great sorrow as ever made lady or gentlewoman. Then Sir Tristram sent a
letter unto La Beale Isoud, and prayed her to be his good lady; and if
it pleased her to make a vessel ready for her and him, he would go with
her unto the realm of Logris, that is this land. When La Beale Isoud
understood Sir Tristram’s letters and his intent, she sent him another,
and bade him be of good comfort, for she would do make the vessel
ready, and all thing to purpose.

Then La Beale Isoud sent unto Sir Dinas, and to Sadok, and prayed them
in anywise to take King Mark, and put him in prison, unto the time that
she and Sir Tristram were departed unto the realm of Logris. When Sir
Dinas the Seneschal understood the treason of King Mark he promised her
again, and sent her word that King Mark should be put in prison. And as
they devised it so it was done. And then Sir Tristram was delivered out
of prison; and anon in all the haste Queen Isoud and Sir Tristram went
and took their counsel with that they would have with them when they
departed.




