CHAPTER XI. Of the communication between King Arthur and Sir Launcelot,
and how King Arthur reproved him.


Then it befell upon a day in harvest time, Sir Launcelot looked over
the walls, and spake on high unto King Arthur and Sir Gawaine: My lords
both, wit ye well all is in vain that ye make at this siege, for here
win ye no worship but maugre and dishonour; for an it list me to come
myself out and my good knights, I should full soon make an end of this
war. Come forth, said Arthur unto Launcelot, an thou durst, and I
promise thee I shall meet thee in midst of the field. God defend me,
said Sir Launcelot, that ever I should encounter with the most noble
king that made me knight. Fie upon thy fair language, said the king,
for wit you well and trust it, I am thy mortal foe, and ever will to my
death day; for thou hast slain my good knights, and full noble men of
my blood, that I shall never recover again. Also thou hast lain by my
queen, and holden her many winters, and sithen like a traitor taken her
from me by force.

My most noble lord and king, said Sir Launcelot, ye may say what ye
will, for ye wot well with yourself will I not strive; but thereas ye
say I have slain your good knights, I wot well that I have done so, and
that me sore repenteth; but I was enforced to do battle with them in
saving of my life, or else I must have suffered them to have slain me.
And as for my lady, Queen Guenever, except your person of your
highness, and my lord Sir Gawaine, there is no knight under heaven that
dare make it good upon me, that ever I was a traitor unto your person.
And where it please you to say that I have holden my lady your queen
years and winters, unto that I shall ever make a large answer, and
prove it upon any knight that beareth the life, except your person and
Sir Gawaine, that my lady, Queen Guenever, is a true lady unto your
person as any is living unto her lord, and that will I make good with
my hands. Howbeit it hath liked her good grace to have me in chierte,
and to cherish me more than any other knight; and unto my power I again
have deserved her love, for ofttimes, my lord, ye have consented that
she should be brent and destroyed, in your heat, and then it fortuned
me to do battle for her, and or I departed from her adversary they
confessed their untruth, and she full worshipfully excused. And at such
times, my lord Arthur, said Sir Launcelot, ye loved me, and thanked me
when I saved your queen from the fire; and then ye promised me for ever
to be my good lord; and now methinketh ye reward me full ill for my
good service. And my good lord, meseemeth I had lost a great part of my
worship in my knighthood an I had suffered my lady, your queen, to have
been brent, and insomuch she should have been brent for my sake. For
sithen I have done battles for your queen in other quarrels than in
mine own, meseemeth now I had more right to do battle for her in right
quarrel. And therefore my good and gracious lord, said Sir Launcelot,
take your queen unto your good grace, for she is both fair, true, and
good.

Fie on thee, false recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine; I let thee wit my
lord, mine uncle, King Arthur, shall have his queen and thee, maugre
thy visage, and slay you both whether it please him. It may well be,
said Sir Launcelot, but wit you well, my lord Sir Gawaine, an me list
to come out of this castle ye should win me and the queen more harder
than ever ye won a strong battle. Fie on thy proud words, said Sir
Gawaine; as for my lady, the queen, I will never say of her shame. But
thou, false and recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine, what cause hadst
thou to slay my good brother Sir Gareth, that loved thee more than all
my kin? Alas thou madest him knight thine own hands; why slew thou him
that loved thee so well? For to excuse me, said Sir Launcelot, it
helpeth me not, but by Jesu, and by the faith that I owe to the high
order of knighthood, I should with as good will have slain my nephew,
Sir Bors de Ganis, at that time. But alas that ever I was so unhappy,
said Launcelot, that I had not seen Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris.

Thou liest, recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine, thou slewest him in
despite of me; and therefore, wit thou well I shall make war to thee,
and all the while that I may live. That me repenteth, said Sir
Launcelot; for well I understand it helpeth not to seek none accordment
while ye, Sir Gawaine, are so mischievously set. And if ye were not, I
would not doubt to have the good grace of my lord Arthur. I believe it
well, false recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine; for thou hast many long
days overled me and us all, and destroyed many of our good knights. Ye
say as it pleaseth you, said Sir Launcelot; and yet may it never be
said on me, and openly proved, that ever I by forecast of treason slew
no good knight, as my lord, Sir Gawaine, ye have done; and so did I
never, but in my defence that I was driven thereto, in saving of my
life. Ah, false knight, said Sir Gawaine, that thou meanest by Sir
Lamorak: wit thou well I slew him. Ye slew him not yourself, said Sir
Launcelot; it had been overmuch on hand for you to have slain him, for
he was one of the best knights christened of his age, and it was great
pity of his death.




CHAPTER XII. How the cousins and kinsmen of Sir Launcelot excited him
to go out to battle, and how they made them ready.


Well, well, said Sir Gawaine to Launcelot, sithen thou enbraidest me of
Sir Lamorak, wit thou well I shall never leave thee till I have thee at
such avail that thou shalt not escape my hands. I trust you well
enough, said Sir Launcelot, an ye may get me I get but little mercy.
But as the French book saith, the noble King Arthur would have taken
his queen again, and have been accorded with Sir Launcelot, but Sir
Gawaine would not suffer him by no manner of mean. And then Sir Gawaine
made many men to blow upon Sir Launcelot; and all at once they called
him false recreant knight.

Then when Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir Lionel, heard
this outcry, they called to them Sir Palomides, Sir Safere’s brother,
and Sir Lavaine, with many more of their blood, and all they went unto
Sir Launcelot, and said thus: My lord Sir Launcelot, wit ye well we
have great scorn of the great rebukes that we heard Gawaine say to you;
wherefore we pray you, and charge you as ye will have our service, keep
us no longer within these walls; for wit you well plainly, we will ride
into the field and do battle with them; for ye fare as a man that were
afeard, and for all your fair speech it will not avail you. For wit you
well Sir Gawaine will not suffer you to be accorded with King Arthur,
and therefore fight for your life and your right, an ye dare. Alas,
said Sir Launcelot, for to ride out of this castle, and to do battle, I
am full loath.

Then Sir Launcelot spake on high unto Sir Arthur and Sir Gawaine: My
lords, I require you and beseech you, sithen that I am thus required
and conjured to ride into the field, that neither you, my lord King
Arthur, nor you Sir Gawaine, come not into the field. What shall we do
then? said Sir Gawaine, [N]is this the king’s quarrel with thee to
fight? and it is my quarrel to fight with thee, Sir Launcelot, because
of the death of my brother Sir Gareth. Then must I needs unto battle,
said Sir Launcelot. Now wit you well, my lord Arthur and Sir Gawaine,
ye will repent it whensomever I do battle with you.

And so then they departed either from other; and then either party made
them ready on the morn for to do battle, and great purveyance was made
on both sides; and Sir Gawaine let purvey many knights for to wait upon
Sir Launcelot, for to overset him and to slay him. And on the morn at
underne Sir Arthur was ready in the field with three great hosts. And
then Sir Launcelot’s fellowship came out at three gates, in a full good
array; and Sir Lionel came in the foremost battle, and Sir Launcelot
came in the middle, and Sir Bors came out at the third gate. Thus they
came in order and rule, as full noble knights; and always Sir Launcelot
charged all his knights in any wise to save King Arthur and Sir
Gawaine.




