CHAPTER VII. Of the opinion of some men of the death of King Arthur;
and how Queen Guenever made her a nun in Almesbury.


Yet some men say in many parts of England that King Arthur is not dead,
but had by the will of our Lord Jesu into another place; and men say
that he shall come again, and he shall win the holy cross. I will not
say it shall be so, but rather I will say: here in this world he
changed his life. But many men say that there is written upon his tomb
this verse: _Hic jacet Arthurus, Rex quondam, Rexque futurus._ Thus
leave I here Sir Bedivere with the hermit, that dwelled that time in a
chapel beside Glastonbury, and there was his hermitage. And so they
lived in their prayers, and fastings, and great abstinence. And when
Queen Guenever understood that King Arthur was slain, and all the noble
knights, Sir Mordred and all the remnant, then the queen stole away,
and five ladies with her, and so she went to Almesbury; and there she
let make herself a nun, and ware white clothes and black, and great
penance she took, as ever did sinful lady in this land, and never
creature could make her merry; but lived in fasting, prayers, and
alms-deeds, that all manner of people marvelled how virtuously she was
changed. Now leave we Queen Guenever in Almesbury, a nun in white
clothes and black, and there she was Abbess and ruler as reason would;
and turn we from her, and speak we of Sir Launcelot du Lake.




CHAPTER VIII. How when Sir Lancelot heard of the death of King Arthur,
and of Sir Gawaine, and other matters, he came into England.


And when he heard in his country that Sir Mordred was crowned king in
England, and made war against King Arthur, his own father, and would
let him to land in his own land; also it was told Sir Launcelot how
that Sir Mordred had laid siege about the Tower of London, because the
queen would not wed him; then was Sir Launcelot wroth out of measure,
and said to his kinsmen: Alas, that double traitor Sir Mordred, now me
repenteth that ever he escaped my hands, for much shame hath he done
unto my lord Arthur; for all I feel by the doleful letter that my lord
Sir Gawaine sent me, on whose soul Jesu have mercy that my lord Arthur
is full hard bestead. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, that ever I should live
to hear that most noble king that made me knight thus to be overset
with his subject in his own realm. And this doleful letter that my
lord, Sir Gawaine, hath sent me afore his death, praying me to see his
tomb, wit you well his doleful words shall never go from mine heart,
for he was a full noble knight as ever was born; and in an unhappy hour
was I born that ever I should have that unhap to slay first Sir
Gawaine, Sir Gaheris the good knight, and mine own friend Sir Gareth,
that full noble knight. Alas, I may say I am unhappy, said Sir
Launcelot, that ever I should do thus unhappily, and, alas, yet might I
never have hap to slay that traitor, Sir Mordred.

Leave your complaints, said Sir Bors, and first revenge you of the
death of Sir Gawaine; and it will be well done that ye see Sir
Gawaine’s tomb, and secondly that ye revenge my lord Arthur, and my
lady, Queen Guenever. I thank you, said Sir Launcelot, for ever ye will
my worship.

Then they made them ready in all the haste that might be, with ships
and galleys, with Sir Launcelot and his host to pass into England. And
so he passed over the sea till he came to Dover, and there he landed
with seven kings, and the number was hideous to behold. Then Sir
Launcelot spered of men of Dover where was King Arthur become. Then the
people told him how that he was slain, and Sir Mordred and an hundred
thousand died on a day; and how Sir Mordred gave King Arthur there the
first battle at his landing, and there was good Sir Gawaine slain; and
on the morn Sir Mordred fought with the king upon Barham Down, and
there the king put Sir Mordred to the worse. Alas, said Sir Launcelot,
this is the heaviest tidings that ever came to me. Now, fair sirs, said
Sir Launcelot, shew me the tomb of Sir Gawaine. And then certain people
of the town brought him into the castle of Dover, and shewed him the
tomb. Then Sir Launcelot kneeled down and wept, and prayed heartily for
his soul. And that night he made a dole, and all they that would come
had as much flesh, fish, wine and ale, and every man and woman had
twelve pence, come who would. Thus with his own hand dealt he this
money, in a mourning gown; and ever he wept, and prayed them to pray
for the soul of Sir Gawaine. And on the morn all the priests and clerks
that might be gotten in the country were there, and sang mass of
Requiem; and there offered first Sir Launcelot, and he offered an
hundred pound; and then the seven kings offered forty pound apiece; and
also there was a thousand knights, and each of them offered a pound;
and the offering dured from morn till night, and Sir Launcelot lay two
nights on his tomb in prayers and weeping.

Then on the third day Sir Launcelot called the kings, dukes, earls,
barons, and knights, and said thus: My fair lords, I thank you all of
your coming into this country with me, but we came too late, and that
shall repent me while I live, but against death may no man rebel. But
sithen it is so, said Sir Launcelot, I will myself ride and seek my
lady, Queen Guenever, for as I hear say she hath had great pain and
much disease; and I heard say that she is fled into the west. Therefore
ye all shall abide me here, and but if I come again within fifteen
days, then take your ships and your fellowship, and depart into your
country, for I will do as I say to you.




CHAPTER IX. How Sir Launcelot departed to seek the Queen Guenever, and
how he found her at Almesbury.


Then came Sir Bors de Ganis, and said: My lord Sir Launcelot, what
think ye for to do, now to ride in this realm? wit ye well ye shall
find few friends. Be as be may, said Sir Launcelot, keep you still
here, for I will forth on my journey, and no man nor child shall go
with me. So it was no boot to strive, but he departed and rode
westerly, and there he sought a seven or eight days; and at the last he
came to a nunnery, and then was Queen Guenever ware of Sir Launcelot as
he walked in the cloister. And when she saw him there she swooned
thrice, that all the ladies and gentlewomen had work enough to hold the
queen up. So when she might speak, she called ladies and gentlewomen to
her, and said: Ye marvel, fair ladies, why I make this fare. Truly, she
said, it is for the sight of yonder knight that yonder standeth;
wherefore I pray you all call him to me.

When Sir Launcelot was brought to her, then she said to all the ladies:
Through this man and me hath all this war been wrought, and the death
of the most noblest knights of the world; for through our love that we
have loved together is my most noble lord slain. Therefore, Sir
Launcelot, wit thou well I am set in such a plight to get my soul-heal;
and yet I trust through God’s grace that after my death to have a sight
of the blessed face of Christ, and at domesday to sit on his right
side, for as sinful as ever I was are saints in heaven. Therefore, Sir
Launcelot, I require thee and beseech thee heartily, for all the love
that ever was betwixt us, that thou never see me more in the visage;
and I command thee, on God’s behalf, that thou forsake my company, and
to thy kingdom thou turn again, and keep well thy realm from war and
wrack; for as well as I have loved thee, mine heart will not serve me
to see thee, for through thee and me is the flower of kings and knights
destroyed; therefore, Sir Launcelot, go to thy realm, and there take
thee a wife, and live with her with joy and bliss; and I pray thee
heartily, pray for me to our Lord that I may amend my misliving. Now,
sweet madam, said Sir Launcelot, would ye that I should now return
again unto my country, and there to wed a lady? Nay, madam, wit you
well that shall I never do, for I shall never be so false to you of
that I have promised; but the same destiny that ye have taken you to, I
will take me unto, for to please Jesu, and ever for you I cast me
specially to pray. If thou wilt do so, said the queen, hold thy
promise, but I may never believe but that thou wilt turn to the world
again. Well, madam, said he, ye say as pleaseth you, yet wist you me
never false of my promise, and God defend but I should forsake the
world as ye have done. For in the quest of the Sangreal I had forsaken
the vanities of the world had not your lord been. And if I had done so
at that time, with my heart, will, and thought, I had passed all the
knights that were in the Sangreal except Sir Galahad, my son. And
therefore, lady, sithen ye have taken you to perfection, I must needs
take me to perfection, of right. For I take record of God, in you I
have had mine earthly joy; and if I had found you now so disposed, I
had cast me to have had you into mine own realm.




