CHAPTER XVII. How Sir Launcelot departed from the king and from Joyous
Gard over seaward, and what knights went with him.


Then Sir Launcelot sighed, and therewith the tears fell on his cheeks,
and then he said thus: Alas, most noble Christian realm, whom I have
loved above all other realms, and in thee I have gotten a great part of
my worship, and now I shall depart in this wise. Truly me repenteth
that ever I came in this realm, that should be thus shamefully
banished, undeserved and causeless; but fortune is so variant, and the
wheel so moveable, there nis none constant abiding, and that may be
proved by many old chronicles, of noble Ector, and Troilus, and
Alisander, the mighty conqueror, and many mo other; when they were most
in their royalty, they alighted lowest. And so fareth it by me, said
Sir Launcelot, for in this realm I had worship, and by me and mine all
the whole Round Table hath been increased more in worship, by me and
mine blood, than by any other. And therefore wit thou well, Sir
Gawaine, I may live upon my lands as well as any knight that here is.
And if ye, most redoubted king, will come upon my lands with Sir
Gawaine to war upon me, I must endure you as well as I may. But as to
you, Sir Gawaine, if that ye come there, I pray you charge me not with
treason nor felony, for an ye do, I must answer you. Do thou thy best,
said Sir Gawaine; therefore hie thee fast that thou were gone, and wit
thou well we shall soon come after, and break the strongest castle that
thou hast, upon thy head. That shall not need, said Sir Launcelot, for
an I were as orgulous set as ye are, wit you well I should meet you in
midst of the field. Make thou no more language, said Sir Gawaine, but
deliver the queen from thee, and pike thee lightly out of this court.
Well, said Sir Launcelot, an I had wist of this short coming, I would
have advised me twice or that I had come hither; for an the queen had
been so dear to me as ye noise her, I durst have kept her from the
fellowship of the best knights under heaven.

And then Sir Launcelot said unto Guenever, in hearing of the king and
them all: Madam, now I must depart from you and this noble fellowship
for ever; and sithen it is so, I beseech you to pray for me, and say me
well; and if ye be hard bestead by any false tongues, lightly my lady
send me word, and if any knight’s hands may deliver you by battle, I
shall deliver you. And therewithal Sir Launcelot kissed the queen; and
then he said all openly. Now let see what he be in this place that dare
say the queen is not true unto my lord Arthur, let see who will speak
an he dare speak. And therewith he brought the queen to the king, and
then Sir Launcelot took his leave and departed; and there was neither
king, duke, nor earl, baron nor knight, lady nor gentlewoman, but all
they wept as people out of their mind, except Sir Gawaine. And when the
noble Sir Launcelot took his horse to ride out of Carlisle, there was
sobbing and weeping for pure dole of his departing; and so he took his
way unto Joyous Gard. And then ever after he called it the Dolorous
Gard. And thus departed Sir Launcelot from the court for ever.

And so when he came to Joyous Gard he called his fellowship unto him,
and asked them what they would do. Then they answered all wholly
together with one voice they would as he would do. My fair fellows,
said Sir Launcelot, I must depart out of this most noble realm, and now
I shall depart it grieveth me sore, for I shall depart with no worship,
for a flemed man departed never out of a realm with no worship; and
that is my heaviness, for ever I fear after my days that men shall
chronicle upon me that I was flemed out of this land; and else, my fair
lords, be ye sure, an I had not dread shame, my lady, Queen Guenever,
and I should never have departed.

Then spake many noble knights, as Sir Palomides, Sir Safere his
brother, and Sir Bellingere le Beuse, and Sir Urre, with Sir Lavaine,
with many others: Sir, an ye be so disposed to abide in this land we
will never fail you; and if ye list not to abide in this land there nis
none of the good knights that here be will fail you, for many causes.
One is, all we that be not of your blood shall never be welcome to the
court. And sithen it liked us to take a part with you in your distress
and heaviness in this realm, wit you well it shall like us as well to
go in other countries with you, and there to take such part as ye do.
My fair lords, said Sir Launcelot, I well understand you, and as I can,
thank you: and ye shall understand, such livelihood as I am born unto I
shall depart with you in this manner of wise; that is for to say, I
shall depart all my livelihood and all my lands freely among you, and I
myself will have as little as any of you, for have I sufficient that
may long to my person, I will ask none other rich array; and I trust to
God to maintain you on my lands as well as ever were maintained any
knights. Then spake all the knights at once: He have shame that will
leave you; for we all understand in this realm will be now no quiet,
but ever strife and debate, now the fellowship of the Round Table is
broken; for by the noble fellowship of the Round Table was King Arthur
upborne, and by their noblesse the king and all his realm was in quiet
and rest, and a great part they said all was because of your noblesse.




CHAPTER XVIII. How Sir Launcelot passed over the sea, and how he made
great lords of the knights that went with him.


Truly, said Sir Launcelot, I thank you all of your good saying,
howbeit, I wot well, in me was not all the stability of this realm, but
in that I might I did my devoir; and well I am sure I knew many
rebellions in my days that by me were peaced, and I trow we all shall
hear of them in short space, and that me sore repenteth. For ever I
dread me, said Sir Launcelot, that Sir Mordred will make trouble, for
he is passing envious and applieth him to trouble. So they were
accorded to go with Sir Launcelot to his lands; and to make short tale,
they trussed, and paid all that would ask them; and wholly an hundred
knights departed with Sir Launcelot at once, and made their avows they
would never leave him for weal nor for woe.

And so they shipped at Cardiff, and sailed unto Benwick: some men call
it Bayonne, and some men call it Beaune, where the wine of Beaune is.
But to say the sooth, Sir Launcelot and his nephews were lords of all
France, and of all the lands that longed unto France; he and his
kindred rejoiced it all through Sir Launcelot’s noble prowess. And then
Sir Launcelot stuffed and furnished and garnished all his noble towns
and castles. Then all the people of those lands came to Sir Launcelot
on foot and hands. And so when he had stablished all these countries,
he shortly called a parliament; and there he crowned Sir Lionel, King
of France; and Sir Bors [he] crowned him king of all King Claudas’
lands; and Sir Ector de Maris, that was Sir Launcelot’s youngest
brother, he crowned him King of Benwick, and king of all Guienne, that
was Sir Launcelot’s own land. And he made Sir Ector prince of them all,
and thus he departed.

Then Sir Launcelot advanced all his noble knights, and first he
advanced them of his blood; that was Sir Blamore, he made him Duke of
Limosin in Guienne and Sir Bleoberis he made him Duke of Poictiers, and
Sir Gahalantine he made him Duke of Querne, and Sir Galihodin he made
him Duke of Sentonge, and Sir Galihud he made him Earl of Perigot, and
Sir Menadeuke he made him Earl of Roerge, and Sir Villiars the Valiant
he made him Earl of Bearn, and Sir Hebes le Renoumes he made him Earl
of Comange, and Sir Lavaine he made him Earl of Arminak, and Sir Urre
he made him Earl of Estrake, and Sir Neroneus he made him Earl of
Pardiak, and Sir Plenorius he made Earl of Foise, and Sir Selises of
the Dolorous Tower he made him Earl of Masauke, and Sir Melias de Lile
he made him Earl of Tursauk, and Sir Bellangere le Beuse he made Earl
of the Launds, and Sir Palomides he made him Duke of the Provence, and
Sir Safere he made him Duke of Landok, and Sir Clegis he gave him the
Earldom of Agente, and Sir Sadok he gave the Earldom of Surlat, and Sir
Dinas le Seneschal he made him Duke of Anjou, and Sir Clarrus he made
him Duke of Normandy. Thus Sir Launcelot rewarded his noble knights and
many more, that meseemeth it were too long to rehearse.




