CHAPTER VII. A wonderful tale of King Solomon and his wife.


That night lay Solomon before the ship with little fellowship. And when
he was asleep him thought there came from heaven a great company of
angels, and alighted into the ship, and took water which was brought by
an angel, in a vessel of silver, and sprent all the ship. And after he
came to the sword, and drew letters on the hilt. And after went to the
ship’s board, and wrote there other letters which said: Thou man that
wilt enter within me, beware that thou be full within the faith, for I
ne am but Faith and Belief. When Solomon espied these letters he was
abashed, so that he durst not enter, and so drew him aback; and the
ship was anon shoven in the sea, and he went so fast that he lost sight
of him within a little while. And then a little voice said: Solomon,
the last knight of thy lineage shall rest in this bed. Then went
Solomon and awaked his wife, and told her of the adventures of the
ship.

Now saith the history that a great while the three fellows beheld the
bed and the three spindles. Then they were at certain that they were of
natural colours without painting. Then they lift up a cloth which was
above the ground, and there found a rich purse by seeming. And
Percivale took it, and found therein a writ and so he read it, and
devised the manner of the spindles and of the ship, whence it came, and
by whom it was made. Now, said Galahad, where shall we find the
gentlewoman that shall make new girdles to the sword? Fair sir, said
Percivale’s sister, dismay you not, for by the leave of God I shall let
make a girdle to the sword, such one as shall long thereto. And then
she opened a box, and took out girdles which were seemly wrought with
golden threads, and upon that were set full precious stones, and a rich
buckle of gold. Lo, lords, said she, here is a girdle that ought to be
set about the sword. And wit ye well the greatest part of this girdle
was made of my hair, which I loved well while that I was a woman of the
world. But as soon as I wist that this adventure was ordained me I
clipped off my hair, and made this girdle in the name of God. Ye be
well found, said Sir Bors, for certes ye have put us out of great pain,
wherein we should have entered ne had your tidings been.

Then went the gentlewoman and set it on the girdle of the sword. Now,
said the fellowship, what is the name of the sword, and what shall we
call it? Truly, said she, the name of the sword is the Sword with the
Strange Girdles; and the sheath, Mover of Blood; for no man that hath
blood in him ne shall never see the one part of the sheath which was
made of the Tree of Life. Then they said to Galahad: In the name of
Jesu Christ, and pray you that ye gird you with this sword which hath
been desired so much in the realm of Logris. Now let me begin, said
Galahad, to grip this sword for to give you courage; but wit ye well it
longeth no more to me than it doth to you. And then he gripped about it
with his fingers a great deal; and then she girt him about the middle
with the sword. Now reck I not though I die, for now I hold me one of
the blessed maidens of the world, which hath made the worthiest knight
of the world. Damosel, said Galahad, ye have done so much that I shall
be your knight all the days of my life.

Then they went from that ship, and went to the other. And anon the wind
drove them into the sea a great pace, but they had no victuals: but it
befell that they came on the morn to a castle that men call Carteloise,
that was in the marches of Scotland. And when they had passed the port,
the gentlewoman said: Lords, here be men arriven that, an they wist
that ye were of King Arthur’s court, ye should be assailed anon.
Damosel, said Galahad, He that cast us out of the rock shall deliver us
from them.




CHAPTER VIII. How Galahad and his fellows came to a castle, and how
they were fought withal, and how they slew their adversaries, and other
matters.


So it befell as they spoke thus there came a squire by them, and asked
what they were; and they said they were of King Arthur’s house. Is that
sooth? said he. Now by my head, said he, ye be ill arrayed; and then
turned he again unto the cliff fortress. And within a while they heard
an horn blow. Then a gentlewoman came to them, and asked them of whence
they were; and they told her. Fair lords, said she, for God’s love turn
again if ye may, for ye be come unto your death. Nay, they said, we
will not turn again, for He shall help us in whose service we be
entered in. Then as they stood talking there came knights well armed,
and bade them yield them or else to die. That yielding, said they,
shall be noyous to you. And therewith they let their horses run, and
Sir Percivale smote the foremost to the earth, and took his horse, and
mounted thereupon, and the same did Galahad. Also Bors served another
so, for they had no horses in that country, for they left their horses
when they took their ship in other countries. And so when they were
horsed then began they to set upon them; and they of the castle fled
into the strong fortress, and the three knights after them into the
castle, and so alighted on foot, and with their swords slew them down,
and gat into the hall.

Then when they beheld the great multitude of people that they had
slain, they held themself great sinners. Certes, said Bors, I ween an
God had loved them that we should not have had power to have slain them
thus. But they have done so much against Our Lord that He would not
suffer them to reign no longer. Say ye not so, said Galahad, for if
they misdid against God, the vengeance is not ours, but to Him which
hath power thereof.

So came there out of a chamber a good man which was a priest, and bare
God’s body in a cup. And when he saw them which lay dead in the hall he
was all abashed; and Galahad did off his helm and kneeled down, and so
did his two fellows. Sir, said they, have ye no dread of us, for we be
of King Arthur’s court. Then asked the good man how they were slain so
suddenly, and they told it him. Truly, said the good man, an ye might
live as long as the world might endure, ne might ye have done so great
an alms-deed as this. Sir, said Galahad, I repent me much, inasmuch as
they were christened. Nay, repent you not, said he, for they were not
christened, and I shall tell you how that I wot of this castle. Here
was Lord Earl Hernox not but one year, and he had three sons, good
knights of arms, and a daughter, the fairest gentlewoman that men knew.
So those three knights loved their sister so sore that they brent in
love, and so they lay by her, maugre her head. And for she cried to her
father they slew her, and took their father and put him in prison, and
wounded him nigh to the death, but a cousin of hers rescued him. And
then did they great untruth: they slew clerks and priests, and made
beat down chapels, that Our Lord’s service might not be served nor
said. And this same day her father sent to me for to be confessed and
houseled; but such shame had never man as I had this day with the three
brethren, but the earl bade me suffer, for he said they should not long
endure, for three servants of Our Lord should destroy them, and now it
is brought to an end. And by this may ye wit that Our Lord is not
displeased with your deeds. Certes, said Galahad, an it had not pleased
Our Lord, never should we have slain so many men in so little a while.

And then they brought the Earl Hernox out of prison into the midst of
the hall, that knew Galahad anon, and yet he saw him never afore but by
revelation of Our Lord.




