CHAPTER XIV. How Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides fought long together,
and after accorded, and how Sir Tristram made him to be christened.


And then they came together as two wild boars, lashing together,
tracing and traversing as noble men that oft had been well proved in
battle; but ever Sir Palomides dread the might of Sir Tristram, and
therefore he suffered him to breathe him. Thus they fought more than
two hours, but often Sir Tristram smote such strokes at Sir Palomides
that he made him to kneel; and Sir Palomides brake and cut away many
pieces of Sir Tristram’s shield; and then Sir Palomides wounded Sir
Tristram, for he was a well fighting man. Then Sir Tristram was wood
wroth out of measure, and rushed upon Sir Palomides with such a might
that Sir Palomides fell grovelling to the earth; and therewithal he
leapt up lightly upon his feet, and then Sir Tristram wounded Palomides
sore through the shoulder. And ever Sir Tristram fought still in like
hard, and Sir Palomides failed not, but gave him many sad strokes. And
at the last Sir Tristram doubled his strokes, and by fortune Sir
Tristram smote Sir Palomides sword out of his hand, and if Sir
Palomides had stooped for his sword he had been slain.

Then Palomides stood still and beheld his sword with a sorrowful heart.
How now, said Sir Tristram unto Palomides, now have I thee at advantage
as thou haddest me this day; but it shall never be said in no court,
nor among good knights, that Sir Tristram shall slay any knight that is
weaponless; and therefore take thou thy sword, and let us make an end
of this battle. As for to do this battle, said Palomides, I dare right
well end it, but I have no great lust to fight no more. And for this
cause, said Palomides: mine offence to you is not so great but that we
may be friends. All that I have offended is and was for the love of La
Beale Isoud. And as for her, I dare say she is peerless above all other
ladies, and also I proffered her never no dishonour; and by her I have
gotten the most part of my worship. And sithen I offended never as to
her own person, and as for the offence that I have done, it was against
your own person, and for that offence ye have given me this day many
sad strokes, and some I have given you again; and now I dare say I felt
never man of your might, nor so well breathed, but if it were Sir
Launcelot du Lake; wherefore I require you, my lord, forgive me all
that I have offended unto you; and this same day have me to the next
church, and first let me be clean confessed, and after see you now that
I be truly baptised. And then will we all ride together unto the court
of Arthur, that we be there at the high feast. Now take your horse,
said Sir Tristram, and as ye say so it shall be, and all thine evil
will God forgive it you, and I do. And here within this mile is the
Suffragan of Carlisle that shall give you the sacrament of baptism.

Then they took their horses and Sir Galleron rode with them. And when
they came to the Suffragan Sir Tristram told him their desire. Then the
Suffragan let fill a great vessel with water, and when he had hallowed
it he then confessed clean Sir Palomides, and Sir Tristram and Sir
Galleron were his godfathers. And then soon after they departed, riding
toward Camelot, where King Arthur and Queen Guenever was, and for the
most part all the knights of the Round Table. And so the king and all
the court were glad that Sir Palomides was christened. And at the same
feast in came Galahad and sat in the Siege Perilous. And so therewithal
departed and dissevered all the knights of the Round Table. And Sir
Tristram returned again unto Joyous Gard, and Sir Palomides followed
the Questing Beast.

_Here endeth the second book of Sir Tristram that was drawn out of
French into English. But here is no rehersal of the third book. And
here followeth the noble tale of the Sangreal, that called is the Holy
Vessel; and the signification of the blessed blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, blessed mote it be, the which was brought into this land by
Joseph Aramathie. Therefore on all sinful souls blessed Lord have thou
mercy._

_Explicit liber xii. Et incipit Decimustercius._




BOOK XIII.




CHAPTER I. How at the vigil of the Feast of Pentecost entered into the
hall before King Arthur a damosel, and desired Sir Launcelot for to
come and dub a knight, and how he went with her.


At the vigil of Pentecost, when all the fellowship of the Round Table
were come unto Camelot and there heard their service, and the tables
were set ready to the meat, right so entered into the hall a full fair
gentlewoman on horseback, that had ridden full fast, for her horse was
all besweated. Then she there alighted, and came before the king and
saluted him; and he said: Damosel, God thee bless. Sir, said she, for
God’s sake say me where Sir Launcelot is. Yonder ye may see him, said
the king. Then she went unto Launcelot and said: Sir Launcelot, I
salute you on King Pelles’ behalf, and I require you come on with me
hereby into a forest. Then Sir Launcelot asked her with whom she
dwelled. I dwell, said she, with King Pelles. What will ye with me?
said Launcelot. Ye shall know, said she, when ye come thither. Well,
said he, I will gladly go with you. So Sir Launcelot bade his squire
saddle his horse and bring his arms; and in all haste he did his
commandment.

Then came the queen unto Launcelot, and said: Will ye leave us at this
high feast? Madam, said the gentlewoman, wit ye well he shall be with
you to-morn by dinner time. If I wist, said the queen, that he should
not be with us here to-morn he should not go with you by my good will.
Right so departed Sir Launcelot with the gentlewoman, and rode until
that he came into a forest and into a great valley, where they saw an
abbey of nuns; and there was a squire ready and opened the gates, and
so they entered and descended off their horses; and there came a fair
fellowship about Sir Launcelot, and welcomed him, and were passing glad
of his coming. And then they led him unto the Abbess’s chamber and
unarmed him; and right so he was ware upon a bed lying two of his
cousins, Sir Bors and Sir Lionel, and then he waked them; and when they
saw him they made great joy. Sir, said Sir Bors unto Sir Launcelot,
what adventure hath brought you hither, for we weened to-morn to have
found you at Camelot? As God me help, said Sir Launcelot, a gentlewoman
brought me hither, but I know not the cause.

In the meanwhile that they thus stood talking together, therein came
twelve nuns that brought with them Galahad, the which was passing fair
and well made, that unnethe in the world men might not find his match:
and all those ladies wept. Sir, said they all, we bring you here this
child the which we have nourished, and we pray you to make him a
knight, for of a more worthier man’s hand may he not receive the order
of knighthood. Sir Launcelot beheld the young squire and saw him seemly
and demure as a dove, with all manner of good features, that he weened
of his age never to have seen so fair a man of form. Then said Sir
Launcelot: Cometh this desire of himself? He and all they said yea.
Then shall he, said Sir Launcelot, receive the high order of knighthood
as to-morn at the reverence of the high feast. That night Sir Launcelot
had passing good cheer; and on the morn at the hour of prime, at
Galahad’s desire, he made him knight and said: God make him a good man,
for of beauty faileth you not as any that liveth.




