CHAPTER LXXXVIII. How Sir Palomides kept his day to have foughten, but
Sir Tristram might not come; and other things.


But in no wise there was no knight about Sir Tristram that would
believe that ever Sir Palomides would hurt Sir Tristram, neither by his
own hands nor by none other consenting. Then when the fifteenth day was
come, Sir Palomides came to the well with four knights with him of
Arthur’s court, and three sergeants-of-arms. And for this intent Sir
Palomides brought the knights with him and the sergeants-of-arms, for
they should bear record of the battle betwixt Sir Tristram and Sir
Palomides. And the one sergeant brought in his helm, the other his
spear, the third his sword. So thus Palomides came into the field, and
there he abode nigh two hours; and then he sent a squire unto Sir
Tristram, and desired him to come into the field to hold his promise.

When the squire was come to Joyous Gard, anon as Sir Tristram heard of
his coming he let command that the squire should come to his presence
thereas he lay in his bed. My lord Sir Tristram, said Palomides’
squire, wit you well my lord, Palomides, abideth you in the field, and
he would wit whether ye would do battle or not. Ah, my fair brother,
said Sir Tristram, wit thou well that I am right heavy for these
tidings; therefore tell Sir Palomides an I were well at ease I would
not lie here, nor he should have no need to send for me an I might
either ride or go; and for thou shalt say that I am no liar—Sir
Tristram showed him his thigh that the wound was six inches deep. And
now thou hast seen my hurt, tell thy lord that this is no feigned
matter, and tell him that I had liefer than all the gold of King Arthur
that I were whole; and tell Palomides as soon as I am whole I shall
seek him endlong and overthwart, and that I promise you as I am true
knight; and if ever I may meet with him, he shall have battle of me his
fill. And with this the squire departed; and when Palomides wist that
Tristram was hurt he was glad and said: Now I am sure I shall have no
shame, for I wot well I should have had hard handling of him, and by
likely I must needs have had the worse, for he is the hardest knight in
battle that now is living except Sir Launcelot.

And then departed Sir Palomides whereas fortune led him, and within a
month Sir Tristram was whole of his hurt. And then he took his horse,
and rode from country to country, and all strange adventures he
achieved wheresomever he rode; and always he enquired for Sir
Palomides, but of all that quarter of summer Sir Tristram could never
meet with Sir Palomides. But thus as Sir Tristram sought and enquired
after Sir Palomides Sir Tristram achieved many great battles,
wherethrough all the noise fell to Sir Tristram, and it ceased of Sir
Launcelot; and therefore Sir Launcelot’s brethren and his kinsmen would
have slain Sir Tristram because of his fame. But when Sir Launcelot
wist how his kinsmen were set, he said to them openly: Wit you well,
that an the envy of you all be so hardy to wait upon my lord, Sir
Tristram, with any hurt, shame, or villainy, as I am true knight I
shall slay the best of you with mine own hands. Alas, fie for shame,
should ye for his noble deeds await upon him to slay him. Jesu defend,
said Launcelot, that ever any noble knight as Sir Tristram is should be
destroyed with treason. Of this noise and fame sprang into Cornwall,
and among them of Liones, whereof they were passing glad, and made
great joy. And then they of Liones sent letters unto Sir Tristram of
recommendation, and many great gifts to maintain Sir Tristram’s estate;
and ever, between, Sir Tristram resorted unto Joyous Gard whereas La
Beale Isoud was, that loved him as her life.

_Here endeth the tenth book which is of Sir Tristram. And here
followeth the eleventh book which is of Sir Launcelot._




BOOK XI.




CHAPTER I. How Sir Launcelot rode on his adventure, and how he holp a
dolorous lady from her pain, and how that he fought with a dragon.


Now leave we Sir Tristram de Liones, and speak we of Sir Launcelot du
Lake, and of Sir Galahad, Sir Launcelot’s son, how he was gotten, and
in what manner, as the book of French rehearseth. Afore the time that
Sir Galahad was gotten or born, there came in an hermit unto King
Arthur upon Whitsunday, as the knights sat at the Table Round. And when
the hermit saw the Siege Perilous, he asked the king and all the
knights why that siege was void. Sir Arthur and all the knights
answered: There shall never none sit in that siege but one, but if he
be destroyed. Then said the hermit: Wot ye what is he? Nay, said Arthur
and all the knights, we wot not who is he that shall sit therein. Then
wot I, said the hermit, for he that shall sit there is unborn and
ungotten, and this same year he shall be gotten that shall sit there in
that Siege Perilous, and he shall win the Sangreal. When this hermit
had made this mention he departed from the court of King Arthur.

And then after this feast Sir Launcelot rode on his adventure, till on
a time by adventure he passed over the pont of Corbin; and there he saw
the fairest tower that ever he saw, and there-under was a fair town
full of people; and all the people, men and women, cried at once:
Welcome, Sir Launcelot du Lake, the flower of all knighthood, for by
thee all we shall be holpen out of danger. What mean ye, said Sir
Launcelot, that ye cry so upon me? Ah, fair knight, said they all, here
is within this tower a dolorous lady that hath been there in pains many
winters and days, for ever she boileth in scalding water; and but late,
said all the people, Sir Gawaine was here and he might not help her,
and so he left her in pain. So may I, said Sir Launcelot, leave her in
pain as well as Sir Gawaine did. Nay, said the people, we know well
that it is Sir Launcelot that shall deliver her. Well, said Launcelot,
then shew me what I shall do.

Then they brought Sir Launcelot into the tower; and when he came to the
chamber thereas this lady was, the doors of iron unlocked and unbolted.
And so Sir Launcelot went into the chamber that was as hot as any stew.
And there Sir Launcelot took the fairest lady by the hand that ever he
saw, and she was naked as a needle; and by enchantment Queen Morgan le
Fay and the Queen of Northgalis had put her there in that pains,
because she was called the fairest lady of that country; and there she
had been five years, and never might she be delivered out of her great
pains unto the time the best knight of the world had taken her by the
hand. Then the people brought her clothes. And when she was arrayed,
Sir Launcelot thought she was the fairest lady of the world, but if it
were Queen Guenever.

Then this lady said to Sir Launcelot: Sir, if it please you will ye go
with me hereby into a chapel that we may give loving and thanking unto
God? Madam, said Sir Launcelot, come on with me, I will go with you. So
when they came there and gave thankings to God all the people, both
learned and lewd, gave thankings unto God and him, and said: Sir
knight, since ye have delivered this lady, ye shall deliver us from a
serpent there is here in a tomb. Then Sir Launcelot took his shield and
said: Bring me thither, and what I may do unto the pleasure of God and
you I will do. So when Sir Launcelot came thither he saw written upon
the tomb letters of gold that said thus: Here shall come a leopard of
king’s blood, and he shall slay this serpent, and this leopard shall
engender a lion in this foreign country, the which lion shall pass all
other knights. So then Sir Launcelot lift up the tomb, and there came
out an horrible and a fiendly dragon, spitting fire out of his mouth.
Then Sir Launcelot drew his sword and fought with the dragon long, and
at the last with great pain Sir Launcelot slew that dragon. Therewithal
came King Pelles, the good and noble knight, and saluted Sir Launcelot,
and he him again. Fair knight, said the king, what is your name? I
require you of your knighthood tell me!




