CHAPTER XXXIV. How Anglides gave the bloody doublet to Alisander, her
son, the same day that he was made knight, and the charge withal.


Then upon a day Bellangere the Constable came to Anglides and said:
Madam, it were time my lord Alisander were made knight, for he is a
passing strong young man. Sir, said she, I would he were made knight;
but then must I give him the most charge that ever sinful mother gave
to her child. Do as ye list, said Bellangere, and I shall give him
warning that he shall be made knight. Now it will be well done that he
may be made knight at our Lady Day in Lent. Be it so, said Anglides,
and I pray you make ready therefore. So came the Constable to
Alisander, and told him that he should at our Lady Day in Lent be made
knight. I thank God, said Alisander; these are the best tidings that
ever came to me. Then the Constable ordained twenty of the greatest
gentlemen’s sons, and the best born men of the country, that should be
made knights that same day that Alisander was made knight. So on the
same day that Alisander and his twenty fellows were made knights, at
the offering of the mass there came Anglides unto her son and said
thus: O fair sweet son, I charge thee upon my blessing, and of the high
order of chivalry that thou takest here this day, that thou understand
what I shall say and charge thee withal. Therewithal she pulled out a
bloody doublet and a bloody shirt, that were be-bled with old blood.
When Alisander saw this he stert aback and waxed pale, and said: Fair
mother, what may this mean? I shall tell thee, fair son: this was thine
own father’s doublet and shirt, that he wore upon him that same day
that he was slain. And there she told him why and wherefore, and how
for his goodness King Mark slew him with his dagger afore mine own
eyen. And therefore this shall be your charge that I shall give thee.




CHAPTER XXXV. How it was told to King Mark of Sir Alisander, and how he
would have slain Sir Sadok for saving his life.


Now I require thee, and charge thee upon my blessing, and upon the high
order of knighthood, that thou be revenged upon King Mark for the death
of thy father. And therewithal she swooned. Then Alisander leapt to his
mother, and took her up in his arms, and said: Fair mother, ye have
given me a great charge, and here I promise you I shall be avenged upon
King Mark when that I may; and that I promise to God and to you. So
this feast was ended, and the Constable, by the advice of Anglides, let
purvey that Alisander was well horsed and harnessed. Then he jousted
with his twenty fellows that were made knights with him, but for to
make a short tale, he overthrew all those twenty, that none might
withstand him a buffet.

Then one of those knights departed unto King Mark, and told him all,
how Alisander was made knight, and all the charge that his mother gave
him, as ye have heard afore time. Alas, false treason, said King Mark,
I weened that young traitor had been dead. Alas, whom may I trust? And
therewithal King Mark took a sword in his hand; and sought Sir Sadok
from chamber to chamber to slay him. When Sir Sadok saw King Mark come
with his sword in his hand he said thus: Beware, King Mark, and come
not nigh me; for wit thou well that I saved Alisander his life, of
which I never repent me, for thou falsely and cowardly slew his father
Boudwin, traitorly for his good deeds; wherefore I pray Almighty Jesu
send Alisander might and strength to be revenged upon thee. And now
beware King Mark of young Alisander, for he is made a knight. Alas,
said King Mark, that ever I should hear a traitor say so afore me. And
therewith four knights of King Mark’s drew their swords to slay Sir
Sadok, but anon Sir Sadok slew them all in King Mark’s presence. And
then Sir Sadok passed forth into his chamber, and took his horse and
his harness, and rode on his way a good pace. For there was neither Sir
Tristram, neither Sir Dinas, nor Sir Fergus, that would Sir Sadok any
evil will. Then was King Mark wroth, and thought to destroy Sir
Alisander and Sir Sadok that had saved him; for King Mark dreaded and
hated Alisander most of any man living.

When Sir Tristram understood that Alisander was made knight, anon
forthwithal he sent him a letter, praying him and charging him that he
would draw him to the court of King Arthur, and that he put him in the
rule and in the hands of Sir Launcelot. So this letter was sent to
Alisander from his cousin, Sir Tristram. And at that time he thought to
do after his commandment. Then King Mark called a knight that brought
him the tidings from Alisander, and bade him abide still in that
country. Sir, said that knight, so must I do, for in my own country I
dare not come. No force, said King Mark, I shall give thee here double
as much lands as ever thou hadst of thine own. But within short space
Sir Sadok met with that false knight, and slew him. Then was King Mark
wood wroth out of measure. Then he sent unto Queen Morgan le Fay, and
to the Queen of Northgalis, praying them in his letters that they two
sorceresses would set all the country in fire with ladies that were
enchantresses, and by such that were dangerous knights, as Malgrin,
Breuse Saunce Pité, that by no mean Alisander le Orphelin should
escape, but either he should be taken or slain. This ordinance made
King Mark for to destroy Alisander.




CHAPTER XXXVI. How Sir Alisander won the prize at a tournament, and of
Morgan le Fay: and how he fought with Sir Malgrin, and slew him.


Now turn we again unto Sir Alisander, that at his departing his mother
took with him his father’s bloody shirt. So that he bare with him
always till his death day, in tokening to think of his father’s death.
So was Alisander purposed to ride to London, by the counsel of Sir
Tristram, to Sir Launcelot. And by fortune he went by the seaside, and
rode wrong. And there he won at a tournament the gree that King Carados
made. And there he smote down King Carados and twenty of his knights,
and also Sir Safere, a good knight that was Sir Palomides’ brother, the
good knight. All this saw a damosel, and saw the best knight joust that
ever she saw. And ever as he smote down knights he made them to swear
to wear none harness in a twelvemonth and a day. This is well said,
said Morgan le Fay, this is the knight that I would fain see. And so
she took her palfrey, and rode a great while, and then she rested her
in her pavilion. So there came four knights, two were armed, and two
were unarmed, and they told Morgan le Fay their names: the first was
Elias de Gomeret, the second was Cari de Gomeret, those were armed;
that other twain were of Camiliard, cousins unto Queen Guenever, and
that one hight Guy, and that other hight Garaunt, those were unarmed.
There these four knights told Morgan le Fay how a young knight had
smitten them down before a castle. For the maiden of that castle said
that he was but late made knight, and young. But as we suppose, but if
it were Sir Tristram, or Sir Launcelot, or Sir Lamorak, the good
knight, there is none that might sit him a buffet with a spear. Well,
said Morgan le Fay, I shall meet that knight or it be long time, an he
dwell in that country.

So turn we to the damosel of the castle, that when Alisander le
Orphelin had forjousted the four knights, she called him to her, and
said thus: Sir knight, wilt thou for my sake joust and fight with a
knight, for my sake, of this country, that is and hath been long time
an evil neighbour to me? His name is Malgrin, and he will not suffer me
to be married in no manner wise for all that I can do, or any knight
for my sake. Damosel, said Alisander, an he come whiles I am here I
will fight with him, and my poor body for your sake I will jeopard. And
therewithal she sent for him, for he was at her commandment. And when
either had a sight of other, they made them ready for to joust, and
they came together eagerly, and Malgrin brised his spear upon
Alisander, and Alisander smote him again so hard that he bare him quite
from his saddle to the earth. But this Malgrin arose lightly, and
dressed his shield and drew his sword, and bade him alight, saying:
Though thou have the better of me on horseback, thou shalt find that I
shall endure like a knight on foot. It is well said, said Alisander;
and so lightly he avoided his horse and betook him to his varlet. And
then they rushed together like two boars, and laid on their helms and
shields long time, by the space of three hours, that never man could
say which was the better knight.

And in the meanwhile came Morgan le Fay to the damosel of the castle,
and they beheld the battle. But this Malgrin was an old roted knight,
and he was called one of the dangerous knights of the world to do
battle on foot, but on horseback there were many better. And ever this
Malgrin awaited to slay Alisander, and so wounded him wonderly sore,
that it was marvel that ever he might stand, for he had bled so much
blood; for Alisander fought wildly, and not wittily. And that other was
a felonious knight, and awaited him, and smote him sore. And sometime
they rushed together with their shields, like two boars or rams, and
fell grovelling both to the earth. Now knight, said Malgrin, hold thy
hand a while, and tell me what thou art. I will not, said Alisander,
but if me list: but tell me thy name, and why thou keepest this
country, or else thou shalt die of my hands. Wit thou well, said
Malgrin, that for this maiden’s love, of this castle, I have slain ten
good knights by mishap; and by outrage and orgulité of myself I have
slain ten other knights. So God me help, said Alisander, this is the
foulest confession that ever I heard knight make, nor never heard I
speak of other men of such a shameful confession; wherefore it were
great pity and great shame unto me that I should let thee live any
longer; therefore keep thee as well as ever thou mayest, for as I am
true knight, either thou shalt slay me or else I shall slay thee, I
promise thee faithfully.

Then they lashed together fiercely, and at the last Alisander smote
Malgrin to the earth. And then he raced off his helm, and smote off his
head lightly. And when he had done and ended this battle, anon he
called to him his varlet, the which brought him his horse. And then he,
weening to be strong enough, would have mounted. And so she laid Sir
Alisander in an horse litter, and led him into the castle, for he had
no foot nor might to stand upon the earth; for he had sixteen great
wounds, and in especial one of them was like to be his death.




