CHAPTER XIII. Of the holy communication of an Abbot to Sir Bors, and
how the Abbot counselled him.


And that night was Sir Bors served richly; and on the morn early he
heard mass, and the Abbot came to him, and bade him good morrow, and
Bors to him again. And then he told him he was a fellow of the quest of
the Sangreal, and how he had charge of the holy man to eat bread and
water. Then [said the Abbot]: Our Lord Jesu Christ showed him unto you
in the likeness of a soul that suffered great anguish for us, since He
was put upon the cross, and bled His heart-blood for mankind: there was
the token and the likeness of the Sangreal that appeared afore you, for
the blood that the great fowl bled revived the chickens from death to
life. And by the bare tree is betokened the world which is naked and
without fruit but if it come of Our Lord. Also the lady for whom ye
fought for, and King Aniause which was lord there-to-fore, betokeneth
Jesu Christ which is the King of the world. And that ye fought with the
champion for the lady, this it betokeneth: for when ye took the battle
for the lady, by her shall ye understand the new law of Jesu Christ and
Holy Church; and by the other lady ye shall understand the old law and
the fiend, which all day warreth against Holy Church, therefore ye did
your battle with right. For ye be Jesu Christ’s knights, therefore ye
ought to be defenders of Holy Church. And by the black bird might ye
understand Holy Church, which sayeth I am black, but he is fair. And by
the white bird might men understand the fiend, and I shall tell you how
the swan is white without-forth, and black within: it is hypocrisy
which is without yellow or pale, and seemeth without-forth the servants
of Jesu Christ, but they be within so horrible of filth and sin, and
beguile the world evil. Also when the fiend appeared to thee in
likeness of a man of religion, and blamed thee that thou left thy
brother for a lady, so led thee where thou seemed thy brother was
slain, but he is yet alive; and all was for to put thee in error, and
bring thee unto wanhope and lechery, for he knew thou were tender
hearted, and all was for thou shouldst not find the blessed adventure
of the Sangreal. And the third fowl betokeneth the strong battle
against the fair ladies which were all devils. Also the dry tree and
the white lily: the dry tree betokeneth thy brother Lionel, which is
dry without virtue, and therefore many men ought to call him the rotten
tree, and the worm-eaten tree, for he is a murderer and doth contrary
to the order of knighthood. And the two white flowers signify two
maidens, the one is a knight which was wounded the other day, and the
other is the gentlewoman which ye rescued; and why the other flower
drew nigh the other, that was the knight which would have defouled her
and himself both. And Sir Bors, ye had been a great fool and in great
peril for to have seen those two flowers perish for to succour the
rotten tree, for an they had sinned together they had been damned; and
for that ye rescued them both, men might call you a very knight and
servant of Jesu Christ.




CHAPTER XIV. How Sir Bors met with his brother Sir Lionel, and how Sir
Lionel would have slain Sir Bors.


Then went Sir Bors from thence and commended the Abbot unto God. And
then he rode all that day, and harboured with an old lady. And on the
morn he rode to a castle in a valley, and there he met with a yeoman
going a great pace toward a forest. Say me, said Sir Bors, canst thou
tell me of any adventure? Sir, said he, here shall be under this castle
a great and a marvellous tournament. Of what folks shall it be? said
Sir Bors. The Earl of Plains shall be in the one party, and the lady’s
nephew of Hervin on the other party. Then Bors thought to be there if
he might meet with his brother Sir Lionel, or any other of his
fellowship, which were in the quest of the Sangreal. And then he turned
to an hermitage that was in the entry of the forest.

And when he was come thither he found there Sir Lionel, his brother,
which sat all armed at the entry of the chapel door for to abide there
harbour till on the morn that the tournament shall be. And when Sir
Bors saw him he had great joy of him, that it were marvel to tell of
his joy. And then he alighted off his horse, and said: Fair sweet
brother, when came ye hither? Anon as Lionel saw him he said: Ah Bors,
ye may not make none avaunt, but as for you I might have been slain;
when ye saw two knights leading me away beating me, ye left me for to
succour a gentlewoman, and suffered me in peril of death; for never
erst ne did no brother to another so great an untruth. And for that
misdeed now I ensure you but death, for well have ye deserved it;
therefore keep thee from henceforward, and that shall ye find as soon
as I am armed. When Sir Bors understood his brother’s wrath he kneeled
down to the earth and cried him mercy, holding up both his hands, and
prayed him to forgive him his evil will. Nay, said Lionel, that shall
never be an I may have the higher hand, that I make mine avow to God,
thou shalt have death for it, for it were pity ye lived any longer.

Right so he went in and took his harness, and mounted upon his horse,
and came to-fore him and said: Bors, keep thee from me, for I shall do
to thee as I would to a felon or a traitor, for ye be the untruest
knight that ever came out of so worthy an house as was King Bors de
Ganis which was our father, therefore start upon thy horse, and so
shall ye be most at your advantage. And but if ye will I will run upon
you thereas ye stand upon foot, and so the shame shall be mine and the
harm yours, but of that shame ne reck I nought.

When Sir Bors saw that he must fight with his brother or else to die,
he nist what to do; then his heart counselled him not thereto, inasmuch
as Lionel was born or he, wherefore he ought to bear him reverence; yet
kneeled he down afore Lionel’s horse’s feet, and said: Fair sweet
brother, have mercy upon me and slay me not, and have in remembrance
the great love which ought to be between us twain. What Sir Bors said
to Lionel he rought not, for the fiend had brought him in such a will
that he should slay him. Then when Lionel saw he would none other, and
that he would not have risen to give him battle, he rashed over him so
that he smote Bors with his horse, feet upward, to the earth, and hurt
him so sore that he swooned of distress, the which he felt in himself
to have died without confession. So when Lionel saw this, he alighted
off his horse to have smitten off his head. And so he took him by the
helm, and would have rent it from his head. Then came the hermit
running unto him, which was a good man and of great age, and well had
heard all the words that were between them, and so fell down upon Sir
Bors.




