CHAPTER II. How Sir Launcelot came to Pelles, and of the Sangreal, and
of Elaine, King Pelles’ daughter.


Sir, said Launcelot, wit you well my name is Sir Launcelot du Lake. And
my name is, said the king, Pelles, king of the foreign country, and
cousin nigh unto Joseph of Armathie. And then either of them made much
of other, and so they went into the castle to take their repast. And
anon there came in a dove at a window, and in her mouth there seemed a
little censer of gold. And herewithal there was such a savour as all
the spicery of the world had been there. And forthwithal there was upon
the table all manner of meats and drinks that they could think upon. So
came in a damosel passing fair and young, and she bare a vessel of gold
betwixt her hands; and thereto the king kneeled devoutly, and said his
prayers, and so did all that were there. O Jesu, said Sir Launcelot,
what may this mean? This is, said the king, the richest thing that any
man hath living. And when this thing goeth about, the Round Table shall
be broken; and wit thou well, said the king, this is the holy Sangreal
that ye have here seen. So the king and Sir Launcelot led their life
the most part of that day. And fain would King Pelles have found the
mean to have had Sir Launcelot to have lain by his daughter, fair
Elaine. And for this intent: the king knew well that Sir Launcelot
should get a child upon his daughter, the which should be named Sir
Galahad the good knight, by whom all the foreign country should be
brought out of danger, and by him the Holy Greal should be achieved.

Then came forth a lady that hight Dame Brisen, and she said unto the
king: Sir, wit ye well Sir Launcelot loveth no lady in the world but
all only Queen Guenever; and therefore work ye by counsel, and I shall
make him to lie with your daughter, and he shall not wit but that he
lieth with Queen Guenever. O fair lady, Dame Brisen, said the king,
hope ye to bring this about? Sir, said she, upon pain of my life let me
deal; for this Brisen was one of the greatest enchantresses that was at
that time in the world living. Then anon by Dame Brisen’s wit she made
one to come to Sir Launcelot that he knew well. And this man brought
him a ring from Queen Guenever like as it had come from her, and such
one as she was wont for the most part to wear; and when Sir Launcelot
saw that token wit ye well he was never so fain. Where is my lady? said
Sir Launcelot. In the Castle of Case, said the messenger, but five mile
hence. Then Sir Launcelot thought to be there the same might. And then
this Brisen by the commandment of King Pelles let send Elaine to this
castle with twenty-five knights unto the Castle of Case. Then Sir
Launcelot against night rode unto that castle, and there anon he was
received worshipfully with such people, to his seeming, as were about
Queen Guenever secret.

So when Sir Launcelot was alighted, he asked where the queen was. So
Dame Brisen said she was in her bed; and then the people were avoided,
and Sir Launcelot was led unto his chamber. And then Dame Brisen
brought Sir Launcelot a cup full of wine; and anon as he had drunken
that wine he was so assotted and mad that he might make no delay, but
withouten any let he went to bed; and he weened that maiden Elaine had
been Queen Guenever. Wit you well that Sir Launcelot was glad, and so
was that lady Elaine that she had gotten Sir Launcelot in her arms. For
well she knew that same night should be gotten upon her Galahad that
should prove the best knight of the world; and so they lay together
until underne of the morn; and all the windows and holes of that
chamber were stopped that no manner of day might be seen. And then Sir
Launcelot remembered him, and he arose up and went to the window.




CHAPTER III. How Sir Launcelot was displeased when he knew that he had
lain by Dame Elaine, and how she was delivered of Galahad.


And anon as he had unshut the window the enchantment was gone; then he
knew himself that he had done amiss. Alas, he said, that I have lived
so long; now I am shamed. So then he gat his sword in his hand and
said: Thou traitress, what art thou that I have lain by all this night?
thou shalt die right here of my hands. Then this fair lady Elaine
skipped out of her bed all naked, and kneeled down afore Sir Launcelot,
and said: Fair courteous knight, come of king’s blood, I require you
have mercy upon me, and as thou art renowned the most noble knight of
the world, slay me not, for I have in my womb him by thee that shall be
the most noblest knight of the world. Ah, false traitress, said Sir
Launcelot, why hast thou betrayed me? anon tell me what thou art. Sir,
she said, I am Elaine, the daughter of King Pelles. Well, said Sir
Launcelot, I will forgive you this deed; and therewith he took her up
in his arms, and kissed her, for she was as fair a lady, and thereto
lusty and young, and as wise, as any was that time living. So God me
help, said Sir Launcelot, I may not wite this to you; but her that made
this enchantment upon me as between you and me, an I may find her, that
same Lady Brisen, she shall lose her head for witchcrafts, for there
was never knight deceived so as I am this night. And so Sir Launcelot
arrayed him, and armed him, and took his leave mildly at that lady
young Elaine, and so he departed. Then she said: My lord Sir Launcelot,
I beseech you see me as soon as ye may, for I have obeyed me unto the
prophecy that my father told me. And by his commandment to fulfil this
prophecy I have given the greatest riches and the fairest flower that
ever I had, and that is my maidenhood that I shall never have again;
and therefore, gentle knight, owe me your good will.

And so Sir Launcelot arrayed him and was armed, and took his leave
mildly at that young lady Elaine; and so he departed, and rode till he
came to the Castle of Corbin, where her father was. And as fast as her
time came she was delivered of a fair child, and they christened him
Galahad; and wit ye well that child was well kept and well nourished,
and he was named Galahad because Sir Launcelot was so named at the
fountain stone; and after that the Lady of the Lake confirmed him Sir
Launcelot du Lake.

Then after this lady was delivered and churched, there came a knight
unto her, his name was Sir Bromel la Pleche, the which was a great
lord; and he had loved that lady long, and he evermore desired her to
wed her; and so by no mean she could put him off, till on a day she
said to Sir Bromel: Wit thou well, sir knight, I will not love you, for
my love is set upon the best knight of the world. Who is he? said Sir
Bromel. Sir, she said, it is Sir Launcelot du Lake that I love and none
other, and therefore woo me no longer. Ye say well, said Sir Bromel,
and sithen ye have told me so much, ye shall have but little joy of Sir
Launcelot, for I shall slay him wheresomever I meet him. Sir, said the
Lady Elaine, do to him no treason. Wit ye well, my lady, said Bromel,
and I promise you this twelvemonth I shall keep the pont of Corbin for
Sir Launcelot’s sake, that he shall neither come nor go unto you, but I
shall meet with him.




