CHAPTER IX. How Sir Percivale promised her help, and how he required
her of love, and how he was saved from the fiend.


Then Sir Percivale promised her all the help that he might; and then
she thanked him. And at that time the weather was hot. Then she called
unto her a gentlewoman and bade her bring forth a pavilion; and so she
did, and pight it upon the gravel. Sir, said she, now may ye rest you
in this heat of the day. Then he thanked her, and she put off his helm
and his shield, and there he slept a great while. And then he awoke and
asked her if she had any meat, and she said: Yea, also ye shall have
enough. And so there was set enough upon the table, and thereon so much
that he had marvel, for there was all manner of meats that he could
think on. Also he drank there the strongest wine that ever he drank,
him thought, and therewith he was a little chafed more than he ought to
be; with that he beheld the gentlewoman, and him thought she was the
fairest creature that ever he saw. And then Sir Percivale proffered her
love, and prayed her that she would be his. Then she refused him, in a
manner, when he required her, for the cause he should be the more
ardent on her, and ever he ceased not to pray her of love. And when she
saw him well enchafed, then she said: Sir Percivale, wit you well I
shall not fulfil your will but if ye swear from henceforth ye shall be
my true servant, and to do nothing but that I shall command you. Will
ye ensure me this as ye be a true knight? Yea, said he, fair lady, by
the faith of my body. Well, said she, now shall ye do with me whatso it
please you; and now wit ye well ye are the knight in the world that I
have most desire to.

And then two squires were commanded to make a bed in midst of the
pavilion. And anon she was unclothed and laid therein. And then Sir
Percivale laid him down by her naked; and by adventure and grace he saw
his sword lie on the ground naked, in whose pommel was a red cross and
the sign of the crucifix therein, and bethought him on his knighthood
and his promise made to-forehand unto the good man; then he made a sign
of the cross in his forehead, and therewith the pavilion turned
up-so-down, and then it changed unto a smoke, and a black cloud, and
then he was adread and cried aloud:




CHAPTER X. How Sir Percivale for penance rove himself through the
thigh; and how she was known for the devil.


Fair sweet Father, Jesu Christ, ne let me not be shamed, the which was
nigh lost had not thy good grace been. And then he looked into a ship,
and saw her enter therein, which said: Sir Percivale, ye have betrayed
me. And so she went with the wind roaring and yelling, that it seemed
all the water brent after her. Then Sir Percivale made great sorrow,
and drew his sword unto him, saying: Sithen my flesh will be my master
I shall punish it; and therewith he rove himself through the thigh that
the blood stert about him, and said: O good Lord, take this in
recompensation of that I have done against thee, my Lord. So then he
clothed him and armed him, and called himself a wretch, saying: How
nigh was I lost, and to have lost that I should never have gotten
again, that was my virginity, for that may never be recovered after it
is once lost. And then he stopped his bleeding wound with a piece of
his shirt.

Thus as he made his moan he saw the same ship come from Orient that the
good man was in the day afore, and the noble knight was ashamed with
himself, and therewith he fell in a swoon. And when he awoke he went
unto him weakly, and there he saluted this good man. And then he asked
Sir Percivale: How hast thou done sith I departed? Sir, said he, here
was a gentlewoman and led me into deadly sin. And there he told him
altogether. Knew ye not the maid? said the good man. Sir, said he, nay,
but well I wot the fiend sent her hither to shame me. O good knight,
said he, thou art a fool, for that gentlewoman was the master fiend of
hell, the which hath power above all devils, and that was the old lady
that thou sawest in thine advision riding on the serpent. Then he told
Sir Percivale how our Lord Jesu Christ beat him out of heaven for his
sin, the which was the most brightest angel of heaven, and therefore he
lost his heritage. And that was the champion that thou foughtest
withal, the which had overcome thee had not the grace of God been. Now
beware Sir Percivale, and take this for an ensample. And then the good
man vanished away. Then Sir Percivale took his arms, and entered into
the ship, and so departed from thence.

_Here endeth the fourteenth book, which is of Sir Percivale. And here
followeth of Sir Launcelot, which is the fifteenth book._




BOOK XV.




CHAPTER I. How Sir Launcelot came to a chapel, where he found dead, in
a white shirt, a man of religion, of an hundred winter old.


When the hermit had kept Sir Launcelot three days, the hermit gat him
an horse, an helm, and a sword. And then he departed about the hour of
noon. And then he saw a little house. And when he came near he saw a
chapel, and there beside he saw an old man that was clothed all in
white full richly; and then Sir Launcelot said: God save you. God keep
you, said the good man, and make you a good knight. Then Sir Launcelot
alighted and entered into the chapel, and there he saw an old man dead,
in a white shirt of passing fine cloth.

Sir, said the good man, this man that is dead ought not to be in such
clothing as ye see him in, for in that he brake the oath of his order,
for he hath been more than an hundred winter a man of a religion. And
then the good man and Sir Launcelot went into the chapel; and the good
man took a stole about his neck, and a book, and then he conjured on
that book; and with that they saw in an hideous figure and horrible,
that there was no man so hard-hearted nor so hard but he should have
been afeard. Then said the fiend: Thou hast travailed me greatly; now
tell me what thou wilt with me. I will, said the good man, that thou
tell me how my fellow became dead, and whether he be saved or damned.
Then he said with an horrible voice: He is not lost but saved. How may
that be? said the good man; it seemed to me that he lived not well, for
he brake his order for to wear a shirt where he ought to wear none, and
who that trespasseth against our order doth not well. Not so, said the
fiend, this man that lieth here dead was come of a great lineage. And
there was a lord that hight the Earl de Vale, that held great war
against this man’s nephew, the which hight Aguarus. And so this Aguarus
saw the earl was bigger than he. Then he went for to take counsel of
his uncle, the which lieth here dead as ye may see. And then he asked
leave, and went out of his hermitage for to maintain his nephew against
the mighty earl; and so it happed that this man that lieth here dead
did so much by his wisdom and hardiness that the earl was taken, and
three of his lords, by force of this dead man.




