CHAPTER XV. How Sir Colgrevance fought against Sir Lionel for to save
Sir Bors, and how the hermit was slain.


Then he said to Lionel: Ah gentle knight, have mercy upon me and on thy
brother, for if thou slay him thou shalt be dead of sin, and that were
sorrowful, for he is one of the worthiest knights of the world, and of
the best conditions. So God help me, said Lionel, sir priest, but if ye
flee from him I shall slay you, and he shall never the sooner be quit.
Certes, said the good man, I have liefer ye slay me than him, for my
death shall not be great harm, not half so much as of his. Well, said
Lionel, I am greed; and set his hand to his sword and smote him so hard
that his head yede backward. Not for that he restrained him of his evil
will, but took his brother by the helm, and unlaced it to have stricken
off his head, and had slain him without fail. But so it happed,
Colgrevance a fellow of the Round Table, came at that time thither as
Our Lord’s will was. And when he saw the good man slain he marvelled
much what it might be. And then he beheld Lionel would have slain his
brother, and knew Sir Bors which he loved right well. Then stert he
down and took Lionel by the shoulders, and drew him strongly aback from
Bors, and said: Lionel, will ye slay your brother, the worthiest knight
of the world one? and that should no good man suffer. Why, said Lionel,
will ye let me? therefore if ye entermete you in this I shall slay you,
and him after. Why, said Colgrevance, is this sooth that ye will slay
him? Slay him will I, said he, whoso say the contrary, for he hath done
so much against me that he hath well deserved it. And so ran upon him,
and would have smitten him through the head, and Sir Colgrevance ran
betwixt them, and said: An ye be so hardy to do so more, we two shall
meddle together.

When Lionel understood his words he took his shield afore him, and
asked him what that he was. And he told him, Colgrevance, one of his
fellows. Then Lionel defied him, and gave him a great stroke through
the helm. Then he drew his sword, for he was a passing good knight, and
defended him right manfully. So long dured the battle that Bors rose up
all anguishly, and beheld [how] Colgrevance, the good knight, fought
with his brother for his quarrel; then was he full sorry and heavy, and
thought if Colgrevance slew him that was his brother he should never
have joy; and if his brother slew Colgrevance the shame should ever be
mine. Then would he have risen to have departed them, but he had not so
much might to stand on foot; so he abode him so long till Colgrevance
had the worse, for Lionel was of great chivalry and right hardy, for he
had pierced the hauberk and the helm, that he abode but death, for he
had lost much of his blood that it was marvel that he might stand
upright. Then beheld he Sir Bors which sat dressing him upward and
said: Ah, Bors, why come ye not to cast me out of peril of death,
wherein I have put me to succour you which were right now nigh the
death? Certes, said Lionel, that shall not avail you, for none of you
shall bear others warrant, but that ye shall die both of my hand. When
Bors heard that, he did so much, he rose and put on his helm. Then
perceived he first the hermit-priest which was slain, then made he a
marvellous sorrow upon him.




CHAPTER XVI. How Sir Lionel slew Sir Colgrevance, and how after he
would have slain Sir Bors.


Then oft Colgrevance cried upon Sir Bors: Why will ye let me die here
for your sake? if it please you that I die for you the death, it will
please me the better for to save a worthy man. With that word Sir
Lionel smote off the helm from his head. Then Colgrevance saw that he
might not escape; then he said: Fair sweet Jesu, that I have misdone
have mercy upon my soul, for such sorrow that my heart suffereth for
goodness, and for alms deed that I would have done here, be to me
aligement of penance unto my soul’s health. At these words Lionel smote
him so sore that he bare him to the earth. So he had slain Colgrevance
he ran upon his brother as a fiendly man, and gave him such a stroke
that he made him stoop. And he that was full of humility prayed him for
God’s love to leave this battle: For an it befell, fair brother, that I
slew you or ye me, we should be dead of that sin. Never God me help but
if I have on you mercy, an I may have the better hand. Then drew Bors
his sword, all weeping, and said: Fair brother, God knoweth mine
intent. Ah, fair brother, ye have done full evil this day to slay such
an holy priest the which never trespassed. Also ye have slain a gentle
knight, and one of our fellows. And well wot ye that I am not afeard of
you greatly, but I dread the wrath of God, and this is an unkindly war,
therefore God show miracle upon us both. Now God have mercy upon me
though I defend my life against my brother: with that Bors lift up his
hand and would have smitten his brother.




CHAPTER XVII. How there came a voice which charged Sir Bors to touch
him not, and of a cloud that came between them.


And then he heard a voice that said: Flee Bors, and touch him not, or
else thou shalt slay him. Right so alighted a cloud betwixt them in
likeness of a fire and a marvellous flame, that both their two shields
brent. Then were they sore afraid, that they fell both to the earth,
and lay there a great while in a swoon. And when they came to themself,
Bors saw that his brother had no harm; then he held up both his hands,
for he dread God had taken vengeance upon him. With that he heard a
voice say: Bors, go hence, and bear thy brother no longer fellowship,
but take thy way anon right to the sea, for Sir Percivale abideth thee
there. Then he said to his brother: Fair sweet brother, forgive me for
God’s love all that I have trespassed unto you. Then he answered: God
forgive it thee and I do gladly.

So Sir Bors departed from him and rode the next way to the sea. And at
the last by fortune he came to an abbey which was nigh the sea. That
night Bors rested him there; and in his sleep there came a voice to him
and bade him go to the sea. Then he stert up and made a sign of the
cross in the midst of his forehead, and took his harness, and made
ready his horse, and mounted upon him; and at a broken wall he rode
out, and rode so long till that he came to the sea. And on the strand
he found a ship covered all with white samite, and he alighted, and
betook him to Jesu Christ. And as soon as he entered into the ship, the
ship departed into the sea, and went so fast that him seemed the ship
went flying, but it was soon dark so that he might know no man, and so
he slept till it was day. Then he awaked, and saw in midst of the ship
a knight lie all armed save his helm. Then knew he that it was Sir
Percivale of Wales, and then he made of him right great joy; but Sir
Percivale was abashed of him, and he asked him what he was. Ah, fair
sir, said Bors, know ye me not? Certes, said he, I marvel how ye came
hither, but if Our Lord brought ye hither Himself. Then Sir Bors smiled
and did off his helm. Then Percivale knew him, and either made great
joy of other, that it was marvel to hear. Then Bors told him how he
came into the ship, and by whose admonishment; and either told other of
their temptations, as ye have heard to-forehand. So went they downward
in the sea, one while backward, another while forward, and everych
comforted other, and oft were in their prayers. Then said Sir
Percivale: We lack nothing but Galahad, the good knight.

_And thus endeth the sixteenth book, which is of Sir Gawaine, Ector de
Maris, and Sir Bors de Ganis, and Sir Percivale. And here followeth the
seven-teenth book, which is of the noble knight Sir Galahad._




