CHAPTER XVI. How Sir Dinadan told Sir Palomides of the battle between
Sir Launcelot and Sir Tristam.


Now turn we again unto Sir Palomides, how Sir Dinadan comforted him in
all that he might, from his great sorrow. What knight are ye? said Sir
Palomides. Sir, I am a knight-errant as ye be, that hath sought you
long by your shield. Here is my shield, said Sir Palomides, wit ye
well, an ye will ought, therewith I will defend it. Nay, said Sir
Dinadan, I will not have ado with you but in good manner. And if ye
will, ye shall find me soon ready. Sir, said Sir Dinadan, whitherward
ride you this way? By my head, said Sir Palomides, I wot not, but as
fortune leadeth me. Heard ye or saw ye ought of Sir Tristram? So God me
help, of Sir Tristram I both heard and saw, and not for then we loved
not inwardly well together, yet at my mischief Sir Tristram rescued me
from my death; and yet, or he and I departed, by both our assents we
assigned a day that we should have met at the stony grave that Merlin
set beside Camelot, and there to have done battle together; howbeit I
was letted, said Sir Palomides, that I might not hold my day, the which
grieveth me sore; but I have a large excuse. For I was prisoner with a
lord, and many other more, and that shall Sir Tristram right well
understand, that I brake it not of fear of cowardice. And then Sir
Palomides told Sir Dinadan the same day that they should have met. So
God me help, said Sir Dinadan, that same day met Sir Launcelot and Sir
Tristram at the same grave of stone. And there was the most mightiest
battle that ever was seen in this land betwixt two knights, for they
fought more than two hours. And there they both bled so much blood that
all men marvelled that ever they might endure it. And so at the last,
by both their assents, they were made friends and sworn-brethren for
ever, and no man can judge the better knight. And now is Sir Tristram
made a knight of the Round Table, and he sitteth in the siege of the
noble knight, Sir Marhaus. By my head, said Sir Palomides, Sir Tristram
is far bigger than Sir Launcelot, and the hardier knight. Have ye
assayed them both? said Sir Dinadan. I have seen Sir Tristram fight,
said Sir Palomides, but never Sir Launcelot to my witting. But at the
fountain where Sir Launcelot lay asleep, there with one spear he smote
down Sir Tristram and me, said Palomides, but at that time they knew
not either other. Fair knight, said Sir Dinadan, as for Sir Launcelot
and Sir Tristram let them be, for the worst of them will not be lightly
matched of no knights that I know living. No, said Sir Palomides, God
defend, but an I had a quarrel to the better of them both I would with
as good a will fight with him as with you. Sir, I require you tell me
your name, and in good faith I shall hold you company till that we come
to Camelot; and there shall ye have great worship now at this great
tournament; for there shall be the Queen Guenever, and La Beale Isoud
of Cornwall. Wit you well, sir knight, for the love of La Beale Isoud I
will be there, and else not, but I will not have ado in King Arthur’s
court. Sir, said Dinadan, I shall ride with you and do you service, so
you will tell me your name. Sir, ye shall understand my name is Sir
Palomides, brother to Safere, the good and noble knight. And Sir
Segwarides and I, we be Saracens born, of father and mother. Sir, said
Sir Dinadan, I thank you much for the telling of your name. For I am
glad of that I know your name, and I promise you by the faith of my
body, ye shall not be hurt by me by my will, but rather be advanced.
And thereto will I help you with all my power, I promise you, doubt ye
not. And certainly on my life ye shall win great worship in the court
of King Arthur, and be right welcome. So then they dressed on their
helms and put on their shields, and mounted upon their horses, and took
the broad way towards Camelot. And then were they ware of a castle that
was fair and rich, and also passing strong as any was within this
realm.




CHAPTER XVII. How Sir Lamorak jousted with divers knights of the castle
wherein was Morgan le Fay.


Sir Palomides, said Dinadan, here is a castle that I know well, and
therein dwelleth Queen Morgan le Fay, King Arthur’s sister; and King
Arthur gave her this castle, the which he hath repented him sithen a
thousand times, for sithen King Arthur and she have been at debate and
strife; but this castle could he never get nor win of her by no manner
of engine; and ever as she might she made war on King Arthur. And all
dangerous knights she withholdeth with her, for to destroy all these
knights that King Arthur loveth. And there shall no knight pass this
way but he must joust with one knight, or with two, or with three. And
if it hap that King Arthur’s knight be beaten, he shall lose his horse
and his harness and all that he hath, and hard, if that he escape, but
that he shall be prisoner. So God me help, said Palomides, this is a
shameful custom, and a villainous usance for a queen to use, and namely
to make such war upon her own lord, that is called the Flower of
Chivalry that is christian or heathen; and with all my heart I would
destroy that shameful custom. And I will that all the world wit she
shall have no service of me. And if she send out any knights, as I
suppose she will, for to joust, they shall have both their hands full.
And I shall not fail you, said Sir Dinadan, unto my puissance, upon my
life.

So as they stood on horseback afore the castle, there came a knight
with a red shield, and two squires after him; and he came straight unto
Sir Palomides, the good knight, and said to him: Fair and gentle
knight-errant, I require thee for the love thou owest unto knighthood,
that ye will not have ado here with these men of this castle; for this
was Sir Lamorak that thus said. For I came hither to seek this deed,
and it is my request; and therefore I beseech you, knight, let me deal,
and if I be beaten revenge me. In the name of God, said Palomides, let
see how ye will speed, and we shall behold you. Then anon came forth a
knight of the castle, and proffered to joust with the Knight with the
Red Shield. Anon they encountered together, and he with the red shield
smote him so hard that he bare him over to the earth. Therewith anon
came another knight of the castle, and he was smitten so sore that he
avoided his saddle. And forthwithal came the third knight, and the
Knight with the Red Shield smote him to the earth. Then came Sir
Palomides, and besought him that he might help him to joust. Fair
knight, said he unto him, suffer me as at this time to have my will,
for an they were twenty knights I shall not doubt them. And ever there
were upon the walls of the castle many lords and ladies that cried and
said: Well have ye jousted, Knight with the Red Shield. But as soon as
the knight had smitten them down, his squire took their horses, and
avoided their saddles and bridles of the horses, and turned them into
the forest, and made the knights to be kept to the end of the jousts.
Right so came out of the castle the fourth knight, and freshly
proffered to joust with the Knight with the Red Shield: and he was
ready, and he smote him so hard that horse and man fell to the earth,
and the knight’s back brake with the fall, and his neck also. O Jesu,
said Sir Palomides, that yonder is a passing good knight, and the best
jouster that ever I saw. By my head, said Sir Dinadan, he is as good as
ever was Sir Launcelot or Sir Tristram, what knight somever he be.




