CHAPTER VI. How Sir Bors departed; and how Sir Launcelot was rebuked of
Queen Guenever, and of his excuse.


Now, said that old man to Sir Bors, go ye to your cousin, Sir
Launcelot, and tell him of this adventure the which had been most
convenient for him of all earthly knights; but sin is so foul in him he
may not achieve such holy deeds, for had not been his sin he had passed
all the knights that ever were in his days; and tell thou Sir
Launcelot, of all worldly adventures he passeth in manhood and prowess
all other, but in this spiritual matters he shall have many his better.
And then Sir Bors saw four gentlewomen come by him, purely beseen: and
he saw where that they entered into a chamber where was great light as
it were a summer light; and the women kneeled down afore an altar of
silver with four pillars, and as it had been a bishop kneeled down
afore that table of silver. And as Sir Bors looked over his head he saw
a sword like silver, naked, hoving over his head, and the clearness
thereof smote so in his eyes that as at that time Sir Bors was blind;
and there he heard a voice that said: Go hence, thou Sir Bors, for as
yet thou art not worthy for to be in this place. And then he yede
backward to his bed till on the morn. And on the morn King Pelles made
great joy of Sir Bors; and then he departed and rode to Camelot, and
there he found Sir Launcelot du Lake, and told him of the adventures
that he had seen with King Pelles at Corbin.

So the noise sprang in Arthur’s court that Launcelot had gotten a child
upon Elaine, the daughter of King Pelles, wherefore Queen Guenever was
wroth, and gave many rebukes to Sir Launcelot, and called him false
knight. And then Sir Launcelot told the queen all, and how he was made
to lie by her by enchantment in likeness of the queen. So the queen
held Sir Launcelot excused. And as the book saith, King Arthur had been
in France, and had made war upon the mighty King Claudas, and had won
much of his lands. And when the king was come again he let cry a great
feast, that all lords and ladies of all England should be there, but if
it were such as were rebellious against him.




CHAPTER VII. How Dame Elaine, Galahad’s mother, came in great estate
unto Camelot, and how Sir Launcelot behaved him there.


And when Dame Elaine, the daughter of King Pelles, heard of this feast
she went to her father and required him that he would give her leave to
ride to that feast. The king answered: I will well ye go thither, but
in any wise as ye love me and will have my blessing, that ye be well
beseen in the richest wise; and look that ye spare not for no cost; ask
and ye shall have all that you needeth. Then by the advice of Dame
Brisen, her maiden, all thing was apparelled unto the purpose, that
there was never no lady more richlier beseen. So she rode with twenty
knights, and ten ladies, and gentlewomen, to the number of an hundred
horses. And when she came to Camelot, King Arthur and Queen Guenever
said, and all the knights, that Dame Elaine was the fairest and the
best beseen lady that ever was seen in that court. And anon as King
Arthur wist that she was come he met her and saluted her, and so did
the most part of all the knights of the Round Table, both Sir Tristram,
Sir Bleoberis, and Sir Gawaine, and many more that I will not rehearse.
But when Sir Launcelot saw her he was so ashamed, and that because he
drew his sword on the morn when he had lain by her, that he would not
salute her nor speak to her; and yet Sir Launcelot thought she was the
fairest woman that ever he saw in his life-days.

But when Dame Elaine saw Sir Launcelot that would not speak unto her
she was so heavy that she weened her heart would have to-brast; for wit
you well, out of measure she loved him. And then Elaine said unto her
woman, Dame Brisen: the unkindness of Sir Launcelot slayeth me near.
Ah, peace, madam, said Dame Brisen, I will undertake that this night he
shall lie with you, an ye would hold you still. That were me liefer,
said Dame Elaine, than all the gold that is above the earth. Let me
deal, said Dame Brisen. So when Elaine was brought unto Queen Guenever
either made other good cheer by countenance, but nothing with hearts.
But all men and women spake of the beauty of Dame Elaine, and of her
great riches.

Then, at night, the queen commanded that Dame Elaine should sleep in a
chamber nigh her chamber, and all under one roof; and so it was done as
the queen commanded. Then the queen sent for Sir Launcelot and bade him
come to her chamber that night: Or else I am sure, said the queen, that
ye will go to your lady’s bed, Dame Elaine, by whom ye gat Galahad. Ah,
madam, said Sir Launcelot, never say ye so, for that I did was against
my will. Then, said the queen, look that ye come to me when I send for
you. Madam, said Launcelot, I shall not fail you, but I shall be ready
at your commandment. This bargain was soon done and made between them,
but Dame Brisen knew it by her crafts, and told it to her lady, Dame
Elaine. Alas, said she, how shall I do? Let me deal, said Dame Brisen,
for I shall bring him by the hand even to your bed, and he shall ween
that I am Queen Guenever’s messenger. Now well is me, said Dame Elaine,
for all the world I love not so much as I do Sir Launcelot.




CHAPTER VIII. How Dame Brisen by enchantment brought Sir Launcelot to
Dame Elaine’s bed, and how Queen Guenever rebuked him.


So when time came that all folks were abed, Dame Brisen came to Sir
Launcelot’s bed’s side and said: Sir Launcelot du Lake, sleep you? My
lady, Queen Guenever, lieth and awaiteth upon you. O my fair lady, said
Sir Launcelot, I am ready to go with you where ye will have me. So Sir
Launcelot threw upon him a long gown, and his sword in his hand; and
then Dame Brisen took him by the finger and led him to her lady’s bed,
Dame Elaine; and then she departed and left them in bed together. Wit
you well the lady was glad, and so was Sir Launcelot, for he weened
that he had had another in his arms.

Now leave we them kissing and clipping, as was kindly thing; and now
speak we of Queen Guenever that sent one of her women unto Sir
Launcelot’s bed; and when she came there she found the bed cold, and he
was away; so she came to the queen and told her all. Alas, said the
queen, where is that false knight become? Then the queen was nigh out
of her wit, and then she writhed and weltered as a mad woman, and might
not sleep a four or five hours. Then Sir Launcelot had a condition that
he used of custom, he would clatter in his sleep, and speak oft of his
lady, Queen Guenever. So as Sir Launcelot had waked as long as it had
pleased him, then by course of kind he slept, and Dame Elaine both. And
in his sleep he talked and clattered as a jay, of the love that had
been betwixt Queen Guenever and him. And so as he talked so loud the
queen heard him thereas she lay in her chamber; and when she heard him
so clatter she was nigh wood and out of her mind, and for anger and
pain wist not what to do. And then she coughed so loud that Sir
Launcelot awaked, and he knew her hemming. And then he knew well that
he lay not by the queen; and therewith he leapt out of his bed as he
had been a wood man, in his shirt, and the queen met him in the floor;
and thus she said: False traitor knight that thou art, look thou never
abide in my court, and avoid my chamber, and not so hardy, thou false
traitor knight that thou art, that ever thou come in my sight. Alas,
said Sir Launcelot; and therewith he took such an heartly sorrow at her
words that he fell down to the floor in a swoon. And therewithal Queen
Guenever departed. And when Sir Launcelot awoke of his swoon, he leapt
out at a bay window into a garden, and there with thorns he was all
to-scratched in his visage and his body; and so he ran forth he wist
not whither, and was wild wood as ever was man; and so he ran two year,
and never man might have grace to know him.




