CHAPTER XV. How Sir Galahad fought with the knights of the castle, and
destroyed the wicked custom.


When Sir Galahad heard this he thanked God, and took his horse; and he
had not ridden but half a mile, he saw in the valley afore him a strong
castle with deep ditches, and there ran beside it a fair river that
hight Severn; and there he met with a man of great age, and either
saluted other, and Galahad asked him the castle’s name. Fair sir, said
he, it is the Castle of Maidens. That is a cursed castle, said Galahad,
and all they that be conversant therein, for all pity is out thereof,
and all hardiness and mischief is therein. Therefore, I counsel you,
sir knight, to turn again. Sir, said Galahad, wit you well I shall not
turn again. Then looked Sir Galahad on his arms that nothing failed
him, and then he put his shield afore him; and anon there met him seven
fair maidens, the which said unto him: Sir knight, ye ride here in a
great folly, for ye have the water to pass over. Why should I not pass
the water? said Galahad. So rode he away from them and met with a
squire that said: Knight, those knights in the castle defy you, and
defenden you ye go no further till that they wit what ye would. Fair
sir, said Galahad, I come for to destroy the wicked custom of this
castle. Sir, an ye will abide by that ye shall have enough to do. Go
you now, said Galahad, and haste my needs.

Then the squire entered into the castle. And anon after there came out
of the castle seven knights, and all were brethren. And when they saw
Galahad they cried: Knight, keep thee, for we assure thee nothing but
death. Why, said Galahad, will ye all have ado with me at once? Yea,
said they, thereto mayst thou trust. Then Galahad put forth his spear
and smote the foremost to the earth, that near he brake his neck. And
therewithal the other smote him on his shield great strokes, so that
their spears brake. Then Sir Galahad drew out his sword, and set upon
them so hard that it was marvel to see it, and so through great force
he made them to forsake the field; and Galahad chased them till they
entered into the castle, and so passed through the castle at another
gate.

And there met Sir Galahad an old man clothed in religious clothing, and
said: Sir, have here the keys of this castle. Then Sir Galahad opened
the gates, and saw so much people in the streets that he might not
number them, and all said: Sir, ye be welcome, for long have we abiden
here our deliverance. Then came to him a gentlewoman and said: These
knights be fled, but they will come again this night, and here to begin
again their evil custom. What will ye that I shall do? said Galahad.
Sir, said the gentlewoman, that ye send after all the knights hither
that hold their lands of this castle, and make them to swear for to use
the customs that were used heretofore of old time. I will well, said
Galahad. And there she brought him an horn of ivory, bounden with gold
richly, and said: Sir, blow this horn which will be heard two mile
about this castle. When Sir Galahad had blown the horn he set him down
upon a bed.

Then came a priest to Galahad, and said: Sir, it is past a seven year
agone that these seven brethren came into this castle, and harboured
with the lord of this castle that hight the Duke Lianour, and he was
lord of all this country. And when they espied the duke’s daughter,
that was a full fair woman, then by their false covin they made debate
betwixt themself, and the duke of his goodness would have departed
them, and there they slew him and his eldest son. And then they took
the maiden and the treasure of the castle. And then by great force they
held all the knights of this castle against their will under their
obeissance, and in great service and truage, robbing and pilling the
poor common people of all that they had. So it happened on a day the
duke’s daughter said: Ye have done unto me great wrong to slay mine own
father, and my brother, and thus to hold our lands: not for then, she
said, ye shall not hold this castle for many years, for by one knight
ye shall be overcome. Thus she prophesied seven years agone. Well, said
the seven knights, sithen ye say so, there shall never lady nor knight
pass this castle but they shall abide maugre their heads, or die
therefore, till that knight be come by whom we shall lose this castle.
And therefore is it called the Maidens’ Castle, for they have devoured
many maidens. Now, said Galahad, is she here for whom this castle was
lost? Nay sir, said the priest, she was dead within these three nights
after that she was thus enforced; and sithen have they kept her younger
sister, which endureth great pains with mo other ladies.

By this were the knights of the country come, and then he made them do
homage and fealty to the king’s daughter, and set them in great ease of
heart. And in the morn there came one to Galahad and told him how that
Gawaine, Gareth, and Uwaine, had slain the seven brethren. I suppose
well, said Sir Galahad, and took his armour and his horse, and
commended them unto God.




CHAPTER XVI. How Sir Gawaine came to the abbey for to follow Galahad,
and how he was shriven to a hermit.


Now, saith the tale, after Sir Gawaine departed, he rode many journeys,
both toward and froward. And at the last he came to the abbey where Sir
Galahad had the white shield, and there Sir Gawaine learned the way to
sewe after Sir Galahad; and so he rode to the abbey where Melias lay
sick, and there Sir Melias told Sir Gawaine of the marvellous
adventures that Sir Galahad did. Certes, said Sir Gawaine, I am not
happy that I took not the way that he went, for an I may meet with him
I will not depart from him lightly, for all marvellous adventures Sir
Galahad enchieveth. Sir, said one of the monks, he will not of your
fellowship. Why? said Sir Gawaine. Sir, said he, for ye be wicked and
sinful, and he is full blessed. Right as they thus stood talking there
came in riding Sir Gareth. And then they made joy either of other. And
on the morn they heard mass, and so departed. And by the way they met
with Sir Uwaine les Avoutres, and there Sir Uwaine told Sir Gawaine how
he had met with none adventure sith he departed from the court. Nor we,
said Sir Gawaine. And either promised other of the three knights not to
depart while they were in that quest, but if fortune caused it.

So they departed and rode by fortune till that they came by the Castle
of Maidens; and there the seven brethren espied the three knights, and
said: Sithen, we be flemed by one knight from this castle, we shall
destroy all the knights of King Arthur’s that we may overcome, for the
love of Sir Galahad. And therewith the seven knights set upon the three
knights, and by fortune Sir Gawaine slew one of the brethren, and each
one of his fellows slew another, and so slew the remnant. And then they
took the way under the castle, and there they lost the way that Sir
Galahad rode, and there everych of them departed from other; and Sir
Gawaine rode till he came to an hermitage, and there he found the good
man saying his evensong of Our Lady; and there Sir Gawaine asked
harbour for charity, and the good man granted it him gladly.

Then the good man asked him what he was. Sir, he said, I am a knight of
King Arthur’s that am in the quest of the Sangreal, and my name is Sir
Gawaine. Sir, said the good man, I would wit how it standeth betwixt
God and you. Sir, said Sir Gawaine, I will with a good will shew you my
life if it please you; and there he told the hermit how a monk of an
abbey called me wicked knight. He might well say it, said the hermit,
for when ye were first made knight ye should have taken you to knightly
deeds and virtuous living, and ye have done the contrary, for ye have
lived mischievously many winters; and Sir Galahad is a maid and sinned
never, and that is the cause he shall enchieve where he goeth that ye
nor none such shall not attain, nor none in your fellowship, for ye
have used the most untruest life that ever I heard knight live. For
certes had ye not been so wicked as ye are, never had the seven
brethren been slain by you and your two fellows. For Sir Galahad
himself alone beat them all seven the day to-fore, but his living is
such he shall slay no man lightly. Also I may say you the Castle of
Maidens betokeneth the good souls that were in prison afore the
Incarnation of Jesu Christ. And the seven knights betoken the seven
deadly sins that reigned that time in the world; and I may liken the
good Galahad unto the son of the High Father, that lighted within a
maid, and bought all the souls out of thrall, so did Sir Galahad
deliver all the maidens out of the woful castle.

Now, Sir Gawaine, said the good man, thou must do penance for thy sin.
Sir, what penance shall I do? Such as I will give, said the good man.
Nay, said Sir Gawaine, I may do no penance; for we knights adventurous
oft suffer great woe and pain. Well, said the good man, and then he
held his peace. And on the morn Sir Gawaine departed from the hermit,
and betaught him unto God. And by adventure he met with Sir Aglovale
and Sir Griflet, two knights of the Table Round. And they two rode four
days without finding of any adventure, and at the fifth day they
departed. And everych held as fell them by adventure. Here leaveth the
tale of Sir Gawaine and his fellows, and speak we of Sir Galahad.




