CHAPTER LII. How Sir Tristram and La Beale Isoud came unto England, and
how Sir Launcelot brought them to Joyous Gard.


Then La Beale Isoud and Sir Tristram took their vessel, and came by
water into this land. And so they were not in this land four days but
there came a cry of a jousts and tournament that King Arthur let make.
When Sir Tristram heard tell of that tournament he disguised himself,
and La Beale Isoud, and rode unto that tournament. And when he came
there he saw many knights joust and tourney; and so Sir Tristram
dressed him to the range, and to make short conclusion, he overthrew
fourteen knights of the Round Table. When Sir Launcelot saw these
knights thus overthrown, Sir Launcelot dressed him to Sir Tristram.
That saw La Beale Isoud how Sir Launcelot was come into the field. Then
La Beale Isoud sent unto Sir Launcelot a ring, and bade him wit that it
was Sir Tristram de Liones. When Sir Launcelot under stood that there
was Sir Tristram he was full glad, and would not joust. Then Sir
Launcelot espied whither Sir Tristram yede, and after him he rode; and
then either made of other great joy. And so Sir Launcelot brought Sir
Tristram and La Beale Isoud unto Joyous Gard, that was his own castle,
that he had won with his own hands. And there Sir Launcelot put them in
to wield for their own. And wit ye well that castle was garnished and
furnished for a king and a queen royal there to have sojourned. And Sir
Launcelot charged all his people to honour them and love them as they
would do himself.

So Sir Launcelot departed unto King Arthur; and then he told Queen
Guenever how he that jousted so well at the last tournament was Sir
Tristram. And there he told her how he had with him La Beale Isoud
maugre King Mark, and so Queen Guenever told all this unto King Arthur.
When King Arthur wist that Sir Tristram was escaped and come from King
Mark, and had brought La Beale Isoud with him, then was he passing
glad. So because of Sir Tristram King Arthur let make a cry, that on
May Day should be a jousts before the castle of Lonazep; and that
castle was fast by Joyous Gard. And thus Arthur devised, that all the
knights of this land, and of Cornwall, and of North Wales, should joust
against all these countries, Ireland, Scotland, and the remnant of
Wales, and the country of Gore, and Surluse, and of Listinoise, and
they of Northumberland, and all they that held lands of Arthur on this
half the sea. When this cry was made many knights were glad and many
were unglad. Sir, said Launcelot unto Arthur, by this cry that ye have
made ye will put us that be about you in great jeopardy, for there be
many knights that have great envy to us; therefore when we shall meet
at the day of jousts there will be hard shift among us. As for that,
said Arthur, I care not; there shall we prove who shall be best of his
hands. So when Sir Launcelot understood wherefore King Arthur made this
jousting, then he made such purveyance that La Beale Isoud should
behold the jousts in a secret place that was honest for her estate.

Now turn we unto Sir Tristram and to La Beale Isoud, how they made
great joy daily together with all manner of mirths that they could
devise; and every day Sir Tristram would go ride a-hunting, for Sir
Tristram was that time called the best chaser of the world, and the
noblest blower of an horn of all manner of measures; for as books
report, of Sir Tristram came all the good terms of venery and hunting,
and all the sizes and measures of blowing of an horn; and of him we had
first all the terms of hawking, and which were beasts of chase and
beasts of venery, and which were vermins, and all the blasts that long
to all manner of games. First to the uncoupling, to the seeking, to the
rechate, to the flight, to the death, and to strake, and many other
blasts and terms, that all manner of gentlemen have cause to the
world’s end to praise Sir Tristram, and to pray for his soul.




CHAPTER LIII. How by the counsel of La Beale Isoud Sir Tristram rode
armed, and how he met with Sir Palomides.


So on a day La Beale Isoud said unto Sir Tristram: I marvel me much,
said she, that ye remember not yourself, how ye be here in a strange
country, and here be many perilous knights; and well ye wot that King
Mark is full of treason; and that ye will ride thus to chase and to
hunt unarmed ye might be destroyed. My fair lady and my love, I cry you
mercy, I will no more do so. So then Sir Tristram rode daily a-hunting
armed, and his men bearing his shield and his spear. So on a day a
little afore the month of May, Sir Tristram chased an hart passing
eagerly, and so the hart passed by a fair well. And then Sir Tristram
alighted and put off his helm to drink of that bubbly water. Right so
he heard and saw the Questing Beast come to the well. When Sir Tristram
saw that beast he put on his helm, for he deemed he should hear of Sir
Palomides, for that beast was his quest. Right so Sir Tristram saw
where came a knight armed, upon a noble courser, and he saluted him,
and they spake of many things; and this knight’s name was Breuse Saunce
Pité. And right so withal there came unto them the noble knight Sir
Palomides, and either saluted other, and spake fair to other.

Fair knights, said Sir Palomides, I can tell you tidings. What is that?
said those knights. Sirs, wit ye well that King Mark is put in prison
by his own knights, and all was for love of Sir Tristram; for King Mark
had put Sir Tristram twice in prison, and once Sir Percivale delivered
the noble knight Sir Tristram out of prison. And at the last time Queen
La Beale Isoud delivered him, and went clearly away with him into this
realm; and all this while King Mark, the false traitor, is in prison.
Is this truth? said Palomides; then shall we hastily hear of Sir
Tristram. And as for to say that I love La Beale Isoud paramours, I
dare make good that I do, and that she hath my service above all other
ladies, and shall have the term of my life.

And right so as they stood talking they saw afore them where came a
knight all armed, on a great horse, and one of his men bare his shield,
and the other his spear. And anon as that knight espied them he gat his
shield and his spear and dressed him to joust. Fair fellows, said Sir
Tristram, yonder is a knight will joust with us, let see which of us
shall encounter with him, for I see well he is of the court of King
Arthur. It shall not be long or he be met withal, said Sir Palomides,
for I found never no knight in my quest of this glasting beast, but an
he would joust I never refused him. As well may I, said Breuse Saunce
Pité, follow that beast as ye. Then shall ye do battle with me, said
Palomides.

So Sir Palomides dressed him unto that other knight, Sir Bleoberis,
that was a full noble knight, nigh kin unto Sir Launcelot. And so they
met so hard that Sir Palomides fell to the earth, horse and all. Then
Sir Bleoberis cried aloud and said thus: Make thee ready thou false
traitor knight, Breuse Saunce Pité, for wit thou certainly I will have
ado with thee to the utterance for the noble knights and ladies that
thou hast falsely betrayed. When this false knight and traitor, Breuse
Saunce Pité, heard him say so, he took his horse by the bridle and fled
his way as fast as ever his horse might run, for sore he was of him
afeard. When Sir Bleoberis saw him flee he followed fast after, through
thick and through thin. And by fortune as Sir Breuse fled, he saw even
afore him three knights of the Table Round, of the which the one hight
Sir Ector de Maris, the other hight Sir Percivale de Galis, the third
hight Sir Harry le Fise Lake, a good knight and an hardy. And as for
Sir Percivale, he was called that time of his time one of the best
knights of the world, and the best assured. When Breuse saw these
knights he rode straight unto them, and cried unto them and prayed them
of rescues. What need have ye? said Sir Ector. Ah, fair knights, said
Sir Breuse, here followeth me the most traitor knight, and most coward,
and most of villainy; his name is Breuse Saunce Pité, and if he may get
me he will slay me without mercy and pity. Abide with us, said Sir
Percivale, and we shall warrant you.

Then were they ware of Sir Bleoberis that came riding all that he
might. Then Sir Ector put himself forth to joust afore them all. When
Sir Bleoberis saw that they were four knights and he but himself, he
stood in a doubt whether he would turn or hold his way. Then he said to
himself: I am a knight of the Table Round, and rather than I should
shame mine oath and my blood I will hold my way whatsoever fall
thereof. And then Sir Ector dressed his spear, and smote either other
passing sore, but Sir Ector fell to the earth. That saw Sir Percivale,
and he dressed his horse toward him all that he might drive, but Sir
Percivale had such a stroke that horse and man fell to the earth. When
Sir Harry saw that they were both to the earth then he said to himself:
Never was Breuse of such prowess. So Sir Harry dressed his horse, and
they met together so strongly that both the horses and knights fell to
the earth, but Sir Bleoberis’ horse began to recover again. That saw
Breuse and he came hurtling, and smote him over and over, and would
have slain him as he lay on the ground. Then Sir Harry le Fise Lake
arose lightly, and took the bridle of Sir Breuse’s horse, and said: Fie
for shame! strike never a knight when he is at the earth, for this
knight may be called no shameful knight of his deeds, for yet as men
may see thereas he lieth on the ground he hath done worshipfully, and
put to the worse passing good knights. Therefore will I not let, said
Sir Breuse. Thou shalt not choose, said Sir Harry, as at this time.
Then when Sir Breuse saw that he might not choose nor have his will he
spake fair. Then Sir Harry let him go. And then anon he made his horse
to run over Sir Bleoberis, and rashed him to the earth like if he would
have slain him. When Sir Harry saw him do so villainously he cried:
Traitor knight, leave off for shame. And as Sir Harry would have taken
his horse to fight with Sir Breuse, then Sir Breuse ran upon him as he
was half upon his horse, and smote him down, horse and man, to the
earth, and had near slain Sir Harry, the good knight. That saw Sir
Percivale, and then he cried: Traitor knight what dost thou? And when
Sir Percivale was upon his horse Sir Breuse took his horse and fled all
that ever he might, and Sir Percivale and Sir Harry followed after him
fast, but ever the longer they chased the farther were they behind.

Then they turned again and came to Sir Ector de Maris and to Sir
Bleoberis. Ah, fair knights, said Bleoberis, why have ye succoured that
false knight and traitor? Why said Sir Harry, what knight is he? for
well I wot it is a false knight, said Sir Harry, and a coward and a
felonious knight. Sir, said Bleoberis, he is the most coward knight,
and a devourer of ladies and a destroyer of good knights and especially
of Arthur’s. What is your name? said Sir Ector. My name is Sir
Bleoberis de Ganis. Alas, fair cousin, said Ector, forgive it me, for I
am Sir Ector de Maris. Then Sir Percivale and Sir Harry made great joy
that they met with Bleoberis, but all they were heavy that Sir Breuse
was escaped them, whereof they made great dole.




