CHAPTER XXII. How they were fed with the Sangreal while they were in
prison, and how Galahad was made king.


But as soon as they were there Our Lord sent them the Sangreal, through
whose grace they were always fulfilled while that they were in prison.

So at the year’s end it befell that this King Estorause lay sick, and
felt that he should die. Then he sent for the three knights, and they
came afore him; and he cried them mercy of that he had done to them,
and they forgave it him goodly; and he died anon. When the king was
dead all the city was dismayed, and wist not who might be their king.
Right so as they were in counsel there came a voice among them, and
bade them choose the youngest knight of them three to be their king:
For he shall well maintain you and all yours. So they made Galahad king
by all the assent of the holy city, and else they would have slain him.
And when he was come to behold the land, he let make above the table of
silver a chest of gold and of precious stones, that hilled the Holy
Vessel. And every day early the three fellows would come afore it, and
make their prayers.

Now at the year’s end, and the self day after Galahad had borne the
crown of gold, he arose up early and his fellows, and came to the
palace, and saw to-fore them the Holy Vessel, and a man kneeling on his
knees in likeness of a bishop, that had about him a great fellowship of
angels, as it had been Jesu Christ himself; and then he arose and began
a mass of Our Lady. And when he came to the sacrament of the mass, and
had done, anon he called Galahad, and said to him: Come forth the
servant of Jesu Christ, and thou shalt see that thou hast much desired
to see. And then he began to tremble right hard when the deadly flesh
began to behold the spiritual things. Then he held up his hands toward
heaven and said: Lord, I thank thee, for now I see that that hath been
my desire many a day. Now, blessed Lord, would I not longer live, if it
might please thee, Lord. And therewith the good man took Our Lord’s
body betwixt his hands, and proffered it to Galahad, and he received it
right gladly and meekly. Now wottest thou what I am? said the good man.
Nay, said Galahad. I am Joseph of Aramathie, the which Our Lord hath
sent here to thee to bear thee fellowship; and wottest thou wherefore
that he hath sent me more than any other? For thou hast resembled me in
two things; in that thou hast seen the marvels of the Sangreal, in that
thou hast been a clean maiden, as I have been and am.

And when he had said these words Galahad went to Percivale and kissed
him, and commended him to God; and so he went to Sir Bors and kissed
him, and commended him to God, and said: Fair lord, salute me to my
lord, Sir Launcelot, my father, and as soon as ye see him, bid him
remember of this unstable world. And therewith he kneeled down to-fore
the table and made his prayers, and then suddenly his soul departed to
Jesu Christ, and a great multitude of angels bare his soul up to
heaven, that the two fellows might well behold it. Also the two fellows
saw come from heaven an hand, but they saw not the body. And then it
came right to the Vessel, and took it and the spear, and so bare it up
to heaven. Sithen was there never man so hardy to say that he had seen
the Sangreal.




CHAPTER XXIII. Of the sorrow that Percivale and Bors made when Galahad
was dead: and of Percivale how he died, and other matters.


When Percivale and Bors saw Galahad dead they made as much sorrow as
ever did two men. And if they had not been good men they might lightly
have fallen in despair. And the people of the country and of the city
were right heavy. And then he was buried; and as soon as he was buried
Sir Percivale yielded him to an hermitage out of the city, and took a
religious clothing. And Bors was alway with him, but never changed he
his secular clothing, for that he purposed him to go again into the
realm of Logris. Thus a year and two months lived Sir Percivale in the
hermitage a full holy life, and then passed out of this world; and Bors
let bury him by his sister and by Galahad in the spiritualities.

When Bors saw that he was in so far countries as in the parts of
Babylon he departed from Sarras, and armed him and came to the sea, and
entered into a ship; and so it befell him in good adventure he came
into the realm of Logris; and he rode so fast till he came to Camelot
where the king was. And then was there great joy made of him in the
court, for they weened all he had been dead, forasmuch as he had been
so long out of the country. And when they had eaten, the king made
great clerks to come afore him, that they should chronicle of the high
adventures of the good knights. When Bors had told him of the
adventures of the Sangreal, such as had befallen him and his three
fellows, that was Launcelot, Percivale, Galahad, and himself, there
Launcelot told the adventures of the Sangreal that he had seen. All
this was made in great books, and put up in almeries at Salisbury. And
anon Sir Bors said to Sir Launcelot: Galahad, your own son, saluted you
by me, and after you King Arthur and all the court, and so did Sir
Percivale, for I buried them with mine own hands in the city of Sarras.
Also, Sir Launcelot, Galahad prayed you to remember of this unsiker
world as ye behight him when ye were together more than half a year.
This is true, said Launcelot; now I trust to God his prayer shall avail
me.

Then Launcelot took Sir Bors in his arms, and said: Gentle cousin, ye
are right welcome to me, and all that ever I may do for you and for
yours ye shall find my poor body ready at all times, while the spirit
is in it, and that I promise you faithfully, and never to fail. And wit
ye well, gentle cousin, Sir Bors, that ye and I will never depart
asunder whilst our lives may last. Sir, said he, I will as ye will.

_Thus endeth the history of the Sangreal, that was briefly drawn out of
French into English, the which is a story chronicled for one of the
truest and the holiest that is in this world, the which is the xvii
book._

_And here followeth the eighteenth book._




