CHAPTER LXXIX. How Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides did the next day, and
how King Arthur was unhorsed.


Then Sir Tristram let call Sir Palomides, and bade him make him ready,
for it was time to go to the field. When they were ready they were
armed, and clothed all in red, both Isoud and all they; and so they led
her passing freshly through the field, into the priory where was her
lodging. And then they heard three blasts blow, and every king and
knight dressed him unto the field. And the first that was ready to
joust was Sir Palomides and Sir Kainus le Strange, a knight of the
Table Round. And so they two encountered together, but Sir Palomides
smote Sir Kainus so hard that he smote him quite over his horse’s
croup. And forthwithal Sir Palomides smote down another knight, and
brake then his spear, and pulled out his sword and did wonderly well.
And then the noise began greatly upon Sir Palomides. Lo, said King
Arthur, yonder Palomides beginneth to play his pageant. So God me help,
said Arthur, he is a passing good knight. And right as they stood
talking thus, in came Sir Tristram as thunder, and he encountered with
Sir Kay the Seneschal, and there he smote him down quite from his
horse; and with that same spear Sir Tristram smote down three knights
more, and then he pulled out his sword and did marvellously. Then the
noise and cry changed from Sir Palomides and turned to Sir Tristram,
and all the people cried: O Tristram, O Tristram. And then was Sir
Palomides clean forgotten.

How now, said Launcelot unto Arthur, yonder rideth a knight that
playeth his pageants. So God me help, said Arthur to Launcelot, ye
shall see this day that yonder two knights shall here do this day
wonders. Sir, said Launcelot, the one knight waiteth upon the other,
and enforceth himself through envy to pass the noble knight Sir
Tristram, and he knoweth not of the privy envy the which Sir Palomides
hath to him; for all that the noble Sir Tristram doth is through clean
knighthood. And then Sir Gareth and Dinadan did wonderly great deeds of
arms, as two noble knights, so that King Arthur spake of them great
honour and worship; and the kings and knights of Sir Tristram’s side
did passingly well, and held them truly together. Then Sir Arthur and
Sir Launcelot took their horses and dressed them, and gat into the
thickest of the press. And there Sir Tristram unknowing smote down King
Arthur, and then Sir Launcelot would have rescued him, but there were
so many upon Sir Launcelot that they pulled him down from his horse.
And then the King of Ireland and the King of Scots with their knights
did their pain to take King Arthur and Sir Launcelot prisoner. When Sir
Launcelot heard them say so, he fared as it had been an hungry lion,
for he fared so that no knight durst nigh him.

Then came Sir Ector de Maris, and he bare a spear against Sir
Palomides, and brast it upon him all to shivers. And then Sir Ector
came again and gave Sir Palomides such a dash with a sword that he
stooped down upon his saddle bow. And forthwithal Sir Ector pulled down
Sir Palomides under his feet; and then Sir Ector de Maris gat Sir
Launcelot du Lake an horse, and brought it to him, and bade him mount
upon him; but Sir Palomides leapt afore and gat the horse by the
bridle, and leapt into the saddle. So God me help, said Launcelot, ye
are better worthy to have that horse than I. Then Sir Ector brought Sir
Launcelot another horse. Gramercy, said Launcelot unto his brother. And
so when he was horsed again, with one spear he smote down four knights.
And then Sir Launcelot brought to King Arthur one of the best of the
four horses. Then Sir Launcelot with King Arthur and a few of his
knights of Sir Launcelot’s kin did marvellous deeds; for that time, as
the book recordeth, Sir Launcelot smote down and pulled down thirty
knights. Notwithstanding the other party held them so fast together
that King Arthur and his knights were overmatched. And when Sir
Tristram saw that, what labour King Arthur and his knights, and in
especial the noble deeds that Sir Launcelot did with his own hands, he
marvelled greatly.




CHAPTER LXXX. How Sir Tristram turned to King Arthur’s side, and how
Palomides would not.


Then Sir Tristram called unto him Sir Palomides, Sir Gareth, and Sir
Dinadan, and said thus to them: My fair fellows, wit ye well that I
will turn unto King Arthur’s party, for I saw never so few men do so
well, and it will be shame unto us knights that be of the Round Table
to see our lord King Arthur, and that noble knight Sir Launcelot, to be
dishonoured. It will be well done, said Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan. Do
your best, said Palomides, for I will not change my party that I came
in withal. That is for my sake, said Sir Tristram; God speed you in
your journey. And so departed Sir Palomides from them. Then Sir
Tristram, Gareth, and Dinadan, turned with Sir Launcelot. And then Sir
Launcelot smote down the King of Ireland quite from his horse; and so
Sir Launcelot smote down the King of Scots, and the King of Wales; and
then Sir Arthur ran unto Sir Palomides and smote him quite from his
horse; and then Sir Tristram bare down all that he met. Sir Gareth and
Sir Dinadan did there as noble knights; then all the parties began to
flee. Alas, said Palomides, that ever I should see this day, for now
have I lost all the worship that I won; and then Sir Palomides went his
way wailing, and so withdrew him till he came to a well, and there he
put his horse from him, and did off his armour, and wailed and wept
like as he had been a wood man. Then many knights gave the prize to Sir
Tristram, and there were many that gave the prize unto Sir Launcelot.
Fair lords, said Sir Tristram, I thank you of the honour ye would give
me, but I pray you heartily that ye would give your voice to Sir
Launcelot, for by my faith said Sir Tristram, I will give Sir Launcelot
my voice. But Sir Launcelot would not have it, and so the prize was
given betwixt them both.

Then every man rode to his lodging, and Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector
rode with Sir Tristram and La Beale Isoud unto their pavilions. Then as
Sir Palomides was at the well wailing and weeping, there came by him
flying the kings of Wales and of Scotland, and they saw Sir Palomides
in that arage. Alas, said they, that so noble a man as ye be should be
in this array. And then those kings gat Sir Palomides’ horse again, and
made him to arm him and mount upon his horse, and so he rode with them,
making great dole. So when Sir Palomides came nigh the pavilions
thereas Sir Tristram and La Beale Isoud was in, then Sir Palomides
prayed the two kings to abide him there the while that he spake with
Sir Tristram. And when he came to the port of the pavilions, Sir
Palomides said on high: Where art thou, Sir Tristram de Liones? Sir,
said Dinadan, that is Palomides. What, Sir Palomides, will ye not come
in here among us? Fie on thee traitor, said Palomides, for wit you well
an it were daylight as it is night I should slay thee, mine own hands.
And if ever I may get thee, said Palomides, thou shalt die for this
day’s deed. Sir Palomides, said Sir Tristram, ye wite me with wrong,
for had ye done as I did ye had won worship. But sithen ye give me so
large warning I shall be well ware of you. Fie on thee, traitor, said
Palomides, and therewith departed.

Then on the morn Sir Tristram, Bleoberis, and Sir Ector de Maris, Sir
Gareth, Sir Dinadan, what by water and what by land, they brought La
Beale Isoud unto Joyous Gard, and there reposed them a seven night, and
made all the mirths and disports that they could devise. And King
Arthur and his knights drew unto Camelot, and Sir Palomides rode with
the two kings; and ever he made the greatest dole that any man could
think, for he was not all only so dolorous for the departing from La
Beale Isoud, but he was a part as sorrowful to depart from the
fellowship of Sir Tristram; for Sir Tristram was so kind and so gentle
that when Sir Palomides remembered him thereof he might never be merry.




