CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Gawaine jousted and smote down Sir Lionel, and
how Sir Launcelot horsed King Arthur.


Then came forth Sir Gawaine from the king’s host, and he came before
and proffered to joust. And Sir Lionel was a fierce knight, and lightly
he encountered with Sir Gawaine; and there Sir Gawaine smote Sir Lionel
through out the body, that he dashed to the earth like as he had been
dead; and then Sir Ector de Maris and other more bare him into the
castle. Then there began a great stour, and much people was slain; and
ever Sir Launcelot did what he might to save the people on King
Arthur’s party, for Sir Palomides, and Sir Bors, and Sir Safere,
overthrew many knights, for they were deadly knights. And Sir Blamore
de Ganis, and Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, with Sir Bellangere le Beuse,
these six knights did much harm; and ever King Arthur was nigh about
Sir Launcelot to have slain him, and Sir Launcelot suffered him, and
would not strike again. So Sir Bors encountered with King Arthur, and
there with a spear Sir Bors smote him down; and so he alighted and drew
his sword, and said to Sir Launcelot: Shall I make an end of this war?
and that he meant to have slain King Arthur. Not so hardy, said Sir
Launcelot, upon pain of thy head, that thou touch him no more, for I
will never see that most noble king that made me knight neither slain
ne shamed. And therewithal Sir Launcelot alighted off his horse and
took up the king and horsed him again, and said thus: My lord Arthur,
for God’s love stint this strife, for ye get here no worship, and I
would do mine utterance, but always I forbear you, and ye nor none of
yours forbeareth me; my lord, remember what I have done in many places,
and now I am evil rewarded.

Then when King Arthur was on horseback, he looked upon Sir Launcelot,
and then the tears brast out of his eyen, thinking on the great
courtesy that was in Sir Launcelot more than in any other man; and
therewith the king rode his way, and might no longer behold him, and
said: Alas, that ever this war began. And then either parties of the
battles withdrew them to repose them, and buried the dead, and to the
wounded men they laid soft salves; and thus they endured that night
till on the morn. And on the morn by underne they made them ready to do
battle. And then Sir Bors led the forward.

So upon the morn there came Sir Gawaine as brim as any boar, with a
great spear in his hand. And when Sir Bors saw him he thought to
revenge his brother Sir Lionel of the despite that Sir Gawaine did him
the other day. And so they that knew either other feutred their spears,
and with all their mights of their horses and themselves, they met
together so felonously that either bare other through, and so they fell
both to the earth; and then the battles joined, and there was much
slaughter on both parties. Then Sir Launcelot rescued Sir Bors, and
sent him into the castle; but neither Sir Gawaine nor Sir Bors died not
of their wounds, for they were all holpen. Then Sir Lavaine and Sir
Urre prayed Sir Launcelot to do his pain, and fight as they had done;
For we see ye forbear and spare, and that doth much harm; therefore we
pray you spare not your enemies no more than they do you. Alas, said
Sir Launcelot, I have no heart to fight against my lord Arthur, for
ever meseemeth I do not as I ought to do. My lord, said Sir Palomides,
though ye spare them all this day they will never con you thank; and if
they may get you at avail ye are but dead. So then Sir Launcelot
understood that they said him truth; and then he strained himself more
than he did aforehand, and because his nephew Sir Bors was sore
wounded. And then within a little while, by evensong time, Sir
Launcelot and his party better stood, for their horses went in blood
past the fetlocks, there was so much people slain. And then for pity
Sir Launcelot withheld his knights, and suffered King Arthur’s party
for to withdraw them aside. And then Sir Launcelot’s party withdrew
them into his castle, and either parties buried the dead, and put salve
unto the wounded men.

So when Sir Gawaine was hurt, they on King Arthur’s party were not so
orgulous as they were toforehand to do battle. Of this war was noised
through all Christendom, and at the last it was noised afore the Pope;
and he considering the great goodness of King Arthur, and of Sir
Launcelot, that was called the most noblest knights of the world,
wherefore the Pope called unto him a noble clerk that at that time was
there present; the French book saith, it was the Bishop of Rochester;
and the Pope gave him bulls under lead unto King Arthur of England,
charging him upon pain of interdicting of all England, that he take his
queen Dame Guenever unto him again, and accord with Sir Launcelot.




CHAPTER XIV. How the Pope sent down his bulls to make peace, and how
Sir Launcelot brought the queen to King Arthur.


So when this Bishop was come to Carlisle he shewed the king these
bulls. And when the king understood these bulls he nist what to do:
full fain he would have been accorded with Sir Launcelot, but Sir
Gawaine would not suffer him; but as for to have the queen, thereto he
agreed. But in nowise Sir Gawaine would not suffer the king to accord
with Sir Launcelot; but as for the queen he consented. And then the
Bishop had of the king his great seal, and his assurance as he was a
true anointed king that Sir Launcelot should come safe, and go safe,
and that the queen should not be spoken unto of the king, nor of none
other, for no thing done afore time past; and of all these appointments
the Bishop brought with him sure assurance and writing, to shew Sir
Launcelot.

So when the Bishop was come to Joyous Gard, there he shewed Sir
Launcelot how the Pope had written to Arthur and unto him, and there he
told him the perils if he withheld the queen from the king. It was
never in my thought, said Launcelot, to withhold the queen from my lord
Arthur; but, insomuch she should have been dead for my sake, meseemeth
it was my part to save her life, and put her from that danger, till
better recover might come. And now I thank God, said Sir Launcelot,
that the Pope hath made her peace; for God knoweth, said Sir Launcelot,
I will be a thousandfold more gladder to bring her again, than ever I
was of her taking away; with this, I may be sure to come safe and go
safe, and that the queen shall have her liberty as she had before; and
never for no thing that hath been surmised afore this time, she never
from this day stand in no peril. For else, said Sir Launcelot, I dare
adventure me to keep her from an harder shour than ever I kept her. It
shall not need you, said the Bishop, to dread so much; for wit you
well, the Pope must be obeyed, and it were not the Pope’s worship nor
my poor honesty to wit you distressed, neither the queen, neither in
peril, nor shamed. And then he shewed Sir Launcelot all his writing,
both from the Pope and from King Arthur. This is sure enough, said Sir
Launcelot, for full well I dare trust my lord’s own writing and his
seal, for he was never shamed of his promise. Therefore, said Sir
Launcelot unto the Bishop, ye shall ride unto the king afore, and
recommend me unto his good grace, and let him have knowledging that
this same day eight days, by the grace of God, I myself shall bring my
lady, Queen Guenever, unto him. And then say ye unto my most redoubted
king, that I will say largely for the queen, that I shall none except
for dread nor fear, but the king himself, and my lord Sir Gawaine; and
that is more for the king’s love than for himself.

So the Bishop departed and came to the king at Carlisle, and told him
all how Sir Launcelot answered him; and then the tears brast out of the
king’s eyen. Then Sir Launcelot purveyed him an hundred knights, and
all were clothed in green velvet, and their horses trapped to their
heels; and every knight held a branch of olive in his hand, in tokening
of peace. And the queen had four-and-twenty gentlewomen following her
in the same wise; and Sir Launcelot had twelve coursers following him,
and on every courser sat a young gentleman, and all they were arrayed
in green velvet, with sarps of gold about their quarters, and the horse
trapped in the same wise down to the heels, with many ouches, y-set
with stones and pearls in gold, to the number of a thousand. And she
and Sir Launcelot were clothed in white cloth of gold tissue; and right
so as ye have heard, as the French book maketh mention, he rode with
the queen from Joyous Gard to Carlisle. And so Sir Launcelot rode
throughout Carlisle, and so in the castle, that all men might behold;
and wit you well there was many a weeping eye. And then Sir Launcelot
himself alighted and avoided his horse, and took the queen, and so led
her where King Arthur was in his seat: and Sir Gawaine sat afore him,
and many other great lords. So when Sir Launcelot saw the king and Sir
Gawaine, then he led the queen by the arm, and then he kneeled down,
and the queen both. Wit you well then was there many bold knight there
with King Arthur that wept as tenderly as though they had seen all
their kin afore them. So the king sat still, and said no word. And when
Sir Launcelot saw his countenance, he arose and pulled up the queen
with him, and thus he spake full knightly.




