CHAPTER LXXXVI. How Sir Tristram and Launcelot, with Palomides, came to
joyous Gard; and of Palomides and Sir Tristram.


Fair knight, said Sir Tristram unto Sir Launcelot, of whence be ye? I
am a knight errant, said Sir Launcelot, that rideth to seek many
adventures. What is your name? said Sir Tristram. Sir, at this time I
will not tell you. Then Sir Launcelot said unto Sir Tristram and to
Palomides: Now either of you are met together I will depart from you.
Not so, said Sir Tristram; I pray you of knighthood to ride with me
unto my castle. Wit you well, said Sir Launcelot, I may not ride with
you, for I have many deeds to do in other places, that at this time I
may not abide with you. Ah, mercy Jesu, said Sir Tristram, I require
you as ye be a true knight to the order of knighthood, play you with me
this night. Then Sir Tristram had a grant of Sir Launcelot: howbeit
though he had not desired him he would have ridden with them, outher
soon have come after them; for Sir Launcelot came for none other cause
into that country but for to see Sir Tristram. And when they were come
within Joyous Gard they alighted, and their horses were led into a
stable; and then they unarmed them. And when Sir Launcelot was
unhelmed, Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides knew him. Then Sir Tristram
took Sir Launcelot in arms, and so did La Beale Isoud; and Palomides
kneeled down upon his knees and thanked Sir Launcelot. When Sir
Launcelot saw Sir Palomides kneel he lightly took him up and said thus:
Wit thou well, Sir Palomides, I and any knight in this land, of worship
ought of very right succour and rescue so noble a knight as ye are
proved and renowned, throughout all this realm endlong and overthwart.
And then was there joy among them, and the oftener that Sir Palomides
saw La Beale Isoud the heavier he waxed day by day.

Then Sir Launcelot within three or four days departed, and with him
rode Sir Ector de Maris; and Dinadan and Sir Palomides were there left
with Sir Tristram a two months and more. But ever Sir Palomides faded
and mourned, that all men had marvel wherefore he faded so away. So
upon a day, in the dawning, Sir Palomides went into the forest by
himself alone; and there he found a well, and then he looked into the
well, and in the water he saw his own visage, how he was disturbed and
defaded, nothing like that he was. What may this mean? said Sir
Palomides, and thus he said to himself: Ah, Palomides, Palomides, why
art thou defaded, thou that was wont to be called one of the fairest
knights of the world? I will no more lead this life, for I love that I
may never get nor recover. And therewithal he laid him down by the
well. And then he began to make a rhyme of La Beale Isoud and him.

And in the meanwhile Sir Tristram was that same day ridden into the
forest to chase the hart of greese; but Sir Tristram would not ride
a-hunting never more unarmed, because of Sir Breuse Saunce Pité. And so
as Sir Tristram rode into that forest up and down, he heard one sing
marvellously loud, and that was Sir Palomides that lay by the well. And
then Sir Tristram rode softly thither, for he deemed there was some
knight errant that was at the well. And when Sir Tristram came nigh him
he descended down from his horse and tied his horse fast till a tree,
and then he came near him on foot; and anon he was ware where lay Sir
Palomides by the well and sang loud and merrily; and ever the
complaints were of that noble queen, La Beale Isoud, the which was
marvellously and wonderfully well said, and full dolefully and
piteously made. And all the whole song the noble knight, Sir Tristram,
heard from the beginning to the ending, the which grieved and troubled
him sore.

But then at the last, when Sir Tristram had heard all Sir Palomides’
complaints, he was wroth out of measure, and thought for to slay him
thereas he lay. Then Sir Tristram remembered himself that Sir Palomides
was unarmed, and of the noble name that Sir Palomides had, and the
noble name that himself had, and then he made a restraint of his anger;
and so he went unto Sir Palomides a soft pace and said: Sir Palomides,
I have heard your complaint, and of thy treason that thou hast owed me
so long, and wit thou well therefore thou shalt die; and if it were not
for shame of knighthood thou shouldest not escape my hands, for now I
know well thou hast awaited me with treason. Tell me, said Sir
Tristram, how thou wilt acquit thee? Sir, said Palomides, thus I will
acquit me: as for Queen La Beale Isoud, ye shall wit well that I love
her above all other ladies in this world; and well I wot it shall
befall me as for her love as befell to the noble knight Sir Kehydius,
that died for the love of La Beale Isoud. And now, Sir Tristram, I will
that ye wit that I have loved La Beale Isoud many a day, and she hath
been the causer of my worship, and else I had been the most simplest
knight in the world. For by her, and because of her, I have won the
worship that I have; for when I remembered me of La Beale Isoud I won
the worship wheresomever I came for the most part; and yet had I never
reward nor bounté of her the days of my life, and yet have I been her
knight guerdonless. And therefore, Sir Tristram, as for any death I
dread not, for I had as lief die as to live. And if I were armed as
thou art, I should lightly do battle with thee. Well have ye uttered
your treason, said Tristram. I have done to you no treason, said
Palomides, for love is free for all men, and though I have loved your
lady, she is my lady as well as yours; howbeit I have wrong if any
wrong be, for ye rejoice her, and have your desire of her, and so had I
never nor never am like to have, and yet shall I love her to the
uttermost days of my life as well as ye.




CHAPTER LXXXVII. How there was a day set between Sir Tristram and Sir
Palomides for to fight, and how Sir Tristram was hurt.


Then said Sir Tristram: I will fight with you to the uttermost. I
grant, said Palomides, for in a better quarrel keep I never to fight,
for an I die of your hands, of a better knight’s hands may I not be
slain. And sithen I understand that I shall never rejoice La Beale
Isoud, I have as good will to die as to live. Then set ye a day, said
Sir Tristram, that we shall do battle. This day fifteen days, said
Palomides, will I meet with you hereby, in the meadow under Joyous
Gard. Fie for shame, said Sir Tristram, will ye set so long day? let us
fight to-morn. Not so, said Palomides, for I am meagre, and have been
long sick for the love of La Beale Isoud, and therefore I will repose
me till I have my strength again. So then Sir Tristram and Sir
Palomides promised faith fully to meet at the well that day fifteen
days. I am remembered, said Sir Tristram to Palomides, that ye brake me
once a promise when that I rescued you from Breuse Saunce Pité and nine
knights; and then ye promised me to meet me at the peron and the grave
beside Camelot, whereas at that time ye failed of your promise. Wit you
well, said Palomides unto Sir Tristram, I was at that day in prison, so
that I might not hold my promise. So God me help, said Sir Tristram, an
ye had holden your promise this work had not been here now at this
time.

Right so departed Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides. And so Sir Palomides
took his horse and his harness, and he rode unto King Arthur’s court;
and there Sir Palomides gat him four knights and four
sergeants-of-arms, and so he returned againward unto Joyous Gard. And
in the meanwhile Sir Tristram chased and hunted at all manner of
venery; and about three days afore the battle should be, as Sir
Tristram chased an hart, there was an archer shot at the hart, and by
misfortune he smote Sir Tristram in the thick of the thigh, and the
arrow slew Sir Tristram’s horse and hurt him. When Sir Tristram was so
hurt he was passing heavy, and wit ye well he bled sore; and then he
took another horse, and rode unto Joyous Gard with great heaviness,
more for the promise that he had made with Sir Palomides, as to do
battle with him within three days after, than for any hurt of his
thigh. Wherefore there was neither man nor woman that could cheer him
with anything that they could make to him, neither Queen La Beale
Isoud; for ever he deemed that Sir Palomides had smitten him so that he
should not be able to do battle with him at the day set.




