CHAPTER IX. How the lady was returned to her lands by the battle of Sir
Bors, and of his departing, and how he met Sir Lionel taken and beaten
with thorns, and also of a maid which should have been devoured.


So then came Bors to all those that held lands of his lady, and said he
should destroy them but if they did such service unto her as longed to
their lands. So they did their homage, and they that would not were
chased out of their lands. Then befell that young lady to come to her
estate again, by the mighty prowess of Sir Bors de Ganis. So when all
the country was well set in peace, then Sir Bors took his leave and
departed; and she thanked him greatly, and would have given him great
riches, but he refused it.

Then he rode all that day till night, and came to an harbour to a lady
which knew him well enough, and made of him great Joy. Upon the morn,
as soon as the day appeared, Bors departed from thence, and so rode
into a forest unto the hour of midday, and there befell him a
marvellous adventure. So he met at the departing of the two ways two
knights that led Lionel, his brother, all naked, bounden upon a strong
hackney, and his hands bounden to-fore his breast. And everych of them
held in his hands thorns wherewith they went beating him so sore that
the blood trailed down more than in an hundred places of his body, so
that he was all blood to-fore and behind, but he said never a word; as
he which was great of heart he suffered all that ever they did to him,
as though he had felt none anguish.

Anon Sir Bors dressed him to rescue him that was his brother; and so he
looked upon the other side of him, and saw a knight which brought a
fair gentlewoman, and would have set her in the thickest place of the
forest for to have been the more surer out of the way from them that
sought him. And she which was nothing assured cried with an high voice:
Saint Mary succour your maid. And anon she espied where Sir Bors came
riding. And when she came nigh him she deemed him a knight of the Round
Table, whereof she hoped to have some comfort; and then she conjured
him: By the faith that he ought unto Him in whose service thou art
entered in, and for the faith ye owe unto the high order of knighthood,
and for the noble King Arthur’s sake, that I suppose made thee knight,
that thou help me, and suffer me not to be shamed of this knight. When
Bors heard her say thus he had so much sorrow there he nist not what to
do. For if I let my brother be in adventure he must be slain, and that
would I not for all the earth. And if I help not the maid she is shamed
for ever, and also she shall lose her virginity the which she shall
never get again. Then lift he up his eyes and said weeping: Fair sweet
Lord Jesu Christ, whose liege man I am, keep Lionel, my brother, that
these knights slay him not, and for pity of you, and for Mary’s sake, I
shall succour this maid.




CHAPTER X. How Sir Bors left to rescue his brother, and rescued the
damosel; and how it was told him that Lionel was dead.


Then dressed he him unto the knight the which had the gentlewoman, and
then he cried: Sir knight, let your hand off that maiden, or ye be but
dead. And then he set down the maiden, and was armed at all pieces save
he lacked his spear. Then he dressed his shield, and drew out his
sword, and Bors smote him so hard that it went through his shield and
habergeon on the left shoulder. And through great strength he beat him
down to the earth, and at the pulling out of Bors’ spear there he
swooned. Then came Bors to the maid and said: How seemeth it you? of
this knight ye be delivered at this time. Now sir, said she, I pray you
lead me thereas this knight had me. So shall I do gladly: and took the
horse of the wounded knight, and set the gentlewoman upon him, and so
brought her as she desired. Sir knight, said she, ye have better sped
than ye weened, for an I had lost my maidenhead, five hundred men
should have died for it. What knight was he that had you in the forest?
By my faith, said she, he is my cousin. So wot I never with what engine
the fiend enchafed him, for yesterday he took me from my father
privily; for I, nor none of my father’s men, mistrusted him not, and if
he had had my maidenhead he should have died for the sin, and his body
shamed and dishonoured for ever. Thus as she stood talking with him
there came twelve knights seeking after her, and anon she told them all
how Bors had delivered her; then they made great joy, and besought him
to come to her father, a great lord, and he should be right welcome.
Truly, said Bors, that may not be at this time, for I have a great
adventure to do in this country. So he commended them unto God and
departed.

Then Sir Bors rode after Lionel, his brother, by the trace of their
horses, thus he rode seeking a great while. Then he overtook a man
clothed in a religious clothing; and rode on a strong black horse
blacker than a berry, and said: Sir knight, what seek you? Sir, said
he, I seek my brother that I saw within a while beaten with two
knights. Ah, Bors, discomfort you not, nor fall into no wanhope; for I
shall tell you tidings such as they be, for truly he is dead. Then
showed he him a new slain body lying in a bush, and it seemed him well
that it was the body of Lionel, and then he made such a sorrow that he
fell to the earth all in a swoon, and lay a great while there. And when
he came to himself he said: Fair brother, sith the company of you and
me is departed shall I never have joy in my heart, and now He which I
have taken unto my master, He be my help. And when he had said thus he
took his body lightly in his arms, and put it upon the arson of his
saddle. And then he said to the man: Canst thou tell me unto some
chapel where that I may bury this body? Come on, said he, here is one
fast by; and so long they rode till they saw a fair tower, and afore it
there seemed an old feeble chapel. And then they alighted both, and put
him into a tomb of marble.




