CHAPTER V. How King Pelles was smitten through both thighs because he
drew the sword, and other marvellous histories.


Sir, said she, there was a king that hight Pelles, the maimed king. And
while he might ride he supported much Christendom and Holy Church. So
upon a day he hunted in a wood of his which lasted unto the sea; and at
the last he lost his hounds and his knights save only one: and there he
and his knight went till that they came toward Ireland, and there he
found the ship. And when he saw the letters and understood them, yet he
entered, for he was right perfect of his life, but his knight had none
hardiness to enter; and there found he this sword, and drew it out as
much as ye may see. So therewith entered a spear wherewith he was
smitten him through both the thighs, and never sith might he be healed,
nor nought shall to-fore we come to him. Thus, said she, was not King
Pelles, your grandsire, maimed for his hardiness? In the name of God,
damosel, said Galahad.

So they went toward the bed to behold all about it, and above the head
there hung two swords. Also there were two spindles which were as white
as any snow, and other that were as red as blood, and other above green
as any emerald: of these three colours were the spindles, and of
natural colour within, and without any painting. These spindles, said
the damosel, were when sinful Eve came to gather fruit, for which Adam
and she were put out of paradise, she took with her the bough on which
the apple hung on. Then perceived she that the branch was fair and
green, and she remembered her the loss which came from the tree. Then
she thought to keep the branch as long as she might. And for she had no
coffer to keep it in, she put it in the earth. So by the will of Our
Lord the branch grew to a great tree within a little while, and was as
white as any snow, branches, boughs, and leaves: that was a token a
maiden planted it. But after God came to Adam, and bade him know his
wife fleshly as nature required. So lay Adam with his wife under the
same tree; and anon the tree which was white was full green as any
grass, and all that came out of it; and in the same time that they
medled together there was Abel begotten: thus was the tree long of
green colour. And so it befell many days after, under the same tree
Caym slew Abel, whereof befell great marvel. For anon as Abel had
received the death under the green tree, it lost the green colour and
became red; and that was in tokening of the blood. And anon all the
plants died thereof, but the tree grew and waxed marvellously fair, and
it was the fairest tree and the most delectable that any man might
behold and see; and so died the plants that grew out of it to-fore that
Abel was slain under it. So long dured the tree till that Solomon, King
David’s son, reigned, and held the land after his father. This Solomon
was wise and knew all the virtues of stones and trees, and so he knew
the course of the stars, and many other divers things. This Solomon had
an evil wife, wherethrough he weened that there had been no good woman,
and so he despised them in his books. So answered a voice him once:
Solomon, if heaviness come to a man by a woman, ne reck thou never; for
yet shall there come a woman whereof there shall come greater joy to
man an hundred times more than this heaviness giveth sorrow; and that
woman shall be born of thy lineage. Tho when Solomon heard these words
he held himself but a fool, and the truth he perceived by old books.
Also the Holy Ghost showed him the coming of the glorious Virgin Mary.
Then asked he of the voice, if it should be in the yerde of his
lineage. Nay, said the voice, but there shall come a man which shall be
a maid, and the last of your blood, and he shall be as good a knight as
Duke Josua, thy brother-in-law.




CHAPTER VI. How Solomon took David’s sword by the counsel of his wife,
and of other matters marvellous.


Now have I certified thee of that thou stoodest in doubt. Then was
Solomon glad that there should come any such of his lineage; but ever
he marvelled and studied who that should be, and what his name might
be. His wife perceived that he studied, and thought she would know it
at some season; and so she waited her time, and asked of him the cause
of his studying, and there he told her altogether how the voice told
him. Well, said she, I shall let make a ship of the best wood and most
durable that men may find. So Solomon sent for all the carpenters of
the land, and the best. And when they had made the ship the lady said
to Solomon: Sir, said she, since it is so that this knight ought to
pass all knights of chivalry which have been to-fore him and shall come
after him, moreover I shall tell you, said she, ye shall go into Our
Lord’s temple, where is King David’s sword, your father, the which is
the marvelloust and the sharpest that ever was taken in any knight’s
hand. Therefore take that, and take off the pommel, and thereto make ye
a pommel of precious stones, that it be so subtly made that no man
perceive it but that they be all one; and after make there an hilt so
marvellously and wonderly that no man may know it; and after make a
marvellous sheath. And when ye have made all this I shall let make a
girdle thereto, such as shall please me.

All this King Solomon did let make as she devised, both the ship and
all the remnant. And when the ship was ready in the sea to sail, the
lady let make a great bed and marvellous rich, and set her upon the
bed’s head, covered with silk, and laid the sword at the feet, and the
girdles were of hemp, and therewith the king was angry. Sir, wit ye
well, said she, that I have none so high a thing which were worthy to
sustain so high a sword, and a maid shall bring other knights thereto,
but I wot not when it shall be, nor what time. And there she let make a
covering to the ship, of cloth of silk that should never rot for no
manner of weather. Yet went that lady and made a carpenter to come to
the tree which Abel was slain under. Now, said she, carve me out of
this tree as much wood as will make me a spindle. Ah madam, said he,
this is the tree the which our first mother planted. Do it, said she,
or else I shall destroy thee. Anon as he began to work there came out
drops of blood; and then would he have left, but she would not suffer
him, and so he took away as much wood as might make a spindle: and so
she made him to take as much of the green tree and of the white tree.
And when these three spindles were shapen she made them to be fastened
upon the selar of the bed. When Solomon saw this, he said to his wife:
Ye have done marvellously, for though all the world were here right
now, he could not devise wherefore all this was made, but Our Lord
Himself; and thou that hast done it wottest not what it shall betoken.
Now let it be, said she, for ye shall hear tidings sooner than ye ween.
Now shall ye hear a wonderful tale of King Solomon and his wife.




