CHAPTER IX. How the three knights, with Percivale’s sister, came unto
the same forest, and of an hart and four lions, and other things.


Then began he to weep right tenderly, and said: Long have I abiden your
coming, but for God’s love hold me in your arms, that my soul may
depart out of my body in so good a man’s arms as ye be. Gladly, said
Galahad. And then one said on high, that all heard: Galahad, well hast
thou avenged me on God’s enemies. Now behoveth thee to go to the Maimed
King as soon as thou mayest, for he shall receive by thee health which
he hath abiden so long. And therewith the soul departed from the body,
and Galahad made him to be buried as him ought to be.

Right so departed the three knights, and Percivale’s sister with them.
And so they came into a waste forest, and there they saw afore them a
white hart which four lions led. Then they took them to assent for to
follow after for to know whither they repaired; and so they rode after
a great pace till that they came to a valley, and thereby was an
hermitage where a good man dwelled, and the hart and the lions entered
also. So when they saw all this they turned to the chapel, and saw the
good man in a religious weed and in the armour of Our Lord, for he
would sing mass of the Holy Ghost; and so they entered in and heard
mass. And at the secrets of the mass they three saw the hart become a
man, the which marvelled them, and set him upon the altar in a rich
siege; and saw the four lions were changed, the one to the form of a
man, the other to the form of a lion, and the third to an eagle, and
the fourth was changed unto an ox. Then took they their siege where the
hart sat, and went out through a glass window, and there was nothing
perished nor broken; and they heard a voice say: In such a manner
entered the Son of God in the womb of a maid Mary, whose virginity ne
was perished ne hurt. And when they heard these words they fell down to
the earth and were astonied; and therewith was a great clearness.

And when they were come to theirself again they went to the good man
and prayed him that he would say them truth. What thing have ye seen?
said he. And they told him all that they had seen. Ah lords, said he,
ye be welcome; now wot I well ye be the good knights the which shall
bring the Sangreal to an end; for ye be they unto whom Our Lord shall
shew great secrets. And well ought Our Lord be signified to an hart,
for the hart when he is old he waxeth young again in his white skin.
Right so cometh again Our Lord from death to life, for He lost earthly
flesh that was the deadly flesh, which He had taken in the womb of the
blessed Virgin Mary; and for that cause appeared Our Lord as a white
hart without spot. And the four that were with Him is to understand the
four evangelists which set in writing a part of Jesu Christ’s deeds
that He did sometime when He was among you an earthly man; for wit ye
well never erst ne might no knight know the truth, for ofttimes or this
Our Lord showed Him unto good men and unto good knights, in likeness of
an hart, but I suppose from henceforth ye shall see no more. And then
they joyed much, and dwelled there all that day. And upon the morrow
when they had heard mass they departed and commended the good man to
God: and so they came to a castle and passed by. So there came a knight
armed after them and said: Lords, hark what I shall say to you.




CHAPTER X. How they were desired of a strange custom, the which they
would not obey; wherefore they fought and slew many knights.


This gentlewoman that ye lead with you is a maid? Sir, said she, a maid
I am. Then he took her by the bridle and said: By the Holy Cross, ye
shall not escape me to-fore ye have yolden the custom of this castle.
Let her go, said Percivale, ye be not wise, for a maid in what place
she cometh is free. So in the meanwhile there came out a ten or twelve
knights armed, out of the castle, and with them came gentlewomen which
held a dish of silver. And then they said: This gentlewoman must yield
us the custom of this castle. Sir, said a knight, what maid passeth
hereby shall give this dish full of blood of her right arm. Blame have
ye, said Galahad, that brought up such customs, and so God me save, I
ensure you of this gentlewoman ye shall fail while that I live. So God
me help, said Percivale, I had liefer be slain. And I also, said Sir
Bors. By my troth, said the knight, then shall ye die, for ye may not
endure against us though ye were the best knights of the world.

Then let they run each to other, and the three fellows beat the ten
knights, and then set their hands to their swords and beat them down
and slew them. Then there came out of the castle a three score knights
armed. Fair lords, said the three fellows, have mercy on yourself and
have not ado with us. Nay, fair lords, said the knights of the castle,
we counsel you to withdraw you, for ye be the best knights of the
world, and therefore do no more, for ye have done enough. We will let
you go with this harm, but we must needs have the custom. Certes, said
Galahad, for nought speak ye. Well, said they, will ye die? We be not
yet come thereto, said Galahad. Then began they to meddle together, and
Galahad, with the strange girdles, drew his sword, and smote on the
right hand and on the left hand, and slew what that ever abode him, and
did such marvels that there was none that saw him but weened he had
been none earthly man, but a monster. And his two fellows halp him
passing well, and so they held the journey everych in like hard till it
was night: then must they needs depart.

So came in a good knight, and said to the three fellows: If ye will
come in to-night and take such harbour as here is ye shall be right
welcome, and we shall ensure you by the faith of our bodies, and as we
be true knights, to leave you in such estate to-morrow as we find you,
without any falsehood. And as soon as ye know of the custom we dare say
ye will accord therefore. For God’s love, said the gentlewoman, go
thither and spare not for me. Go we, said Galahad; and so they entered
into the chapel. And when they were alighted they made great joy of
them. So within a while the three knights asked the custom of the
castle and wherefore it was. What it is, said they, we will say you
sooth.




