CHAPTER LVIII. How they approached the Castle Lonazep, and of other
devices of the death of Sir Lamorak.


Thus they rode until they were ware of the Castle Lonazep. And then
were they ware of four hundred tents and pavilions, and marvellous
great ordinance. So God me help, said Sir Tristram, yonder I see the
greatest ordinance that ever I saw. Sir, said Palomides, meseemeth that
there was as great an ordinance at the Castle of Maidens upon the rock,
where ye won the prize, for I saw myself where ye forjousted thirty
knights. Sir, said Dinadan, and in Surluse, at that tournament that
Galahalt of the Long Isles made, the which there dured seven days, was
as great a gathering as is here, for there were many nations. Who was
the best? said Sir Tristram. Sir, it was Sir Launcelot du Lake and the
noble knight, Sir Lamorak de Galis, and Sir Launcelot won the degree. I
doubt not, said Sir Tristram, but he won the degree, so he had not been
overmatched with many knights; and of the death of Sir Lamorak, said
Sir Tristram, it was over great pity, for I dare say he was the
cleanest mighted man and the best winded of his age that was alive; for
I knew him that he was the biggest knight that ever I met withal, but
if it were Sir Launcelot. Alas, said Sir Tristram, full woe is me for
his death. And if they were not the cousins of my lord Arthur that slew
him, they should die for it, and all those that were consenting to his
death. And for such things, said Sir Tristram, I fear to draw unto the
court of my lord Arthur; I will that ye wit it, said Sir Tristram unto
Gareth.

Sir, I blame you not, said Gareth, for well I understand the vengeance
of my brethren Sir Gawaine, Agravaine, Gaheris, and Mordred. But as for
me, said Sir Gareth, I meddle not of their matters, therefore there is
none of them that loveth me. And for I understand they be murderers of
good knights I left their company; and God would I had been by, said
Gareth, when the noble knight, Sir Lamorak, was slain.

Now as Jesu be my help, said Sir Tristram, it is well said of you, for
I had liefer than all the gold betwixt this and Rome I had been there.

Iwis, said Palomides, and so would I had been there, and yet had I
never the degree at no jousts nor tournament thereas he was, but he put
me to the worse, or on foot or on horseback; and that day that he was
slain he did the most deeds of arms that ever I saw knight do in all my
life days. And when him was given the degree by my lord Arthur, Sir
Gawaine and his three brethren, Agravaine, Gaheris, and Sir Mordred,
set upon Sir Lamorak in a privy place, and there they slew his horse.
And so they fought with him on foot more than three hours, both before
him and behind him; and Sir Mordred gave him his death wound behind him
at his back, and all to-hew him: for one of his squires told me that
saw it. Fie upon treason, said Sir Tristram, for it killeth my heart to
hear this tale. So it doth mine, said Gareth; brethren as they be mine
I shall never love them, nor draw in their fellowship for that deed.

Now speak we of other deeds, said Palomides, and let him be, for his
life ye may not get again. That is the more pity, said Dinadan, for Sir
Gawaine and his brethren, except you Sir Gareth, hate all the good
knights of the Round Table for the most part; for well I wot an they
might privily, they hate my lord Sir Launcelot and all his kin, and
great privy despite they have at him; and that is my lord Sir Launcelot
well ware of, and that causeth him to have the good knights of his kin
about him.




CHAPTER LIX. How they came to Humber bank, and how they found a ship
there, wherein lay the body of King Hermance.


Sir, said Palomides, let us leave of this matter, and let us see how we
shall do at this tournament. By mine advice, said Palomides, let us
four hold together against all that will come. Not by my counsel, said
Sir Tristram, for I see by their pavilions there will be four hundred
knights, and doubt ye not, said Sir Tristram, but there will be many
good knights; and be a man never so valiant nor so big, yet he may be
overmatched. And so have I seen knights done many times; and when they
weened best to have won worship they lost it, for manhood is not worth
but if it be medled with wisdom. And as for me, said Sir Tristram, it
may happen I shall keep mine own head as well as another.

So thus they rode until that they came to Humber bank, where they heard
a cry and a doleful noise. Then were they ware in the wind where came a
rich vessel hilled over with red silk, and the vessel landed fast by
them. Therewith Sir Tristram alighted and his knights. And so Sir
Tristram went afore and entered into that vessel. And when he came
within he saw a fair bed richly covered, and thereupon lay a dead
seemly knight, all armed save the head, was all be-bled with deadly
wounds upon him, the which seemed to be a passing good knight. How may
this be, said Sir Tristram, that this knight is thus slain? Then Sir
Tristram was ware of a letter in the dead knight’s hand. Master
mariners, said Sir Tristram, what meaneth that letter? Sir, said they,
in that letter ye shall hear and know how he was slain, and for what
cause, and what was his name. But sir, said the mariners, wit ye well
that no man shall take that letter and read it but if he be a good
knight, and that he will faithfully promise to revenge his death, else
shall there be no knight see that letter open. Wit ye well, said Sir
Tristram, that some of us may revenge his death as well as other, and
if it be so as ye mariners say his death shall be revenged. And
therewith Sir Tristram took the letter out of the knight’s hand, and it
said thus: Hermance, king and lord of the Red City, I send unto all
knights errant, recommending unto you noble knights of Arthur’s court.
I beseech them all among them to find one knight that will fight for my
sake with two brethren that I brought up of nought, and feloniously and
traitorly they have slain me; wherefore I beseech one good knight to
revenge my death. And he that revengeth my death I will that he have my
Red City and all my castles.

Sir, said the mariners, wit ye well this king and knight that here
lieth was a full worshipful man and of full great prowess, and full
well he loved all manner knights errants. So God me help, said Sir
Tristram, here is a piteous case, and full fain would I take this
enterprise upon me; but I have made such a promise that needs I must be
at this great tournament, or else I am shamed. For well I wot for my
sake in especial my lord Arthur let make this jousts and tournament in
this country; and well I wot that many worshipful people will be there
at that tournament for to see me; therefore I fear me to take this
enterprise upon me that I shall not come again by time to this jousts.
Sir, said Palomides, I pray you give me this enterprise, and ye shall
see me achieve it worshipfully, other else I shall die in this quarrel.
Well, said Sir Tristram, and this enterprise I give you, with this,
that ye be with me at this tournament that shall be as this day seven
night. Sir, said Palomides, I promise you that I shall be with you by
that day if I be unslain or unmaimed.




