CHAPTER IV. How Sir Bors came to Dame Elaine and saw Galahad, and how
he was fed with the Sangreal.


Then as it fell by fortune and adventure, Sir Bors de Ganis, that was
nephew unto Sir Launcelot, came over that bridge; and there Sir Bromel
and Sir Bors jousted, and Sir Bors smote Sir Bromel such a buffet that
he bare him over his horse’s croup. And then Sir Bromel, as an hardy
knight, pulled out his sword, and dressed his shield to do battle with
Sir Bors. And then Sir Bors alighted and avoided his horse, and there
they dashed together many sad strokes; and long thus they fought, till
at the last Sir Bromel was laid to the earth, and there Sir Bors began
to unlace his helm to slay him. Then Sir Bromel cried Sir Bors mercy,
and yielded him. Upon this covenant thou shalt have thy life, said Sir
Bors, so thou go unto Sir Launcelot upon Whitsunday that next cometh,
and yield thee unto him as knight recreant. I will do it, said Sir
Bromel, and that he sware upon the cross of the sword. And so he let
him depart, and Sir Bors rode unto King Pelles, that was within Corbin.

And when the king and Elaine his daughter wist that Sir Bors was nephew
unto Sir Launcelot, they made him great cheer. Then said Dame Elaine:
We marvel where Sir Launcelot is, for he came never here but once.
Marvel not, said Sir Bors, for this half year he hath been in prison
with Queen Morgan le Fay, King Arthur’s sister. Alas, said Dame Elaine,
that me repenteth. And ever Sir Bors beheld that child in her arms, and
ever him seemed it was passing like Sir Launcelot. Truly, said Elaine,
wit ye well this child he gat upon me. Then Sir Bors wept for joy, and
he prayed to God it might prove as good a knight as his father was. And
so came in a white dove, and she bare a little censer of gold in her
mouth, and there was all manner of meats and drinks; and a maiden bare
that Sangreal, and she said openly: Wit you well, Sir Bors, that this
child is Galahad, that shall sit in the Siege Perilous, and achieve the
Sangreal, and he shall be much better than ever was Sir Launcelot du
Lake, that is his own father. And then they kneeled down and made their
devotions, and there was such a savour as all the spicery in the world
had been there. And when the dove took her flight, the maiden vanished
with the Sangreal as she came.

Sir, said Sir Bors unto King Pelles, this castle may be named the
Castle Adventurous, for here be many strange adventures. That is sooth,
said the king, for well may this place be called the adventures place,
for there come but few knights here that go away with any worship; be
he never so strong, here he may be proved; and but late Sir Gawaine,
the good knight, gat but little worship here. For I let you wit, said
King Pelles, here shall no knight win no worship but if he be of
worship himself and of good living, and that loveth God and dreadeth
God, and else he getteth no worship here, be he never so hardy. That is
wonderful thing, said Sir Bors. What ye mean in this country I wot not,
for ye have many strange adventures, and therefore I will lie in this
castle this night. Ye shall not do so, said King Pelles, by my counsel,
for it is hard an ye escape without a shame. I shall take the adventure
that will befall me, said Sir Bors. Then I counsel you, said the king,
to be confessed clean. As for that, said Sir Bors, I will be shriven
with a good will. So Sir Bors was confessed, and for all women Sir Bors
was a virgin, save for one, that was the daughter of King Brangoris,
and on her he gat a child that hight Elaine, and save for her Sir Bors
was a clean maiden.

And so Sir Bors was led unto bed in a fair large chamber, and many
doors were shut about the chamber. When Sir Bors espied all those
doors, he avoided all the people, for he might have nobody with him;
but in no wise Sir Bors would unarm him, but so he laid him down upon
the bed. And right so he saw come in a light, that he might well see a
spear great and long that came straight upon him pointling, and to Sir
Bors seemed that the head of the spear brent like a taper. And anon, or
Sir Bors wist, the spear head smote him into the shoulder an
hand-breadth in deepness, and that wound grieved Sir Bors passing sore.
And then he laid him down again for pain; and anon therewithal there
came a knight armed with his shield on his shoulder and his sword in
his hand, and he bade Sir Bors: Arise, sir knight, and fight with me. I
am sore hurt, he said, but yet I shall not fail thee. And then Sir Bors
started up and dressed his shield; and then they lashed together
mightily a great while; and at the last Sir Bors bare him backward
until that he came unto a chamber door, and there that knight yede into
that chamber and rested him a great while. And when he had reposed him
he came out freshly again, and began new battle with Sir Bors mightily
and strongly.




CHAPTER V. How Sir Bors made Sir Pedivere to yield him, and of
marvellous adventures that he had, and how he achieved them.


Then Sir Bors thought he should no more go into that chamber to rest
him, and so Sir Bors dressed him betwixt the knight and that chamber
door, and there Sir Bors smote him down, and then that knight yielded
him. What is your name? said Sir Bors. Sir, said he, my name is
Pedivere of the Straight Marches. So Sir Bors made him to swear at
Whitsunday next coming to be at the court of King Arthur, and yield him
there as a prisoner as an overcome knight by the hands of Sir Bors. So
thus departed Sir Pedivere of the Straight Marches. And then Sir Bors
laid him down to rest, and then he heard and felt much noise in that
chamber; and then Sir Bors espied that there came in, he wist not
whether at the doors nor windows, shot of arrows and of quarrels so
thick that he marvelled, and many fell upon him and hurt him in the
bare places.

And then Sir Bors was ware where came in an hideous lion; so Sir Bors
dressed him unto the lion, and anon the lion bereft him his shield, and
with his sword Sir Bors smote off the lion’s head. Right so Sir Bors
forthwithal saw a dragon in the court passing horrible, and there
seemed letters of gold written in his forehead; and Sir Bors thought
that the letters made a signification of King Arthur. Right so there
came an horrible leopard and an old, and there they fought long, and
did great battle together. And at the last the dragon spit out of his
mouth as it had been an hundred dragons; and lightly all the small
dragons slew the old dragon and tare him all to pieces.

Anon withal there came an old man into the hall, and he sat him down in
a fair chair, and there seemed to be two adders about his neck; and
then the old man had an harp, and there he sang an old song how Joseph
of Armathie came into this land. Then when he had sung, the old man
bade Sir Bors go from thence. For here shall ye have no more
adventures; and full worshipfully have ye done, and better shall ye do
hereafter. And then Sir Bors seemed that there came the whitest dove
with a little golden censer in her mouth. And anon therewithal the
tempest ceased and passed, that afore was marvellous to hear. So was
all that court full of good savours. Then Sir Bors saw four children
bearing four fair tapers, and an old man in the midst of the children
with a censer in his own hand, and a spear in his other hand, and that
spear was called the Spear of Vengeance.




