CHAPTER XXVI. How King Arthur, the Queen, and Launcelot received
letters out of Cornwall, and of the answer again.


Now leave we Sir Palomides and Sir Dinadan in the Castle of
Beale-Valet, and turn we again unto King Arthur. There came a knight
out of Cornwall, his name was Fergus, a fellow of the Round Table. And
there he told the king and Sir Launcelot good tidings of Sir Tristram,
and there were brought goodly letters, and how he left him in the
castle of Tintagil. Then came the damosel that brought goodly letters
unto King Arthur and unto Sir Launcelot, and there she had passing good
cheer of the king, and of the Queen Guenever, and of Sir Launcelot.
Then they wrote goodly letters again. But Sir Launcelot bade ever Sir
Tristram beware of King Mark, for ever he called him in his letters
King Fox, as who saith, he fareth all with wiles and treason. Whereof
Sir Tristram in his heart thanked Sir Launcelot. Then the damosel went
unto La Beale Isoud, and bare her letters from the king and from Sir
Launcelot, whereof she was in passing great joy. Fair damosel, said La
Beale Isoud, how fareth my Lord Arthur, and the Queen Guenever, and the
noble knight, Sir Launcelot? She answered, and to make short tale: Much
the better that ye and Sir Tristram be in joy. God reward them, said La
Beale Isoud, for Sir Tristram suffereth great pain for me, and I for
him.

So the damosel departed, and brought letters to King Mark. And when he
had read them, and understood them, he was wroth with Sir Tristram, for
he deemed that he had sent the damosel unto King Arthur. For Arthur and
Launcelot in a manner threated King Mark. And as King Mark read these
letters he deemed treason by Sir Tristram. Damosel, said King Mark,
will ye ride again and bear letters from me unto King Arthur? Sir, she
said, I will be at your commandment to ride when ye will. Ye say well,
said the king; come again, said the king, to-morn, and fetch your
letters. Then she departed and told them how she should ride again with
letters unto Arthur. Then we pray you, said La Beale Isoud and Sir
Tristram, that when ye have received your letters, that ye would come
by us that we may see the privity of your letters. All that I may do,
madam, ye wot well I must do for Sir Tristram, for I have been long his
own maiden.

So on the morn the damosel went to King Mark to have had his letters
and to depart. I am not avised, said King Mark, as at this time to send
my letters. Then privily and secretly he sent letters unto King Arthur,
and unto Queen Guenever, and unto Sir Launcelot. So the varlet
departed, and found the king and the queen in Wales, at Carlion. And as
the king and the queen were at mass the varlet came with the letters.
And when mass was done the king and the queen opened the letters
privily by themself. And the beginning of the king’s letters spake
wonderly short unto King Arthur, and bade him entermete with himself
and with his wife, and of his knights; for he was able enough to rule
and keep his wife.




CHAPTER XXVII. How Sir Launcelot was wroth with the letter that he
received from King Mark, and of Dinadan which made a lay of King Mark.


When King Arthur understood the letter, he mused of many things, and
thought on his sister’s words, Queen Morgan le Fay, that she had said
betwixt Queen Guenever and Sir Launcelot. And in this thought he
studied a great while. Then he bethought him again how his sister was
his own enemy, and that she hated the queen and Sir Launcelot, and so
he put all that out of his thought. Then King Arthur read the letter
again, and the latter clause said that King Mark took Sir Tristram for
his mortal enemy; wherefore he put Arthur out of doubt he would be
revenged of Sir Tristram. Then was King Arthur wroth with King Mark.
And when Queen Guenever read her letter and understood it, she was
wroth out of measure, for the letter spake shame by her and by Sir
Launcelot. And so privily she sent the letter unto Sir Launcelot. And
when he wist the intent of the letter he was so wroth that he laid him
down on his bed to sleep, whereof Sir Dinadan was ware, for it was his
manner to be privy with all good knights. And as Sir Launcelot slept he
stole the letter out of his hand, and read it word by word. And then he
made great sorrow for anger. And so Sir Launcelot awaked, and went to a
window, and read the letter again, the which made him angry.

Sir, said Dinadan, wherefore be ye angry? discover your heart to me:
forsooth ye wot well I owe you good will, howbeit I am a poor knight
and a servitor unto you and to all good knights. For though I be not of
worship myself I love all those that be of worship. It is truth, said
Sir Launcelot, ye are a trusty knight, and for great trust I will shew
you my counsel. And when Dinadan understood all, he said: This is my
counsel: set you right nought by these threats, for King Mark is so
villainous, that by fair speech shall never man get of him. But ye
shall see what I shall do; I will make a lay for him, and when it is
made I shall make an harper to sing it afore him. So anon he went and
made it, and taught it an harper that hight Eliot. And when he could
it, he taught it to many harpers. And so by the will of Sir Launcelot,
and of Arthur, the harpers went straight into Wales, and into Cornwall,
to sing the lay that Sir Dinadan made by King Mark, the which was the
worst lay that ever harper sang with harp or with any other
instruments.




CHAPTER XXVIII. How Sir Tristram was hurt, and of a war made to King
Mark; and of Sir Tristram how he promised to rescue him.


Now turn we again unto Sir Tristram and to King Mark. As Sir Tristram
was at jousts and at tournament it fortuned he was sore hurt both with
a spear and with a sword, but yet he won always the degree. And for to
repose him he went to a good knight that dwelled in Cornwall, in a
castle, whose name was Sir Dinas le Seneschal. Then by misfortune there
came out of Sessoin a great number of men of arms, and an hideous host,
and they entered nigh the Castle of Tintagil; and their captain’s name
was Elias, a good man of arms. When King Mark understood his enemies
were entered into his land he made great dole and sorrow, for in no
wise by his will King Mark would not send for Sir Tristram, for he
hated him deadly.

So when his council was come they devised and cast many perils of the
strength of their enemies. And then they concluded all at once, and
said thus unto King Mark: Sir, wit ye well ye must send for Sir
Tristram, the good knight, or else they will never be overcome. For by
Sir Tristram they must be foughten withal, or else we row against the
stream. Well, said King Mark, I will do by your counsel; but yet he was
full loath thereto, but need constrained him to send for him. Then was
he sent for in all haste that might be, that he should come to King
Mark. And when he understood that King Mark had sent for him, he
mounted upon a soft ambler and rode to King Mark. And when he was come
the king said thus: Fair nephew Sir Tristram, this is all. Here be come
our enemies of Sessoin, that are here nigh hand, and without tarrying
they must be met with shortly, or else they will destroy this country.
Sir, said Sir Tristram, wit ye well all my power is at your
commandment. And wit ye well, sir, these eight days I may bear none
arms, for my wounds be not yet whole. And by that day I shall do what I
may. Ye say well, said King Mark; then go ye again and repose you and
make you fresh, and I shall go and meet the Sessoins with all my power.

So the king departed unto Tintagil, and Sir Tristram went to repose
him. And the king made a great host and departed them in three; the
first part led Sir Dinas the Seneschal, and Sir Andred led the second
part, and Sir Argius led the third part; and he was of the blood of
King Mark. And the Sessoins had three great battles, and many good men
of arms. And so King Mark by the advice of his knights issued out of
the Castle of Tintagil upon his enemies. And Dinas, the good knight,
rode out afore, and slew two knights with his own hands, and then began
the battles. And there was marvellous breaking of spears and smiting of
swords, and slew down many good knights. And ever was Sir Dinas the
Seneschal the best of King Mark’s party. And thus the battle endured
long with great mortality. But at the last King Mark and Sir Dinas,
were they never so loath, they withdrew them to the Castle of Tintagil
with great slaughter of people; and the Sessoins followed on fast, that
ten of them were put within the gates and four slain with the
portcullis.

Then King Mark sent for Sir Tristram by a varlet, that told him all the
mortality. Then he sent the varlet again, and bade him: Tell King Mark
that I will come as soon as I am whole, for erst I may do him no good.
Then King Mark had his answer. Therewith came Elias and bade the king
yield up the castle: For ye may not hold it no while. Sir Elias, said
the king, so will I yield up the castle if I be not soon rescued. Anon
King Mark sent again for rescue to Sir Tristram. By then Sir Tristram
was whole, and he had gotten him ten good knights of Arthur’s; and with
them he rode unto Tintagil. And when he saw the great host of Sessoins
he marvelled wonder greatly. And then Sir Tristram rode by the woods
and by the ditches as secretly as he might, till he came nigh the
gates. And there dressed a knight to him when he saw that Sir Tristram
would enter; and Sir Tristram smote him down dead, and so he served
three more. And everych of these ten knights slew a man of arms. So Sir
Tristram entered into the Castle of Tintagil. And when King Mark wist
that Sir Tristram was come he was glad of his coming, and so was all
the fellowship, and of him they made great joy.




