CHAPTER XXV. How true love is likened to summer.


And thus it passed on from Candlemass until after Easter, that the
month of May was come, when every lusty heart beginneth to blossom, and
to bring forth fruit; for like as herbs and trees bring forth fruit and
flourish in May, in like wise every lusty heart that is in any manner a
lover, springeth and flourisheth in lusty deeds. For it giveth unto all
lovers courage, that lusty month of May, in something to constrain him
to some manner of thing more in that month than in any other month, for
divers causes. For then all herbs and trees renew a man and woman, and
likewise lovers call again to their mind old gentleness and old
service, and many kind deeds that were forgotten by negligence. For
like as winter rasure doth alway arase and deface green summer, so
fareth it by unstable love in man and woman. For in many persons there
is no stability; for we may see all day, for a little blast of winter’s
rasure, anon we shall deface and lay apart true love for little or
nought, that cost much thing; this is no wisdom nor stability, but it
is feebleness of nature and great disworship, whosomever useth this.
Therefore, like as May month flowereth and flourisheth in many gardens,
so in like wise let every man of worship flourish his heart in this
world, first unto God, and next unto the joy of them that he promised
his faith unto; for there was never worshipful man or worshipful woman,
but they loved one better than another; and worship in arms may never
be foiled, but first reserve the honour to God, and secondly the
quarrel must come of thy lady: and such love I call virtuous love.

But nowadays men can not love seven night but they must have all their
desires: that love may not endure by reason; for where they be soon
accorded and hasty heat, soon it cooleth. Right so fareth love
nowadays, soon hot soon cold: this is no stability. But the old love
was not so; men and women could love together seven years, and no
licours lusts were between them, and then was love, truth, and
faithfulness: and lo, in like wise was used love in King Arthur’s days.
Wherefore I liken love nowadays unto summer and winter; for like as the
one is hot and the other cold, so fareth love nowadays; therefore all
ye that be lovers call unto your remembrance the month of May, like as
did Queen Guenever, for whom I make here a little mention, that while
she lived she was a true lover, and therefore she had a good end.

_Explicit liber Octodecimus. And here followeth liber xix._




BOOK XIX.




CHAPTER I. How Queen Guenever rode a-Maying with certain knights of the
Round Table and clad all in green.


So it befell in the month of May, Queen Guenever called unto her
knights of the Table Round; and she gave them warning that early upon
the morrow she would ride a-Maying into woods and fields beside
Westminster. And I warn you that there be none of you but that he be
well horsed, and that ye all be clothed in green, outher in silk outher
in cloth; and I shall bring with me ten ladies, and every knight shall
have a lady behind him, and every knight shall have a squire and two
yeomen; and I will that ye all be well horsed. So they made them ready
in the freshest manner. And these were the names of the knights: Sir
Kay le Seneschal, Sir Agravaine, Sir Brandiles, Sir Sagramore le
Desirous, Sir Dodinas le Savage, Sir Ozanna le Cure Hardy, Sir Ladinas
of the Forest Savage, Sir Persant of Inde, Sir Ironside, that was
called the Knight of the Red Launds, and Sir Pelleas, the lover; and
these ten knights made them ready in the freshest manner to ride with
the queen. And so upon the morn they took their horses with the queen,
and rode a-Maying in woods and meadows as it pleased them, in great joy
and delights; for the queen had cast to have been again with King
Arthur at the furthest by ten of the clock, and so was that time her
purpose.

Then there was a knight that hight Meliagrance, and he was son unto
King Bagdemagus, and this knight had at that time a castle of the gift
of King Arthur within seven mile of Westminster. And this knight, Sir
Meliagrance, loved passing well Queen Guenever, and so had he done long
and many years. And the book saith he had lain in await for to steal
away the queen, but evermore he forbare for because of Sir Launcelot;
for in no wise he would meddle with the queen an Sir Launcelot were in
her company, outher else an he were near-hand her. And that time was
such a custom, the queen rode never without a great fellowship of men
of arms about her, and they were many good knights, and the most part
were young men that would have worship; and they were called the
Queen’s Knights, and never in no battle, tournament, nor jousts, they
bare none of them no manner of knowledging of their own arms, but plain
white shields, and thereby they were called the Queen’s Knights. And
then when it happed any of them to be of great worship by his noble
deeds, then at the next Feast of Pentecost, if there were any slain or
dead, as there was none year that there failed but some were dead, then
was there chosen in his stead that was dead the most men of worship,
that were called the Queen’s Knights. And thus they came up all first,
or they were renowned men of worship, both Sir Launcelot and all the
remnant of them.

But this knight, Sir Meliagrance, had espied the queen well and her
purpose, and how Sir Launcelot was not with her, and how she had no men
of arms with her but the ten noble knights all arrayed in green for
Maying. Then he purveyed him a twenty men of arms and an hundred
archers for to destroy the queen and her knights, for he thought that
time was best season to take the queen.




