CHAPTER XVII. How Sir Launcelot armed him to assay if he might bear
arms, and how his wounds brast out again.


Then Sir Bors told Sir Launcelot how there was sworn a great tournament
and jousts betwixt King Arthur and the King of Northgalis, that should
be upon All Hallowmass Day, beside Winchester. Is that truth? said Sir
Launcelot; then shall ye abide with me still a little while until that
I be whole, for I feel myself right big and strong. Blessed be God,
said Sir Bors. Then were they there nigh a month together, and ever
this maiden Elaine did ever her diligent labour night and day unto Sir
Launcelot, that there was never child nor wife more meeker to her
father and husband than was that Fair Maiden of Astolat; wherefore Sir
Bors was greatly pleased with her.

So upon a day, by the assent of Sir Launcelot, Sir Bors, and Sir
Lavaine, they made the hermit to seek in woods for divers herbs, and so
Sir Launcelot made fair Elaine to gather herbs for him to make him a
bain. In the meanwhile Sir Launcelot made him to arm him at all pieces;
and there he thought to assay his armour and his spear, for his hurt or
not. And so when he was upon his horse he stirred him fiercely, and the
horse was passing lusty and fresh because he was not laboured a month
afore. And then Sir Launcelot couched that spear in the rest. That
courser leapt mightily when he felt the spurs; and he that was upon
him, the which was the noblest horse of the world, strained him
mightily and stably, and kept still the spear in the rest; and
therewith Sir Launcelot strained himself so straitly, with so great
force, to get the horse forward, that the button of his wound brast
both within and without; and therewithal the blood came out so fiercely
that he felt himself so feeble that he might not sit upon his horse.
And then Sir Launcelot cried unto Sir Bors: Ah, Sir Bors and Sir
Lavaine, help, for I am come to mine end. And therewith he fell down on
the one side to the earth like a dead corpse. And then Sir Bors and Sir
Lavaine came to him with sorrow-making out of measure. And so by
fortune the maiden Elaine heard their mourning, and then she came
thither; and when she found Sir Launcelot there armed in that place she
cried and wept as she had been wood; and then she kissed him, and did
what she might to awake him. And then she rebuked her brother and Sir
Bors, and called them false traitors, why they would take him out of
his bed; there she cried, and said she would appeal them of his death.

With this came the holy hermit, Sir Baudwin of Brittany, and when he
found Sir Launcelot in that plight he said but little, but wit ye well
he was wroth; and then he bade them: Let us have him in. And so they
all bare him unto the hermitage, and unarmed him, and laid him in his
bed; and evermore his wound bled piteously, but he stirred no limb of
him. Then the knight-hermit put a thing in his nose and a little deal
of water in his mouth. And then Sir Launcelot waked of his swoon, and
then the hermit staunched his bleeding. And when he might speak he
asked Sir Launcelot why he put his life in jeopardy. Sir, said Sir
Launcelot, because I weened I had been strong, and also Sir Bors told
me that there should be at All Hallowmass a great jousts betwixt King
Arthur and the King of Northgalis, and therefore I thought to assay it
myself whether I might be there or not. Ah, Sir Launcelot, said the
hermit, your heart and your courage will never be done until your last
day, but ye shall do now by my counsel. Let Sir Bors depart from you,
and let him do at that tournament what he may: And by the grace of God,
said the knight-hermit, by that the tournament be done and ye come
hither again, Sir Launcelot shall be as whole as ye, so that he will be
governed by me.




CHAPTER XVIII. How Sir Bors returned and told tidings of Sir Launcelot;
and of the tourney, and to whom the prize was given.


Then Sir Bors made him ready to depart from Sir Launcelot; and then Sir
Launcelot said: Fair cousin, Sir Bors, recommend me unto all them unto
whom me ought to recommend me unto. And I pray you, enforce yourself at
that jousts that ye may be best, for my love; and here shall I abide
you at the mercy of God till ye come again. And so Sir Bors departed
and came to the court of King Arthur, and told them in what place he
had left Sir Launcelot. That me repenteth, said the king, but since he
shall have his life we all may thank God. And there Sir Bors told the
queen in what jeopardy Sir Launcelot was when he would assay his horse.
And all that he did, madam, was for the love of you, because he would
have been at this tournament. Fie on him, recreant knight, said the
queen, for wit ye well I am right sorry an he shall have his life. His
life shall he have, said Sir Bors, and who that would otherwise, except
you, madam, we that be of his blood should help to short their lives.
But madam, said Sir Bors, ye have been oft-times displeased with my
lord, Sir Launcelot, but at all times at the end ye find him a true
knight: and so he departed.

And then every knight of the Round Table that were there at that time
present made them ready to be at that jousts at All Hallowmass, and
thither drew many knights of divers countries. And as All Hallowmass
drew near, thither came the King of Northgalis, and the King with the
Hundred Knights, and Sir Galahad, the haut prince, of Surluse, and
thither came King Anguish of Ireland, and the King of Scots. So these
three kings came on King Arthur’s party. And so that day Sir Gawaine
did great deeds of arms, and began first. And the heralds numbered that
Sir Gawaine smote down twenty knights. Then Sir Bors de Ganis came in
the same time, and he was numbered that he smote down twenty knights;
and therefore the prize was given betwixt them both, for they began
first and longest endured. Also Sir Gareth, as the book saith, did that
day great deeds of arms, for he smote down and pulled down thirty
knights. But when he had done these deeds he tarried not but so
departed, and therefore he lost his prize. And Sir Palomides did great
deeds of arms that day, for he smote down twenty knights, but he
departed suddenly, and men deemed Sir Gareth and he rode together to
some manner adventures.

So when this tournament was done Sir Bors departed and rode till he
came to Sir Launcelot, his cousin; and then he found him walking on his
feet, and there either made great joy of other; and so Sir Bors told
Sir Launcelot of all the Jousts like as ye have heard. I marvel, said
Sir Launcelot, that Sir Gareth, when he had done such deeds of arms,
that he would not tarry. Thereof we marvelled all, said Sir Bors, for
but if it were you, or Sir Tristram, or Sir Lamorak de Galis, I saw
never knight bear down so many in so little a while as did Sir Gareth:
and anon he was gone we wist not where. By my head, said Sir Launcelot,
he is a noble knight, and a mighty man and well breathed; and if he
were well assayed, said Sir Launcelot I would deem he were good enough
for any knight that beareth the life; and he is a gentle knight,
courteous, true, and bounteous, meek, and mild, and in him is no manner
of mal engin, but plain, faithful, and true.

So then they made them ready to depart from the hermit. And so upon a
morn they took their horses and Elaine le Blank with them; and when
they came to Astolat there were they well lodged, and had great cheer
of Sir Bernard, the old baron, and of Sir Tirre, his son. And so upon
the morn when Sir Launcelot should depart, fair Elaine brought her
father with her, and Sir Lavaine, and Sir Tirre, and thus she said:




