CHAPTER III. How Sir Tristram sought a strong knight that had smitten
him down, and many other knights of the Round Table.


And so Sir Tristram rode long after this strong knight. And at the last
he saw where lay a lady overthwart a dead knight. Fair lady, said Sir
Tristram, who hath slain your lord? Sir, she said, here came a knight
riding, as my lord and I rested us here, and asked him of whence he
was, and my lord said of Arthur’s court. Therefore, said the strong
knight, I will joust with thee, for I hate all these that be of
Arthur’s court. And my lord that lieth here dead amounted upon his
horse, and the strong knight and my lord encountered together, and
there he smote my lord throughout with his spear, and thus he hath
brought me in great woe and damage. That me repenteth, said Sir
Tristram, of your great anger; an it please you tell me your husband’s
name. Sir, said she, his name was Galardoun, that would have proved a
good knight. So departed Sir Tristram from that dolorous lady, and had
much evil lodging. Then on the third day Sir Tristram met with Sir
Gawaine and with Sir Bleoberis in a forest at a lodge, and either were
sore wounded. Then Sir Tristram asked Sir Gawaine and Sir Bleoberis if
they met with such a knight, with such a cognisance, with a covered
shield. Fair sir, said these knights, such a knight met with us to our
great damage. And first he smote down my fellow, Sir Bleoberis, and
sore wounded him because he bade me I should not have ado with him, for
why he was overstrong for me. That strong knight took his words at
scorn, and said he said it for mockery. And then they rode together,
and so he hurt my fellow. And when he had done so I might not for shame
but I must joust with him. And at the first course he smote me down and
my horse to the earth. And there he had almost slain me, and from us he
took his horse and departed, and in an evil time we met with him. Fair
knights, said Sir Tristram, so he met with me, and with another knight
that hight Palomides, and he smote us both down with one spear, and
hurt us right sore. By my faith, said Sir Gawaine, by my counsel ye
shall let him pass and seek him no further; for at the next feast of
the Round Table, upon pain of my head ye shall find him there. By my
faith, said Sir Tristram, I shall never rest till that I find him. And
then Sir Gawaine asked him his name. Then he said: My name is Sir
Tristram. And so either told other their names, and then departed Sir
Tristram and rode his way.

And by fortune in a meadow Sir Tristram met with Sir Kay, the
Seneschal, and Sir Dinadan. What tidings with you, said Sir Tristram,
with you knights? Not good, said these knights. Why so? said Sir
Tristram; I pray you tell me, for I ride to seek a knight. What
cognisance beareth he? said Sir Kay. He beareth, said Sir Tristram, a
covered shield close with cloth. By my head, said Sir Kay, that is the
same knight that met with us, for this night we were lodged within a
widow’s house, and there was that knight lodged; and when he wist we
were of Arthur’s court he spoke great villainy by the king, and
specially by the Queen Guenever, and then on the morn was waged battle
with him for that cause. And at the first recounter, said Sir Kay, he
smote me down from my horse and hurt me passing sore; and when my
fellow, Sir Dinadan, saw me smitten down and hurt he would not revenge
me, but fled from me; and thus he departed. And then Sir Tristram asked
them their names, and so either told other their names. And so Sir
Tristram departed from Sir Kay, and from Sir Dinadan, and so he passed
through a great forest into a plain, till he was ware of a priory, and
there he reposed him with a good man six days.




CHAPTER IV. How Sir Tristram smote down Sir Sagramore le Desirous and
Sir Dodinas le Savage.


And then he sent his man that hight Gouvernail, and commanded him to go
to a city thereby to fetch him new harness; for it was long time afore
that that Sir Tristram had been refreshed, his harness was brised and
broken. And when Gouvernail, his servant, was come with his apparel, he
took his leave at the widow, and mounted upon his horse, and rode his
way early on the morn. And by sudden adventure Sir Tristram met with
Sir Sagramore le Desirous, and with Sir Dodinas le Savage. And these
two knights met with Sir Tristram and questioned with him, and asked
him if he would joust with them. Fair knights, said Sir Tristram, with
a good will I would joust with you, but I have promised at a day set,
near hand, to do battle with a strong knight; and therefore I am loath
to have ado with you, for an it misfortuned me here to be hurt I should
not be able to do my battle which I promised. As for that, said
Sagramore, maugre your head, ye shall joust with us or ye pass from us.
Well, said Sir Tristram, if ye enforce me thereto I must do what I may.
And then they dressed their shields, and came running together with
great ire. But through Sir Tristram’s great force he struck Sir
Sagramore from his horse. Then he hurled his horse farther, and said to
Sir Dodinas: Knight, make thee ready; and so through fine force Sir
Tristram struck Dodinas from his horse. And when he saw them lie on the
earth he took his bridle, and rode forth on his way, and his man
Gouvernail with him.

Anon as Sir Tristram was passed, Sir Sagramore and Sir Dodinas gat
again their horses, and mounted up lightly and followed after Sir
Tristram. And when Sir Tristram saw them come so fast after him he
returned with his horse to them, and asked them what they would. It is
not long ago sithen I smote you to the earth at your own request and
desire: I would have ridden by you, but ye would not suffer me, and now
meseemeth ye would do more battle with me. That is truth, said Sir
Sagramore and Sir Dodinas, for we will be revenged of the despite ye
have done to us. Fair knights, said Sir Tristram, that shall little
need you, for all that I did to you ye caused it; wherefore I require
you of your knighthood leave me as at this time, for I am sure an I do
battle with you I shall not escape without great hurts, and as I
suppose ye shall not escape all lotless. And this is the cause why I am
so loath to have ado with you; for I must fight within these three days
with a good knight, and as valiant as any is now living, and if I be
hurt I shall not be able to do battle with him. What knight is that,
said Sir Sagramore, that ye shall fight withal? Sirs, said he, it is a
good knight called Sir Palomides. By my head, said Sir Sagramore and
Sir Dodinas, ye have cause to dread him, for ye shall find him a
passing good knight, and a valiant. And because ye shall have ado with
him we will forbear you as at this time, and else ye should not escape
us lightly. But, fair knight, said Sir Sagramore, tell us your name.
Sir, said he, my name is Sir Tristram de Liones. Ah, said Sagramore and
Sir Dodinas, well be ye found, for much worship have we heard of you.
And then either took leave of other, and departed on their way.




