CHAPTER II. Of the advision of Sir Ector, and how he jousted with Sir
Uwaine les Avoutres, his sworn brother.


But to Ector de Maris befell another vision the contrary. For it seemed
him that his brother, Sir Launcelot, and he alighted out of a chair and
leapt upon two horses, and the one said to the other: Go we seek that
we shall not find. And him thought that a man beat Sir Launcelot, and
despoiled him, and clothed him in another array, the which was all full
of knots, and set him upon an ass, and so he rode till he came to the
fairest well that ever he saw; and Sir Launcelot alighted and would
have drunk of that well. And when he stooped to drink of the water the
water sank from him. And when Sir Launcelot saw that, he turned and
went thither as the head came from. And in the meanwhile he trowed that
himself and Sir Ector rode till that they came to a rich man’s house
where there was a wedding. And there he saw a king the which said: Sir
knight, here is no place for you. And then he turned again unto the
chair that he came from.

Thus within a while both Gawaine and Ector awaked, and either told
other of their advision, the which marvelled them greatly. Truly, said
Ector, I shall never be merry till I hear tidings of my brother
Launcelot. Now as they sat thus talking they saw an hand showing unto
the elbow, and was covered with red samite, and upon that hung a bridle
not right rich, and held within the fist a great candle which burned
right clear, and so passed afore them, and entered into the chapel, and
then vanished away and they wist not where. And anon came down a voice
which said: Knights of full evil faith and of poor belief, these two
things have failed you, and therefore ye may not come to the adventures
of the Sangreal.

Then first spake Gawaine and said: Ector, have ye heard these words?
Yea truly, said Sir Ector, I heard all. Now go we, said Sir Ector, unto
some hermit that will tell us of our advision, for it seemeth me we
labour all in vain. And so they departed and rode into a valley, and
there met with a squire which rode on an hackney, and they saluted him
fair. Sir, said Gawaine, can thou teach us to any hermit? Here is one
in a little mountain, but it is so rough there may no horse go thither,
and therefore ye must go upon foot; there shall ye find a poor house,
and there is Nacien the hermit, which is the holiest man in this
country. And so they departed either from other.

And then in a valley they met with a knight all armed, which proffered
them to joust as far as he saw them. In the name of God, said Sir
Gawaine, sith I departed from Camelot there was none proffered me to
joust but once. And now, sir, said Ector, let me joust with him. Nay,
said Gawaine, ye shall not but if I be beat; it shall not for-think me
then if ye go after me. And then either embraced other to joust and
came together as fast as their horses might run, and brast their
shields and the mails, and the one more than the other; and Gawaine was
wounded in the left side, but the other knight was smitten through the
breast, and the spear came out on the other side, and so they fell both
out of their saddles, and in the falling they brake both their spears.

Anon Gawaine arose and set his hand to his sword, and cast his shield
afore him. But all for naught was it, for the knight had no power to
arise against him. Then said Gawaine: Ye must yield you as an overcome
man, or else I may slay you. Ah, sir knight, said he, I am but dead,
for God’s sake and of your gentleness lead me here unto an abbey that I
may receive my Creator. Sir, said Gawaine, I know no house of religion
hereby. Sir, said the knight, set me on an horse to-fore you, and I
shall teach you. Gawaine set him up in the saddle, and he leapt up
behind him for to sustain him, and so came to an abbey where they were
well received; and anon he was unarmed, and received his Creator. Then
he prayed Gawaine to draw out the truncheon of the spear out of his
body. Then Gawaine asked him what he was, that knew him not. I am, said
he, of King Arthur’s court, and was a fellow of the Round Table, and we
were brethren sworn together; and now Sir Gawaine, thou hast slain me,
and my name is Uwaine les Avoutres, that sometime was son unto King
Uriens, and was in the quest of the Sangreal; and now forgive it thee
God, for it shall ever be said that the one sworn brother hath slain
the other.




CHAPTER III. How Sir Gawaine and Sir Ector came to an hermitage to be
confessed, and how they told to the hermit their advisions.


Alas, said Gawaine, that ever this misadventure is befallen me. No
force, said Uwaine, sith I shall die this death, of a much more
worshipfuller man’s hand might I not die; but when ye come to the court
recommend me unto my lord, King Arthur, and all those that be left
alive, and for old brotherhood think on me. Then began Gawaine to weep,
and Ector also. And then Uwaine himself and Sir Gawaine drew out the
truncheon of the spear, and anon departed the soul from the body. Then
Sir Gawaine and Sir Ector buried him as men ought to bury a king’s son,
and made write upon his name, and by whom he was slain.

Then departed Gawaine and Ector, as heavy as they might for their
misadventure, and so rode till that they came to the rough mountain,
and there they tied their horses and went on foot to the hermitage. And
when they were come up they saw a poor house, and beside the chapel a
little courtelage, where Nacien the hermit gathered worts, as he which
had tasted none other meat of a great while. And when he saw the errant
knights he came toward them and saluted them, and they him again. Fair
lords, said he, what adventure brought you hither? Sir, said Gawaine,
to speak with you for to be confessed. Sir, said the hermit, I am
ready. Then they told him so much that he wist well what they were. And
then he thought to counsel them if he might.

Then began Gawaine first and told him of his advision that he had had
in the chapel, and Ector told him all as it is afore rehearsed. Sir,
said the hermit unto Sir Gawaine, the fair meadow and the rack therein
ought to be understood the Round Table, and by the meadow ought to be
understood humility and patience, those be the things which be always
green and quick; for men may no time overcome humility and patience,
therefore was the Round Table founded, and the chivalry hath been at
all times so by the fraternity which was there that she might not be
overcome; for men said she was founded in patience and in humility. At
the rack ate an hundred and fifty bulls; but they ate not in the
meadow, for their hearts should be set in humility and patience, and
the bulls were proud and black save only three. By the bulls is to
understand the fellowship of the Round Table, which for their sin and
their wickedness be black. Blackness is to say without good or virtuous
works. And the three bulls which were white save only one that was
spotted: the two white betoken Sir Galahad and Sir Percivale, for they
be maidens clean and without spot; and the third that had a spot
signifieth Sir Bors de Ganis, which trespassed but once in his
virginity, but sithen he kept himself so well in chastity that all is
forgiven him and his misdeeds. And why those three were tied by the
necks, they be three knights in virginity and chastity, and there is no
pride smitten in them. And the black bulls which said: Go we hence,
they were those which at Pentecost at the high feast took upon them to
go in the quest of the Sangreal without confession: they might not
enter in the meadow of humility and patience. And therefore they
returned into waste countries, that signifieth death, for there shall
die many of them: everych of them shall slay other for sin, and they
that shall escape shall be so lean that it shall be marvel to see them.
And of the three bulls without spot, the one shall come again, and the
other two never.




