CHAPTER VIlI. How each of them knew other, and of their great courtesy,
and how his brother Sir Ector came unto him, and of their joy.


And therewithal Sir Launcelot kneeled down upon his knees, and threw
away his shield and his sword from him. When Sir Percivale saw him do
so he marvelled what he meant. And then thus he said: Sir knight,
whatsomever thou be, I require thee upon the high order of knighthood,
tell me thy true name. Then he said: So God me help, my name is Sir
Launcelot du Lake, King Ban’s son of Benoy. Alas, said Sir Percivale,
what have I done? I was sent by the queen for to seek you, and so I
have sought you nigh this two year, and yonder is Sir Ector de Maris,
your brother abideth me on the other side of the yonder water. Now for
God’s sake, said Sir Percivale, forgive me mine offences that I have
here done. It is soon forgiven, said Sir Launcelot.

Then Sir Percivale sent for Sir Ector de Maris, and when Sir Launcelot
had a sight of him, he ran unto him and took him in his arms; and then
Sir Ector kneeled down, and either wept upon other, that all had pity
to behold them. Then came Dame Elaine and she there made them great
cheer as might lie in her power; and there she told Sir Ector and Sir
Percivale how and in what manner Sir Launcelot came into that country,
and how he was healed; and there it was known how long Sir Launcelot
was with Sir Bliant and with Sir Selivant, and how he first met with
them, and how he departed from them because of a boar; and how the
hermit healed Sir Launcelot of his great wound, and how that he came to
Corbin.




CHAPTER IX. How Sir Bors and Sir Lionel came to King Brandegore, and
how Sir Bors took his son Helin le Blank, and of Sir Launcelot.


Now leave we Sir Launcelot in the Joyous Isle with the Lady Dame
Elaine, and Sir Percivale and Sir Ector playing with them, and turn we
to Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Lionel, that had sought Sir Launcelot nigh
by the space of two year, and never could they hear of him. And as they
thus rode, by adventure they came to the house of Brandegore, and there
Sir Bors was well known, for he had gotten a child upon the king’s
daughter fifteen year to-fore, and his name was Helin le Blank. And
when Sir Bors saw that child it liked him passing well. And so those
knights had good cheer of the King Brandegore. And on the morn Sir Bors
came afore King Brandegore and said: Here is my son Helin le Blank,
that as it is said he is my son; and sith it is so, I will that ye wit
that I will have him with me unto the court of King Arthur. Sir, said
the king, ye may well take him with you, but he is over tender of age.
As for that, said Sir Bors, I will have him with me, and bring him to
the house of most worship of the world. So when Sir Bors should depart
there was made great sorrow for the departing of Helin le Blank, and
great weeping was there made. But Sir Bors and Sir Lionel departed, and
within a while they came to Camelot, where was King Arthur. And when
King Arthur understood that Helin le Blank was Sir Bors’ son, and
nephew unto King Brandegore, then King Arthur let him make knight of
the Round Table; and so he proved a good knight and an adventurous.

Now will we turn to our matter of Sir Launcelot. It befell upon a day
Sir Ector and Sir Percivale came to Sir Launcelot and asked him what he
would do, and whether he would go with them unto King Arthur or not.
Nay, said Sir Launcelot, that may not be by no mean, for I was so
entreated at the court that I cast me never to come there more. Sir,
said Sir Ector, I am your brother, and ye are the man in the world that
I love most; and if I understood that it were your disworship, ye may
understand I would never counsel you thereto; but King Arthur and all
his knights, and in especial Queen Guenever, made such dole and sorrow
that it was marvel to hear and see. And ye must remember the great
worship and renown that ye be of, how that ye have been more spoken of
than any other knight that is now living; for there is none that
beareth the name now but ye and Sir Tristram. Therefore brother, said
Sir Ector, make you ready to ride to the court with us, and I dare say
there was never knight better welcome to the court than ye; and I wot
well and can make it good, said Sir Ector, it hath cost my lady, the
queen, twenty thousand pound the seeking of you. Well brother, said Sir
Launcelot, I will do after your counsel, and ride with you.

So then they took their horses and made them ready, and took their
leave at King Pelles and at Dame Elaine. And when Sir Launcelot should
depart Dame Elaine made great sorrow. My lord, Sir Launcelot, said Dame
Elaine, at this same feast of Pentecost shall your son and mine,
Galahad, be made knight, for he is fully now fifteen winter old. Do as
ye list, said Sir Launcelot; God give him grace to prove a good knight.
As for that, said Dame Elaine, I doubt not he shall prove the best man
of his kin except one. Then shall he be a man good enough, said Sir
Launcelot.




CHAPTER X. How Sir Launcelot with Sir Percivale and Sir Ector came to
the court, and of the great joy of him.


Then they departed, and within five days’ journey they came to Camelot,
that is called in English, Winchester. And when Sir Launcelot was come
among them, the king and all the knights made great joy of him. And
there Sir Percivale de Galis and Sir Ector de Maris began and told the
whole adventures: that Sir Launcelot had been out of his mind the time
of his absence, and how he called himself Le Chevaler Mal Fet, the
knight that had trespassed; and in three days Sir Launcelot smote down
five hundred knights. And ever as Sir Ector and Sir Percivale told
these tales of Sir Launcelot, Queen Guenever wept as she should have
died. Then the queen made great cheer. O Jesu, said King Arthur, I
marvel for what cause ye, Sir Launcelot, went out of your mind. I and
many others deem it was for the love of fair Elaine, the daughter of
King Pelles, by whom ye are noised that ye have gotten a child, and his
name is Galahad, and men say he shall do marvels. My lord, said Sir
Launcelot, if I did any folly I have that I sought. And therewithal the
king spake no more. But all Sir Launcelot’s kin knew for whom he went
out of his mind. And then there were great feasts made and great joy;
and many great lords and ladies, when they heard that Sir Launcelot was
come to the court again, they made great joy.




