CHAPTER XX. How Sir Launcelot was shriven, and what sorrow he made and
of the good ensamples which were shewed him.


Then Sir Launcelot wept with heavy cheer, and said: Now I know well ye
say me sooth. Sir, said the good man, hide none old sin from me. Truly,
said Sir Launcelot, that were me full loath to discover. For this
fourteen year I never discovered one thing that I have used, and that
may I now wite my shame and my disadventure. And then he told there
that good man all his life. And how he had loved a queen unmeasurably
and out of measure long. And all my great deeds of arms that I have
done, I did for the most part for the queen’s sake, and for her sake
would I do battle were it right or wrong, and never did I battle all
only for God’s sake, but for to win worship and to cause me to be the
better beloved and little or nought I thanked God of it. Then Sir
Launcelot said: I pray you counsel me. I will counsel you, said the
hermit, if ye will ensure me that ye will never come in that queen’s
fellowship as much as ye may forbear. And then Sir Launcelot promised
him he nold, by the faith of his body. Look that your heart and your
mouth accord, said the good man, and I shall ensure you ye shall have
more worship than ever ye had.

Holy father, said Sir Launcelot, I marvel of the voice that said to me
marvellous words, as ye have heard to-forehand. Have ye no marvel, said
the good man thereof, for it seemeth well God loveth you; for men may
understand a stone is hard of kind, and namely one more than another;
and that is to understand by thee, Sir Launcelot, for thou wilt not
leave thy sin for no goodness that God hath sent thee; therefore thou
art more than any stone, and never wouldst thou be made nesh nor by
water nor by fire, and that is the heat of the Holy Ghost may not enter
in thee. Now take heed, in all the world men shall not find one knight
to whom Our Lord hath given so much of grace as He hath given you, for
He hath given you fairness with seemliness, He hath given thee wit,
discretion to know good from evil, He hath given thee prowess and
hardiness, and given thee to work so largely that thou hast had at all
days the better wheresomever thou came; and now Our Lord will suffer
thee no longer, but that thou shalt know Him whether thou wilt or nylt.
And why the voice called thee bitterer than wood, for where overmuch
sin dwelleth, there may be but little sweetness, wherefore thou art
likened to an old rotten tree.

Now have I shewed thee why thou art harder than the stone and bitterer
than the tree. Now shall I shew thee why thou art more naked and barer
than the fig tree. It befell that Our Lord on Palm Sunday preached in
Jerusalem, and there He found in the people that all hardness was
harboured in them, and there He found in all the town not one that
would harbour him. And then He went without the town, and found in
midst of the way a fig tree, the which was right fair and well
garnished of leaves, but fruit had it none. Then Our Lord cursed the
tree that bare no fruit; that betokeneth the fig tree unto Jerusalem,
that had leaves and no fruit. So thou, Sir Launcelot, when the Holy
Grail was brought afore thee, He found in thee no fruit, nor good
thought nor good will, and defouled with lechery. Certes, said Sir
Launcelot, all that you have said is true, and from henceforward I cast
me, by the grace of God, never to be so wicked as I have been, but as
to follow knighthood and to do feats of arms.

Then the good man enjoined Sir Launcelot such penance as he might do
and to sewe knighthood, and so assoiled him, and prayed Sir Launcelot
to abide with him all that day. I will well, said Sir Launcelot, for I
have neither helm, nor horse, nor sword. As for that, said the good
man, I shall help you or to-morn at even of an horse, and all that
longed unto you. And then Sir Launcelot repented him greatly.

_Here endeth off the history of Sir Launcelot. And here followeth of
Sir Percivale de Galis, which is the fourteenth book._




BOOK XIV.




CHAPTER I. How Sir Percivale came to a recluse and asked counsel, and
how she told him that she was his aunt.


Now saith the tale, that when Sir Launcelot was ridden after Sir
Galahad, the which had all these adventures above said, Sir Percivale
turned again unto the recluse, where he deemed to have tidings of that
knight that Launcelot followed. And so he kneeled at her window, and
the recluse opened it and asked Sir Percivale what he would. Madam, he
said, I am a knight of King Arthur’s court, and my name is Sir
Percivale de Galis. When the recluse heard his name she had great joy
of him, for mickle she had loved him to-fore any other knight, for she
ought to do so, for she was his aunt. And then she commanded the gates
to be opened, and there he had all the cheer that she might make him,
and all that was in her power was at his commandment.

So on the morn Sir Percivale went to the recluse and asked her if she
knew that knight with the white shield. Sir, said she, why would ye
wit? Truly, madam, said Sir Percivale, I shall never be well at ease
till that I know of that knight’s fellowship, and that I may fight with
him, for I may not leave him so lightly, for I have the shame yet. Ah,
Percivale, said she, would ye fight with him? I see well ye have great
will to be slain as your father was, through outrageousness. Madam,
said Sir Percivale, it seemeth by your words that ye know me. Yea, said
she, I well ought to know you, for I am your aunt, although I be in a
priory place. For some called me sometime the Queen of the Waste Lands,
and I was called the queen of most riches in the world; and it pleased
me never my riches so much as doth my poverty. Then Sir Percivale wept
for very pity when that he knew it was his aunt. Ah, fair nephew, said
she, when heard ye tidings of your mother? Truly, said he, I heard none
of her, but I dream of her much in my sleep; and therefore I wot not
whether she be dead or alive. Certes, fair nephew, said she, your
mother is dead, for after your departing from her she took such a
sorrow that anon, after she was confessed, she died. Now, God have
mercy on her soul, said Sir Percivale, it sore forthinketh me; but all
we must change the life. Now, fair aunt, tell me what is the knight? I
deem it be he that bare the red arms on Whitsunday. Wit you well, said
she, that this is he, for otherwise ought he not to do, but to go in
red arms; and that same knight hath no peer, for he worketh all by
miracle, and he shall never be overcome of none earthly man’s hand.




