VII

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF MOTHERHOOD. SECOND PAPER


What I always wish to impress upon the readers who are kind enough to
be interested in the articles which I write is to keep the end aimed
at in view. So in this second paper upon the responsibility of
motherhood, I must begin by reiterating this necessity.

No mother has a right to drift and trust to chance for the welfare of
her children, and however they develop, for good or ill, she must in
greater or lesser degree be held responsible.

The period when animals cease all interest in and care for their
offspring only commences when these latter can safely be left to look
after themselves; and so it should be with human beings. But, judging
the ages relatively of animals and mankind, numbers of human mothers
entirely neglect their progeny long before they have come even to the
fledgling stage! How often in society one sees women of forty-five and
younger with daughters of fifteen to twenty, about whose real
characters and souls they know nothing! They have always been too busy
with their own personal interest to give the time and sympathy
required for a real mother's understanding of her children. Servants
and governesses have been the directors through the most critical
period of the girls' lives, and it is merely a piece of luck if they
have imbibed no ill from them.

There are numbers of worthy and innocent women married to men whose
characters have certain forcible and unpleasant traits, which are more
than likely to be reproduced in their children, but from the limited
education these good creatures have received, and the absence of all
habit of personal analysation of cause and effect, they never realise
that it is their bounden duty to be on the lookout for the first signs
of the hereditary traits appearing, and the necessity for using
special care and influence to counteract them.

A woman (unless too vain) knows very well her own failings and her own
good qualities, and can, if she is wise, suppress or encourage them
when they show in her children; but she cannot trace the
characteristics of remote ancestors, or even be certain of what her
husband has on his side endowed their joint offspring with, so her
duty is to be on the watch from the very commencement, and to use her
intelligence as she already uses it in every ordinary affair in life.

People of even the most mediocre understanding are quite sensible
enough to select the right implements to carry on any work that they
have undertaken. A woman about to sew a fine piece of muslin does not
dash haphazard into her work-basket and pick out any needle which
comes first, and any thread, coarse or fine, which is handy. She would
know very well that her work would be a sorry affair if she did so,
and that, on the contrary, she must choose the exact fineness of both
thread and needle to sew this particular bit of stuff satisfactorily,
the ones she may have employed an hour before upon firm cloth being of
no use for muslin.

She is keeping _the end_ in view.


LOOKING AHEAD

But countless numbers of mothers never understand that any different
method is necessary with different children; they just go on in the
old way they have been taught when young themselves, if they trouble
at all about the matter.

Every woman who has a child ought to ask herself these questions: Who
is responsible for this child being in the world? Am I and my husband
responsible, or is the child responsible itself? The answers are
ridiculously obvious, and, when realised, the remembrance of them
should entail grave obligations upon the parents.

The mother should look ahead and try to determine whether or no what
seems to be showing as the result of the ideas of up-bringing in the
past fifteen years is good or bad.

The main features of that system being the relaxation of all
discipline and the cessation of the inculcation of self-control,
because the standards suddenly became different. Formerly, to perform
Duty (spelt with a big D!) was the only essential matter in life, and
to obtain happiness was merely a thing by the way. In the past fifteen
years the essential goal sought after has been happiness, and duty has
been merely the thing by the way. But a very large number of the
mothers of England have not perhaps begun to develop sufficient scope
of brain to enable them to judge what will eventually bring happiness;
they can only see the immediate moment, and to indulge their
children's every desire seems to be the simplest way. But they forget
that during this short and impressionable stage of life all strength
and will-power and self-control ought to be enforced and encouraged,
to enable the loved children to withstand hardships and to attract
happiness in the long after years. A mother should ask herself if it
is worth while, in securing a joyous and irresponsible childhood and
adolescence, to leave her children at the end of them unarmed and at
the mercy of every adverse blast. The great dangers which seem to be
resulting from the system of upbringing in the last fifteen years are
that at seventeen or eighteen most young people are satiated with
pleasure and blase with life, while they have no definite aim or end
of achievement in view, and absolutely no sense of duty or
responsibility to the community.


THE FIRST OBLIGATION

It would seem to me that a mother's first obligation is to enforce
discipline, and to teach self-control from the earliest infancy with
the fondest loving care, and to transmit that sense of responsibility
for noble citizenship into her children which should have been her own
guiding star.

But, again, to do so she must not employ obsolete methods without
taking into account the spirit of the age which has aroused a sense of
personal liberty in the youngest child, and makes it refuse to accept
rules and regulations on trust. It must be convinced that they are for
its good, or it will only bow to them by fear, learn to deceive, and
remain rebellious and determined at the first opportunity to throw off
the yoke and go its own way. I will give a concrete case of what I
mean upon this point, to show how even a good woman can misunderstand
the real meaning of the responsibility of motherhood, and by her
method of upbringing can allow misfortune to fall upon her young
family.

Here is a lady of the highest rank, who comes of a steady and worthy
stock, and who has been brought up herself strictly and well. She
marries a man of great position, but with rather wild blood in his
veins. She has no modern ideas of only desiring a small family; she
wishes to and intends to do her duty to her state, and is by no means
set upon personal amusement.

As the years go on she becomes the mother of four boys and two girls.
She engages the best nurses for them, and, later on, the best
governesses and tutors. The children are taught their catechism on
Sundays and are drilled as those of their class into having good
outward manners and behaviour. They are given orders without
explanations, which they are expected to obey unquestioningly, and
they are duly punished when they are disobedient. They see their
parents at stated hours each day, and are seemingly a well-regulated
and satisfactory young brood.

The good woman and great lady's time is naturally much occupied with
social duties, and duties to her husband's tenants, and to various
charities and good works in which she is interested. She fulfils all
these admirably, and is generally held in affection and respect. All
the children have been treated exactly the same by her, although she
knows that her husband has a dishonourable, gambling, scapegrace
brother who has had to be sent to Australia, and that her husband
himself has had tastes, the reverse of orthodox where his emotions
were concerned, though happily he has not jeopardised the family
fortunes as his brother would have done had he been head. All the
children have been so well brought up and instructed in the tenets of
the Church that she feels quite placid and sure that she has done all
that could be expected of her, and is horribly surprised and
distressed when disasters presently occur. She looks upon them as the
will of God and fate, but feels in no way to blame personally.


A HATRED OF PREACHING

It had never struck her intelligence that boys with such heredity in
them should have been specially influenced and directed from earliest
youth towards ideas of the finest honour and proudest responsibility
in keeping unblemished their ancient name; that all the stupidities
and follies of gambling should have been pointed out to them; that the
certain temptations which are bound to beset the path of those in
their position should have been fully explained to them--all this done
in a simple, common-sense fashion which would convince their
understanding. She had never thought that it would be wise to make
them clearly comprehend why they should try to resist bad habits and
youthful lusts of the flesh--not so much from the point of view that
such things are sins, as because science and experience have shown
that the indulgence in them spoils health and brain and pleasure in
manhood. Boys are creatures full of common sense, and their education
in public schools broadens and helps their understanding of logical
sequences, if only things are explained to them without mystery and
too much spiritual emphasis being put upon them. They so hate being
preached at! No young, growing person in normal animal health and
spirits can be guided and coerced to resist the desires of the body
_solely_ by religious and moral teaching; he must have some definite
reward and gain upon this earth held out to him as well; there must be
some tangible reason for abstinence to convince his imagination and
strengthen his will. And the gain he is offered if he resists certain
temptations is that he will grow strong and powerful, and the better
able, when his judgment is ripe enough to discriminate properly, to
enjoy real pleasures later on. When the adolescent spiritual self
begins to rule him, then the moral point can be more forcibly pressed
home; but it is quite futile while he is at the growing animal stage.

Our good and highly placed mother of whom we are speaking has never
thought of any of these laws of cause and effect, as applied to her
own nearest and dearest, although she is accustomed to think out
schemes for the betterment and development of her Girls' Friendly
societies, or for furthering her husband's political interests in the
country.


INHERITED CHARACTER

She sees good little well-behaved daughters coming down in "the
children's hour" and receives favourable reports from the governesses,
and has no idea, or even any speculation about what strange and new
thoughts and emotions may be commencing to germinate in their brains.
Mildred has perhaps inherited her father's _volage_ nature where the
other sex are concerned, and early shows tendencies which ought to be
sympathetically checked and directed. Catherine has got a strong touch
of Uncle Billy's unscrupulousness, and is often deceitful and
scheming, with a wonderful aptitude for the nursery dominoes and other
games of chance. But both, taught by Fraulein or Mademoiselle--and
that good old Nurse Timson!--only show their mother their sweetest
side when in her company, and are meek, well-behaved little mice,
influenced to be thus not from any moral conviction--because if that
were so they would be good at all times as well--but swayed by the
certain knowledge of personal physical gain if they make a good
impression upon mother, and certain punishment and unpleasantness from
the governesses if they do not. All goes along smoothly until the
rising sap of nature begins to dominate their lives; then some outward
and visible sign of their inherited tendencies begins to show, the
force causing its expression being stronger for the time than any
other thing.

One of the boys gambles, and goes to the Jews for money. The eldest
son and heir, who has never had the wiles of women revealed and
explained to him, or the temptations which are bound to be thrust upon
him because of his great position in the world pointed out to him,
succumbs to the fascinations and falls into the snares of a cunning
chorus girl. Our good mother and great lady has steadily avoided even
admitting that there can be sex questions in life, and has rigorously
banished all possible discussion of them as not being a subject which
should be talked of in any nice family. She has never given any
especial teaching to arouse pride in his old name in her eldest son,
or impressed the great responsibility there is in the worthy
guardianship of the fine position God has endowed him with. He has
just been allowed to drift with the rest, and, unwarned and unarmed,
has fallen in the first fight with his physical emotions.


INSTINCTS UNCHECKED

A third son is apparently the darling of the gods; he is full of
charm. But, fearing that the gambling propensities of his second
brother should come out in him also, his parents keep him with special
strictness and very short of money. The same absence of all
explanations of the meaning of things has been his portion as well as
that of his brothers and sisters. He has never been enlightened as to
the possible workings of heredity, and shown how that as the vice of
gambling is in the blood it will require special will-power to
overcome it. None of these things has been pointed out to him, and so,
being restive at restraint and worried for money, he soon slips into
easy ways, and often allows women to help him in his difficulties.
Uncle Billy's instincts and his own father's have combined in him.
Both could have been checked and diverted into sane channels with
loving foresight and knowledge and sympathy.

The fourth son goes early into the Navy, and the discipline and the
inheritance of his mother's more level qualities turn him into a
splendid fellow; but this is mere chance, and cannot be counted as
accruing from his mother's care.

Here is a case where every outward circumstance seemed to be
propitious, and where both parents were good and respected members of
their class and race. But neither had the intelligence to realise an
end, or consciously to keep it in view; they were solely ruled by
tradition and what seemed to them--especially the mother--to be the
proper and well-established religious methods for the bringing up of
their children. So the remorseless laws of cause and effect rolled on
their Juggernaut car and crushed the victims.

Now, if this mother had had the end--that of her children's happiness
and welfare--really in view, she would have questioned herself as to
the best methods of obtaining that end, and would not have been
content just to go on with the narrow ideas which had held sway in her
own day, and which had perhaps then succeeded very well, because, as I
said before, they were aided by the two forces now stultified--namely,
a tremendous discipline and a spirit of the age which brought no
suggestion of a struggle for personal liberty to young minds. Had she
thought out all these things, she would have understood the
responsibilities of motherhood in their real sense, and not only in
the sense which the outward appearance judges good. She would have
poured love and sympathy on each one of her children separately and
individually, since she was the half-cause of their coming to earth.
She would have studied each one's character, and with determined
concentration have inculcated the necessary pride in fine actions in
them, knowing what their pitfalls would be likely to be. She would
have taught the simple religion of respect for the loan God has made
in giving their bodies a soul, and she would have watched for possible
signs of ill, and would finally have guided each one through the
dangerous age on to the time when every man and woman must answer for
himself and herself.

Heredity is sometimes stronger than even the wisest bringing up; but
who can say how many families might not have been saved and kept
together by a prudent and understanding mother's love?

There is a story, which exactly illustrates the point of the
importance of keeping _the end_ in view, told of the Iron Duke in the
Peninsular War. I cannot remember the exact details, and they are of
no consequence. The point is this: There was a certain tremendously
obstinate Spanish general whom the Duke (then Sir Arthur Wellesley)
found very difficult to lead. The moment had arrived when it was
absolutely necessary for success that this general should move his
troops to a certain position. He was a man filled with his own
importance, and he refused huffily to do so unless the English chief
went down upon his knees to him!

The Iron Duke is reported to have replied to this message in some such
words as these: "Good Lord! the winning of the day is the essential
thing, not the resisting of the man's vanity! I'll go down upon my
knees with pleasure if that will make him move his troops!" He did,
and the Spanish general conceded the request and the day was won.

The great commander and astute Englishman had _the end_ in view, you
see, whereas the lesser brain of the Spaniard would have sacrificed
the battle for a personal whim, having lost sight, in his vanity, of
the importance of the main issue.

How many parents do this day after day and year after year, clinging
to obsolete methods, trying to rule by worn-out precepts, all
because--when you come to analyse it--their own sense of importance
really matters to them more than their children's welfare, and no one
has opened their eyes to see themselves and their actions in the true
light.

Although the case which I have just given of the seemingly good mother
was drawn from the highest class, and so at first sight might not be
said to apply to lesser grades, yet I want to show that this is not
so, but that the same principle applies to the most modest little
family.

Every mother should study how best she can develop and elevate the
souls which by her own part-action she has brought into being, and
make that aim her first thought--for surely the satisfaction of the
feeling that one has succeeded in training one's own children to high
ideals and the attainment of happiness would be greater in old age
than any gratification from the acquirement of social supremacy or
realised personal ambitions.

I would implore every mother, of any class, ruthlessly to reject all
the rules which she has been taught for the guidance of her family,
_unless she has proved with common sense that they can be profitably
applied to each particular case_. I would ask her to keep to no
transmitted axiom, _unless it comes up to the requirements of the
ever-changing and ever-advancing day_. There is only one unchangeable
and immutable command which we should follow, and this is that we
should not soil our souls, or render them up to God degraded and
smirched when we go hence upon that journey from whence no man
returneth.

In summing up both my articles upon the responsibility of motherhood,
I find that in this second one I have made two statements which might
read as contradictions. Firstly, I spoke of young people requiring
personal gain to be held out to them as a reason for committing, or
refraining from committing, certain actions; and then, a paragraph or
two afterwards, I gave the illustration of the little girls' good
behaviour to their mother as being only caused by the fact that it was
more to their advantage so to behave. What I meant to show was that
while boys are young and full of the rising impulses of nature they
very rarely can have acquired sufficient spiritual belief to make them
refrain from indulging in certain pleasures--or what seem pleasures to
them--merely because they have been told these pleasures are wrong.
For instance, on the subject of smoking. What boy will stop smoking by
being told it is wrong and that he is sinning by his disobedience? But
there are many intelligent ones who will not indulge in it if it is
explained to them that smoking will stop their growth and make them
less likely to succeed in the cricket eleven, or, later, in the
college eight. At that period the mind cannot look into unseen worlds,
and is mainly occupied with realities from day to day, and therefore
is more likely to be influenced by a simple explanation of what
physical harm or what good in the immediate future will be the result
of actions.

The little girls' behaviour to their mother is really an example of
this same rule, only the principle for their action was not good,
being merely temporary and strictly limited gain, and not that they
should, as in the case of the boys, grow into fine, strong and healthy
people, more able to enjoy life in the future.

There is another statement which I have constantly made which possibly
might be twisted or misunderstood, and that is the one of the
importance of the end. There are people who would turn it into the
Jesuitical motto of "The end justifies the means." That is not what I
wished to convey at all, but that if an end is good--and the main
object, admittedly, is to obtain it--then there is no use in using
methods which once might have accomplished this, but which no longer
are practical because of the changed conditions, and if continued in
will only lose all possibility of success.

How many fathers and mothers in past days have driven their offspring
to disgrace and even death by adhering to harsh, Puritanical systems,
out of date even at that time! And how many more to-day let them slip
into the same abysses by their too indulgent rule!

As I have said, over and over again, the proof of any pudding is in
the eating of it; so let every mother _examine her methods with her
children by this standard: Are the children developing in moral and
physical welfare by those which she is using, or are they
retrogressing?_ Is she employing tact to guide their young fierce
spirits, or is she trying to crush them by old-fashioned rules?

Questions such as these ought to be honestly asked by each mother of
herself, and if the answer proves that retrogression is in progress,
then she should not be so incredibly stupid as to continue in her old
lines, but should examine herself and see how she can find the right
new ones for her particular cases. La Rochefoucauld was wise when he
said that vanity was at the root of most human mistakes. If a woman is
not willing to undertake the true responsibility of motherhood, then
she had far better be that sad thing which is a growing quantity in
modern civilisation, namely, a childless wife devoted to dogs.
Hundreds of selfish, neurotic females show the utmost unselfish
devotion to wretched little pet animals, when the slightest
self-denial asked of them for little human atoms is more than they can
accord. What does this mean? Is it a writing upon the wall?







