III

MARRIAGE


It is an interesting subject--and one which has touched, or will
probably touch, most of our lives, therefore it may not be
unprofitable to study it a little, and what it means and what it
should mean; because, in the present upheaval of all our old beliefs,
marriage, as a sensible institution, is being attacked upon many
sides.

It is extremely easy to pull down a house, but it requires skill and
special training to rebuild it again; and before dragging the roof off
and demolishing the walls, it would be wiser to have made a distinct
plan and provided the materials ready for the reconstruction of a new
habitation, that the rain and the wind may not overcome us when we
have no shelter for our heads. But this is what the attackers of
marriage have failed to do as yet. Here are three facts which we can
begin by looking at.

_Firstly._ Some kind of union between man and woman, consolidated by
the law, is necessary for the continuation of a race in vigour and
moral upliftment.

_Secondly._ It is admitted by great philosophers and deep thinkers
that the welfare of the community is of more importance than the
fluctuating desires of the individual.

_Thirdly._ A fine ideal, however impossible of attainment, is a force
for good to be held up before the eyes of the mass of the people, who,
however much actual education has advanced, are still too unendowed
with personal brain to have any judgment themselves--their capacities
only allowing them to see the effects of things upon their immediate
surroundings without perceiving the causes, and therefore leaving them
incapable of judging what could be good for the country, the race, or
humanity in general.

After all these centuries, legal marriage still holds, because no one
has been able to suggest any other union which could take its place
without bringing chaos. And it seems more than likely that no one will
ever be sufficiently inspired so to do! Thus let us now consider the
present legal marriage as still being a stable fact, and see how we
can make the best of it. In it there are two things which both man and
woman forget--or refuse to face--and which are perhaps the chief
causes of most unhappiness. Man forgets that his kind _words_ of love
and sympathy matter far more to the actual happiness of the woman than
any of his _deeds_: because words fill and satisfy her imagination,
which is active whenever she is alone; and kind deeds, with few or
indifferent words, make very little impression upon it. Woman
forgets--or will not face--the fact that man is by nature a polygamous
animal. There is no use in arguing about this and saying he ought not
to be, and that it is a horrible idea. It is a physiological fact, and
to dispute it is to criticise the Almighty's scheme for ensuring a
continued population. That man should have polygamous instincts is
essential for this scheme to work against any odds.

Whatever we choose to say in contradiction to this resolves itself
into empty words, the fact of nature remaining. It would be just as
sensible to try to argue that, because we do not like to drink sea
water, it has no business to be salt! and to decide that it is _not_
salt! and that we will not recognise that _it is_ salt! The ocean
would just laugh at us, and remain briny! And no doubt Nature laughs
at silly woman too, when she tries to judge man without understanding
the elementary principle of creation.

This being grasped clearly, it must be seen that monogamous marriage
is _an ideal state_, not a _natural state_, and it must be admitted to
be such, and lived up to as an ideal, not undertaken with the notion
that fidelity in man is _natural_, and infidelity an _unnatural_
thing. It is the other way about because of the fundamental instincts
of man, which continuously and subconsciously suggest to him the
necessity for self-preservation, and in its larger sense
self-preservation means species-preservation.

Woman, on the other hand, although unconsciously inspired by this same
fundamental instinct of species-preservation, is not naturally
polygamous, or rather polyandrous, because such a state would militate
against this end by eventually destroying pure offspring. She only
becomes so under certain conditions. Fidelity, then, is, so to speak,
a natural state for woman, and she has not to fight against any
fundamental instinct of her sex in order to preserve it--she has only
to resist perverted desire, which is an exotic growth, the outcome of
civilisation. Thus fidelity is much harder for man, who, to succeed in
being faithful, is obliged to dominate a natural instinct, which is a
far more difficult thing to do than to fight against an exotic desire;
because all natural things are governed by inexorable and eternal
laws, and are not at the mercy of circumstance. Thus the natural
instinct of man is at work all the time in continuous activity--and
the exotic desire of woman is intermittent, and the result of
circumstance.

Of course, all this has been said before by every serious thinker, and
I am only reiterating these facts because the general readers may have
forgotten them, and I must bring them to their recollection to make
the rest of our discussion upon marriage clear.

These nature instincts being admitted, we can get on to a survey of
legal marriage. At first, it must have been an affair of expediency.
The woman was probably expected to be faithful, and brute force took
care that she was so, or that she immediately paid the price of
possible contamination of offspring by being killed. She was expected
to be faithful for a natural reason, not for a spiritual or
sentimental one; the reason being, as already inferred, to ensure the
purity of the offspring. Man had no need to be faithful to one woman
to secure this end, and never, in consequence, dreamed of being so.

All through Pagan times infidelity in man was rampant and recognised,
and not looked upon as sin. And when woman became civilised enough to
have exotic desires, she lost her natural instinct, that of
preservation of pure offspring, and became liable to vagrant fancies
and often a vicious creature.

Then the Church arrived and turned marriage into a sacrament;
presumably with the noble intention of trying to elevate man and
overcome his carnal nature. Man outwardly conformed, and, with his
whole soul's desire to be true and to uplift himself, each individual
who really believed no doubt did war with his instincts, and numbers
probably succeeded in conquering them. While woman, always a creature
of more delicate nervous susceptibilities, flung herself with furore
under the influences of spiritual things, and in the truly devout
cases overcame her grafted desires and returned to natural instincts.
But in beings of both sexes who were unconvinced by religion,
infidelity continued to flourish, as it does even to this day. A man
who truly believes that he is sinning in being unfaithful, and who
understands that outside opinion is nothing in the soiling of his own
soul, but that the matter is between himself and God, will always be
faithful _in body_ to a woman he has wedded, whether he cares for her
or not. But a man who has not this conviction, and who does not live
in this intimate relation to God, has no reason to hold him from
indulging his natural instinct, except the fear of being found out,
and when his sagacity has suggested safeguards against this, his
instinct will certainly give itself expression. It is all a question
of personal belief. There are numbers of good and honest characters
who do not feel convinced that entire fidelity in man to one woman was
intended by the Creator, and who therefore feel no degradation in the
latitude they allow themselves. It is not for us to argue which are
right and which are wrong, but to stick to the subject of marriage and
how it can perhaps be made happier in these present days, when all
other conditions of life are changing, by a better comprehension of
fundamental instincts and laws of nature.

Woman has developed so far that generally she thinks she is (and
sometimes she really is!) a reasonable and balanced creature, with
strong individuality--and personal tastes and likes and dislikes. She
is now ill-fitted to keep them all in subservience to man, unless he
is her intellectual master. She may have wedded only because the
emotion of sex (not understood as such, and called by a number of
other names such as "love," "devotion," "attraction") forced her at
one of its powerful moments to take a physical mate--totally unsuited
to her moral calibre. But she has knelt at the altar and sworn vows
before God--and perhaps has fulfilled woman's original mission in the
world, and become the mother of children--so what is to be done to
rectify her mistake and its unhappy consequences?

She must look the whole circumstances of it in the face and ask
herself whether she herself threw dust in her own eyes as regards the
character of her husband, whether he deceived her in this, or whether
they just drifted together, each to blame as much as the other,
through the attraction of sex and the cruelty of ignorance. She may
regret it a thousandfold--but she has done the thing of her own free
will, no one forced her to wed the man; she may have done so
unwillingly in some cases--and for ulterior motives, but at all events
she was consenting and not dragged to church resisting, and so if she
is sensible she will use the whole of her intelligence to make the
best of it. She will look to the end of her every action and her every
thought. Will brooding over her "rights," and the wrongs he has
inflicted, mend them? Will it do anything but give her vanity--the
satisfaction of self-pity? Certainly not.

If she has really evolved enough to wish to impose her opinions and
individuality upon her household or the community, she will have
realised that the welfare of the home for which she is responsible,
and the community to which she belongs, are, or ought to be, of far
more consequence to her than her own personal emotions. Therefore she
must ask herself whether she has any right to upset the happiness of
the one, and the conception of good of the other, by indulging in
personal quarrels and bickerings, or open scandal with her mate. A
really noble and unselfish woman would never consider her personal
emotion before her duty to God and to her neighbour. It is because the
outlook of woman is as a rule so pitifully narrow and self-centred
that she often makes a useless and unhappy wife, and shipwrecks her
own and others' futures.

Man has gone on with his brute force, and his physical and mental
attraction, and his tastes and beliefs and aspirations very much the
same for thousands of years. Numbers of them were brutes then, and
numbers are brutes still and will remain so. It is only woman who has
so incredibly changed, and after staying immeasurably behind in
importance and in intellectuality for countless centuries, now seeks
to equal if not outstep man in all things. It would be well for man to
wake up to the fact that he is now wedding a woman with every sense
and nerve and conception of life far in advance of what his mother
believed herself to be capable of--and so his methods towards her in
return must not be as his father's were. If man wishes to have the
good, domestic, obedient wife his father--perhaps one should go
farther back and say grandfather!--expected--and got--he must either
choose a timid weakling who becomes just his echo, or he must learn to
treat the modern woman as a comrade, a being who mentally can
understand and follow his aspirations and even assist him in his
desires, a creature to respect and consult, and whom he cannot rule
just because he is a man and she is a woman--but can only do so, and
bring her to obedience, when he has shown her his intellectual
superiority and his wisdom.

Woman is as willing to be ruled as ever she was--she always adores a
master; but she has grown too intelligent to bow her head just because
a man is a _man_--he must be _the man_. Man is naturally fighting for
his old omnipotence, which he possessed regardless of his personal
endowment, simply because he was a male creature--and the foolish
section of woman is fighting man, with bombs and tricks and frantic
words, instead of _convincing_ him by her wisdom and attainments, by
her demonstrations of knowledge of life and its duties and
responsibilities, that she has grown at last indeed fitted to be
treated as an equal and a comrade, not as a plaything and a slave.

Who does not respect a woman who fulfils all her obligations with
grace and charm, whose house is well ordered, whose friends are well
entertained by her fine mind, and whose children are well brought up
and full of understanding? She is indeed more precious than rubies and
far more full of influence for the good of her community than she who
shouts of rights and wrongs and votes and such-like. The first woman
could control a hundred votes, and help a government, but the second
can only clog the wheels of the sex's advancement.

Now we get back to marriage!

And the first and foremost thing to be understood is that it is a
frightful responsibility to undertake, and that all those who enter
into this bond lightly and for frivolous motives, or from just
drifting, will be made by fate to pay the price.

Think of it! Two people stand up and swear before God to continue to
love one another until death do them part. They solemnly stand there
and make vows about an emotion over which they have no more control
than they have over the keeping of the wind in the south. They have
only control, if they have strong wills, over its demonstration. And
then in nine cases out of ten neither thinks for a moment afterwards,
of his or her responsibility _of trying to make possible_ the
observance of these vows, by keeping alight the flame of love in the
other's heart. A man utterly disillusions a woman and then blames her,
not himself, for her ceasing to care for him, and being eventually
attracted by some one else! A woman disgusts or bores a man, and then
bewails her sad lot, and calls the man a brute for being indifferent,
and a shameful creature for looking elsewhere for consolation! In all
marriages there is no one to blame or praise for unhappiness or
happiness but the two individuals themselves. It is his fault--or
misfortune--if she no longer cares, and likewise hers in the parallel
case--and it is owing to the weakness of either if outside
circumstances have been able to interfere. Thus to ensure happiness
there must be a tremendous sense of personal responsibility, and there
should be understanding of life and understanding of nature instincts
and understanding of sex instincts; and a ruthless tearing away of the
false values which a Victorian age grafted upon religion, narrowing
the mind of woman as to man's needs--and narrowing man's conception of
woman's mental capacity.

No woman must ever forget in her relation to man that "he who pays the
piper calls the tune," and in this I am not only speaking literally of
shekels of gold and silver, but of the power incorporated in certain
personalities; and man, if he chose to exert it, has always _force
majeure_ at his command in the last extremity, although in these days
of Herculean young women he may lose even this in time!

Before undertaking to play that most difficult part of wife, every
girl ought to ask herself, Does she really care for the man enough to
make her use her intelligence to understand him, and to try to keep
him loving her? Or if she does not personally care enough for him to
trouble about this--will the situation of her husband in the world
satisfy her, and make the bondage, unleavened by love, of the care of
house, servants, and possible children, worth while?

Before undertaking the situation she ought to look at every aspect of
the case, and question herself searchingly upon her own aims and ends,
and if the actual facts will or will not fit in with them. Having made
up her mind that for one reason or another it is for her happiness to
take a certain man for her mate, she ought then sedulously to
cultivate all the aspects of the condition which can conduce to peace
and to the attainment and enjoyment of that end. She must not forget
that the man has paid her the highest honour a man can pay a woman. He
has selected her to be his life's companion. He proposes in nine cases
out of ten, to provide her with a home and a position in life, and to
take upon himself the responsibility of her maintenance (when the
woman has money of her own this question is different naturally). But
in all cases the man in asking her to marry him has shown that
something in her--or in her possessions--makes her appear worth the
giving up of his liberty. So she owes him just as much as the thing he
took her for. If for her money, and she knows it is for that, and she
has been sufficiently humble to accept him on those terms--she owes
him money. If for love--she owes him at least the outside observances
of love. If he has pretended love and it is for some other motive, his
Nemesis will fall upon himself in the disillusion and contempt he will
inspire. But in all cases the woman, through want of intelligence or
pure misfortune, has crossed the Rubicon with him; she has allowed him
to teach her the meaning of dual life--she has put it into his power
with her to create future lives. She cannot, for any price or any
prayers, recross that fatal stream. So for all reasons of common
sense--and above all, sense of responsibility to the community--she
had better make the best of her bargain.

Likewise, man should pause and think, Is it merely because I cannot
obtain this woman upon any other terms that I am offering her
marriage? Have I respect for her? Do I think she will bring happiness
into my house as well as pleasure to my body? Is she suited to my
brain capacity when I am not exalted by physical emotion? Am I going
to curb my selfishness and behave decently towards her?

If he cannot answer these questions satisfactorily he may know that he
is undertaking a hundred-to-one chance of peace and happiness. But if
the physical desire is stronger than all these considerations, then he
must _know and realise_ that whatever happens _he must never blame the
woman_. He has succumbed to the most material and alas! the most
hideously strong force in nature--not because the woman tempted him,
as it has been the fashion for man to say since the days of Adam--but
because there is something in himself which is so weak that it cannot
listen to the promptings of the spirit when the body calls.

In each and every case it is a man's duty to be kind and courteous to
a woman who is his wife. He has made her so by his free vows before
God (because no one can be forced to the altar against his absolute
will in these days), or he has made her so by vows and business
agreement, according to the laws of his country, before the Registrar.
In either case he has made her his legal wife and the possible mother
of his children--units unborn who can affect the welfare of his
country. He has, then, his great duties towards her. If she was a
girl, he has taken from her that which nothing on earth can restore;
he has made her into another being. He has been instrumental in making
her--this other human soul--accept responsibilities, and he is bound
as an honourable man to school himself so as to be able to help the
mutual happiness and peace of their dual existence. And if he wishes
to be obeyed, loved, and respected, he has to look to himself that he
inspires obedience, love, and respect in his mate. She will not
experience these feelings to order; and fear alone, or some other and
lower motive, would make her simulate them. Man must not forget that
nothing simulated can last. Truth alone remains at the end of the
year.

No marriage can be certain of continuing happy which has been entered
into in the spirit of taking a lottery ticket. But most marriages
could be fairly happy if both man and woman looked the thing squarely
in the face and made up their minds that they would run together in
harness as two well-trained carriage horses, both knowing of the pole,
both pulling at the collar and not over-straining the traces, both
taking pride in their high stepping and their unity of movement. How
much more dignified than to make a pitiful exhibition of
incompatibility like two wild creatures kicking and plunging, and
finally upsetting the vehicle they had agreed to draw?

I would like to discuss now the problem of whether or not marriage
could be made happy no matter how it starts, by using common sense,
but the deep interest of the whole subject has made my pen already
cover too much space and I must refrain in this chapter.

Only, men and women who read this, do not pass it by, but stop and
_think_ before you plunge, through the giving and the taking of a
wedding ring, into happiness or misery.




