VI

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF MOTHERHOOD


As far as the necessities for it go in the animal world, nearly all
animals have a very strong sense of the responsibility of
motherhood--unless they have become over-civilised, or live under
unnatural circumstances. A striking example of the consequences of the
latter state of being is shown by "Barbara," that thrillingly
attractive Polar bear in the Zoo, whose twelfth and thirteenth infants
were only the other day condemned to follow their brothers and sisters
to an early grave through their parents'--and especially their
mother's--gross stupidity about their bringing-up and welfare. And we
who are human animals, given by God conscious souls, ought to realise
the fact that civilisation and pampered environment have enormously
blunted our natural instincts in this respect, just as they have
Barbara's, and so we should try to restore the loss by consciously
cultivating our understanding of the subject and deliberately
realising the tremendous responsibilities we incur by bringing
children into the world. When we think about the matter quietly, the
magnitude of it is almost overwhelming, and yet there are hundreds and
thousands of women who never give it a serious thought! They have some
vague idea that to have children is the inevitable result of
matrimony, and that if they pay others to feed and clothe the little
creatures, and give them some instruction in the way that they should
go, their own part of the affair is finished. That, until a child is
grown to an age to judge for itself, the parents will be held
responsible for their stewardship of its body and soul at the great
tribunal of God does not strike them, and it is only perhaps when the
boomerang of their neglect has returned to them and blasted them with
calamity that they become conscious of their past negligence.

In this article I do not propose to touch upon the father's side of
the question, important as it is, but shall confine myself to the
mother's, because this has always been one of my deep preoccupations
to think out the meaning of it all, and how best to fulfil the trust.
Obviously the sole aim of true motherhood is the moral and physical
welfare of the child, and to accomplish this end we should understand
that it is quite impossible to lay down any set rule, or go by any
recognised and unchangeable method. For in one age certain precepts
are taught which are obsolete in the next, because science and the
improvement of mechanical aids to well-being advance with such giant
strides. But if we keep _the end_ in view it is simple enough to see
that common sense and discrimination, unclouded by custom or sentiment
or superstition, can accomplish miracles. The circumstances of the
particular case must always govern the method to be used in order to
obtain the same given end, no matter what the station in life of the
parents. Thus every mother, from the humblest to the highest, ought to
think out how she can best procure her child moral and physical
welfare _according to her means_.

In the lives of the very poor the only thing to be done for the
betterment of the understanding of the responsibility of motherhood
seems to be to teach the simplest rules of hygiene which animals know
by instinct, and after that for the State to take care of the children
as much as possible. For this very strange fact is in operation,
namely, that while Nature leaves an insatiable desire to create life,
she allows civilisation to rob human beings of instinctive knowledge
of how to preserve it in its earliest stages, and that the human
mother is of all creation the only one entirely at the mercy of
imparted knowledge as regards the proper treatment of her offspring.

Into the conception of the duties of motherhood among the very poor we
cannot go in this short paper--the subject is too vast--so we must
confine ourselves to discussing those of a higher class where, having
the means to do well, the responsibilities are far greater. I want, if
I can, to open a window, as it were, upon the outlook of the general
responsibility of motherhood and let each class apply what it gathers
of the meaning, if it wishes, to its own circumstances.

It is the aim and end of a thing which is of sole importance; in this
case the aim and end being the happiness and welfare of the child. And
that is the point which I want to harp upon, the necessity of keeping
the goal in view and of not wandering off into side issues. It was for
the sake of the end, namely, obtaining happiness, that I tried to show
in my articles upon marriage how common sense might secure this
desired state. And it was to _the end_ of what might be best for
England that I pleaded for the necessity of using fair judgment over
the question of facilitating or restricting divorce. And it is now to
_the end_ of helping the coming race to be fine and true that I want
to talk about the responsibility of motherhood.

Let us take the subject from the very beginning.


PRE-NATAL INFLUENCES

The thought for the child should commence with the first knowledge of
its coming birth. A tremendous control of self, and emotions, and
foolish habits, and a stern command of nerves should be the
prospective mother's constant effort, as science has proved that all
pre-natal influences have such powerful effect upon the child; and,
surely, if any woman stopped to think of the colossal responsibility
she has undertaken in having become the vehicle to bring a soul from
God to earth, she would at least try to employ as much intelligence in
the fulfilment of her obligation as she puts into succeeding in any of
the worldly pursuits in life. Think of the hours some women spend in
painful discipline by going through exercises to keep their figures
young and their faces beautiful--the massage! the cures! and the
"rests" they take to this end--but who let their waiting time for
motherhood be passed in a sort of relaxation of all control--getting
into tempers, indulging in nerves, over-smoking, or tiring themselves
out with excitement without one thought for the coming little one,
except as an inevitable necessity or a shocking nuisance. During this
period the wise woman ought to study such matters as heredity. She
ought to view the characteristics of her own and her husband's
families, and then firmly determine to counteract the objectionable
features in them by making her own mind dwell upon only good and fine
attributes for her child. She ought to try to keep herself in perfect
health by using common sense, and, above all, she should _determine_
to fight and conquer the nervous emotions which more or less beset all
women at such time. She ought to encourage happy and loving relations
with her husband, and try in every way to be in herself good and
gentle and brave. It is the most important moment in the whole of a
woman's life for self-discipline, because of the prodigious results of
all her moods and actions upon the child, and yet, as I said before,
it is one of the commonest sights to see a woman who at other times is
a very good sort of creature, simply letting herself go and becoming
an insupportable bore to her husband and the whole house, with her
perverseness and her nerves and her fads.

If they could analyse causes, what bitter reproaches many poor little
diseased, neurotic children might truly throw at their irresponsible
mothers for endowing them with these evils before birth.


THE CASE OF TWO WOMEN

When the child is born--again it is only its welfare which should be
thought of by the mother, and not what custom or family opinion would
enforce. To me it seems that no mother ought to undertake any of the
so-called duties of a mother that she is incapable of performing to
the advantage of the child, who would be better cared for by employing
highly trained service. She should only force herself to do her best
in uncongenial tasks if circumstances make it impossible for her to
obtain a better nurse or teacher for her infant than she herself could
be. She must constantly keep _the end_ in view, so as to stamp out
prejudice and out-of-date methods; especially she should guard against
making the child suffer for her own fads and experiments. I believe I
shall better illustrate what I mean by "keeping the end in view" if I
give a few concrete examples, instead of trying to explain in the
abstract.

Here is one example.

There were two women of my acquaintance, one of whom had an exquisitely
obedient, perfectly brought-up little girl of five who was her
constant thought, and a baby of two months. This mother could afford
an excellent nurse, and left all the physical care of the infant to
her, concentrating her intelligence upon wise general supervision, and
upon the training of the little girl whose dawning character was her
study. The other mother had two very ill-behaved, disobedient children
of five and seven, and a baby of three months. She spent her time
washing and dressing the infant, fussing over it and caressing it from
morning to night, and interfering with the paid nurse, who well knew
her duties. She was also quite indifferent to her appearance, and
wearied her husband to death with her over-domesticity. But she felt
herself to be a perfect and affectionate wife and mother, and strongly
censured the other woman when she admitted that she had never washed
or dressed her baby, and was even rather nervous when she held it in
case she should hurt its tender neck and head. But the proof that the
first woman was a true and good guardian of God's gift to her was in
the finely trained little girl, and the proof of the second woman's
undevelopment from the animal stage was in her concentrated and, in
the circumstances, unnecessary preoccupation with the infant, to the
entire neglect of the character training of the elder children. Had
they both been so poor that actual physical care of the infants
devolved solely upon each mother, the first would have used all her
intelligence to discover the sensible and common-sense way to carry
out her duties, and the second would have continued using any obsolete
method she had been accustomed to, while she lavished silly fuss and
attention upon the baby.


FORE-THOUGHT FOR BEAUTY

The first woman had _the end_ in view; the second did not look ahead
at all, but simply indulged her own selfishly animal instincts,
without a thought of what would be best for her child.

The apparently "good" mothers might be divided into two classes--the
animal mothers and the spiritual mothers. The animal mothers are
better than indifferent, and therefore abnormal, mothers, but are far
below spiritual mothers, for they, the animal mothers, are only
obeying natural instincts which have happily survived in them, but
obeying them only as animals do, without reason or conscience. And the
spiritual mother uses her common sense and tries to secure the
continual welfare of her child, looking ahead for all eventualities,
from matters of health to personal appearance, as well as character
training and soul elevation.

Numbers of women think that if they follow out the same lines of
bringing-up for their children as are the recognised ones employed by
their class they have fully done their duty, and that if the children
do not profit by the stereotyped lessons of religion and behaviour
that have been imparted to them by proper teachers it is the fault of
the children, and a misfortune which they, the mothers, must bear with
more or less resignation.

But indeed this is not so.

Let us take a spiritual mother's duties in rotation, beginning with
the most material. After bringing into the world the healthiest infant
her common sense has been able to secure, she should guard against any
physical disability accruing to it that she can prevent. In all
matters of health she should either make a great study of the subject
herself, or employ trained aid to its accomplishment; but beyond this
there are other things which, if she neglects them, the boy or girl
could reproach her for afterwards and with reason. One is the
fore-thought for beauty. How many boys' whole personal appearances are
ruined by standing-out ears! How many little girls' complexions are
irretrievably spoilt by unsuitable soap having been used which has
burnt red veins into their tender cheeks. These two small examples are
entirely the fault of the mother and do not lie at the door of
uncorrected habits in the children themselves. No boy's ears need
stick out; there are caps and every sort of contrivance yearly being
improved upon to obviate this disfigurement. No girl need have
anything but a beautiful skin if her mother uses intelligence and
supervises the early treatment of it. Because if she has _the end_ in
view, the mother will know that her little boy or girl will probably
grow up and desire affection and happiness, and that beauty is a means
not to be discounted to obtain these good things, and, for the
securing of them, is relatively as important as having a well-endowed
mind.


THE SPIRITUAL MOTHER

When the first dawning characteristics begin to show, the spiritual
mother's study of heredity will begin to stand her in good stead, for
she must never forget that every expressed thought and action of a
small child shows the indication of some undeveloped instinct, and
should be watched by a sensible mother, so that she may decide which
one to encourage and which one to curb, and, if possible, eradicate.
Should there be some strong inherited tendency which is not good, then
her most careful care and influence will be needed. There is not the
slightest use in making rules and then leaving their enforcement to
servants and governesses--the true mother should see that her child
thoroughly understands what it is being asked to do, and why it is
being asked to do it. She should appeal to its intelligence from
earliest days, and make it comprehend it is for its own benefit. For
children cannot when very young be influenced by high moral
considerations which come with maturer years, but only by personal
gain or fear--and if ruled by fear they invariably become deceitful.
It is a spiritual mother's business to show interest in all her
child's tastes and occupations, and to supervise and direct them into
the best channels, and if she has several children she should watch
each one's idiosyncrasies and not imagine that the same method will do
for them all. What good gardener would treat a rose-tree in the same
fashion which he does a tulip bulb? The spiritual mother should think
out for herself, guided by what she sees are their personal needs, the
best method of instructing her children in true morality--that is,
honour and truth, and freedom from all hypocrisy and deceit. She
should not be influenced by any set-down rules of religion or dogma,
or by any precepts she may have been taught herself in her youth, if
they no longer convey conviction because of the change in time,
otherwise she will be following custom and losing sight of _the end_.
She should make her children understand that the soiling of their own
souls by committing mean actions is the greatest sin, and that what
other people think or do not think of them is of no consequence, but
the only vital things are what God thinks and they think of
themselves. Hundreds of children's afterlives are shipwrecked because
they were only taught all the dry dogmas and seemings of religion, and
the real meaning was never explained to them. I know a rigorously
strict clergyman's family where the children are taught and conform to
all the observances of their father's church, and yet a falser, more
paltry set of young creatures could not be found--they have never had
it explained to them that it is impossible to hoodwink God. For a
perfect example of the religious spirit _not to_ employ towards
children, all mothers ought to read the immortal scene between Trilby
before she dies and Mrs. Bagot--when the narrow woman expresses her
puny views and Trilby puts forth her broad and true ones. It is so
incredibly stupid to use obsolete methods which can never obtain the
desired end just because the dominion of custom is still strong upon
us, and we have not been intelligent enough to grasp and benefit by
the spirit of the age. For all mothers must realise that they can
never dominate the spirit of the age, and must either make vain fights
with it, and be conquered to their loss, or must make terms with it
and use it in its brightest and best aspect. The spirit of this age is
a totally different one to the spirit of their own childhood's age. It
is shorn of reverence and unquestioning obedience to elders, and is an
independent creature who will only obey through conviction of good or
personal benefit. Children are unerring and pitiless judges of those
placed over them, and how can a mother, just because she is a mother,
expect respect and reverence in her children if she earns their
contempt by her conduct and selfishness?

It is the spiritual mother's duty to instil chivalry towards the other
sex into her little sons from earliest years, by making them polite to
herself and to their sisters. She should, before they go to school and
when they return for the holidays, endeavour to influence them into
liking cleanliness and care of their persons, especially when with
ladies. She should try to make these little men so happy and
contented, so certain of sympathy and understanding that home spells
heaven for them and remains the dearest memory of their lives, and for
her little girls, over whom she has a far vaster influence, she should
polish their minds, explain all the true and pure principles of
life--teach them the value of self-control and self-respect, and watch
for and encourage all their graces, so that when they arrive at the
ages of seventeen and eighteen they may be fitted in all points to
shine in whatever world they belong to, and take their places among
the best of their class. Space forbids me to go on longer, although
the subject seems only just to have been begun, so large is its sphere
of action, but I must give one last concrete example of two women's
methods, to enforce my meaning of the importance of _the end_.

Both sent their girls to the same school, where every accomplishment
was taught and the highest tone prevailed that the masters could
inculcate. The first mother showed deep interest in the holidays, in
all her child's lessons, directed and encouraged her, opening her
understanding and broadening her point of view, while she attended to
every physical grace. She explained how her child should apply the
knowledge she acquired during term, so that it should grow
interesting, and as far as it lay in her power she endeavoured that
her daughter should be fitted with every charm and attraction which
could procure for her later on a larger selection from which to choose
her partner in life. The other mother let her girl run wild during the
holidays, and allowed her to feel that all she learned was just an
irksome duty to be forgotten the moment school was over. Her
appearance, her gentle manners, her refinement, her point of view,
were all left to take their own chance, from the mistaken idea that it
would encourage vanity and egotism in the girl to discuss these things
with her--and that she, the mother, had done all that was required of
her in simply providing a good education! This second mother had
completely lost sight of the end, you see, and was unconsciously only
thinking of herself and not of her child at all.

And this--to think of the welfare of the child and allow no other
point to obscure this--is the whole meaning of the responsibility of
motherhood.




