Chapter III

AGENTS AND BYSTANDERS


1

When a citizen has qualified as a voter he finds himself one of the
theoretical rulers of a great going concern. He has not made the
complicated machine with its five hundred thousand federal officers
and its uncounted local offices. He has not seen much of it. He is
bound by contracts, by debts, by treaties, by laws, made before he
was aware of them. He does not from day to day decide who shall do
what in the business of government. Only some small fraction of it
comes intermittently to his notice. And in those episodic moments
when he stands in the polling booth he is a highly intelligent and
public-spirited voter indeed who can discover two real alternatives
and enlist his influence for a party which promises something he can
understand.

The actual governing is made up of a multitude of arrangements on
specific questions by particular individuals. These rarely become
visible to the private citizen. Government, in the long intervals
between elections, is carried on by politicians, officeholders
and influential men who make settlements with other politicians,
officeholders and influential men. The mass of people see these
settlements, judge them, and affect them only now and then. They are
altogether too numerous, too complicated, too obscure in their effects
to become the subject of any continuing exercise of public opinion.

Nor in any exact and literal sense are those who conduct the daily
business of government accountable after the fact to the great mass of
the voters. They are accountable only, except in spectacular cases,
to the other politicians, officeholders and influential men directly
interested in the particular act. Modern society is not visible to
anybody, nor intelligible continuously and as a whole. One section is
visible to another section, one series of acts is intelligible to this
group and another to that.

Even this degree of responsible understanding is attainable only by the
development of fact-finding agencies of great scope and complexity.[11]
These agencies give only a remote and incidental assistance to the
general public. Their findings are too intricate for the casual reader.
They are also almost always much too uninteresting. Indeed the popular
boredom and contempt for the expert and for statistical measurement are
such that the organization of intelligence to administer modern affairs
would probably be entirely neglected were it not that departments of
government, corporations, trade unions and trade associations are being
compelled by their own internal necessities of administration, and
by compulsion of other corporate groups, to record their own acts,
measure them, publish them and stand accountable for them.

The need in the Great Society not only for publicity but for
uninterrupted publicity is indisputable. But we shall misunderstand
the need seriously if we imagine that the purpose of the publication
can possibly be the informing of every voter. We live at the mere
beginnings of public accounting. Yet the facts far exceed our
curiosity. The railroads, for example, make an accounting. Do we read
the results? Hardly. A few executives here and there, some bankers,
some regulating officials, some representatives of shippers and the
like read them. The rest of us ignore them for the good and sufficient
reason that we have other things to do.

For the man does not live who can read all the reports that drift
across his doorstep or all the dispatches in his newspaper. And if
by some development of the radio every man could see and hear all
that was happening everywhere, if publicity, in other words, became
absolute, how much time could or would he spend watching the Sinking
Fund Commission and the Geological Survey? He would probably tune in
on the Prince of Wales, or, in desperation, throw off the switch and
seek peace in ignorance. It is bad enough today—with morning newspapers
published in the evening and evening newspapers in the morning, with
October magazines in September, with the movies and the radio—to be
condemned to live under a barrage of eclectic information, to have
one’s mind made the receptacle for a hullabaloo of speeches, arguments
and unrelated episodes. General information for the informing of public
opinion is altogether too general for intellectual decency. And life is
too short for the pursuit of omniscience by the counting in a state of
nervous excitement of all the leaves on all the trees.


2

If all men had to conceive the whole process of government all the time
the world’s work would obviously never be carried on. Men make no
attempt to consider society as a whole. The farmer decides whether to
plant wheat or corn, the mechanic whether to take the job offered at
the Pennsylvania or the Erie shops, whether to buy a Ford or a piano,
and, if a Ford, whether to buy it from the garage on Elm Street or from
the dealer who sent him a circular. These decisions are among fairly
narrow choices offered to him; he can no more choose among all the jobs
in the world than he can consider marrying any woman in the world.
These choices in detail are in their cumulative mass the government
of society. They may rest on ignorant or enlightened opinions, but,
whether he comes to them by accident or scientific instruction, they
are specific and particular among at best a few concrete alternatives
and they lead to a definite, visible result.

But men are supposed also to hold public opinions about the general
conduct of society. The mechanic is supposed not only to choose
between working for the Pennsylvania or the Erie but to decide how
in the interests of the nation all the railroads of the country shall
be regulated. The two kinds of opinion merge insensibly one into the
other; men have general notions which influence their individual
decisions and their direct experiences unconsciously govern their
general notions. Yet it is useful to distinguish between the two kinds
of opinion, the specific and direct, the general and the indirect.

Specific opinions give rise to immediate executive acts; to take a job,
to do a particular piece of work, to hire or fire, to buy or sell,
to stay here or go there, to accept or refuse, to command or obey.
General opinions give rise to delegated, indirect, symbolic, intangible
results: to a vote, to a resolution, to applause, to criticism,
to praise or dispraise, to audiences, circulations, followings,
contentment or discontent. The specific opinion may lead to a decision
to act within the area where a man has personal jurisdiction; that
is, within the limits set by law and custom, his personal power and
his personal desire. But general opinions lead only to some sort of
expression, such as voting, and do not result in executive acts except
in coöperation with the general opinions of large numbers of other
persons.

Since the general opinions of large numbers of persons are almost
certain to be a vague and confusing medley, action cannot be taken
until these opinions have been factored down, canalized, compressed
and made uniform. The making of one general will out of a multitude
of general wishes is not an Hegelian mystery, as so many social
philosophers have imagined, but an art well known to leaders,
politicians and steering committees.[12] It consists essentially in the
use of symbols which assemble emotions after they have been detached
from their ideas. Because feelings are much less specific than ideas,
and yet more poignant, the leader is able to make a homogeneous
will out of a heterogeneous mass of desires. The process, therefore,
by which general opinions are brought to coöperation consists of an
intensification of feeling and a degradation of significance. Before a
mass of general opinions can eventuate in executive action, the choice
is narrowed down to a few alternatives. The victorious alternative is
executed not by the mass but by individuals in control of its energy.

A private opinion may be quite complicated, and may issue in quite
complicated actions, in a whole train of subsidiary opinions, as when
a man decides to build a house and then makes a hundred judgments as
to how it shall be built. But a public opinion has no such immediate
responsibility or continuous result. It leads in politics to the making
of a pencil mark on a piece of paper, and then to a period of waiting
and watching as to whether one or two years hence the mark shall be
made in the same column or in the adjoining one. The decision to make
the mark may be for reasons _a_^1, _a_^2, _a_^3 ... _a_^n: the result,
whether an idiot or genius has voted, is A.

For great masses of people, though each of them may have more or less
distinct views, must when they act converge to an identical result. And
the more complex the collection of men the more ambiguous must be the
unity and the simpler the common ideas.


3

In English-speaking countries during the last century the contrast
between the action of men individually and in the mass has been much
emphasized, and yet greatly misunderstood. Macaulay, for example,
speaking on the Reform Bill of 1832, drew the conventional distinction
between private enterprise and public action:

“In all those things which depend on the intelligence, the knowledge,
the industry, the energy of individuals, this country stands preëminent
among all countries of the world ancient and modern. But in those
things which it belongs to the state to direct we have no such claim to
superiority ... can there be a stronger contrast than that which exists
between the beauty, the completeness, the speed, the precision with
which every process is performed in our factories, and the awkwardness,
the crudeness, the slowness, the uncertainty of the apparatus by which
offenses are punished and rights vindicated?... Surely we see the
barbarism of the Thirteenth Century and the highest civilization of the
Nineteenth Century side by side, and we see that the barbarism belongs
to the government, and the civilization to the people.”[13]

Macaulay was, of course, thinking of the contrast between factory
production and government as it existed in England under Queen
Victoria’s uncles and the hard-drinking, hard-riding squirearchy. But
the Prussian bureaucracy amply demonstrated that there is no such
necessary contrast between governmental and private action. There is
a contrast between action by and through great masses of people and
action that moves without them.

The fundamental contrast is not between public and private enterprises,
between “crowd” psychology and individual, but between men doing
specific things and men attempting to command general results. The
work of the world is carried on by men in their executive capacity,
by an infinite number of concrete acts, plowing and planting and
reaping, building and destroying, fitting this to that, going from
here to there, transforming A into B and moving B from X to Y. The
relationships between the individuals doing these specific things are
balanced by a most intricate mechanism of exchange, of contract, of
custom and of implied promises. Where men are performing their work
they must learn to understand the process and the substance of these
obligations if they are to do it at all. But in governing the work of
other men by votes or by the expression of opinion they can only reward
or punish a result, accept or reject alternatives presented to them.
They can say yes or no to something which has been done, yes or no to
a proposal, but they cannot create, administer and actually perform
the act they have in mind. Persons uttering public opinions may now
and then be able to define the acts of men, but their opinions do not
execute these acts.


4

To the realm of executive acts, each of us, as a member of the public,
remains always external. Our public opinions are always and forever,
by their very nature, an attempt to control the actions of others from
the outside. If we can grasp the full significance of that conclusion
we shall, I think, have found a way of fixing the rôle of public
opinion in its true perspective; we shall know how to account for the
disenchantment of democracy, and we shall begin to see the outline of
an ideal of public opinion which, unlike that accepted in the dogma of
democracy, may be really attainable.


FOOTNOTES:

[11] _Cf._ my _Public Opinion_, Chapters XXV and XXVI.

[12] _Cf._ my _Public Opinion_, Chapters XIII and XIV.

[13] Speech on the Reform Bill of 1832, quoted in the _Times_
(London), July 12, 1923.




