Chapter II

THE UNATTAINABLE IDEAL


I have tried to imagine how the perfect citizen could be produced.
Some say he will have to be born of the conjunction of the right germ
plasms, and, in the pages of books written by Madison Grant, Lothrop
Stoddard and other revivalists, I have seen prescriptions as to just
who ought to marry whom to produce a great citizenry. Not being a
biologist I keep an open but hopeful mind on this point, tempered,
however, with the knowledge that certainty about how to breed ability
in human beings is on the whole in inverse proportion to the writer’s
scientific reputation.

It is then to education that logically one turns next, for education
has furnished the thesis of the last chapter of every optimistic book
on democracy written for one hundred and fifty years. Even Robert
Michels, stern and unbending antisentimentalist that he is, says
in his “final considerations” that “it is the great task of social
education to raise the intellectual level of the masses, so that they
may be enabled, within the limits of what is possible, to counteract
the oligarchical tendencies” of all collective action.

So I have been reading some of the new standard textbooks used to teach
citizenship in schools and colleges. After reading them I do not see
how any one can escape the conclusion that man must have the appetite
of an encyclopædist and infinite time ahead of him. To be sure he no
longer is expected to remember the exact salary of the county clerk
and the length of the coroner’s term. In the new civics he studies the
problems of government, and not the structural detail. He is told, in
one textbook of five hundred concise, contentious pages, which I have
been reading, about city problems, state problems, national problems,
international problems, trust problems, labor problems, transportation
problems, banking problems, rural problems, agricultural problems, and
so on _ad infinitum_. In the eleven pages devoted to problems of the
city there are described twelve sub-problems.

But nowhere in this well-meant book is the sovereign citizen of the
future given a hint as to how, while he is earning a living, rearing
children and enjoying his life, he is to keep himself informed about
the progress of this swarming confusion of problems. He is exhorted to
conserve the natural resources of the country because they are limited
in quantity. He is advised to watch public expenditures because the
taxpayers cannot pay out indefinitely increasing amounts. But he, the
voter, the citizen, the sovereign, is apparently expected to yield an
unlimited quantity of public spirit, interest, curiosity and effort.
The author of the textbook, touching on everything, as he thinks, from
city sewers to Indian opium, misses a decisive fact: the citizen gives
but a little of his time to public affairs, has but a casual interest
in facts and but a poor appetite for theory.

It never occurs to this preceptor of civic duty to provide the student
with a rule by which he can know whether on Thursday it is his duty
to consider subways in Brooklyn or the Manchurian Railway, nor how,
if he determines on Thursday to express his sovereign will on the
subway question, he is to repair those gaps in his knowledge of that
question which are due to his having been preoccupied the day before in
expressing his sovereign will about rural credits in Montana and the
rights of Britain in the Sudan. Yet he cannot know all about everything
all the time, and while he is watching one thing a thousand others
undergo great changes. Unless he can discover some rational ground for
fixing his attention where it will do the most good, and in a way that
suits his inherently amateurish equipment, he will be as bewildered as
a puppy trying to lick three bones at once.

I do not wish to say that it does the student no good to be taken on
a sightseeing tour of the problems of the world. It may teach him
that the world is complicated, even if he comes out of the adventure
“laden with germs, breathing creeds and convictions on you whenever
he opens his mouth.”[8] He may learn humility, but most certainly his
acquaintance with what a high-minded author thought were American
problems in 1925 will not equip him to master American problems ten
years later. Unless out of the study of transient issues he acquires an
intellectual attitude no education has occurred.

That is why the usual appeal to education as the remedy for the
incompetence of democracy is so barren. It is, in effect, a proposal
that school teachers shall by some magic of their own fit men to govern
after the makers of laws and the preachers of civic ideals have had a
free hand in writing the specifications. The reformers do not ask what
men can be taught. They say they should be taught whatever may be
necessary to fit them to govern the modern world.

The usual appeal to education can bring only disappointment. For the
problems of the modern world appear and change faster than any set
of teachers can grasp them, much faster than they can convey their
substance to a population of children. If the schools attempt to teach
children how to solve the problems of the day, they are bound always to
be in arrears. The most they can conceivably attempt is the teaching
of a pattern of thought and feeling which will enable the citizen to
approach a new problem in some useful fashion. But that pattern cannot
be invented by the pedagogue. It is the political theorist’s business
to trace out that pattern. In that task he must not assume that the
mass has political genius, but that men, even if they had genius, would
give only a little time and attention to public affairs.

The moralist, I am afraid, will agree all too readily with the idea
that social education must deal primarily not with the elements and
solutions of particular phases of transient problems but with the
principles that constitute an attitude toward all problems. I warn
him off. It will require more than a good conscience to govern modern
society, for conscience is no guide in situations where the essence of
the difficulty is to find a guide for the conscience.

When I am tempted to think that men can be fitted out to deal with the
modern world simply by teaching morals, manners and patriotism, I try
to remember the fable of the pensive professor walking in the woods at
twilight. He stumbled into a tree. This experience compelled him to
act. Being a man of honor and breeding, he raised his hat, bowed deeply
to the tree, and exclaimed with sincere regret: “Excuse me, sir, I
thought you were a tree.”

Is it fair, I ask, as a matter of morality, to chide him for his
conduct? If he had encountered a tree, can any one deny his right to
collide with it? If he had stumbled into a man, was his apology not
sufficient? Here was a moral code in perfect working order, and the
only questionable aspect of his conduct turned not on the goodness of
his heart or the firmness of his principles but on a point of fact.
You may retort that he had a moral obligation to know the difference
between a man and a tree. Perhaps so. But suppose that instead of
walking in the woods he had been casting a ballot; suppose that instead
of a tree he had encountered the Fordney-McCumber tariff. How much more
obligation to know the truth would you have imposed on him then? After
all, this walker in the woods at twilight with his mind on other things
was facing, as all of us think we are, the facts he imagined were
there, and was doing his duty as he had learned it.

In some degree the whole animate world seems to share the inexpertness
of the thoughtful professor. Pawlow showed by his experiments on dogs
that an animal with a false stomach can experience all the pleasures
of eating, and the number of mice and monkeys known to have been
deceived in laboratories is surpassed only by the hopeful citizens of a
democracy. Man’s reflexes are, as the psychologists say, conditioned.
And, therefore, he responds quite readily to a glass egg, a decoy duck,
a stuffed shirt or a political platform. No moral code, as such, will
enable him to know whether he is exercising his moral faculties on a
real and an important event. For effective virtue, as Socrates pointed
out long ago, is knowledge; and a code of the right and the wrong must
wait upon a perception of the true and the false.

But even the successful practice of a moral code would not emancipate
democracy. There are too many moral codes. In our immediate lives,
within the boundaries of our own society, there may be commonly
accepted standards. But a political theorist who asks that a local
standard be universally applied is merely begging one of the questions
he ought to be trying to solve. For, while possibly it may be an aim
of political organization to arrive at a common standard of judgment,
one of the conditions which engenders politics and makes political
organization necessary is the conflict of standards.

Darwin’s story of the cats and clover[9] may be recommended to any
one who finds it difficult to free his mind of the assumption that
his notions of good and bad are universal. The purple clover is
cross-fertilized by the bumblebee, and, therefore, the more bumblebees
the better next year’s crop of clover. But the nests of bumblebees are
rifled by field mice which are fond of the white grubs. Therefore, the
more field mice the fewer bumblebees and the poorer the crop. But in
the neighborhood of villages the cats hunt down the field mice. And so
the more cats the fewer mice, the more bumblebees the better the crop.
And the more kindly old ladies there are in the village the more cats
there will be.

If you happen not to be a Hindu or a vegetarian and are a beef-eating
Occidental you will commend the old ladies who keep the cats who hunt
the mice who destroy the bumblebees who make the pasture of clover
for the cattle. If you are a cat you also will be in favor of the old
ladies. But if you are a field mouse, how different the rights and
wrongs of that section of the universe! The old ladies who keep cats
will seem about as kindly as witches with pet tigers, and the Old Lady
Peril will be debated hysterically by the Field Mouse Security League.
For what could a patriotic mouse think of a world in which bumblebees
did not exist for the sole purpose of producing white grubs for field
mice? There would seem to be no law and order in such a world; and
only a highly philosophical mouse would admit with Bergson that “the
idea of disorder objectifies for the convenience of language, the
disappointment of a mind that finds before it an order different from
what it wants.”[10] For the order which we recognize as good is an
order suited to our needs and hopes and habits.

There is nothing universal or eternal or unchangeable about our
expectations. For rhetorical effect we often say there is. But in
concrete cases it is not easy to explain why the thing we desire is so
righteous. If the farmers are able to buy less than their accustomed
amount of manufactured foods there is disorder and a problem. But what
absolute standard is there which determines whether a bushel of wheat
in 1925 should, as compared with 1913, exchange for more, as many,
or less manufactures? Can any one define a principle which shall say
whether the standard of living of the farmers or of any other class
should rise or fall, and how fast and how much? There may be more jobs
than workingmen at the wage offered: the employers will complain and
will call it a problem, but who knows any rule which tells how large a
surplus of labor there ought to be and at what price? There may be more
workingmen than jobs of the kind and at the places and for the wages
they will or can take. But, although the problem will be acute, there
is no principle which determines how many machinists, clerks, coal
miners, bankers, or salesmen it is the duty of society to provide work
for.

It requires intense partisanship and much self-deception to argue that
some sort of peculiar righteousness adheres to the farmers’ claims as
against the manufacturers’, the employers’ against the wage-earners’,
the creditors’ against the debtors’, or the other way around. These
conflicts of interest are problems. They require solution. But there
is no moral pattern available from which the precise nature of the
solution can be deduced.

If then eugenics cannot produce the ideal democratic citizen,
omnicompetent and sovereign, because biology knows neither how to breed
political excellence nor what that excellence is; if education cannot
equip the citizen, because the school teacher cannot anticipate the
issues of the future; if morality cannot direct him, first, because
right or wrong in specific cases depends upon the perception of true
or false, and, second, on the assumption that there is a universal
moral code, which, in fact, does not exist, where else shall we look
for the method of making the competent citizen? Democratic theorists
in the nineteenth century had several other prescriptions which still
influence the thinking of many hopeful persons.

One school based their reforms on the aphorism that the cure for the
evils of democracy is more democracy. It was assumed that the popular
will was wise and good if only you could get at it. They proposed
extensions of the suffrage, and as much voting as possible by means of
the initiative, referendum and recall, direct election of Senators,
direct primaries, an elected judiciary, and the like. They begged the
question, for it has never been proved that there exists the kind of
public opinion which they presupposed. Since the Bryan campaign of
1896 this school of thought has made great conquests in most of the
states, and has profoundly influenced the federal government. The
eligible vote has trebled since 1896; the direct action of the voter
has been enormously extended. Yet that same period has seen a decline
in the percentage of the popular vote cast at presidential elections
from 80.75 per cent in 1896 to 52.36 per cent in 1920. Apparently there
is a fallacy in the first assumption of this school that “the whole
people” desires to participate actively in government. Nor is there any
evidence to show that the persons who do participate are in any real
sense directing the course of affairs. The party machines have survived
every attack. And why should they not? If the voter cannot grasp the
details of the problems of the day because he has not the time, the
interest or the knowledge, he will not have a better public opinion
because he is asked to express his opinion more often. He will simply
be more bewildered, more bored and more ready to follow along.

Another school, calling themselves revolutionary, have ascribed the
disenchantment of democracy to the capitalistic system. They have
argued that property is power, and that until there is as wide a
distribution of economic power as there is of the right to vote the
suffrage cannot be more effective. No serious student, I think,
would dispute that socialist premise which asserts that the weight
of influence on society exercised by an individual is more nearly
related to the character of his property than to his abstract legal
citizenship. But the socialist conclusion that economic power can be
distributed by concentrating the ownership of great utilities in the
state, the conclusion that the pervasion of industrial life by voting
and referenda will yield competent popular decisions, seems to me again
to beg the question. For what reason is there to think that subjecting
so many more affairs to the method of the vote will reveal hitherto
undiscovered wisdom and technical competence and reservoirs of public
interest in men? The socialist scheme has at its root the mystical
fallacy of democracy, that the people, all of them, are competent; at
its top it suffers from the homeopathic fallacy that adding new tasks
to a burden the people will not and cannot carry now will make the
burden of citizenship easily borne. The socialist theory presupposes an
unceasing, untiring round of civic duties, an enormous complication of
the political interests that are already much too complicated.

These various remedies, eugenic, educational, ethical, populist and
socialist, all assume that either the voters are inherently competent
to direct the course of affairs or that they are making progress
toward such an ideal. I think it is a false ideal. I do not mean an
undesirable ideal. I mean an unattainable ideal, bad only in the sense
that it is bad for a fat man to try to be a ballet dancer. An ideal
should express the true possibilities of its subject. When it does not
it perverts the true possibilities. The ideal of the omnicompetent,
sovereign citizen is, in my opinion, such a false ideal. It is
unattainable. The pursuit of it is misleading. The failure to achieve
it has produced the current disenchantment.

The individual man does not have opinions on all public affairs. He
does not know how to direct public affairs. He does not know what is
happening, why it is happening, what ought to happen. I cannot imagine
how he could know, and there is not the least reason for thinking, as
mystical democrats have thought, that the compounding of individual
ignorances in masses of people can produce a continuous directing force
in public affairs.


FOOTNOTES:

[8] Logan Pearsall Smith.

[9] As told by J. Arthur Thomson, _The Outline of Science_, Vol. III,
p. 646.

[10] _Creative Evolution_, Ch. III.




