PART III




Chapter XIV

SOCIETY IN ITS PLACE


1

A false ideal of democracy can lead only to disillusionment and
to meddlesome tyranny. If democracy cannot direct affairs, then a
philosophy which expects it to direct them will encourage the people
to attempt the impossible; they will fail, but that will interfere
outrageously with the productive liberties of the individual. The
public must be put in its place, so that it may exercise its own
powers, but no less and perhaps even more, so that each of us may live
free of the trampling and the roar of a bewildered herd.


2

The source of that bewilderment lies, I think, in the attempt to
ascribe organic unity and purpose to society. We have been taught to
think of society as a body, with a mind, a soul and a purpose, not as a
collection of men, women and children whose minds, souls and purposes
are variously related. Instead of being allowed to think realistically
of a complex of social _relations_, we have had foisted upon us by
various great propagative movements the notion of a mythical entity,
called Society, the Nation, the Community.

In the course of the nineteenth century society was personified under
the influence largely of the nationalist and the socialist movements.
Each of these doctrinal influences in its own way insisted upon
treating the public as the agent of an overmastering social purpose.
In point of fact, the real agents were the nationalist leaders and
their lieutenants, the social reformers and their lieutenants. But they
moved behind a veil of imagery. And the public was habituated to think
that any one conforming to the stereotype of nationalism or of social
welfare was entitled to support. What the nationalist rulers thought
and did was the nation’s purpose, and the touchstone for all patriots;
what the reformers proposed was the benevolent consciousness of the
human race moving mysteriously but progressively toward perfection.

The deception was so generally practised that it was often practised
sincerely. But to maintain the fiction that their purposes were the
spirit of mankind, public men had to accustom themselves to telling the
public only a part of what they told themselves. And, incidentally,
they confessed to themselves only a part of the truth on which they
were acting. Candor in public life became a question of policy and not
a rule of life.

“He may judge rightly,” Mr. Keynes once said of Mr. Lloyd George,[27]
“that this is the best of which a democracy is capable,—to be jockeyed,
humbugged, cajoled along the right road. A prejudice for truth or for
sincerity as a method may be a prejudice based on some æsthetic or
personal standard inconsistent, in politics, with practical good. We
cannot yet tell.”

We do know, as a matter of experience, that all the cards are not laid
face up upon the table. For however deep the personal prejudice of
the statesman in favor of truth as a method, he is almost certainly
forced to treat truth as an element of policy. The evidence on this
point is overwhelming. No statesman risks the safety of an army out of
sheer devotion to truth. He does not endanger a diplomatic negotiation
in order to enlighten everybody. He does not usually forfeit his
advantages in an election in order to speak plainly. He does not admit
his own mistakes because confession is so good for the soul. In so far
as he has power to control the publication of truth, he manipulates it
to what he considers the necessities of action, of bargaining, morale
and prestige. He may misjudge the necessities. He may exaggerate the
goodness of his aims. But where there is a purpose in public affairs
there are also apparent necessities which weigh in the balance against
the indiscreet expression of belief. The public man does not and cannot
act on the fiction that his mind is also the public mind.

You cannot account for this, as angry democrats have done by dismissing
all public men as dishonest. It is not a question of personal morals.
The business man, the trade-union leader, the college president, the
minister of religion, the editor, the critic and the prophet, all feel
as Jefferson did when he wrote that “although we often wished to go
faster we slackened our pace that our less ardent colleagues might keep
pace with us ... [and] by this harmony of the bold with the cautious,
we advanced with our constituents in undivided mass.”[28]

The necessity for an “undivided mass” makes men put truth in the
second place. I do not wish to argue that the necessity is not often
a real one. When a statesman tells me that it is not safe for him to
disclose all the facts, I am content to trust him in this if I trust
him at all. There is nothing misleading in a frank refusal to tell. The
mischief comes in the pretense that all is being told, that the public
is entirely in the confidence of the public man. And that mischief has
its source in the sophistry that the public and all the individuals
composing it are one mind, one soul, one purpose. It is seen to be
an absurd sophistry, once we look it straight in the face. It is an
unnecessary sophistry. For we do well enough with doctors, though we
are ignorant of medicine, and with engine drivers, though we cannot
drive a locomotive; why not, then, with a Senator, though we cannot
pass an examination on the merits of an agricultural bill?

Yet we are so deeply indoctrinated with the notion of union based
upon identity, that we are most reluctant to admit that there is
room in the world for different and more or less separate purposes.
The monistic theory has an air of great stability about it; we are
afraid if we do not hang together we shall all hang separately. The
pluralistic theory, as its leading advocate, Mr. Laski, has pointed
out, seems to carry with it “a hint of anarchy.”[29] Yet the suggestion
is grossly exaggerated. There is least anarchy precisely in those
areas of society where separate functions are most clearly defined
and brought into orderly adjustment; there is most anarchy in those
twilight zones between nations, between employers and employees,
between sections and classes and races, where nothing is clearly
defined, where separateness of purpose is covered up and confused,
where false unities are worshiped, and each special interest is forever
proclaiming itself the voice of the people and attempting to impose its
purpose upon everybody as the purpose of all mankind.


3

To this confusion liberalism has with the kindest intentions
contributed greatly. Its main insight was into the prejudices of the
individual; the liberal discovered a method of proving that men are
finite, that they cannot escape from the flesh. From the so-called age
of enlightenment down to our day the heavy guns of criticism have been
used to make men realize that they submit, as Bacon said, the shadows
of things to the desires of the mind. Once the resistance was broken
by proof that man belonged to the natural world, his pretensions to
absolute certainty were attacked from every quarter. He was shown
the history of his ideas and of his customs, and he was driven to
acknowledge that they were bounded by time and space and circumstance.
He was shown that there is a bias in all opinion, even in opinion
purged of desire, for the man who holds the opinion must stand at some
point in space and time and can see not the whole world but only the
world as seen from that point. So men learned that they saw a little
through their own eyes, and much more through reports of what other men
thought they had seen. They were made to understand that all human eyes
have habits of vision, which are often stereotyped, which always throw
facts into a perspective; and that the whole of experience is more
sophisticated than the naïve mind suspects. For its pictures of the
world are drawn from things half heard and of things half seen; they
deal with the shadows of things unsteadily, and submit unconsciously to
the desires of the mind.

It was an amazing and unsettling revelation, and liberalism never quite
knew what to do with it. In a theater in Moscow a certain M. Yevreynoff
carried the revelation to one of its logical conclusions. He produced
the monodrama.[30] This is a play in which the action, the setting and
all the characters are seen by the audience through the eyes of one
character only, as the hero sees them, and they take on the quality
which his mind imagines they possess. Thus in the old theater, if the
hero drank too much, he reeled in the midst of a sober environment.
But in M. Yevreynoff’s supremely liberal theater, if I understand
Mr. Macgowan’s account of it correctly, the drunkard will not reel
about the lamppost; two lampposts will reel about him, and he will be
dressed, because that is the way he feels, like Napoleon Bonaparte.

M. Yevreynoff has troubled me a good deal, for he seemed to have
finished off the liberal with a fool’s cap, and left him sitting in a
world that does not exist, except as so many crazy mirrors reflecting
his own follies one upon the other. But then I recalled that M.
Yevreynoff’s logic was defective and make-believe. He had all the time
stood soberly outside his own drunken hero, and so had his audience;
the universe had not after all gone up in the smoke of one fantasy; the
drunken hero had his point of view, but, after all, there were others,
just as authentic, with which in the course of his career he might
collide. There might be a policeman, for example, with fantasies to be
sure, but his own, who would break in upon the monodrama and remind the
hero, and us, that when we submit the shadows of things to the desires
of the mind we do not submit the things themselves.

But while all this does vindicate the sanity of the liberal criticism,
it does not answer the question: since every action has to be taken by
somebody, since everybody is in some degree a drunken hero with two
lampposts teetering about him, how can any common good be furthered by
this creature who is dominated by his special purposes? The answer was
that it could be furthered by taming his purposes, enlightening them
and fitting them into each other as the violin and the drum are fitted
together into the orchestra. The answer was not acceptable in the
nineteenth century, when men, in spite of all their iconoclasm, were
still haunted by the phantom of identity. So liberals refused to write
harmonious but separate parts for the violinist and the drummer. They
made, instead, a noble appeal to their highest instincts. They spoke
over the heads of men to man.

These general appeals were as vague as they were broad. They gave
particular men no clue as to how to behave sincerely, but they
furnished them with an excellent masquerade when they behaved
arbitrarily. Thus the trappings of liberalism came into the service of
commercial exploiters, of profiteers and prohibitionists and jingoes,
of charlatans and the makers of buncombe.

For liberalism had burned down the barn to roast the pig. The discovery
of prejudice in all particular men gave the liberal a shock from
which he never recovered. He was so utterly disconcerted by his own
discovery of a necessary but perfectly obvious truth, that he took
flight into generalities. The appeal to everybody’s conscience gave
nobody a clue how to act; the voter, the politician, the laborer, the
capitalist had to construct their own codes _ad hoc_, accompanied
perhaps by an expansive liberal sentiment, but without intellectual
guidance from liberal thought. In time, when liberalism had lost its
accidental association with free trade and _laissez faire_, through
their abandonment in practice, it sadly justified itself as a necessary
and useful spirit, as a kind of genial spook worth having around the
place. For when individual men, guided by no philosophy but their own
temporary rationalizations, got themselves embroiled, the spook would
appear and in a peroration straighten out the more arbitrary biases
they displayed.

Yet even in this disembodied state liberalism is important. It tends
to awaken a milder spirit; it softens the hardness of action. But it
does not dominate action, because it has eliminated the actor from its
scheme of things. It cannot say: You do this and you do that, as all
ruling philosophies must. It can only say: That isn’t fair, that’s
selfish, that’s tyrannical. Liberalism has been, therefore, a defender
of the under dog, and his liberator, but not his guide, when he is
free. Top dog himself, he easily leaves his liberalism aside, and to
liberals the sour reflection that they have forged a weapon of release
but not a way of life.

The liberals have misunderstood the nature of the public to which
they appealed. The public in any situation is, in fact, merely those
persons, indirectly concerned, who might align themselves in support
of one of the actors. But the liberal took no such uninflated view of
the public. He assumed that all mankind was within hearing, that all
mankind when it heard would respond homogeneously because it had a
single soul. His appeal to this cosmopolitan, universal, disinterested
intuition in everybody was equivalent to an appeal to nobody.

No such fallacy is to be found in the political philosophies which
active men have lived by. They have all assumed, as a matter of course,
that in the struggle against evil it was necessary to call upon some
specific agent to do the work. Even when the thinker was out of temper
with the human race, he had always hitherto made somebody the hero of
his campaign. It was the peculiarity of liberalism among theories which
have played a great part in the world that it attempted to eliminate
the hero entirely.

Plato would certainly have thought this strange: his _Republic_ is a
tract on the proper education of a ruling class. Dante, in the turmoil
of thirteenth century Florence, seeking order and stability, addressed
himself not to the conscience of Christendom but to the Imperial Party.
The great state builders of modern times, Hamilton, Cavour, Bismarck,
Lenin, each had in mind somebody, some group of real people, who
were to realize his program. The agents in the theory have varied,
of course; here they are the landlords, then the peasants, or the
unions, or the military class, or the manufacturers; there are theories
addressed to a church, to the ruling classes in particular nations, to
some nation or race. The theories are always, except in the liberal
philosophy, addressed to somebody.

By comparison the liberal philosophy has an air of vague unworldiness.
Yet the regard of men for it has been persistent; somehow or other with
all the lapses in its logic and with all its practical weaknesses it
touches a human need. These appeals from men to man: are they not a way
of saying that men desire peace, that there is a harmony attainable in
which all men can live and let live? It seems so to me. The attempt
to escape from particular purposes into some universal purpose, from
personality into something impersonal, is, to be sure, a flight from
the human problem, but it is at the same time a demonstration of how
we wish to see that problem solved. We seek an adjustment, as perfect
as possible, as untroubled as it was before we were born. Even if
man were a fighting animal, as some say he is, he would wish for a
world in which he could fight perfectly, with enemies fleet enough to
extend him and not too fleet to elude him. All men desire their own
perfect adjustment, but they desire it, being finite men, on their own
terms. Because liberalism could not accommodate the universal need of
adjustment to the permanence and the reality of individual purpose, it
remained an incomplete, a disembodied philosophy. It was frustrated
over the ancient problem of the One and the Many. Yet the problem is
not so insoluble once we cease to personify society. It is only when
we are compelled to personify society that we are puzzled as to how
many separate organic individuals can be united in one homogeneous
organic individual. This logical underbrush is cleared away if we
think of society not as the name of a thing but as the name of all
the adjustments between individuals and their things. Then, we can
say without theoretical qualms what common sense plainly tells us is
so: it is the individuals who act, not society; it is the individuals
who think, not the collective mind; it is the painters who paint,
not the artistic spirit of the age; it is the soldiers who fight
and are killed, not the nation; it is the merchant who exports, not
the country. It is their relations with each other that constitute
a society. And it is about the ordering of those relations that the
individuals not executively concerned in a specific disorder may have
public opinions and may intervene as a public.


FOOTNOTES:

[27] John Maynard Keynes, _A Revision of the Treaty_, p. 4.

[28] In a letter to William Wirt, cited by John Sharp Williams, _Thomas
Jefferson_, p. 7.

[29] Harold J. Laski, _Studies in the Problem of Sovereignty_, p. 24.

[30] Kenneth Macgowan, _The Theatre of Tomorrow_, pp. 249–50.




