Chapter IV

WHAT THE PUBLIC DOES


1

I do not mean to say that there is no other attainable ideal of public
opinion but that severely practical one which this essay is meant
to disclose. One might aim to enrich the minds of men with charming
fantasies, animate nature and society with spirits, set up an Olympus
in the skies and an Atlantis at the end of the world. And one might
then assert that, so the quality of ideas be fine or give peace, it
does not matter how or whether they eventuate in the government of
affairs.

Utopia and Nirvana are by definition their own sufficient reason, and
it may be that to contemplate them is well worth the abandonment of
feeble attempts to control the action of events. Renunciation, however,
is a luxury in which all men cannot indulge. They will somehow seek to
control the behavior of others, if not by positive law then at least
by persuasion. When men are in that posture toward events they are a
public, as I am here defining the term; their opinions as to how others
ought to behave are public opinions. The more clearly it is understood
what the public can do and what it cannot, the more effectively it will
do what lies within its power to do well and the less it will interfere
with the liberties of men.

The rôle of public opinion is determined by the fact that its relation
to a problem is external. The opinion affects an opinion, but does not
itself control the executive act. A public opinion is expressed by a
vote, a demonstration of praise or blame, a following or a boycotting.
But these manifestations are in themselves nothing. They count only
if they influence the course of affairs. They influence it, however,
only if they influence an actor in the affair. And it is, I believe,
precisely in this secondary, indirect relationship between public
opinion and public affairs that we have the clue to the limits and the
possibilities of public opinion.


2

It may be objected at once that an election which turns one set of
men out of office and installs another is an expression of public
opinion which is neither secondary nor indirect. But what in fact is an
election? We call it an expression of the popular will. But is it? We
go into a polling booth and mark a cross on a piece of paper for one of
two, or perhaps three or four names. Have we expressed our thoughts on
the public policy of the United States? Presumably we have a number of
thoughts on this and that with many buts and ifs and ors. Surely the
cross on a piece of paper does not express them. It would take us hours
to express our thoughts, and calling a vote the expression of our mind
is an empty fiction.

A vote is a promise of support. It is a way of saying: I am lined up
with these men, on this side. I enlist with them. I will follow. I will
buy. I will boycott. I will strike. I applaud. I jeer. The force I can
exert is placed here, not there.

The public does not select the candidate, write the platform, outline
the policy any more than it builds the automobile or acts the play. It
aligns itself for or against somebody who has offered himself, has made
a promise, has produced a play, is selling an automobile. The action of
a group as a group is the mobilization of the force it possesses.

The attempt has been made to ascribe some intrinsic moral and
intellectual virtue to majority rule. It was said often in the
nineteenth century that there was a deep wisdom in majorities which
was the voice of God. Sometimes this flattery was a sincere mysticism,
sometimes it was the self-deception which always accompanies the
idealization of power. In substance it was nothing but a transfer to
the new sovereign of the divine attributes of kings. Yet the inherent
absurdity of making virtue and wisdom dependent on 51 per cent of any
collection of men has always been apparent. The practical realization
that the claim was absurd has resulted in a whole code of civil
rights to protect minorities and in all sorts of elaborate methods of
subsidizing the arts and sciences and other human interests so they
might be independent of the operation of majority rule.

The justification of majority rule in politics is not to be found in
its ethical superiority. It is to be found in the sheer necessity of
finding a place in civilized society for the force which resides in
the weight of numbers. I have called voting an act of enlistment, an
alignment for or against, a mobilization. These are military metaphors,
and rightly so, I think, for an election based on the principle
of majority rule is historically and practically a sublimated and
denatured civil war, a paper mobilization without physical violence.

Constitutional democrats, in the intervals when they were not
idealizing the majority, have acknowledged that a ballot was a
civilized substitute for a bullet. “The French Revolution,” says
Bernard Shaw, “overthrew one set of rulers and substituted another
with different interests and different views. That is what a general
election enables the people to do in England every seven years if they
choose. Revolution is therefore a national institution in England;
and its advocacy by an Englishman needs no apology.”[14] It makes an
enormous difference, of course, whether the people fight or vote,
but we shall understand the nature of voting better if we recognize
it to be a substitute for fighting. “There grew up in the 17th and
18th Centuries in England,” says Dwight Morrow in his introduction to
Professor Morse’s book, “and there has been carried from England to
almost every civilized government in the world, a procedure through
which party government becomes in large measure a substitute for
revolution.”[15] Hans Delbrück puts the matter simply when he says that
the principle of majority rule is “a purely practical principle. If one
wants to avoid a civil war, one lets those rule who in any case would
obtain the upper hand if there should be a struggle; and they are the
superior numbers.”[16]

But, while an election is in essence sublimated warfare, we must take
care not to miss the importance of the sublimation. There have been
pedantic theorists who wished to disqualify all who could not bear
arms, and woman suffrage has been deplored as a falsification of the
value of an election in uncovering the alignment of martial force in
the community. One can safely ignore such theorizing. For, while the
institution of an election is in its historical origins an alignment
of the physical force, it has come to be an alignment of all kinds of
force. It remains an alignment, though in advanced democracies it has
lost most of its primitive association with military combat. It has
not lost it in the South where the Negro population is disfranchised
by force, and not permitted to make its weight felt in an election. It
has not lost it in the unstable Latin American republics where every
election is in some measure still an armed revolution. In fact, the
United States has officially recognized this truth by proclaiming that
the substitution of election for revolution in Central America is the
test of political progress.

I do not wish to labor the argument any further than may be necessary
to establish the theory that what the public does is not to express its
opinions but to align itself for or against a proposal. If that theory
is accepted, we must abandon the notion that democratic government can
be the direct expression of the will of the people. We must abandon
the notion that the people govern. Instead we must adopt the theory
that, by their occasional mobilizations as a majority, people support
or oppose the individuals who actually govern. We must say that the
popular will does not direct continuously but that it intervenes
occasionally.


FOOTNOTES:

[14] Preface to _The Revolutionist’s Handbook_, p. 179.

[15] _Parties and Party Leaders_, p. xvi.

[16] H. Delbrück, _Government and the Will of the People_, p. 15.
Translated by Roy S. MacElwee.




