Chapter XIII

THE PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC OPINION


1

The tests outlined in the preceding chapters have certain common
characteristics. They all select a few samples of behavior or a
few aspects of a proposal. They measure these samples by rough but
objective, by highly generalized but definite standards. And they yield
a judgment which is to justify the public in aligning itself for or
against certain actors in the matter at issue.

I do not, of course, set great store upon my formulation of these
tests. That is wholly tentative, being put out merely as a basis of
discussion and to demonstrate that the formulation of tests suited to
the nature of public opinion is not impracticable. But I do attach
great importance to the character of these tests.

The principles underlying them are these:

1. Executive action is not for the public. The public acts only by
aligning itself as the partisan of some one in a position to act
executively.

2. The intrinsic merits of a question are not for the public. The
public intervenes from the outside upon the work of the insiders.

3. The anticipation, the analysis and the solution of a question are
not for the public. The public’s judgment rests on a small sample of
the facts at issue.

4. The specific, technical, intimate criteria required in the handling
of a question are not for the public. The public’s criteria are
generalized for many problems; they turn essentially on procedure and
the overt, external forms of behavior.

5. What is left for the public is a judgment as to whether the actors
in the controversy are following a settled rule of behavior or their
own arbitrary desires. This judgment must be made by sampling an
external aspect of the behavior of the insiders.

6. In order that this sampling shall be pertinent, it is necessary to
discover criteria, suitable to the nature of public opinion, which can
be relied upon to distinguish between reasonable and arbitrary behavior.

7. For the purposes of social action, reasonable behavior is conduct
which follows a settled course whether in making a rule, in enforcing
it or in amending it.

It is the task of the political scientist to devise the methods of
sampling and to define the criteria of judgment. It is the task of
civic education in a democracy to train the public in the use of these
methods. It is the task of those who build institutions to take them
into account.


2

These principles differ radically from those on which democratic
reformers have proceeded. At the root of the effort to educate a
people for self-government there has, I believe, always been the
assumption that the voter should aim to approximate as nearly as he
can the knowledge and the point of view of the responsible man. He
did not, of course, in the mass, ever approximate it very nearly. But
he was supposed to. It was believed that if only he could be taught
more facts, if only he would take more interest, if only he would
read more and better newspapers, if only he would listen to more
lectures and read more reports, he would gradually be trained to direct
public affairs. The whole assumption is false. It rests upon a false
conception of public opinion and a false conception of the way the
public acts. No sound scheme of civic education can come of it. No
progress can be made toward this unattainable ideal.

This democratic conception is false because it fails to note the
radical difference between the experience of the insider and the
outsider; it is fundamentally askew because it asks the outsider to
deal as successfully with the substance of a question as the insider.
He cannot do it. No scheme of education can equip him in advance for
all the problems of mankind; no device of publicity, no machinery
of enlightenment, can endow him during a crisis with the antecedent
detailed and technical knowledge which is required for executive action.

The democratic ideal has never defined the function of the public. It
has treated the public as an immature, shadowy executive of all things.
The confusion is deep-seated in a mystical notion of society. “The
people” were regarded as a person; their wills as a will; their ideas
as a mind; their mass as an organism with an organic unity of which
the individual was a cell. Thus the voter identified himself with the
officials. He tried to think that their thoughts were his thoughts,
that their deeds were his deeds, and even that in some mysterious
way they were a part of him. All this confusion of identities led
naturally to the theory that everybody was doing everything. It
prevented democracy from arriving at a clear idea of its own limits and
attainable ends. It obscured for the purposes of government and social
education the separation of function and the specialization in training
which have gradually been established in most human activities.

Democracy, therefore, has never developed an education for the public.
It has merely given it a smattering of the kind of knowledge which
the responsible man requires. It has, in fact, aimed not at making
good citizens but at making a mass of amateur executives. It has not
taught the child how to act as a member of the public. It has merely
given him a hasty, incomplete taste of what he might have to know if he
meddled in everything. The result is a bewildered public and a mass
of insufficiently trained officials. The responsible men have obtained
their training not from the courses in “civics” but in the law schools
and law offices and in business. The public at large, which includes
everybody outside the field of his own responsible knowledge, has had
no coherent political training of any kind. Our civic education does
not even begin to tell the voter how he can reduce the maze of public
affairs to some intelligible form.

Critics have not been lacking, of course, who pointed out what a hash
democracy was making of its pretensions to government. These critics
have seen that the important decisions were taken by individuals, and
that public opinion was uninformed, irrelevant and meddlesome. They
have usually concluded that there was a congenital difference between
the masterful few and the ignorant many. They are the victims of a
superficial analysis of the evils they see so clearly. The fundamental
difference which matters is that between insiders and outsiders. Their
relations to a problem are radically different. Only the insider can
make decisions, not because he is inherently a better man but because
he is so placed that he can understand and can act. The outsider is
necessarily ignorant, usually irrelevant and often meddlesome, because
he is trying to navigate the ship from dry land. That is why excellent
automobile manufacturers, literary critics and scientists often talk
such nonsense about politics. Their congenital excellence, if it
exists, reveals itself only in their own activity. The aristocratic
theorists work from the fallacy of supposing that a sufficiently
excellent square peg will also fit a round hole. In short, like the
democratic theorists, they miss the essence of the matter, which is,
that competence exists only in relation to function; that men are not
good, but good for something; that men cannot be educated, but only
educated for something.

Education for citizenship, for membership in the public, ought,
therefore, to be distinct from education for public office. Citizenship
involves a radically different relation to affairs, requires different
intellectual habits and different methods of action. The force of
public opinion is partisan, spasmodic, simple-minded and external. It
needs for its direction, as I have tried to show in these chapters,
a new intellectual method which shall provide it with its own usable
canons of judgment.




