





                           THE PHANTOM PUBLIC


                                   BY
                             WALTER LIPPMANN


                                NEW YORK
                       HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY




                           COPYRIGHT, 1925, BY
                    HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY, INC.


                         Printed in the U. S. A.




                                   TO
                              LEARNED HAND




  “_The Voice of the People has been said to be the voice of God:
  and however generally this maxim has been quoted and believed, it
  is not true in fact._”—Alexander Hamilton, June 18, 1787, at the
  Federal Convention (Yates’s notes, cited _Sources and Documents
  Illustrating the American Revolution_, edited by S. G. Morison).

  “... _consider ‘Government by Public Opinion’ as a formula.... It
  is an admirable formula: but it presupposes, not only that public
  opinion exists, but that on any particular question there is a
  public opinion ready to decide the issue. Indeed, it presupposes
  that the supreme statesman in democratic government is public
  opinion. Many of the shortcomings of democratic government are
  due to the fact that public opinion is not necessarily a great
  statesman at all._”—From “Some Thoughts on Public Life,” a lecture
  by Viscount Grey of Fallodon, February 3, 1923.




                              Contents


                               PART I

  Chapter                                                  Page

     I. The Disenchanted Man                                 13

    II. The Unattainable Ideal                               22

   III. Agents and Bystanders                                40

    IV. What the Public Does                                 54

     V. The Neutralization of Arbitrary Force                63

                              PART II

    VI. The Question Aristotle Asked                         77

   VII. The Nature of a Problem                              81

  VIII. Social Contracts                                     95

    IX. The Two Questions Before the Public                 107

     X. The Main Value of Public Debate                     110

    XI. The Defective Rule                                  115

   XII. The Criteria of Reform                              125

  XIII. The Principles of Public Opinion                    143

                              PART III

   XIV. Society in Its Place                                155

    XV. Absentee Rulers                                     173

   XVI. The Realms of Disorder                              187

        Index                                               201




PART I




Chapter I

THE DISENCHANTED MAN


1

The private citizen today has come to feel rather like a deaf spectator
in the back row, who ought to keep his mind on the mystery off there,
but cannot quite manage to keep awake. He knows he is somehow affected
by what is going on. Rules and regulations continually, taxes annually
and wars occasionally remind him that he is being swept along by great
drifts of circumstance.

Yet these public affairs are in no convincing way his affairs. They
are for the most part invisible. They are managed, if they are managed
at all, at distant centers, from behind the scenes, by unnamed powers.
As a private person he does not know for certain what is going on, or
who is doing it, or where he is being carried. No newspaper reports
his environment so that he can grasp it; no school has taught him how
to imagine it; his ideals, often, do not fit with it; listening to
speeches, uttering opinions and voting do not, he finds, enable him to
govern it. He lives in a world which he cannot see, does not understand
and is unable to direct.

In the cold light of experience he knows that his sovereignty is
a fiction. He reigns in theory, but in fact he does not govern.
Contemplating himself and his actual accomplishments in public affairs,
contrasting the influence he exerts with the influence he is supposed
according to democratic theory to exert, he must say of his sovereignty
what Bismarck said of Napoleon III.: “At a distance it is something,
but close to it is nothing at all.”[1] When, during an agitation of
some sort, say a political campaign, he hears himself and some thirty
million others described as the source of all wisdom and power and
righteousness, the prime mover and the ultimate goal, the remnants of
sanity in him protest. He cannot all the time play Chanticleer who was
so dazzled and delighted because he himself had caused the sun to rise.

For when the private man has lived through the romantic age in politics
and is no longer moved by the stale echoes of its hot cries, when he is
sober and unimpressed, his own part in public affairs appears to him a
pretentious thing, a second rate, an inconsequential. You cannot move
him then with a good straight talk about service and civic duty, nor
by waving a flag in his face, nor by sending a boy scout after him to
make him vote. He is a man back home from a crusade to make the world
something or other it did not become; he has been tantalized too often
by the foam of events, has seen the gas go out of it, and, with sour
derision for the stuff, he is saying with the author of _Trivia_:[2]

“‘Self-determination,’ one of them insisted.

“‘Arbitration,’ cried another.

“‘Coöperation,’ suggested the mildest of the party.

“‘Confiscation,’ answered an uncompromising female.

“I, too, became intoxicated with the sound of these vocables. And were
they not the cure for all our ills?

“‘Inoculation!’ I chimed in. ‘Transubstantiation, alliteration,
inundation, flagellation, and afforestation!’”


2

It is well known that nothing like the whole people takes part in
public affairs. Of the eligible voters in the United States less
than half go to the polls even in a presidential year.[3] During the
campaign of 1924 a special effort was made to bring out more voters.
They did not come out. The Constitution, the nation, the party system,
the presidential succession, private property, all were supposed to be
in danger. One party prophesied red ruin, another black corruption, a
third tyranny and imperialism if the voters did not go to the polls in
greater numbers. Half the citizenship was unmoved.

The students used to write books about voting. They are now beginning
to write books about nonvoting. At the University of Chicago Professor
Merriam and Mr. Gosnell have made an elaborate inquiry[4] into the
reason why, at the typical Chicago mayoral election of 1923, there
were, out of 1,400,000 eligible electors, only 900,000 who registered,
and out of those who registered there were only 723,000 who finally
managed to vote. Thousands of persons were interviewed. About 30 per
cent of the abstainers had, or at least claimed to have had, an
insuperable difficulty about going to the polls. They were ill, they
were absent from the city, they were women detained at home by a child
or an invalid, they had had insufficient legal residence. The other 70
per cent, representing about half a million free and sovereign citizens
of this Republic, did not even pretend to have a reason for not voting,
which, in effect, was not an admission that they did not care about
voting. They were needed at their work, the polls were crowded, the
polls were inconveniently located, they were afraid to tell their age,
they did not believe in woman suffrage, the husband objected, politics
is rotten, elections are rotten, they were afraid to vote, they did
not know there was an election. About a quarter of those who were
interviewed had the honesty to say they were wholly uninterested.

Yet Bryce is authority for the statement that “the will of the
sovereign people is expressed ... in the United States ... by as large
a proportion of the registered voters as in any other country.”[5]
And certainly Mr. Lowell’s tables on the use of the initiative and
referendum in Switzerland in the main support the view that the
indifference of the American voter is not unique.[6] In fact, realistic
political thinkers in Europe long ago abandoned the notion that the
collective mass of the people direct the course of public affairs.
Robert Michels, himself a Socialist, says flatly that “the majority is
permanently incapable of self-government,”[7] and quotes approvingly
the remark of a Swedish Socialist Deputy, Gustaf F. Steffen, that
“even after the victory there will always remain in political life the
leaders and the led.” Michels, who is a political thinker of great
penetration, unburdens himself finally on the subject by printing a
remark of Hertzen’s that the victory of an opposition party amounts to
“passing from the sphere of envy to the sphere of avarice.”

There is then nothing particularly new in the disenchantment which the
private citizen expresses by not voting at all, by voting only for the
head of the ticket, by staying away from the primaries, by not reading
speeches and documents, by the whole list of sins of omission for which
he is denounced. I shall not denounce him further. My sympathies are
with him, for I believe that he has been saddled with an impossible
task and that he is asked to practice an unattainable ideal. I find
it so myself for, although public business is my main interest and I
give most of my time to watching it, I cannot find time to do what is
expected of me in the theory of democracy; that is, to know what is
going on and to have an opinion worth expressing on every question
which confronts a self-governing community. And I have not happened to
meet anybody, from a President of the United States to a professor of
political science, who came anywhere near to embodying the accepted
ideal of the sovereign and omnicompetent citizen.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Cited Philip Guedalla, _The Second Empire_.

[2] Logan Pearsall Smith, _More Trivia_, p. 41.

[3] _Cf._ Simon Michelet, _Stay-at-Home Vote and Absentee Voters_,
pamphlet of the National Get Out the Vote Club; also A. M. Schlesinger
and E. M. Erickson, “The Vanishing Voter,” _New Republic_, Oct. 15,
1924. The percentage of the popular to the eligible vote from 1865 to
1920 declined from 83.51 per cent to 52.36 per cent.

[4] Charles Edward Merriam and Harvey Foote Gosnell, _Non-Voting:
Causes and Methods of Control_.

[5] James Bryce, _Modern Democracies_, Vol. II, p. 52.

[6] A. Lawrence Lowell, _Public Opinion and Popular Government_. _Cf._
Appendices.

[7] Robert Michels, _Political Parties_, p. 390.




