Chapter XV

ABSENTEE RULERS


1

The practical effect of the monistic theories of society has been to
rationalize that vast concentrating of political and economic power in
the midst of which we live. Since society was supposed to have organic
purposes of its own, it came to seem quite reasonable that these
purposes should be made manifest to a people by laws and decisions from
a central point. Somebody had to have a purpose revealed to him which
could be treated as the common purpose; if it was to be accepted it had
to be enforced by command; if it was really to look like the national
purpose, it had to be handed down as a rule binding upon all. Thus men
could say with Goethe:

  “And then a mighty work completed stands,
  One mind suffices for a thousand hands.”[31]

In this fashion the eulogies of the Great Society have been made. Two
thousand years ago it was possible for whole civilizations as mature as
the Chinese and the Greco-Roman to coexist in total indifference to one
another. Today the food supplies, the raw materials, the manufactures,
the communications and the peace of the world constitute one great
system which cannot be thrown severely out of balance in any part
without disturbing the whole.

Looked at from the top, the system in its far-flung and intricate
adjustments has a certain grandeur. It might, as some hopeful persons
think, even ultimately mean the brotherhood of man since all men
living in advanced communities are now in quite obvious fashion
dependent upon one another. But the individual man cannot look at the
system steadily from the top or see it in its ultimate speculative
possibilities. For him it means in practice, along with the rise in
certain of his material standards of life, a nerve-wracking increase
of the incalculable forces that bear upon his fate. My neighbor in the
country who borrowed money to raise potatoes which he cannot sell for
cash looks at the bills from the village store asking for immediate
cash payments, and does not share the philosophic hopeful view of the
interdependence of the world. When unseen commission merchants in New
York City refuse his potatoes, the calamity is as dumfounding as a
drought or a plague of locusts.

The harvest in September of the planting in May is now determined not
only by wind and weather, which his religion has from time immemorial
justified, but by a tangle of distant human arrangements of which
only loose threads are in his hands. He may live more richly than his
ancestors; he may be wealthier and healthier and, for all he knows,
even happier. But he gambles with the behavior of unseen men in a
bewildering way. His relations with invisibly managed markets are
decisively important for him; his own foresight is not dependable. He
is a link in a chain that stretches beyond his horizon.

The rôle that salesmanship and speculation play is a measure of the
spread between the work men do and the results. To market the output
of Lancashire, says Dibblee,[32] “the merchants and warehousemen of
Manchester and Liverpool, not to mention the marketing organizations
in other Lancashire towns, have a greater capital employed than that
required in all the manufacturing industries of the cotton trade.” And,
according to Anderson’s calculations,[33] the grain received at Chicago
in 1915 was sold sixty-two times in futures, as well as an unknown
number of times in spot transactions. Where men produce for invisible
and uncertain markets “the initial plans of enterprisers”[34] cannot be
adequate. The adjustments, often very crude and costly, are effected by
salesmanship and speculation.

Under these conditions neither the discipline of the craftsman who
controls his process from beginning to end nor the virtues of thrift,
economy and work are a complete guide to a successful career. Defoe in
his _Complete English Tradesman_[35] could say that “trade is not a
ball where people appear in masque and act a part to make sport ... but
is a plain, visible scene of honest life ... supported by prudence and
frugality” ... and so “prudent management and frugality will increase
any fortune to any degree.” Benjamin Franklin might opine that “he that
gets all he can honestly, and saves all he gets (necessary expenses
excepted) will certainly become rich, if that Being who governs
the world, to whom all should look for a blessing on their honest
endeavors, doth not in His wise providence, otherwise determine.” Young
men were until quite recently exhorted in the very words of Defoe and
Franklin, though Franklin’s rather canny allowance for the whims of
the Almighty was not always included. But of late the gospel of success
contains less about frugality and more about visions and the message
of business. This new gospel, beneath all its highfalutin cant, points
dimly though excitedly to the truth that for business success a man
must project his mind over an invisible environment.

This need has bred an imperious tendency to organization on a large
scale. To defend themselves against the economic powers of darkness,
against great monopolies or a devastating competition, the farmers set
up great centralized selling agencies. Business men form great trade
associations. Everybody organizes, until the number of committees and
their paid secretaries cannot be computed. The tendency is pervasive.
We have had, if I remember correctly, National Smile Week. At any rate
we have had Nebraska which discovered that if you wish to prohibit
liquor in Nebraska you must prohibit it everywhere. Nebraska cannot
live by itself alone, being too weak to control an international
traffic. We have had the socialist who was convinced that socialism
can maintain itself only on a socialist planet. We have had Secretary
Hughes who was convinced that capitalism could exist only on a
capitalist planet. We have had all the imperialists who could not live
unless they advanced the backward races. And we have had the Ku Klux
Klansmen who were persuaded that if you organized and sold hate on a
country-wide scale there would be lots more hate than there was before.
We have had the Germans before 1914 who were told they had to choose
between “world power or downfall,” and the French for some years after
1919 who could not be “secure” in Europe unless every one else was
insecure. We have had all conceivable manifestations of the impulse
to seek stability in an incalculable environment by standardizing for
one’s own apparent convenience all those who form the context of one’s
activity.

It has entailed perpetual effort to bring more and more men under the
same law and custom, and then, of course, to assume control of the
lawmaking and law-enforcing machinery in this larger area. The effect
has been to concentrate decision in central governments, in distant
executive offices, in caucuses and in steering committees. Whether
this concentration of power is good or bad, permanent or passing, this
at least is certain. The men who make the decisions at these central
points are remote from the men they govern and the facts with which
they deal. Even if they conscientiously regard themselves as agents or
trustees, it is a pure fiction to say that they are carrying out the
will of the people. They may govern the people wisely. They are not
governing with the active consultation of the people. They can at best
lay down policy wholesale in response to electorates which judge and
act upon only a detail of the result. For the governors see a kind of
whole which obscures the infinite varieties of particular interests;
their vices are abstraction and generalization which appear in politics
as legalism and bureaucracy. The governed, on the contrary, see vivid
aspects of a whole which they can rarely imagine, and their prevailing
vice is to mistake a local prejudice for a universal truth.

The widening distance between the centers where decisions are taken
and the places where the main work of the world is done has undermined
the discipline of public opinion upon which all the earlier theorists
relied.[36] A century ago the model of popular government was the
self-sufficing township in which the voters’ opinions were formed and
corrected by talk with their neighbors. They might entertain queer
opinions about witches and spirits and foreign peoples and other
worlds. But about the village itself the facts were not radically in
dispute, and nothing was likely to happen that the elders could not
with a little ingenuity bring under a well-known precedent of their
common law.

But under absentee government these checks upon opinion are lacking.
The consequences are often so remote and long delayed that error is not
promptly disclosed. The conditioning factors are distant; they do not
count vividly in our judgments. The reality is inaccessible; the bounds
of subjective opinion are wide. In the interdependent world, desire,
rather than custom or objective law, tends to become the criterion of
men’s conduct. They formulate their demands at large for “security” at
the expense of every one else’s safety, for “morality” at the expense
of other men’s tastes and comfort, for the fulfillment of a national
destiny that consists in taking what you want when you want it. The
lengthening of the interval between conduct and experience, between
cause and effect, has nurtured a cult of self-expression in which each
thinker thinks about his own thoughts and has subtle feelings about
his feelings. That he does not in consequence deeply affect the course
of affairs is not surprising.


2

The centralizing tendencies of the Great Society have not been accepted
without protest, and the case against them has been stated again and
again.[37] Without local institutions, said de Tocqueville, a nation
may give itself a free government, but it does not possess the spirit
of liberty. To concentrate power at one point is to facilitate the
seizure of power. “What are you going to do?” Arthur Young asked some
provincials at the time of the French Revolution. “We do not know,”
they replied; “we must see what Paris is going to do.” Local interests
handled from a distant central point are roughly handled by busy and
inattentive men. And in the meantime the local training and the local
winnowing of political talent are neglected. The overburdened central
authority expands into a vast hierarchy of bureaucrats and clerks
manipulating immense stacks of paper, always dealing with symbols on
paper, rarely with things or with people. The genius of centralization
reached its climax in the famous boast of a French minister of
education, who said: It is three o’clock; all the pupils in the third
grade throughout France are now composing a Latin verse.

There is no need to labor the point. The more centralization the less
can the people concerned be consulted and give conscious assent. The
more extensive the rule laid down the less account it can take of fact
and special circumstance. The more it conflicts with local experience,
the more distant its source and wholesale its character, the less
easily enforceable it is. General rules will tend to violate particular
needs. Distantly imposed rules usually lack the sanction of consent.
Being less suited to the needs of men, and more external to their
minds, they rest on force rather than on custom and on reason.

A centralized society dominated by the fiction that the governors are
the spokesmen of a common will tends not only to degrade initiative
in the individual but to reduce to insignificance the play of public
opinion. For when the action of a whole people is concentrated, the
public is so vast that even the crude objective judgments it might
make on specific issues cease to be practicable. The tests indicated
in preceding chapters by which a public might judge the workability
of a rule or the soundness of a new proposal have little value when
the public runs into millions and the issues are hopelessly entangled
with each other. It is idle under such circumstances to talk about
democracy, or about the refinement of public opinion. With such
monstrous complications the public can do little more than at intervals
to align itself heavily for or against the régime in power, and for
the rest to bear with its works, obeying meekly or evading, as seems
most convenient. For, in practice, the organic theory of society means
a concentration of power; that is, the way the notion of one purpose
is actually embodied in affairs. And this in turn means that men must
either accept frustration of their own purposes or contrive somehow to
frustrate that declared purpose of that central power which pretends it
is the purpose of all.


FOOTNOTES:

[31] _Faust_, Part II, Act v, scene 3.

[32] Dibblee, _The Laws of Supply and Demand_, cited by B. M. Anderson,
Jr., _The Value of Money_, p. 259.

[33] B. M. Anderson, Jr., _The Value of Money_, p. 251.

[34] _Ibid._

[35] _Cf._ Werner Lombart, _The Quintessence of Capitalism_, Chapter
VII.

[36] _Cf._ my _Public Opinion_, Chapters XVI and XVII.

[37] In a convenient form by J. Charles Brun, _Le Régionalisme_, pp.
13 _et seq._ _Cf._ also Walter Thompson, _Federal Centralization_,
