Chapter V

THE NEUTRALIZATION OF ARBITRARY FORCE


1

If this is the nature of public action, what ideal can be formulated
which shall conform to it?

We are bound, I think, to express the ideal in its lowest terms,
to state it not as an ideal which might conceivably be realized by
exceptional groups now and then or in some distant future but as an
ideal which normally might be taught and attained. In estimating the
burden which a public can carry, a sound political theory must insist
upon the largest factor of safety. It must understate the possibilities
of public action.

The action of a public, we had concluded, is principally confined
to an occasional intervention in affairs by means of an alignment
of the force which a dominant section of that public can wield. We
must assume, then, that the members of a public will not possess an
insider’s knowledge of events or share his point of view. They cannot,
therefore, construe intent, or appraise the exact circumstances, enter
intimately into the minds of the actors or into the details of the
argument. They can watch only for coarse signs indicating where their
sympathies ought to turn.

We must assume that the members of a public will not anticipate a
problem much before its crisis has become obvious, nor stay with
the problem long after its crisis is past. They will not know the
antecedent events, will not have seen the issue as it developed, will
not have thought out or willed a program, and will not be able to
predict the consequences of acting on that program. We must assume as a
theoretically fixed premise of popular government that normally men as
members of a public will not be well informed, continuously interested,
nonpartisan, creative or executive. We must assume that a public is
inexpert in its curiosity, intermittent, that it discerns only gross
distinctions, is slow to be aroused and quickly diverted; that, since
it acts by aligning itself, it personalizes whatever it considers, and
is interested only when events have been melodramatized as a conflict.

The public will arrive in the middle of the third act and will leave
before the last curtain, having stayed just long enough perhaps to
decide who is the hero and who the villain of the piece. Yet usually
that judgment will necessarily be made apart from the intrinsic merits,
on the basis of a sample of behavior, an aspect of a situation, by very
rough external evidence.

We cannot, then, think of public opinion as a conserving or creating
force directing society to clearly conceived ends, making deliberately
toward socialism or away from it, toward nationalism, an empire, a
league of nations or any other doctrinal goal. For men do not agree as
to their aims, and it is precisely the lack of agreement which creates
the problems that excite public attention. It is idle, then, to argue
that though men evidently have conflicting purposes, mankind has some
all-embracing purpose of which you or I happen to be the authorized
spokesman. We merely should have moved in a circle were we to conclude
that the public is in some deep way a messianic force.


2

The work of the world goes on continually without conscious direction
from public opinion. At certain junctures problems arise. It is only
with the crises of some of these problems that public opinion is
concerned. And its object in dealing with a crisis is to help allay
that crisis.

I think this conclusion is unescapable. For though we may prefer to
believe that the aim of popular action should be to do justice or
promote the true, the beautiful and the good, the belief will not
maintain itself in the face of plain experience. The public does not
know in most crises what specifically is the truth or the justice of
the case, and men are not agreed on what is beautiful and good. Nor
does the public rouse itself normally at the existence of evil. It is
aroused at evil made manifest by the interruption of a habitual process
of life. And finally, a problem ceases to occupy attention not when
justice, as we happen to define it, has been done but when a workable
adjustment that overcomes the crisis has been made. If all this were
not the necessary manner of public opinion, if it had seriously to
crusade for justice in every issue it touches, the public would have to
be dealing with all situations all the time. That is impossible. It is
also undesirable. For did justice, truth, goodness and beauty depend on
the spasmodic and crude interventions of public opinion there would be
little hope for them in this world.

Thus we strip public opinion of any implied duty to deal with the
substance of a problem, to make technical decisions, to attempt justice
or impose a moral precept. And instead we say that the ideal of public
opinion is to align men during the crisis of a problem in such a way
as to favor the action of those individuals who may be able to compose
the crisis. The power to discern those individuals is the end of the
effort to educate public opinion. The aim of research designed to
facilitate public action is the discovery of clear signs by which these
individuals may be discerned.

The signs are relevant when they reveal by coarse, simple and objective
tests which side in a controversy upholds a workable social rule, or
which is attacking an unworkable rule, or which proposes a promising
new rule. By following such signs the public might know where to
align itself. In such an alignment it does not, let us remember,
pass judgment on the intrinsic merits. It merely places its force at
the disposal of the side which, according to objective signs, seems
to be standing for human adjustments according to a clear rule of
behavior and against the side which appears to stand for settlement in
accordance with its own unaccountable will.

Public opinion, in this theory, is a reserve of force brought into
action during a crisis in public affairs. Though it is itself an
irrational force, under favorable institutions, sound leadership
and decent training the power of public opinion might be placed at
the disposal of those who stood for workable law as against brute
assertion. In this theory, public opinion does not make the law. But by
canceling lawless power it may establish the condition under which law
can be made. It does not reason, investigate, invent, persuade, bargain
or settle. But, by holding the aggressive party in check, it may
liberate intelligence. Public opinion in its highest ideal will defend
those who are prepared to act on their reason against the interrupting
force of those who merely assert their will.

The action of public opinion at its best would not, let it be noted,
be a continual crusade on behalf of reason. When power, however
absolute and unaccountable, reigns without provoking a crisis, public
opinion does not challenge it. Somebody must challenge arbitrary power
first. The public can only come to his assistance.


3

That, I think, is the utmost that public opinion can effectively do.
With the substance of the problem it can do nothing usually but meddle
ignorantly or tyrannically. It has no need to meddle with it. Men in
their active relation to affairs have to deal with the substance, but
in that indirect relationship when they can act only through uttering
praise or blame, making black crosses on white paper, they have done
enough, they have done all they can do if they help to make it possible
for the reason of other men to assert itself.

For when public opinion attempts to govern directly it is either
a failure or a tyranny. It is not able to master the problem
intellectually, nor to deal with it except by wholesale impact. The
theory of democracy has not recognized this truth because it has
identified the functioning of government with the will of the people.
This is a fiction. The intricate business of framing laws and of
administering them through several hundred thousand public officials is
in no sense the act of the voters nor a translation of their will.

But although the acts of government are not a translation of public
opinion, the principal function of government is to do specifically, in
greater detail, and more continually what public opinion does crudely,
by wholesale, and spasmodically. It enforces some of the working rules
of society. It interprets them. It detects and punishes certain kinds
of aggression. It presides over the framing of new rules. It has
organized force which is used to counteract irregular force.

It is also subject to the same corruption as public opinion. For when
government attempts to impose the will of its officials, instead of
intervening so as to steady adjustments by consent among the parties
directly interested, it becomes heavy-handed, stupid, imperious, even
predatory. For the public official, though he is better placed to
understand the problem than a reader of newspapers, and though he is
much better able to act, is still fundamentally external to the real
problems in which he intervenes. Being external, his point of view is
indirect, and so his action is most appropriate when it is confined to
rendering indirect assistance to those who are directly responsible.

Therefore, instead of describing government as an expression of the
people’s will, it would seem better to say that government consists
of a body of officials, some elected, some appointed, who handle
professionally, and in the first instance, problems which come to
public opinion spasmodically and on appeal. Where the parties directly
responsible do not work out an adjustment, public officials intervene.
When the officials fail, public opinion is brought to bear on the issue.


4

This, then, is the ideal of public action which our inquiry suggests.
Those who happen in any question to constitute the public should
attempt only to create an equilibrium in which settlements can be
reached directly and by consent. The burden of carrying on the work of
the world, of inventing, creating, executing, of attempting justice,
formulating laws and moral codes, of dealing with the technic and the
substance, lies not upon public opinion and not upon government but
on those who are responsibly concerned as agents in the affair. Where
problems arise, the ideal is a settlement by the particular interests
involved. They alone know what the trouble really is. No decision by
public officials or by commuters reading headlines in the train can
usually and in the long run be so good as settlement by consent among
the parties at interest. No moral code, no political theory can usually
and in the long run be imposed from the heights of public opinion,
which will fit a case so well as direct agreement reached where
arbitrary power has been disarmed.

It is the function of public opinion to check the use of force in a
crisis, so that men, driven to make terms, may live and let live.




