Chapter XXI. Miscellaneous

290. If by leaving a small pleasure one sees a great pleasure, let a
wise man leave the small pleasure, and look to the great.

291. He who, by causing pain to others, wishes to obtain pleasure for
himself, he, entangled in the bonds of hatred, will never be free from
hatred.

292. What ought to be done is neglected, what ought not to be done is
done; the desires of unruly, thoughtless people are always increasing.

293. But they whose whole watchfulness is always directed to their body,
who do not follow what ought not to be done, and who steadfastly do what
ought to be done, the desires of such watchful and wise people will come
to an end.

294. A true Brahmana goes scatheless, though he have killed father and
mother, and two valiant kings, though he has destroyed a kingdom with
all its subjects.

295. A true Brahmana goes scatheless, though he have killed father and
mother, and two holy kings, and an eminent man besides.

296. The disciples of Gotama (Buddha) are always well awake, and their
thoughts day and night are always set on Buddha.

297. The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their thoughts
day and night are always set on the law.

298. The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their thoughts
day and night are always set on the church.

299. The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their thoughts
day and night are always set on their body.

300. The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their mind day
and night always delights in compassion.

301. The disciples of Gotama are always well awake, and their mind day
and night always delights in meditation.

302. It is hard to leave the world (to become a friar), it is hard to
enjoy the world; hard is the monastery, painful are the houses; painful
it is to dwell with equals (to share everything in common) and the
itinerant mendicant is beset with pain. Therefore let no man be an
itinerant mendicant and he will not be beset with pain.

303. Whatever place a faithful, virtuous, celebrated, and wealthy man
chooses, there he is respected.

304. Good people shine from afar, like the snowy mountains; bad people
are not seen, like arrows shot by night.

305. He alone who, without ceasing, practises the duty of sitting
alone and sleeping alone, he, subduing himself, will rejoice in the
destruction of all desires alone, as if living in a forest.




Chapter XXII. The Downward Course

306. He who says what is not, goes to hell; he also who, having done a
thing, says I have not done it. After death both are equal, they are men
with evil deeds in the next world.

307. Many men whose shoulders are covered with the yellow gown are
ill-conditioned and unrestrained; such evil-doers by their evil deeds go
to hell.

308. Better it would be to swallow a heated iron ball, like flaring
fire, than that a bad unrestrained fellow should live on the charity of
the land.

309. Four things does a wreckless man gain who covets his neighbour's
wife,--a bad reputation, an uncomfortable bed, thirdly, punishment, and
lastly, hell.

310. There is bad reputation, and the evil way (to hell), there is the
short pleasure of the frightened in the arms of the frightened, and
the king imposes heavy punishment; therefore let no man think of his
neighbour's wife.

311. As a grass-blade, if badly grasped, cuts the arm, badly-practised
asceticism leads to hell.

312. An act carelessly performed, a broken vow, and hesitating obedience
to discipline, all this brings no great reward.

313. If anything is to be done, let a man do it, let him attack it
vigorously! A careless pilgrim only scatters the dust of his passions
more widely.

314. An evil deed is better left undone, for a man repents of it
afterwards; a good deed is better done, for having done it, one does not
repent.

315. Like a well-guarded frontier fort, with defences within and
without, so let a man guard himself. Not a moment should escape, for
they who allow the right moment to pass, suffer pain when they are in
hell.

316. They who are ashamed of what they ought not to be ashamed of, and
are not ashamed of what they ought to be ashamed of, such men, embracing
false doctrines enter the evil path.

317. They who fear when they ought not to fear, and fear not when they
ought to fear, such men, embracing false doctrines, enter the evil path.

318. They who forbid when there is nothing to be forbidden, and forbid
not when there is something to be forbidden, such men, embracing false
doctrines, enter the evil path.

319. They who know what is forbidden as forbidden, and what is not
forbidden as not forbidden, such men, embracing the true doctrine, enter
the good path.




