Chapter II. On Earnestness

21. Earnestness is the path of immortality (Nirvana), thoughtlessness
the path of death. Those who are in earnest do not die, those who are
thoughtless are as if dead already.

22. Those who are advanced in earnestness, having understood this
clearly, delight in earnestness, and rejoice in the knowledge of the
Ariyas (the elect).

23. These wise people, meditative, steady, always possessed of strong
powers, attain to Nirvana, the highest happiness.

24. If an earnest person has roused himself, if he is not forgetful,
if his deeds are pure, if he acts with consideration, if he restrains
himself, and lives according to law,--then his glory will increase.

25. By rousing himself, by earnestness, by restraint and control, the
wise man may make for himself an island which no flood can overwhelm.

26. Fools follow after vanity, men of evil wisdom. The wise man keeps
earnestness as his best jewel.

27. Follow not after vanity, nor after the enjoyment of love and lust!
He who is earnest and meditative, obtains ample joy.

28. When the learned man drives away vanity by earnestness, he, the
wise, climbing the terraced heights of wisdom, looks down upon the
fools, serene he looks upon the toiling crowd, as one that stands on a
mountain looks down upon them that stand upon the plain.

29. Earnest among the thoughtless, awake among the sleepers, the wise
man advances like a racer, leaving behind the hack.

30. By earnestness did Maghavan (Indra) rise to the lordship of the
gods. People praise earnestness; thoughtlessness is always blamed.

31. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in earnestness, who looks with
fear on thoughtlessness, moves about like fire, burning all his fetters,
small or large.

32. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in reflection, who looks with
fear on thoughtlessness, cannot fall away (from his perfect state)--he
is close upon Nirvana.




Chapter III. Thought

33. As a fletcher makes straight his arrow, a wise man makes straight
his trembling and unsteady thought, which is difficult to guard,
difficult to hold back.

34. As a fish taken from his watery home and thrown on dry ground, our
thought trembles all over in order to escape the dominion of Mara (the
tempter).

35. It is good to tame the mind, which is difficult to hold in and
flighty, rushing wherever it listeth; a tamed mind brings happiness.

36. Let the wise man guard his thoughts, for they are difficult to
perceive, very artful, and they rush wherever they list: thoughts well
guarded bring happiness.

37. Those who bridle their mind which travels far, moves about alone,
is without a body, and hides in the chamber (of the heart), will be free
from the bonds of Mara (the tempter).

38. If a man's thoughts are unsteady, if he does not know the true law,
if his peace of mind is troubled, his knowledge will never be perfect.

39. If a man's thoughts are not dissipated, if his mind is not
perplexed, if he has ceased to think of good or evil, then there is no
fear for him while he is watchful.

40. Knowing that this body is (fragile) like a jar, and making this
thought firm like a fortress, one should attack Mara (the tempter) with
the weapon of knowledge, one should watch him when conquered, and should
never rest.

41. Before long, alas! this body will lie on the earth, despised,
without understanding, like a useless log.

42. Whatever a hater may do to a hater, or an enemy to an enemy, a
wrongly-directed mind will do us greater mischief.

43. Not a mother, not a father will do so much, nor any other relative;
a well-directed mind will do us greater service.


Chapter IV. Flowers

44. Who shall overcome this earth, and the world of Yama (the lord of
the departed), and the world of the gods? Who shall find out the plainly
shown path of virtue, as a clever man finds out the (right) flower?

45. The disciple will overcome the earth, and the world of Yama, and the
world of the gods. The disciple will find out the plainly shown path of
virtue, as a clever man finds out the (right) flower.

46. He who knows that this body is like froth, and has learnt that it
is as unsubstantial as a mirage, will break the flower-pointed arrow of
Mara, and never see the king of death.

47. Death carries off a man who is gathering flowers and whose mind is
distracted, as a flood carries off a sleeping village.

48. Death subdues a man who is gathering flowers, and whose mind is
distracted, before he is satiated in his pleasures.

49. As the bee collects nectar and departs without injuring the flower,
or its colour or scent, so let a sage dwell in his village.

50. Not the perversities of others, not their sins of commission or
omission, but his own misdeeds and negligences should a sage take notice
of.

51. Like a beautiful flower, full of colour, but without scent, are the
fine but fruitless words of him who does not act accordingly.

52. But, like a beautiful flower, full of colour and full of scent, are
the fine and fruitful words of him who acts accordingly.

53. As many kinds of wreaths can be made from a heap of flowers, so many
good things may be achieved by a mortal when once he is born.

54. The scent of flowers does not travel against the wind, nor (that
of) sandal-wood, or of Tagara and Mallika flowers; but the odour of good
people travels even against the wind; a good man pervades every place.

55. Sandal-wood or Tagara, a lotus-flower, or a Vassiki, among these
sorts of perfumes, the perfume of virtue is unsurpassed.

56. Mean is the scent that comes from Tagara and sandal-wood;--the
perfume of those who possess virtue rises up to the gods as the highest.

57. Of the people who possess these virtues, who live without
thoughtlessness, and who are emancipated through true knowledge, Mara,
the tempter, never finds the way.

58, 59. As on a heap of rubbish cast upon the highway the lily will
grow full of sweet perfume and delight, thus the disciple of the truly
enlightened Buddha shines forth by his knowledge among those who are
like rubbish, among the people that walk in darkness.




