Chapter V. The Fool

60. Long is the night to him who is awake; long is a mile to him who is
tired; long is life to the foolish who do not know the true law.

61. If a traveller does not meet with one who is his better, or
his equal, let him firmly keep to his solitary journey; there is no
companionship with a fool.

62. "These sons belong to me, and this wealth belongs to me," with such
thoughts a fool is tormented. He himself does not belong to himself; how
much less sons and wealth?

63. The fool who knows his foolishness, is wise at least so far. But a
fool who thinks himself wise, he is called a fool indeed.

64. If a fool be associated with a wise man even all his life, he will
perceive the truth as little as a spoon perceives the taste of soup.

65. If an intelligent man be associated for one minute only with a wise
man, he will soon perceive the truth, as the tongue perceives the taste
of soup.

66. Fools of little understanding have themselves for their greatest
enemies, for they do evil deeds which must bear bitter fruits.

67. That deed is not well done of which a man must repent, and the
reward of which he receives crying and with a tearful face.

68. No, that deed is well done of which a man does not repent, and the
reward of which he receives gladly and cheerfully.

69. As long as the evil deed done does not bear fruit, the fool thinks
it is like honey; but when it ripens, then the fool suffers grief.

70. Let a fool month after month eat his food (like an ascetic) with the
tip of a blade of Kusa grass, yet he is not worth the sixteenth particle
of those who have well weighed the law.

71. An evil deed, like newly-drawn milk, does not turn (suddenly);
smouldering, like fire covered by ashes, it follows the fool.

72. And when the evil deed, after it has become known, brings sorrow to
the fool, then it destroys his bright lot, nay, it cleaves his head.

73. Let the fool wish for a false reputation, for precedence among the
Bhikshus, for lordship in the convents, for worship among other people!

74. "May both the layman and he who has left the world think that this
is done by me; may they be subject to me in everything which is to be
done or is not to be done," thus is the mind of the fool, and his desire
and pride increase.

75. "One is the road that leads to wealth, another the road that leads
to Nirvana;" if the Bhikshu, the disciple of Buddha, has learnt this,
he will not yearn for honour, he will strive after separation from the
world.




Chapter VI. The Wise Man (Pandita)

76. If you see an intelligent man who tells you where true treasures are
to be found, who shows what is to be avoided, and administers reproofs,
follow that wise man; it will be better, not worse, for those who follow
him.

77. Let him admonish, let him teach, let him forbid what is
improper!--he will be beloved of the good, by the bad he will be hated.

78. Do not have evil-doers for friends, do not have low people for
friends: have virtuous people for friends, have for friends the best of
men.

79. He who drinks in the law lives happily with a serene mind: the sage
rejoices always in the law, as preached by the elect (Ariyas).

80. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they like); fletchers bend the
arrow; carpenters bend a log of wood; wise people fashion themselves.

81. As a solid rock is not shaken by the wind, wise people falter not
amidst blame and praise.

82. Wise people, after they have listened to the laws, become serene,
like a deep, smooth, and still lake.

83. Good people walk on whatever befall, the good do not prattle,
longing for pleasure; whether touched by happiness or sorrow wise people
never appear elated or depressed.

84. If, whether for his own sake, or for the sake of others, a man
wishes neither for a son, nor for wealth, nor for lordship, and if he
does not wish for his own success by unfair means, then he is good,
wise, and virtuous.

85. Few are there among men who arrive at the other shore (become
Arhats); the other people here run up and down the shore.

86. But those who, when the law has been well preached to them, follow
the law, will pass across the dominion of death, however difficult to
overcome.

87, 88. A wise man should leave the dark state (of ordinary life), and
follow the bright state (of the Bhikshu). After going from his home to
a homeless state, he should in his retirement look for enjoyment where
there seemed to be no enjoyment. Leaving all pleasures behind, and
calling nothing his own, the wise man should purge himself from all the
troubles of the mind.

89. Those whose mind is well grounded in the (seven) elements of
knowledge, who without clinging to anything, rejoice in freedom from
attachment, whose appetites have been conquered, and who are full of
light, are free (even) in this world.




