Chapter XIX. The Just

256, 257. A man is not just if he carries a matter by violence; no, he
who distinguishes both right and wrong, who is learned and leads others,
not by violence, but by law and equity, and who is guarded by the law
and intelligent, he is called just.

258. A man is not learned because he talks much; he who is patient, free
from hatred and fear, he is called learned.

259. A man is not a supporter of the law because he talks much; even if
a man has learnt little, but sees the law bodily, he is a supporter of
the law, a man who never neglects the law.

260. A man is not an elder because his head is grey; his age may be
ripe, but he is called `Old-in-vain.'

261. He in whom there is truth, virtue, love, restraint, moderation, he
who is free from impurity and is wise, he is called an elder.

262. An envious greedy, dishonest man does not become respectable by
means of much talking only, or by the beauty of his complexion.

263. He in whom all this is destroyed, and taken out with the very root,
he, when freed from hatred and wise, is called respectable.

264. Not by tonsure does an undisciplined man who speaks falsehood
become a Samana; can a man be a Samana who is still held captive by
desire and greediness?

265. He who always quiets the evil, whether small or large, he is called
a Samana (a quiet man), because he has quieted all evil.

266. A man is not a mendicant (Bhikshu) simply because he asks others
for alms; he who adopts the whole law is a Bhikshu, not he who only
begs.

267. He who is above good and evil, who is chaste, who with knowledge
passes through the world, he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

268, 269. A man is not a Muni because he observes silence (mona, i.e.
mauna), if he is foolish and ignorant; but the wise who, taking the
balance, chooses the good and avoids evil, he is a Muni, and is a Muni
thereby; he who in this world weighs both sides is called a Muni.

270. A man is not an elect (Ariya) because he injures living creatures;
because he has pity on all living creatures, therefore is a man called
Ariya.

271, 272. Not only by discipline and vows, not only by much learning,
not by entering into a trance, not by sleeping alone, do I earn the
happiness of release which no worldling can know. Bhikshu, be not
confident as long as thou hast not attained the extinction of desires.




Chapter XX. The Way

273. The best of ways is the eightfold; the best of truths the four
words; the best of virtues passionlessness; the best of men he who has
eyes to see.

274. This is the way, there is no other that leads to the purifying of
intelligence. Go on this way! Everything else is the deceit of Mara (the
tempter).

275. If you go on this way, you will make an end of pain! The way was
preached by me, when I had understood the removal of the thorns (in the
flesh).

276. You yourself must make an effort. The Tathagatas (Buddhas) are only
preachers. The thoughtful who enter the way are freed from the bondage
of Mara.

277. `All created things perish,' he who knows and sees this becomes
passive in pain; this is the way to purity.

278. `All created things are grief and pain,' he who knows and sees this
becomes passive in pain; this is the way that leads to purity.

279. `All forms are unreal,' he who knows and sees this becomes passive
in pain; this is the way that leads to purity.

280. He who does not rouse himself when it is time to rise, who, though
young and strong, is full of sloth, whose will and thought are weak,
that lazy and idle man will never find the way to knowledge.

281. Watching his speech, well restrained in mind, let a man never
commit any wrong with his body! Let a man but keep these three roads of
action clear, and he will achieve the way which is taught by the wise.

282. Through zeal knowledge is gotten, through lack of zeal knowledge is
lost; let a man who knows this double path of gain and loss thus place
himself that knowledge may grow.

283. Cut down the whole forest (of lust), not a tree only! Danger comes
out of the forest (of lust). When you have cut down both the forest (of
lust) and its undergrowth, then, Bhikshus, you will be rid of the forest
and free!

284. So long as the love of man towards women, even the smallest, is not
destroyed, so long is his mind in bondage, as the calf that drinks milk
is to its mother.

285. Cut out the love of self, like an autumn lotus, with thy hand!
Cherish the road of peace. Nirvana has been shown by Sugata (Buddha).

286. `Here I shall dwell in the rain, here in winter and summer,' thus
the fool meditates, and does not think of his death.

287. Death comes and carries off that man, praised for his children and
flocks, his mind distracted, as a flood carries off a sleeping village.

288. Sons are no help, nor a father, nor relations; there is no help
from kinsfolk for one whom death has seized.

289. A wise and good man who knows the meaning of this, should quickly
clear the way that leads to Nirvana.




