Chapter VII. The Venerable (Arhat).

90. There is no suffering for him who has finished his journey, and
abandoned grief, who has freed himself on all sides, and thrown off all
fetters.

91. They depart with their thoughts well-collected, they are not happy
in their abode; like swans who have left their lake, they leave their
house and home.

92. Men who have no riches, who live on recognised food, who have
perceived void and unconditioned freedom (Nirvana), their path is
difficult to understand, like that of birds in the air.

93. He whose appetites are stilled, who is not absorbed in enjoyment,
who has perceived void and unconditioned freedom (Nirvana), his path is
difficult to understand, like that of birds in the air.

94. The gods even envy him whose senses, like horses well broken in by
the driver, have been subdued, who is free from pride, and free from
appetites.

95. Such a one who does his duty is tolerant like the earth, like
Indra's bolt; he is like a lake without mud; no new births are in store
for him.

96. His thought is quiet, quiet are his word and deed, when he has
obtained freedom by true knowledge, when he has thus become a quiet man.

97. The man who is free from credulity, but knows the uncreated, who has
cut all ties, removed all temptations, renounced all desires, he is the
greatest of men.

98. In a hamlet or in a forest, in the deep water or on the dry land,
wherever venerable persons (Arhanta) dwell, that place is delightful.

99. Forests are delightful; where the world finds no delight, there the
passionless will find delight, for they look not for pleasures.




Chapter VIII. The Thousands

100. Even though a speech be a thousand (of words), but made up of
senseless words, one word of sense is better, which if a man hears, he
becomes quiet.

101. Even though a Gatha (poem) be a thousand (of words), but made up of
senseless words, one word of a Gatha is better, which if a man hears, he
becomes quiet.

102. Though a man recite a hundred Gathas made up of senseless words,
one word of the law is better, which if a man hears, he becomes quiet.

103. If one man conquer in battle a thousand times thousand men, and if
another conquer himself, he is the greatest of conquerors.

104, 105. One's own self conquered is better than all other people; not
even a god, a Gandharva, not Mara with Brahman could change into defeat
the victory of a man who has vanquished himself, and always lives under
restraint.

106. If a man for a hundred years sacrifice month after month with a
thousand, and if he but for one moment pay homage to a man whose soul is
grounded (in true knowledge), better is that homage than sacrifice for a
hundred years.

107. If a man for a hundred years worship Agni (fire) in the forest, and
if he but for one moment pay homage to a man whose soul is grounded
(in true knowledge), better is that homage than sacrifice for a hundred
years.

108. Whatever a man sacrifice in this world as an offering or as an
oblation for a whole year in order to gain merit, the whole of it is
not worth a quarter (a farthing); reverence shown to the righteous is
better.

109. He who always greets and constantly reveres the aged, four things
will increase to him, viz. life, beauty, happiness, power.

110. But he who lives a hundred years, vicious and unrestrained, a life
of one day is better if a man is virtuous and reflecting.

111. And he who lives a hundred years, ignorant and unrestrained, a life
of one day is better if a man is wise and reflecting.

112. And he who lives a hundred years, idle and weak, a life of one day
is better if a man has attained firm strength.

113. And he who lives a hundred years, not seeing beginning and end, a
life of one day is better if a man sees beginning and end.

114. And he who lives a hundred years, not seeing the immortal place, a
life of one day is better if a man sees the immortal place.

115. And he who lives a hundred years, not seeing the highest law, a
life of one day is better if a man sees the highest law.




