Chapter IX. Evil

116. If a man would hasten towards the good, he should keep his thought
away from evil; if a man does what is good slothfully, his mind delights
in evil.

117. If a man commits a sin, let him not do it again; let him not
delight in sin: pain is the outcome of evil.

118. If a man does what is good, let him do it again; let him delight in
it: happiness is the outcome of good.

119. Even an evil-doer sees happiness as long as his evil deed has not
ripened; but when his evil deed has ripened, then does the evil-doer see
evil.

120. Even a good man sees evil days, as long as his good deed has not
ripened; but when his good deed has ripened, then does the good man see
happy days.

121. Let no man think lightly of evil, saying in his heart, It will not
come nigh unto me. Even by the falling of water-drops a water-pot is
filled; the fool becomes full of evil, even if he gather it little by
little.

122. Let no man think lightly of good, saying in his heart, It will not
come nigh unto me. Even by the falling of water-drops a water-pot is
filled; the wise man becomes full of good, even if he gather it little
by little.

123. Let a man avoid evil deeds, as a merchant, if he has few companions
and carries much wealth, avoids a dangerous road; as a man who loves
life avoids poison.

124. He who has no wound on his hand, may touch poison with his hand;
poison does not affect one who has no wound; nor is there evil for one
who does not commit evil.

125. If a man offend a harmless, pure, and innocent person, the evil
falls back upon that fool, like light dust thrown up against the wind.

126. Some people are born again; evil-doers go to hell; righteous
people go to heaven; those who are free from all worldly desires attain
Nirvana.

127. Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea, not if we enter into
the clefts of the mountains, is there known a spot in the whole world
where a man might be freed from an evil deed.

128. Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea, not if we enter into
the clefts of the mountains, is there known a spot in the whole world
where death could not overcome (the mortal). 




Chapter X. Punishment

129. All men tremble at punishment, all men fear death; remember that
you are like unto them, and do not kill, nor cause slaughter.

130. All men tremble at punishment, all men love life; remember that
thou art like unto them, and do not kill, nor cause slaughter.

131. He who seeking his own happiness punishes or kills beings who also
long for happiness, will not find happiness after death.

132. He who seeking his own happiness does not punish or kill beings who
also long for happiness, will find happiness after death.

133. Do not speak harshly to anybody; those who are spoken to will
answer thee in the same way. Angry speech is painful, blows for blows
will touch thee.

134. If, like a shattered metal plate (gong), thou utter not, then thou
hast reached Nirvana; contention is not known to thee.

135. As a cowherd with his staff drives his cows into the stable, so do
Age and Death drive the life of men.

136. A fool does not know when he commits his evil deeds: but the wicked
man burns by his own deeds, as if burnt by fire.

137. He who inflicts pain on innocent and harmless persons, will soon
come to one of these ten states:

138. He will have cruel suffering, loss, injury of the body, heavy
affliction, or loss of mind,

139. Or a misfortune coming from the king, or a fearful accusation, or
loss of relations, or destruction of treasures,

140. Or lightning-fire will burn his houses; and when his body is
destroyed, the fool will go to hell.

141. Not nakedness, not platted hair, not dirt, not fasting, or lying on
the earth, not rubbing with dust, not sitting motionless, can purify a
mortal who has not overcome desires.

142. He who, though dressed in fine apparel, exercises tranquillity, is
quiet, subdued, restrained, chaste, and has ceased to find fault with
all other beings, he indeed is a Brahmana, an ascetic (sramana), a friar
(bhikshu).

143. Is there in this world any man so restrained by humility that he
does not mind reproof, as a well-trained horse the whip?

144. Like a well-trained horse when touched by the whip, be ye active
and lively, and by faith, by virtue, by energy, by meditation, by
discernment of the law you will overcome this great pain (of reproof),
perfect in knowledge and in behaviour, and never forgetful.

145. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they like); fletchers bend the
arrow; carpenters bend a log of wood; good people fashion themselves.




