Chapter XIV. The Buddha (The Awakened)

179. He whose conquest is not conquered again, into whose conquest no
one in this world enters, by what track can you lead him, the Awakened,
the Omniscient, the trackless?

180. He whom no desire with its snares and poisons can lead astray,
by what track can you lead him, the Awakened, the Omniscient, the
trackless?

181. Even the gods envy those who are awakened and not forgetful, who
are given to meditation, who are wise, and who delight in the repose of
retirement (from the world).

182. Difficult (to obtain) is the conception of men, difficult is the
life of mortals, difficult is the hearing of the True Law, difficult is
the birth of the Awakened (the attainment of Buddhahood).

183. Not to commit any sin, to do good, and to purify one's mind, that
is the teaching of (all) the Awakened.

184. The Awakened call patience the highest penance, long-suffering the
highest Nirvana; for he is not an anchorite (pravragita) who strikes
others, he is not an ascetic (sramana) who insults others.

185. Not to blame, not to strike, to live restrained under the law,
to be moderate in eating, to sleep and sit alone, and to dwell on the
highest thoughts,--this is the teaching of the Awakened.

186. There is no satisfying lusts, even by a shower of gold pieces; he
who knows that lusts have a short taste and cause pain, he is wise;

187. Even in heavenly pleasures he finds no satisfaction, the disciple
who is fully awakened delights only in the destruction of all desires.

188. Men, driven by fear, go to many a refuge, to mountains and forests,
to groves and sacred trees.

189. But that is not a safe refuge, that is not the best refuge; a man
is not delivered from all pains after having gone to that refuge.

190. He who takes refuge with Buddha, the Law, and the Church; he who,
with clear understanding, sees the four holy truths:--

191. Viz. pain, the origin of pain, the destruction of pain, and the
eightfold holy way that leads to the quieting of pain;--

192. That is the safe refuge, that is the best refuge; having gone to
that refuge, a man is delivered from all pain.

193. A supernatural person (a Buddha) is not easily found, he is not
born everywhere. Wherever such a sage is born, that race prospers.

194. Happy is the arising of the awakened, happy is the teaching of the
True Law, happy is peace in the church, happy is the devotion of those
who are at peace.

195, 196. He who pays homage to those who deserve homage, whether the
awakened (Buddha) or their disciples, those who have overcome the host
(of evils), and crossed the flood of sorrow, he who pays homage to
such as have found deliverance and know no fear, his merit can never be
measured by anybody.




Chapter XV. Happiness

197. Let us live happily then, not hating those who hate us! among men
who hate us let us dwell free from hatred!

198. Let us live happily then, free from ailments among the ailing!
among men who are ailing let us dwell free from ailments!

199. Let us live happily then, free from greed among the greedy! among
men who are greedy let us dwell free from greed!

200. Let us live happily then, though we call nothing our own! We shall
be like the bright gods, feeding on happiness!

201. Victory breeds hatred, for the conquered is unhappy. He who has
given up both victory and defeat, he, the contented, is happy.

202. There is no fire like passion; there is no losing throw like
hatred; there is no pain like this body; there is no happiness higher
than rest.

203. Hunger is the worst of diseases, the body the greatest of pains; if
one knows this truly, that is Nirvana, the highest happiness.

204. Health is the greatest of gifts, contentedness the best riches;
trust is the best of relationships, Nirvana the highest happiness.

205. He who has tasted the sweetness of solitude and tranquillity,
is free from fear and free from sin, while he tastes the sweetness of
drinking in the law.

206. The sight of the elect (Arya) is good, to live with them is always
happiness; if a man does not see fools, he will be truly happy.

207. He who walks in the company of fools suffers a long way; company
with fools, as with an enemy, is always painful; company with the wise
is pleasure, like meeting with kinsfolk.

208. Therefore, one ought to follow the wise, the intelligent, the
learned, the much enduring, the dutiful, the elect; one ought to follow
a good and wise man, as the moon follows the path of the stars.




