Chapter IV. treats of the male and female essences, and has a
curious note on the Hebrew letter Hé, speaking of it as female, and
composed of D, Daleth, and I, Jod—a great mystery worthy of study.
Chapter V. speaks of the Supernal Eden, the Heavens, the Earth, the
Waters, the Giants-Nephilim in the earth, wars of the kings, the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, the serpent, and the houses of
judgment; so that this treatise is no less discursive than abstruse.

The “Idra Rabba,” or “Greater Holy Assembly,” consisted of ten
Rabbis, of whom Rabbi Schimeon was chief, and the book contains
their several speeches and comments upon the doctrines laid down by
Rabbi Schimeon, on a similar plan to the conversations narrated in
the Book of Job. Twenty-five chapters are occupied with an allegory
of the several parts of Macroprosopus, the type of God the Father;
the twenty-sixth concerns the Edomite kings, the vanished creations;
Chapters XXVII. to XLII. are an allegorical description of
Microprosopus, the Son Deity, the V or Vau of the Tetragrammaton;
Chapter XLIII. concerns the Judgments; XLIV., the Supernal Man; and
XLV. is a Conclusion, in narrative form, of the passing away of
three of the ten Rabbis, and the acknowledgment of R. Schimeon as
chief of them all.

Very much of this descriptive volume referring to Deity is not only
abstruse, but is, to the modern European, verbiage run wild; yet in
this characteristic it is truly Oriental and Hebrew; some passages
remind me very much of the “Song of Solomon,” there are the same
exuberant and flowery outbursts of poetic imagery.

The “Idra Zuta,” or “Lesser Holy Assembly,” is a similar treatise,
explanatory of the Holy powers of the Deity, ascribing honour and
power to Macroprosopus, Microprosopus, AIMA the God Mother, and the
Bride of God; with instructive allusions to the Prior Worlds of the
so-called Edomite Kings, and the sexual aspects of Godhead. The work
concludes with a narrative of the death of R. Schimeon and his
burial, the whole “Idra” being his last dying declaration of
doctrine.

It is noteworthy that the words of the “Smaragdime Tablet of
Hermes”—“that which is below is like that which is above” occur in
paragraph 388 of the Idra Rabba, and are thus introduced, “We have
learned through Barietha, the tradition given forth _without_ the
Holy City.” I note also that the Mischna is mentioned in the Idra
Zuta. Want of space compels me to omit all extracts from this
volume, which is a matter of regret, as many passages are very
eloquently written.

A flaw in this book is the construction of the Index, which should
have contained sub-headings, as well as main headings. Of what value
is the entry “Microprosopus,” followed by eleven lines each of
fourteen page-numbers? A score of references, sub-divided between
his characteristics, his relationships, and his titles would have
been of more practical use. With this exception, and when the
abomination of Hebrew in English letters has been tolerated, we must
acknowledge the production of a most valuable theosophical and
philosophical storehouse of ancient Hebrew doctrine, on which Mr.
MacGregor Mathers may be heartily congratulated.

                                              W. WYNN WESTCOTT, M.B.

                           ------------------



“AN ADVENTURE AMONG THE ROSICRUCIANS.”

                   BY A STUDENT OF OCCULTISM.[29]

-----

Footnote 29:

  Copyrighted by Franz Hartmann, Boston Occult Publishing Co., 1887.

-----

A strange and original little story, charmingly fantastic, but full
of poetic feeling and, what is more, of deep philosophical and
occult truths, for those who can perceive the ground-work it is
built upon. A fresh Eclogue of Virgil in its first part, descriptive
of Alpine scenery in the Tyrol, where the author “dreamt” his
adventure, with “shining glaciers glistening like vast mirrors in
the light of the rising sun,” deep ravines with rushing streams
dancing between the cliffs, blue lakes slumbering among the meadows,
and daisy-sprinkled valleys resting in the shadow of old pine
forests.

Gradually as the hero of the “Adventure” ascended higher and higher,
he began losing the sense of the world of the real, to pass
unconsciously into the land of waking dreams.

  “In these solitudes there is nothing to remind one of the
  existence of man, except occasionally the sawed-off trunk of a
  tree, showing the destructive influence of human activity. In some
  old, rotten, and hollow trunks rain-water has collected, sparkling
  in the sun like little mirrors, such as may be used by
  water-nymphs, and around their edges mushrooms are growing, which
  our imagination transforms into chairs, tables, and baldachinos
  for elves and fairies.... No sound could now be heard, except
  occasionally the note of a titmouse and the cry of a hawk who rose
  in long-drawn spiral motion high up into the air....”

Throwing himself upon the moss, he begins watching the play of the
water until it becomes “alive with forms of the most singular
shape,” with super-mundane beings dancing in the spray, “shaking
their heads in the sunshine and throwing off showers of liquid
silver from their waving locks.”...

  “Their laughter sounded like that of the Falls of _Minnehaha_, and
  from the crevices of the rocks peeped the ugly faces of gnomes and
  kobolds, watching slyly the fairies.”

Then the dreamer asks himself a variety of questions of the most
perplexing nature, except, perhaps, to the materialist, who cuts
every psychological problem as Alexander cleft the Gordian knot....

“What is the reason that we imagine such things?” he inquires.

  “Why do we endow ‘dead’ things with human consciousness and with
  sensation?... Is our consciousness merely a product of the organic
  activity of our physical body, or is it a function of the
  universal life ... within the body? Is our personal consciousness
  dependent for its existence on the existence of the physical body,
  and does it die with it; or is there a spiritual consciousness,
  belonging to a higher, immortal, and invisible self of man,
  temporarily connected with the organism, but which may exist
  independently of the latter? If such is the case, if our physical
  organism is merely an instrument through which our consciousness
  acts, then this instrument is _not_ our real self. If this is
  true, then our real self is there where our consciousness exists,
  and may exist independently of the latter.... Can there be any
  _dead_ matter in the Universe? Is not even a stone held together
  by the ‘cohesion’ of its particles, and attracted to the earth by
  ‘gravitation’? But what else is this ‘cohesion’ and ‘gravitation’
  but _energy_, and what is ‘energy’ but the _soul_, an interior
  principle called _force_, which produces an outward manifestation
  called _matter_?... All things possess life, all things possess
  soul, and there may be soul-beings ... invisible to our physical
  senses, but which may be perceived by our soul.” (p. 19.)

The arch-druid of modern Hylo-Idealism, Dr. Lewins, failing to
appear to rudely shake our philosopher out of his unscientific
thoughts, a dwarf appears in his stead. The creature, however, does
not warn the dreamer, as that _too_-learned _Idealist_ would. He
does not tell him that he transcends “the limits of the anatomy of
his conscious Ego,” since “_psychosis_ is now diagnosed by
_medico-psychological symptomatology as vesiculo-neurosis in
activity_,”[30] and—as quoth the raven—“merely this, and nothing
more.” But being a _cretin_, he laughingly invites him to his
“Master.”

-----

Footnote 30:

  “What is Religion: A Vindication of Free Thought.” By C. N.,
  annotated by Robert Lewins, M. D. See his Appendices, p. 35, _et
  seq._

-----

The hero follows, and finds he is brought to a “theosophical
monastery,” in a hidden valley of the most gorgeous description.
Therein he meets, to his surprise, with adepts of both sexes; for,
as he learns later:—

  “What has intelligence to do with the sex of the body? Where the
  sexual instincts end, there ends the influence of the sex.”

Meanwhile, he is brought into the presence of a male adept of
majestic appearance, who welcomes and informs him that he is among
“The Brothers of the Golden and Rosy Cross.” He is invited to remain
with them for some time, and see how they live. His permanent
residence with them is, however, objected to. The reasons given for
it are as follow:—

  “There are still too many of the lower and animal elements
  adhering to your constitution.... They could not resist long the
  destructive influence of the pure and spiritual air of this place;
  and, as you have not yet a sufficient amount of truly spiritual
  elements in your organism to render it firm and strong, you would,
  by remaining here, soon become weak and waste away, like a person
  in consumption; you would become miserable instead of being happy,
  and you would die.”

Then follows a philosophical conversation on WILL, in which the
latter, in individual man, is said to become the stronger if it only
uses the universal Will-Power in Nature, _itself remaining passive
in the_ LAW. This sentence has to be well understood, lest it should
lead the reader into the error of accepting pure _mediumistic
passivity_ as the best thing for spiritual and occult development. A
phenomenon is produced on a passing cloud, into which apparent life
is infused by the Master’s hand, stretched towards it; this is again
explained by showing that LIFE is universal and identical with WILL.
Other phenomena still more wonderful follow; and they are all
explained as being produced through natural laws, in which science
will not believe. The thoughts of the student are read and answered
as though his mind were an opened book. A lovely garden, full of
exotic plants and luxurious palm-trees, into which he is taken,
striking him as something unnatural in the Tyrolean Alps; so much
luxury, moreover, seeming to him to disagree with the ascetic views
just expressed by the adept, he is told forthwith, in answer to his
unexpressed thoughts, that the garden had been erected to make his
visit an agreeable one; and that it was an _illusion_. “All these
trees and plants ... require no gardeners, ... they cost us nothing
but an effort of our imagination”—he learns.

“Surely,” he said, “this rose cannot be an illusion ... or an effect
of my imagination?”

“No,” answered the adept ... “but it is a product of the imagination
of Nature, whose processes can be guided by the will of the adept.
The whole world ... is nothing else but a world of the imagination
of the _Universal Mind_, which is the _Creator_ of forms....”

To exemplify the teaching, a Magnolia Tree in full blossom sixty
feet high, standing at a distance, is made to look less and less
dense. The green foliage fades into gray, becomes “more and more
shadowy and transparent,” until “it seemed to be merely the ghost of
a tree, and finally disappeared entirely from view.”

  “Thus” continued the adept, “you see that tree stood in the sphere
  of my mind as it stood in yours. We are all living within the
  sphere of each other’s mind.... The Adept creates his own images;
  the ordinary mortal lives in the products of the imagination of
  others, or the imagination of nature. We live in the paradise of
  our own soul ... but the spheres of our souls are not narrow. They
  have expanded far beyond the limits of the visible bodies, and
  will continue to expand until they become one with the universal
  Soul....”

  “The power of the imagination is yet too little known to mankind,
  else they would better beware of what they think. If a man thinks
  a good or an evil thought, that thought calls into existence a
  corresponding form or power ... which may assume density and
  become living ... and live long after the physical body of the man
  who created it has died. It will accompany his soul after death,
  because _the creations are attracted to their creator_.” (p. 83.)

Scattered hither and thither, through this little volume are pearls
of wisdom. For that which is rendered in the shape of dialogue and
monologue is the fruit gathered by the author during a long research
in old forgotten and mouldy, MSS. of the Rosicrucians, or mediæval
alchemists, and in the worm-eaten _infoglios_ of unrecognized, yet
great adepts of every age.

Thus when the author approaches the subject of theosophical retreats
or communities—a dream cherished by many a theosophist—he is
answered by the “Adept” that “the _true ascetic is he who lives in
the world, surrounded by its temptations_; he in whose soul the
animal elements are still active, craving for, the gratification of
their desires and possessing the means for such gratification, but
_who by the superior power of his will conquers his animal self_.
Having attained that state he may retire from the world.... He
expects no future reward in heaven; for what could heaven offer him
except happiness which he already possesses? He desires no other
good, but to create good for the world.”... Saith the Adept.

  “If you could establish theosophical monasteries, where
  intellectual and spiritual development would go hand-in-hand,
  where a new science could be taught, based upon a true knowledge
  of the fundamental laws of the universe, and when, at the same
  time man would be taught how to obtain a mastery over himself, you
  would confer the greatest possible benefit upon the world. Such a
  convent would afford immense advantage for the advancement of
  intellectual research.... These convents would become centres of
  intelligence....”

Then, reading the student’s thoughts:

  “You mistake,” he added; “it is not the want of money which
  prevents us to execute the idea. It is the impossibility to find
  the proper kind of people to inhabit the convent after it is
  established. Indeed, we would be poor Alchemists if we could not
  produce gold in any desirable quantity ... but gold is a curse to
  mankind, and we do not wish to increase the curse.... Distribute
  gold among men, and you will only create craving for more; give
  them gold, and you will transform them into devils. No, it is not
  gold that we need; it is men who thirst after wisdom. _There are
  thousands who desire knowledge, but few who desire wisdom...._
  Even many of your would-be Occultists ... have taken up their
  investigations merely for the purpose of gratifying idle
  curiosity, while others desire to pry into the secrets of nature,
  to obtain knowledge which they desire to employ for the attainment
  of selfish ends. Give us men or women who desire nothing else but
  the truth, and we will take care of their needs....”

And then having given a startlingly true picture of modern
civilisation, and explained the occult side of certain things
pertaining to knowledge, the Adept led on the student to his
laboratory, where he left him for a few minutes alone. Then another
adept, looking like a monk, joined him, and drew his attention to
some powders, by the fumigations of which the Elementals, or
“Spirits of Nature” could be made to appear. This provoked the
student’s curiosity. Sure of his invulnerability in the matter of
tests and temptations, he begged to be allowed to see these
creatures....

Suddenly the room looked dim, and the walls of the laboratory
disappeared. He felt he was in the water, light as a feather,
dancing on the waves, with the full moon pouring torrents of light
upon the ocean, and the beautiful Isle of Ceylon appearing in the
distance. The melodious sound of female voices made him espy near to
where he was three beautiful female beings. The Queen of the
Undines, the most lovely of the three—for these were the longed-for
Elementals—entices the unwary student to her submarine palace. He
follows her, and, forgetting theosophical convents, Adepts and
Occultism, succumbs to the temptation....

           *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

Was it but a dream? It would so appear. For he awakes on the mossy
plot where he had lain to rest in the morning, and from whence he
had followed the dwarf. But how comes it that he finds in his
button-hole the exotic lily given to him by the adept lady, and in
his pocket the piece of gold transmuted in his presence by the
“Master”? He rushes home, and finds on the table of his hotel-room a
promised work on “The Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians,” and on
its fly-leaf a few words in pencil. They ran thus:—

“_Friend, I regret ... I cannot invite you to visit us again for the
present. He who desires to remain in the peaceful valley must know
how to resist all sensual attractions, even those of the Water
Queen. Study ... bring the circle into the square, mortify the
metals.... When you have succeeded we shall meet again.... I shall
be with you when you need me._”

The work ends with the quotation from Paul’s Second Epistle to the
Corinthians, where the man caught up into Paradise (whether in the
body or out of the body ... God knoweth) “_heard unspeakable words,
which it is not lawful for a man to utter_....”

The “adventure” is more than worth perusal.

                           ------------------

     TABULA BEMBINA SIVE MENSA ISIACA. THE ISIAC TABLET OF CARDINAL
              BEMBO. ITS HISTORY AND OCCULT SIGNIFICANCE.

         BY W. WYNN WESTCOTT, M.B. BATH. R. H. FRYAR, 1887.

This work is a monograph of 20 foolscap folio pages, on the
celebrated Isiac Tablet. It is well and clearly printed in
good-sized type on good paper, and has for frontispiece a
well-executed photogravure of the Tablet itself, from a drawing made
by the author some years previously. It is written in the clear
style which distinguishes Dr. Westcott’s writings, and in all
quotations chapter and verse are scrupulously given. Three centuries
ago this Tablet greatly exercised the minds of the learned, and
continued to do so till the researches of modern Egyptologists began
to throw some doubt upon its authenticity as a reliable specimen of
ancient Egyptian art; since which time the interest in it has
gradually declined. Undoubtedly occult, as its meaning and symbolism
alike are, we feel that this monograph will be of service to all
lovers and students of the mystical ideas of ancient Egypt. The
first thing which strikes the eye of even the most careless observer
is the careful and systematic arrangement of the figures and emblems
in triads, or groups of three, which system of classification
prevailed in the religious symbolism of the Egyptians. The Tablet,
again, is divided by transverse horizontal lines into three
principal portions, Upper, Lower, and Middle, the latter being
sub-divided by vertical lines into three parts, the centre of which
is occupied by a throned female figure, flanked on each side by a
triad, of which the central figure in each instance is seated. Thus
the Upper and Lower portions of the Tablet give each a Dodecad
sub-divided into Triads, while the central portion forms a Heptad.
This at once corresponds to the symbolism of the ספר יצירה, _Sepher
Yetzirah_, Chapter VI., § 3. “The Triad, the Unity which standeth
one and alone, the Heptad divided into Three as opposed to Three and
the Centre Mediating between them, the Twelve which stand in war ...
the Unity above the Triad, the Triad above the Heptad, the Heptad
above the Dodecad and they are all bound together each with each.”

Commencing with a description of the Tablet, Dr. Westcott gives as
much as is known of its history, quoting from Kircher, Keysler,
Murray, and others. It appears that it was first discovered in Rome,
at a spot where a Temple of Isis had once stood. After the sack of
Rome by the Constable De Bourbon, it fell into the hands of a smith,
who sold it to Cardinal Bembo for a large sum. At his death it came
into the possession of the Dukes of Mantua, at the taking of which
city in 1630, it passed into the hands of Cardinal Pava. It is now
in the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities at Turin. The dimensions are 4
ft. 2 in., by 2 ft. 5½ in. Thus its experiences during the last few
centuries have been rather stormy.

After mentioning Æneas De Vico and Pignorius, Dr. Westcott gives us
an extensive digest of the views of Athanasius Kircher, from whose
plate in the “Œdipus Ægyptiacus” the photogravure at the
commencement is taken. Kircher undoubtedly more nearly grasped the
esoteric design of the tablet than any one except Eliphas Levi, and
his attempted explanation marks him alike as a profound scholar and
an advanced mystic, notwithstanding the great disadvantages with
which he had to contend in the utter ignorance of Egyptology as it
is now understood, which prevailed at the date at which he wrote.

Quotations and notes from Montfauçon, Shuckford, Warburton,
Jablonski, Caylus, Banier, Mackenzie, Kenealy, and Winckelman follow
the excerpts from Kircher, and we then come to the views of modern
Egyptologists on the subject, notably those of Professor Le Page
Renouf as expressed to Dr Westcott in person. The reasons they
assign for doubting the authenticity of the Tablet are briefly
these:—that they consider the execution of the work stamps it as a
Roman production; that the hieroglyphics will not read so as to make
sense; that the running pattern with the masks would never have been
employed by an Egyptian; and that some of the best known Egyptian
deities are conspicuous by their absence. In answer to these attacks
Dr. Westcott wisely remarks that “it is a gross absurdity to suppose
that any man capable of designing such a tablet, over which immense
energy, research, and knowledge must have been expended, to say
nothing of the skill displayed in its execution, should have wasted
his abilities in perpetrating a gigantic hoax; for that is, I
suppose, what some modern writers mean who call it a ‘forgery’; but
a _forgery_ is a _deceitful imitation_. How it can be called an
imitation considering that its special character is that of being
different to any other Stelé or Tablet known is not clear; and how
it can be a deceit is also incomprehensible, since it bears no name
or date purporting to refer it to a definite author or period.”

On page 16 Dr. Westcott observes that the Four Genii of the Dead are
conspicuous by their absence, but he seems to overlook their
representation in figure 41 of the Limbus, where the sepulchral
vases beneath the couch have, as usual, the heads of the Genii of
the Dead.

A quotation, together with a plate from Levi’s “Histoire de la
Magie,” follows this, together with a disquisition on the Taro,
which has so much exercised occult students of late. Altogether the
book is an extremely interesting production, and Dr. Westcott puts
forward his own views on the subject with much clearness.

                           ------------------

                         EARTH’S EARLIEST AGES
      AND THEIR CONNECTION WITH MODERN SPIRITUALISM AND THEOSOPHY.

            BY G. H. PEMBER, M.A. (Hodder & Stoughton).

To meet with a book like this in the last quarter of the nineteenth
century is like meeting a Pterodactyl strolling along the Row in the
height of the season. But more careful perusal, while augmenting the
reader’s wonder, mingles with it a certain respect for the writer’s
courage and unflinching logic.

Granting his fundamental premiss—the verbal inspiration of the
Bible—and accepting his first principle of interpretation, his
argument is at least consistent, and is weakened by no half-hearted
pandering to the facts of experience or the discoveries of science.

To quote Mr. Pember’s primary canon, he assumes—

  I. “That the first chapter of Genesis, equally with those which
  follow it, is, in its primary meaning, neither vision nor
  allegory, but plain history, and must, therefore, be accepted as a
  literal statement of facts.”

On this basis he gives an interpretation of Genesis, the main idea
of which is the interposition of “The Interval” between the creation
and the “Six Days” described in the text. During this period the
earth was wholly given over to Satan and his host, and the “Six
Days” creation was, according to Mr. Pember, the restoration and
reformation of the world from this chaos of confusion.

But space forbids to follow the author into details, since one-half
of his volume is devoted to the subject indicated in its sub-title,
and this portion is of greater interest to readers of LUCIFER.

As an accurate and thorough student of the work of those he
condemns, Mr. Pember stands unrivalled. He has both read and
understood a very large part of the literature of Theosophy and
Spiritualism. His quotations are fair and well chosen, his comments
strictly moderate in tone and entirely free from any personal
animus. And these traits are the more surprising since the author
has certainly got the “Powers of the Air” very much on the brain. It
is hardly even a rhetorical expression to say that it is his firm
and unshakeable conviction, that all persons who do not hold the
same views of Biblical criticism and Scriptural exegesis as Mr.
Pember, are, to the extent of their difference from him, serving the
Powers of Evil, the Personal Devil, the Antichrist, whose coming he
expects in the very near future.

On this point only Mr. Pember does not seem to have the courage of
his opinions; perhaps he does not see, or seeing does not realise,
the inevitable conclusion to which his arguments point. But then he
may, after all, take refuge in the famous _credo quia absurdum_.

The author, moreover, is sure to meet with scant sympathy even from
the materialists to whom he is most nearly allied in thought. For he
accepts, _en bloc_, the phenomena and wonders of spiritualism as of
occultism, and never attempts even to question their reality.
Meanwhile, he believes in the resurrection of the _physical body_
after death, in a physical kingdom of Christ upon earth, and so on.
Indeed, his views are the most remarkable compound of pure
materialism and wholesale acceptance of the psychic and so-called
supernatural that have ever appeared in print.

To sum up, a few passages may be quoted to give an idea of the
spirit of Mr. Pember’s treatment of this part of the subject, which
at the same time will be the most telling criticism of his book to
the minds of those who have grasped the ideas of which he speaks.

  “... the existence, in all times of the world’s history, of
  persons with abnormal faculties, initiates of the great mysteries
  and depositors of the secrets of antiquity, has been affirmed by a
  testimony far too universal and persistent to admit of denial....
  He who would be an adept must conform to the teaching of those
  demons, predicted leaders of the last apostasy, who forbid to
  marry, and command to abstain from meat.”

  “We have never met with a single reported instance of a spirit
  entering the lower spheres with the glad tidings, “Believe on the
  Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved.” On the contrary, among
  Spiritualists, as with Theosophists and Buddhists, sin can be
  expiated only by personal suffering.... “Sin,” shrieks the
  familiar of “M. A. Oxon,” “is remediable by repentance and
  atonement and reparation personally wrought out in pain and shame,
  not by coward cries for mercy, and by feigned assent to statements
  which ought to create a shudder.”

Mr. Pember, therefore, believes in vicarious atonement in its
crudest form? He teaches that “repentance and faith” save man _from
the consequences_ of his actions!

After describing the “Perfect Way” as “an ecclesiastical compound of
Heathenism” (_with a capital H_), the author proceeds to expound the
doctrine of reincarnation as therein set forth. Nothing can be
fairer or more correct than this exposition, at the conclusion of
which we read:

  “Jews, Christians, Buddhists and Mahommedans ... will become able
  to unite in a universal belief that sin is expiated by
  transmigrations and in the worship of ‘the Great Goddess’. The
  conception of a second league of Babel has been formed in the
  minds of Theosophists.”

And even then, would not such a league be better than the sectarian
wars, the religious persecutions, the tests and disabilities which
still disfigure _Christendom_ in the name of religion?

Further on the author refers to the occult axiom that “whereas God
is I AM, or positive being, the Devil is NOT, and remarks:

  “There is little doubt that the culminations of the Mysteries was
  the worship of Satan himself... It would appear, then, that from
  remote ages, probably from the time when the Nephilim [the fallen
  angels of Satan’s Host] were upon earth, there has existed a
  league with the Prince of Darkness, a Society of men consciously
  on the side of Satan, and against the Most High.

  “The spells by which spirits may be summoned from the unseen are
  now known to all; and those unearthly forms which in past times
  were projected from the void only in the labyrinths, caverns, and
  subterranean chambers of the initiated, are now manifesting
  themselves in many a private drawing-room and parlour. Men have
  become enamoured of demons, and ere long will receive the Prince
  of the Demons as their God.”

Theosophy, says Mr. Pember, will become the creed of the
intellectual and the educated, while Spiritualism influences the
masses of mankind. And he traces the influences of Theosophy and
Buddhism in “Broad-Churchism, Universalism, Comtism, Secularism, and
Quietism.” Nay, even under the Temperance movement he spies the
lurking serpent of esoteric teaching and guidance, and he cites
letters from Christian friends complaining that these and other
philanthropic movements are being swamped, and their periodicals
occupied by Theosophists, who work on Buddhist principles.

In his concluding chapter, the author sums up a truly formidable
array of evidences to prove that “the advocates of modern thought
array themselves against every principle of the early revelations of
the Divine Will,” apparently since they deny and repudiate the
following “cosmic or universal laws”:—

I. The law of the Sabbath.

II. The headship of the man over the woman.

III. The institution of marriage [_i.e._, they practise _celibacy_].

IV. The law of substitution, that life must atone for life, and that
    without shedding of blood there is no remission, as taught in
    type by animal sacrifices. Latter-day philosophers affect the
    utmost horror of such a salvation, and will have none of Christ.

V. The command to use the flesh of animals as food.

VI. The decree that “whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his
    blood be shed.”

VII. The direction to multiply and replenish the earth.

The charge of disobedience to such laws as these every mystic will
joyfully admit, with the cry, “Happy will it be for all things
living when such laws shall no longer be obeyed by any living
creature.”

These laws, the disobedience to which Mr. Pember so much regrets in
the later schools, date from the dark past when man had to form his
physical existence and root it upon the earth. If they are some of
the early revelations of the “Divine Will,” that is no reason why
they should rule mankind when its condition is changed and it is
emerging from the darkness of Materialism, and losing, from its
natural growth towards that Divine will, the desire for physical
existence. The Mosaic laws were made by the Jehovah, the God of
anger and cruelty. In spite of the strange inconsistency by which
the followers of Jesus Christ, the teacher of a gentle and sublime
faith, read in their churches these Mosaic laws, yet they are empty
words from a past of bloodshed to the humane or religious man. The
occultist professes even more than religion—he dares to avow himself
a follower of the light, an aspirant towards knowledge, and one who
is determined to live the noblest life knowledge can indicate. What
to him are the laws of murder, of the shedding of blood, of marriage
and giving in marriage? It is not his aim to help people the earth,
for he desires to lift himself and others above the craving for
earth-life. He commits no murder, for all men are his brethren, and
he no longer recognises the brutal law of the criminal, by which,
when blood is shed, blood must be again shed to wash it away. He can
have no interest either in the straightforward laws of the past, or
the complicated modern law of the present—which permits of many
things the Jews would have been ashamed of. The only law he
recognises is that of charity and justice.

There is a charming page in the _Introduction_, a ring of genuine
sorrow for the failure of certain missionaries in their cowardly
attack upon the theosophical leaders, as refreshing as it is
ludicrous. The Jeremiad runs in this wise:—

  “It would seem that the attack of the Madras Christian College
  upon Madame Blavatsky has by no means checked the movement in
  which she has been so conspicuous an actor, and, apparently, the
  failure is nowhere more manifest than in Madras itself. It was
  confidently predicted that the High Priestess of Theosophy and
  Buddhism would not dare to show her face again in that city.
  Nevertheless she did so, and ... received a warm welcome, not
  merely from the members of the Theosophical societies, but also
  from the members of the various colleges and from many other
  persons. She was conducted in procession from the shore to the
  Pancheappa Hall, and was there presented by the students with an
  address of sympathy and admiration, to which, among other
  signatures, were appended those of more than three hundred members
  of the very Christian College whose professors had assailed her.”

And he adds, “Satan is now setting in motion intellectual forces
which will be more than a match for the missionaries, if they
persist in carrying on the warfare in the old way.”

Too much praise cannot be rendered to Mr. Pember for his fairness
and impersonality. He writes as becomes a scholar and a gentleman,
and though one may smile at his intellectual blindness and stand
amazed at the mental capacity which can digest the views which he
maintains, one cannot but respect his earnestness, his thoroughness,
and his mastery of the subject.

                                                               B. K.

                           ------------------

                        ISAURE AND OTHER POEMS.

                        BY W. STEWART ROSS.

The poem which gives its name to this volume of ringing verse is, as
may easily be conjectured, the lament of a poet over his love torn
from him by inexorable death.

A true instinct has taught the author that it is such hours of agony
as this, such piercing of the heart, such fierce and burning
torture, which reveal to the noble soul capable of intense suffering
the inner truths and realities of life.

To quote:

                “I stand on the cis-mortal,
                  And I gaze with ’wildered eye,
                To the mists of the trans-mortal,
                  And the signs called Live and Die.
                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .
                Let me dream in this cis-mortal,
                  And the noblest dream I can.
                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .
                Let me dream far from the formulæ,
                  And I may dream more nigh
                To the sable shore of mystery,
                  And the signs of Live and Die.”

Some passages in this opening poem are instinct with the breath of
mysticism, and rouse a keen desire that Mr. Stewart Ross had become
acquainted, in that period of his life when this book was written,
with the wider and grander view of life as a whole, of its purpose
and meaning, of its laws and its realities, which occultism affords
to a mind capable of grasping them.

Surely the man who could write:

                “For death and life are really one.”

And again:

                  “For the mystic Part is gathered
                    Unto the mystic Whole.
                  And the vague lines of non-Being
                    Are scribbled o’er thy soul.”

must have the power to sense the keener air of the subtle life and
grasp its glorious promise.

What pilgrim of the path has not felt:

                “Hard-paced the iron years have gone
                  Over my head since then;
                I’ve haunted in a waking dream
                  The paths of living men;
                But of this world my kingdom’s not,
                  Like him of Galilee,
                For I grasp hands they cannot feel,
                  See forms they cannot see.”

In “Leonore: A Lay of Dipsomania,” one of the most terrible sides of
human life is depicted with a vividness which tortures the reader,
and flings a gloom on the inexorable sweep of life, fitly in keeping
with the vision pictured in “A Nightmare.” A mystic, struggling with
the negations of modern science, battling to assert the intuitive
knowledge of his true self against its captious intellectualisms,
speaks through this picture of desolation and decay, protesting
against the disappearance of all that is great and valuable in life
under the waves of oblivion.

But no man in whom the spark of true poetic inspiration burns can
ever in the depths of his own heart accept the lifeless, empty,
unreal phantom which materialism offers as the aim, the purpose, the
fulfilment of life. We hope, therefore, that Mr. Stewart Ross will
some day give us a volume of poetry in which his true power and
insight will find expression, and which will enroll his name on the
list of those who have given new life to men.

[Illustration: decorative separator]




One cannot fill a vacuum from within itself.—L.S.C.

Many a man will follow a misleader.—L.S.C.

It is not necessary for truth to put on boxing-gloves.—L.S.C.

You cannot build a temple of truth by hammering dead stones. Its
foundations must precipitate themselves like crystals from the
solution of life.—L.S.C.

When a certain point is reached pain becomes its own anodyne.—L.S.C.

Some pluck the fruits of the tree (of knowledge) to crown themselves
therewith, instead of plucking them to eat.—L.S.C.




                         =THEOSOPHICAL=
                    =AND MYSTIC PUBLICATIONS=


THE THEOSOPHIST; a magazine of Oriental Philosophy, Art, Literature,
and Occultism, conducted by H. P. Blavatsky, and H. S. Olcott,
Permanent President of the T. S. Vol. VIII., 1887. Madras, India. In
London, George Redway, 15, York Street, Covent Garden.

The September number contains several articles of great interest.
For lovers of the wonderful, as for the more scientifically inclined
students of the laws of psycho-physics, the account given by
Sreenath Chatterjee, of a self-levitating lama who stayed for some
days in his house, is both interesting and instructive. It is
endorsed by Colonel Olcott and another independent witness, and
bears evident marks of genuine and careful observation. Curious and
wonderful as such feats are, however, they have little to do with
Theosophy.

To many readers such articles as Mr. Khandalwala’s “The
Bhagavat-Gita and the Microcosmic Principles” will be far more
attractive. The questions propounded in this paper have a very
important bearing upon a question which has recently been a good
deal under discussion, and it is to be hoped that it will elicit
from Mr. Subba Row the further explanation of his views which is so
much needed.

Visconde Figanière continues his “Esoteric Studies” with some
abstruse but very interesting calculations as to the composition of
the alchemical elements during various cycles. A page of moral
maxims from the Mahabharata and a thoughtful paper on the “Kabbalah
and the Microcosm” contribute to make this number full of valuable
matter.

                                  ---

THE PATH; “a magazine devoted to the Brotherhood of Humanity,
Theosophy in America, and the Study of Occult Science, Philosophy,
and Aryan Literature.” Edited by W. Q. Judge, New York, P. O. Box
2,659, and in London from George Redway.

In the September issue, the opening paper is the fourth of “Jasper
Niemand’s” admirable “Letters on the True.” Its subject is the
“Mind” (_Manas_) or Heart in its relation to the Soul. Both analysis
and synthesis are employed by the writer, with the intuition of a
true mystic, and many suggestive gleams of light are thrown on an
exceedingly difficult subject in the course of a few pages.

The idea of re-incarnation is traced by Mr. Walker in the writings
of various poets: Mr. Johnston contributes an interesting paper on
“Gospels and Upanishads,” and “Rameses” gives us a charming allegory
under the archaic title of “Papyrus,” and the number concludes with
“Tea-Table Talk,” which is, as usual, quaint, yet instructive.
Finally, thanks are due to Mr. Judge for the kind and cordial
welcome he has extended to LUCIFER; the first number of which has,
it is to be hoped, fulfilled the flattering expectations he
expresses.

                                  ---

LE LOTUS: “Revue des Hautes Etudes Théosophiques. Tendant à
favoriser le rapprochement entre l’Orient et l’Occident.” Sous
l’inspiration de H. P. Blavatsky (nominally, but edited in reality,
by our able brother, F. K. Gaborian, F. T. S.). Georges Carré, 112
Boulevard St. Germain, Paris.

This journal—the French Theosophist—contains in its September number
an article by Madame Blavatsky on “Misconceptions,” in which various
doctrines and ideas erroneously connected with Theosophy are dealt
with. M. Barlet continues his series of articles on “Initiation,”
and the reprint of the Abbé de Villars’ clever and humorous “Comte
de Gabalis,” is continued. Some verses by Amaravella, and several
pages of sparkling “Notes,” conclude the table of contents.

LUCIFER owes thanks also to the _Lotus_ for inserting an admirably
translated extract from its prospectus.

                                  ---

L’AURORE: Revue mensuelle sous la direction de Lady Caithness,
Duchesse de Pomar, Georges Carré, 112 Boulevard St. Germain, Paris.

The articles in the September number are neither so numerous nor so
varied as those of the other Theosophical periodicals already
referred to. Lady Caithness advocates, in the current issue, the
theory that the English nation is descended from the lost ten tribes
of Israel. As the very existence of these ten tribes is more than
questionable, students must judge for themselves of the weight of
the arguments advanced; the subject being too extensive even for
comment here.

                                  ---

THE SPHINX: “A monthly journal devoted to proving historically and
experimentally the supersensuous conception of the world on a
monistic basis.” Edited by Hübbe Schleiden. Dr. J. U. Th. Griebens
Verlag, Leipzig.

The October number is a full and highly instructive one. Dr. Carl
du Prel’s handling of the “Demon of Socrates” contrasts
brilliantly with the lame and obscure treatment which the same
subject received a while ago at the hands of a body, which
professes to investigate matters pertaining to the soul and its
activity. Herr Niemann’s proof of the existence of an esoteric or
secret teaching in the Platonic dialogues is able and convincing;
Mr. Finch contributes a most interesting article on his
observations among the “Faith-Healers” in America, and Herr Carl
zu Leiningen pursues his able exposition of the Kabbalistic
doctrine of Souls.

                                  ---

Three new works on mystic subjects are shortly to appear from the
pen of Dr. Franz Hartmann, whose valuable book on Paracelsus is
certainly in the hands of many of our readers.

Of these the first, and probably the most important, is entitled:
“THE SECRET SYMBOLS OF THE ROSICRUCIANS,” and is to be published in
Boston, U.S.A., by the Occult Publishing Company. It will contain
numerous plates coloured by hand, giving accurate transcriptions of
symbols and figures which have hitherto lain buried in rare, and in
some cases, unattainable manuscripts. The value of the work as a
text-book for students will be much enhanced by the copious
vocabulary which Dr. Hartmann promises shall accompany it.

The other two will probably be issued by Mr. Redway; the one being
called: “IN THE PRONAOS OF THE TEMPLE OF THE R.C.,” and the other:
“THE LIFE OF JEHOSHUA, THE ADEPT OF NAZARETH: AN OCCULT STUDY.”

This is an attempt to dispel the mists which for many centuries have
been gathering around the person of the supposed founder of
Christianity, and which have prevented mankind from obtaining a
clear view of the “Redeemer.” It claims to give an approximately
correct account of his life, his initiation into the Egyptian
mysteries and of his ignominious death caused by an infuriated mob,
excited by the Pharisees of the temple, who were bound to destroy
his mortal form, because he had taught the religion of universal
fraternal love and freedom of thought in opposition to priestcraft
and superstition.

While the book deals to a certain extent with the external life of
Jehoshua, as far as its details have become known by historical
researches into sources not generally known, it especially deals
with his inner life—_i.e._ his method of thought.

The author says: “If we wish to give a correct picture of the
character of a person, we must try to describe his thoughts as well
as his acts, for the thought-life of a man constitutes his real
life, while his outward life is merely a pictorial representation, a
shadow of the actions that are taking place upon the interior stage
of his mind.”

“To describe this inner life, a dramatical representation of the
processes going on in the soul of man will be better adapted to
bring it to our understanding, than a merely verbal description of
character. This maxim seems to have influenced those who wrote the
accounts contained in the bible, and who describe interior processes
in allegorical pictures of events, which may or may not have taken
place on the outward plane. I have adhered to this plan in
describing the thought-life of Jehoshua Ben-Pandira, but I have
attempted to shape the allegories contained in this book in such a
manner that the intelligent reader may easily perceive their true
meaning, for I have made the forms sufficiently transparent, so that
the truths which they are intended to represent may be easily seen
through the external shell.”

“Nevertheless, these descriptions are not mere fancies, but they are
based upon historical facts, and upon information received from
sources whose nature will be plain to every occultist. The events
described have all actually taken place; but whether they have
wholly or in part taken place on the external or internal plane,
each intelligent reader is left to decide for himself.”

                        =CORRESPONDENCE=

                    INTERESTING TO ASTROLOGERS.

                     ASTROLOGICAL NOTES—No. 2.

                    _To the Editor of_ LUCIFER.

The ancients assigned to the planets certain signs and degrees, in
which they were essentially dignified, being there more powerful for
good, and less powerful for evil; these were called their House,
Exaltation, Triplicity, Term, and Face. Opposite to the first two
were the places where they were essentially debilitated, being there
less powerful for good and more powerful for evil; these were called
their Detriment and Fall. Whether the latter three dignities have
three corresponding debilities has not been stated.

To the seven known planets, the ancients apportioned the twelve
zodiacal signs as their respective houses or chief dignity, thus: ☉
ruled ♌, and ☽ ruled ♋, both by day and night; while the remaining
ten signs were divided between the remaining five planets, each
planet ruling two signs, one by day and the other by night. But when
♅ and ♆ were discovered, the question arose where to place them.

A. J. Pearce, the present editor of _Zadkiel’s Almanac_, has
suggested that, as they were more remote from ☉ than was ♄, they
should have the same houses and exaltations as ♄. Raphael dethrones
♄ from ♒, and proclaims that ♅ reigns in his stead. Both these
suggestions involve serious difficulties, nor do they settle the
question once and for all with regard to any planets which may yet
be discovered. It seems unlikely that planets of such diverse
natures as ♄, ♅, and ♆ (not to mention any still more distant
planets) should all bear equal rule in the same two signs, and to
depose ♄ from his throne, pre-supposes a grave error on the part of
the ancients, whose teaching on this point has been handed down with
complete unanimity from the dim past: necessitating, also, a further
process of dethronement, and a further ignoring of the teachings of
antiquity, as further planetary discoveries are made.

The first Raphael (the late R. C. Smith) rejected the ancient
nocturnal and diurnal division of the Houses and Triplicities, in
which he is followed by his successor. It appears to me that it is
here that the error, with its consequent difficulties, first arose;
and that by observing this distinction, ♅ and ♆ easily find their
homes, with room to spare for their yet undiscovered brethren.

It is obvious that Astrology can never become an even approximately
perfect science, unless we are able in our calculations to take
fully into account the influence of ♅ and ♆. With this end in view,
I have been endeavouring, in my leisure moments, to solve the
problem. To a certain extent I have been successful; and though I
have not yet been able to substantiate all my conclusions as fully
as I could wish, yet I deem it is the best interests of the Science
to make them now public, that their truth or falsity may be as
speedily as possible established by the investigations of
astrologers generally.

My conclusions are the following: that the ancient Diurnal and
Nocturnal divisions are quite correct, so that if a figure is drawn
for any time between sunrise and sunset, the planets which rule by
day the signs on the cusps of the houses of the significators must
be chiefly, and sometimes exclusively, considered; and _vice versâ_.

The Houses of the new planets are, I believe, these:

♒, which is the day-house of ♄, is the night-house of ♅.

♊, which is the day-house of ☿, is the night-house of ♆.

♍, which is the night-house of ☿, is the day-house of ♅.

♓, which is the night-house of ♃, is the day-house of ♆.

The first two I have verified by horary figures drawn for the time
of an event; the latter two I consider as highly probable, but have
not yet been able to thoroughly substantiate them.

There is an old tradition (_Esoteric Science in Human History_, p.
180) that there are 12 principal planets in our solar system; this
leaves 4 more to be discovered. It will be seen at a glance that
these 4 will fill up the vacant signs, two planets ruling each sign,
one by night and the other by day. The only alteration which will
then have to be made will be to consider ☉ to rule ♌ by day only,
and ☽ to rule ♋ by night only; this, however, will be only in
accordance with nature: moreover, the fact that the ancients
assigned only one house each to ☉ and ☽, and two to each of the
other planets, denotes some essential astrological difference
between them.

With regard to the other essential dignities, Raphael considers ♏ to
be the exaltation of ♅; I am inclined to believe ♒ to be the
exaltation of ♆. In the Triplicities there is a curious want of
harmony; each, according to the ancients, being ruled by two
planets, one by day and the other by night, except the watery
triplicity, which is ruled by ♂ only. There seems to be no reason
for this discrepancy, except the all-powerful one that there was no
other known planet to share his dominion. I have ascertained that ♆
has strong dignity in ♏, and conclude that he rules the watery
triplicity, probably by night. Furthermore, I believe ♅ rules the
airy triplicity. As for the Terms and Faces of the planets, they
also, like the Planetary Hours, require re-arrangement so as to
bring in ♅ and ♆ but in what way this is to be done, I have not yet
been able to discover.

I will take this opportunity of saying, in reply to inquiries, that
the best books for beginners are Raphael’s _Horary Astrology_ for
that branch of the Science; A. J. Pearce’s _Science of the Stars_
for Mundane and Atmospheric Astrology; A. J. Pearce’s _Text Book of
Astrology_ for Nativities, to be worked out by Primary Directions;
and Raphael’s _Guide to Astrology_ for the same, worked out by
Secondary Directions excited by Transits. Raphael’s works are
published by Foulsham and Co., 4, Pilgrim Street, E.C.; and Pearce’s
works may be procured from the author, 54, East Hill, Wandsworth,
S.W.

                                                               NEMO.




                           ------------------




                    _To the Editors of_ LUCIFER.

For the purpose of correcting any prejudicial suspicion or erroneous
misrepresentation of myself, arising from the insertion of the note
at the end of the “Bath Occult Reprint Edition” of the “Divine
Pymander” or as associated with the Society of the “H. B. of L.,”
known to me only through the names of Peter Davidson and T. H.
Burgoyne, alias D’Alton, Dalton, &c., and whose secretary is
announced to be “A convicted felon, and the supposed adept to be a
Hindu of questionable antecedents,” I wish it to be understood I
have now no confidence, sympathy, or connection therewith, direct or
indirect, since or even prior to the date hereof, viz., May, 1886.

                                                     Yours truly,
                                                     ROBT. H. FRYAR.

8, Northumberland Place, Bath.

        =FROM THE NOTE BOOK OF AN UNPOPULAR PHILOSOPHER=

THE ESOTERIC VALUE OF CERTAIN WORDS AND DEEDS IN SOCIAL LIFE.

_To Show Anger._—No “_cultured_” man or woman will ever show anger
in Society. To check and restrain every sign of annoyance shows good
manners, certainly, but also considerable achievement in hypocrisy
and dissimulation. There is an occult side to this rule of good
breeding expressed in an Eastern proverb: “Trust not the face which
never shows signs of anger, nor the dog that never barks.”
Cold-blooded animals are the most venomous.

_Non-resistance to Evil._—To brag of it is to invite all evil-doers
to sit upon you. To practice it openly is to lead people into the
temptation of regarding you as a coward. Not to resist the evil you
have never created nor merited, to eschew it yourself, and help
others quietly to get out of its way, is the only wise course open
to the lover of wisdom.

“_Love Thy Neighbour._”—When a parson has preached upon this
subject, his pious congregation accepts it as tacit permission to
slander and vilify their friends and acquaintances in neighbouring
pews.

_International Brotherhood._—When a Mussulman and a Christian swear
mutual friendship, and pledge themselves to be brothers, their two
formulas differ somewhat. The Moslem says: “Thy mother shall be my
mother, my father thy father, my sister thy hand maid, and thou
shalt be my brother.” To which the Christian answers: “Thy mother
and sister shall be my hand-maidens, thy wife shall be my wife, and
my wife shall be thy dear sister.”—_Amen._

_Brave as a Lion._—The highest compliment—in appearance—paid to
one’s courage; a comparison with a bad-smelling wild-beast—in
reality. The recognition, also, of the superiority of animal over
human bravery, considered as a virtue.

_A Sheep._—A weak, silly fellow, figuratively, an insulting,
contemptuous epithet among laymen; but one quite flattering among
churchmen, who apply it to “the people of God” and the members of
their congregations, comparing them to _sheep_ under the guidance of
the lamb.

_The Code of Honour._—In France—to seduce a wife and kill her
husband. There, offended honour can feel satisfied only with blood;
here, a wound inflicted upon the offender’s pocket suffices.

_The Duel as a Point of Honour._—The duel being an institution of
Christendom and civilization, neither the old Spartans, nor yet the
Greeks or Romans knew of it, as they were only uncivilized
heathens.—(_See Schopenhauer._)

_Forgive and Forget._—“We should freely forgive, but forget rarely,”
says Colton. “I will not be revenged, and this I owe to my enemy;
but I will _remember_, and this I owe to myself.” This is real
practical wisdom. It stands between the ferocious “Eye for eye, and
tooth for tooth” of the Mosaic Law, and the command to turn the left
cheek to the enemy when he has smitten you on the right. Is not the
latter a direct encouraging of sin?

_Practical Wisdom._—On the tree of silence hangs the fruit of peace.
The secret thou wouldst not tell to thine enemy, tell it not to thy
friend.—(_Arabic._)

_Civilised Life._—Crowded, noisy and full of vital power, is modern
Society to the eye of matter; but there is no more still and silent,
empty and dreary desert than that same Society to the spiritual eye
of the Seer. Its right hand freely and lavishly bestows ephemeral
but costly pleasures, while the left grasps greedily the leavings
and often grudges the necessities of show. All our social life is
the result and consequence of that unseen, yet ever present autocrat
and despot, called _Selfishness_ and _Egotism_. The strongest will
becomes impotent before the voice and authority of _Self_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                LUCIFER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

        VOL. 1.     LONDON, NOVEMBER 15TH, 1887.     NO. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                “LET EVERY MAN PROVE HIS OWN WORK.”

Such is the title of a letter received by the Editors of LUCIFER. It
is of so serious a nature that it seems well to make it the subject
of this month’s editorial. Considering the truths uttered in its few
lines, its importance and the bearing it has upon the much obscured
subject of Theosophy, and its visible agent or vehicle—the Society
of that name—the letter is certainly worthy of the most considerate
answer.

                   “_Fiat justitia, ruat cœlum!_”

Justice will be done to both sides in the dispute; namely,
Theosophists and the members of the Theosophical Society[31] on the
one hand, and the followers of the _Divine Word_ (or Christos), and
the so-called Christians, on the other.

-----

Footnote 31:

  Not all the members of the Theosophical Society are Theosophists;
  nor are the members of the so-called Christian Churches all
  Christians, by any means. True Theosophists, as true Christians,
  are very, _very_ few; and there are practical Theosophists in the
  fold of Christianity, as there are practical Christians in the
  Theosophical Society, outside all ritualistic Christianity. “Not
  every one that saith unto me ‘Lord, Lord,’ shall enter the Kingdom
  of Heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father.” (Matthew,
  vii. 21.) “Believe not in Me, but in the truths I utter.”
  (Buddha’s _Aphorisms_.)

-----

We reproduce the letter:

                    “_To the Editors of_ LUCIFER.

  “What a grand chance is now open in this country, to the exponents
  of a noble and advanced religion (if such this Theosophy be[32])
  for proving its strength, righteousness and verity to the Western
  world, by throwing a penetrating and illuminating ray of its
  declared light upon the terribly harrowing and perplexing
  practical problems of our age.

  “Surely one of the purest and least self-incrusted duties of man,
  is to alleviate the sufferings of his fellow man?

  “From what I read, and from what I daily come into immediate
  contact with, I can hardly think it would be possible to over-rate
  in contemplation, the intense privation and agonizing suffering
  that is—aye, say it—_at this moment_ being endured by a vast
  proportion of our brothers and sisters, arising in a large measure
  from their not absolutely having the means for procuring the _bare
  necessaries of existence_?

  “Surely a high and Heaven-born religion—a religion professing to
  receive its advanced knowledge and Light from ‘those more learned
  in the Science of Life,’ should be able to tell us something of
  how to deal with such life, in its primitive condition of helpless
  submission to the surrounding circumstances of—civilization!

  “If one of our main duties is that of exercising disinterested
  love towards the Brotherhood, surely ‘those more learned’ ones,
  whether in the flesh, or out of it, can and will, if appealed to
  by their votaries, aid them in discovering ways and means for such
  an end, and in organising some great fraternal scheme for dealing
  _rightly_ with questions which are so appalling in their
  complexity, and which must and do press with such irresistible
  force upon all those who are earnest in their endeavours to carry
  out the will of Christ in a Christian Land?

                                                          “L. F. FF.

  “October 25, 1887.”

-----

Footnote 32:

  “This” Theosophy is not a religion, but rather _the_ RELIGION—if
  one. So far, we prefer to call it a philosophy; one, moreover,
  which contains every religion, as it is the essence and the
  foundation of all. Rule III. of the Theos. Body says: “The Society
  represents no particular religious creed, is entirely
  _unsectarian_, and includes professors of all faiths.”

-----

This honest-spoken and sincere letter contains two statements; an
implied accusation against “Theosophy” (_i.e._ the Society of that
name), and a virtual admission that Christianity—or, again, rather
its ritualistic and dogmatic religions—deserve the same and even a
sterner rebuke. For if “Theosophy,” represented by its professors,
merits on external appearance the reproach that so far it has failed
to transfer divine wisdom from the region of the metaphysical into
that of practical work, “Christianity,” that is, merely professing
Christians, churchmen and laymen lie under a like accusation,
evidently. “Theosophy” has, certainly, failed to discover
_infallible_ ways and means of bringing all its votaries to exercise
“disinterested love” in their Brotherhood; it has not yet been able
to relieve suffering in mankind at large; but neither has
Christianity. And not even the writer of the above letter, nor any
one else, can show sufficient excuse for the Christians in this
respect. Thus the admission that “those who are earnest in their
endeavour to carry out the will of Christ in a Christian land” _need
the help of_ “‘those more learned,’ whether (pagan adepts) in flesh,
or (spirits?) out of it” is very suggestive, for it contains the
defence and the _raison d’être_ of the Theosophical Society. Tacit
though it is, once that it comes from the pen of a sincere
Christian, one who longs to learn some practical means to relieve
the sufferings of the starving multitudes—this admission becomes the
greatest and most complete justification for the existence of the
Theosophical Brotherhood; a full confession of the absolute
necessity for such a body independent of, and untrammelled by, any
enchaining dogmas, and it points out at the same time the signal
failure of Christianity to accomplish the desired results.

Truly said Coleridge that “good works may exist _without_ saving (?)
principles, therefore cannot contain in themselves the principles of
salvation; but saving principles never did, never can exist without
good works.” Theosophists admit the definition, and disagree with
the Christians only as to the nature of these “saving principles.”
The Church (or churches) maintain that the only saving principle is
belief in Jesus, or the carnalized Christ of the soul-killing dogma;
theosophy, undogmatic and unsectarian, answers, it is not so. The
only _saving_ principle dwells in man himself, and has never dwelt
outside of his immortal divine self; _i.e._ it is the true Christos,
as it is the true Buddha, the divine inward light which proceeds
from the eternal unmanifesting unknown ALL. And this light _can only
be made known by its works_—_faith_ in it having to remain ever
blind in all, save in the man himself who feels that light within
his soul.

Therefore, the tacit admission of the author of the above letter
covers another point of great importance. The writer seems to have
felt that which many, among those who strive to help the suffering,
have felt and expressed. The creeds of the churches fail to supply
the _intellectual_ light, and the true wisdom which are needed to
make the practical philanthropy carried out, by the true and earnest
followers of Christ, a _reality_. The “practical” people either go
on “doing good” unintelligently, and thus often do harm instead; or,
appalled by the awful problem before them, and failing to find in
their “churches” any clue, or a hope of solution, they retire from
the battlefield and let themselves be drifted blindly by the current
in which they happen to be born.

Of late it has become the fashion for friends, as well as for foes,
to reproach the Theosophical Society with doing no practical work,
but losing itself in the clouds of metaphysics. Metaphysicians, we
are told, by those who like to repeat stale arguments, have been
learning their lesson for the last few thousand years; and it is now
high time that they should begin to do some practical work. Agreed;
but considering that the Christian churches count nearly nineteen
centuries of existence, and that the Theosophical Society and
Brotherhood is a body hardly twelve years old; considering again
that the Christian churches roll in fabulous wealth, and number
their adherents by hundreds of millions, whereas the Theosophical
Brotherhood is but a few thousand strong, and that it has no fund,
or funds, at its disposal, but that 98 per cent. of its members are
as poor and as uninfluential as the aristocracy of the Christian
church is rich and powerful; taking all this into consideration,
there would be much to say if the theosophists would only choose to
press the matter upon the public notice. Meanwhile, as the bitterest
critics of the “leaders” of the Theosophical Society are by no means
only outsiders, but as there are members of that society who always
find a pretext to be dissatisfied, we ask: Can works of charity that
will be known among men be accomplished without money? Certainly
not. And yet, notwithstanding all this, none of its (European)
members, except a few devoted officers in charge of societies, will
do _practical_ work; but some of them, those especially who have
never lifted a finger to relieve suffering, and help their outside,
poorer brothers, are those who talk the most loudly, and are the
bitterest in their denunciations of the _unspirituality_ and the
unfitness of the “leaders of theosophy.” By this they remove
themselves into the outer ring of critics, like those spectators at
the play who laugh at an actor passably representing Hamlet, while
they themselves could not walk on to the stage with a letter on a
salver. While in India, comparatively poor theosophists have opened
gratuitous dispensaries for the sick, hospitals, schools, and
everything they could think of, asking no returns from the poor, as
the missionaries do, no abandonment of one’s forefathers’ religion,
as a heavy price for favours received, have the English
theosophists, as a rule, done a single thing for those suffering
multitudes, whose pitiful cry rings throughout the whole Heavens as
a protest against the actual state of things in Christendom?

We take this opportunity of saying, in reply to others as much as to
our correspondent, that, up till now, the energies of the Society
have been chiefly occupied in organising, extending, and solidifying
the Society itself, which work has taxed its time, energies, and
resources to such an extent as to leave it far less powerful for
practical charity than we would have wished. But, even so, compared
with the influence and the funds at the disposal of the Society, its
work in practical charity, if less widely known, will certainly bear
favourable comparison with that of professing Christians, with their
enormous resources in money, workers, and opportunities of all
kinds. It must not be forgotten that practical charity is not one of
the _declared_ objects of the Society. It goes without saying, and
needs no “declaration,” that every member of the Society must be
practically philanthropic if he be a theosophist at all; and our
declared work is, in reality, more important and more efficacious
than work in the every-day plane which bears more evident and
immediate fruit, for the direct effect of an appreciation of
theosophy is to make those charitable who were not so before.
Theosophy creates the charity which afterwards, and of its own
accord, makes itself manifest in works.

Theosophy is correctly—though in this particular case, it is rather
ironically—termed “a High, Heaven-born Religion.” It is argued that
since it professes to receive its advanced knowledge and light from
“those more learned in the Science of Life,” the latter ought and
_must_, if appealed to by their votaries (the theosophists), aid
them in discovering ways and means, in organising some great
fraternal scheme,” etc.

The scheme was planned, and the rules and laws to guide such a
practical brotherhood, have been given by those “more learned in the
Science of (practical, daily, _altruistic_) life;” aye, verily “more
learned” in it than any other men since the days of Gautama Buddha
and the Gnostic Essenes. The “scheme” dates back to the year when
the Theosophical Society was founded. Let anyone read its wise and
noble laws embodied to this day in the Statutes of the Fraternity,
and judge for himself whether, if carried out rigorously and applied
to practical life, the “scheme” would not have proved the most
beneficent to mankind in general, and especially to our poorer
brethren, of “the starving multitudes.” Theosophy teaches the spirit
of “non-separateness,” the evanescence and illusion of human creeds
and dogma, hence, inculcates _universal love and charity for all
mankind “without distinction of race, colour, caste or creed;”_ is
it not therefore the fittest to alleviate the sufferings of mankind?
No true theosophist would refuse admission into a hospital, or any
charitable establishment, to any man, woman or child, under the
pretext that he is _not_ a theosophist, as a Roman Catholic would
when dealing with a Protestant, and _vice versa_. No true
theosophist of the original rules would fail to put into practice
the parable of the “Good Samaritan,” or proffer help only to entice
the unwary who, he hopes, will become a pervert from his god and the
gods of his forefathers. None would slander his brother, none let a
needy man go unhelped, none offer fine talk instead of practical
love and charity.

Is it then the fault of Theosophy, any more than it is the fault of
the Christ-teachings, if the majority of the members of the
Theosophical Society, often changing their philosophical and
religious views upon entering our Body, have yet remained
practically the same as they were when professing _lip_
Christianity? Our laws and rules are the same as given to us from
the beginning; it is the general members of the Society who have
allowed them to become virtually _obsolete_. Those few who are ever
ready to sacrifice their time and labour to work for the poor, and
who do, unrecognised and unthanked for it, good work wherever they
can, are often too poor themselves to put their larger schemes of
charity into objective practical form, however willing they may be.

“The fault I find with the Theosophical Society,” said one of the
most eminent surgeons in London to one of the editors, quite
recently, “is that I cannot discover that any of its members really
lead the Christ-life.” This seemed a very serious accusation from a
man who is not only in the front rank of his profession, and valued
for his kindly nature, by his patients, and by society, and
well-known as a quiet doer of many good deeds. The only possible
answer to be made was that the Christ-life is undeniably the ideal
of every one worthy in any sense of the name of a Theosophist, and
that if it is not lived it is because there are none strong enough
to carry it out. Only a few days later the same complaint was put in
a more graphic form by a celebrated lady-artist.

“You Theosophists don’t do enough good for me,” she said pithily.
And in her case also there is the right to speak, given by the fact
that she leads two lives—one, a butterfly existence in society, and
the other a serious one, which makes little noise, but has much
purpose. Those who regard life as a great vocation, like the two
critics of the Theosophical movement whom we have just quoted, have
a right to demand of such a movement more than mere words. They
themselves endeavour very quietly to lead the “Christ-life,” and
they cannot understand a number of people uniting in the effort
towards this life without practical results being apparent. Another
critic of the same character who has the best possible right to
criticise, being a thoroughly practical philanthropist and
charitable to the last degree, has said of the Theosophists that
their much talking and writing seems to resolve itself into mere
intellectual luxury, productive of no direct good to the world.

The point of difference between the Theosophists (when we use this
term we mean, not members of the Society, but people who are really
using the organization as a method of learning more of the true
wisdom-religion which exists as a vital and eternal fact behind all
such efforts) and the practical philanthropists, religious or
secular, is a very serious one, and the answer, that probably none
of them are strong enough yet to lead the “Christ-life,” is only a
portion of the truth. The situation can be put very plainly, in so
many words. The religious philanthropist holds a position of his
own, which cannot in any way concern or affect the Theosophist. He
does not do good merely for the sake of doing good, but also as a
means towards his own salvation. This is the outcome of the selfish
and personal side of man’s nature, which has so coloured and
affected a grand religion that its devotees are little better than
the idol-worshippers who ask their deity of clay to bring them luck
in business, and the payment of debts. The religious philanthropist
who hopes to gain salvation by good works has simply, to quote a
well-worn yet ever fresh witticism, exchanged worldliness for
other-worldliness.

The secular philanthropist is really at heart a socialist, and
nothing else; he hopes to make men happy and good by bettering their
physical position. No serious student of human nature can believe in
this theory for a moment. There is no doubt that it is a very
agreeable one, because if it is accepted there is immediate,
straightforward work to undertake. “The poor ye have always with
you.” The causation which produced human nature itself produced
poverty, misery, pain, degradation, at the same time that it
produced wealth, and comfort, and joy and glory. Lifelong
philanthropists, who have started on their work with a joyous
youthful conviction that it is possible to “do good,” have, though
never relaxing the habit of charity, confessed to the present writer
that, as a matter of fact, misery cannot be relieved. It is a vital
element in human nature, and is as necessary to some lives as
pleasure is to others.

It is a strange thing to observe how practical philanthropists will
eventually, after long and bitter experience, arrive at a conclusion
which, to an occultist, is from the first a working hypothesis. This
is, that misery is not only endurable, but agreeable to many who
endure it. A noble woman, whose life has been given to the rescue of
the lowest class of wretched girls, those who seem to be driven to
vice by want, said, only a few days since, that with many of these
outcasts it is not possible to raise them to any apparently happier
lot. And this she distinctly stated (and she can speak with
authority, having spent her life literally among them, and studied
them thoroughly), is not so much from any love of vice, but from
love of that very state which the wealthy classes call misery. They
prefer the savage life of a bare-foot, half-clad creature, with no
roof at night and no food by day, to any comforts which can be
offered them. By comforts, we do not mean the workhouse or the
reformatory, but the comforts of a quiet home; and we can give
chapter and verse, so to speak, to show that this is the case, not
merely with the children of outcasts, who might be supposed to have
a savage heredity, but with the children of gentle, cultivated, and
Christian people.

Our great towns hide in their slums thousands of beings whose
history would form an inexplicable enigma, a perfectly baffling
moral picture, could they be written out clearly, so as to be
intelligible. But they are only known to the devoted workers among
the outcast classes, to whom they become a sad and terrible puzzle,
not to be solved, and therefore, better not discussed. Those who
have no clue to the science of life are compelled to dismiss such
difficulties in this manner, otherwise they would fall, crushed
beneath the thought of them. The social question as it is called,
the great deep waters of misery, the deadly apathy of those who have
power and possessions—these things are hardly to be faced by a
generous soul who has not reached to the great idea of evolution,
and who has not guessed at the marvellous mystery of human
development.

The Theosophist is placed in a different position from any of these
persons, because he has heard of the vast scope of life with which
all mystic and occult writers and teachers deal, and he has been
brought very near to the great mystery. Indeed, none, though they
may have enrolled themselves as Fellows of the Society, can be
called in any serious sense Theosophists, until they have begun to
consciously taste in their own persons, this same mystery; which is,
indeed, a law inexorable, by which man lifts himself by degrees from
the state of a beast to the glory of a God. The rapidity with which
this is done is different with every living soul; and the wretches
who hug the primitive task-master, _misery_, choose to go slowly
through a tread-mill course which may give them innumerable lives of
physical sensation—whether pleasant or painful, well-beloved because
tangible to the very lowest senses. The Theosophist who desires to
enter upon occultism takes some of Nature’s privileges into his own
hands by that very wish, and soon discovers that experiences come to
him with double-quick rapidity. His business is then to recognise
that he is under a—to him—new and swifter law of development, and to
snatch at the lessons that come to him.

But, in recognising this, he also makes another discovery. He sees
that it takes a very wise man to do good works without danger of
doing incalculable harm. A highly developed adept in life may grasp
the nettle, and by his great intuitive powers, know whom to relieve
from pain and whom to leave in the mire that is their best teacher.
The poor and wretched themselves will tell anyone who is able to win
their confidence what disastrous mistakes are made by those who come
from a different class and endeavour to help them. Kindness and
gentle treatment will sometimes bring out the worst qualities of a
man or woman who has led a fairly presentable life when kept down by
pain and despair. May the Master of Mercy forgive us for saying such
words of any human creatures, all of whom are a part of ourselves,
according to the law of human brotherhood which no disowning of it
can destroy. But the words are true. None of us know the darkness
which lurks in the depths of our own natures until some strange and
unfamiliar experience rouses the whole being into action. So with
these others who seem more miserable than ourselves.

As soon as he begins to understand what a friend and teacher pain
can be, the Theosophist stands appalled before the mysterious
problem of human life, and though he may long to do good works,
equally dreads to do them wrongly until he has himself acquired
greater power and knowledge. The ignorant doing of good works may be
vitally injurious, as all but those who are blind in their love of
benevolence are compelled to acknowledge. In this sense the answer
made as to lack of Christ-like lives among Theosophists, that there
are probably none strong enough to live such, is perfectly correct
and covers the whole question. For it is not the spirit of
self-sacrifice, or of devotion, or of desire to help that is
lacking, but the strength to acquire knowledge and power and
intuition, so that the deeds done shall really be worthy of the
“Buddha-Christ” spirit. Therefore it is that Theosophists cannot
pose as a body of philanthropists, though secretly they may
adventure on the path of good works. They profess to be a body of
learners merely, pledged to help each other and all the rest of
humanity, so far as in them lies, to a better understanding of the
mystery of life, and to a better knowledge of the peace which lies
beyond it.

But as it is an inexorable law, that the ground must be tilled if
the harvest is to be reaped, so Theosophists are obliged to work in
the world unceasingly, and very often in doing this to make serious
mistakes, as do all workers who are not embodied Redeemers. Their
efforts may not come under the title of good works, and they may be
condemned as a school of idle talkers, yet they are an outcome and
fruition of this particular moment of time, when the ideas which
they hold are greeted by the crowd with interest; and therefore
their work is good, as the lotus-flower is good when it opens in the
mid-day sun.

None know more keenly and definitely than they that good works are
necessary; only these cannot be rightly accomplished without
knowledge. Schemes for Universal Brotherhood, and the redemption of
mankind, might be given out plentifully by the great adepts of life,
and would be mere dead-letter utterances while individuals remain
ignorant, and unable to grasp the great meaning of their teachers.
To Theosophists we say, let us carry out the rules given us for our
society before we ask for any further schemes or laws. To the public
and our critics we say, try to understand the value of good works
before you demand them of others, or enter upon them rashly
yourselves. Yet it is an absolute fact that without good works the
spirit of brotherhood would die in the world; and this can never be.
Therefore is the double activity of learning and doing most
necessary; we have to do good, and we have to do it _rightly_, with
knowledge.

            *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

It is well known that the first rule of the society is to carry out
the object of forming the nucleus of a universal brotherhood. The
practical working of this rule was explained by those who laid it
down, to the following effect:—

“HE WHO DOES NOT PRACTISE ALTRUISM; HE WHO IS NOT PREPARED TO SHARE
HIS LAST MORSEL WITH A WEAKER OR POORER THAN HIMSELF; HE WHO
NEGLECTS TO HELP HIS BROTHER MAN, OF WHATEVER RACE, NATION, OR
CREED, WHENEVER AND WHEREVER HE MEETS SUFFERING, AND WHO TURNS A
DEAF EAR TO THE CRY OF HUMAN MISERY; HE WHO HEARS AN INNOCENT PERSON
SLANDERED, WHETHER A BROTHER THEOSOPHIST OR NOT, AND DOES NOT
UNDERTAKE HIS DEFENCE AS HE WOULD UNDERTAKE HIS OWN—IS NO
THEOSOPHIST.”

[Illustration: decorative separator]




                      THE DEMAND OF THE NEOPHYTE.

  [Continuation of COMMENTS ON LIGHT ON THE PATH: By the Author.]

“Before the voice can speak in the presence of the Masters.”

Speech is the power of communication; the moment of entrance into
active life is marked by its attainment.

And now, before I go any further, let me explain a little the way in
which the rules written down in “Light on the Path” are arranged.
The first seven of those which are numbered are sub-divisions of the
two first unnumbered rules, those with which I have dealt in the two
preceding papers. The numbered rules were simply an effort of mine
to make the unnumbered ones more intelligible. “Eight” to “fifteen”
of these numbered rules belong to this unnumbered rule which is now
my text.

As I have said, these rules are written for all disciples, but for
none else; they are not of interest to any other persons. Therefore
I trust no one else will trouble to read these papers any further.
The first two rules, which include the whole of that part of the
effort which necessitates the use of the surgeon’s knife, I will
enlarge upon further if I am asked to do so. But the disciple is
expected to deal with the snake, his lower self, unaided; to
suppress his human passions and emotions by the force of his own
will. He can only demand assistance of a master when this is
accomplished, or at all events, partially so. Otherwise the gates
and windows of his soul are blurred, and blinded, and darkened, and
no knowledge can come to him. I am not, in these papers, purposing
to tell a man how to deal with his own soul; I am simply giving, to
the disciple, knowledge. That I am not writing, even now, so that
all who run may read, is owing to the fact that super-nature
prevents this by its own immutable laws.

The four rules which I have written down for those in the West who
wish to study them, are as I have said, written in the ante-chamber
of every living Brotherhood; I may add more, in the ante-chamber of
every living or dead Brotherhood, or Order yet to be formed. When I
speak of a Brotherhood or an Order, I do not mean an arbitrary
constitution made by scholiasts and intellectualists; I mean an
actual fact in supernature, a stage of development towards the
absolute God or Good. During this development the disciple
encounters harmony, pure knowledge, pure truth, in different
degrees, and, as he enters these degrees, he finds himself becoming
part of what might be roughly described as a layer of human
consciousness. He encounters his equals, men of his own self-less
character, and with them his association becomes permanent and
indissoluble, because founded on a vital likeness of nature. To them
he becomes pledged by such vows as need no utterance or framework in
ordinary words. This is one aspect of what I mean by a Brotherhood.

If the first rules are conquered the disciple finds himself standing
at the threshold. Then if his will is sufficiently resolute his
power of speech comes; a two-fold power. For, as he advances now, he
finds himself entering into a state of blossoming, where every bud
that opens throws out its several rays or petals. If he is to
exercise his new gift, he must use it in its two-fold character. He
finds in himself the power to speak in the presence of the masters;
in other words, he has the right to demand contact with the divinest
element of that state of consciousness into which he has entered.
But he finds himself compelled, by the nature of his position, to
act in two ways at the same time. He cannot send his voice up to the
heights where sit the gods till he has penetrated to the deep places
where their light shines not at all. He has come within the grip of
an iron law. If he demands to become a neophyte, he at once becomes
a servant. Yet his service is sublime, if only from the character of
those who share it. For the masters are also servants; they serve
and claim their reward afterwards. Part of their service is to let
their knowledge touch him; his first act of service is to give some
of that knowledge to those who are not yet fit to stand where he
stands. This is no arbitrary decision, made by any master or teacher
or any such person, however divine. It is a law of that life which
the disciple has entered upon.

Therefore was it written in the inner doorway of the lodges of the
old Egyptian Brotherhood, “The labourer is worthy of his hire.”

“Ask and ye shall have,” sounds like something too easy and simple
to be credible. But the disciple cannot “ask” in the mystic sense in
which the word is used in this scripture until he has attained the
power of helping others.

Why is this? Has the statement too dogmatic a sound?

Is it too dogmatic to say that a man must have foothold before he
can spring? The position is the same. If help is given, if work is
done, then there is an actual claim—not what we call a personal
claim of payment, but the claim of co-nature. The divine give, they
demand that you also shall give before you can be of their kin.

This law is discovered as soon as the disciple endeavours to speak.
For speech is a gift which comes only to the disciple of power and
knowledge. The spiritualist enters the psychic-astral world, but he
does not find there any certain speech, unless he at once claims it
and continues to do so. If he is interested in “phenomena,” or the
mere circumstance and accident of astral life, then he enters no
direct ray of thought or purpose, he merely exists and amuses
himself in the astral life as he has existed and amused himself in
the physical life. Certainly there are one or two simple lessons
which the psychic-astral can teach him, just as there are simple
lessons which material and intellectual life teach him. And these
lessons have to be learned; the man who proposes to enter upon the
life of the disciple without having learned the early and simple
lessons must always suffer from his ignorance. They are vital, and
have to be studied in a vital manner; experienced through and
through, over and over again, so that each part of the nature has
been penetrated by them.

To return. In claiming the power of speech, as it is called, the
Neophyte cries out to the Great One who stands foremost in the ray
of knowledge on which he has entered, to give him guidance. When he
does this, his voice is hurled back by the power he has approached,
and echoes down to the deep recesses of human ignorance. In some
confused and blurred manner the news that there is knowledge and a
beneficent power which teaches is carried to as many men as will
listen to it. No disciple can cross the threshold without
communicating this news, and placing it on record in some fashion or
other.

He stands horror-struck at the imperfect and unprepared manner in
which he has done this; and then comes the desire to do it well, and
with the desire thus to help others comes the power. For it is a
pure desire, this which comes upon him; he can gain no credit, no
glory, no personal reward by fulfilling it. And therefore he obtains
the power to fulfil it.

The history of the whole past, so far as we can trace it, shows very
plainly that there is neither credit, glory, or reward to be gained
by this first task which is given to the Neophyte. Mystics have
always been sneered at, and seers disbelieved; those who have had
the added power of intellect have left for posterity their written
record, which to most men appears unmeaning and visionary, even when
the authors have the advantage of speaking from a far-off past. The
disciple who undertakes the task, secretly hoping for fame or
success, to appear as a teacher and apostle before the world, fails
even before his task is attempted, and his hidden hypocrisy poisons
his own soul, and the souls of those he touches. He is secretly
worshipping himself, and this idolatrous practice must bring its own
reward.

The disciple who has the power of entrance, and is strong enough to
pass each barrier, will, when the divine message comes to his
spirit, forget himself utterly in the new consciousness which falls
on him. If this lofty contact can really rouse him, he becomes as
one of the divine in his desire to give rather than to take, in his
wish to help rather than be helped, in his resolution to feed the
hungry rather than take manna from Heaven himself. His nature is
transformed, and the selfishness which prompts men’s actions in
ordinary life suddenly deserts him.

                        (_To be continued._)




                 THE ESOTERIC CHARACTER OF THE GOSPELS.

  “.... Tell us, when shall these things be? And what shall be the
  sign _of thy presence_, and _of the consummation of the age_?”[33]
  asked the Disciples of the MASTER, on the Mount of Olives.

-----

Footnote 33:

  St. Matthew xxiv., 3, _et seq._ The sentences italicised are those
  which stand corrected in the New Testament after the recent
  revision in 1881 of the version of _1611_; which version is full
  of errors, voluntary and involuntary. The word “presence,” for
  “coming,” and “the consummation of the age,” now standing for “the
  end of the world,” have altered, of late, the whole meaning, even
  for the most sincere Christians, if we exempt the Adventists.

-----

The reply given by the “Man of Sorrow,” the _Chréstos_, on his
trial, but also on his way to triumph, as _Christos_, or Christ,[34]
is prophetic, and very suggestive. It is a warning indeed. The
answer must be quoted in full. Jesus ... said unto them:—

  “Take heed that _no man_ lead you astray. For many shall come in
  my name saying, I am the Christ; and shall lead many astray. And
  ye shall hear of wars ... but the end is not yet. _For nation
  shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there
  shall be famines and earthquakes in divers places._ But all these
  things are the beginning of travail.... Many false prophets shall
  arise, and shall lead many, astray ... then shall the end come ...
  when ye see the abomination of desolation which was spoken through
  Daniel.... Then if any man shall say unto you, _Lo, here is the
  Christ_, or There; believe him not.... If they shall say unto you,
  Behold, he is in the wilderness, go not forth; behold, he is in
  the inner chambers, believe them not. For as the lightning cometh
  forth from the East, and is seen even in the West, so shall be the
  _presence_ of the Son of Man,” etc., etc.

-----

Footnote 34:

  He who will not ponder over and master the great difference
  between the meaning of the two Greek words—χρηστος and χριστος
  must remain blind for ever to the true esoteric meaning of the
  Gospels; that is to say, to the living Spirit entombed in the
  sterile dead-letter of the texts, the very Dead Sea fruit of
  _lip_-Christianity.

-----

Two things become evident _to all_ in the above passages, now that
their false rendering is corrected in the revision text: (_a_) “the
coming of Christ,” means _the presence of_ CHRISTOS in a regenerated
world, and not at all the actual coming in body of “Christ” Jesus;
(_b_) this Christ is to be sought neither in the wilderness nor “in
the inner chambers,” nor in the sanctuary of any temple or church
built by man; for Christ—the true esoteric SAVIOUR—_is no man_, but
the DIVINE PRINCIPLE in every human being. He who strives to
resurrect the Spirit _crucified in him by his own terrestrial
passions_, and buried deep in the “sepulchre” of his sinful flesh;
he who has the strength to roll back _the stone of matter_ from the
door of his own _inner_ sanctuary, he _has the risen Christ in
him_.[35] The “Son of Man” is no child of the bond-woman—_flesh_,
but verily of the free-woman—_Spirit_,[36] the child of man’s own
deeds, and the fruit of his own spiritual labour.

-----

Footnote 35:

  For ye are the temple (“sanctuary” in the _revised_ N. T.) of the
  living God. (II. Cor. vi., 16.)

Footnote 36:

  Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, was feminine with the Jews, as with
  most ancient peoples, and it was so with the early Christians.
  _Sophia_ of the Gnostics, and the third Sephiroth _Binah_
  (the _female_ Jehovah of the Kabalists), are feminine
  principles—“Divine Spirit,” or _Ruach_. “_Achath Ruach Elohim
  Chiim._” “One is _She_, the Spirit of the Elohim of Life,” is said
  in “Sepher Yezirah.”

-----

On the other hand, at no time since the Christian era, have the
precursor signs described in _Matthew_ applied so graphically and
forcibly to any epoch as they do to our own times. When has nation
arisen against nation more than at this time? When have
“famines”—another name for destitute pauperism, and the famished
multitudes of the proletariat—been more cruel, earthquakes more
frequent, or covered such an area simultaneously, as for the last
few years? Millenarians and Adventists of robust faith, may go on
saying that “the coming of (the carnalised) Christ” is near at hand,
and prepare themselves for “the end of the world.” Theosophists—at
any rate, some of them—who understand the hidden meaning of the
universally-expected Avatars, Messiahs, Sosioshes and Christs—know
that it is no “end of the world,” but “the consummation of the age,”
_i.e._, the close of a cycle, which is now fast approaching.[37] If
our readers have forgotten the concluding passages of the article,
“The Signs of the Times,” in LUCIFER for October last, let them read
them over, and they will plainly see the meaning of this particular
cycle.

-----

Footnote 37:

  There are several remarkable cycles that come to a close at the
  end of this century. First, the 5,000 years of the Kaliyug cycle;
  again the Messianic cycle of the Samaritan (also Kabalistic) Jews
  of the man connected with _Pisces_ (Ichthys or “Fish-man” _Dag_).
  It is a cycle, historic and not very long, but very occult,
  lasting about 2,155 solar years, but having a true significance
  only when computed by lunar months. It occurred 2410 and 255 B.C.,
  or when the equinox entered into the sign of the _Ram_, and again
  into that of _Pisces_. When it enters, in a few years, the sign of
  _Aquarius_, psychologists will have some extra work to do, and the
  psychic idiosyncrasies of humanity will enter on a great change.

-----

Many and many a time the warning about the “false Christs” and
prophets who shall lead people astray has been interpreted by
charitable Christians, the worshippers of the dead-letter of their
scripture, as applying to mystics generally, and Theosophists most
especially. The recent work by Mr. Pember, “Earth’s Earliest
Ages,” is a proof of it. Nevertheless, it seems very evident that
the words in Matthew’s Gospel and others can hardly apply to
Theosophists. For these were never found saying that Christ is
“Here” or “There,” in wilderness or city, and least of all in the
“inner chamber” behind the altar of any modern church. Whether
Heathen or Christian by birth, they refuse to materialise and thus
degrade that which is the purest and grandest ideal—the symbol of
symbols—namely, the immortal Divine Spirit in man, whether it be
called Horus, Krishna, Buddha, or Christ. None of them has ever
yet said: “I am the Christ”; for those born in the West feel
themselves, so far, only _Chréstians_,[38] however much they may
strive to become _Christians_ in Spirit. It is to those, who in
their great conceit and pride refuse to win the right of such
appellation by first leading the life of _Chrestos_;[39] to those
who haughtily proclaim themselves _Christians_ (the glorified, the
anointed) by sole virtue of baptism when but a few days old—that
the above-quoted words of Jesus apply most forcibly. Can the
prophetic insight of him who uttered this remarkable warning be
doubted by any one who sees the numerous “false prophets” and
pseudo-apostles (_of Christ_), now roaming over the world? These
have split the one divine Truth into fragments, and broken, in the
camp of the Protestants alone, the rock of the Eternal Verity into
three hundred and fifty odd pieces, which now represent the bulk
of their Dissenting sects. Accepting the number in round figures
as 350, and admitting, for argument’s sake, that, at least, one of
these may have the approximate truth, still 349 _must be
necessarily false_.[40] Each of these claims to have Christ
exclusively in its “inner chamber,” and denies him to all others,
while, in truth, the great majority of their respective followers
daily put Christ to death on the cruciform tree of matter—the
“tree of infamy” of the old Romans—indeed!

-----

Footnote 38:

  The earliest Christian author, Justin Martyr, calls, in his first
  Apology, his co-religionists _Chrestians_, χρηστιανοι—not
  Christians.

Footnote 39:

  “Clemens Alexandrinus, in the second century, founds a serious
  argument on this paranomasia (lib. iii., cap. xvii., p. 53 _et
  circa_), that all who believed in _Chrest_ (_i.e._, “a good man”)
  both are, and are called Chrestians, that is, good men,”
  (Strommata, lib. ii. “Higgins’ _Anacalypsis_.”) And Lactantius
  (lib. iv., cap. vii.) says that it is only through _ignorance_
  that people call themselves Christians, instead of Chrestians:
  “_qui proper ignorantium errorem cum immutata litera Chrestum
  solent dicere_.”

Footnote 40:

  In England alone, there are over 239 various sects. (See
  Whitaker’s Almanac.) In 1883, there were 186 denominations only,
  and now they steadily increase with every year, an additional 53
  sects having sprung up in only four years!

-----

The worship of the dead-letter in the Bible is but one more form of
_idolatry_, nothing better. A fundamental dogma of faith cannot
exist under a double-faced Janus form. “Justification” _by Christ_
cannot be achieved at one’s choice and fancy, _either_ by “faith” or
by “works” and James, therefore (ii., 25), contradicting Paul (Heb.
xi., 31), and _vice versa_,[41] one of them must be wrong. Hence,
the Bible is _not_ the “Word of God” but contains at best the words
of fallible men and _imperfect_ teachers. Yet read _esoterically_,
it does contain, if not the _whole_ truth, still, “_nothing but the
truth_,” under whatever allegorical garb. Only: _Quot homines tot
sententiæ_.

-----

Footnote 41:

  It is but fair to St. Paul to remark that this contradiction is
  surely due to later tampering with his Epistles. Paul was a
  Gnostic himself, _i.e._, A “Son of Wisdom,” and an Initiate into
  the true _mysteries of Christos_, though he may have thundered (or
  was made to appear to do so) against some Gnostic sects, of which,
  in his day, there were many. But his Christos was not Jesus of
  Nazareth, nor any living man, as shown so ably in Mr. Gerald
  Massey’s lecture, “Paul, the Gnostic Opponent of Peter.” He was an
  Initiate, a true “Master-Builder” or adept, as described in “Isis
  Unveiled,” Vol II., pp. 90-91.

-----

The “Christ principle,” the awakened and glorified Spirit of Truth,
being universal and eternal, the true _Christos_ cannot be
monopolized by any one person, even though that person has chosen to
arrogate to himself the title of the “Vicar of Christ,” or of the
“Head” of that or another State-religion. The spirits of “Chrest”
and “Christ” cannot be confined to any creed or sect, only because
that sect chooses to exalt itself above the heads of all other
religions or sects. The name has been used in a manner so intolerant
and dogmatic, especially in our day, that Christianity is now the
religion of arrogance _par excellence_, a stepping-stone for
ambition, a sinecure for wealth, sham and power; a convenient screen
for hypocrisy. The noble epithet of old, the one that made Justin
Martyr say that “_from the mere name_, which is imputed to us as a
crime, _we are the most excellent_,”[42] is now degraded. The
missionary prides himself with the so-called _conversion_ of a
heathen, who makes of Christianity ever a _profession_, but rarely a
religion, a source of income from the missionary fund, and a
pretext, since the blood of Jesus has washed them all by
anticipation, for every petty crime, from drunkenness and lying up
to theft. That same missionary, however, would not hesitate to
publicly condemn the greatest saint to eternal perdition and hell
fires if that holy man has only neglected to pass through the
fruitless and meaningless form of baptism by water with
accompaniment of _lip_ prayers and vain ritualism.

-----

Footnote 42:

  ὁσοντε ὲκ τοῦ κατηγορουμένου ἡμῶν ὀνομάτος χρησότατοι ὑπάρχομεν
  (_First Apology_).

-----

We say “lip prayer” and “vain ritualism” knowingly. Few Christians
among the laymen are aware even of the true meaning of the word
_Christ_; and those of the clergy who happen to know it (for they
are brought up in the idea that to study such subjects is _sinful_)
keep the information secret from their parishioners. They demand
blind, implicit faith, and _forbid inquiry as the one unpardonable
sin_, though nothing of that which leads to the knowledge of the
truth can be aught else than holy. For what is “Divine Wisdom,” or
_Gnosis_, but the essential reality behind the evanescent
appearances of objects in nature—the very soul of the manifested
LOGOS? Why should men who strive to accomplish union with the one
eternal and absolute Deity shudder at the idea of prying into its
mysteries—however awful? Why, above all, should they use names and
words the very meaning of which is a sealed mystery to them—a mere
sound? Is it because an unscrupulous, power-seeking Establishment
called a Church has cried “wolf” at every such attempt, and,
denouncing it as “blasphemous,” has ever tried to kill the spirit of
inquiry? But Theosophy, the “divine Wisdom,” has never heeded that
cry, and has the courage of its opinions. The world of sceptics and
fanatics may call it, one—an empty “_ism_”—the other “Satanism”:
they can never crush it. Theosophists have been called Atheists,
haters of Christianity, the enemies of God and the gods. They are
none of these. Therefore, they have agreed this day to publish a
clear statement of their ideas, and a profession of their faith—with
regard to monotheism and Christianity, at any rate—and to place it
before the impartial reader to judge them and their detractors on
the merits of their respective faiths. No truth-loving mind would
object to such honest and sincere dealing, nor will it be dazzled by
any amount of new light thrown upon the subject, howsoever much
startled otherwise. On the contrary, such minds will thank LUCIFER,
perhaps, while those of whom it was said “_qui vult decipi
decipiatur_”—let them be deceived by all means!

The editors of this magazine propose to give a series of essays upon
the hidden meaning or esotericism of the “New Testament.” No more
than any other scripture of the great world-religions can the Bible
be excluded from that class of allegorical and symbolical writings
which have been, from the pre-historic ages, the receptacle of the
secret teachings of the Mysteries of Initiation, under a more or
less veiled form. The primitive writers of the _Logia_ (now the
Gospels) knew certainly _the_ truth, and the _whole_ truth; but
their successors had, as certainly, only dogma and form, which lead
to hierarchical power at heart, rather than the spirit of the
so-called Christ’s teachings. Hence the gradual perversion. As
Higgins truly said, in the Christologia of St. Paul and Justin
Martyr, we have the esoteric religion of the Vatican, a refined
Gnosticism for the cardinals, a more gross one for the people. It is
the latter, only still more materialized and disfigured, which has
reached us in our age.

The idea of writing this series was suggested to us by a certain
letter published in our October issue, under the heading of “Are the
Teachings ascribed to Jesus contradictory?” Nevertheless, this is no
attempt to contradict or weaken, in any one instance, that which is
said by Mr. Gerald Massey in his criticism. The contradictions
pointed out by the learned lecturer and author are too patent to be
explained away by any “Preacher” or Bible champion; for what he has
said—only in more terse and vigorous language—is what was said of
the descendant of Joseph Pandira (or Panthera) in “Isis Unveiled”
(vol. ii., p. 201), from the Talmudic _Sepher Toldos Jeshu_. His
belief with regard to the spurious character of Bible and New
Testament, _as now edited_, is therefore, also the belief of the
present writer. In view of the recent revision of the Bible, and its
many thousands of mistakes, mistranslations, and interpolations
(some confessed to, and others withheld), it would ill become an
opponent to take any one to task for refusing to believe in the
authorised texts.

But the editors would object to one short sentence in the criticism
under notice. Mr. Gerald Massey writes:—

“What is the use of taking your ‘Bible oath’ that the thing is true,
if the book you are sworn upon is a magazine of falsehoods already
exploded, or just going off?”

Surely it is not a symbologist of Mr. G. Massey’s powers and
learning who would call the “Book of the Dead,” or the Vedas, or any
other ancient Scripture, “a magazine of falsehoods.”[43] Why not
regard in the same light as all the others, the Old, and, _in a
still greater measure_, the _New_ Testament?

-----

Footnote 43:

  The extraordinary amount of information collated by that able
  Egyptologist shows that he has thoroughly mastered the secret of
  the production of the _New Testament_. Mr. Massey knows the
  difference between the spiritual, divine and purely metaphysical
  Christos, and the made-up “lay figure” of the carnalized Jesus. He
  knows also that the Christian canon, especially the _Gospels_,
  _Acts_ and _Epistles_, are made up of fragments of gnostic wisdom,
  the ground-work of which is _pre-Christian_ and built on the
  MYSTERIES of Initiation. It is the mode of theological
  presentation and the interpolated passages—such as in Mark xvi.
  from verse 9 to the end—which make of the Gospels a “magazine of
  (_wicked_) falsehoods,” and throw a slur on CHRISTOS. But the
  Occultist who discerns between the two currents (the true gnostic
  and the _pseudo_ Christian) knows that the passages free from
  theological tampering belong to archaic wisdom, and so does Mr.
  Gerald Massey, though his views differ from ours.

-----

All of these are “magazines of falsehoods,” if accepted in the
exoteric dead-letter interpretations of their ancient, and
especially their modern, theological glossarists. Each of these
records has served in its turn as a means for securing power and of
supporting the ambitious policy of an unscrupulous priesthood. All
have promoted superstition, all made of their gods bloodthirsty and
ever-damning Molochs and fiends, as all have made nations to serve
the latter more than the God of Truth. But while cunningly-devised
dogmas and intentional misinterpretations by scholiasts are beyond
any doubt, “falsehoods already exploded,” the texts themselves are
mines of universal truths. But for the world of the profane and
sinners, at any rate—they were and still are like the mysterious
characters traced by “the fingers of a man’s hand” on the wall of
the Palace of Belshazzar: _they need a Daniel to read and understand
them_.

Nevertheless, TRUTH has not allowed herself to remain without
witnesses. There are, besides great Initiates into scriptural
symbology, a number of quiet students of the mysteries of archaic
esotericism, of scholars proficient in Hebrew and other dead
tongues, who have devoted their lives to unriddle the speeches of
the Sphinx of the world-religions. And these students, though none
of them has yet mastered all the “seven keys” that open the great
problem, have discovered enough to be able to say: There _was_ a
universal mystery-language, in which all the World Scriptures were
written, from _Vedas_ to “Revelation,” from the “Book of the Dead”
to the _Acts_. One of the keys, at any rate—the numerical and
geometrical key[44] to the Mystery Speech is now rescued; an ancient
language, truly, which up to this time remained hidden, but the
evidences of which abundantly exist, as may be proven by undeniable
mathematical demonstrations. If, indeed, the Bible is forced on the
acceptance of the world in its dead-letter meaning, in the face of
the modern discoveries by Orientalists and the efforts of
independent students and kabalists, it is easy to prophesy that even
the present new generations of Europe and America will repudiate it,
as all the materialists and logicians have done. For, the more one
studies ancient religious texts, the more one finds that the
ground-work of the New Testament is the same as the ground-work of
the Vedas, of the Egyptian theogony, and the Mazdean allegories. The
atonements by blood—blood-covenants and blood-transferences from
gods to men, and by men, as sacrifices to the gods—are the first
key-note struck in every cosmogony and theogony; soul, life and
blood were synonymous words in every language, pre-eminently with
the Jews; and that blood-giving was life-giving. “Many a legend
among (geographically) alien nations ascribes soul and consciousness
in newly-created mankind to the blood of the god-creators. Berosus
records a Chaldean legend ascribing the creation of a new race of
mankind to the admixture of dust with the blood that flowed from the
severed head of the god Belus. “On this account it is that men are
rational and partake of divine knowledge,” explains Berosus.[45] And
Lenormant has shown (_Beginnings of History_, p. 52, note) that “the
Orphics ... said that the _immaterial part of man, his soul_ (his
life) sprang from the blood of Dionysius Zagreus, whom ... Titans
tore to pieces.” Blood “revivifies the dead”—_i.e._, interpreted
metaphysically, it gives _conscious_ life and a soul to the man of
matter or clay—such as the modern materialist is now. The mystic
meaning of the injunction, “Verily I say unto you, except _ye eat
the flesh_ of the Son of man and _drink his blood_, ye have not life
in yourselves,” &c., can never be understood or appreciated at its
true _occult_ value, except by those who hold some of the _seven
keys_, and yet care little for St Peter.[46] These words, whether
said by Jesus of Nazareth, or Jeshua Ben-Panthera, are the words of
an INITIATE. They have to be interpreted with the help of _three_
keys—one opening the _psychic_ door, the second that of physiology,
and the third that which unlocks the mystery of terrestrial being,
by unveiling the inseparable blending of theogony with anthropology.
It is for revealing a few of these truths, with the _sole view of
saving intellectual mankind from the insanities of materialism and
pessimism_, that mystics have often been denounced as the servants
of Antichrist, even by those Christians who are most worthy,
sincerely pious and respectable men.

-----

Footnote 44:

  “The key to the recovery of the language, so far as the writer’s
  efforts have been concerned, was found in the use, strange to say,
  of the discovered integral ratio in numbers of diameter to
  circumference of a circle,” by a geometrician. “This ratio is
  6,561 for diameter and 20,612 for circumference.” (Cabalistic
  MSS.) In one of the future numbers of “LUCIFER” more details will
  be given, with the permission of the discoverer.—Ed.

Footnote 45:

  Cory’s _Anc. Frag._, p. 59, f. So do Sanchoniaton and Hesiod, who
  both ascribe the _vivifying_ of mankind to the spilt blood of the
  gods. But blood and _soul_ are one (_nephesh_), and the blood of
  the gods means here the informing soul.

Footnote 46:

  The existence of these _seven_ keys is virtually admitted,
  owing to deep research in the Egyptological lore, by Mr. G.
  Massey again. While opposing the teachings of “Esoteric
  Buddhism”—unfortunately misunderstood by him in almost every
  respect—in his Lecture on “The Seven Souls of Man,” he writes
  (p. 21):—

  “This system of thought, this mode of representation, this
  septenary of powers, in various aspects, had been established in
  Egypt, at least, seven thousand years ago, as we learn from
  certain allusions to Atum (the god ‘in whom the fatherhood was
  individualised as the _begetter of an eternal soul_,’ the
  _seventh_ principle of the Theosophists,) found in the
  inscriptions lately discovered at Sakkarah. I say in various
  aspects, _because the gnosis of the Mysteries was, at least,
  sevenfold in its nature_—it was Elemental, Biological, Elementary
  (human), Stellar, Lunar, Solar and Spiritual—and _nothing short of
  a grasp of the whole system can possibly enable us to discriminate
  the various parts, distinguish one from the other, and determinate
  the which and the what, as we try to follow the symbolical Seven
  through their several phases of character_.”

-----

The first key that one has to use to unravel the dark secrets
involved in the mystic name of Christ, is the key which unlocked the
door to the ancient mysteries of the primitive Aryans, Sabeans and
Egyptians. The Gnosis supplanted by the Christian scheme was
universal. It was the echo of the primordial wisdom-religion which
had once been the heirloom of the whole of mankind; and, therefore,
one may truly say that, in its purely metaphysical aspect, the
Spirit of Christ (the divine _logos_) was present in humanity from
the beginning of it. The author of the Clementine Homilies is right;
the mystery of Christos—now supposed to have been taught by Jesus of
Nazareth—“was identical” with that which _from the first_ had been
communicated “_to those who were worthy_,” as quoted in another
lecture.[47] We may learn from the Gospel _according_ to Luke, that
the “worthy” were those who had been initiated into the mysteries of
the Gnosis, and who were “accounted worthy” to attain that
“resurrection from the dead” _in this life_ ... “those who knew that
they could die no more, being equal to the angels as sons of God and
sons of the Resurrection.” In other words, they were the great
adepts _of whatever religion_; and the words apply to all those who,
without being Initiates, strive and succeed, through personal
efforts to _live the life_ and to attain the naturally ensuing
spiritual illumination in blending their personality—the (“Son”)
with (the “Father,”) their individual divine Spirit, _the God
within_ them. This “resurrection” can never be monopolized by the
Christians, but is the spiritual birth-right of every human being
endowed with soul and spirit, whatever his religion may be. Such
individual is a _Christ-man_. On the other hand, those who choose to
ignore the Christ (principle) within themselves, must die
_unregenerate heathens_—baptism, sacraments, lip-prayers, and belief
in dogmas notwithstanding.

In order to follow this explanation, the reader must bear in mind
the real archaic meaning of the paronomasia involved in the two
terms _Chréstos_ and _Christos_. The former means certainly more
than merely “a good,” an “excellent man,” while the latter was never
applied to any one living man, but to every Initiate at the moment
of _his second birth and resurrection_.[48] He who finds Christos
within himself and recognises the latter as his only “way,” becomes
a follower and an _Apostle of Christ_, though he may have never been
baptised, nor even have met a “Christian,” still less call himself
one.

                                                            H. P. B.

                        (_To be continued._)

-----

Footnote 47:

  “Gnostic and Historic Christianity.”

Footnote 48:

  “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man _be born again_ he
  cannot see the Kingdom of God.” (John iii. 4.) Here the birth
  _from above_, the spiritual birth, is meant, achieved at the
  supreme and last initiation.

-----




                       THE “SQUARE” IN THE HAND.


I am unable to say where or when the events related in the following
pages took place. Neither can I give any details concerning the
personal circumstances of the narrator. All I know is that she was a
young woman of French nationality, and that the “uncle” of whom she
speaks—her senior by some thirty years—was more distinguished as a
philosopher than as an enthusiast. Whether the conspiracy against
the reigning authorities in which our heroine and her friends were
implicated, happened to be of any historical importance or not, is
also more than I can say. As my object in reproducing the narrative
is merely to illustrate the curious operation through natural
channels of laws, which are usually regarded as “occult,” and the
activity of which on the material plane has given rise to the common
notion of “miracle,” I do not propose to trouble the reader or
myself with any preamble of merely local interest. So, without more
introduction, I leave the diary of the writer to recount the
adventure set down therein by her own hand.

            .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

“I was concerned in a very prominent way in a political struggle for
liberty and the people’s rights. My part in this struggle was,
indeed, the leading one, but my uncle had been drawn into it at my
instance, and was implicated in a secondary manner only. The
government sought our arrest, and, for a time, we evaded all
attempts to take us, but at last we were surprised and driven under
escort in a private carriage to a military station, where we were to
be detained for examination. With us was arrested a man popularly
known as ‘Fou,’ a poor weakling whom I much pitied. When we arrived
at the station which was our destination, ‘Fou’ gave some trouble to
the officials. I think he fainted, but at all events his conveyance
from the carriage to the _caserne_ needed the conjoined efforts of
our escort, and some commotion was caused by his appearance among
the crowd assembled to see us. Clearly the crowd was sympathetic
with us and hostile to the military. I particularly noticed one
woman who pressed forward as ‘Fou’ was being carried into the
station, and who loudly called on all present to note his feeble
condition and the barbarity of arresting a witless creature such as
he. At that moment my uncle laid his hand on my arm and whispered:
‘Now is our time; the guards are all occupied with ‘Fou;’ we are
left alone for a minute; let us jump out of the carriage and run!’
As he said this he opened the carriage door on the side opposite to
the _caserne_ and alighted in the street. I instantly followed, and
the people favouring us, we pressed through them and fled at the top
of our speed down the road. As we ran I espied a pathway winding up
a hill-side away from the town, and cried: ‘Let us go up there; let
us get away from the streets!’ My uncle answered: ‘No, no; they
would see us there immediately at that height, the path is too
conspicuous. Our best safety is to lose ourselves in the town. We
may throw them off our track by winding in and out of the streets.’
Just then a little child, playing in the road, got in our way, and
nearly threw us down as we ran. We had to pause a moment to recover
ourselves. ‘That child may have cost us our lives,’ whispered my
uncle breathlessly. A second afterwards we reached the bottom of the
street which branched off right and left. I hesitated a moment; then
we both turned to the right. As we did so—in the twinkling of an
eye—we found ourselves in the midst of a group of soldiers coming
round the corner. I ran straight into the arms of one of them, who
the same instant knew me and seized me by throat and waist with a
grip of iron. This was a horrible moment! The iron grasp was sudden
and solid as the grip of a vice; the man’s arm held my waist like a
bar of steel. ‘I arrest you!’ he cried, and the soldiers immediately
closed round us. At once I realised the hopelessness of the
situation; the utter futility of resistance. ‘_Vous n’avez pas
besoin de me tenir ainsi_,’ I said to the officer; ‘_j’irai
tranquillement_.’ He loosened his hold and we were then marched off
to another military station, in a different part of the town from
that whence we had escaped. The man who had arrested me was a
sergeant or some officer in petty command. He took me alone with him
into the guard-room, and placed before me on a wooden table some
papers which he told me to fill in and sign. Then he sat down
opposite to me and I looked through the papers. They were forms,
with blanks left for descriptions specifying the name, occupation,
age, address and so forth of arrested persons. I signed these, and
pushing them across the table to the man, asked him what was to be
done with us. ‘You will be shot,’ he replied, quickly and
decisively. ‘Both of us?’ I asked. ‘Both,’ he replied. ‘But,’ said
I, ‘my companion has done nothing to deserve death. He was drawn
into this struggle entirely by me. Consider, too, his advanced age.
His hair is white; he stoops, and, had it not been for the
difficulty with which he moves his limbs, both of us would probably
be at this moment in a place of safety. What can you gain by
shooting an old man such as he?’ The officer was silent. He neither
favoured nor discouraged me by his manner. While I sat awaiting his
reply, I glanced at the hand with which I had just signed the
papers, and a sudden idea flashed into my mind. ‘At least,’ I said,
‘grant me one request. If my uncle _must_ die, _let me die first_.’
Now I made this request for the following reason. In my right hand,
the line of life broke abruptly halfway in its length; indicating a
sudden and violent death. But the point at which it broke was
terminated by a perfectly marked _square_, extraordinarily clear-cut
and distinct. Such a square, occurring at the end of a broken line
means _rescue_, _salvation_. I had long been aware of this strange
figuration in my hand, and had often wondered what it presaged. But
now, as once more I looked at it, it came upon me with sudden
conviction that in some way I was destined to be delivered from
death at the last moment, and I thought that if this be so it would
be horrible should my uncle have been killed first. If _I_ were to
be saved I should certainly save him also, for my pardon would
involve the pardon of both, or my rescue the rescue of both.
Therefore it was important to provide for his safety until after my
fate was decided. The officer seemed to take this last request into
more serious consideration than the first. He said shortly: ‘I may
be able to manage that for you,’ and then at once rose and took up
the papers I had signed. ‘When are we to be shot?’ I asked him.
‘To-morrow morning,’ he replied, as promptly as before. Then he went
out, turning the key of the guard-room upon me.

            .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

“The dawn of the next day broke darkly. It was a terribly stormy
day; great black lurid thunderclouds lay piled along the horizon,
and came up slowly and awfully against the wind. I looked upon them
with terror; they seemed so near the earth, and so like living,
watching things. They hung out of the sky, extending long ghostly
arms downwards, and their gloom and density seemed supernatural. The
soldiers took us out, our hands bound behind us, into a quadrangle
at the back of their barracks. The scene is sharply impressed on my
mind. A palisade of two sides of a square, made of wooden planks,
ran round the quadrangle. Behind this palisade, and pressed up close
against it was a mob of men and women—the people of the town—come to
see the execution. But their faces were sympathetic; an unmistakable
look of mingled grief and rage, not unmixed with desperation—for
they were a down-trodden folk—shone in the hundreds of eyes turned
towards us. I was the only woman among the condemned. My uncle was
there, and poor ‘Fou,’ looking bewildered, and one or two other
prisoners. On the third and fourth sides of the quadrangle was a
high wall, and in a certain place was a niche partly enclosing the
trunk of a tree, cut off at the top. An iron ring was driven into
the trunk midway, evidently for the purpose of securing condemned
persons for execution. I guessed it would be used for that now. In
the centre of the square piece of ground stood a file of soldiers,
armed with carbines, and an officer with a drawn sabre. The palisade
was guarded by a row of soldiers somewhat sparsely distributed,
certainly not more than a dozen in all. A Catholic priest in black
cassock walked beside me, and as we were conducted into the
enclosure, he turned to me and offered religious consolation. I
declined his ministrations, but asked him anxiously if he knew which
of us was to die first. ‘_You_,’ he replied; ‘the officer in charge
of you said you wished it, and he has been able to accede to your
request.’ Even then I felt a singular joy at hearing this, though I
had no longer any expectation of release. Death was, I thought, far
too near at hand for that. Just then a soldier approached us, and
led me, bare-headed, to the tree trunk, where he placed me with my
back against it, and made fast my hands behind me with a rope to the
iron ring. No bandage was put over my eyes. I stood thus, facing the
file of soldiers in the middle of the quadrangle, and noticed that
the officer with the drawn sabre placed himself at the extremity of
the line, composed of six men. In that supreme moment I also noticed
that their uniform was bright with steel accoutrements. Their
helmets were of steel and their carbines, as they raised them and
pointed them at me, ready cocked, glittered in a fitful gleam of
sunlight with the same burnished metal. There was an instant’s
stillness and hush while the men took aim; then I saw the officer
raise his bared sabre as the signal to fire. It flashed in the air;
then, with a suddenness impossible to convey, the whole quadrangle
blazed with an awful light—a light so vivid, so intense, so
blinding, so indescribable that everything was blotted out and
devoured by it. It crossed my brain with instantaneous conviction
that this amazing glare was the physical effect of being shot, and
that the bullets had pierced my brain or heart, and caused this
frightful sense of all-pervading flame. Vaguely I remembered having
read or having been told that such was the result produced on the
nervous system of a victim to death from fire-arms. ‘It is over,’ I
said, ‘that was the bullets.’ But presently there forced itself on
my dazed senses a sound—a confusion of sounds—darkness succeeding
the white flash—then steadying itself into gloomy daylight; a
tumult; a heap of stricken, tumbled men lying stone-still before me;
a fearful horror upon every living face; and then ... it all burst
on me with distinct conviction. The storm which had been gathering
all the morning had culminated in its blackest and most electric
point immediately over-head. The file of soldiers appointed to shoot
me stood exactly under it. Sparkling with bright steel on head and
breast and carbines, they stood shoulder to shoulder, a complete
lightning conductor, and at the end of the chain they formed, their
officer, at the critical moment, raised his shining, naked blade
towards the sky. Instantaneously heaven opened, and the lightning
fell, attracted by the burnished steel. From blade to carbine, from
helmet to breastplate it ran, smiting every man dead as he stood.
They fell like a row of nine-pins, blackened in face and hand in an
instant—in the twinkling of an eye. _Dead._ The electric flame
licked the life out of seven men in that second; not one moved a
muscle or a finger again. Then followed a wild scene. The crowd,
stupefied for a minute by the thunderbolt and the horror of the
devastation it had wrought, recovered sense, and with a mighty shout
hurled itself against the palisade, burst it, leapt over it and
swarmed into the quadrangle, easily overpowering the unnerved
guards. I was surrounded, eager hands unbound mine, arms were thrown
about me; the people roared, and wept, and triumphed, and fell about
me on their knees praising Heaven. I think rain fell, my face was
wet with drops, and my hair—but I knew no more, for I swooned and
lay unconscious in the arms of the crowd. My rescue had indeed come,
and from the very Heavens!”

                                                ANNA KINGSFORD, M.D.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                                FREEDOM.

             Know, striving soul, on truth intent,
             That not with words by mortal sent—
               Faint shimmerings of earthly light—
             Shall ever-living truth be taught,
             Or light to gild the path be bought,
               That leads us upward from the night.

             But govern mind with ordered will,
             Subduing this with knowledge still,
               Fanning the spark within that glows,
             The essence of that power divine,
             The pledge to man from mystic time,
               The light from thrones above that flows.

             Then may the spirit, bathed in light,
             Soar upward from the realms of night,
               No more a fettered earth-bound thing,
             But freed from clay, and doubt, and slime,
             Triumphant over death and time!
               To the eternal ever cling!

                                                            P. H. D.

                          THE INVISIBLE WORLD.

In many of the tasks of life the first step costs the great effort,
and the investigation of truth in the higher regions of Nature
justifies the familiar maxim. The first step for the modern inquirer
is that which carries his consciousness across the threshold of
matter into the invisible world. Never mind for the moment whether
occult progress be attempted by a direct onslaught on the defences
of the invisible world, or by purely internal combats with the
desires of the lower self. The unseen must first become a reality
for anyone who seriously desires to enter into relations with it,
whether he sets his will to work to vanquish his own frailties, or
the forces of Nature on the astral plane. An internal struggle with
material desire undertaken for a spiritual purpose, just as much as
the other kind of contest, is a recognition of the superior realm;
and it is not a struggle of the kind we are contemplating at all, if
it is merely undertaken for a worldly purpose, as thrifty habits may
be cultivated, for instance, at the bidding of the grossest material
selfishness. But though a recognition of the invisible world must in
this way have been forced, at an early stage of his inquiry, on the
mind of everyone who becomes an earnest explorer of Nature’s higher
laws, its invisibility is a terrible barrier in the way of the
progress that would otherwise be made by the throngs of intelligent
materialists who people civilised countries at this epoch of our
history. From the point of view of conventional thinkers—of those
alike who sacrifice their Sunday mornings to provide for the
contingency that there may be something in religion after all, and
of those who are frankly incredulous of any Nature lying beyond the
reach of instrumental research—a tremendous revolution in all their
views of life is accomplished if they are somehow brought face to
face with the reality of super-material phenomena, if they ever
discover the invisible world and come to know it, or any part of it,
as an unequivocal fact.

Long experienced explorers of the unseen often forget how profoundly
clouded the whole region seems from the shore of materialistic
thought. Indeed, from the shore of other systems where habits of
metaphysical speculation would lead men to repudiate the charge of
materialism, the unseen appears to be equally impenetrable to all
human faculties. It is as though we lived beside an ocean always
shrouded from view by a belt of mist. A few persons are in the
constant habit of pushing out beyond in boats, but these, when they
come back, are told, “Nonsense! there is no ocean; you have been
dreaming!” For the vast majority, the mist is an infinite void. Only
by a minority have the few who have passed through it, been even
encountered. Will anyone who knows his generation pretend to say
that even among ordinary religious people the next world is a
certain fact in Nature, like the next street? How many are there who
do more than rest on the hypothesis that there may be somewhere a
heaven to “go to” when the dreadful moment comes at which mortal man
must perforce bid adieu to the warm precincts of the cheerful day.
“God forbid!” a bishop is said to have piously remarked when warned,
during danger at sea, that he would be in Heaven that night. The
next world of commonplace orthodoxy is but too often regarded as a
desperate resource for ruined men, whose fortune of life has been
wrung from them to the last drop. For those who are bankrupt of
breath, “let us trust” (as a frequent phrase expresses the idea)
that some compensation may be provided by Providence hereafter,
though it does all remain so hopelessly obscure.

“Ah, if you could only show me that there really is a life beyond
this—a perpetuation of this real individual Me after I am what my
friends will call dead—you would be giving me a blessing that no
words could over-estimate.” That is a passionate cry from many
hearts to those who talk of other lives for the soul—of spiritual
rewards, or the fruit of Karma in future states of existence.

It is a cry which few people indeed, even among those who have been
in contact with the invisible world, are in a position to satisfy.
Most of us are obliged to reply: “This satisfaction can only be
acquired by a resolute effort; it is impossible for us to bring you
proof of what we know, to save you trouble. If you would know
whether Africa exists, we cannot bring you Africa to prove it; we
can only give you directions how to get there if you are willing to
undertake the journey.” “But why,” we might ask, “cannot you believe
the testimony of those who have had proof of the sort you require.”
The answer always is in effect: “_C’est le premier pas qui coute_.
It would be worth worlds to know, but to believe without personal
knowledge—that would be an act of faith. I might as easily believe
at once in the Roman Catholic Church.”

There is a great difference, really, between the surrender of that
reason claimed by ecclesiastical tyranny and the faith required to
enable a seeker after truth to gain personal cognisance of the
invisible world. The priest and the occultist both claim faith from
the neophyte; but the first bids him develop this by strangling his
reason, the second by satisfying it. Sensible faith is that which
recognises the logic of facts appealing to human intelligence. It is
stupid to believe that which you have no reason for believing; it is
no less stupid to disbelieve that which there is reason to believe.
The majority of modern men and women, indeed—fed exclusively on the
husks of knowledge—are too profoundly ignorant of the records
accumulated by those who have penetrated the unseen to be called
stupid for undervaluing them. But on one or the other horn of the
dilemma they must take their place. They are unconscious of the
existence of the records left, or of the work done by students of
occultism in its various phases; or they must be held responsible
for defects of understanding. Does anyone say: “What are the records
you refer to?” The answer would be analogous to one that might be
given to a person brought up in American backwoods, on modern
practicalities exclusively, and who in mature life should hear
someone refer to classical literature as important. “What book do
you want me to read?” he might ask. What would an accomplished
University devotee of Greek poetry _think_ in reply, even if he
tried to disguise his answer in polite terms?

Any fairly considerable acquaintance with the literature of occult
research—including in that broad designation records of any
supermaterial phenomena—will put any man in a position in which he
must either believe in the existence of the invisible world, or
discover that he is an irrational being, whose “convictions” are
merely acts of submission to the decrees of the multitude. And
then, for most of those who perceive that they must believe, or
who find that they cannot continue to disbelieve, some personal
contact with some phases of the invisible world will probably
follow in the sequence of events; because, once _believing_—once
saturated with a complete conviction that there are other planes
of Nature—these will present themselves to the mind as so
interesting, that it becomes worth while to take trouble in order
to get the gratification of beholding their phenomena in some way
or other; and then success will sooner or later be attained. While
people merely think “there _may be_ an invisible world, let us try
if we can find it out,” they are easily baffled by failure. They
draw one or two covers “blank” and retire from the effort
declaring “there is nothing to be discovered; it is all a
delusion.” The man who has read and assimilated what he has read
is, as we have said above, saturated with a conviction on the
subject. His state of mind remains unaffected by personal failure;
and still impelled by the fascination of the idea, he will try
again and again till he succeeds. When anyone says, “I _wish_ I
could see something out of the common way, but I never have any
luck in such things,” the answer is: “Then you certainly do not
wish _much_.” Probably such people do not wish enough to take the
trouble merely to study. What they wish is that conclusive
phenomena demonstrating the existence of the invisible world
should always be on view at some London theatre, where inquirers
might go without liability to disappointment, when other
engagements permitted.

And yet, though it is so easy to blame and ridicule that attitude of
mind, no one who has the influence of the higher occultism in his
heart, and at the same time a capacity for sympathising with the
best attributes of modern culture, can be otherwise than
indefatigably anxious to waken up the present generation more fully
to an appreciation of the sublime knowledge accessible to those who
get across the outer barriers and come to realise the existence of
the world beyond, once for all. Occultists will often fail to
understand the situation aright. There are some who would do nothing
but draw from their own knowledge of the invisible world a store of
moral maxims, and serve these out to their brethren, fearing to
suggest further inquiries lest danger should be incurred, for, of
course, people are put in danger the higher they climb, falls being
then more disastrous. But maxims to have any value must be in
circuit with knowledge. “Be good!” is a sound maxim. “Be good
children!” is often an efficient exhortation, but it will not
survive the period when the persons addressed say “Why?” And all the
educated world is saying “Why?” now in regard to injunctions which
rest upon incredible assertions. Why is Society so tolerant of some
misdoing which the Church has always specially condemned, though it
lies outside the catalogue of offences like robbery and murder,
proscribed by common convenience? Because maxims which merely rest
upon religion have no longer any binding force; in other words,
because religion is the science, or the sum total of the sciences of
the invisible world, and men now claim to have cut and dried maxims
overhauled on principles to which this age of science has accustomed
them. It is quite possible to get this done. The fact that this _is_
a scientific age is a declaration, in other words, that a time has
come for putting a scientific complexion on religious thought; in
other words again, for beginning to lead the public, in flocks,
where hitherto rare pioneers only have penetrated in secret—across
the threshold unto the limitless realms of the invisible world. By
flocks we need not be supposed to mean crude masses of humanity
selected on no system, but large numbers compared to the rare
explorers of former times, considerable groups of the most
intelligent and advanced minds of the age. A man of the present day,
who has obtained the beautiful culture of modern civilisation, who
may be an accomplished classic, a finely-trained man of science, a
poet, an artist, and yet a person so ignorant or stupid (as to
certain facets of his mind) as not to know anything about the
invisible world, is a creature who provokes in the more enlightened
observer a feeling analogous to that with which one might look at a
lady of fashion, beautiful in the face, but whose winning draperies
you know to hide ugly deformities or repulsive disease. Or treating
the subject more abstractedly, this lovely culture of modern
civilisation is like the soulless statue—the Galatea without life.
Surely it is time that the gods informed the marble with the breath
of the spirit; and have they not shown themselves ready to do this
if the sculptor does but appeal to them?

The man who penetrates, or gets into relations of some sort or other
with the invisible world, will not necessarily be illuminated at
once with a flood of exhilarating knowledge. The new realm may open
out before the explorer in many different ways; and there is much
going astray amidst its innumerable mazes for new comers, as a rule.
But to discuss these perils in detail would be to attempt an essay
on all branches of occultism. For the present we are arguing merely
that to make no journeys there at all is to give up progress, to
move no longer with the onward stream of evolution, to fall out of
the line of march.

It is deplorable that men of intelligence, in the present day,
should neglect to pick up the threads which might guide them to
some knowledge of the invisible world, for two reasons, or rather,
the reasons why this is deplorable may be divided into two great
classes, those which have reference to knowledge, as such, and
those which have reference to the spiritual interests of mankind.
To people who appreciate spiritual interests, nothing else is
relatively worth a thought; but for men of modern civilisation at
large knowledge is worth everything for its own sake; it is the
end they are pursuing, and this being so, it is astounding that
they neglect the most subtle, fascinating and intricate phenomena
of all nature, those which have to do with supermaterial planes of
existence and natural force. And from that point of view, any
passage across the threshold of the invisible world will do as
well as any other. The tables that move without hands, the pencils
that write without fingers, are surely linked with mysteries of
Nature not yet understood, and, therefore, worth examination.
Investigations concerning them bring one face to face with the
forces of the invisible world.

Are we told that science cannot grasp these phenomena to investigate
them? The statement is not true. They cannot be grasped at any time
by anybody, but no more can the depths of stellar space be fathomed
by whoever chooses whenever it suits his leisure. Great telescopes
are scarce; nights perfectly fitted for observation must be waited
for with patience. But when they come, the men who have got the
telescopes take observations and make reports, and their records are
studied by other astronomers, and used as the foundation of
theories, as the raw material of current knowledge. If similar
methods were adopted with even the crudest spiritualistic, not to
speak of scientific, research in occult mystery, the world at large
would not be blundering about as it is, with absurd denials of facts
known to thousands. Clairvoyance again, by flights of perception
through the invisible world, bridges gulfs that are materially
impassable. But what does modern culture know of it? As a scientific
fact, it is enormously more certain than the existence, for example,
of the satellites of Mars; but who disputes the latter fact? They
have been seen, those satellites, if they are not seen easily or
often, and therefore their existence has been established. But five
newspapers out of six in the present day—barometers of prevailing
belief—would profess to disbelieve in clairvoyance if the subject
had to be mentioned; to _disbelieve_ in that which is an elementary
truth having to do with the most easily accessible region of
supermaterial knowledge!

To gain touch with this is _not_ to be put at once in possession of
that certainty concerning the survival after death of the real “Me”
in each case, which is the great point to be established for most
European doubters, but it is the first step. Students of the laws
which govern existence in the higher realms of Nature can gain no
hearing from those to whom that great point remains unsatisfied.
Once the higher realm is felt to be a reality, the possibility of
gaining a knowledge of the laws which prevail there presents itself
to the mind with an altogether new significance. And finally, closer
attention shows that this knowledge certainly has been gained; that
the path leading to spiritual wisdom is defined; that with some of
the powers which reign in the invisible world we may enter into more
or less definite relations beforehand here; that of all practical
pursuits which men of clear heads and resolute purpose can set
themselves to, during the space of incarnate earthly life,
immeasurably the most practical, in so far as it has to do with
objects which dwarf all others in their importance, are those which
have to do with the culture and development of that Higher Self
within them which has its natural home in the invisible world, and
is but a passing guest in the midst of material occupations. To use
and apply the knowledge of supermaterial laws which occult studies
disclose is a life’s task, but of that for the moment we need not
speak. It is with the heedless and frivolous generation at large
that we are concerned in this appeal—with those who waste great
gifts of intelligence and splendid energies and courage and
indomitable industry on transitory pursuits, on money-making (in
excess), on discovery and research that merely subserve passing
material wants, on the struggle for flattering distinctions which
cast a meteoric gleam on the brief journey to personal oblivion, on
the “solid realities” of the visible world, which, like the ice
drops of a hailstorm, are as hard as bullets one minute and
dissolved in new forms the next. It is all for want of taking the
first step that they are squandering their lives. Their immediate
predecessors _knew_ no more than they perhaps of the hidden
mysteries, but they were less critical of the distorted shape in
which pious tradition told them of the future and of the powers
above. The heirs of modern thought have grown in knowledge of
molecules and of the transmutation of energy but as they look back
upon the beliefs which contented their forefathers, they perceive
that their fuller science of the physical plane has entirely shut
out the wide, vague prospect that used to gleam on the earlier
horizon.

Rational human creatures cannot afford to leave that prospect in a
permanent eclipse. The neglect of all facts concerned with the
durabilities of existence; the concentration of effort and interest
on the hastily dissolving view of its physically manifested phases,
is the crying folly of the period. To spring at once into complete
conscious spiritual relationship with the higher planes of Nature is
not an easy achievement. The great Realities lie within a domain
which makes no direct appeal to the five senses of the earthly body,
and the only way of approaching their comprehension is to press on
through the darkness, beyond which other men before us declare that
they have reached illuminated altitudes.

But meanwhile, the torpor of the educated world at large in regard
to the promptings which ought now to stir its activity in this
direction is little less than idiotic. Idiotic relatively, that is
to say, to spiritual culture. There are men of illustrious fame in
the various provinces of intellectual culture, who are behaving
relatively to their own higher potentialities, as the luckless
victim of a shallow skull may behave towards the teachings of
science and art. But there is always one thing to be remembered
about them; they are curable. Their cure can be undertaken with sure
certainty of success at any moment, but for each sufferer from that
inner cataract which shuts out from his consciousness the prospect
of the invisible world, there is only one surgeon who can
successfully perform the necessary operation—the man himself. What
we can do who have accomplished the feat for ourselves, is to
encourage others—not to _go_, but to come and do likewise.

                                                      A. P. SINNETT.

[Illustration: decorative separator]


                          THE MYSTIC THOUGHT.

       When will come rest? Is it alone the silent grave
         That can bring true peace to the restless soul
         That striving, yearns to reach some distant goal,
       Toss’d like a boat on the crest of a mighty wave?
       Is there oblivion in the cold, dark tomb
         To dull the heart and kill the abject fear
       Which loads the sense, when unknown dangers loom
         From regions that our sense perceives not here?
       When from the soul goes forth the mystic thought
         That we have higher purpose than we know,
         And each must reap the fruit he cares to sow,
       Or learn the duties he himself has taught:
       Can this be killed?—no, surely!—but that lamp can save
       That burns within us here—and burns beyond the grave.

                                                      P. H. DALBIAC.


                  =THE BLOSSOM AND THE FRUIT=:

                  _THE TRUE STORY OF A MAGICIAN_.

                           (_Continued._)

                         ---------------------

                         BY MABEL COLLINS,

         Author of “THE PRETTIEST WOMAN IN WARSAW,” &c., &c.,
 And Scribe of “THE IDYLL OF THE WHITE LOTUS,” and “THROUGH THE GATES
                              OF GOLD.”

                         ---------------------

                               CHAPTER V.

Adventure is said to be sweet to the young; if it was so to Hilary,
he must soon have found abundant pleasure in the possession of
enough sweets. For the next few days scarcely an hour passed without
an event large enough in his eyes to be an adventure.

He was ready at the hour Fleta had named; and had provided against
all probable contingencies by taking with him the smallest possible
amount of luggage. For aught he knew they might have to climb
mountains in the course of this journey. And moreover he knew
Fleta’s unprincess-like distaste for superfluities; he would not
have been surprised to see her start in her riding habit and take no
luggage at all. The difficulty he dreaded was his mother’s surprise
at this scant provision of his. But good luck—or was it something
else?—took her away. She was summoned to visit a sick friend at a
little distance out of the city, and said good-bye to Hilary before
her departure. So Hilary made his preparations without being
troubled by criticism.

At noon a lad presented himself at the door of the Estanol’s house,
with a note which he said he was to give into Hilary’s own hand.
Hilary immediately went to him and took it, as he guessed it was
from Fleta. A single line!—and no signature!—

“I am waiting for you outside the north gate.”

Hilary took his valise in his hand, afraid to hire a carriage lest
it should not please her that he brought any eyes to note their
meeting. He walked out of the city by the quietest side streets he
could select, hoping not to meet any of his friends. He met no one
he knew, and with a sigh of relief passed out through the gate and
walked on to the broad country road beyond it. Drawn up under some
trees was a handsome travelling carriage, with four horses and
postilions. Hilary was surprised. He had not expected so much
luxury. When he reached the carriage he was even more surprised.
Fleta was hardly dressed as for a journey; she wore a much richer
robe than usual, and her head and shoulders were covered with
beautiful black lace. She leaned back in a corner of the roomy
carriage, with a voluptuous dreamy expression on her face which was
new to Hilary. Opposite her sat Father Amyot. Hilary could not but
regard the priest with amazement. Was the town to lose its favourite
confessor? How then could all the gossips in it be prevented from
hearing of the Princess Fleta’s journey? But Hilary resolved not to
harass himself with conjecture. He entered the carriage and Fleta
motioned to him to seat himself at her side.

At her side! Yes, that was his place. And Father Amyot, the father
confessor, beloved and almost worshipped by the people, in whose
breast reposed the secrets and the sorrows of the city; Father
Amyot, who was the model of piety to all who knew him, sat opposite
in the carriage. Did he watch the lovers? Seemingly not. His eyes
were lowered and his gaze was apparently fixed on his clasped hands.
He sat there like a statue. Once or twice when Hilary glanced at his
face, he fancied he must be there unwillingly. Was it so? Was he
Fleta’s tool and servant held by her domineering temper to do her
bidding? Surely not. Father Amyot was too well known as a man of
power for the idea to be credible. Hilary checked himself for the
hundredth time in these hopeless speculations and determined to
enjoy the moment he was in possession of and not trouble about the
next one till it came; nor yet endeavour to read others’ hearts. And
so this young philosopher went open eyed, as he believed, to his
destruction.

The carriage rolled away at a great speed; it was drawn by four
beautiful Russian horses, and the postilions were Fleta’s own, and
accustomed to her likings. She was a most daring and intrepid rider
and nothing pleased her in the way of motion except great speed. She
was a lover of animals and her horses were the finest kept in the
city. It was strange to Hilary to try and realise her singular
independence of position, as to-day he felt impelled to. For himself
he was still to a great extent in leading strings; he had made no
position for himself, nor even planned any career; he was dependent
on his mother’s fortune, and consequently, to a certain extent,
could act only according to her approval. He was still so young that
all this seemed natural enough. But Fleta was younger than himself,
though it was difficult always to remember it, so dominant was her
temper. A glance at her fresh face still so soft in its outlines as
to have something childish about it when her expression permitted;
at her figure, so slender in spite of its stateliness, recalled the
fact that the Princess was indeed only a girl. Did the man who was
about to marry her suppose that his young Queen was a creature
unformed, fresh from the schoolroom, altogether malleable to his
hand?

During the whole of the afternoon they drove on with scarcely a
pause, and with very little conversation to pass the time. Yet for
Hilary it flew with swift wings. The mere sensation of his novel
position was enough for him as yet. To be beside Fleta and to watch
her mysterious face for so long together satisfied for the moment
his longing soul. Fleta herself seemed buried in profound thought.
She sat silent, her eyes on the country they passed through, but her
mind, as far as Hilary could judge, wandering in some remote region.
As for Father Amyot, his regard remained fixed upon a small crucifix
which he held hidden within his clasped hands, and now and then his
lips moved in prayer, while, on that austere face, no expression
seemed to have room but that of adoration or contemplation of the
divine.

At sundown they stopped at a very small way-side inn. Hilary could
not believe they were going to stay here, for it looked little more
than a place where men drink and horses are fed. Yet so it was. The
carriage was driven round to the side of the small house, the horses
taken out of it, and Fleta led the way in at a side door, followed
by her two companions.

Within they found a motherly, plain and kindly woman, who evidently
knew Fleta well; Hilary learned afterwards that this landlady had
been a kitchen maid in the royal household. And now he saw strange
things indeed. For this inn was in reality nothing but a drinking
shop for the drivers who passed along the road. It had no parlour,
nor any accommodation for travellers of a better sort. And Fleta
knew this, as was evident at once. She drew a hard chair forward,
close to the great fire which flamed up the wide open chimney, and
sat down seemingly quite at her ease.

“We must have some supper,” she said to the landlady. “Get us what
you can. Can you find room for these gentlemen to-night?”

The landlady came near to Fleta and spoke in a low voice; the
Princess laughed.

“There are no bedrooms in this house, it seems,” she said, aloud,
“in fact, it is not an hotel. Shall we drive on or shall we sit here
through the night?”

“The horses are tired,” said Father Amyot, speaking for the first
time since they had left the city.

“True,” said Fleta, absently—for already she appeared to be thinking
of something else. “I suppose, then, we must stay here.”

Hilary had never passed, nor ever contemplated passing, a night in
such rough fashion. He was fond of comfort, or rather of luxury. But
what could he do when his Princess, the greatest lady in the land,
set him the example. Any protest would have appeared effeminate, and
his pride held him silent. Still, when after a very indifferent
supper, they all returned to the hard wooden chairs beside the fire,
Hilary for the moment very sincerely wished himself at home in his
own comfortable rooms. As he wished this, suddenly he became aware
that Fleta’s dark eyes had turned upon him, and he would not look
up, for he believed she had read his thought. He wished he could
have hidden it from her, for he had no mind to be held as more
effeminate than herself.

There was a sort of second kitchen even rougher and more cheerless
than the one in which they sat; and there the postilions and other
men, the ordinary customers of the house, were crowded together,
drinking and talking and singing. Their presence was horrid to
Hilary, who was conscious of refined susceptibilities, but Fleta
seemed quite indifferent to the noise they made and the odour of
their coarse tobacco; or rather it might be that she was unaware of
anything outside her own thoughts. She sat, her chin on her hand,
looking into the fire; and so graceful and perfect was her attitude
that she had the air of being a masterpiece of art placed amid the
commonest surroundings. She looked more lovely than ever from the
contrast, but yet the incongruity was painful to Hilary.

The silence in the room in which they sat became the more marked
from contrast with the increasing noise in the crowded room without.
At last, however, the hour came for the house to be closed and the
landlady politely showed her customers the door; all except those
who were travellers on the road. These, including the postilions,
gathered into the chimney corner and became quiet, at last falling
sound asleep. To Hilary it seemed now that he was living through a
painful dream, and he longed for the awakening—willing to awake,
even if that meant that he would be at home and away from Fleta.

At last sleep came to him, and his head drooped forward; he sat
there, upright in the wooden chair, fast asleep. When he awoke it
was with a sense of pain in every limb, from the posture which he
had maintained; and he could scarcely refrain from crying out when
he attempted to move. But he instantly remembered that if the others
were sleeping he must not wake them. Then he quickly looked round.
Father Amyot sat near, looking just as he had looked since they
entered the house; he might have been a statue. Fleta’s chair was
empty.

Hilary roused himself, sat up and stared at her empty place; then
looked all round the kitchen. An idea occurred to him; possibly the
landlady had found some resting place for the young Princess. A
sense of oppression came over him; the kitchen seemed stifling. He
rose with difficulty and stretched himself, then found his way out
into the air. It was a glorious morning; the sun had just risen, the
world seemed like a beautiful woman seen in her sleep. How sharp the
sweet fresh air was! Hilary drew a deep breath of it. The country in
which this lonely little inn stood was exceedingly lovely, and at
this moment it wore its most fascinating appearance. A sense of
great delight came upon Hilary; the uneasiness of the past night was
at an end, and he was glad now and full of youth and strength. He
turned and walked away from the house, soon leaving the road and
plunging into the dewy grass. There was a stream in the valley, and
here he determined to bathe. He soon reached it, and in another
moment had hastily undressed, and was plunged in the ice-cold water.
An intoxicating sense of vigour came over him as he experienced the
keen contact. Never had he felt so full of life as now! It was not
possible to remain long in the water, it was so intensely cold; he
sprang out again and stood for a moment on the bank in the brilliant
morning sunshine, looking like a magnificent figure carved by the
god of the day, his flesh gleaming in the light. Slowly he began at
last to put on his dress, feeling as if in some way this meant a
partial return and submission to civilization. Something of the
savage which lay deep hidden in him had been roused and touched. A
fire burned that hitherto he had never felt, and which made him long
for pure freedom and uncriticised life. And this was Hilary Estanol!
It seemed incredible that a draught of fresh morning air, a plunge
into ice-cold water beneath the open sky, should have been enough to
unloose the savage in him, which was held fast beneath his
conventional and languid self, as it is in all of us, and all those
whom we meet in ordinary life. He moved hastily, striding on as
though he were hurrying to some end, but it was merely a new
pleasure in motion. There was a grove of old yew trees near the
stream; a grove which with the superstitious was held to be sacred.
That it should be revered was no wonder, so stately were the ancient
trees, so deep the shadow they cast. Hilary went towards this grove,
attracted by its splendid appearance; as he approached its margin a
dim sense of familiarity came over him. Never had he left the city
by this road, yet it seemed to him that he had entered the grove of
yews by the early morning light already many a time. We are all
accustomed to meet with this curious sensation; Hilary laughed at it
and put it away. What if he had visited this spot in a dream? Now it
was broad daylight, and he felt himself young and a giant. He
plunged into the deep shadow, pleased by the contrast it made to the
brilliant light without.

Suddenly his heart leaped within him and his brain reeled. For there
before him, stood Fleta; and the brilliant Princess looked like a
spirit of the night, so pale and grave and proud was her face and so
much a part did she seem of the deep shadow of the wood.

“Is it you?” she said with a smile, a smile of mystery and deep
unfathomable knowledge.

“Yes it is!” he answered, and felt, as he spoke, that he said
something in those words which he did not himself understand. They
stood side by side for a moment in silence; and then Hilary
remembered himself to be alone with this woman, alone with her in
the midst of the world. They were separated by the hour from other
men and women, for the world still lay asleep; they were separated
by the deep shadow of the wood from all moving life that answered to
the sun. They were alone—and overwhelmed by this sudden sense of
solitude Hilary spoke out his soul.

“Princess,” he said, “I am ready to be your blind servant, your dumb
slave, speaking and seeing only when you tell me. You know well why
I am willing to be the tool in your hands. It is because I love you.
But you must pay a price for your tool if you would have it! I
cannot only worship at your feet. Fleta, you must give yourself to
me, absolutely, utterly. Marry that man to whom you are betrothed if
you desire to be a queen, but to me you must give your love,
yourself. Ah! Fleta, you cannot refuse me!”

Fleta stood still a long moment, her eyes upon his face.

“No,” she said, “I cannot refuse you.”

And to Hilary, for an instant of horror, it seemed to him that in
her eyes was a glance of ineffable scorn. Yet there was love in the
smile on her lips and in the touch of her hand as she laid it in
his.

“The bond is made,” she said, “all that you can take of me is yours.
And I will pay you for your love with my love. Only do not forget
that you and I are different—that we are after all, two persons—that
we cannot love in exactly the same way. Do not forget this!”

Hilary knew not what to answer. As she spoke the last words he
recognised his princess, he saw the queen before him. What did she
mean? Well, he was so unhappy that his love had gone from him to a
lady of royal birth. It could not be undone, this folly. He must be
content to take that part which a subject may take in the life of a
queen, even though he be her lover. The thought brought a pang, a
swift stab to his heart and a sigh burst from his lips. Fleta put
her hand on his arm.

“Do not be sad so soon,” she said, “let us wait for trouble. Come,
let us go out into the sunshine.”

They went out, hand in hand; they wandered down beside the stream
and looked into the gleaming waters.

                              CHAPTER VI.

That day the journey began early, and was very protracted. Twice
during it they halted at little inns to rest the horses and to
obtain what food they could. By the evening they had entered upon
the most deserted region of the great forest which was one of the
prides of the country. The King’s hunting seat, where he now was,
stood in a part of this forest, but in quite another region, a long
distance from this wild place where Hilary and his companions now
were. Hilary had never been within the forest, as few from the city
ever penetrated it except as part of the King’s retinue, and then
they only saw such tracts of it as were preserved and in order. Of
this wilder region practically little was known, and the spirit of
adventure within Hilary made him rejoice to find that their journey
led them through this unpopulated district. His curiosity as to
their destination was not now very acute, for the experiences of the
passing moments were all sufficient. It is true that he was
conscious of the great gulf fixed between himself and Fleta. He knew
her to be his superior in every respect. He knew not only that he
must always be separated from her by their difference in station but
that he was more vitally separated from her by their difference in
thought—and that even now. But he was made happy by a look of love
that plunged deep from her eyes into his own now and again, and he
was thrilled to the heart when her hand touched his with a light and
delicate pressure that he alone could understand. Ah! that secret
understanding which separates lovers from all the rest of the world.
How sweet it is! How strange it is, too, for they are overpowered by
a mutual sense of sympathy which appears to be a supreme
intelligence, giving each the power to look into the other’s heart.
Dear moments are they when this is realised, when all life outside
the sacred circle in which the two dwell is obscure and dim, while
that within is rich, and strong, and sweet. Hilary lived supremely
content only in the consciousness of being near this woman whom he
loved; for now that he had actually asked her love, and been granted
it, nothing else existed for him save that sweet fact. He was
indifferent to the hardships, and, indeed, probable dangers, of the
journey they were upon, which might have made a more intrepid spirit
uneasy; for now he was content to suffer, or even to die, if all
conditions were shared with Fleta. All her life could not be shared
with him, but all his could be shared with her. When a man reaches
this point, and is content to face such a state of things between
himself and the woman he loves, he may be reckoned as being in love
indeed.

Quite late at night it was when this day’s journey ended, and the
splendid horses were really tired out. But a certain point evidently
had to be reached, and the postilions pushed on. Fleta at last
seemed to grow a little anxious, and several times rose in the
carriage to look on ahead; once or twice she inquired of the
postilions if they were certain of their way. They answered yes;
though how that could be was to Hilary a mystery, for they had been
for a long while travelling over mere grass tracts, of which there
were many, to his eyes undistinguishable one from the other. But the
postilions either had landmarks which he could not detect, or else
knew their way very well. At last they stopped; and in the dim light
Hilary saw that there was a gate at the side of the track, a gate
wide enough to drive through, but of the very simplest construction.
It might have defended merely a spot where young trees were planted,
or some kind of preserving done; and it was set in a fence of the
same character, almost entirely hidden by thick growth of wild
shrubs. The Princess Fleta produced from her dress a whistle on
which she sounded a clear ringing note, and then everybody sat still
and waited. It seemed to Hilary that it was quite a long while that
they waited; perhaps it was not really long, but the night was so
still, the silence so profound, the feeling of expectancy so strong.
He was, for the first time since they started, really very curious
as to what would happen next. What did happen at last was this.
There was a sound of laughter and footsteps, and presently two
figures appeared at the gate; one that of a tall man, the other that
of a young, slight girl. The gate was unlocked and thrown wide open,
and a moment later the young girl was in the carriage, embracing
Fleta with the greatest enthusiasm and delight. Hilary hardly knew
how everything happened, but presently the whole party was standing
together inside the gate, the carriage had driven in and was out of
sight. Then the tall man shut and locked the gate, after which he
turned back, and walked on ahead with the young girl at his side,
while Hilary followed with Fleta. The moon had risen now, and Hilary
could see her beautiful face plainly, wearing on it an unusually gay
and happy expression; her lips seemed to smile at her own thoughts.
The sweet gladness in her face made Hilary’s heart spring with joy.
It could not be rejoining her friends that made her so glad, for
they had gone on and left her alone with him.

“Fleta—my princess—no, my Fleta,” he said, “are you happy to be with
me? I think you are!”

“Yes, I am happy to be with you—but I am not Fleta.”

“Not Fleta!” echoed Hilary, in utter incredulity.

He stopped, and catching his companion’s hand, looked into her face.
She glanced up, and her eyes were full of shy coquetry and ready
gaiety.

“I might be her twin sister, might I not, if I am not Fleta herself?
Ah! no, Fleta’s fate is to live in a court—mine to live in a forest
Live!—no, it is not life!”

What was it in that voice that made his heart grow hot with passion?
Fiercely he exclaimed to himself that it _was_, it _must_, be
Fleta’s voice. No other woman could speak in such tones—no other
woman’s words give him such a sense of maddening joy.

“Oh! yes,” he said, “it is life—when one loves, one lives anywhere.”

“Yes, perhaps, when one loves!” was the answer.

“You told me this morning that you loved me, Fleta!” cried Hilary in
despair.

“Ah! but I am not Fleta,” was the mocking answer. It sounded like
mockery indeed as she spoke. And yet the voice was Fleta’s. There
was no doubt of that. He looked, he listened, he watched. The voice,
the face, the glorious eyes, were Fleta’s. It was Fleta who was
beside him, say she what she might.

They had been following the others all this while, and had now
reached a clearing in the wood, where was a garden full of sweet
flowers, as Hilary could tell at once by the rich scents that came
to him on the night air.

“I am glad we have reached the house,” said his companion, “for I am
very tired and hungry. Are not you? I wonder what we shall have for
supper. You know this is an enchanted place which we call the palace
of surprises. We never know what will happen next. That is why one
can enjoy a holiday here as one can enjoy it no where else. At home
there is a frightful monotony about the eating and drinking
Everything is perfect, of course, but it is always the same. Now
here one is fed like a Russian one day, and a Hungarian the next.
There is a perpetual novelty about the menus, and yet they are
always good. Is not that extraordinary. And oh! the wines, great
heavens! what a cellar our sainted father keeps. I can only bless,
with all my heart, the long dead founders of his order, who
instituted such a system.”

Hilary had regarded his companion with increasing amazement during
this speech. Certainly it was unlike Fleta. Was she acting for his
benefit? But at the words “sainted father” another idea thrust that
one out of his head. What had become of Father Amyot? He had not
seen him leave the carriage, or approach the house.

“Oh, your holy companion has gone to his brethren,” said the girl,
with a laugh. “They have a place of their own where they torture
themselves and mortify the flesh. But they entertain us well, and
that is what I care for. We will have a dance to-night. Oh! Hilary,
the music here! It is better than that of any band in the world!”

“If you are not, Fleta, how do you know my name?”

“Simple creature! What a question! Why, Fleta has told me all about
you. Did you never hear that the princess had a foster-sister, and
that none could ever tell which was which, so like were we—and are
we! Did you never hear that Fleta’s mother was blonde, and dull, and
plain, and that Fleta is like none of her own family? Oh, Hilary,
you, fresh from the city, you know nothing!”

A sudden remembrance crossed Hilary’s mind.

“I _have_ heard,” he said, “that no one could tell where Fleta had
drawn her beauty from. But I believe you draw it from your own
beautiful soul!”

“Ah, you still think me Fleta? I have had some happy hours in the
city before now when Fleta has let me play at being a princess. Ah,
but the men all thought the princess in a strange, charming,
delightful humour on these days. And when next they saw her, that
humour was gone, and they were afraid to speak to her. Come in. I am
starving!”

They had entered a wide, low doorway, and stood now within the great
hall. What a strange hall it was! The floor was covered with the
skins of animals, many of them very handsome skins; and great jars
held flowering plants, the scent from which made the air rich and
heavy. A wood fire burned on the wide hearth, and before it, still
in the dress she had travelled in, stood—Fleta.

Yes, Fleta.

The girl who stood at Hilary’s side laughed and clapped her hands as
he uttered a cry of amazement, even of horror.

“This is some of your magic, Fleta!” he exclaimed involuntarily.

The Princess turned at his words. She was looking singularly grave
and stern; her glance gave Hilary a sense of almost fear.

“No,” she answered in a low, quiet voice that had a tone, as Hilary
fancied, of pain, “it is not magic. It is all very natural. This is
Adine, my little sister; so like me that I do not know her from
myself.”

She drew Adine to her with a gesture which had a protecting
tenderness in it. This was the Princess who spoke, queen-like in her
kindness. Hilary stood, unable to speak, unable to think, unable to
understand. Before him stood two girls—each Fleta. Only by the
difference of expression could he detect any difference between
them. One threw him back the most coquettish and charming glance, as
she went towards her grave sister. He could feel keenly how vitally
different the two were. Yet they stood side by side, and though
Fleta said “my little sister” there was no outward difference
between them. Adine was as tall, as beautiful—and the same in
everything!

“Do not be startled,” said Fleta quietly, “you will soon grow used
to the likeness.”

“Though I doubt,” added Adine, with a wicked glance from her
brilliant eyes, “whether you will ever tell us apart except when we
are not together.”

“Come,” said Fleta, “let us go and wash the travel stains off. It is
just supper time.”

Fleta talked of travel stains, but as Hilary looked at her queenly
beauty, he thought she seemed as fresh as though she had but from
this moment come from the hands of her maid. However, the two went
away arm in arm, Adine turning at the door to have one last glance
of amusement at Hilary’s utterly perplexed face. He was left alone,
and he remained standing where he was, without power of thought or
motion.

Presently some one came and touched him on the shoulder; this was
necessary in order to attract his attention. It was the tall man who
had come to the gate to meet them. He was very handsome, and with
the most cheerful and good-natured expression; his blue eyes were
full of laughter.

“Come,” he said, “come and see your room. I am master of the
ceremonies here; apply to me for anything you want—even information!
I may, or may not give it, according to the decision of the powers
that be. Call me Mark. I have a much longer name, in fact,
half-a-dozen much longer ones, and a few titles to boot; but they
would not interest you, and in the midst of a forest where nobody
has any dignity, a name of one syllable is by far the best.” While
he talked on like this, apparently indifferent as to whether Hilary
listened or no, he led the way out of the hall and down a wide,
carpeted corridor. He opened the last door in this, and ushered
Hilary in.

(_To be continued._)

                          THE SCIENCE OF LIFE.

What is Life? Hundreds of the most philosophical minds, scores of
learned well-skilled physicians, have asked themselves the question,
but to little purpose. The veil thrown over primordial Kosmos and
the mysterious beginnings of life upon it, has never been withdrawn
to the satisfaction of earnest, honest science. The more the men of
official learning try to penetrate through its dark folds, the more
intense becomes that darkness, and the less they see, for they are
like the treasure-hunter, who went across the wide seas to look for
that which lay buried in his own garden.

What is then this Science? Is it biology, or the study of life in
its general aspect? No. Is it physiology, or the science of organic
function? Neither; for the former leaves the problem as much the
riddle of the Sphinx as ever; and the latter is the science of death
far more than that of life. Physiology is based upon the study of
the different organic functions and the organs necessary to the
manifestations of life, but that which science calls living matter,
is, in sober truth, _dead matter_. Every molecule of the living
organs contains the germ of death in itself, and begins dying as
soon as born, in order that its successor-molecule should live only
to die in its turn. An organ, a natural part of every living being,
is but the medium for some special function in life, and is a
combination of such molecules. The vital organ, the _whole_, puts
the mask of life on, and thus conceals the constant decay and death
of its parts. Thus, neither biology nor physiology are the science,
nor even branches of the _Science of Life_, but only that of the
_appearances_ of life. While true philosophy stands Œdipus-like
before the Sphinx of life, hardly daring to utter the paradox
contained in the answer to the riddle propounded, materialistic
science, as arrogant as ever, never doubting its own wisdom for one
moment, biologises itself and many others into the belief that it
has solved the awful problem of existence. In truth, however, has it
even so much as approached its threshold? It is not, surely, by
attempting to deceive itself and the unwary in saying that life is
but the result of molecular complexity, that it can ever hope to
promote the truth. Is vital force, indeed, only a “phantom,” as
Du-Bois Reymond calls it? For his taunt that “life,” as something
independent, is but the _asylum ignorantiæ_ of those who seek refuge
in abstractions, when direct explanation is impossible, applies with
far more force and justice to those materialists who would blind
people to the reality of facts, by substituting bombast and
jaw-breaking words in their place. Have any of the five divisions of
the functions of life, so pretentiously named—Archebiosis,
Biocrosis, Biodiæresis, Biocænosis and Bioparodosis[49], ever helped
a Huxley or a Hæckel to probe more fully the mystery of the
generations of the humblest ant—let alone of man? Most certainly
not. For life, and everything pertaining to it, belongs to the
lawful domain of the _metaphysician_ and psychologist, and physical
science has no claim upon it. “That which hath been, is that which
shall be; and that which hath been is named already—and it is known
that it is MAN”—is the answer to the riddle of the Sphinx. But “man”
here, does not refer to _physical_ man—not in its esoteric meaning,
at any rate. Scalpels and microscopes may solve the mystery of the
material parts of _the shell of man_: they can never cut a window
into his soul to open the smallest vista on any of the wider
horizons of being.

-----

Footnote 49:

  Or Life-origination, Life-fusion, Life-division, Life-renewal and
  Life-transmission.

-----

It is those thinkers alone, who, following the Delphic injunction,
have cognized life in their _inner_ selves, those who have studied
it thoroughly in themselves, before attempting to trace and analyze
its reflection in their outer shells, who are the only ones rewarded
with some measure of success. Like the fire-philosophers of the
Middle Ages, they have skipped over the _appearances_ of light and
fire in the world of effects, and centred their whole attention upon
the producing arcane agencies. Thence, tracing these to the one
abstract cause, they have attempted to fathom the MYSTERY, each as
far as his intellectual capacities permitted him. Thus they have
ascertained that (1) the _seemingly_ living mechanism called
physical man, is but the fuel, the material, upon which life feeds,
in order to manifest itself; and (2) that thereby the inner man
receives as his wage and reward the possibility of accumulating
additional experiences of the terrestrial illusions called lives.

One of such philosophers is now undeniably the great Russian
novelist and reformer, Count Lef N. Tolstoi. How near his views are
to the esoteric and philosophical teachings of higher Theosophy,
will be found on the perusal of a few fragments from a lecture
delivered by him at Moscow before the local Psychological Society.

Discussing the problem of life, the Count asks his audience to
admit, for the sake of argument, _an impossibility_. Says the
lecturer:—

Let us grant for a moment that all that which modern science longs
to learn of life, it has learnt, and now knows; that the problem has
become as clear as day; that it is clear how organic matter has, by
simple adaptation, come to be originated from inorganic material;
that it is as clear how natural forces may be transformed into
feelings, will, thought, and that finally, all this is known, not
only to the city student, but to every village schoolboy, as well.

I am aware, then, that such and such thoughts and feelings originate
from such and such motions. Well, and what then? Can I, or cannot I,
produce and guide such motions, in order to excite within my brain
corresponding thoughts? The question—what are the thoughts and
feelings I ought to generate in myself and others, remains still,
not only unsolved, but even untouched.

Yet it is precisely this question which is the _one_ fundamental
question of the central idea of life.

Science has chosen as its object a few manifestations that accompany
life; and _mistaking_[50] the part for the whole, called these
manifestations the integral total of life....”

-----

Footnote 50:

  “Mistaking” is an erroneous term to use. The men of science know
  but too well that what they teach concerning life is a
  materialistic fiction contradicted at every step by logic and
  fact. In this particular question science is abused, and made to
  serve personal hobbies and a determined policy of crushing in
  humanity every spiritual aspiration and thought. “_Pretending_ to
  mistake” would be more correct.—H. P. B.

-----

The question inseparable from the idea of life is not _whence_ life,
but _how one should live_ that life: and it is only by first
starting with this question that one can hope to approach some
solution in the problem of existence.

The answer to the query “How are we to live?” appears so simple to
man that he esteems it hardly worth his while to touch upon it.

... One must live the best way one can—that’s all. This seems at
first sight very simple and well known to all, but it is by far
neither as simple nor as well known as one may imagine....

The idea of life appears to man in the beginning as a most simple
and self-evident business. First of all, it seems to him that life
is in himself, in his own body. No sooner, however, does one
commence his search after that life, in any one given spot of the
said body, than one meets with difficulties. Life is not in the
hair, nor in the nails; neither is it in the foot nor the arm, which
may both be amputated; it is not in the blood, it is not in the
heart, and it is not in the brain. It is everywhere and it is
nowhere. It comes to this: life cannot be found in any of its
dwelling-places. Then man begins to look for life in Time; and that,
too, appears at first a very easy matter.... Yet again, no sooner
has he started on his chase than he perceives that here also the
business is more complicated than he had thought. Now, I have
_lived_ fifty-eight years, so says my baptismal church record. But I
know that out of these fifty-eight years I slept over twenty. How
then? have I lived all these years, or have I not? Deduct the months
of my gestation, and those I passed in the arms of my nurse, and
shall we call this life, also? Again, out of the remaining
thirty-eight years, I know that a good half of that time I slept
while moving about; and thus, I could no more say in this case,
whether I lived during that time or not. I may have lived a little,
and vegetated a little. Here again, one finds that in time, as in
the body, life is everywhere, yet nowhere. And now the question
naturally arises, whence, then, that life which I can trace to
nowhere? Now—will I learn.... But it so happens that in this
direction also, what seemed to me so easy at first, now seems
impossible. I must have been searching for something else, not for
my life, assuredly. Therefore, once we have to go in search of the
whereabouts of life—if search we have to—then it should be neither
in space nor in time, neither as cause nor effect, but as a
something which I cognize within myself as quite independent from
Space, time and causality.

That which remains to do now is to study _self_. But how do I
cognize life in myself?

This is how I cognize it. I know, to begin with, that I live; and
that I live wishing for myself everything that is good, wishing this
since I can remember myself, to this day, and from morn till night.
All that lives outside of myself is important in my eyes, but only
in so far as it co-operates with the creation of that which is
productive of _my_ welfare. The Universe is important in my sight
only because it can give _me_, pleasure.

Meanwhile, something else is bound up with this knowledge in me of
my existence. Inseparable from the life I feel, is another cognition
allied to it; namely, that besides myself, I am surrounded with a
whole world of living creatures, possessed, as I am myself, of the
same instinctive realization of their exclusive lives; that all
these creatures live for their own objects, which objects are
foreign to me; that those creatures do not know, nor do they care to
know, anything of my pretensions to an exclusive life, and that all
these creatures, in order to achieve success in their objects, are
ready to annihilate me at any moment. But this is not all. While
watching the destruction of creatures similar in all to myself, I
also know that for me too, for that precious ME in whom alone life
is represented, a very speedy and inevitable destruction is lying in
wait.

It is as if there were two “I’s” in man; it is as if they could
never live in peace together; it is as if they were eternally
struggling, and ever trying to expel each other.

One “I” says, “I alone am living as one should live, all the rest
only seems to live. Therefore, the whole _raison d’être_ for the
universe is in that _I_ may be made comfortable.”

The other “I” replies, “The universe is not for thee at all, but for
its own aims and purposes, and it cares little to know whether thou
art happy or unhappy.”

Life becomes a dreadful thing after this!

One “I” says, “I only want the gratification of all my wants and
desires, and that is why I need the universe.”

The other “I” replies, “All animal life lives only for the
gratification of its wants and desires. It is the wants and desires
of animals alone that are gratified at the expense and detriment of
other animals; hence the ceaseless struggle between the animal
species. Thou art an animal, and therefore thou hast to struggle.
Yet, however successful in thy struggle, the rest of the struggling
creatures must sooner or later crush thee.”

Still worse! life becomes still more dreadful....

But the most terrible of all, that which includes in itself the
whole of the foregoing, is that:—

One “I” says, “I want to live, to live for ever.”

And that the other “I” replies, “Thou shalt surely, perhaps in a few
minutes, die; as also shall die all those thou lovest, for thou and
they are destroying with every motion your lives, and thus
approaching ever nearer suffering, death, all that which thou so
hatest, and which thou fearest above anything else.”

This is the worst of all....

To change this condition is impossible.... One can avoid moving,
sleeping, eating, even breathing, but one cannot escape from
thinking. One thinks, and that thought, _my_ thought, is poisoning
every step in my life, as a personality.

No sooner has man commenced a conscious life than that consciousness
repeats to him incessantly without respite, over and over the same
thing again. “To live such life as you feel and see in your past,
the life lived by animals and many men too, lived in _that_ way,
which made you become what you are now—is no longer possible. Were
you to attempt doing so, you could never escape thereby the struggle
with all the world of creatures which live as you do—for their
personal objects; and then those creatures will inevitably destroy
you.”...

To change this situation is impossible. There remains but one thing
to do, and that is always done by him who, beginning to live,
transfers his objects in life outside of himself, and aims to reach
them.... But, however far he places them outside his personality, as
his mind gets clearer, none of these objects will satisfy him.

Bismarck, having united Germany, and now ruling Europe—if his reason
has only thrown any light upon the results of his activity—must
perceive, as much as his own cook does who prepares a dinner that
will be devoured in an hour’s time, the same unsolved contradiction
between the vanity and foolishness of all he has done, and the
eternity and reasonableness of that which exists for ever. If they
only think of it, each will see as clearly as the other; _firstly_,
that the preservation of the integrity of Prince Bismarck’s dinner,
as well as that of powerful Germany, is solely due: the preservation
of the former—to the police, and the preservation of the latter—to
the army; and that, so long only as both keep a good watch. Because
there are famished people who would willingly eat the dinner, and
nations which would fain be as powerful as Germany. Secondly, that
neither Prince Bismarck’s dinner, nor the might of the German
Empire, coincide with the aims and purposes of universal life, but
that they are in flagrant contradiction with them. And thirdly, that
as he who cooked the dinner, so also the might of Germany, will both
very soon die, and that so shall perish, and as soon, both the
dinner and Germany. That which shall survive alone is the Universe,
which will never give one thought to either dinner or Germany, least
of all to those who have cooked them.

As the intellectual condition of man increases, he comes to the idea
that no happiness connected with his personality is an achievement,
but only a necessity. Personality is only that incipient state from
which begins life, and the ultimate limit of life....

Where, then, does life begin, and where does it end, I may be asked?
Where ends the night, and where does day commence? Where, on the
shore, ends the domain of the sea, and where does the domain of land
begin?

There is day and there is night; there is land and there is sea;
there is life and there is _no_ life.

Our life, ever since we became conscious of it, is a pendulum-like
motion between two limits.

One limit is, an absolute unconcern for the life of the infinite
Universe an energy directed only toward the gratification of one’s
own personality.

The other limit is a complete renunciation of that personality, the
greatest concern with the life of the infinite Universe, in full
accord with it, the transfer of all our desires and good will from
one’s self, to that infinite Universe and all the creatures outside
of us.[51]

The nearer to the first limit, the less life and bliss, the closer
to the second, the more life and bliss. Therefore, man is ever
moving from one end to the other; _i.e._ he lives. THIS MOTION IS
LIFE ITSELF.

And when I speak of life, know that the idea of it is indissolubly
connected in my conceptions with that of _conscious_ life. No other
life is known to me except conscious life, nor can it be known to
anyone else.

We call life, the life of animals, organic life. But this is no life
at all, only a certain state or condition of life manifesting to us.

But what is this consciousness or mind, the exigencies of which
exclude personality and transfer the energy of man outside of him
and into that state which is conceived by us as the blissful state
of love?

What is conscious mind? Whatsoever we may be defining, we have to
define it with our conscious mind. Therefore, with what shall we
define mind?...

If we have to define all with our mind, it follows that conscious
mind cannot be defined. Yet all of us, we not only know it, but it
is the only thing which is given to us to know undeniably....

It is the same law as the law of life, of everything organic, animal
or vegetable, with that one difference that we _see_ the
consummation of an intelligent law in the life of a plant. But the
law of conscious mind, to which we are subjected as the tree, is
subjected to its law, we _see_ it not, but fulfil it....

-----

Footnote 51:

  This is what the Theosophists call “living _the_ life”—in a
  nut-shell.—H. P. B.

-----

We have settled that life is that which is not our life. It is
herein that lies hidden the root of error. Instead of studying that
life of which we are conscious within ourselves, absolutely and
exclusively—since we can know of nothing else—in order to study it,
we observe that which is devoid of the most important factor and
faculty of our life, namely, intelligent consciousness. By so doing,
we act as a man who attempts to study an object by its shadow or
reflection does.

If we know that substantial particles are subjected during their
transformations to the activity of the organism; we know it not
because we have observed or studied it, but simply because we
possess a certain familiar organism united to us, namely the
organism of our animal, which is but too well known to us as the
material of our life; _i.e._ that upon which we are called to work
and to rule by subjecting it to the law of reason.... No sooner has
man lost faith in life, no sooner has he transferred that life into
that which is no life, than he becomes wretched, and sees death....
A man who conceives life such as he finds it in his consciousness,
knows neither misery, nor death: for all the good in life for him is
in the subjection of his animal to the law of reason, to do which is
not only in his power, but takes place unavoidably in him. The death
of particles in the animal being, we know. The death of animals and
of man, as an animal, we know; but we know nought about the death of
conscious mind, nor can we know anything of it, _just because that
conscious mind is the very life itself_. And _Life can never be
Death_....

The animal lives an existence of bliss, neither seeing nor knowing
death, and dies without cognizing it. Why then should man have
received the gift of seeing and knowing it, and why should death be
so terrible to him that it actually tortures his soul, often forcing
him to kill himself out of sheer fear of death? Why should it be so?
Because the man who sees death is a sick man, one who has broken the
law of his life, and lives no longer a conscious existence. He has
become an animal himself, an animal which also has broken the law of
life.

The life of man is an aspiration to bliss, and that which he aspires
to is given to him. The light lit in the soul of man is bliss and
life, and that light can never be darkness, as there exists—verily
there exists for man—only this solitary light which burns within his
soul.

                           ------------------

We have translated this rather lengthy fragment from the Report of
Count Tolstoi’s superb lecture, because it reads like the echo of
the finest teachings of the universal ethics of true theosophy. His
definition of life in its abstract sense, and of the life every
earnest theosophist ought to follow, each according to, and in the
measure of, his _natural_ capacities—is the summary and the Alpha
and the Omega of practical psychic, if not spiritual life. There are
sentences in the lecture which, to the average theosophist will seem
too hazy, and perhaps incomplete. Not one will he find, however,
which could be objected to by the most exacting, practical
occultist. It may be called a treatise on the Alchemy of Soul. For
that “solitary” light in man, which burns for ever, and can never be
darkness in its intrinsic nature, though the “animal” outside us may
remains blind to it—is that “Light” upon which the Neo Platonists of
the Alexandrian school, and after them the Rosecroix and especially
the Alchemists, have written volumes, though to the present day
their true meaning is a dark mystery to most men.

True, Count Tolstoi is neither an Alexandrian nor a modern
theosophist; still less is he a Rosecroix or an Alchemist. But that
which the latter have concealed under the peculiar phraseology of
the Fire-philosophers, purposely confusing cosmic transmutations
with Spiritual Alchemy, all that is transferred by the great Russian
thinker from the realm of the metaphysical unto the field of
practical life. That which Schelling would define as a realisation
of the identity of subject and object in the man’s inner Ego, that
which unites and blends the latter with the universal Soul—which is
but the identity of subject and object on a higher plane, or the
unknown Deity—all that Count Tolstoi has blended together without
quitting the terrestrial plane. He is one of those few _elect_ who
begin with intuition and end with _quasi_-omniscience. It is the
transmutations of the baser metals—the _animal mass_—into gold and
silver, or the philosopher’s stone, the development and
manifestation of man’s higher, SELF which the Count has achieved.
The _alcahest_ of the inferior Alchemist is the _All-geist_, the
all-pervading Divine Spirit of the higher Initiate; for Alchemy was,
and is, as very few know to this day, as much a spiritual philosophy
as it is a physical science. He who knows nought of one, will never
know much of the other. Aristotle told it in so many words to his
pupil, Alexander: “It is not a stone,” he said, of the philosopher’s
stone. “_It is in every man and in every place_, and at all seasons,
and is called the _end_ of all philosophers,” as the _Vedanta_ is
_the end_ of all philosophies.

To wind up this essay _on the Science of Life_, a few words may be
said of the eternal riddle propounded to mortals by the Sphinx. To
fail to solve the problem contained in it, was to be doomed to sure
death, as the Sphinx of life devoured the unintuitional, who would
live only in their “animal.” He who lives for Self, and only for
_Self_, will surely die, as the higher “I” tells the lower “animal”
in the Lecture. The riddle has seven keys to it, and the Count opens
the mystery with one of the highest. For, as the author on “Hermetic
Philosophy” beautifully expressed it: “The real mystery most
familiar and, at the same time, most unfamiliar to every man, _into
which he must be initiated or perish as an atheist, is himself_. For
him is the elixir of life, to quaff which, before the discovery of
the philosopher’s stone, is to drink the beverage of death, while it
confers on the adept and the _epopt_, the true immortality. He may
know truth as it really is—_Aletheia_, the breath of God, or Life,
the conscious mind in man.”

This is “the Alcahest which dissolves all things,” and Count Tolstoi
has well understood the riddle.

                                                            H. P. B.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                           SIN AGAINST LIFE.

A newspaper paragraph lately declared that a certain American lady
of great wealth, residing in London, had conceived the strange
desire to possess a cloak made of the soft warm down on the breasts
of birds of Paradise. Five hundred breasts, it was said, were
required for this purpose, and two skilful marksmen, the story went
on to aver, had been sent to New Guinea to shoot the poor little
victims whose wholesale slaughter must be accomplished to gratify
this savage whim. We rejoice to observe that the whole statement has
been flatly contradicted by the _World_, apparently on the best
possible authority; but, however little the lady concerned may
deserve the reproach which the authors of the calumny endeavoured to
evoke against her, the feeling it may have excited is worth analysis
in a world where, if bird of Paradise cloaks are rare, most women
who dress luxuriously adorn themselves in one way or another at the
expense of the feathered kingdom. The principle involved in a bonnet
which is decorated with the plumage of a single bird, slaughtered
for its sake, is the same as that which would be more grotesquely
manifest in a garment that would require the slaughter of five
hundred. Too many rich people in this greedy age forget that the
grandest privilege of those who possess the means is that they have
the power of alleviating suffering. Too many, again, forget that the
sympathies of those who rule the animate world should extend beyond
the limits of their own kind; and thus we have the painful spectacle
of human “sport” associated in civilised countries still, with
pursuits which should no longer afford pleasure to men who have
emerged from the primitive life of hunters and fishers. But how is
it possible, let us consider, to stoop lowest from the proud estate
of humanity in search of ignoble gratification? It is bad to kill
any sentient creature for the sake of the savage pleasures of the
chase. It is bad, perhaps worse, to cause their destruction for the
sake of coldly profiting by their slaughter, and it is bad to
squander money in this hard world of want and wide-spread privation
on costly personal indulgence. But the acme of all that is
reprehensible in these various departments of ill-doing is surely
reached when women—who should, by virtue of their sex, be helping to
soften the ferocities of life—contrive to collect the cream of evil
from each of these varieties, and to sin against a whole catalogue
of human duties by cruel acquiescence in an unworthy fashion.

                              BROTHERHOOD.

The Theosophical Society has always placed in the forefront of its
programme, as its first and most important object, the formation of
the nucleus of a Universal Brotherhood, without distinction of race,
creed, caste or sex. It would doubtless be incorrect to say that
this object of the Society has been entirely overlooked in the West,
but it is to be feared that not a few members of the Society have
accepted it as an amiable formula, to which no objection could be
raised, and have turned their attention almost exclusively to the
two remaining objects. And yet, without some attempt to understand
the true meaning of this Universal Brotherhood, it is idle to expect
that any great services can be rendered to the cause of Theosophy.
It may be useful to see whether any explanation can be given of the
reason for the neglect of this first object, and whether such light
may be thrown on its meaning, as may render the idea a living
reality to many who now but faintly grasp its significance.

In the first place it may be said, that in many enlightened Western
minds, there was already a familiarity with the idea thus
enunciated. Christianity has always taught the “theoretical”
equality in the sight of God, of all true believers, and politically
the dogma of “equal rights” is practically beyond the reach of
attack. The abolition of slavery, the extension of representative
government, the spread of education, and perhaps also, in some
degree, the influence of the scientific as opposed to the religious
theories of the origin and destiny of man, have all combined to
render this idea by no means difficult of apprehension, at least
intellectually. Further its acceptance in this sense has not
necessarily entailed any different view of the duties and
responsibilities of life. In the East it cannot be said that this is
the case. In India, the stringency of caste regulations causes class
distinctions to assume a very definite form, while religious
hatreds, if not more bitter than with us, enter more directly into
the life of the people, and interpose stronger barriers between man
and man than in Europe or America. Hence an Indian theosophist must,
before he can accept the first object, even in its outward form,
modify to some extent his intellectual conception of the relations
in which he stands to the rest of mankind, and he will in his life
give practical proof of the change. In his case the acceptance of
the outward form can only follow on the appreciation of the inner
meaning; that which results is that his theosophy is firmly founded
on the principle of the Universal Brotherhood.

On the other hand, in the West, a familiarity with the external side
seems, in many cases, to have prevented any attempt to go below the
surface, and to have caused men to be satisfied with vague
philanthropic sentimentality, effecting nothing, and leading
nowhere.

What then is this Universal Brotherhood, which is the main spring of
Theosophy? and what are its results?

_Socialism_ as preached in this 19th century it certainly is not.
Indeed, there would be little difficulty in shewing that modern
materialistic Socialism is directly at variance with all the
teachings of theosophy. Socialism advocates a direct interference
with the results of the law of _Karma_, and would attempt to alter
the dénouement of the parable of the talents, by giving to the man
who hid his talent in a napkin, a portion of the ten talents
acquired by the labour of his more industrious fellow.

Neither is it true that in practical benevolence is the whole idea
of universal brotherhood exemplified, though doubtless that
unselfish and unceasing work for the good of mankind, which is true
philanthropy must of necessity be one result of it. The
philanthropist may be, and no doubt often is, a true theosophist in
all but name, though there is still much of what may be called
unintelligent benevolence, the result of a mere emotional impulse;
and again there is much that is the result of very decided and very
narrow sectarian views, to which it would be absolutely impossible
to apply the epithet universal. The devotion and self-sacrifice
shown in many individual instances by Christian missionaries of
various denominations, may be taken as fairly exemplifying
philanthropy both of the unintelligent and the narrow type. They are
prepared to make any sacrifice for what they believe to be the
ultimate good of humanity, and in that sense are practising what
some others only preach, namely true unselfishness, but they are
often hampered by an intellectual inability to view both sides of
the question, and fail thereby to acquire that understanding of, and
sympathy with the difficulties and the wants of those whom they are
endeavouring to aid, which are necessary preliminaries to any work
of lasting usefulness. In a word, they too often fail to realise
that unity in mankind which truly underlies all individualism. But
having said so much, it must be added that an understanding of the
real meaning of “Brotherhood” must entail active benevolence, that
is to say work for others in some form or other, upon every one who
does not wilfully thrust aside the obligation.

Where then are we to look for the explanation, and how are we to
understand the spirit which must animate all true theosophists, if
they are to realise and follow out the first rule of the Society?
Not surely on the physical plane. Not by an attempt to force on the
intellect as a fact to be accepted, or more truly a pill to be
swallowed, a belief in similarities, equalities or identities, which
have no existence. Only a realisation of what truly constitutes man
can help us to form a conception of what brotherhood means.

Man is a complex organism as he exists on our earth to-day. He is
partly transitory, partly eternal; in one sense the creature of
circumstances, in another the creator of his own environment. But
the true man, the underlying individuality is a reflection of the
Divine. We are able to discern physical beauty, even when clad in
rags. Is it impossible that we should also recognise the beauty of
the soul, though it be for a time veiled beneath a gross material
body? The physical body is indeed nothing but the garment of the
ego, the true man; that momentarily suited to his needs and his
deserts, the livery of his servitude, which must be worn, in ever
changing forms, till the moment of his final emancipation. It is
then beyond the physical, beyond the intellectual man, that we must
look for that fraternity, arising out of unity and equality, which
cannot be found on the purely material plane of existence. The
divine soul of man, in which is posited his true individuality, is
the real man, the immortal ego, which, through the accumulated
experience of many earth lives is marching onward through the ages
to its goal, reunion with the Infinite. What matters then the
outward semblance, which our senses know as man? Our æsthetic
perception may shrink from the rags, the dirt, the ugliness which
belong to the physical environment. Our moral nature may revolt at
association with vice, with low selfish courses of life, but within
and behind all this we must endeavour to realise the continual
presence of the immortal ego, one with us, as with all humanity, as
sharing the divine nature, and ever struggling, as we are
struggling, on the upward path that leads to the realisation of the
Absolute. As Carlyle says in Sartor Resartus. “Mystical, more than
magical, is that communing of Soul with Soul, both looking
heavenward; here properly Soul first speaks with Soul; for only in
looking heavenward, take it in what sense you may, not in looking
earthward does what we can call Union, Mutual Love, Society, begin
to be possible.”

It may be objected that in some cases it is impossible to recognise
even the glimmerings of those higher aspirations, which are the
tokens of the presence of the soul, the immortal ego. Such cases,
however, must be comparatively rare. Still there are beings—it is
almost impossible to call them human—who have so persistently
concentrated all their efforts on the gratification of their lower
consciousness, as to sever the frail link which binds them to their
higher selves. Then the true man is no longer present in the human
form, and brotherhood becomes an impossibility. But we may in truth
almost ignore the existence of this type of mankind, for even when
an intellectual materialism seems to be the sole ruling principle,
we dare not deny the presence of that capacity for higher things
which must exist in all who can still truly be called men.

Surely then it is in this view of our relations to our fellow men,
that we shall find that guiding influence which may enable us to
rise above the sordid considerations of our ordinary earthly
existence. It is no sectarian belief that is here advanced; it is
the essence of the teaching of Jesus, as it was of Gautama; nor is
it a mere formula, to be accepted as an article of faith, and then
laid on the shelf. Once understood, it must influence all who have
sufficient strength of purpose to fight their own lower selfish
personalities, and must lead them to the practical realisation of
their aspirations towards true unselfishness and active benevolence.

But there lurks a danger even in the use of the word unselfishness.
It has been the text of sermons from every pulpit in Christendom for
centuries, and with what small results? No doubt the duty nearest at
hand must not be neglected, and it is the duty of every one to do
what he can to render those about him happier. But many stop there
and consider that all their work consists in the practice of
self-abnegation in their own small circle. Does not the broader view
of human life here set forth suggest a new sphere of usefulness, and
therefore of duty? It is for every man to determine what he can do
for the good of humanity; all are not equally gifted, but all can do
something. Some theosophists appear to be satisfied with
intellectual study, or the development of their own spiritual
nature, and neither of these two courses is to be neglected; but
something more must be done. “It is more blessed to give than to
receive,” and the acquirement of knowledge brings with it the
obligation of spreading it. This is work from which none need
shrink, and all who truly desire to work for Theosophy, which is in
the highest sense “the religion of humanity,” will find the work
ready to their hand, and be able to assist in bringing the Light “to
them that sit in darkness.”

                                                            T. B. H.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                  PYTHAGORIC SENTENCES OF DEMOPHILUS.

Esteem that to be eminently good, which, when communicated to
another, will be increased to yourself.

Be persuaded that those things are not your riches which you do not
possess in the penetralia of the reasoning power.

As many passions of the soul, so many fierce and savage despots.

No one is free who has not obtained the empire of himself.

                         BLOOD-COVENANTING.[52]

-----

Footnote 52:

  “The Blood-Covenant, a Primitive Rite, and its bearings on
  Scripture.” By H. Clay Trumbull, D.D. London: Redway.

-----


Particular attention has been recently directed to this subject of
_Blood-Covenant_ by the experiences of explorers in Africa, who
appear to have discovered in that Dark Land some of the primitive
facts the gory ghost of which has long haunted our European mind in
the Eschatological phase.

Stanley, an especial sufferer from the practice, denounces the
blood-brotherhood as a _beastly cannibalistic ceremony_. “For the
fiftieth time my poor arm was scarified and my blood shed for the
cause of civilization.” As the writer of this book observes: “The
blood of a fair proportion of all the first families of equatorial
Africa now courses in Stanley’s veins; and if ever there was an
American citizen who could pre-eminently appropriate to himself the
national motto ‘_E pluribus unum_,’ Stanley is the man.”

In his book, Dr. Trumbull has collected a mass of data from a wide
range of sources to illustrate what he terms the “_Primitive rite of
covenanting by the inter-transfusion of blood_.”

Dr. Trumbull is anxious to make the efficacy of the rite depend upon
the recognition of a vivifying virtue in the blood itself, as the
essence of life. But such recognition appears to have been remote
enough from the Primitive thought. The Aborigines were not Jews or
Christians. They gave of their life without always thinking of the
exact equivalent or superior value received. They gave it as the
witness to the troth they plighted and the covenant which they
intended to keep. His theory of interpretation is that there was a
dominating and universal conviction that the “blood is the life;
that blood-transfer is soul-transfer, and that blood-sharing, human
or _divine_-human, secures an inter-union of natures; and that a
union of the human nature with the divine is the highest ultimate
attainment reached out after by the most primitive, as well as the
most enlightened, mind of humanity.”

His collection of facts may serve a most useful purpose as
eye-openers to other people (and for other facts to follow), just as
they appear to have been to himself. The book is interesting, if not
profound; and nothing that follows in this article is intended to
decry it, or to prevent the readers of LUCIFER from looking into it
if they do not feel too great a “scunner” at sight of the
gilded-gory illustration on the cover. But the work is written by
one who talks to us out of a window of Noah’s Ark, and who still
seems to think the Hebrew Bible is the rim of the universe. We value
and recommend the book solely for its facts, not for its theories,
nor for its bibliolatry.

In all studies of this kind which make use of the word “Primitive,”
it is the fundamental facts that we first need; and next a
first-hand acquaintanceship with all the facts, so that we may do
our own thinking for ourselves and strike our light within by which
we can read the facts without, as the primary and essential
procedure in the endeavour to attain the truth.

Also the facts may be genuine and honestly presented, yet the
interpretation may be according to an inadequate or a “bogus”
theory. The truth is that no bibliolator can be trusted to interpret
the past of our race now being unveiled by evolution. He is born and
begotten with the blinkers on. His mode of interpretation is to get
behind us, to lay the hands upon our eyes in front, and ask us to
listen whilst he gives us his views of the past! But the
non-evolutionist cannot interpret the past from lack of a true
standpoint with regard to the beginnings or rather the processes of
becoming. He can begin anywhere and at any time short of the
starting-point. There is nothing for it but to break away, and turn
round to see for ourselves whether the traditionary vision of the
Blinkerists be true or false. The facts alone are the final
determinatives of the Truth. But we must have the whole of them and
not a few, whether judiciously or Jesuitically selected to support a
Christian theory. Whereas, the object and aim of this work, the bias
of the writer, and the trend of his arguments, are all on the line
of showing or suggesting that the blood-covenant was the result of
some innate instinct or divine revelation which prefigured and
foreshadowed, and may be taken to indicate and authorize, the
Christian scheme of atonement, and the remission of sin by the
shedding of innocent blood. The writer asserts that this primitive
symbolism was “_made a reality in Jesus Christ_” in whom “_God was
to give of his blood in the blood of his Son for the revivifying of
the sons of Abraham in the Blood of the Eternal Covenant_.” But it
can be demonstrated that the covenant by blood did not commence
where Dr. Trumbull begins—with a religious yearning God-ward for the
establishing of a brotherhood between the human nature and the
Divine. The root-idea was not that of an “inter-union of the
spiritual natures by the inter-commingling of blood for the sake of
an inter-communion with deity.” That, at least, was by no means the
“_primitive_ rite,” which the blood-covenant is here called. The
many forms of the blood-covenant can only be unified at the root,
_i.e._, in the beginning, not at the end. They are not to be
understood apart from the primitive language of signs, as in Tattoo,
the very primitive biology of the early observers, and the most
primitive sociology of the Totemic times.

Time was, and may be still, when the blood-covenant would often
serve as the one protection against being killed and eaten. Even the
cannibals will not partake of their own Totemic brothers. Also the
covenant was extended to certain animals which were made of kin and
held to be sacred as brothers of the blood.

The Blood-covenant takes many forms besides that of the
blood-brotherhood, which are not to be explained by this writer’s
theory of exchange.

When the blood of an African woman accidentally spurted into the eye
of Dr. Livingstone, she claimed him for her blood relation, without
there being any exchange of blood for blood.

Dr. Trumbull claims the Egyptians as witnesses to the truth of his
interpretation. But so far from their highest conception of “a union
with the Divine nature” being an inter-flowing and interfusion of
blood, the soul of blood was the very lowest, that is the first, in
a series of seven souls!

Their highest type of the soul was the sun that vivified for ever
called Atmu, the Father Soul.[53] The bases of natural fact which
lie at the foundation of the Blood-covenant, preceded any and all
such ideas as those postulated by the writer as being extant from
the first, such as “a longing for oneness of life with God;” an
“out-reaching after inter-union and inter-communion with God.” There
was no conception of a one God extant in the category of human
consciousness when the rites of a blood-covenant were first founded.
There could be no atonement where there was no sense of sin or a
breaking of the law. All through, the writer is apt to confuse the
past with the present, and eager to read the present into the
past.[54]

-----

Footnote 53:

  The Theosophists are reminded that the “seven souls” are what we
  call the “seven principles” in man. “Blood” is the _principle_ of
  the Body, the lowest in our septenary, as the highest is “Atma,”
  which may well be symbolized by the Sun; Atma being the light and
  life in man, as the physical sun is the light and life of our
  solar system.—ED.

Footnote 54:

  The arcane doctrine teaches that the “blood” rites are as old as
  the Third-Root race, being established in their final form by the
  Fourth Parent race in commemoration of the separation of
  androgynous mankind, their forefathers, into males and females.
  Mr. G. Massey is a strict scholar, who holds only to that which is
  made evident to him, and ignores the Occultistic division of
  mankind into Races, and the fact that we are in our Fifth-Root
  race, and would, of course, refuse to carry mankind back into
  _pre_-Tertiary times. Yet his researches and the fruit of his
  life-labour, corroborate, by their numberless new facts revealed
  by him, most wonderfully, the teachings of the “Secret Doctrines.”
  (ED.)

-----

The real roots of matters like these are to be found only in certain
facts of nature which were self-revealing, and not in the sphere of
concepts and causation! And it is only when we can reach the natural
genesis of primitive customs and fetishtic beliefs, and trace their
lines of descent, that we can understand and interpret their meaning
in the latest symbolical and superstitious phase of religious rites.
Nothing can be more fatally false than to interpret the physics of
the past by means of modern metaphysic, with the view of proving
that certain extant doctrines of delusion are the lineal descendants
of an original Divine revelation, which has been bound up in two
Testaments for the favoured few.

The blood-covenant is undoubtedly a primitive rite; but the author
of this work does not penetrate to its most primitive or significant
phases. These are not to be read by the light of Hebrew revelation,
but by the light of nature if at all. Many primitive customs and
rites survived amongst the Semites, but they themselves were not
amongst the aboriginal races of the world. We have to get far beyond
their stage to understand the meaning of the myths, legends, rites,
and customs, that were preserved by them as sacred survivals from
the remoter past. The symbolical and superstitious phases of custom
cannot be directly explained on the spot where we may first meet
with them in going back. In becoming symbolical they had already
passed out of their primary phase, and only indirectly represent the
natural genesis of the truly primitive rite. I have spent the best
part of my life in tracking these rites and customs to their natural
origin, and in expounding the typology and symbols by which the
earliest meaning was expressed.

What then was the root-origin of a blood-covenant? The primary
perceptions of primitive or archaic men included the observation
that they came from the mother, and first found themselves at her
breast.

Next they saw that the child was fleshed by the mother, and formed
from her blood, the flow of which was arrested to be solidified, and
take form in their own persons. Thus the red amulet which was worn
by the Egyptian dead, was representative of the blood of Isis, who
came from herself, and made her own child without the fatherhood,
when men could only derive their blood and descent from the mother.
This amulet was put on by her, says Plutarch, when she found herself
_enceinte_ with Horus, her child, who was derived from the mother
alone, or was traced solely to the blood of Isis. Primitive men
could perceive that the children of one mother were of the same
blood. This, the first form of a blood-brotherhood, was the first to
be recognised as the natural fact. Uterine brothers were
blood-brothers. The next stage of the brotherhood was Totemic; and
the mode of extending the brotherhood to the children of several
mothers implies, as it necessitated, some form of symbolic rite
which represented them as brothers, or as typically becoming of the
one blood. Here we can track the very first step in sociology which
was made when the typical blood-brotherhood of the Totem was formed
in imitation of the natural brotherhood of the mother-blood. The
modes and forms of the Covenant can be identified by the Totemic
mysteries, some of which yet survive in the crudest condition. The
brotherhood was entered at the time of puberty; that is, at the time
of re-birth, when the boy was re-born as a man, and the child of the
mother attained the soul of the fatherhood, and was permitted to
join the ranks of the begetters. The mystery is one with that of
Horus, child of the mother alone, who comes to receive the soul of
the father in _Tattu_, the region of establishing the son as the
father, which is still extant in the mysteries, and the symbolism of
_Tattoo_.

This re-birth was enacted in various ways by typically re-entering
the womb. One of these was by burial in the earth, the tomb or place
of re-birth being the image of the maternal birth-place all the
world over. Thus when the Norsemen or other races prepared a hole
under the turf, and buried their cut and bleeding arms to let the
blood flow, and commingle in one as the token of a covenant, they
were returning typically to the condition of uterine twins, and the
act of burial for the purpose of a re-birth was a symbolical mode of
establishing the social brotherhood upon the original grounds of the
natural brotherhood of blood. Thus the blood-covenant did not
originate in the set transfusion or inter-fusion of blood. In the
Totemic mysteries the pubescent lad was admitted by the shedding of
his blood, with or without any interchange. The blood itself was the
symbol of brotherhood, and the shedding of it was the seal of a
covenant.

Nor was this merely because flesh was formed of blood, or the first
men were made of the mystical red soil, as with the _aarea_ of the
Tahitians, or the red earth of the Adamic man. Most of these
primitive rites, the Blood-Covenant included, had their
starting-point from the period of puberty. It was at this time the
lads who were not brothers uterine were made brothers of the Totem
at what was termed the festival of young-man-making. The proper
period for circumcision, or cutting and sealing, as still practised
by the oldest aborigines, is the time of puberty, the natural coming
of age. It is then they enter the Totemic Brotherhood. Now in
Egyptian, the word _khet_ or _khut_ = cut, means to cut and to seal.
_Khetem_ is to enclose, bind, seal, and is applied to sealing. The
same root passes into Assyrian and Hebrew as _Khatan_, _Katam_ or
_Chatan_, with the same meaning. In Arabic, _Khatana_ is to
circumcise. Cutting and sealing are identical as the mode of
entering into a Blood-Covenant. Circumcision was _one_ form of the
sealing, but there were various kinds of cuts employed, and
different parts of the body were scarified and tattooed. In the
primary phase, then, the blood-brotherhood was established by the
shedding of blood; the register was written in blood, and instead of
the covenant being witnessed by the seal of red wax, it was stamped
in blood.

The reason for phallic localization is to be sought in the fact that
the young men not only entered the Brotherhood by the baptism of
blood, they were also received into the higher ranks of the fathers,
and sworn in to live an orderly, legal and cleanly life, henceforth,
as the pro-creators and loyal preservers of the race.

But this was not the only clue directly derived from nature. There
is another reason why blood should have become the sacred sign of a
covenant. Amongst many primitive races blood, or the colour red, is
the symbol of _Tapu_, the sign of sanctity. The bones of the dead
were covered with red ochre as a means of protection by the most
widely scattered races in the world. The stamp of a red hand on the
building, or a crimson daub upon the gravestone will render them
sacred. The Kaffirs will wash their bodies with blood as a
protection against being wounded in battle. The colour of
robin-redbreast still renders him _tapu_ or sacred to English
children.

Blood having become a sign of that which is true and sacred, on
account of the Covenant, it is then made the symbol of all that is
sacred. It can be used for the purpose of anointing the living or
the dead, can be the seal of the marriage or other ceremonies and
rites of covenanting. It is the primæval token of _tapu_.

As I have elsewhere shown, blood was sworn by as the type of that
which was true, the primary one of the typical Two Truths of Egypt.
It was so in all the mysteries, and is so to-day, including the
mysteries of Masonry. I have suggested the derivation of the masonic
name from the Egyptian _Sen_ = son, for blood and brotherhood. The
working Mason in Egyptian is the _makh_ (_makht_) by name. _Makh_
means to work, inlay by rule and measure. We see that _makh_
modifies into _mâ_ for measure, and for that which is just and true.

_Mâ-sen_ = Mason, would denote the true brotherhood; and as _sen_ is
also blood, the true brotherhood as the blood-brotherhood would be
the masons in the mystical or occult sense. Red is the colour of
_Mâ_ or Truth personified, and _sen_ is blood. Blood is sworn by
because it is the colour of truth, or the true colour. Now in old
English the word _seng_ means both “blood” and “true.” Here, then,
we find the origin of the oath, which constitutes the supreme
expression in the vocabulary of our English roughs, when they use
the oath of the blood-covenant, and swear by the word “bloody!” When
they wax emphatic, everything they say becomes “bloody true.” This
is the exact equivalent of “seng it is” for “it is true.” According
to the primitive mysteries, this mode of swearing, or establishing
the covenant, was sacred whilst kept piously secret, and it becomes
impious when made public or profane. Such mysteries were very simply
natural at first, and it was this primitive simplicity and nearness
to nature which demanded the veil to protect them from the gaze of
the later consciousness. Time was when the English felon would carry
a red handkerchief with him to the scaffold, and hold it in his hand
as a signal that he had betrayed no secrets, but died “bloody true,”
or true blood.

These customs were symbolical, but there is a hint of the
blood-covenant beyond them—a hint received direct from Nature
herself—call it revelation if you please. In the first rude ethics
we find that the time for the sexes to come together was recognised
by the intimation of nature, made in her own sign-language at the
period of feminine pubescence. Nature gave the hint, and a covenant
was established. Henceforth, the child that could not enter that
covenant would be protected from brutal assault, and was allowed, or
rather compelled, to run about unclothed in token of her exemption.
It is here in the swearing-in and covenanting of the sexes at the
time of pubescence that we discover another real and most secret,
_i.e._, sacred root of the rite.

The self-revelation made by nature to primitive man was very
primitive in its kind. She not only demonstrated that the blood was
the life, or that the life passed away with the letting out of the
blood, but in another domain, which our author has not entered, she
showed that blood was, and how it was, the future life. Blood was
the primary witness to the future life which the child received from
the mother. It was the token of the time when the female could
become the bearer of that future life which took flesh and form in
her blood.

The blood-covenanting of the primitive races is still a part of the
most elaborate system of making presents, which are the express
witnesses of proffered troth and intended fealty. The most precious
or sacred things are parted from in proof. The best is given on
either side. And in the offering of blood, they were giving their
very life, that in which the best attains supremacy. But these
primitive rites can never be truly read except by those who are
deeply grounded in the fact, and well acquainted with the evidence,
that sign-language was primordial, that gestures preceded verbal
speech, and acting was an earlier mode of representing than talking.
Primitive men could only _do_ that which we can _say_. In Egyptian
that which is _said_ is _done_. And in these primitive customs and
religious rites we see the early races of men performing in
pantomime the early drama of dumb or inarticulate humanity. And it
seems as if this primitive language could produce an impression and
reach a reality that are unapproachable by means of words. The
significance of the teaching went all the deeper when it was incised
in the flesh and branded into the blood. For example, what a
terrific glimpse of reality is revealed by the fact that the
Malagasy make their sign of a blood-covenant by an incision in the
skin that covers the bosom, and this opening with its utterance of
blood is called _ambavfo_, the “mouth of the heart.” Thus the
covenant is made in the blood, which is the very life, uttering
itself with the mouth of the heart. In Egyptian the covenant, the
oath, and the life, have the same name of _Ankhu_; and the greatest
oath was to swear by the life or the blood of the Pharaoh. The
primitive mode was to slash the flesh and let the hot blood spout
and speak for itself with the “mouth of the heart,” the utterance of
the living letter and red seal of the wound, as true witness.

No verbal covenant or written record of the modern races has ever
had the full force and effect of these modes of covenanting amongst
the primitive people of the past. The moderns do not keep their word
with anything like the inviolable sanctity of the aborigines; when
once they are sworn to fealty, the covenant is almost never broken.
Few things in poetry are more pathetic than the story related of
Tolo, a chief of the Shastika Indians on the Pacific Coast. In the
year 1852 he entered into a tribal treaty with Colonel McKee and was
desirous of making a covenant for life in some way that could not
possibly be violated. Instead of exchanging blood he proposed a
transfer of their own two personal names. Henceforth he was to be
known as McKee, and the Colonel as Tolo. But the treaty was
discarded, the covenant was not kept by the American Government. In
reply, the Indian cast off the title of McKee and refused to resume
his own tarnished and degraded name of Tolo! He considered that his
very identity was lost by this mode of losing his good name! I doubt
whether 1,800 years of Christianity have evolved in the later races
of men a consciousness of truth, probity, and loyalty, so quick and
profound as that!

The writer of this book remains stone-blind to its own teachings
with regard to the doctrine of survivals, and of the past persisting
as a pattern for the present.

To quote his own words, he rejoices in the “_blessed benefits of the
covenant of blood_,” and is still a fervent supporter of the great
delusion inculcated by the gospel of ruddy gore.

The doctrine is fundamentally the same whether the Greek murderer
was cleansed from his guilt by the filthy purification of pig’s
blood or the modern sinner is supposed to be washed white in the
Blood of the Lamb.

As I had already written in my “Natural Genesis,” “the religious
ritual of the moderns is crowded like a kitchen-midden with the
refuse relics of customs that were natural once, and are now clung
to as if they were supernatural in their efficacy because their
origin has been unknown. Indeed, the current masquerade in these
appurtenances of the past is as sorry a sight to the archaic student
as are the straw crowns and faded finery of the kings and queens
whose domain is limited to the lunatic asylum.” Dr. Trumbull
endorses the doctrine that “_Mortals gave the blood of their
first-born sons in sacrifice to the Supreme Being, then the Supreme
Being gave the blood of his first-born male in sacrifice_” for men;
and there you have the covenant of blood in its final form!

It is true that first-born children were offered in sacrifice just
as the first take of fish was returned to the waters with a lively
sense of future favours from the Typhonian power thus propitiated,
but where is the sense of talking about the thought of an
intercommunion with the divine nature through a blood-union with God
as a concept in the mind of primitive man? It is true the recognized
nature-powers, or devils of physical force, were invoked with blood,
but what was the status of these powers when the beasts of blood
were their representatives on earth, and the blood, which is the
life, was given to the Serpent, for instance, as the likeness of
life itself because it sloughed its own skin and manifested the
enviable power of self-renewal? The profounder and more fundamental
our researches, the more clearly does it become apparent that we
have been victimised by the unsuspected survival of the past in the
present, and that the veriest leavings of primitive man have been
palmed off upon us by the ignorant as sacred mysteries and
revelations guaranteed to be original and divine. Continually we
find that our errors of belief are based upon very simple truths
that have been misunderstood through a misinterpretation of
primitive matters and modes of representation by means of modern
ignorance. The blood-covenant of the aboriginal races has
undoubtedly survived and culminated as Christian in the frightful
formula, “Without blood there is no remission of sin.” Not merely
the blood of beasts or human creatures this time, but the ruddy life
and ichor of a supposed Divine Being, who was made flesh on purpose
to pour out the blood for Almighty vengeance to lap in the person of
a gory ghost of God. One of the seven primal powers in Egypt was
represented by the hawk, because it drank blood. One of the Seven in
Akkad was the vampire. And this type of blood-drinking has been
divinised at last as the Christian God.

Pindar says: “It is impossible for me to call one of the blessed
gods a cannibal.” But the Christian scheme makes the Only God a
cannibal, who offers the flesh and blood of his own Son and Very
Self as sacrificial food made sacred for his followers. Such a god
is, in two senses, _chimerical_. How natural an accompaniment is the
picture of the Crucified Christ to the Zuni saying, “My Father, this
day shalt thou refresh thyself with blood!” Such a doctrine is but
an awful shadow of the primitive past—the shadow, so to say, of our
old earth in the very far-off past—that remains to eclipse the light
of Heaven to-day, and darken the souls of men in the present through
the survival of savage spiritualism in its final Christian phase,
where the extant doctrines are little more than an ignorant
perversion of the most primitive knowledge.

It is in this final and not in the primitive phase that we shall
identify the irrationality, the impiety, the disgusting grossness of
Mythology under the surface of theological varnish and veneer. The
only senselessness is in the survival of Myths without their sense.

Lastly, it is observable that in the genuine rite the
covenant-makers always bled _directly_ and suffered each for
themselves. Later on we find that other victims were substituted by
purchase, by fraud, or by force; hence the blood-covenant by proxy.
Now the Christian scheme is that which culminated in the
blood-covenant and atonement by proxy. “_His offspring for his life
he gave_,” is said of an Akkadian ruler who sacrificed his own son
as an expiatory offering to save himself from the consequences of
his own sin. And this doctrine of the despicable, this type of the
fatherhood, is elevated to the status of divinity by Dr. Trumbull.
To quote his own words, the inspired author of the narrative found
in the Hebrew Genesis shows “Abel lovingly and trustfully reaching
out toward God with _substitute_ blood!”

And there began for the Historic Christians that vast perversion of
a primitive custom which culminated at last in the Christian
doctrine of vicarious sacrifice, based upon the mythology of the Old
Testament being literalized in the New. Now we have the ludicrous
spectacle of salvation by means of a rite which has lost all the
manhood, all the morality, all the meaning, that was put into it by
the despised races of uncivilized men.

The eucharistic rite is incredibly primitive when really understood.
The bread and wine of the Christian sacrament still represent the
male spirit and the female source of life. The “Blood of Jesus,”
which was to be “drink indeed,” is identical with the “Blood of
Bacchus,” which preceded historic Christianity, and has been
substituted for the human or animal blood of the earlier mysteries.
Imbibing the blood of the Christ did not originate in any historic
or personal transaction. Also the blood of Christ, or Mithras, or
Horus, employed in drinking the covenant, was preceded by the blood
of Charis. In some of the Gnostic mysteries we have the proof that
the first form of the saving blood was feminine, not masculine at
all. Irenæus presents us with a picture of profound interest from
the anthropological point of view.

He tells us how Marcus performed the eucharistic rite with the blood
of Charis, instead of the blood of Christ. He handed cups to the
women and bade them consecrate these in his presence. Then, by the
use of magical incantation, “Charis was thought to drop her own
blood into the cup” thus consecrated. (B. I. 13, 2.)

There is but one known fact in natural phenomena which will fitly
account as _Vera Causa_ for a monthly Sacrament, celebrated every
twenty-eight days, or thirteen times to the year; which fact was
commemorated by the Blood-Covenant of Charis ( _Vide_ “Nat. Gen.” V.
ii. section 12, for proofs). This kind of blood-covenant can be
paralleled in the Yain or Yonian mysteries of India.

When rightly understood, the eucharist is a survival of the “beastly
cannibalistic ceremony,” whether considered as the blood of Charis
or the blood of Christ, or partaken of as the red Tent wine or the
“bloody wafer” of Rome.

We welcome Dr. Trumbull’s contribution on the subject, although he
has but “breathed a vein” of it, because these rites and customs
have to be unveiled, and when they are at last exposed in all the
simplicity of naked nature the erroneous ideas read into them, the
delusive inferences drawn from them, the false illusions painted
upon the veil that concealed the truth about them, will be doomed to
pass away. To explain the true is the only effectual mode of
exploding the false.

                                                      GERALD MASSEY.

                        =Correspondence.=

     CORRESPONDENCE ADDRESSED TO THE AUTHOR OF “LIGHT ON THE PATH.”

                                 I.

“What are the senses called astral, in reality? Are they not really
spiritual, seizing on the inner essence of things and interpreting
it. The ordinary psychic or clairvoyant surely does not use the
astral senses? Yet he sees things which we do not see. It would be
well to explain this.”

                                                               B. K.

_A._ The senses called astral in the comments on “Light on the Path”
are the senses which perceive the inner essence, certainly; which
are cognisant of the life underlying every form of matter. The
ordinary psychic or clairvoyant only perceives other forms of matter
than those we ordinarily see, and perceives them as a child
perceives the forms in this world at first, without understanding
their meaning. The astral senses carry beyond matter, and enlighten
man with regard to any form of life which especially interests him.
They show the poet painter, and composer the things they express to
other men, who regard these great ones as beings of another
order—beings with the gift of genius. So they are, and the vigour of
that genius carries them on into the inner life where meaning, and
harmony, and the indefinable all-desired are to be perceived.
Wordsworth saw it in nature, he recognised the “spirit in the
woods”—not the wood-nymphs but the divine spirit of peace which
teaches a lesson in life. Richard Jeffries saw it in nature, too, as
perhaps no other man ever has seen it; through the finite visible
world he perceived the infinite invisible one, and before he died he
had begun to know that the visible world does not exist. Turner,
perhaps, is the only parallel. By the invisible world I must repeat
again that I do not mean what the spiritualists call by that name—a
new world of other forms. I mean the formless world. It is the
farthest limit man’s _consciousness_ can reach to; and only the pure
and star-like soul can become even aware of its existence. It is not
man’s divine nature, but the man who enters it with any reverence
for the great miracle of life can only do so by the aid of his
divine nature, whether as a poet, a painter, or an occultist. The
soul which enters it without reverence is unable to endure its
extreme rarity of atmosphere and turns to the psychic-astral in
which to live; such men become madmen and suicides, more or less
pronounced, as men do who refuse to dwell in any form of physical
life but the grossest and simplest. There is some law of life which
impels men onward—call it evolution or developement or what you
will; and a man can no more go downwards without suffering than a
tree can be placed with its branches in the ground, instead of its
roots, without discomfort, and in the end, death.

I propose to use two phrases which have been suggested to me; the
psychic-astral and the divine-astral. This seems the only way to
make my meaning clear, for the word astral has two meanings, its own
proper derivative one, from the Sanskrit _stri_ to strew light, and
that given it by the use of all occultists. Paracelsus appropriated
the word for all things sidereal, subject to the moon and stars,
part and parcel of this material universe, even though formed as
Dryden says of “purest atoms of the air.” In this sense the
spiritualists and psychics have the right of custom to use it as
they do, to describe their world of finer forms. In this meaning an
astral shape is the form of the human soul, still in possession of
the passions which make it human; and the astral senses perceive not
the subtle and supreme glory which Shelley seized on in Prometheus,
but a region full of shapes and forms differing but little from
those we now wear, and still distinctly material.

The “astral man” in the “Comments on Light on the Path” should have
been written the divine-astral man, according to this evident
difference of meaning between the present writer and all other
writers on occultism.

                                II.

“Are not the _astral_ senses used by every great poet or inventor
though he does not see clairvoyantly at all? _i.e._ does not see
elementals, astral pictures, forms, &c.”

                                                              FAUST.

The answer to the former question seems to contain the answer to
this, which is clearly prompted by a conception of the word “astral”
in its divine sense.

                                III.

1. “There is a law of nature which insists that a man shall read
these mysteries for himself. Will all men seeking the occult path
read these mysteries alike, or will each man find the interpretation
peculiarly adapted to his own phrase of development. No two men read
the mysteries contained in the Bhagavat Gita quite alike, each gains
the glimpses of light which he is able to assimilate and no more.”

_A._ This seems to be rather a statement of a truth than a question
which can be answered in any way other than putting it into
different words, perhaps not so good.

2. “Is the outer world the reflection of the world within? like a
shadowed reproduction in clumsy form, the inner being reality?”

_A._ This is what should be. But materialists have brought their
sense of reality into the shadowed life.

3. “How is the intuition to be developed which enables one to grasp
swift knowledge?”

_A._ To me no way is known but that of living the life of a
disciple.

4. “Can the laws in super-nature only act on their own plane, or can
their reflection be brought down intact in their own purity to
govern physical life.”

_A._ Surely this must be so; yet rarely, for when it is accomplished
the man would be divine, a Buddha!

5. “To be incapable of tears”—does not that mean that the physical
emotions, being merged into the inner physical, that tears are
impossible as being an outward phase of the physical nature—whereas
the psychical emotions, to use a physical term are vibratory.

_A._ “The whole of ‘Light on the Path,’ is written in an astral
cipher” is stated at the outset of the “comments;” the word “tears”
does not refer to physical tears in any way.

It is the only word which will convey any idea whatever of the
moisture of life, that which bursts from the human soul in its
experience of sensation and emotion, and in the passion of its
hunger for them.

6. “How is one to take the snake of self in a steady grasp and
conquer it?”

                                                                  W.

_A._ This is the great mystery which each man must solve for
himself.

                                IV.

                                                  WALLASEY, Oct. 1st

Referring to the comments on “Light on the Path,” in the first
number of LUCIFER, may I ask whether the full paradox “Before the
eyes can see they must be incapable of tears, and yet no eyes
incapable of tears can see,” _i.e._, see good or God, is not truer
and stronger than its part?

“Therefore the soul of the occultist must become stronger than joy
and greater than sorrow” I presume means that he must not _seek_ joy
or _fear_ sorrow, not that he may not enjoy nor sorrow?

The phrase by itself may read “Before the eyes can see they must be
incapable of tears,” tearless, dry, in fact dead! which is obviously
not the author’s intention in “Light on the Path.”

                                                    Yours truly,
                                                            A. E. I.

_A._ Once more I must refer to the preliminary statement in the
comments that “Light on the Path,” is written in an astral cipher,
and that tears do not mean the tears of the physical body, but the
rain drops that come from the passion-life of the human soul. These
being stayed for ever, the astral sight is no longer blinded or
blurred. Divine love and charity then find room, when personal
desire is gone. Joy and sorrow, _for oneself_, then drop naturally
into another place than that which they filled before.

                                 V.

(1.) I desire very strongly to obtain conquest over “self;” would my
using the occult means for so doing, which apparently to me lie
without the _ordinary_ experience of Christians, necessitate my
sacrificing any iota of my belief in the _power of Christ_?

(2.) If I submit myself to the occult conditions under which the
four first rules in “Light on the Path” may be “engraved on my heart
and life;” will these conditions permit me to _pray throughout_ for
the Divine help and strength of the Eternal Christ, who has passed
the portal, opened the “way,” and whom I believe to be the “Master
of Masters,” the “Lord of Angels”?

(3.) Do the words—“the disciple” ... “must then so shut the gates of
his soul that _no comforter_ can enter there nor any enemy”—mean,
that we are wilfully to exclude ourselves from any desire for the
sympathy, strength, and support of the spirit of One who said “No
man cometh unto the Father but by Me,” and who drank the cup of
agony to the very dregs for love of the Brotherhood?

                                                           L. H. FF.

_A._ (1.) Not any iota of your belief in the power of the
Christ-spirit would or should be sacrificed; it would rather
increase, for that spirit is the same Divine overshadowing which has
inspired every Redeemer.

(2.) It matters very little by what name you call the Master of
Masters, so that you do appeal to “_Its_” power throughout.

(3.) Man can find no comforter save in the Divine Spirit within
himself. Does not the tale of the life of Jesus illustrate this,
looking at it from one point of view? In what dread isolation he
lived and died; His disciples, even those who were most beloved by
Him, could not reach His spirit in its sublime moments, or in the
hours of its keenest suffering. So with every one who raises himself
by effort above the common life of man, in however small a degree.
Solitude becomes a familiar state, for nothing personal, not even a
personal God, can comfort or cheer any longer.

                                VI.

“Is there any chance of self-deception? May one enter the path so
gradually as to be conscious of no radical change, representing a
change of life or stage of progression? How is it with one who has
never experienced a great and lasting sorrow, or an all-absorbing
joy, but who in the midst of both joy and sorrow strives to remember
others, and to feel that he hardly deserves the joy, and that his
sorrow is meagre in the presence of the great all-pain? How is such
a one to enter through the gates? By what sign shall he know them?”

                                                               Y. H.

_A._ It is difficult for such a one to know anything of what lies
beneath the surface of his nature until it has been probed by the
fiercer experiences of life. But, of course, the theory of
re-incarnation makes it possible that such experiences are left
behind in the past. The entrance to the gates is marked by one
immutable sign; the sense that personal joy or sorrow no longer
exist. The disciple lives for humanity, not for himself; works for
all creatures that suffer instead of knowing that he himself has
pain.

                           ------------------

                          “ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.”

“As the Editors of LUCIFER kindly invite questions concerning
Theosophy and kindred subjects, an honest enquirer into these
matters would welcome an answer to the following difficulty:

“In his book on ‘Esoteric Buddhism,’ Mr. Sinnett states that souls
or spirits pass the long interval between the one incarnation and
another in a sort of quiescent, and at least half-unconscious,
state, losing enough of their identity to preclude their carrying
any recollection of one incarnation on to the next. In his novel,
“Karma,” Mr. Sinnett represents one character, Mrs. Lakesby, gifted
with more than usual powers, as being very fond, when she has the
chance, of allowing her spirit to escape from the trammels of the
body and meeting the spirits of departed—that is, dead friends—“and
others” on the Astral plane where she holds agreeable converse with
them.

“How are these two statements reconcilable?

“October 22nd, 1887.

                                                              N. D.”

Mr. Sinnett would probably reply that the answer could only be given
fully by reprinting all that he has written in various published
works, on the conditions of existence in Kama-Loca, and Devachan,
and on the higher and lower aspects of _Self_. The normal course of
events will conduct a human being who quits the material body
through Kama-Loca to the Devachanic state, in which Mrs. Lakesby
would not be able to interview him. But while in Kama-Loca she might
at least imagine she did this, and, perhaps not too wisely, indulge
in the practice of so doing. If we remember rightly the Baron, in
“Karma,” who is represented as knowing a good deal more than Mrs.
Lakesby, gifted as she is, throws some discredit upon her view
concerning the Astral plane and its inhabitants. At the best when a
clairvoyant can gain touch with a soul in Kama-Loca, it is the lower
self remaining there, though it has left the body, that she deals
with. And though that lower self may be very recognisable for people
who have known it in the earthly manifestation, it will be _lower_
than the lower self of earth and not higher because ethereal. That
is to say on earth the living man is more or less under the guidance
of his higher self. But the higher has no longer any business to
transact with the lower self of Kama-Loca, and does not manifest
there at all.

Finally it must always be remembered that a romance, even though
written by an Occultist, is a romance still, designed to suggest
broad conceptions rather than to expound scientific and doctrinal
details.

                           ------------------

“Being courteously invited to address any questions bearing on the
matter contained in LUCIFER to the Editors, Madame la Marechale
Canrobert would gladly know:—First, What is the distinction made
(page 11) between _the soul_ and the starry spirit? Is it that soul
which is again alluded to (page 91) as the animal soul, in
opposition to the Divine soul? Second, What are the external forms
of the individualised being spoken of also on page 91?”

_A._ The human soul, that which is subject to human passions, but
which can also yearn towards the nobility of the Divine soul, is
that which is spoken of on page 11. The starry spirit is the
Divine-astral. The animal soul is that which animates the mere
physical life, the unintelligent existence of the body. The
“external forms” referred to on page 91 are the successive human
shapes which the starry spirit inspires during its long pilgrimage.

                                                               M. C.

                           =Reviews.=

                                  ---

               THE REAL HISTORY OF THE ROSICRUCIANS.[55]

-----

Footnote 55:

  A. E. Waite. Published by G. Redway.

-----

Mr. Waite’s new book will be welcomed by that large class of readers
who regard occultism, alchemy, and all like studies with antagonism
and suspicion. Secret societies supposed to deal with such subjects
are, from their point of view, better exposed and ridiculed than
treated with respect or taken seriously. The author of the present
volume does not, however, cast disrespect on occult science, nor
does he discuss the Rosicrucians in a spirit of levity or disdain.
He recognises that there may be, and probably is, a grand spiritual
and moral philosophy in the higher aspects of true alchemy, but in
these pages he treats the subject of the society from the
historical, and not at all from the mystical side, and confines
himself to tracing its recorded history, its rise, fall, and _raison
d’etre_. The conscientious study of these records relating to the
Brotherhood has brought Mr. Waite to the conclusion that they do not
support the traditions which up to the present have surrounded the
society with a veil of unknown antiquity and have endowed its
members with a halo of marvellous wisdom. It is these conclusions
that will charm the incredulous, and may probably blind them to the
indications of an undercurrent of belief in the reality of occult
science, _per se_, which the author has evidently not desired to
suppress. To investigate and disentangle the network of facts,
theories, and traditions which must necessarily envelope a society
that up to the commencement of the seventeenth century had not been
heard of by the general public is no easy task, and Mr. Waite may be
congratulated upon the calm and judicial spirit with which he has
treated his subject, as well as upon the moderation with which he
advances his own views. To be able to gather from these open records
how far the members of such a society may have held in their keeping
some of the inner secrets of Nature is of course impossible to
ordinary humanity. The real character and aims of such an
association can be known only to passed Initiates. In his preface
Mr. Waite says: “I claim to have performed my task in a sympathetic
but impartial manner, purged from the bias of any theory, and above
all uncontaminated by the pretension to superior knowledge, which
claimants have never been able to substantiate.” This statement is
fully justified in the pages of the book under review. Its value
does not lie so much in any new presentation of the facts or
theories pertaining to the Rosicrucians, and which are so frequently
distorted by ignorant commentators, as in the compact and systematic
arrangement of some of the principal writings available. He has
brought together not only the leading works of the various writers
known, or supposed to be Rosicrucians, but he has also collected the
criticisms and conjectures on these current at the time of their
appearance in Germany, together with others of a much more recent
date. Consequently the reader has before him almost all the
information of this description he could require, and which he could
not obtain for himself except by the expenditure of time and trouble
that very few are either able or willing to give.

It is not surprising that Mr. Waite should have satisfied himself
that the Rosicrucians have no sort of claim to the reverence and
admiration in which scholars and mystics have held them up to the
present time. But these conclusions will form only one more of other
proofs to students of esotericism, that the task of writing a true
and real history of a secret occult society from its records, where
such exist, is an impossibility. For even when such societies left
reliable information of their pursuits, aspirations, and beliefs,
the language employed has always been of such a character as to
baffle entirely the ordinary exoteric reader, whether he were
historian, literateur, or scientist. Such literature can be
interesting only to the student on the track of esoteric knowledge,
or to one who has in a great measure acquired the meaning conveyed,
for himself in other ways. This method of giving to the world, as it
were, the proceeds, of life-long research in the realms of unseen
Nature, has been adopted by alchemists, magicians, priests, and
hierophants from all ages. None but those who were sufficiently
steadfast in the cause of truth could read and understand what was
thus written. The numerous and minute directions for the working of
spells and cures, etc., left by Paracelsus, and which are apparently
as straight forward and practicable as the receipts in a modern
cookery book, would turn out probably much less successful in the
hands of an amateur, no matter how highly educated on the physical
plane, than the more delicate dishes taken from such receipts
manipulated by an entirely inexperienced servant. For these
elaborate instructions are given in terms that appeal simply to the
material senses of those who are in search of power rather than of
wisdom, whereas the real effort to produce the result has to take
place on the Astral plane of nature. The spiritual or soul side of
man, must be awakened and utilised, before the Philosopher’s stone,
or the elixir of life, can be discovered.

The comprehension of the potentialities of the human body, their
nurture and eventual utilisation for purely unselfish ends and
spiritual, _i.e._, real wisdom, is, or ought to be, the work of all
secret occult societies. But to return to Mr. Waite’s book. The
popular notion that this Brotherhood is of great, almost incredible
antiquity, is utterly condemned by him. He fails to find any
documentary evidence to show that it existed before the early part
of the seventeenth century, and argues that the well-known antiquity
of the Rose and Cross in symbolism is no proof of the antiquity of a
society using them “at a period subsequent to the Renaissance.”
Granting that the device of the Rose and Cross, as emblems of a
particular order or brotherhood, does not guarantee its equal
antiquity with them, still it must be admitted that these symbols
bearing as they do a profoundly esoteric interpretation, and being
adopted by a society of a distinctly occult character, is an
argument in support of the theory that the founder or originator of
this order had some reason other than fancy for thus labelling his
fraternity. Elsewhere he says, “I have shown indisputably that there
was no novelty in the Rosicrucian pretensions, and no originality in
their views. They appear before us as Lutheran disciples of
Paracelsus.”

The author here seems to be not entirely logical in his deductions.
When he states that he has not met in his search with either
letters, records, or papers that mention or suggest the existence of
such a society before the seventeenth century, he is of course, as a
historian, safely ensconced from attack. In this capacity as an
impartial seeker after facts, it is outside the area of his work in
the absence of data to theorise on probabilities. When, however, in
dealing with the manifestoes of the seventeenth century, he finds
therein evidence that shows him the Brotherhood had no back history
or ancestry, his conclusions are open to criticism. The very fact of
the want of originality and novelty in the views, aims and
aspirations set forth in the “Fama,” and “Confessio” surely gives
strength to the theory that holds to the antiquity of the society,
rather than to its being the outcome of a spontaneous effort. All
true students of mysticism have good reason to believe, even when
they do not absolutely know, that the various schools of occultism
considered from their highest or most spiritual and abstract
teaching, lead to the same goal. They may be called by different
names, and their methods in minor details may not be the same, but
the wisdom _au fond_ is identical. Therefore when Mr. Waite casts
discredit upon the Rosicrucians for not advertising novelties in
their manifesto, in the mystical line of thought, he reminds us of a
man who in making up his mind on the value of a violin, decides that
it cannot be of great age, because it emits only the same set of
sounds that such musical instruments have been accustomed to give
forth from time immemorial.

As far as can be ascertained by studying the state of thought and
society at the period when the Rosicrucians were first heard of in
Europe, this particular order manifested itself as an antidote to
the general tendency towards the material side of alchemy, which
honey-combed the educated classes of Germany. Wonder-seekers then,
as now, did not apprehend that ethics, both social and spiritual,
are the fundamental basis of real wisdom, consequently the great cry
was for power, no matter of what description, for the accumulation
of wealth. The craving for arcane knowledge, so widely diffused, and
which alchemists were truly known to possess, had gradually
degenerated into a purely selfish desire for the secret of
transmuting metals. To supply this eager demand charlatans of every
description rushed to the front professing to teach all who joined
their standards, _i.e._, who could pay the necessary fee, how to
turn common metal into pure gold. The craze for this power was so
universal, the motive of it so unspiritual, that in order to stem
the tide of the folly, and to checkmate the impostors who were
bringing discredit on the _Sacred Art_, the “Fama” was issued by a
body of people who took as their symbols the Rose and Cross. From
this point of view the Rosicrucians historically come before the
world in the light of a group of Reformers.

Different people interpret in different ways the two manifestoes—the
“Fama” and “Confessio.” Mr. Waite appears to place great importance
on the adherence to Christian dogmas observable in the wording of
these papers. But in taking the documents literally, he seems to
overlook the necessity that all writers were under, in those
troubled times, of pandering to the narrow and prejudiced minds of
the leaders of the so called Christian Church, by apparently
adhering to the Ritual. Naturally, the author of the “Fama” worded
it in such a manner as to avoid persecution or suspicion of heresy.
Those to whom it was really addressed would not be misled by its
tone of orthodoxy, and the general public and the church would pass
it by as harmless. Moreover, as Mr. Waite remarks further on, “the
philosophical and scientific opinions and pretentions of the
Rosicrucian Society have more claim on our notice” than their
theology. Speaking again of the school of thought current at the
time this organization was floated, and which he tells us the
Rosicrucians followed, he says.... “Mystics in an age of scientific
and religious materialism, they were connected by an unbroken chain
with the theurgists of the first Christian centuries, they were
alchemists in the spiritual sense, and the professors of a Divine
Magic. Their disciples, the Rosicrucians, followed closely in their
footsteps, and the claims of the “Fama” and “Confessio” must be
reviewed in the light of the great elder claims of alchemy and
magic.” In spite of this, Mr. Waite judges the Society, it would
appear, by what he admits to be the minor and less important side of
its object, for he speaks of it eventually, as a body of
“pre-eminently learned men and a Christian Sect.” We will not stop
to consider the probability or possibility of a body of
“pre-eminently learned men,” being at the same time a “Christian
Sect.”

Having thus deprived the Rosicrucians of the dignity, reverence and
romance, that cling round great antiquity; having saddled them with
the tenets and dogmas of conventional mediæval christianity, Mr.
Waite next proceeds to demolish their emblems, or at all events, to
deny that they attached any esoteric interpretation to them. He says
... “The whole question of the Crucified Rose, in its connection
with the Society is one of pure conjecture, that no Rosicrucian
manifestoes, and no acknowledged Brother have ever given any
explanation concerning it, and that no presumption is afforded by
the fact of its adoption, for the antiquity of the Society, or for
its connection with Universal Symbolism.” Allowing for the necessity
in writing a history of a mystical society of taking the documents
as they stand, Mr. Waite rather ignores the fact that the evidence
for the statement above is of a negative character. That in their
manifestoes and records there appears no explanation of their
emblems, hardly justifies the conclusion that they were incapable of
giving any. It would indeed have been a new departure in the annals
of Secret Societies if the founders of this particular order had
left behind the explanation of their signs and symbols. The study
and interpretation of symbology forms a most important element in
the education of occult disciples, and therefore to assume that the
projectors of this organisation should be unaware of the mystic
reading of the Rose and Cross, is a hypothesis that no student of
mysticism could accept.

It is, on the whole, generally assumed by those who have taken any
pains to investigate the evidence, that Johann Valentin Andreas was
the author of the “Fama,” the _Confessio Fraternitatis_, and also of
the “Chymical Marriage” of Christian Rosencreutz, and to that extent
he must be looked upon exoterically as the founder of the
Rosicrucian Society, as first known to history. He was deeply versed
in mystic studies and alchemy, and had besides a widespread
reputation as a scholar and learned man. His “Chymical Marriage,” to
anyone with even a slight acquaintance with alchemical literature,
reveals him as one who had penetrated deeply into some of the
mysteries of nature. Consequently, he must have been well aware that
the Rose and Cross bore a profoundly occult signification.
Considering the man himself, the character of his studies, and his
well known devotion to alchemy and mysticism, it is certainly more
reasonable to suppose that he took those emblems (presuming he had
any choice in the matter) for his society, not as some suggest,
because they happened to form a part of his own armorial bearings,
or that the Rose and Cross on a Heart was used by Martin Luther, but
because he recognised their full value and importance as symbols of
cosmic evolution.

Mr. Waite seems, on the whole, to agree with the idea that Andreas
was the author of the “Fama” and “Confessio,” and regards the
“Chymical Marriage” as undoubtedly his production. He also allows
that the latter pamphlet can only have been the work of a man deeply
embued with alchemical speculations, a mystic and follower of
Paracelsus. How then can he ask us to believe that the Society
formed under such auspices was _au fond_, nothing but a Christian
sect based on the teachings of Martin Luther! To the public at large
these theories may perhaps appear sufficiently plausible in face of
the wording of those parts of the manifestoes that touch on
theology. To students of esotericism, however, such conclusions will
be absolutely unacceptable, and we can not allow to pass without
comment Mr. Waite’s hypothesis that the Rosicrucian Society, as it
first came before the world, was simply a society for the
propagation of the deteriorated Christianity of the middle ages. No
mystic, whether calling himself Rosicrucian, Cabbalist, Theosophist,
Christian, or Buddhist, would either, intellectually or spiritually,
accept the narrow dogmas and intolerant views of the Christian
church, even when to some extent cleansed of many of its grosser
abuses by the energy of Martin Luther’s Reform.

The two lines of thought are essentially different. In the case of
the Christian, no matter of what denomination, his thoughts are
bound down and paralysed within the rigid circle drawn by the
materialistic reading of Christ’s birth, life, and death. The true
occultist takes those episodes spiritually or allegorically, finding
their correspondences within himself as well as in the universe. To
say that a human being can at one and the same time be an occultist,
and a sectarian Christian, is as impossible as to speak of a
Christian Jew. A true Christian, _i.e._, one who understood and
followed absolutely the teachings of Jesus, would be also a true
Rosicrucian. Membership of particular churches or societies does not
unfortunately endow the individual immediately with the virtue,
knowledge or power, that is the theoretical goal of his initial
action. Such membership is, or may be a step in the direction of
Divine Wisdom, but one step does not carry him to the summit of the
path. Men do not become either Rosicrucians, Christians, or
Theosophists merely by joining the Societies working under those
particular names. But certain tendencies in their temperaments urge
them into the special Society where the mode of thought seems best
fitted to help them, to realise the magnitude and glory of the
possibilities inherent in their own souls.

Between the humanity of to-day, and the development of a sixth
sense, which will enable it to perceive what now is imperceptible,
there is but a thin veil of obstructing matter, metaphorically
speaking. This veil is even now being continually pierced by
psychics, first in one direction then in another, letting in through
these tiny openings glimpses of the invisible world around. In a
little while the veil will be worn away entirely, and the humanity
of that future time will doubtless wonder how the humanity of this
age, which we find so enlightened, could have been so unintuitive
and blind to the most important side of their natures. Until the
race however has by soul evolution attained to this sixth sense,
real histories of Mystical Societies can hardly be hoped for.
Members of such Societies, who by study and training have attained
some degree of knowledge _may_ not disclose the secrets, non-members
cannot get at them. The reading-classes of to-day may, after reading
Mr. Waite’s book, think they have learnt something of the body of
people called Rosicrucians, and until now supposed to have some
claim to arcane knowledge. The students of occultism will know that
the vital part of the subject is and must remain ever impregnable,
excepting from its esoteric side.

                           ------------------

                      “NINETEENTH CENTURY SENSE.”

Sense! What is ”sense”? A word meaning either little or much; simple
and clear to the understanding, or various and carrying with it many
connotations. It is one or other according as we measure the depth,
the thoroughness, or the _reality_ of the knowledge acquired. From a
purely physical “sensation” we may trace the word through endless
shades of signification; through “good” sense, “sound” sense,
through the artistic and finer sensibilities, the “moral” sense,
till it loses itself in the vague hint of a dim, unformed
consciousness, pointing the way to the new world of the “inner
senses.”

All these meanings and more are connoted by the phrase “Nineteenth
Century Sense;” [56] for, by a daring metaphor, the tools which
modern science places at our disposal are considered as “senses,”
and even the faculty and power of analysis is sometimes included
under the word.

-----

Footnote 56:

  NINETEENTH CENTURY SENSE: The Paradox of Spiritualism. By John
  Darby. J. B. Lippincott, Philadelphia, and 10, Henrietta Street,
  Covent Garden, London.

-----

Beginning with the simplest, the reader is led on to the most
astounding phenomena of modern spiritualism in the first
thirty-seven pages of this strange work. The author depicts in vivid
language his own experiences, and the triumphs of phenomena produced
by one of his personal friends, in a style which is often quaint and
striking, though at times the writer’s disregard of many of the
accepted rules of composition becomes—to say the least—irritating.
But the matter of his book earns forgiveness for the manner in which
it is formulated.

After carrying his reader to a pitch of interest and expectation as
to the phenomena he describes, Mr. Darby suddenly plunges him into
the frozen sea of scepticism by stating that all the phenomena
produced under what seemed the strictest test conditions, were
produced by conjuring and legerdemain, and by explaining the
physical causes of some of the visions he has so graphically
described. It will suffice to cite a single instance in
illustration. “The President of the American Branch of the Indian
Society of Theosophists (Professor Coues) ... spent an evening with
me some time back in conversation on the subject of psychical
phenomena. We parted at midnight. At seven o’clock the next morning
I suddenly awoke, beholding the astral of the professor standing at
my bed-side.”

This vision Mr. Darby explains by reference to the fact of the
persistence of retinal images and the super-excitability of the
nerves and brain. “Astral projections,” he concludes, “are of
precisely similar significance.” We would feel obliged to the
eminent American professor of physiology referred to if he would
give his written opinion on the question thus raised. For
Theosophists have heard of persons whose brains were in complete
repose and fully occupied otherwise who have also seen the astral
form of Professor Coues. How’s this?

He concludes, nevertheless, that materialistic agnosticism is the
only “creed”? Far from it. This portion of the book is purely
introductory; it forms the five door-steps leading to the Spiritus
Sanctus—the laboratory of the Divine Spirit.

From this black depth of doubt and confusion, the reader is lifted
suddenly into the clear ether, and his feet are placed on the
“Rosicrucian Way.”

Whether called “Rosicrucian,” or by whatever other name, the “Way”
is the “Way of Life,” the path which leads to freedom, to wisdom, to
true living. Whole pages might well be quoted; a few aphorisms must
suffice.

      “A thing is to the sense that uses it what to the sense
      It seems to be; it is never anything else.”

Many passages recall “Light on the Path,” though Mr. Darby probably
never saw that book; but life is one, and _true_ occultism is one.

Speaking of mankind as divided into two classes, _men_ in whom is
the Holy Ghost, the Divine Spirit or the _Logos_, he says:

  “With people self-wise or over-sufficient, with the proud and the
  uncharitable, with all who are _without understanding as to the
  common good being the only good_, with him who fails to see that
  gifts _are in men as almoners only_—with all these the Holy Ghost
  is absent, otherwise so lacking in measure as to be incapable of
  making itself felt.”

The italicised passages give the key-note of the true science and
art of living. To quote again:

  “Settled into tranquillity by entirely satisfactory recognition of
  noumenon through phenomenon an end is reached where instrument is
  prepared and ready for use. Analysis has shown the Rosicrucian
  what he is; more than this—what he can become as to his Ego. If
  out of his understanding, he puts office [_the service of
  others_.—ED.] before self, he learns directly of the God, as the
  God comes to live in and to make use of him.”

  “Proving to one’s self that one’s self is God”; and again, “God
  ... the One is in all; the All is in one.”

The next chapter contrasts strangely with the one just quoted
from—strangely, that is, to the outer sense. The one full of deep
philosophy, of questionings of God, the Self, the World, clothed in
the profound and significant paradoxes in which wisdom finds
expression; the other an idyll, a sketch of nature, deeply coloured
by the influence of Walt Whitman, whose _style_, perhaps, has had
too great an influence on Mr. Darby, who has caught its jerky and
unpleasant strings of detached sentences.

This is Chapter V.; Chapter VI. deals with Matter in its relation to
the Ego, the spirit of the treatment being indicated by the
following conclusion:

  “That there shows itself, out of a process of exclusion, conducted
  even only so far as the analysis of matter, a something which is
  not matter. The analysis demonstrates the something to be of
  individual signification; further, that it is to it what a flute
  or other instrument is to harmony.”

The final words express a purely occult doctrine, which is worked
out at length in the succeeding chapter on the Ego.

This is the fundamental thought of the book, the last fifty pages of
which describe the author’s individual experiences in nascent
psychic development.

They are not of a very striking character, but exhibit with
sufficient clearness the early forms of this new growth.
Unfortunately, the author seems to have lacked the desire to pursue
the road thus opened to him, and the final pages of his work are but
a lame and halting conclusion to a remarkable production.

The book is well adapted for those who stand halting on the verge of
mysticism, while for the student who has advanced further, its pages
may serve as a means for helping others.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

The Editors of LUCIFER beg to acknowledge the following books, which
will be noticed in future numbers:—

  From Messrs. Ward and Downey: “A Modern Magician,” by Fitzgerald
  Molloy. “Twin Souls.”

  From Messrs. David Nutt & Co.: “The Gnostics and their Remains,”
  by C. H. King.

  From the Authors: “Natural Genesis,” by Gerald Massey. “Sepher
  Yezirah,” by Dr. Wynn Westcott. “Palingenesia,” by “Theosopho and
  Ellora.” “Mohammed Benani,” by Ion Perdicaris. “Lays of Romance,”
  by W. Stewart Ross.

  From George Redway: “Posthumous Humanity,” translated by Col. H.
  S. Olcott.

                           ------------------

⁂ The Editors regret that the pressure on their space prevents their
noticing in detail the various Theosophical Magazines:—THE
THEOSOPHIST, THE PATH, LE LOTUS, and L’AURORE. A full summary of
their contents for November and December will appear next month. The
same remark applies to a letter on “Karma,” received from Mr.
Beatty, which will be published and fully answered next month.

        =FROM THE NOTE BOOK OF AN UNPOPULAR PHILOSOPHER=


I am Sternly Rebuked for some remarks made in the last number. My
reflections with regard to the respective value of Mussulman and
Christian pledges exchanged, as also on the doubtful propriety of
zoological symbolism in the Churches—are pronounced wantonly wicked
and calculated to hurt the tender feelings of Christian readers—if
any. Protestant England—it is solemnly urged—is full of truly good
men and women, of sincere church-goers, who “walk in the ways of the
Lord.” No doubt there are such, and no doubt they do, or try to,
which is a step in advance of those who do not. But then none of the
“righteous” need recognize their faces in the mirror presented by
the “Unpopular Philosopher” only to the _unrighteous_. And again—-

“THE WAYS OF THE LORD....” The ways of _which_ Lord? Is the jealous
Lord of Moses meant, the God who thundered amidst the lightnings of
Sinai, or the meek “Lord” of the Mount of Olives and Calvary? Is it
the stern God that saith “_vengeance is mine_,” and who must be
“_worshipped in fear_,” or the “man-God” who commanded _to love
one’s neighbours as oneself_, _to forgive one’s enemies_ and _bless
those who revile us_? For the ways of the two Lords are wide apart,
and can never meet.

No one who has studied the Bible can deny for one single moment that
a large proportion (if _happily_ not all) of modern Christians walk
indeed “in the _ways_ of the Lord”—Number I. This one is the “Lord”
who _had respect unto Abel_, because the meat of his sacrifice smelt
sweet in his nostrils; the “Lord” who commanded the Israelites to
_spoil_ the Egyptians of their jewels of silver and gold;[57] also
to “_kill every male among the little ones_,” as “_every woman ...
but all the women children_ (virgins) _to keep alive for
themselves_” (Numb. XXXI., 17, _et seq._); and to commit other
actions too coarse to be repeated in any respectable publication.

-----

Footnote 57:

  And no doubt also the Anglo-Indians to _spoil_ the King of Burmah
  of his?

-----

Hence the modern warriors who achieve such feats (with the modern
improvement occasionally, of shooting their enemies out of the
mouths of big guns) walk, most undeniably, “in the ways” of the Lord
of the Jews, but _never in the ways_ of Christ. So does the modern
trader who keeps the Sabbath most rigorously, attending Divine
Service thrice on that day, after treating during the whole week his
hired clerks as the brood of Ham “who shall be their (Shem and
Japhet’s) servants.”

So does, likewise, he who helps himself, David-like, to a
Bath-Sheba, the wife of Uriah, without the least concern whether he
simply robs or kills the Hittite husband. For he has every right to
take for his sampler “a friend of God”—the _God_ of the old
covenant.

But will either of these pretend they walk in the ways of their Lord
of the _new_ Dispensation? Yet, he who raises his voice in a protest
against the “ways” of the Mosaic God, therefore, in favour of those
preached by the very _antithesis_ of Jehovah—the meek and gentle
“Man of Sorrow”—he is forthwith set up on the pillory and denounced
to public opprobrium as an _anti-Christian_ and an Atheist! This, in
the face of the words: “_Not every one that saith unto me Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that doeth the
will of my Father which is in Heaven.... And every one that heareth
these words of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a
foolish man, which built his house upon the sand.... and great was
the fall thereof!_”

THE “WILL OF MY FATHER?” Is this “Father” identical with the God of
Mount Sinai and of the Commandments? Then what is the meaning of the
whole Chapter V. of Matthew, of the Sermon on the Mount, in which
every one of these Commandments is virtually criticised and
destroyed by the new amendments?

“_Ye have heard that it hath been said ‘An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth’; but I say unto you that you resist not evil_,”
etc.

Glance at the big centres of our Christian civilisations. Look at
the jails, the court and the prison-houses, the tribunals, and the
police; see the distress, with starvation and prostitution as its
results. Look at the host of the men of law and of judges; and then
see how far the words of Christ, “Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, Judge not that ye be not judged,” apply to the whole
structure of our modern civilised life, and how far we may be called
_Christians_.

How well the commandment—“_He that is without sin among you, let him
first cast a stone_”—is now obeyed, may be seen by following day
after day, the law reports for slander, calumny and defamation.
Obedience to the injunction, and warning against the sin of
offending children, “_these little ones_,” of whom is the Kingdom of
Heaven, is found in the brutal treatment of fatherless children on
the streets by the Christian police, of other children by their
parents, and finally, in the merciless flogging of wee bits of
culprits driven to crime by their own parents and starvation. And is
it those who denounce such an anti-Christian spirit in legislation,
the Pharisaical church and society, who shall be branded for
speaking the truth? The magistrate, who has sworn on the
Bible—contrary to Christ’s express injunction—to administer justice;
the pious defaulter, who swears falsely on it, but cannot be
convicted; the sanctimonious millionaire who fattens on the blood
and sweat of the poor; and the aristocratic “Jezebel” who casts mud
from her carriage wheels on her “fallen” sister, on the street, a
_victim perchance, of one of the men of her own high caste_—all
these call themselves Christians. The _anti-Christians_ are those
who dare to look behind that veil of respectability.

The best answer to such paradoxical denunciation may be found in one
of “Saladin’s” admirable editorials. The reader must turn to _The
Secular Review_ for October 22nd, 1887, and read some pertinent
reflections on “The Bitter Cry of Outcast London,” and the
“Child-thieves” flogging. Well may a “heathen Chinee” or a “mild
Hindu” shudder in horror at the picture in it of that “drawing of
blood” out of the baby-bodies of infant thieves. The process is
executed by a Christian policeman acting under the orders and in the
presence of a righteous Christian magistrate. Has either of the two
ever given a thought during the “child-torture” to the words of
their Christ: “_Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, it
is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he
were cast into the sea_”?

Yes, they _are_ walking “in the ways of the God of Israel”! For, as
“_it repented the Lord that he had made man_” so wicked and so
imperfect, that “Lord” drowned and destroyed him “from the face of
the Earth,” without more ado. Verily so, “_both man and beast, and
the creeping thing and the fowls_,” though the latter had neither
sinned, nor were they “wicked.” And why shouldn’t the righteous men
on Earth do likewise? It repents the Christian citizens of pious
LUGDUNUM perchance also, that they create the starving little
wretches, the foundlings abandoned to vice from the day of their
birth? And the truly good Christian men, who would believe
themselves damned to hell-fire were they to miss their Sabbath
Service, forbidden by law to drown _their_ creatures, resort to the
next best thing they can; they “draw blood” from those little ones
whom their “Saviour” and Master took under his special protection.

May the shadow of “Saladin” never grow less, for the fearless honest
words of truth he writes:—

  “And whose blood was in the veins of these two boys? Whose blood
  reddened the twigs of the birch? Peradventure that of the
  magistrate himself, or of the chaplain of the prison. For mystical
  are the grinding of the wheels of the mill of misery. And God
  looks on and tolerates. And I am accounted a heretic, and my
  anti-Christian writings are produced against me in a Court of
  Justice to prevent my getting justice, because I fail to see in
  all this how Christianity “elevates” woman and casts a “halo of
  sacred innocence round the tender years of the child.” So be it. I
  have flung down my gage of battle, and the force of bigotry may
  break me to death; but it shall never bend me to submission.
  Unsalaried and ill-supported, I fight as stubbornly as if the
  world flung at my feet its gold and laurels and huzzas; for the
  weak need a champion and the wronged an avenger. It is necessary
  that Sham find an opponent and Hypocrisy a foe: these they will
  find in me, be the consequences what they may.

                                                          “SALADIN.”

This is the epitomized history of the “Unpopular Philosopher”; aye,
the story of all those who, in the words of “Lara,” know that
“Christianity will never save humanity, but humanity may save
Christianity,” _i.e._, the ideal spirit of the Christos-Buddha—of
THEOSOPHY.

                                LUCIFER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

        VOL. I.     LONDON, DECEMBER 15TH, 1887.     NO. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

               “LUCIFER” TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY,
                               GREETING!

MY LORD PRIMATE OF ALL ENGLAND,—

We make use of an open letter to your Grace as a vehicle to convey
to you, and through you, to the clergy, to their flocks, and to
Christians generally—who regard us as the enemies of Christ—a brief
statement of the position which Theosophy occupies in regard to
Christianity, as we believe that the time for making that statement
has arrived.

Your Grace is no doubt aware that Theosophy is not a religion, but a
philosophy at once religious and scientific; and that the chief
work, so far, of the Theosophical Society has been to revive in each
religion its own animating spirit, by encouraging and helping
enquiry into the true significance of its doctrines and observances.
Theosophists know that the deeper one penetrates into the meaning of
the dogmas and ceremonies of all religions, the greater becomes
their apparent underlying similarity, until finally a perception of
their fundamental unity is reached. This common ground is no other
than Theosophy—the Secret Doctrine of the ages; which, diluted and
disguised to suit the capacity of the multitude, and the
requirements of the time, has formed the living kernel of all
religions. The Theosophical Society has branches respectively
composed of Buddhists, Hindoos, Mahomedans, Parsees, Christians, and
Freethinkers, who work together as brethren on the common ground of
Theosophy; and it is precisely because Theosophy is not a religion,
nor can for the multitude supply the place of a religion, that the
success of the Society has been so great, not merely as regards its
growing membership and extending influence, but also in respect to
the performance of the work it has undertaken—the revival of
spirituality in religion, and the cultivation of the sentiment of
BROTHERHOOD among men.

We Theosophists believe that a religion is a natural incident in the
life of man in his present stage of development; and that although,
in rare cases, individuals may be born without the religious
sentiment, a community must have a religion, that is to say, _a
uniting bond_—under penalty of social decay and material
annihilation. We believe that no religious doctrine can be more than
an attempt to picture to our present limited understandings, in the
terms of our terrestrial experiences, great cosmical and spiritual
truths, which in our normal state of consciousness we vaguely
_sense_, rather than actually perceive and comprehend; and a
revelation, if it is to reveal anything, must necessarily conform to
the same earth-bound requirements of the human intellect. In our
estimation, therefore, no religion can be absolutely true, and none
can be absolutely false. A religion is true in proportion as it
supplies the spiritual, moral and intellectual needs of the time,
and helps the development of mankind in these respects. It is false
in proportion as it hinders that development, and offends the
spiritual, moral and intellectual portion of man’s nature. And the
transcendentally spiritual ideas of the ruling powers of the
Universe entertained by an Oriental sage would be as false a
religion for the African savage as the grovelling fetishism of the
latter would be for the sage, although both views must necessarily
be true in degree, for both represent the highest ideas attainable
by the respective individuals of the same cosmico-spiritual facts,
which can never be known in their reality by man while he remains
but man.

Theosophists, therefore, are respecters of all the religions, and
for the religious ethics of Jesus they have profound admiration. It
could not be otherwise, for these teachings which have come down to
us are the same as those of Theosophy. So far, therefore, as modern
Christianity makes good its claim to be the _practical_ religion
taught by Jesus, Theosophists are with it heart and hand. So far as
it goes contrary to those ethics, pure and simple, Theosophists are
its opponents. Any Christian can, if he will, compare the Sermon on
the Mount with the dogmas of his church, and the spirit that
breathes in it, with the principles that animate this Christian
civilisation and govern his own life; and then he will be able to
judge for himself how far the religion of Jesus enters into his
Christianity, and how far, therefore, he and Theosophists are
agreed. But professing Christians, especially the clergy, shrink
from making this comparison. Like merchants who fear to find
themselves bankrupt, they seem to dread the discovery of a
discrepancy in their accounts which could not be made good by
placing material assets as a set-off to spiritual liabilities. The
comparison between the teachings of Jesus and the doctrines of the
churches has, however, frequently been made—and often with great
learning and critical acumen—both by those who would abolish
Christianity and those who would reform it; and the aggregate result
of these comparisons, as your Grace must be well aware, goes to
prove that in almost every point the doctrines of the churches and
the practices of Christians are _in direct opposition to the
teachings of Jesus_.

We are accustomed to say to the Buddhist, the Mahomedan, the Hindoo,
or the Parsee: “The road to Theosophy lies, for you, through your
own religion.” We say this because those creeds possess a deeply
philosophical and esoteric meaning, explanatory of the allegories
under which they are presented to the people; but we cannot say the
same thing to Christians. The successors of the Apostles never
recorded the _secret doctrine_ of Jesus—the “mysteries of the
kingdom of Heaven”—which it was given to them (his apostles) alone
to know.[58] These have been suppressed, made away with, destroyed.
What have come down upon the stream of time are the maxims, the
parables, the allegories and the fables which Jesus expressly
intended for the spiritually deaf and blind to be revealed later to
the world, and which modern Christianity either takes all literally,
or interprets according to the fancies of the Fathers of the secular
church. In both cases they are like cut flowers: they are severed
from the plant on which they grew, and from the root whence that
plant drew its life. Were we, therefore, to encourage Christians, as
we do the votaries of other creeds, to study their own religion for
themselves, the consequence would be, not a knowledge of the meaning
of its mysteries, but either the revival of mediæval superstition
and intolerance, accompanied by a formidable outbreak of mere
lip-prayer and preaching—such as resulted in the formation of the
239 Protestant sects of England alone—or else a great increase of
scepticism, for Christianity has no esoteric foundation known to
those who profess it. For even you, my Lord Primate of England, must
be painfully aware that you know absolutely no more of those
“mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven” which Jesus taught his
disciples, than does the humblest and most illiterate member of your
church.

-----

Footnote 58:

  S. Mark, iv. 11; Matthew, xiii. 11; Luke, viii. 10.

-----

It is easily understood, therefore, that Theosophists have nothing
to say against the policy of the Roman Catholic Church in
forbidding, or of the Protestant churches in discouraging, any such
private enquiry into the meaning of the “Christian” dogmas as would
correspond to the esoteric study of other religions. With their
present ideas and knowledge, professing Christians are not prepared
to undertake a critical examination of their faith, with a promise
of good results. Its inevitable effect would be to paralyze rather
than stimulate their dormant religious sentiments; for biblical
criticism and comparative mythology have proved conclusively—to
those, at least, who have no vested interests, spiritual or
temporal, in the maintenance of orthodoxy—that the Christian
religion, as it now exists, is composed of the husks of Judaism, the
shreds of paganism, and the ill-digested remains of gnosticism and
neo-platonism. This curious conglomerate which gradually formed
itself round the recorded sayings (λογια) of Jesus, has, after the
lapse of ages, now begun to disintegrate, and to crumble away from
the pure and precious gems of Theosophic truth which it has so long
overlain and hidden, but could neither disfigure nor destroy.
Theosophy not only rescues these precious gems from the fate that
threatens the rubbish in which they have been so long embedded, but
saves that rubbish itself from utter condemnation; for it shows that
the result of biblical criticism is far from being the ultimate
analysis of Christianity, as each of the pieces which compose the
curious mosaics of the Churches once belonged to a religion which
had an esoteric meaning. It is only when these pieces are restored
to the places they originally occupied that their hidden
significance can be perceived, and the real meaning of the dogmas of
Christianity understood. To do all this, however, requires a
knowledge of the Secret Doctrine as it exists in the esoteric
foundation of other religions; and this knowledge is not in the
hands of the Clergy, for the Church has hidden, and since lost, the
keys.

Your Grace will now understand why it is that the Theosophical
Society has taken for one of its three “objects” the study of those
Eastern religions and philosophies, which shed such a flood of light
upon the inner meaning of Christianity; and you will, we hope, also
perceive that in so doing, we are acting not as the enemies, but as
the friends of the religion taught by Jesus—of true Christianity, in
fact. For it is only through the study of those religions and
philosophies that Christians can ever arrive at an understanding of
their own beliefs, or see the hidden meaning of the parables and
allegories which the Nazarene told to the spiritual cripples of
Judea, and by taking which, either as matters of fact or as matters
of fancy, the Churches have brought the teachings themselves into
ridicule and contempt, and Christianity into serious danger of
complete collapse, undermined as it is by historical criticism and
mythological research, besides being broken by the sledge-hammer of
modern science.

Ought Theosophists themselves, then, to be regarded by Christians
as their enemies, because they believe that orthodox Christianity
is, on the whole, opposed to the religion of Jesus; and because
they have the courage to tell the Churches that they are traitors
to the MASTER they profess to revere and serve? Far from it,
indeed. Theosophists know that the same spirit that animated the
words of Jesus lies latent in the hearts of Christians, as it does
naturally in all men’s hearts. Their fundamental tenet is the
Brotherhood of Man, the ultimate realisation of which is alone
made possible by that which was known long before the days of
Jesus as “the Christ spirit.” This spirit is even now potentially
present in all men, and it will be developed into activity when
human beings are no longer prevented from understanding,
appreciating and sympathising with one another by the barriers of
strife and hatred erected by priests and princes. We know that
Christians in their lives frequently rise above the level of their
Christianity. All Churches contain many noble, self-sacrificing,
and virtuous men and women, eager to do good in their generation
according to their lights and opportunities, and full of
aspirations to higher things than those of earth—followers of
Jesus in spite of their Christianity. For such as these,
Theosophists feel the deepest sympathy; for only a Theosophist, or
else a person of your Grace’s delicate sensibility and great
theological learning, can justly appreciate the tremendous
difficulties with which the tender plant of natural piety has to
contend, as it forces its root into the uncongenial soil of our
Christian civilization, and tries to blossom in the cold and arid
atmosphere of theology. How hard, for instance, must it not be to
“love” such a God as that depicted in a well-known passage by
Herbert Spencer:

  “The cruelty of a Fijian God, who, represented as devouring the
  souls of the dead, may be supposed to inflict torture during the
  process, is small, compared to the cruelty of a God who condemns
  men to tortures which are eternal.... The visiting on Adam’s
  descendants through hundreds of generations, of dreadful penalties
  for a small transgression which they did not commit, the damning
  of all men who do not avail themselves of an alleged mode of
  obtaining forgiveness, which most men have never heard of, and the
  effecting of reconciliation by sacrificing a son who was perfectly
  innocent, to satisfy the assumed necessity for a propitiatory
  victim, are modes of action which, ascribed to a human ruler,
  would call forth expressions of abhorrence.”

                        (“_Religion: a Retrospect and a Prospect._”)

Your Grace will say, no doubt, that Jesus never taught the worship
of such a god as that. Even so say we Theosophists. Yet that is the
very god whose worship is officially conducted in Canterbury
Cathedral, by you, my Lord Primate of England; and your Grace will
surely agree with us that there must indeed be a divine spark of
religious intuition in the hearts of men, that enables them to
resist so well as they do, the deadly action of such poisonous
theology.

If your Grace, from your high pinnacle, will cast your eyes around,
you will behold a Christian civilisation in which a frantic and
merciless battle of man against man is not only the distinguishing
feature, but the acknowledged principle. It is an accepted
scientific and economic axiom to-day, that all progress is achieved
through the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest;
and the fittest to survive in this Christian civilization are not
those who are possessed of the qualities that are recognised by the
morality of every age to be the best—not the generous, the pious,
the noble-hearted, the forgiving, the humble, the truthful, the
honest, and the kind—but those who are strongest in selfishness, in
craft, in hypocrisy, in brute force, in false pretence, in
unscrupulousness, in cruelty, and in avarice. The spiritual and the
altruistic are “the weak,” whom the “laws” that govern the universe
give as food to the egoistic and material—“the strong.” That “might
is right” is the only legitimate conclusion, the last word of the
19th century ethics, for, as the world has become one huge
battlefield, on which “the fittest” descend like vultures to tear
out the eyes and the hearts of those who have fallen in the fight.
Does religion put a stop to the battle? Do the churches drive away
the vultures, or comfort the wounded and the dying? Religion does
not weigh a feather in the _world_ at large to-day, when worldly
advantage and selfish pleasures are put in the other scale; and the
churches are powerless to revivify the religious sentiment among
men, because their ideas, their knowledge, their methods, and their
arguments are those of the Dark Ages. My Lord Primate, your
Christianity is five hundred years behind the times.

So long as men disputed whether this god or that god was the true
one, or whether the soul went to this place or that one after death,
you, the clergy, understood the question, and had arguments at hand
to influence opinion—by syllogism or torture, as the case might
require; but now it is the existence of any such being as God, at
all, or of any kind of immortal spirit, that is questioned or
denied. Science invents new theories of the Universe which
contemptuously ignore the existence of any god; moralists establish
theories of ethics and social life in which the non-existence of a
future life is taken for granted; in physics, in psychology, in law,
in medicine, the one thing needful in order to entitle any teacher
to a hearing is that no reference whatever should be contained in
his ideas either to a Providence, or to a soul. The world is being
rapidly brought to the conviction that god is a mythical conception,
which has no foundation in fact, or place in Nature; and that the
immortal part of man is the silly dream of ignorant savages,
perpetuated by the lies and tricks of priests, who reap a harvest by
cultivating the fears of men that their mythical God will torture
their imaginary souls to all eternity, in a fabulous Hell. In the
face of all these things the clergy stand in this age dumb and
powerless. The only answer which the Church knew how to make to such
“objections” as these, were _the rack and the faggot_; and she
cannot use that system of logic _now_.

It is plain that if the God and the soul taught by the churches be
imaginary entities, then the Christian salvation and damnation are
mere delusions of the mind, produced by the hypnotic process of
assertion and suggestion on a magnificent scale, acting cumulatively
on generations of mild “hysteriacs.” What answer have you to such a
theory of the Christian religion, except a repetition of assertions
and suggestions? What ways have you of bringing men back to their
old beliefs but by reviving their old habits? “Build more churches,
say more prayers, establish more missions, and your faith in
damnation and salvation will be revived, and a renewed belief in God
and the soul will be the necessary result.” That is the policy of
the churches, and their only answer to agnosticism and materialism.
But your Grace must know that to meet the attacks of modern science
and criticism with such weapons as assertion and habit, is like
going forth against magazine guns, armed with boomerangs and leather
shields. While, however, the progress of ideas and the increase of
knowledge are undermining the popular theology, every discovery of
science, every new conception of European advanced thought, brings
the 19th century mind nearer to the ideas of the Divine and the
Spiritual, known to all esoteric religions and to Theosophy.

The Church claims that Christianity is the only true religion, and
this claim involves two distinct propositions, namely, that
Christianity is true religion, and that there is no true religion
except Christianity. It never seems to strike Christians that God
and Spirit could possibly exist in any other form than that under
which they are presented in the doctrines of their church. The
savage calls the missionary an Atheist, because he does not carry an
idol in his trunk; and the missionary, in his turn, calls everyone
an Atheist who does not carry about a fetish in his mind; and
neither savage nor Christian ever seem to suspect that there may be
a higher idea than their own of the great hidden power that governs
the Universe, to which the name of “God” is much more applicable. It
is doubtful whether the churches take more pains to prove
Christianity “true,” or to prove that any other kind of religion is
necessarily “false;” and the evil consequences of this, their
teaching, are terrible. When people discard dogma they fancy that
they have discarded the religious sentiment also, and they conclude
that religion is a superfluity in human life—a rendering to the
clouds of things that belong to earth, a waste of energy which could
be more profitably expended in the struggle for existence. The
materialism of this age is, therefore, the direct consequence of the
Christian doctrine that there is no ruling power in the Universe,
and no immortal Spirit in man except those made known in Christian
dogmas. The Atheist, my Lord Primate, is the bastard son of the
Church.

But this is not all. The churches have never taught men any other or
higher reason why they should be just and kind and true than the
hope of reward and the fear of punishment, and when they let go
their belief in Divine caprice and Divine injustice the foundations
of their morality are sapped. They have not even natural morality to
consciously fall back upon, for Christianity has taught them to
regard it as worthless on account of the natural depravity of man.
Therefore self-interest becomes the only motive for conduct, and the
fear of being found out, the only deterrent from vice. And so, with
regard to morality as well as to God and the soul, Christianity
pushes men off the path that leads to knowledge, and precipitates
them into the abyss of incredulity, pessimism and vice. The last
place where men would now look for help from the evils and miseries
of life is the Church, because they know that the building of
churches and the repeating of litanies influence neither the powers
of Nature nor the councils of nations; because they instinctively
feel that when the churches accepted the principle of expediency
they lost their power to move the hearts of men, and can now only
act on the external plane, as the supporters of the policeman and
the politician.

The function of religion is to comfort and encourage humanity in its
life-long struggle with sin and sorrow. This it can do only by
presenting mankind with noble ideals of a happier existence after
death, and of a worthier life on earth, to be won in both cases by
conscious effort. What the world now wants is a Church that will
tell it of Deity, or the immortal principle in man, which will be at
least on a level with the ideas and knowledge of the times. Dogmatic
Christianity is not suited for a world that reasons and thinks, and
only those who can throw themselves into a mediæval state of mind,
can appreciate a Church whose religious (as distinguished from its
social and political) function is to keep God in good humour while
the laity are doing what they believe he does not approve; to pray
for changes of weather; and occasionally, to thank the Almighty for
helping to slaughter the enemy. It is not “medicine men,” but
spiritual guides that the world looks for to-day—a “clergy” that
will give it ideals as suited to the intellect of this century, as
the Christian Heaven and Hell, God and the Devil, were to the ages
of dark ignorance and superstition. Do, or can, the Christian clergy
fulfil this requirement? The misery, the crime, the vice, the
selfishness, the brutality, the lack of self-respect and
self-control, that mark our modern civilization, unite their voices
in one tremendous cry, and answer—NO!

What is the meaning of the reaction against materialism, the signs
of which fill the air to-day? It means that the world has become
mortally sick of the dogmatism, the arrogance, the self-sufficiency,
and the spiritual blindness of modern science—of that same Modern
Science which men but yesterday hailed as their deliverer from
religious bigotry and Christian superstition, but which, like the
Devil of the monkish legends, requires, as the price of its
services, the sacrifice of man’s immortal soul. And meanwhile, what
are the Churches doing? The Churches are sleeping the sweet sleep of
endowments, of social and political influence, while the world, the
flesh, and the devil, are appropriating their watchwords,
their miracles, their arguments, and their blind faith. The
Spiritualists—oh! Churches of Christ—have stolen the fire from your
altars to illumine their séance rooms; the Salvationists have taken
your sacramental wine, and make themselves spiritually drunk in the
streets; the Infidel has stolen the weapons with which you
vanquished him once, and triumphantly tells you that “What you
advance, has been frequently said before.” Had ever clergy so
splendid an opportunity? The grapes in the vineyard are ripe,
needing only the right labourers to gather them. Were you to give to
the world some proof, on the level of the present intellectual
standard of probability, that Deity—the immortal Spirit in man—have
a real existence as facts in Nature, would not men hail you as their
saviour from pessimism and despair, from the maddening and
brutalizing thought that there is no other destiny for man but an
eternal blank, after a few short years of bitter toil and
sorrow?—aye; as their saviours from the panic-stricken fight for
material enjoyment and worldly advancement, which is the direct
consequence of believing this mortal life to be the be-all and
end-all of existence?

But the Churches have neither the knowledge nor the faith needed to
save the world, and perhaps your Church, my Lord Primate, least of
all, with the mill-stone of £8,000,000 a year hung round its neck.
In vain you try to lighten the ship by casting overboard the ballast
of doctrines which your forefathers deemed vital to Christianity.
What more can your Church do now, than run before the gale with bare
poles, while the clergy feebly endeavour to putty up the gaping
leaks with the “revised version,” and by their social and political
deadweight try to prevent the ship from capsizing, and its cargo of
dogmas and endowments from going to the bottom?

Who built Canterbury Cathedral, my Lord Primate? Who invented and
gave life to the great ecclesiastical organisation which makes an
Archbishop of Canterbury possible? Who laid the foundation of the
vast system of religious taxation which gives you £15,000 a year and
a palace? Who instituted the forms and ceremonies, the prayers and
litanies, which, slightly altered and stripped of art and ornament,
make the liturgy of the Church of England? Who wrested from the
people the proud titles of “reverend divine” and “Man of God” which
the clergy of your Church so confidently assume? Who, indeed, but
the Church of Rome! We speak in no spirit of enmity. Theosophy has
seen the rise and fall of many faiths, and will be present at the
birth and death of many more. We know that the lives of religions
are subject to law. Whether you inherited legitimately from the
Church of Rome, or obtained by violence, we leave you to settle with
your enemies and with your conscience; for our mental attitude
towards your Church is determined by its intrinsic worthiness. We
know that if it be unable to fulfil the true spiritual function of a
religion, it will surely be swept away, even though the fault lie
rather in its hereditary tendencies, or in its environments, than in
itself.

The Church of England, to use a homely simile, is like a train
running by the momentum it acquired before steam was shut off. When
it left the main track, it got upon a siding that leads nowhere. The
train has nearly come to a standstill, and many of the passengers
have left it for other conveyances. Those that remain are for the
most part aware that they have been depending all along upon what
little steam was left in the boiler when the fires of Rome were
withdrawn from under it. They suspect that they may be only playing
at train now; but the engineer keeps blowing his whistle and the
guard goes round to examine the tickets, and the breaksmen rattle
their breaks, and it is not such bad fun after all. For the
carriages are warm and comfortable and the day is cold, and so long
as they are tipped all the company’s servants are very obliging. But
those who know where they want to go, are not so contented.

For several centuries the Church of England has performed the
difficult feat of blowing hot and cold in two directions at
once—saying to the Roman Catholics “Reason!” and to the Sceptics
“Believe!” It was by adjusting the force of its two-faced blowing,
that it has managed to keep itself so long from falling off the
fence. But now the fence itself is giving way. Disendowment and
disestablishment are in the air. And what does your Church urge in
its own behalf? Its usefulness. It is _useful_ to have a number of
educated, moral, unworldly men, scattered all over the country, who
prevent the world from utterly forgetting the name of religion, and
who act as centres of benevolent work. But the question now is no
longer one of repeating prayers, and giving alms to the poor, as it
was five hundred years ago. The people have come of age, and have
taken their thinking and the direction of their social, private and
even spiritual affairs into their own hands, for they have found out
that their clergy know no more about “things of Heaven” than they do
themselves.

But the Church of England, it is said, has become so liberal that
all ought to support it. Truly, one can go to an excellent imitation
of the mass, or sit under a virtual Unitarian, and still be within
its fold. This beautiful tolerance, however, only means that the
Church has found it necessary to make itself an open common, where
every one can put up his own booth, and give his special performance
if he will only join in the defence of the endowments. Tolerance and
liberality are contrary to the laws of the existence of any church
that believes in divine damnation, and their appearance in the
Church of England is not a sign of renewed life, but of approaching
disintegration. No less deceptive is the energy evinced by the
Church in the building of churches. If this were a measure of
religion what a pious age this would be! Never was dogma so well
housed before, though human beings may have to sleep by thousands in
the streets, and to literally starve in the shadow of our majestic
cathedrals, built in the name of Him who had not where to lay His
head. But did Jesus tell you, your Grace, that religion lay not in
the hearts of men, but in temples made with hands? You cannot
convert your piety into stone and use it in your lives; and history
shows that petrifaction of the religious sentiment is as deadly a
disease as ossification of the heart. Were churches, however,
multiplied a hundred fold, and were every clergyman to become a
centre of philanthropy, it would only be substituting the work that
the poor require from their fellow men but not from their spiritual
teachers, for that which they ask and cannot obtain. It would but
bring into greater relief the spiritual barrenness of the doctrines
of the Church.

The time is approaching when the clergy will be called upon to
render an account of their stewardship. Are you prepared, my Lord
Primate, to explain to YOUR MASTER why you have given His children
stones, when they cried to you for bread? You smile in your fancied
security. The servants have kept high carnival so long in the inner
chambers of the Lord’s house, that they think He will surely never
return. But He told you He would come as a thief in the night; and
lo! He is coming already in the hearts of men. He is coming to take
possession of His Father’s kingdom there, where alone His kingdom
is. But you know Him not! Were the Churches themselves not carried
away in the flood of negation and materialism which has engulfed
Society, they would recognise the quickly growing germ of the
Christ-spirit in the hearts of thousands, whom they now brand as
infidels and madmen. They would recognise there the same spirit of
love, of self-sacrifice, of immense pity for the ignorance, the
folly, and the sufferings of the world, which appeared in its purity
in the heart of Jesus, as it had appeared in the hearts of other
Holy Reformers in other ages; and which is the light of all true
religion, and the lamp by which the Theosophists of all times have
endeavoured to guide their steps along the narrow path that leads to
salvation—the path which is trodden by every incarnation of CHRISTOS
or the SPIRIT OF TRUTH.

And now, my Lord Primate, we have very respectfully laid before you
the principal points of difference and disagreement between
Theosophy and the Christian Churches, and told you of the oneness of
Theosophy and the teachings of Jesus. You have heard our profession
of faith, and learned the grievances and plaints which we lay at the
door of dogmatic Christianity. We, a handful of humble individuals,
possessed of neither riches nor worldly influence, but strong in our
knowledge, have united in the hope of doing the work which you say
that your MASTER has allotted to you, but which is so sadly
neglected by that wealthy and domineering colossus—the Christian
Church. Will you call this presumption, we wonder? Will you, in this
land of free opinion, free speech, and free effort, venture to
accord us no other recognition than the usual _anathema_, which the
Church keeps in store for the reformer? Or may we hope that the
bitter lessons of experience, which that policy has afforded the
Churches in the past, will have altered the hearts and cleared the
understandings of her rulers; and that the coming year, 1888, will
witness the stretching out to us of the hand of Christians in
fellowship and goodwill? This would only be a just recognition that
the comparatively small body called the Theosophical Society is no
pioneer of the Anti-Christ, no brood of the Evil one, but the
practical helper, perchance the saviour, of Christianity, and that
it is only endeavouring to do the work that Jesus, like Buddha, and
the other “sons of God” who preceded him, has commanded all his
followers to undertake, but which the Churches, having become
dogmatic, are entirely unable to accomplish.

And now, if your Grace can prove that we do injustice to the Church
of which you are the Head, or to popular Theology, we promise to
acknowledge our error publicly. But—“SILENCE GIVES CONSENT.”

                        “EMERSON AND OCCULTISM.”

         “’Tis thus at the roaring Loom of Time I ply,
         And weave for God the garment thou seest Him by.”

                                               —_Erd. Geist_, FAUST.

The sunset, to the boor a mere mass of evening vapours, presaging
rain for his fields or heat for his harvest, expands for the poet,
standing beside him and beholding the self-same firmament, into a
splendid picture, rich in crimson and purple, in golden light and
gleaming colour, mingled in harmonious purity.

Whence so great a difference?

The poet has finer eyes; and within the mere material forms
perceives a subtle essence, which flows everywhere through nature,
adding to all it touches a new wealth of joy and power. The poet’s
eyes have opened to a new reality; he no longer values things for
themselves; but in proportion as they contain this quality, they
become dear to him.

But beyond the poet, there is yet a third rank. The poet, it is
true, rejoices in nature, and perceives its beauty and symbolic
character. But he rests in the beauty of the symbol, and does not
pass to the reality symbolised. Rapt in adoration of the beauty of
the garment, he does not pierce through to Him who wears the
garment. This remains for the philosopher—the sage. Yet the boor has
his place in Nature. He has tilled and subdued the soil, has brought
its latent powers into action; in command of nature, he is far in
advance of the mere nomad savage, for whom nature is a maze of
uncertain and unconquered forces.

The savage, the boor, the poet; these types have their parallels in
mental life.

When the crude conceptions of nature, which mark dawning
civilisation, give place to those fair and truer, because more
harmonious, views which bear the name of Science; when the principle
of Continuity, the reign of Universal Law, have displaced the first
notions of Chance and Discord, the work of the physical scientist is
done; he must stand aside, and make way for the philosopher, the
transcendentalist. Modern Science has replaced the crudities of
mediæval theology by the idea of an orderly universe permeated by
Law, binding alike the galaxy and the atom, as the tillage of the
farmer has replaced the nomadism of the savage.

But within the world of the boor nestles the poet’s world, and
within the world of the physical scientist lies an ethereal,
spiritual universe, with its own powers, its own prophets. The great
trilogy of friends at the beginning of this century, who rose like
three mountain peaks above their contemporaries, Goethe, Carlyle,
and Emerson, were chosen by Destiny as prophets of this nature
within nature.

Their gleanings have been rich enough to tempt many to enter the
same field, though they have no more exhausted its wealth than Homer
and Shakespeare have exhausted poetry.

The new world they have explored, is the land of hope of the future,
for which we must leave the impoverished soil of theology, and the
arid deserts of materialism.

What these three masters taught, Occultism teaches; and we propose
to show them as great natural masters in the mystic knowledge.

To do this with any completeness in the space at our disposal is
necessarily impossible; for the present, we must content ourselves
with shewing from the writings of one of the masters, Emerson, that
he recognised some of the chief laws announced by Occultism.

The first truth to be insisted on, concerning this nature within
nature, the spiritual universe, is that it exists for its own ends,
and not as an adjunct to the material world; in other words, the end
of morals is to make archangels rather than good citizens.

Spirit is the reality; matter, the secondary; or, as Goethe says,
the _Garment_ of God.

No occultist could insist on the subordinate character of matter
more vehemently than Emerson—he writes:

  “Nature is a mutable cloud, which is always and never the same.
  Through the bruteness and toughness of matter, a subtle spirit
  bends all things to its own will. The world proceeds from the same
  spirit as the body of man. It is a _remoter and inferior
  incarnation of God_, a projection of God into the unconscious.”

The Occultist sees in this world of spirit the home of that true joy
of which all earthly happiness is the shadow, and whispered
intimation. There all ideals find their realization, all highest
hopes their fulfilment; there flow abundant fountains of celestial
bliss, whose least presence makes earthly things radiant.

Of spirit, Emerson writes:

  “But when following the invisible steps of thought, we come to
  enquire, Whence is matter? and where to? Many truths arise to us
  out of the recesses of consciousness. We learn that the highest is
  present to the soul of man, that the dread universal essence which
  is not wisdom, or love, or beauty, or power; but all in one, and
  each entirely, is that for which all things exist, and that by
  which they are; that spirit creates; that behind nature,
  throughout nature spirit is present. As a plant upon the earth, so
  a man rests upon the bosom of God; he is nourished by unfailing
  fountains, and draws, at his need, inexhaustible power.”

But to obtain a footing in this world of essential being, is to be
emancipated from the domination of Time and Space, to enter a
universe where they do not exist; for Space and Time are no
realities, but, as Carlyle says, the “deepest of all _illusory
appearances_.” Emancipation from Space and Time; how much more this
implies than is at first sight apparent. The first fruit of this
freedom is a feeling of eternalness, the real basis of the doctrine
of immortality. It is an attainable reality, this sense of
eternalness; let the sceptic and materialist say what they will.

Of this truth, also, we may bring Emerson as witness. He writes:

  “To truth, justice, love, the attributes of the soul, the idea of
  _immutableness_ is essentially associated. In the flowing of love,
  in the adoration of humility, there is no question of
  continuance.”

Once recognise the truth that we can gain a footing in a world free
from the tyranny of time, that the soul exists in such a world, and
a new philosophy is at once required. Freedom from Time implies the
eternity of the soul, and the facts of life and death take a new
position and significance. If the soul be eternal, death must be an
illusion, a garment in which Nature wraps some hidden law.

In the following words of Emerson, on this subject:

  “It is the secret of the world that _all things subsist and do not
  die_, but only retire a little from sight, and afterwards return
  again. Whatever does not concern us, is concealed from us. As soon
  as a person is no longer related to our present well-being, he is
  concealed or _dies_, as we say. When the man has exhausted for the
  time the nourishment to be drawn from any one person or thing,
  that object is withdrawn from his observation, and though still in
  his immediate neighbourhood, he does not suspect its presence.
  Nothing is dead; men feign themselves dead, and endure mock
  funerals and mournful obituaries, and there they stand looking out
  of the window, sound and well, in some new disguise. Jesus is not
  dead; he is very well alive; nor John, nor Paul, nor Mahomet, nor
  Aristotle.”

we have an accurate exposition of the occult doctrine of
Reincarnation—the progressive discipline of the soul through
many lives—which has been parodied in the popular fable of
metemphsychosis.

The true occult doctrine does not picture a series of bodies in each
of which the soul makes a temporary sojourn. In this, as in all
else, it begins with spirit and then descends to matter. It depicts
that vital energy which we call a soul, alternately exuding from
itself and re-absorbing into its own nature an environment or
physical encasement, whose character varies with the increasing
stature of the soul. According to the teaching of occultism, the
successive formations of this objective shell—whose purpose is to
provide for the development of the animal nature—alternate with
periods of subjective life, which give expansion to the powers of
the soul.

As corollary to this doctrine, occultism postulates a second—that
the incidents of each objective environment or physical life—are not
fortuitous and isolated, but that they are bound to all that precede
and follow them, and moreover that “the future is not arbitrarily
formed by any separate acts of the present, but that the whole
future is in unbroken continuity with the present, as the present is
with the past.”

To the various developments of this law, eastern philosophy has
given the name of Karma; the west has as yet no name for it. But
though unnamed, its leading ideas have not been unperceived by those
western minds which have penetrated into the world of supernature.

Thus we find Emerson writing:

  “Every secret is told, every crime is punished, every virtue
  rewarded, every wrong redressed, in silence and certainty. Crime
  and punishment grow on one stem; punishment is a fruit that
  unsuspected ripens within the flower of pleasure which concealed
  it. You cannot do wrong without suffering wrong. The thief steals
  from himself; the swindler swindles himself. Everything in nature,
  even motes and feathers, goes by law and not by luck. _What a man
  sows, he reaps._”

The picture of an orderly universe, where matter is the garment of
spirit—spirit visualised—where souls march onward in orderly
procession to boundless perfection; where the life of each permeates
and flows through the life of all; where the wrong of each is turned
to the benefit of all by the firm hand of an invisible and ever
active law, incessantly disciplining and correcting, till the last
dross of self and sin is purged away, and instead of man there
remains God only, working through the powers that were man’s; such
is the conception Occultism holds.

“I know not,” says Emerson—

  “I know not whether there be, as is alleged, in the upper region
  of our atmosphere a permanent westerly current, which carries with
  it all atoms which rise to that height, but I see that when souls
  reach a certain clearness of perfection, they accept a knowledge
  and motive above selfishness. A breath of Will blows eternally
  through the universe of souls in the direction of the Right and
  Necessary. It is the air which all intellects inhale and exhale,
  and it is the wind which blows the world into order and orbit.

  “Let us build altars to the Beautiful Necessity which rudely or
  softly educates men to the perception that there are no
  contingencies, that Law rules through existence, a Law which is
  not intelligent but intelligence, not personal nor impersonal—it
  disdains words, and passes understanding; it dissolves persons; it
  vivifies nature, yet solicits the pure in heart to draw on its
  all, its omnipotence.”

Discipline always and everywhere throughout the universe; to
discipline, development, all other facts are subordinate; for their
sake, all laws are enunciated, all spiritual facts are insisted on;
all truths which tend not to the melioration of human life—if any
such there be—are worthless. Discipline, development. What
development does Occultism predict for man? Man’s future destiny, in
the view of Occultism, is so stupendous, that we prefer merely to
erect a finger-post pointing out the direction of the path, using
the words of Emerson:

  “The youth puts off the illusions of the child, the man puts off
  the ignorance and tumultuous passions of the youth; proceeding
  thence, puts off the egotism of manhood, and becomes at last a
  public and universal soul. He is rising to greater height, but
  also to realities; the outer relations and circumstances dying
  out, he is entering deeper into God, God into him, until the last
  garment of egotism falls, and he is with God, shares the will and
  the immensity of the First Cause.”

From first to last, Occultism has preached no doctrine more
emphatically than the necessity of dependence on the intuitions, and
the reality of interior illumination. “Seek out the way by making
the profound obeisance of the soul to the dim star that burns
within; within you is the light of the world,” writes the Occultist.

And this doctrine is repeated again and again in the writings of the
philosopher we have been quoting from. He writes:

  “A man should learn to detect and watch that gleam of light which
  flashes across his mind from within, more than the lustre of the
  firmament of bards and sages. From within or from behind, a light
  shines through us upon things, and makes us aware that we are
  nothing, but that the light is all. The consciousness in each man
  is a sliding scale, which identifies him now with the First Cause,
  and now with the flesh of his body; life above life, in infinite
  degrees. There is for each a Best Counsel, which enjoins the fit
  word and the fit act for every moment. There is no bar or wall in
  the soul where man, the effect, ceases, and God, the cause,
  begins. The walls are taken away, we lie open on one side to the
  deeps of spiritual nature, to the attributes of God. The simplest
  person who, in his integrity, worships God, becomes God; yet for
  ever and ever the influx of this better and universal self is new
  and unsearchable.”

The life of one is the life of all. The good of one re-acts on all.
The walls by which selfishness conceives itself enclosed and
isolated, are unreal, have no existence. Spirit is fluid and
all-pervading; its beneficent power flows unchecked from soul to
soul, energising, harmonising, purifying. To resist all discordant
tendencies which check this salutary flow, this all-permeating love,
is to come under the reign of Universal Brotherhood; and to the
honour of Occultism be it said, that Universal Brotherhood is
blazoned highest on its standard.

“Thus,” writes Emerson—

  —“Are we put in training for a love which knows not sex nor
  person, nor partiality, but which seeks virtue and wisdom
  everywhere. One day all men will be lovers, and every calamity
  will be dissolved in universal sunshine. An acceptance of the
  sentiment of love throughout Christendom for a season would bring
  the felon and the outcast to our side in tears, with the devotion
  of his faculties to our service.”

But to the axiom “Kill out the sense of separateness” Occultism adds
another, “Yet stand alone.” Before the lesson of life can be learnt,
the soul must in some sort detach itself from its environment, and
view all things impersonally, in solitude and stillness. There is an
oracle in the lonely recess of the soul to which all things must be
brought for trial. Here all laws are tested, all appearances
weighed.

About this truth always hangs a certain solemnity, and Emerson has
given it a fitting expression in the following words:

  “The soul gives itself alone, original, and pure, to the Lonely,
  Original, and Pure, who, on that condition, gladly inhabits,
  leads, and speaks through it. Then it is glad, young, and nimble.
  Behold, it saith, I am born into the great, the universal mind. I,
  the imperfect, adore my own Perfect. I am somehow receptive of the
  great soul, and thereby I do overlook the sun and the stars, and
  feel them to be the fair accidents and effects which change and
  pass. More and more the surges of everlasting nature enter into
  me, and I become public and human in my regards and actions. So I
  come to live in thoughts, and act with energies, which are
  immortal.”

The last words of this sentence lead us to the occult idea of
_Mahatma-hood_, which conceives a perfected soul as “living in
thoughts, and acting with energies which are immortal.”

The _Mahatma_ is a soul of higher rank in the realms of life,
conceived to drink in the wealth of spiritual power closer to the
fountain-head, and to distil its essence into the interior of
receptive souls.

In harmony with this idea, Emerson writes:

  “Truth is the summit of being; justice is the application of it to
  affairs. All individual natures stand in a scale, according to the
  purity of this element in them. The will of the pure runs down
  from them into other natures, as water runs down from a higher
  into a lower vessel; this natural force is no more to be withstood
  than any other natural force. A healthy soul stands united with
  the Just and the True, as the magnet arranges itself with the
  pole, so that he stands to all beholders like a transparent object
  betwixt them and the sun, and whoso journeys towards the sun,
  journeys towards that person.”

Occultism conceives the outer world and all its accidents to be so
many veils, shrouding the splendour of essential nature, and
tempering the fiery purity of spirit to the imperfect powers of the
understanding soul. This illusory power Occultism considers to be
the “active will of God,” a means to the ends of eternal spirit.

In the view of Occultism, life is a drama of thinly veiled souls; as
Shakespeare writes:

                           “We are such stuff
             As dreams are made of, and our little life
             Is rounded with a sleep!”

We shall conclude with two passages from Emerson’s essays, on the
subject of illusions:

  “Do you see that kitten chasing so prettily her own tail? If you
  could look with her eyes, you might see her surrounded with
  hundreds of figures performing complex dramas, with tragic and
  comic issues, long conversations, many characters, many ups and
  downs of fate; and meantime it is only puss and her tail. How long
  before our masquerade will end its noise of tambourines, laughter,
  and shouting, and we shall find it was a solitary performance?”

We must supplement this rather playful passage with one in a higher
strain:

  “There is no chance, and no anarchy, in the universe. All is
  system and gradation. Every god is there sitting in his sphere.
  The young mortal enters the hall of the firmament; there is he
  alone with them alone, they pouring on him benedictions and gifts,
  and beckoning him up to their thrones. On an instant, and
  incessantly, fall snowstorms and illusions. He fancies himself in
  a vast crowd which sways this way and that, and whose movement and
  doings he must obey: he fancies himself poor, orphaned,
  insignificant. The mad crowd drives hither and thither, now
  furiously commanding this thing to be done, now that. What is he
  that he should resist their will, and think or act for himself?
  Every moment new changes and new showers of deceptions to baffle
  and distract him. And when, by-and-bye, for an instant, the air
  clears, and the cloud lifts a little, there are the gods still
  sitting around him on their thrones—they alone with him alone.”

                                            CHARLES JOHNSTON, F.T.S.

                  =THE BLOSSOM AND THE FRUIT=:

                  _THE TRUE STORY OF A MAGICIAN_.

                           (_Continued._)

                         ---------------------

                         BY MABEL COLLINS,

 Scribe of “THE IDYLL OF THE WHITE LOTUS,” and “THROUGH THE GATES OF
                                GOLD.”

  [_Some of the readers of_ LUCIFER _have taken great exception to
  the love passages between Fleta and Hilary, saying that they are
  not up to the standard of Theosophic thought, and are out of place
  in the magazine. The author can only beg that time may be given
  for the story to develope. None of us that is born dies without
  experiencing human passion; it is the base on which an edifice
  must rise at last, after many incarnations have purified it; “it
  is the blossom which has in it the fruit.” Hilary is still only a
  man, he has not yet learned to the full the lesson of human life
  and human passion. Fleta promises him all that he can take and
  that plainly is only what she can give—the deep love of the
  disciple. But she cannot instantly free his eyes from the
  illusions caused by his own passionate heart; till he has suffered
  and conquered, he cannot recognise her for what she is, the
  pledged servant of a great master, of necessity more white-souled
  than any nun need be._

  _Another strange criticism is made, condemning portions of the
  story as though expressive of the author’s feelings and
  sentiments; whereas they are simply descriptive of the states
  through which Hilary is passing. They no more express the author’s
  feelings than do those later parts which refer to the ordeals of
  Fleta, the accepted disciple, express the author’s feelings. The
  two characters of the struggling aspirant and the advanced
  disciple, are studies from life. The stumbling-block of human
  passion which stands in Hilary’s way, is the same which lost
  Zanoni his high estate; in the coming chapters of “The Blossom and
  the Fruit,” we shall see Fleta flung back from the high estate she
  aims at, by this same stumbling-block, in an idealised and subtle
  form. She has not yet learned the bitter truth that the Occultist
  must stand absolutely alone, without even companionship of
  thought, or sympathy of feeling, at the times of the Initiations
  and the trials which precede them._—M. C.]

                         ---------------------

                       CHAPTER VI.—(_Continued._)

Hilary found himself in a room which no longer permitted him to
regret his own rooms at home, for it was more luxurious. A great
bath stood ready filled with perfumed water, and he hastened to
bathe himself therein, with a sort of idea that he was perhaps
suffering from hallucinations, some of which he might wash away. His
scanty luggage had been brought into the room, and when the bath was
over Hilary got out a velvet suit which he thought would do well for
evening-dress in this palace of surprises. He was but just ready
when a knock came at his door, and without further ceremony, Mark
opened it and looked in.

“Come,” he said, “we don’t wait for anybody here. The cook won’t
stand it. He is a very holy father indeed, and nobody dare say him
nay, unless it were the Princess herself. She always does as she
likes. Are you ready?”

“Quite,” replied Hilary.

Opening out of the entrance was a great oak door, double, and very
richly carved. This had been shut when Hilary passed through before;
now it stood open, and Mark led the way through it. They entered an
immense room, of which the floor was polished so that it shone like
a mirror. Two figures were standing in the midst of this room,
dressed alike in clouds of white lace; they were the two Fletas, as
to Hilary’s eyes they still seemed.

His heart was torn as he gazed on them, waiting for a glance of
love, a gleam of love-light, to tell him which was his own, his
Fleta, his princess, the Fleta whom he served. There was none; they
had been talking together very earnestly and both looked sad and a
little weary.

As Hilary’s eyes wandered from one face to the other his mind grew
confused. And then suddenly a flash of bewitchingly beautiful
laughter came on one of the faces; and immediately he decided that
must be Adine. And yet, had he not seen just such laughter flash
across Fleta’s face? But all this passed in a moment, and no more
time was given him for thought. A table stood at one end of the
hall, set as a king’s table might be; covered with the finest linen,
edged with deep lace, and with gold dishes of fruit upon it; it was
decorated with lovely flowers. Hilary opened his eyes a little even
in the midst of his other much greater perplexities, to see this
luxury here in the midst of the forest. And was it prepared in
honour of Fleta, who ate a crust of dry bread in an ale-house with
perfect cheerfulness, or rather, indifference? Fleta took her place
at the end of the table; at least, one sister did so, and the other
took her place beside Hilary—he could not yet determine which was
which, and his whole soul was absorbed in the attempted solution of
that problem. Mark sat at the other end of the table, evidently
prepared to do such labours of carving as might be necessary. Two
places were set at the other side of the table, but no one came to
fill them. A very elaborate dinner was served, and a very good one;
and Hilary thought he was satisfied now that it was Adine who sat
next him, for she showed herself an unmistakable little gourmand. He
had just come to this conclusion when his attention was distracted
by the great doors being thrown open again for two persons to enter.
Everyone rose, even Fleta, who advanced with a smile to meet these
new comers. Hilary rose also and turned from the table. Two men
stood there; one a man but little older than himself, and of
extremely fine appearance. Little more than a boy, yet he had a
dignity which made him something much more, and Hilary felt
immediately a kind of jealousy, undefined, vague, but still
jealousy. For Fleta had put both her hands into those of this
handsome young man and greeted him with great warmth. At his side
stood a small shrivelled old man, in the same dress that Father
Amyot always wore. This circumstance again made Hilary wonder what
had become of Father Amyot; but he concluded Adine’s account had
been the correct one.

There was something familiar in the face of the young man, so Hilary
thought; while he was thinking this, Fleta turned and introduced
them to each other.

He was the young king to whom Fleta was betrothed.

This is a history of those things which lie behind the scenes, not a
history of that which is known to all the world. We will give this
young King the name of Alan. Let those who like fix upon his kingdom
and assign to him his true name.

He sat down opposite Hilary; and the old priest took his place
beside him. Hilary returned to his chair, feeling that all strength,
and hope, and power, and life had gone from him. By a fierce and
terrible revulsion of his whole nature and all his recent feelings,
he returned to his cynical estimate of mankind and most of all of
Fleta. She had brought him to this place simply to taunt and harass
him and show him his madness and folly in aspiring to her love in
the face of such a rival. It cut Hilary’s heart like a knife to find
the young King so magnificent a creature. And Fleta, why had she
come here to meet him? Why had she brought her unhappy lover with
her? Hilary tore himself with doubts, and fears, and questions; and
sat silent, not even noticing the plates that were placed before him
and taken away untouched. The others talked and laughed gaily, Alan
being apparently possessed of a hundred things to say. Hilary did
not hear what they were, but it annoyed him to find his rival
speaking so much in that rich, musical voice of his, while he
himself sat dumb, silenced by a bitter pain that tore his heart.

“You are sad,” said a soft voice at his side, “it is hard, if you
love Fleta, to see her monopolised by some one else. How often have
I had to suffer it? Well, it must be so, I suppose. Why am I sorry
for you. I wonder? For if Alan were not here you would monopolise
Fleta, and have no eyes for anyone else. Ah me!”

The sigh was very tender, the voice very low and soft; and that
voice was Fleta’s voice, those lovely eyes uplifted to his were
Fleta’s eyes. Yes, it was so! He thought as he looked back. Did he
not know Fleta well enough by now?

“Ah, you are playing with me,” he exclaimed eagerly, “it is Fleta
now, not Adine! Is it not so? Oh, my love, my love, be honest and
tell me!”

He spoke like this under cover of the others’ voices, but Fleta
looked round alarmed.

“Hush!” she said, “take care. Your life would be lost if you
revealed our secret here. After dinner is over, come with me.”

This appointment made Hilary happy again; his heart leaped up, his
pulses throbbed; all the world changed. He found some fruit was
before him, he began to eat it, and to drink the wine in his glass.
Fleta was watching him.

“You have just begun to dine!” said Fleta with a soft laugh. “Well,
never mind; you are young and strong. Do you think you could live
through a great many hardships?”

Hilary made the lover’s answer, which is so evident that it need not
be recorded. He did not know how he said it, but he desired to tell
her that for her he would endure anything. She laughed again.

“It may be so!” she said thoughtfully; and then he caught her eyes
fixed upon him with a searching glance that for an instant seemed to
turn the blood cold in his veins. His terrible thoughts and doubts
of her returned again the more fiercely for their momentary
repulsion. He emptied his glass, but eat nothing more, and was very
glad when they all rose from the table together, a few moments
later. He followed the figure of the girl who had sat next him since
Alan’s entrance, believing that Fleta had then changed her place.
She went across the great room and led the way into a greenhouse
which opened out of it. A very wonderful greenhouse it was, full of
the strangest plants. They were extremely beautiful, and yet in some
way they inspired in him a great repugnance. They were of many
colours, and the blossoms were variously shaped, but evidently they
were all of one species.

“These are very precious,” said Fleta, looking at the flowers near
her tenderly. “I obtain a rare and valuable substance from them. You
have seen me use it,” she added, after a moment’s pause. Hilary
longed to leave the greenhouse and sit elsewhere; but that was so
evidently not Fleta’s wish that he could not suggest it. There were
seats here and there among the flowers, and she placed herself upon
one of them, motioning Hilary to sit beside her.

“Now,” she said, “I am going to tell you a great many things which
you have earned the right to know. To begin with, you are now in a
monastery, belonging to the most rigid of the religious orders.”

“Are you a Catholic?” asked Hilary suddenly. And then laughed at
himself for such a question. How could Fleta be catalogued like
this? He knew her to be a creature whose thought could not be
limited.

“No,” she answered simply. “I am not a Catholic. But I belong to
this order. I fear such an answer will be so unintelligible as to be
like an impertinence. Forgive me, Hilary.”

Ah, what a tone she spoke in, gentle, sweet—the voice of the woman
he loved. Hilary lost all control over himself. He sprang to his
feet and stood before her.

“I do not want to know your religion,” he exclaimed passionately, “I
do not want to know where we are, or why we are here. I ask you only
this—Are you indeed my love given to me, as you said this
morning?—or is your love given to the king, and are you only
laughing at me. It is enough to make me think so, to bring me here
to meet him! Oh, it is a cruel insult, a cruel mockery! For, Fleta,
you have made me love you with all my heart and soul. My whole life
is yours. Be honest and tell me the truth.”

“You have a powerful rival,” said Fleta deliberately. “Is he not
handsome, courtly, all that a king should be? And I am pledged to
him. Yes, Hilary, I am pledged to him. Would you have the woman you
love live a lie for your sake, and hourly betray the man she
marries?”

“I would have her give me her love,” said Hilary despairingly, “at
all costs, at all hazards. Oh, Fleta, do not keep me in agony. You
said this morning that you loved me, that you would give yourself to
me. Are you going to take those words back?”

“No,” said Fleta, “I am not. For I do love you, Hilary. Did I not
see you first in my sleep? Did I not dream of you? Did I not come to
your house in search of you? Unwomanly, was it not? No one but Fleta
would have done it. And Fleta would only have done it for love. You
do not know what she risked—what she risks now—for you! Oh, Hilary,
if you could guess what I have at stake. Never mind. None can know
my own danger but myself.”

“Escape from it!” said Hilary in a sort of madness. A passionate
desire to help her came over him and swept all reasonable thoughts
away. “You are so powerful, so free, there is no need for you to
encounter danger. Does it lie in these people, in this strange
place? Come back then to the city, to your home. What is there to
induce you to run risks, you that have all that the world can offer?
Is there anything you need that you cannot have?”

“Yes,” said Fleta, “there is. I need something which no power of
royalty can give me. I need something which I may have to sacrifice
my life to obtain. Yet I am ready to sacrifice it—oh, how ready!
What is my life to me! What is my life to me! Nothing!”

She had risen and was impatiently walking to and fro, moving her
hands with a strange eager gesture as she did so; and her eyes were
all aflame. This was the woman he loved. This, who said her life was
nothing to her. Hilary forgot all else that was strange in her words
and manner in the thought of this. Could she then return his
love—no, it was impossible, if she meant these strange and terrible
words that she uttered!

“Ah, this it is that keeps me back,” she said, before he had time to
speak. Her voice had altered, and her face had grown pale, so pale
that he forgot everything else in watching her.

“This it is that keeps me from my strength, this longing for it!”
And with a heavy sigh she moved back to her seat and fell into it
with a weariness he had never seen in her before. Her head drooped
on her breast, she fell into profound thought. Presently she spoke
again, disjointedly, and in such words as seemed unintelligible.

“I have always been too impatient, too eager,” she said sadly, “I
have always tried to take what I longed for without waiting to earn
it. So it was long ago, Hilary, when you and I stood beneath those
blossoming trees, long ages ago. I broke the peace that kept us
strong and simple. I caused the torment of pain and peril to arise
in our lives. We have to live it out—alas, Hilary, we have to live
it out!—and live beyond it. How long will it take us—how long will
it take!”

There was a despair, an agony in her voice and manner, that were so
new, he was bewildered, he hardly recognised her. Her moods changed
so strangely that he could not follow them, for he had not the key;
he could not read her thought. He sat dumb, looking in her sad drawn
face.

“My love, my love,” he murmured at last, hardly knowing that he
spoke, hardly knowing what his thought was that he spoke, only full
of longing. “Would that I could help you! Would that I understood
you!”

“Do you indeed wish to?” asked Fleta, her voice melting into a sort
of tender eagerness.

“Do you not know it?” exclaimed Hilary. “My soul is burning to meet
yours and to recognise it, to stand with you and help you. Why are
you so far off, so like a star, so removed and unintelligible to me,
who love you so! Oh, help me to change this, to come nearer to you!”

Fleta rose slowly, her eyes fixed upon his face.

“Come,” she said. And she held out her hand to him. He put his into
it, and together, hand in hand, they left the conservatory. They did
not enter the great dining hall, where now there was music and
dancing as Hilary could see and hear. They left the house of the
strange flowers by a different doorway, which admitted them to a
long dim corridor. Fleta opened the door by a key that was attached
to a chain hanging from her waist; and she closed it behind her.
Hilary asked no questions, for she seemed buried in thought so
profound that he did not care to rouse her.

At the end of the corridor was a small and very low doorway. Fleta
stooped and knocked, and without waiting for any answer pushed the
door open.

“May I come in, Master?” she said.

“Come, child,” was the answer, in a very gentle voice.

“I am bringing some one with me.”

“Come,” was repeated.

They entered. The room was small, and was dimly lit by a shaded
lamp. Beside the table, on which this stood, sat a man, reading. He
put a large book which he had been holding, on to the table, and
turned towards his visitors. Hilary saw before him the handsomest
man he had ever seen in his life. He was still young, though Hilary
felt himself to be a boy beside him; he rose from his chair and
stood before them very tall and very slight, and yet there was that
in his build which suggested great strength. He looked attentively
at Hilary for a moment, and then turned to Fleta.

“Leave him here.” Fleta bowed and immediately went out of the room
without another word. Hilary gazed upon her in amazement. Was this
the proud, imperious princess who yielded such instant and ready
obedience? It seemed incredible. But he forgot the extraordinary
sight immediately afterwards in the interest excited by his new
companion, who at once addressed him:

“The Princess has often spoken to me of you,” he said, “and I know
she has much wished that this moment should arrive. She will be
satisfied if she thinks you appreciate with your inner senses the
step you are about to take if you accord with her wishes. But I
think it right you should know it in every aspect as far as that is
possible. If you really desire to know Fleta, to approach her, to
understand her, you must give up all that men ordinarily value in
the world.”

“I have it not to surrender,” said Hilary rather bitterly, “my life
is nothing splendid.”

“No, but you are only at the beginning of it. To you the future is
full of promise. If you desire to be the Princess Fleta’s companion,
your life is no longer your own.”

“No—it is hers—and it is hers now!”

“Not so. It is not hers now, nor will it be hers then. Not even your
love does she claim for her own. She has nothing.”

“I don’t understand,” said Hilary simply. “She is the Princess of
this country; she will soon be the Queen of another. She has all
that the world has to give a woman.”

“Do you not know the woman you love better than to suppose that she
cares for her position in the world?” demanded this man whom Fleta
called her master. “At a word from me, at any hour, at any time she
will leave her throne and never return to it. That she will do this
certainly some day I know very well; and her sister will take her
place, the world being no wiser than it now is. Fleta looks forward
to this change eagerly.”

“Well, perhaps,” admitted Hilary.

“Neither has she your love nor your life as her own. In loving her
you love the Great Order to which she belongs, and she will gladly
give your love to its right owner. She has done this already in
bringing you to me.”

Hilary started to his feet, stung beyond endurance.

“This is mere nonsense, mere insult,” he said angrily, “Fleta has
accepted my love with her own lips.”

“That is so,” was the answer, “and she is betrothed to King Alan.”

“I know that,” said Hilary in a low voice.

“And what did you hold Fleta to be then? A mere pleasure seeker,
playing with life like the rest, devoid of honour and principle? Was
this your estimate of the woman you loved? What else indeed could it
be, when you said, let her give her hand to King Alan while you know
her love is yours! And you could love such a woman! Hilary Estanol,
you have been reared in a different school than this. Does not your
own conscience shame you?”

Hilary stood silent. Every word struck home. He knew not what to
say. He had been wilfully blinding himself; the bandages were rudely
drawn aside. After a long pause he spoke, hesitatingly:

“The Princess cannot be judged as other women would be; she is
unlike all others.”

“Not so, if she is what you seem to think her; then she is just like
the rest, one of the common herd.”

“How can you speak of her in that way?”

“How can you think of her as you do, dishonouring her by your
thoughts?”

The two stood opposite each other now, and their eyes met. A strange
light seemed to struggle into Hilary’s soul as these bitter words
rang sharply on his ear. Dishonouring her? Was it possible? He
staggered back and leaned against the wall, still gazing on the
magnificent face before him.

“Who are you?” he said at last.

“I am Father Ivan, the superior of the order to which the Princess
Fleta belongs,” was the reply. But another voice spoke when his
ceased, and Hilary saw that Fleta had entered, and was standing
behind him.

“And he is the master of knowledge, the master in life, the master
in thought, of whom the Princess Fleta is but a poor and impatient
disciple. Master, forgive me! I cannot endure to hear you speak as
if you were a monk, the mere tool of a religion, the mere professor
of a miserable creed.”

She sank on her knees before Father Ivan, in an attitude strangely
full of humility. The priest bent down and lifted her to her feet.
They stood a moment in silence, side by side, Fleta’s eyes upon his
face devouring his expression with a passionate and adoring
eagerness. How splendid they looked! Suddenly Hilary saw it, and a
wild, fierce, all-devouring flame of jealousy awoke in his heart—a
jealousy such as King Alan, no, nor a hundred King Alans, could not
have roused in him.

For he saw that this Ivan, who wore a priest’s dress, yet was
evidently no priest, who spoke as if this world had no longer any
meaning for him, yet who was magnificent in his personal presence
and power—he saw that this man was Fleta’s equal. And more, he saw
that Fleta’s whole face melted and softened, and grew strangely
sweet, as she looked on him. Never had Hilary seen it like that.
Never had Hilary dreamed it could look like that. Stumbling like a
blind man he felt for the door, which he knew was near, and escaped
from the room—how he knew not. Hurriedly he went on, through places
he did not see, and at last found himself in the open air. He went
with great strides away through the tall ferns and undergrowth until
he found himself in so quiet a spot that it appeared as if he were
alone in the great forest. Then he flung himself upon the ground and
yielded to an agony of despair which blotted out sky and trees and
everything from his gaze, like a great cloud covering the earth.

(_To be continued._)

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                               TWILIGHT.

             I sit alone in the twilight,
             Dreaming—but not as of old;
             Blind to the flickering fire-light,
             Mystic visions my spirit enfold.

             What means this struggle within me,
             This new hope of a far-off goal?
             This fighting against superstition,
             That would fetter my awakening soul?

             Why cannot I pray as I once did,
             For self before all the world?
             Whence came the flash of lightning
             That self from its pedestal hurled?

             But what if I’m struggling blindly,
             What if this new hope is vain,
             Can I go back to my old faith?
             A voice whispers—“Never again.”

             So I will press forward—believing
             Hands unseen will guide to the goal,
             And tho’ dim yet the light on my pathway,
             Nirväna breathes peace to my soul.

                                                          _K. D. K._

                         THE SPIRIT OF HEALING.

It is somewhat difficult to say what real or theosophical work is
when exactly defined, and, in consequence, it becomes very easy to
speak of an effort as untheosophical—that is not sufficiently
unselfish in motive. The fact is that the word Theosophy has such a
very wide meaning, embracing, as it does, the true spirit of all
creeds and religions, and confining itself to none in particular,
that no work done in the spirit of truth and wisdom is really
untheosophical. Hence, unless the speaker is possessed of more
knowledge than ordinary men concerning the causes which underlie our
actions, the application of the word untheosophical is incorrect. In
fact, if it is once granted that it is possible to work from an
impersonal standpoint in favour of a particular creed or religion,
that work becomes theosophical in character. Thus it is only work
(in the widest sense of the word and on all planes) from the
personal standpoint, and which, therefore, militates against
Universal Brotherhood, which can really be described as
untheosophical. But this by no means presupposes that work which has
outwardly the appearance of theosophical genuineness is not really
selfish. It is, of course, the old story of the wolf in sheep’s
clothing. We do but need one example—the truly-called _profession_
of Medicine. We constantly hear of the wonderful self-sacrifice of
medical men; of men who die at their posts rather than desert a
possible case in times of epidemic and cholera; of men who suck
tracheotomy tubes with almost certain death by diphtheria staring
them in the face; finally we hear, though but seldom, of the honest,
earnest devotion of a lifetime in places and districts where the
fees are so small that it is barely possible for the doctor to live
on his earnings. These are the heroes of the profession. Their work,
for the most part, consists of an unselfish devotion to the
alleviation of suffering, culminating in a final sacrifice of their
personal selves—for death is nothing less than this. But we must
turn to the less favourable side of the picture—the struggle not for
a living, but for wealth, and work, fired by ambition and the search
for fame. Of course, apart from the personal, selfish element in it,
the ambitious struggle in other professions than those of the Church
or Medicine is of no great or unnatural harm; but in these two cases
it is more than harmful, it is a degrading betrayal of trust. It is
Simonism with a vengeance; yes, kind friends, it approaches very
nearly to the case of Judas, who held the bag, and betrayed his
Master with a kiss. It may be asked why this sweeping denunciation
is made of the two noblest professions; of those two which,
considered from the ethical standpoint, consist of devotion to the
service of man? The reason is not very far to seek. The power which
true healers possess—healers alike of body and soul, is not one
which can be sold for money or bartered for wealth and fame. At
least, if the possibility does exist, it bears a suspicious
resemblance to the old idea of selling one’s soul to the devil in
exchange for power and prosperity. It may be replied to this that
there is no harm in bartering knowledge of drugs, of pathology,
diagnosis of disease, surgical skill, etc.—in short, all the
knowledge acquired by education—for money. I answer No! for it is
material given for material, and nothing more. But these are not the
sole properties of the true healer, and those who do not possess
these other properties I speak of are not healers, and while they
may _profess_ medicine[59] and may be _in_ it, are yet not _of_ it.

-----

Footnote 59:

  So medicine is, in the Shakespearian use of the word, and also
  from its Greek derivation, not to give drugs, but to cure or heal.

-----

As regards the Church and its professors of religion, the case is
even worse; they have no material products of education to barter,
and for the most part are contented with telling their flock to “do
as I bid you, and not as I do.” But among them there are noble
examples of unswerving unselfishness and devotion, although for the
most part those who enter the Church are too young to understand
fully the nature of their high calling. Unfortunately the call in
too many cases is not a call to minister and heal souls, but to make
a living and heal the souls in the process. But again, it may be
asked, what are these wonderful powers which constitute the true
healer, and which are not to be bought or sold? The first one which
occurs naturally to the mind is the power of sympathy. The old joke
in _Punch_ about “the good bedside manner” has a considerable
substratum of truth when divested of its unpleasing folly. The
substratum of that manner is that which is given by sympathy; and
this is one of the first elements which constitute the power of
healing. It gives the power of suffering with the patient and
therefore of understanding what the sufferer is enduring. It is
beyond diagnosis, although it assists it by being much surer—at
least, as to the reality of the suffering. But this power of
sympathy only expresses a part of the meaning of the power to heal.
Sympathy tends to annihilate the personal distinctions between the
healer and the sufferer; it tends to exalt the consciousness of the
healer not only to know the remedy for the disease, but to be
himself the power of cure, and also it is a vast occult power in
virtue of which all the “elder brethren” of the Universal
Brotherhood live their lives; in virtue of which the world’s great
enlighteners have not only lived their lives but _lived their
death_, in order that they might benefit the sufferers who despised
and rejected them. But this power of sympathy and the kindred powers
which constitute the true healer, are really secret powers and
secret remedies. Therefore they are openly tabooed by the medical
profession, although the said professors cannot avoid using them.
But secret remedies are to some degree justly avoided. For it is but
natural to regard secret remedies with suspicion. At best their use
seems like working in the dark and blindly, and, consequently, any
results obtained must be empirical. Again, the medical profession
seems to plume and feather itself upon possessing a slight leaven of
its ideal condition, and, by constituting itself into a kind of
trades’ union, declines as a body to have anything to do with any
remedy of which the composition is not made fully known. This, at
least, is the more charitable view, for, on the other hand, the
doctors know only too well how eagerly the public rushes after any
new “quack” medicine, and seeks to cure itself without calling in
their aid. The doctors reply to this that they will have nothing to
do with a medicine whose composition is a secret, and which is
therefore devoted, to a great extent, to replenishing the purse of
its discoverer, and not to the cure of diseases from a love of man
and a hatred of suffering. This is a very high-sounding idea, and a
noble one, when it is not what the Americans would call only
“high-falutin.” But even when a remedy is made public property, it
is not necessarily _pro bono publico_; in fact, as a rule, it serves
only the good of the dispensing chemist. He sees the prescription
and notes it, the public does not; and, as a rule, the chemist
obtains the drugs cheaply, and compounds them at the same rate as
this medicine was originally sold under the patent of its
discoverer. Still, with all the dislike of the profession for secret
remedies, there is no doubt at all that in the case of the heads of
the profession some of the best results are obtained by the use of
prescriptions, which practically constitute a secret formula. The
especial combination which the particular man has discovered to be
of use is his property, and his only until he writes a book, for the
various chemists who make it up, and the various patients who drink
it, are not to the full aware of its value and use. The difference
between this and quack medicine lies merely in the peculiar names
and large advertisements, but very often these are balanced by the
fame of the particular surgeon or physician. But, in all honour to
physicians and surgeons, who do in many cases have and show a
large-hearted sympathy for suffering, it must be remembered that
many of the greatest and busiest of them give hours of their
valuable time to those who are too poor to pay in any other form
than that of grateful thanks. There are, again, others who disregard
all the rules which govern trades’ union society, and boldly take
their stand upon Christ’s dictum, that “the Sabbath was made for man
and not man for the Sabbath.” In other words, they say that any
medicine which they personally find valuable in the alleviation of
pain and disease must be used even at the risk of themselves being
called “unprofessional.” Again, others will use these so-called
secret remedies, and say nothing about it, preferring to pin their
faith to the wittily termed eleventh commandment, “Thou shalt not be
found out.” At this point it is possible to draw a parallel between
the use of the terms “untheosophical” and “unprofessional.” It would
seem that both are used in very much the same trades’ union sense.
In the case of the word “unprofessional,” it is to be regretted that
it is due very largely to a lack of charity and of the spirit of
enquiry. In the case of the word “untheosophical” it is often used
in consequence of a lack of charity, and further in the spirit of
scandal and gossip. Unless a man or woman is a theosophist pure and
simple, who carries out in their _entirety_, the objects of the
Theosophical Society, the use of the word untheosophical betrays
_them_ to be untheosophical and to fail in carrying out those
objects which they have promised to further to the best of their
power.

In the light of the foregoing it is now possible to examine the
manner in which Count Mattei’s remedies have been received. The
Count himself is a member of a noble family of Bologna, he has
travelled much, but returned there in 1847, and took part in the
movement which led to the liberation of Italy. In early life he much
wished to study medicine, but was prevented from doing so by his
father’s wish. Still his desire for knowledge was not quenched, and
he attempted to follow the bent of his own mind. He rightly
concluded that the instincts of the lower animals would lead them to
search for herbs and plants which would cure their ailments, and
that careful observation of these instincts might disclose medicines
of the greatest value to human sufferers. Thus he adopted the habit
of taking walks in the company of a number of dogs which were
suffering from various diseases, and carefully watched their
proceedings. Gradually the new pharmacopœia assumed shape, and the
instinct of the dogs showed that particular diseases were met by
particular remedies. These observations were made more than sixty
years ago, and were not forgotten amid the occupations of a busy
life. Indeed, when those occupations became less, Count Mattei
returned with ardour to his earlier studies. He became a deputy in
the Roman Parliament, but retired into private life after finding
that his political views were not those of the men by whom he was
surrounded. After this retirement the Count devoted himself to the
study of medicine, in order that he might fit himself to apply
certain principles which he believed he had discovered to be
valuable for sick and suffering humanity. By his own account and the
testimony of his patients he was not deceived, and the present
remedies which bear his name are the result of twenty-five years’
unceasing labour and experiment. He rapidly acquired an enormous
practice, and during the early years of it his advice and his
medicines were entirely gratis. But an unfortunate combination of
circumstances, as well as the expense entailed by the preparation of
the remedies, rendered it necessary for the Count to demand some
small remuneration for his services. Then he learned that his bounty
was abused, and that certain doctors, who had asked and obtained the
remedies from him, departed from Bologna and retailed the remedies
at extravagantly exorbitant prices. To such an extent was this
carried that there exist authentic cases where a thaler was demanded
for a single globule, and for the globules (20-30) necessary to give
a bath, 1,000 francs were asked in New York. Some idea of the
extortion may be given when Count Mattei refers to the thaler price
as being 1,350 times the price at Bologna. This would be enough to
justify any amount of secrecy on Count Mattei’s part, more
especially as that secrecy entirely prevents the adulteration of the
medicines which would inevitably follow, were they to become
commercial property.

We have only too familiar an example in the ranks of the medical
profession. Many of his confrères have been appealed to for the
support of a physician, named Warburg. At this date it seems hardly
possible to believe that this gentleman was the happy discoverer of
Warburg’s Fever Tincture. Perhaps in this country the value of the
compound was not so highly appreciated as in India. But it is
impossible to open any treatise on either surgery or medicine which
is about twenty years old and not find the use of Warburg’s tincture
specially urged in all cases of high fever, and especially in cases
of malarial fever and pyæmia. The compound had an enormous sale, and
yielded a very substantial income to its discoverer, but as soon as
he yielded to the pressure of professional opinion, and consented to
publish his formula so that it might obtain an extended use, he
obtained the reward of such philanthropy. Every chemist now prepares
the prescription and sells it at very nearly the original price, and
what is more, never refunds a fraction of a farthing in the shape of
a royalty to the discoverer. Consequently, we have before us the
edifying spectacle of the learned discoverer compelled to exist on
the charity of his professional confrères. Count Mattei has, at all
events, protected himself against this, for although he states that
in the event of his death he has provided against the loss of his
secret to the world, and intends to leave it carefully as a legacy
to suffering humanity, there is not the slightest doubt that he
alone is the possessor of his own secret. That it is possible to
obtain wealth from using this system is very evident. Certain among
the chief of his followers are in the habit of visiting London at
intervals, and the number of those who consult them is really
wonderful. I am assured by an eye-witness that the crowd is far
beyond that which besieges the door of the most fashionable
physician of the day. When one reads the literature of the subject,
one becomes more and more astonished at its simplicity. All diseases
resolve themselves into three main forms, and constitutions vary
accordingly. There are sanguine and lymphatic constitutions, and the
various combinations of these two; there are also febrile
disturbances and diseases of the liver and spleen. Consequently
there are three chief medicines, which are used in an extraordinary
state of dilution. It is no use, here at least, to discuss the value
of these infinitesimal doses, so that may be left for future
discussion. To a professional mind the most extraordinary claim on
Count Mattei’s part will be that of curing cancer by internal and
external medicines, and wholly without the use of the knife. He
claims positively to cure every case in which the cancer has not
ulcerated, and to cure a large proportion even of those which have
already done so. Even of those which have been neglected, and have
remained long in the ulcerated state, he claims to restore a certain
proportion (though not a large one) to health. Of course, to any man
who has seen the difficulty which attends the early diagnosis of
cancer, these claims are very high-sounding indeed—almost to
absurdity. The difficulties which attend diagnosis, even almost to
the time when the knife _has been_ used, and the tissue submitted to
the microscope, are very great. But in Count Mattei’s second
division there is no such difficulty. It is then possible by certain
indications, as well as by the use of the microscope, to be sure of
the nature of the disease. Here Mattei steps in and claims that, by
the use of one of his medicines, which exerts an _electric_
influence on cancer, and by one of what he terms his vegetable
electricities, he can restore the sufferer to health. Surely
_conservative_ surgery, if it be worthy of the name, will
investigate such a claim. Of the vegetable electricities there is no
doubt whatever. Cases of neuralgia and sciatica and articular
rheumatic pain have been seen to yield to them as to magic;
consequently, even in the last stages of cancer, when there is no
refuge save the grave left to the sufferer, I have reason to believe
Count Mattei, to some extent, when he claims to enable the said
sufferer to sink gently away in full consciousness, and without the
use of morphia.

To those who know anything of the occult uses and powers of plants,
the fact that Count Mattei gathers his herbs at particular phases of
the moon, will convey a good deal of meaning. Further, they will
feel an additional assurance as to their value, and will no longer
wonder, on one side at least, that Count Mattei chooses to keep his
secret. It would seem probable to some extent that Count Mattei is
one of the “elder brethren” of the race, although how far he is
consciously so may be a matter for speculation, which could only be
set at rest by Mattei himself and his compeers and superiors. What
is definitely certain is that his system of medicine in its
theories, if not in its practice, is a distinct step in advance in
the healing art. Mattei is one of those pioneers of advance who
spend the greater part of their lives in introducing for public use
a secret of which they have become possessed. Mr. Keeley, of
Philadelphia,[60] appears to be another of those pioneers who are in
advance of their times. But Mr. Keeley, in his work, resembles Friar
Bacon, who blessed (?) the world with gunpowder. No doubt
civilization has been enormously extended by its aid; but however
much use it may have been to man in adapting the face of nature to
his service, it has at any rate subserved the gratification of his
passions. Count Mattei appears to have none of these “defects of his
qualities,” and to have endeavoured to bless the world without
giving to it attendant curses. Still it is always possible that when
his secret shall become known it will draw attention to plants which
have just as destructive and poisonous an influence as the plants
and herbs he uses have of healing power. At all events, at present
his secret is of use to the world, and so far as may be seen he
makes a just and “brotherly” use of it. Has enough been said above
to show that the fact that his medicines are “secret” compounds
should be no barrier to their use? What is still more important is
that true theosophists should recognise that Count Mattei has done
what they endeavour to do, and devoted his life to Real Work.

                                                            A. I. R.

-----

Footnote 60:

  The discoverer of the new power now known as the Keeley-motor and
  inter-etheric force.

-----

                  ------------------------------------

               THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY’S CONVENTION OF 1887.

                                -------

Safely returned from my long tour of ten months, my first duty upon
reaching home is to remind the Branches that the time approaches for
the Annual Meeting of the Convention of the General Council—27th to
30th of December. It appears that the attendance this year will be
much larger than ever before; some thinking that we shall register
between 200 and 300 Delegates: besides the old, there will be some
twenty new Branches entitled to representation and votes. The yearly
extension of our Society is thus steadily augmenting the strength of
the General Council, and the importance of its Annual Convention. As
the Society settles gradually upon its constitutional basis, the
volume of committee and parliamentary work lessens and more time
becomes available for theosophical lectures, the formation of
friendships, and the cultivation of a good mutual understanding as
to the work before us.

The Adyar Library, to which considerable gifts of old MSS. and books
have been made since last December, is already being put to use. The
Dwaita Catechism was issued at the last Convention, and at this
year’s the Vishistadvaita and Advaita Catechisms will be ready; as
will also a compilation of Buddhistic Morals from the sacred
literature of Ceylon. It is hoped that members of our many Branches
will kindly bring forward as many ancient works upon every
Department of Aryan knowledge as they can procure for this best of
national monuments, the Adyar Library.

Every effort will be made to promote the comfort of Delegates, as
heretofore. Lectures are being arranged for, but learned Mofussil
members who are willing to read discourses upon special topics
interesting to Delegates, are requested to at once correspond with
the Secretary, and if the MSS. are ready, to send them in for
approval.

         *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

In conclusion let me assure our colleagues of all races, creeds and
colors, that a hearty and brotherly welcome awaits them at their
Theosophical home at Adyar.

      Adyar, 17th October, 1887.         H. S. OLCOTT, P.T.S.




                      A REMARKABLE CHRISTMAS EVE.


It was a dark and solitary path, a narrow, hardly perceptible,
footway in a dense forest, hemmed in by two walls of impenetrable
thorns and wild creepers, covering, as with a net-work, the trunks
of the tall, bare, moss-covered trees. The path led through the
woods down to a deep valley in which a few country-houses were
nestled. Night was fast approaching, and the hurricane, that blew
across the country, boded evil to many a traveller, by land and sea.
The wind, which had hitherto been only moaning through the trees, in
low sad tones reminding one of a funereal dirge, was now beginning
to roar with fury, filling the forest as with the howling of a
hundred hungry wolves. Very soon a drizzling, ice-cold rain veiled
the whole forest in a damp shroud of fog.

One solitary traveller was wearily wending his way along this
deserted path. The hour was late, and the darkening shadows were
creeping on steadily, making the gloom in the thicket still more
depressing. The young man looked worn and tired, as he again and
again brushed aside the entangled briars which impeded his progress
forward. He was well-dressed, and wore a marine officer’s cap. But
his coat was now in rags, torn by the hard, frozen, cruel thorns,
and his hands were bleeding in the struggle he had had with the
briars for a whole long night and a day since he had lost his way in
the huge forest. Panting, he stopped at last; and, as he heaved a
deep sigh, he fell down half-insensible at the foot of an old shaggy
oak. Then, half-opening his weary eyes, he murmured in despair, as
he placed his hand on his heart:—“I wonder how long _this_ will yet
beat.... I feel as if it were gradually stopping.”

He closed his eyes once more, and very soon the feeble palpitations
he was watching within himself, turned his half-paralysed thought
into a new groove of ideas. Now the hardly audible beatings of his
heart seemed to transform themselves into the ticking of an old
clock quite near to him. He imagined the old Nüremberg timepiece in
his mother’s room. He was dripping wet, chilled to the marrow of his
bones, and was fast losing consciousness. But, forgetting for one
moment his situation, and where he was, he caught himself
soliloquising as was his custom, when alone.

“This clock,” he thought, “has to be wound up ... else it will stop.
So shall this heart. A man has to eat and drink to renew the fuel
which feeds life, the clock too ... no; the clock is different to
man. Let it rest for a week, for two, three months, even for a
year.... Still, if wound up again, it will tick on as merrily as
ever. But once the supply of the body is stopped—well, what then?
Shall the working power cease for ever, or the ticking of the heart
be resumed as that of the clock? No, no!... You may feed the dead
body of man as much as you please! it shall awaken to life no
more.... A queer problem to solve,—What becomes of that something
which made the body move? The food is not the cause, is it?... No;
the food is only the fuel.... There must be some inward fire ever
burning, as long as it is supplied.... But when the supply of the
fuel ceases? Ah!... that is it ... where does it go?... Does
anything really die?... What form shall _my_ inner fire take?...
Shall it return to _its_ primordial light ... and be no more?... Oh,
how I suffer!... No, no; I must not allow this, _my_ fire, to go
out. No, not before I see once more my loved ones ... my mother and
Alice....”

Arising with great effort he pursued his way with tottering steps,
feeling his way in the darkness. But instantly a wild gust of wind,
tearing along the narrow pathway, caused the great trees to sway and
rock as if in very agony. Catching in its icy clasp the weakened
form of the young man, the hurricane nearly upset him. Being already
wet through and through with rain and cold, he shivered and groaned
aloud, as he felt a sharp pain penetrating his limbs from the brain
downwards. One more short struggle and he heavily fell on the cold
hard ground. Clasping his hands over his brow, he could only whisper
again: “Mother, I can do no more.... Farewell, mother, for ever!
Alice—fare thee well!”...

His strength was gone. For over thirty hours he had tasted no food.
He had travelled night and day in the hope of being with his family
on Christmas Eve, that blessed day of joy and peace. Never yet had
he spent a Christmas Eve away from home; but that year had been an
unusually unfortunate one for him. His vessel had been wrecked and
he had lost all. It was only by the greatest of chances that he had
been enabled to find his way back to his country, in time to take
the train that brought him from a large seaport to the small town
some twenty miles’ distance from his home. Once there, he had to
travel that distance by coach. But just as he was preparing to start
on his last journey, he met a poor sailor, a companion of his
shipwreck. With tears in his eyes the man told him that having lost
all, he had no more money left to take him to his wife and children,
who were yet two days’ journey by rail from where he was; and that
thus, he could not be with them to make merry Christmas together. So
the good-hearted young officer, thinking he could easily walk the
short distance that separated him from home, had emptied his purse
into the sailor’s hands and started on his way on foot, hoping to
arrive on that same evening.

He set out early in the morning and bethought himself of a short cut
through the vast forests of his native place. But on that afternoon
he hurt his foot badly, and being able to move only at a very slow
pace, the night had overtaken him in the forest in which he had
finally lost his way during that terrible night. He had wandered
since the morning during the whole long day, until pain, exhaustion,
and the hurricane had overpowered him. And now, he was lying
helpless on the bare frozen ground, and would surely die before the
dawn.

How long he lay there he never remembered; but, when he came back to
himself, he thought he could move, and resolved to make a last
supreme effort after the short rest. The wind had suddenly fallen.
He felt warmer and calmer now, as he sat leaning against a tree. Old
habit brought him back to his previous train of thought.

“Never, mother dear, never,” he addressed her in thought, “never
have I spent a Christmas away from your dear selves.... Never, since
my boyhood, when father died twelve years ago! I made a vow then
that, come what would, I should spend each Christmas Eve at home;
and now, though life seems slowly ebbing out of my body, I want to
keep my promise. They must be waiting for me even now, they, and
Alice, my sweet fair cousin, who tells me she never loved but me!
Reginald and Lionel, my brothers, who are earnestly waiting for me;
my shy pretty May, and little Fanny.... They are all longing to see
me, my dear ones, all expecting their old brother Hugo to return and
decorate their Christmas-tree.... Oh, mother, mother, see you I
must! I will be with you on this Christmas Eve, come what may!”

This passionate longing appeal seemed to give him a ten-fold
strength. He made a desperate effort to rise from his place, and
found he could do so quite easily. Then, overcome with joy, he flew
rather than walked through the dense black forest. He must have
surely mistaken the distance, as a minute later he found himself in
the brushwood, and saw the well-known valley so familiar to him, and
even discerned in the bright moonlight the home that contained all
his dear ones. He ran still faster, more and more rapidly, and even
forgot in his excitement to wonder whence he had found the power of
using his lame foot so easily.... At last he reached the lawn, and
approached the cosy old house, all wrapped in its snowy winter
garments, and sparkling in moonlight like a palace of King Frost.
From a large bay-window poured out torrents of light, and as he drew
still nearer, trying to see through it, he caught a glimpse of the
loved faces, which he stopped to look at, before knocking at the
door....

“Oh, my mother! I see her there,” he exclaimed. “There she is,
seated in her arm-chair, with her knitting by her side, her
beautiful silvery hair as soft and glossy as ever under her
snow-white cap. I see her kind eyes and placid features still
unmarked by the furrows of age.... She looks troubled.... She
listens to the fierce gusts of wind which cause the windows to shake
and rattle. How that wind _does_ try to get into the house, and,
finding itself no welcome guest, hark, how it rolls away.... How
strange!... I _hear_, but I do _not feel_ the wind.... Oh!...
Kneeling at my mother’s feet, there’s Alice. Her arms are clasped
around mother’s knees; her golden curls fall on her back....
But—but, why are her large violet eyes filled with tears as she
looks with up-turned face into mother’s sad eyes?... Hush! What is
she saying?... I hear it, even through that wall....

“‘Don’t be uneasy, mother, dear, Hugo will come back. You know he
told us so in his last letter. He said that after their shipwreck he
was kindly cared for by those who saved the crew. He wrote also that
he had borrowed money for the journey, and that he would be with us
at the latest on Christmas Eve!... Bad roads and the stormy night
will have detained him.... The coach, you say? Well, and though the
coach has long since passed by, he may have taken a carriage. He
will soon be here, mother.’

“Ah, dear Alice, I see—she looks at her finger, with its little ruby
ring I placed on it. She puts it to her lips, and I hear her
murmuring my name....

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

(From Hugo’s diary, where he recorded that night’s experience.)

... I rushed into the house at that appeal, and, as I now remember,
without knocking at the door, as if I had passed through the stone
walls. I tried to speak, but no sound appeared to reach their ears.
Nor did anyone seem to see or greet me.... I drew Alice by the arm,
but she never turned round, only continued to murmur sweet words of
consolation into my mother’s ear. Good God, what agony! Why do they
not hear, or even see me.... Am I really here? I look round the
room. The old home is just as I had left it nine months since. There
is my father’s picture hanging over the mantel-piece, looking at me
with his kind smile; the old piano open, with my favourite song on
it.... The cat sleeping as usual, on the hearthrug, and purring, as
she stretches out her lazy paws. Albums on the table, my photograph,
with its bright and happy look! How different to my present self!
Here am I, standing in an agony of doubt, before my loved ones,
seeing them, feeling them, touching them ... and yet unseen by them,
unnoticed, as one who is not there.... Not even my shadow on the
wall over their own. But who then, am I?... Why have they grown so
blind to my presence? Why do their hearts and senses remain so
dense? I try again and again. I call them piteously by their names,
but they heed me not. My heart, my love, all is here, but my
physical body seems far away. Yes, it is far, far away, and now I
see it, as it lies cold and lifeless in that forest, where I must
have left it. It is surely for _me_, not for that body, that they
care! And is it because I am no longer clothed with flesh that I
must be as only a breath, an empty naught, to them?...

Full of despair, I turned away, and passing through the folding
doors, arrived in the adjoining room, where my young brothers and
sisters were busily occupied decorating the Christmas tree. There it
stands, the old friend of my youth. I see it, and even discern its
resinous perfume.... Towering up towards the ceiling, its lower
branches are bending to the ground, laden with golden fruits, with
toys and wax tapers. My brothers and sisters are gathered around it.
But Reginald looks grave. I see him turning to May, and hear him
saying:

“Are you not anxious about Hugo? I wonder what can have become of
him!”

“I did not like to tell mother,” May replies with a little shiver,
“but I had a dreadful dream last night. I saw Hugo white and cold.
He looked sorrowfully at me, but when he tried to speak he could
not. His look haunts me still!” she softly sobbed, with tears
rolling down her cheeks.

But now little Fanny gives a scream of delight. The child has
discovered among the Christmas presents a real pipe, a pipe with
silver bells.

“Oh, _this_ shall be for Hugo, and then he will have music whenever
he smokes!” exclaims the little one, merrily laughing, and holding
out the toy in the direction where I am standing.

For a moment I hope she sees me. I try to take the pipe, but my hand
cannot clasp it, and the toy seems to slip away from me as if it
were a shadow.... I try to speak again, but it is of no use ... they
see me not, neither do they hear me!...

Grieved beyond words, I left them, and returning into the next room,
went up straight to Alice, who was still at mother’s side, murmuring
to her loving words. I spoke again, I entreated, I besought them to
look at me, and my suffering was so great that I felt that death
would be preferable to this!

Then came a last and supreme effort. Concentrating all my will, I
bent over Alice, and gasped out with my whole soul:

“If ever you loved me, Alice, know and hear me now!” I exclaimed, as
I pressed my lips to hers.

She gave a shudder, a start, and then, opening her eyes wider and
wider, she shrieked in terror:

“Hugo! Hugo! Mother, do you see? Hugo is here!”

She tried to clasp me in her arms, but her hands met together, and
only joined as if in prayer.

“Hugo, Hugo, stay, why can I not touch you? Mother, look! look! Here
is Hugo!”

She was growing wilder and more excited with every moment.

My mother looked faint and frightened, as she said:

“Alice, what is the matter, child? What do you see? Hugo is not
here!”

The children, hearing Alice’s cry, flew into the room, all eager
with expectation.

“Where is Hugo? Where is he?” they prattled.

I felt that I was invisible to all but Alice. She was the only one
to see me. Therefore, realizing that the body had to be saved from
its danger in the woods without loss of time, I drew her after
myself with all my will. I slowly moved towards the door, never
taking my look off her eyes. She followed me, as one in a state of
somnambulism.

My mother looked stunned and bewildered.

Rising with difficulty from her place, she would have made for the
door also, but sank back into her arm-chair powerless and covered
her face with her hands.

“Boys, follow Alice,” said May. “Wait ... the carriage is there
ready to go after the doctor’s children. Take it. Call the gardener
and John to go with you. I will stay with mother.” And whispering to
Reginald, she added, “Tell John to take rugs and blankets ... but I
am afraid poor Hugo is dead!”

She then turned to mother, who had fainted. I would see no more, but
_willing_ Alice to follow me, I left the house.

She came slowly after me, her face all white, her large eyes full of
a look of terror, but also of resolution in them. On she would have
gone on foot, in the drizzling rain, her golden hair all flying
about her head, had she been allowed to do so by my brothers and
servants. The strange cortege was ushered into the open carriage,
the coachman being ordered to follow her directions. On it went, as
speedily as the horse could go. I found myself floating now before
them, and, to my own amazement, sliding backwards, with my face
turned towards Alice, strongly willing that she should not lose
sight of me. Two hours afterwards, the carriage entered the
brushwood, and they were obliged to alight.

The night was now very dark and stormy, and notwithstanding the
lanterns, the group made way with great difficulty into the thicket.
The wind had begun to blow and howl with the same fury as when I had
left the wood, and seemed to have caught them all in its chilly
embrace. The boys and servants panted and shivered, but Alice heeded
nothing. What cared _she_ for that! The only thought of my beloved
was I, Hugo.... On, on we went, her tender feet wounded with the
brambles, and the wet sprays of branches brushing against her white
face. On, on she ran, till, with a sudden and loud cry of joy and
terror mixed, she fell down....

At the same instant _I_ collapsed, and _fell also on the ground, as
it seemed to me_; and then all became a blank.... As I learned
later, at that moment the boys drew near, and lowering their
lanterns found Alice with her arms clasped around a form, and when
the lanterns were placed close to it they saw before them the body
of their brother Hugo, a corpse!

“Sure enough he is dead, the poor young master!” cried John, our old
servant, who was close behind.

“No, no!” Alice answered. “No, he is not dead.... His body is cold,
but his heart still beats. Let us carry him home.... Quick, quick!”

Lifting up the body gently and placing it in the carriage they
covered it with rugs and shawls, and drove at a furious speed back
to our home. It was near midnight when the carriage stopped at the
gate.

“Reginald, run on quickly and give the good news to mother!” cried
Alice. “Tell May to have hot bottles and blankets ready, on the sofa
in the drawing-room. It is warm there near the fire.... Tell them
all that Hugo lives, for I _know_ he does,” she went on repeating.

More lights were brought out, and the servants carried carefully
their burden into the house, where they placed it on the sofa, hot
flannels and restoratives being immediately applied. Noiselessly and
breathlessly went on the work of love around the apparently dead
body, and was at last rewarded. A sigh was heard, a deeper _breath_
was drawn, and then the eyes slowly opened and _I_ looked round in
vague surprise at all those loved and anxious faces crowding eagerly
around me.

“Don’t speak yet, Hugo,” whispered Alice anxiously. “Don’t, till you
feel stronger.”

But I could not control my impatience.

“How am I here?” I asked. “Ah, I remember. I lost my way in the old
forest.... Ah, yes; I recollect now all.... The cold biting wind, my
lame foot, after I stumbled and fell, knocking my head against a
stone, and all became a blank to me!”

“Hush, Hugo, hush my boy,” said my mother wiping tears of joy from
her still pale and suffering face. “You will tell us all that
presently.... Now rest.”

But I could not refrain from speaking, as thoughts crowded into my
head, and recollections came vividly back. “No, no, I am better,” I
went on. “I am strong again, and I must let you know all that I
dreamed. I was here, and I saw you all.... Oh, the torture I
suffered when you knew me not!... Mother, darling, did you not see
me, your son? But she, my Alice, saw and followed me, and it is she
who saved me from death! Ah, yes! I remember now, you found my body,
and then all was darkness again. Kiss me, mother! Kiss me all, let
me feel that I am really with you in body, and am no longer an
invisible shadow.... Mother I kept my promise; I am here on
Christmas Eve! Light the tree, my little Fan, and give me the pipe
with the bells I saw you holding, and heard you say it was for old
brother Hugo.”

The child ran into the other room and returned with the pipe I had
seen her playing with a few hours before. This was the greatest and
final proof for me, as for my family. The event was no vision then,
no hallucination, but true to its merest details! As my mother often
said afterwards, referring to that wonderful night, it was a weird
and strange experience, but one which had happened to others before,
and will go on happening from time to time. Of late years, when I
had been happily married to my Alice (who will not let me travel far
away without her, any longer) I have dived a good deal into such
psychic mysteries, and I think I can explain my experience. I think
that by privation, cold, and mental agony, I had been thrown into
such abnormal conditions, that my astral body, as it is now
generally called, my “conscious self,” was able to escape from the
physical tenement and take itself to the home I so passionately
desired to reach. All my thoughts, and longings being intensely
directed towards it, I found myself there where I wished to be, in
spirit. Then the agony of mind from the consciousness that I was
invisible to all, added to the fear of death unless I could impress
them with my presence, became finally productive of the supreme
effort of will, the success of which alone could save me. This
joined to Alice’s sensitiveness and her love for me, enabled her to
sense my presence, and even to see my form, whereas others saw
nothing. Man is a wonderful and marvellous enigma; but it is one
which has to, and _will_, be completely unriddled some day, the
scepticism of the age notwithstanding.

Such is the simple story told to the writer by an old naval officer,
about the most “memorable Christmas Eve” that came within his own
experience.

                                             CONSTANCE WACHTMEISTER.

[Illustration: decorative separator]


                            A HALF CONVERT.

     Buddha! my earthly memory is so dimmed
         By this poor passing life which travels a hem
         Across my soul, and thought I cannot stem
     Pours like a flood to wash all traces limned
     Of former selves, that I shall ne’er recall
         The steps I came, nor know the fleshly tents
         In which I sojourned;—yet the fraying rents
     Of time-worn garments I have seen, and all
     The dust upon my feet, and I the sin
     Of tiger and of cobra passions striven
     To crush. These were strait gates, and through them driven
     My chariot wheels, so prithee set me free
     From other births, lest I seek Peter’s key,
     O! Sakya Muni, let me trembling in.

                                                       MARY N. GALE.




                    THEOSOPHY AND MODERN SOCIALISM.

                BY A SOCIALIST STUDENT OF THEOSOPHY.


The writer of the article on “Brotherhood” in your last issue has
given an erroneous impression of Socialism, which, as a student of
Theosophy (I do not know if I can yet call myself a disciple), who
has been, in a large measure, drawn to this great study _through
Socialism_, I may, perhaps, be allowed to correct. Indeed, I should
feel that I was shirking a task clearly indicated to me at the
present moment, were I to leave such errors, so far as all readers
of LUCIFER are concerned, uncorrected.

“T.B.H.,” the writer of the article in question—an interesting and,
I believe, useful article in many respects—has, I venture to
conjecture, confused the general system or class of systems known as
Socialism, with certain methods of propagating its principles. Let
me commence by quoting the paragraph in his article to which I take
exception. He says (LUCIFER No. 3, p. 213):—

  (1). “Socialism, as preached in this nineteenth century, it
  [the Universal Brotherhood, which is the mainspring of
  Theosophy.—J.B.B.] certainly is not. (2). Indeed, there would
  be little difficulty in showing that modern materialistic
  Socialism is directly at variance with all the teachings of
  Theosophy. (3). Socialism advocates a direct interference with
  the results of the law of _Karma_, and would attempt to alter
  the dénouement of the parable of the talents by giving to the
  man, who hid his talent in a napkin, a portion of the ten
  talents acquired by the labour of his more industrious
  fellow.”

I will first take the three statements contained in this paragraph
separately, and, for convenience’s sake, in inverted order. The
allegation against Socialism contained in the third is the most
specific, and that which, in the eyes of Theosophists, must appear
the most serious. This statement, namely, that “Socialism advocates
a direct interference with the results of the law of Karma, and
would attempt &c.,” constitutes, in fact, the only definite premise
in his argument. Of course, if Socialists do advocate, consciously
or unconsciously, anything of the sort, they advocate a physical and
psychical impossibility, and their movement is fore-doomed to
failure. More than this, if they do so _consciously_, they are
sinning against the light, and are impious as well as childish in
their efforts. Of such, clearly, the Universal Brotherhood is not.

But neither Socialists nor Socialism, “as preached in this
nineteenth century,” do anything of the kind. By “Materialistic”
Socialism, I presume “T.B.H.” implies (if he has really _studied_
Socialism at all, which I venture to doubt) so much of it as can be
urged upon purely worldly grounds, such as the better feeding,
housing, &c., of those who do the active work of society, technical
instruction, such general education as fits a man for the domestic
and secular duties of life, and the reorganisation of society with
these objects upon a “co-operative” basis,[61] in which public
salaried officers, elected by their fellows, will take the place of
capitalists and landlords, and in which the production and
distribution of wealth will be more systematically regulated. This
system, of course, takes no account of the law of Karma.

-----

Footnote 61:

  Co-operative, that is to say, in the sense that the various
  sections and individual members of society shall _willingly_
  co-operate, being fully conscious of their interdependance.

                                                ST. GEORGE LANE FOX.

-----

In a rough sort of way, however, all Socialists recognise the law,
so far as its effects are visible in this world on the physical,
intellectual, and moral planes. The fact that “the evil that men
do,” and classes and nations of men also, “lives after them,” none
are more ready to own and act upon. The action and reaction of
individual _will_ and individual and social _circumstance_, both
upon each other and upon individual and social _conditions_, forms
part of the foundations of Socialism. _Quâ_ Socialists we do not, of
course, take any more account of the law of Karma than do
non-Socialist Christians and Agnostics, but I maintain there is
nothing whatever in Socialism repugnant to a belief in this law. If
anything, it is the other way. All Socialists, whether they call
themselves Collectionists or Anarchists, Christian Socialists,[62]
Communists, or purely economic Socialists, are anxious to give freer
play to human abilities and social impulses, by creating leisure and
educational opportunities for all. We may thus, if it is permitted
to me to speculate while criticising, become the instruments of a
greater equalisation, distribution, and acceleration of Karmic
growth, “good” or “evil,” upon and among individual souls, during
their incarnation on this planet. This would come to pass by the
transferring of a great deal of the responsibility for Karmic
results which now lies with each individual in his personal
capacity, upon the collective entities composed of individuals
acting in public capacities; _e.g._, as nations, provinces,
communes, or trade corporations.

-----

Footnote 62:

  Socialists who consider their Christianity to supply them with
  sufficient motives for their Socialism. They do not strictly form
  a sect either of Socialists or of Christians.

-----

It is surely true, even now, to speak of a collective, _e.g._, a
national or municipal Karma, as we do of a national conscience. We
speak of reward or retribution to nations and cities as if they had
distinct personalities—are these mere “figures of speech”? But what
is more important is that Socialists may prepare the way for a
revelation of the noble truths of Theosophy to the multitude; they
may help to raise the intellectual and instinctive moral standard of
the whole community to such an extent that all will, in the next
generation following after the Social Revolution,[63] be amenable to
those truths. In this way Socialism would not, indeed, interfere
with the results of the law of Karma, but would, as the precursor of
Theosophy, be the indirect means of enabling multitudes to rise and
free themselves from its bonds.

-----

Footnote 63:

  This word, of course, is employed in the general sense, without
  any reference to the physical character which the revolution may
  assume. It may be attended with violence, or it may be as peaceful
  as, for instance, the religious revolution accomplished by
  Constantine in the fourth century. All I am postulating is a more
  or less sudden transformation of the existing social order,
  effected by one of those impulses with which evolution seems to
  complete its periods, and of which Theosophy may some day afford
  the explanation.

-----

As to the parable of the talents, well, Socialists would be only too
glad to see its moral better enforced in this and other “civilised”
countries. To them it seems impossible that it could be _less_
enforced or taken to heart than it is now. They see that under the
present system of Society—that vast engine of usury by which whole
classes are held in economic servitude to other classes—many are
encouraged to live in sloth and hide their talents, even if they put
them to no worse uses than that. This could hardly happen under a
_régime_ of economic Socialism (such a _régime_, for instance, as
Laurence Grönlund contemplates in his “Co-operative Commonwealth”);
for these able-bodied or talented citizens who declined to work
would simply be left to starve or sponge upon their relatives. Under
a purely communist _régime_,[64] no doubt there would be a few who
would shirk their proper share in the social work, but at least none
would be brought up from infancy, as now, to “eat the bread of
idleness.”

-----

Footnote 64:

  The only kind to which T. B. H.’s remarks are in any way
  applicable.

-----

Finally on this point, if to advocate such changes as Socialists
advocate, the substitution of social co-operation for competition;
of production with a view to use, for production with view to
profit; of peace between nations, classes, and individuals, for war;
of harmonious organisation to the advantage of all, for _laissez
faire_, and chaos for the advantage (or supposed advantage) of a
few. If I say, to advocate such changes be to advocate interference
with the results of the law of Karma, so is every proposal for the
amelioration of the physical or intellectual welfare of our fellows.
And if participation in this and other movements, which may with
equal justice be called “materialistic,” be prohibited to
Theosophists, they may as well, for all good their Universal
Brotherhood will do to the mass of those at present outside it, stay
at home and content themselves with communing with the select few
who alone will ever be in a position to appreciate them. If, for one
reason or other, they do not care to co-operate with Socialists, let
them, at least, recognise that the latter are preparing their way
for them, doing the dirty (?) and laborious work, without which
Theosophy can never descend from the serene heights in which it now
dwells, to replenish, spiritually, this sadly benighted world. For,
apart from a healthier physical and psychical atmosphere than
“civilised” life engenders in either rich or poor (collective Karmic
effects), a fair amount of leisure and freedom from sordid care are
indispensable in most human beings for the higher development of the
perceptive or gnostic faculties. At present this minimum of
leisure and economic independence is probably unattainable by
nineteen-twentieths of the population. Yet this self-same society,
with its scientific learning and experience, its machinery, and its
business organisation, contains within it all the germs of such a
reconstruction of the physical environment as shall very shortly
place the means of spiritual and psychical regeneration within the
reach of all.

“T. B. H.’s” second statement is that “Indeed there would be very
little difficulty in showing that modern materialistic Socialism is
directly at variance with all the teachings of Theosophy.” Such an
expression as “materialistic Socialism” is, as I have already
hinted, erroneous. _All_ Socialism is materialistic in the sense
that it concerns itself primarily with the material or physical
conditions of mankind. So do chemistry and mechanics, pure or
applied; so, in ordinary politics, do Liberalism and Conservatism.
_No_ Socialism is materialistic in the sense that it is based upon
any materialistic, as distinct from spiritualistic or pantheistic
conceptions of the universe. It has hardly any more to do with such
questions than have cotton-spinning or boot-making. I do not,
however, pretend to mistake “T. B. H’s” meaning. Taking Socialism in
its essentially economic aspect (which I admit is the foremost for
the present, and must remain so until it has been disposed of), he
asserts that “there would be very little difficulty in proving &c.”
This is a mere general charge against it, although, I think, a less
plausible, and therefore—from the point of view of harmony between
Socialists and Theosophists—a less serious one, than the particular
charge which follows it, and with which I have already endeavoured
to deal. For my own enlightenment, I should be glad to have some
samples, taken at random, of his skill in showing this variance; but
I doubt if such a demonstration could effect any good. Meanwhile it
is impossible to _answer_ the charge on account of its vague, albeit
sweeping and all-comprehensive character. “All the teachings of
Theosophy” are quite too much for a student like myself to attempt
to compare with Economic Socialism, as a system; nor do I think one
with ten times the learning and discernment that I can claim, would
readily attempt it. I merely record, therefore, my sincere
conviction that on this general point “T. B. H.” is also mistaken,
and that it is not Socialism, economic, or otherwise, which he has
really been scrutinising and balancing, but the sayings or doings of
some particular “Socialist,” whom he has seen or read of.

Individual Socialists have, of course, many faults which cannot
fairly be charged to the social and economic tenets they profess.
Thus one besetting fault of militant advocates of the cause is the
use of violent language against individual capitalists, police
officials and landlords. It, is so easy, even for men of a calibre
superior to the average, to be drawn on from righteous indignation
at a corrupt system, to abuse of the creatures and instruments
thereof—or even, on occasion, to personal violence against them.
Every good cause has its Peters, no less than its Judases. Socialism
unfortunately has a rich crop of the former. Another still worse
fault on the part of certain agitators, but one which might easily
be predicted from the character of the struggle and the condition of
the classes who must form the backbone of the Socialist Party, is
the frequent appeal to lower motives, such as revenge and love of
luxury.

But such faults, although by all human prevision necessary
incidents in the movement, are by no means inherent in Socialism.
Even the purely “materialistic” socialism of Karl Marx, to which
“T. B. H.” seems (although I think not with any clear picture of
it in his mind) to refer, aims simply at securing the decencies
and ordinary comforts of life to all, as a recompense for more
evenly distributed social labour. The very conditions of life
under a co-operative commonwealth such as Hyndman, Grönlund, and
other followers of the late Karl Marx’s economic ideal, have in
view—above all the obligation (virtual, at any rate) under which
every able-bodied member of the community would find himself or
herself, to do a few hours of useful work of one kind or another
every day, and the elimination of the commercial and speculative
element, with the wretched insecurity and dangerous temptations
which it involves,—would preclude inordinate luxury. A healthy
simplicity of life would become, first, “fashionable,” then
usual.[65] Communism, of course, goes further than economic
socialism, as it implies not only the claim of the individual upon
the community for the means of _labour_ and the enjoyment of its
fruits or their equivalent, but his claim for _subsistence_,
irrespective of the amount and social value of the labour which he
is able to perform. It would abolish, therefore, not only
individual property in the means of production, but in the
products themselves. The practicability of Communism, the motto of
which is, “From each according to his abilities, to each according
to his needs,” obviously depends upon the prevalence of more
generous motives, of a higher sense of duty both to work and to
give—a more perfect development, in fact, of the sense of human
solidarity. It is for this very reason more commendable than mere
economic socialism, as an ideal, to the attention of Theosophists;
although its application, on the national or universal scale,
cannot yet be said to have entered “the sphere of practical
politics.”

-----

Footnote 65:

  I do not, of course, mean to predict that “sin” (or its
  Theosophical equivalent) would die out. It is, after all, a
  relative matter to the capacities and potentialities of the
  individual and his surroundings. Under Socialism, sensuality,
  social or plutocratic pride, and other sins fostered by the
  present order, would simply give way to ambition (to obtain
  popular distinction, _e.g._, as an artist or inventor) and perhaps
  to magic and other at present unfashionable vices.

-----

Communism, which may be either Collectivist or Anarchist, leads me
to add a few words about Anarchism. I refer, of course, to the
social ideal philosophically denoted by this name, and not to the
means advocated by some of its supporters for putting an end to the
present society. Anarchism involves Communism, as well as extreme
decentralisation; more than this, it involves the abolition of all
permanent machinery of law and order, such as “the State” is
supposed to provide, and the abolition of physical force as a method
of suasion, even for criminals and lunatics. As a protest against
political domination of all kinds, and an antidote to the excessive
centralisation advocated by some state-Socialists, Anarchism may be
of some use, but it is obviously further even than Communism (of the
Collectivist variety) from becoming a school of “practical”
politics. It could only become so after society at large, all the
world over, had grown sufficiently homogeneous and _solidaire_ for
its members to co-operate spontaneously and automatically for all
necessary purposes, grouping themselves into large or small
organizations (limbs and organs) as required, and forming a complete
_body-social_, or Mesocosm, if I may be allowed to coin a word for
the purpose.

The erroneous conceptions of Socialism which I believe “T. B. H.” to
have formed, do not necessarily invalidate the first statement in
the paragraph of his article upon which I have been commenting, to
wit, that the Universal Brotherhood which he has in view (and which,
I understand from him, forms the first part of the programme of the
Theosophical Society) is not “Socialism as preached in this 19th
century,”—or at any other time, past or future, for that matter.
Still, I am inclined to hope that a more intimate study of Socialism
will lead him to see that, whether identical or not, they are at any
rate not antagonistic. My own belief is that Theosophy and
“materialistic” Socialism will be found to be working along
different planes in the same direction.

Any Universal Brotherhood of Theosophists must be based upon
Socialist principles, _inter alia_: its foundations may extend
further and deeper than those of Socialism, but cannot be less
extensive. Greed and War (political or industrial) Social Caste and
Privilege, Political Domination of Man over Man, are as out of place
in a true Brotherhood as wolves in a flock of sheep. Yet the
exclusion of these anti-social demons and the enthronement in their
place of Universal Love and Peace, if effected by such a
Brotherhood, would simply leave Socialists nothing to do but to
organize the material framework of their co-operative commonwealths.
To preach economic or “materialistic” Socialism to a world already
converted to the highest and completest form of Socialism, would be
to advocate the plating of gold with tin or copper.

Modern Socialism, if the noble aspirations of some of its apostles
may be taken as an earnest of its future, is already developing
(incidentally, of course, to its main economic and ethical
doctrines) strong æsthetic and spiritual tendencies. No reader of
William Morris or Edward Carpenter, to speak of English Socialists
only, will fail to notice this. At present the mass of Socialists
content themselves with basing their social and economic faith upon
the ethical principles of Justice, Freedom and Brotherhood. But the
highest, because most mystical of these principles, that of
Brotherhood, or better, Human Solidarity—the ancient conception of
“Charity”—forms the unconscious link between modern Socialism on the
one hand, and Esoteric Buddhism, Esoteric Christianity, and
Theosophy generally, on the other. I say _unconscious_ link, but I
mean to imply that it may soon be rendered conscious and visible. As
the various “orthodox” varieties, first of Christianity, then of
Mohammedanism, perish with the destruction or collapse of the Social
systems that have grown up along with them, this simple religion of
Human Solidarity will take possession of the deserted shrines of
Christ and Allah, and will begin to seek out its own fount of
inspiration. Then will be the time for the Universal Brotherhood of
Theosophists to step into the breach.

                                J. BRAILSFORD BRIGHT (_M.A. Oxon._).


                            THE GREAT QUEST.

           “In many mortal forms I rashly sought
           The shadow of that idol of my thought.”
                                           —_Shelley._

           “Après l’amour éteint si je vécus encore
           C’est pour la vérité, soif aussi qui dévore!”
                                         —_Lamartine._

The loss of youth and love is the perpetual wail of the poets. A
never-changing spring-time of life, where the sweet dreams of youth
would be realised in the fruition of reciprocal love, such would be
a heaven to them, and such _is_ a heaven while it lasts. If we add
to this the refined æsthetic taste that can delicately balance and
appreciate to a nicety every joy of the senses, and the
highly-developed intellect which can roam at will over the
accumulated store of past ages of culture, what would there be left
for poets to dream of? With heart, senses and mind worthily
employed, and with the well-balanced nature that knows moderation
alone can give continued bliss, could not man rest satisfied at
last? What more could he desire?

It is useless to deny that life has very sweet gifts to give, though
the number is limited of those who are capable of receiving them in
their fulness. But even while these gifts are being enjoyed, it is
felt that the horizon is bounded. With what questioning
uncertainty—albeit with fascination—does youth open its eyes upon
the glamour of the dazzling world! The love of the Springtide, even
in fruition, is continually building fairy bowers in the future—it
never for long rests content in the present, while to the intellect
the bounded scope of utmost learning is a still more definite goad
towards a knowledge that shall transcend all past experience.

And even were man content to continue to drink of the one cup of
bliss, he is never allowed to do so. The lessons of life, the great
teacher, are continually being altered, and the tempest of the heart
takes the place of the calm that was never expected to end.

If, then, we must look in vain to find permanent bliss in any of
these things—if, beyond the highest intellectual culture of an
intellectual age there gleams the vision of a higher knowledge—if
behind the artistic refinement of this, as of all past flowers of
civilization, the fount of all sweetness lies hid—if even the
heart-binding communion of earthly love is but a faint reflex of the
deep peace realized by him who has torn aside the veil that hides
the Eternal, surely all man’s energies should be devoted to the
quest which will yield him such results.

The whole philosophy of life may be summed up in the Four great
Truths that Buddha taught, and no more convincing description of
them can be read than that given in the lovely lines of the eighth
book of the “Light of Asia.”

He who has once been deeply imbued with these great truths—who has
realised the transitory nature of all earthly bliss, and the pains
and sorrows that more than counterbalance the joys of life—will
never in his truest moments desire to be again blessed, either in
the present or in any future incarnation, with an uniformly happy
life, for there is no such soporific for the soul as the feeling of
satisfaction, as there is no such powerful goad as the feeling of
dissatisfaction. He is bound to pass through periods of joy, but
they will be looked forward to with fear and doubting, for then it
is that the sense-world again fastens its fangs on the soul, to be
followed by the pain of another struggle for freedom.

When first setting out on the great quest, it seems as if many
lifetimes would fail to appease the dominant passion of the soul,
but nature works quickly in the hottest climates, and from the very
intensity of the desire may spring the strength and will to conquer
it. Though it is probably the same key-note that is struck
throughout, the dominant desire will appear to take a different tone
through the ascending scale of life. It is a speculation, but one
which would seem to receive endorsement from the analogies of
nature; for as the human embryo in its antenatal development,
exhibits in rapid succession, but with longer pauses as it
approaches the period of birth, the characteristics of the lower
races of animal life from which man has evolved, so does the human
soul realise in its passage through life the dominant desires and
attractions which have affected it through countless past
incarnations. The lower desires which in past lives may have been
more or less completely conquered, will be experienced in rapid
succession and left behind without much difficulty, till the great
struggle of the life is reached, from which man must come out more
or less victorious if he is to continue the progress at all.

If right intention were the only thing needed, if it were a
guarantee against being led astray, or if straying did not
necessitate retardation on the road, there would be no such supreme
necessity that belief should be in accordance with facts; but even
in worldly affairs we see every day that purity of intention is no
guard against the failures that come from lack of knowledge. In the
great spiritual science therefore, which deals with the problem of
life as a whole—not the mere fragment which this earthly existence
represents—it will be seen how vitally necessary it is that facts
should be conceived correctly.

To us whose eyes are blinded to the heights above, by the mists of
our own desires, the only rays of light which can illumine the
darkness of our journey on the great quest, are the words (whether
or not in the form of recognised revelation) left by the masters who
have preceded us on the road, and the counsel of our comrades who
are bound for the same goal. But words are capable of many
interpretations, and the opinions of our comrades are coloured by
their own personality—the ultimate touch-stone of truth must
therefore be looked for in the disciple’s own breast.

Having stated the necessity for correct belief, let us now consider
the question of the great achievement—the annihilation of Karma—the
attainment of Nirvana. It must be acknowledged as a logical
proposition that Karma can never annihilate Karma, _i.e._, that no
thoughts words, or acts of the man in his present state of
consciousness, can, ever free him from the circle of re-births. This
view would seem to necessitate some power external to the man to
free him—a power which has touch of him, and which would have to be
allied to him.

Now the teachings which have been put before the world in “Light on
the Path” state the other side of the question. “Each man is to
himself absolutely the _way_, the _truth_, and the _life_.” And
again, “For within you is the light of the world, the only light
that can be shed on the Path. If you are unable to perceive it
within you, it is useless to look for it elsewhere.” It would seem
that the solution of this great paradox must be sought for in the
constitution of man, as described in theosophic writings. Indeed, it
is the scientific statement of deep spiritual truths which gives to
the Theosophic teachings their remarkable value, and which seems
likely to carry conviction of their truth to the Western peoples,
who have for too long been accustomed to the mere emotional
sentimentality of the orthodox religions, and to the pessimistic
negation of science.

The higher principles, as they have been called, in the constitution
of man, particularly the divine Atma, through which he is allied to
the all-pervading Deity, must ever remain deep mysteries. But at
least they are cognisable by the intellect, as providing logical
stepping-stones for spanning the great gulf between Humanity and
Divinity,—the Power—the correct cognition of which provides the very
link between both systems of thought—which is at the same time
external to man, and has touch of him by its own divine light which
enlightens him, and which is also the very man himself—his highest
and truest Self.

For most of us it is the “God hidden in the Sanctuary,” of whose
very existence we are unaware, is known under the name of Iswara or
the Logos—the primal ray from the Great Unknown. It is the Chrestos
of the Christians, but, save, perhaps, to a few mystics in the Roman
or Greek churches, it has been degraded past recognition by their
materialistic anthropomorphism. A help to its better understanding
may be obtained by a reference to Sanscrit philosophy, which
describes man’s nature as consisting of the three _gunas_ or
qualities—Satwa, goodness, Rajas, passion and Tamas, darkness, or
delusion—and the nature of most men is made up almost entirely of
the two last named—while the Logos is pure Satwa.

The vexed question, therefore, as to whether man is freed by his own
dominant will, or by the power of the Logos, will be seen to be very
much a distinction without a difference. For the attainment of final
liberation the God within and the God without must co-operate.

Desire being, as Buddha taught, the great obstacle in the way, its
conquest by the dominant will is the thing that has to be done, but
the Divine will cannot arise in its power, till the conviction of
the Supreme desirability of attaining the eternal condition is
rendered permanent; and it is this that necessitates the goad which
the Logos is continually applying by its light on the soul.

We are now face to face with a very difficult problem—it is, in fact
the gulf which separates the Occultist from the Religionist, and it
is here that it is so necessary to get hold of the correct idea.

        “Strong limbs may dare the rugged road which storms,
          Soaring and perilous, the mountain’s breast;
        The weak must wind from slower ledge to ledge,
          With many a place of rest.”

The short cut to perfection referred to in the first two lines has
been called in Theosophic writings “the perilous ladder which leads
to the path of life.” To have faced the fearful abyss of darkness of
the first trial, without starting back in terror at the apparent
annihilation which the casting aside of the sense-life implies, and
out of the still more awful silence of the second trial; to have had
the strength to evoke the greater Self—the God that has hitherto
been hidden in the sanctuary—such is the language used with
reference to the very first—nay, the preliminary—steps on this path,
while the further steps are represented by the ascending scale of
the occult Hierarchy, where the neophyte or chela, through a series
of trials and initiations, may attain the highest Adeptship, and the
man may gradually leave behind him his human desires and
limitations, and realise instead the attributes of Deity.

                                                            PILGRIM.

(_To be continued._)

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                   “_GOD SPEAKS FOR LAW AND ORDER._”

                             INTRODUCTION.

The readers of the curious article which follows are requested to
remember that the writers of signed papers in LUCIFER, and not the
editors, are responsible for their contents. Captain Serjeant’s
views excite much interest among a large number of earnest people,
who use Biblical forms and phraseology to picture to themselves the
hidden things of nature and of spirit—things which we, the editors,
and also the large majority of Theosophists, believe to be more
clearly conveyed under the symbolism of the ancient Wisdom-Religion
of the East, and better expressed in its terminology. The article is
an attempt to explain the significance of a very curious cloud
formation observed by many persons in Scotland, on the 16th of
September last, a sketch of which appeared in the _St. Stephens
Review_ on the 24th of the same month. In the centre of the sketch
appears a side view of the British Lion rampant, with his paw on the
head of a bearded man, who bears a considerable likeness to Mr.
Parnell; to the right of the Lion is an excellent likeness of Her
Majesty, crowned, as in the Jubilee coinage, and smiling very
naturally; and to the left of the picture is an Irish harp. The
appearance, by the testimony of many witnesses, must have been
remarkably perfect and striking. Cloud-forms of a similar kind have
been recorded many times in history, and they are usually connected
in the public mind with some important political event. The Cross of
Constantine will, no doubt, recur to the readers’ mind, but the
sword and reversed crescent, which everyone saw in the sky when the
Turks were driven out of Vienna, may be less generally known; as
also the reversed thistles, with the outline of a Scotchman, armed
with claymore and targe, and falling backward, which was observed in
the clouds by the King and Court at Windsor on the night before the
battle of Culloden.

The question of what interpretation is to be put upon remarkable
cloud appearances, is of little interest to anyone who believes that
such phenomena are merely accidental arrangements of the watery
vapours of the atmosphere driven by currents of air. Apart, however,
from the obvious consideration that this way of regarding the
phenomenon only raises the further question of what causes the
currents of air to run in these particular ways, it may be safely
said that the chances are millions of millions of millions to one,
against the appearance in the clouds of any such perfect and
complete picture of well-known persons and emblems, as were seen in
Scotland on the 16th of September. Of course it may be argued, on
the other hand, that the clouds are for ever forming and re-forming
in millions of millions of millions different ways, and that the
mathematical chances are that one of these ways will occasionally
represent an earth scene. But even if the infinite number of
continual permutations and transformations of cloud substance be
held to account for the occasional appearance of some graphic
picture of human things, it does not in any way explain why these
rare pictures, when they do occur, should be perfect and appropriate
symbols; neither does it account for their appearance at the
particular moment when the extraordinary events, to which they are
appropriate, are occurring, or about to occur.

The phenomenon of vapours and fumes taking the shape of persons and
things, is one of the oldest and best accredited facts in magic, and
these cloud appearances, if they be viewed as having any
significance, are merely instances of a similar action on a large
scale produced by some conscious or unconscious force in nature.

If it be allowed, however, that the occasional assumption by vapours
of the shapes and likenesses of terrestrial things is not a
“fortuitous concourse of atoms,” but occurs in accordance with some
obscure law of Nature that in itself is the result of the mutual
interaction and interdependence of everything in the Universe, the
important question still remains—whether these appearances, when
they do occur, are “intended” as warnings or omens? Should the lion,
the harp, her Majesty, and Mr. Parnell, of the Scottish
cloud-picture, be taken as having any more significance in the
affairs of the nation, or of the world at large, than chemical
phenomena can be supposed to presage disturbances or rejoicings in
the world of nature? To answer this question would involve
considerations which only an advanced Occultist would be able to
comprehend; so we shall merely say, that although there are natural
symbols which carry in them a definite meaning for those who can
read that secret language, still symbols are generally significant
in proportion as people themselves put a significance into them.

A triangle or a cube is nothing but a triangle or a cube to a yokel,
but to an Occultist they contain the philosophy of the Universe.
Even so, Captain Serjeant, “the New Dispensationist,” and
Theosophist, can put the meaning he likes into this or any other
symbolical representation. We do not quite agree with either his
methods or his results in the case before us, but the conclusions he
draws are the same that are now being reached by many minds pursuing
very different paths; and these conclusions may be summed up by
saying that great changes are approaching, both in the temporal and
in the spiritual life of humanity, and that these changes will
eventuate in better things and nobler ideas.

                                  ---

             AN INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION, BY SERJEANT.

                     (The New Dispensationist.)

Thus may be interpreted the symbolical appearance represented and
described in the _St. Stephen’s Review_ of 24th September 1887. The
lion[66] of the house of Judah[67] arises with Victoria[68] the
female principle of the victor[69] of this world of ignorance,
error, sin, crime and misery. The lion represents that wisdom which
is the only true and lasting power on earth. He shall crush out the
anarchy and confusion now so manifest in _the world_ which is the
state of ignorance existing on this earth. Without a miracle shall
all this be accomplished?

-----

Footnote 66:

  It is somewhat difficult to follow the argument of this passage,
  unless the meaning of the words is explained. The Lion of the
  House of Judah is equivalent to “the Lord” and to “the Victor”
  mentioned below. In the writer’s phraseology “Victor is the symbol
  of the Trinity of Wisdom, Love, Truth.” Now the Lion is symbolical
  of Wisdom; but, as it is impossible to sever one element of the
  Trinity from another, it is necessary to remember that whenever
  the word wisdom is used it carries with it the other two as well.
  The above sentence would then seem to mean the conjunction of the
  male and female principles to effect the purpose of the
  manifestation of the Trinity above mentioned; by which
  manifestation all ignorance is dispelled. [ED.]

Footnote 67:

  Judah means _praised_; the true idea being _the Lord be praised_.
  Too much attention cannot be paid to the meanings of the words
  used in the sacred writings of all nations and peoples.

Footnote 68:

  _i.e._ the Queen, on whose lands _the Sun never sets_; it must be
  remembered that—“neither is the woman without the man, nor the man
  without the woman in the Lord.”—(1 Corinthians xi, 11.)

Footnote 69:

  “And no man can say _Jesus is Lord_ (_i.e._ Victor), but in the
  Holy Spirit.”—(1 Corinthians xii., 3, Revised Version.) It is
  especially necessary to remember that whenever allusion is made to
  Victoria, it is not Her Most Gracious Majesty who is meant but the
  unseen Victoria whose outward manifestation the Queen is alleged
  to be. It is as though the Queen is the mouth-piece of the
  intelligence behind, as the Foreign Secretary may be the
  mouth-piece of the Foreign policy of the Government. The language
  used is purely symbolical and by using words as symbols an
  esoteric meaning is attached to the most commonplace events in
  life. It is a truly occult argument, but one which matter-of-fact
  people will regard as nonsensical. [ED.]

-----

As insidious doubt has crept into the hearts of the children of men,
so shall insidious truth creep in to dispel all doubt; ignorance
developed into wisdom shall be the destruction of the world.[70]
Ignorance is the former or lower expression of knowledge, and
knowledge is the former or lower expression of wisdom—ignorance[71]
is the cross—wisdom is the crown. Ignorance regarded in a true light
is really an incentive to knowledge, for no man would try to attain
to knowledge were he not ignorant. And no man would strive to attain
to wisdom, did he not possess the knowledge which ever silently
proclaims to him its crowning happiness. Wisdom is not only the
celestial crown which every embodied soul is ultimately destined to
possess, but it is also that particular state of Heaven called the
“New Jerusalem” which shall descend from the Spirit (_i.e._ God, see
John iv., 24.) to earth in these latter days (see Revelation xxi.)

-----

Footnote 70:

  According to the explanations of the writer (_v. supra_), _The
  World_ signifies a state of ignorance and darkness. Taken in this
  sense the above sentence becomes a truism. [ED.]

Footnote 71:

  Ignorance is the equivalent of the Body, which is the Cross. By
  this light the Wisdom means the life of the Spirit. [ED.]

-----

Man was created[72] an ignorant being for a great purpose, which he
will ultimately realise and know. Were there no ignorance, there
could be no error, without error there could be no sin. Were there
no ignorance, no sin, there could be no crime, no unhappiness, no
misery existing on the earth. When, therefore, general ignorance
shall succumb to the disintegrating power of universal intelligence
so rapidly developing in these latter days[73] (see Daniel xii., 4),
and which is the quickening of the Spirit of God in man; then the
very conditions responsible for evolving error, sin, crime,
unhappiness, and misery will be entirely done away with, and thus
the consummation of the age—or, as the old translation of the Bible
has it, the end of the world—will be brought about as a necessary
consequence of purification by the Fire of the Spirit, _Truth_,
which is the Divine Son of the Supreme Spirit, or God. “When He, the
Spirit of Truth, is come, He shall guide you into all the Truth”;
then shall the princes of the House of David[74] arise from amongst
the people to rule the nations in equity and justice, in prosperity
and peace, and the reign of the One Almighty Spirit of Wisdom, Love,
and Truth shall begin on earth—for the Lion (or wisdom) shall lie
down with the Lamb (or innocence), and a little child (or truth, see
Rev. xii., the coming man-child) shall lead them.

-----

Footnote 72:

  To say that Man was created ignorant for a great purpose would
  argue the idea of a creator, according to orthodox ideas. But the
  writer is known to repudiate this idea entirely. It is difficult,
  therefore, to see what he means, unless it is that the man of
  flesh was ushered into existence by an evolution which he has not
  yet completed—ignorant, to acquire knowledge gradually. [ED.]

Footnote 73:

  This is a _very_ optimistic view of the case, and we can only hope
  to see it realised. The article “Signs of the Times” agrees with
  the views of the writer of this article. There is a development
  going on, but the forces against which it has to contend are too
  dense for an early realisation of this dreamlike Golden Age. It is
  too good to be true; but that it is possible to help it is also
  true. The Kingdom of Heaven may be taken by violence, and an
  entrance effected in an instant, but the process of attaining the
  position whence the attack may be delivered, is one extending over
  years. No student of occultism needs to be told this. [ED.]

Footnote 74:

  David means _beloved_; he was the first King of Israel, chosen of
  the Spirit. Israel means _one who strives with God_—_i.e._ one who
  strives against ignorance in order that he may be blessed together
  with his posterity. It was a name given to Jacob when he wrestled
  with the Angel (Genesis xxxii., 28), and applies _to all_ who
  contend on the side of the Deity.

-----

The soul-stirring and elevating harp of the sweet and trusting
daughters of Judah[75] is hushed—no crown surmounts it; and angels
weep and mourn over the discord now prevailing in the world. Where
are the harmonious chords which, through their inherent, soft,
loving and sympathetic notes once rendered powerless that enemy of
man—the serpent? Lost, through the ignorance and sin of the puny
earth-worms of this world! Yet Ireland, in common with the whole
earth, shall be freed ere long from the yoke of ignorance which is
so sorely oppressing all God’s creatures, for the crowned female
head symbolically represents the “Sign in Heaven” _which has
appeared_, of the Victoria or the woman[76] clothed with the Sun,
the Divine Mother from whom will proceed the Child of Wisdom, Love
and Truth, who shall rule all nations with a rod of iron,[77] and
who shall be caught up unto God and unto His Throne.[78]

-----

Footnote 75:

  In the writer’s phraseology, Judah is the equivalent of Erin in
  this case. It becomes exceedingly difficult to follow his meaning,
  for as everything is the equivalent of everything else, we are
  landed in a hopeless maze of paradox. On the principle that there
  is no truth without a paradox, there must be a great truth in this
  article (as there is), but its disentanglement is a matter of much
  labour and thought. The line of argument is the Judah meaning “be
  praised”—certain people who praised or followed the Lord (or
  Wisdom) were “oppressed and laid aside _their harps_.” There are
  people unjustly oppressed in Ireland, not by the outer troubles,
  but by the causes of the undoubted misery which prevails there.
  Consequently, the daughters of Judah and Erin are equivalent terms
  and interchangeable as symbols. The fact is that the author uses a
  peculiar cryptogram, as he himself states. [ED.]

Footnote 76:

  See “The Mother, the woman clothed with the Sun,” Vols. I. and
  II.; and also the celebrated picture of “The Woman clothed with
  the Sun,” by Carl Müller.

Footnote 77:

  _i.e._, The Sceptre that endureth.

Footnote 78:

  _Revelation_, xii.

-----

The following quotation from one of the replies to two leading
articles, which appeared in the _Manchester Courier_ of May 4th and
13th, may also tend to throw some light on the vision of the crowned
female head: “The present year heralds the jubilee of Her Majesty
Queen Victoria, on whose glorious Empire the sun never sets. It
shall also proclaim the jubilee of another Queen Victoria, well
known to the ancients as the Bride of God who awaits the arrival of
the Bridegroom. This Queen is She of Sheba[79]—the female principle
of the one who is the Victor[80] of this world of ignorance and
darkness, sin and crime; and He is the Solomon,[81] or Man of Light,
Truth and Life Eternal. On her glorious empire the golden rays of
Love and Peace shall shine forth from the Living Sun which nevermore
shall set. She is the woman clothed with the Sun, and from her will
proceed the promised man-child who shall rule all nations with a rod
of iron, and shall be caught up unto God and unto His Throne. Were
the English nation but to realise the mighty import of the grand and
everlasting truths which I now proclaim, it would, to a man, support
us in that work in which we, the New Dispensationists, daily and
hourly labour in the interests of a suffering humanity now being
slowly ground to powder in the stern mill of social ignorance and
degradation. The time has come for the promise to be made known of
the fulfilment of the “Saving health of all nations”; the prophecies
of the ancients relating to the ultimatum of the written Word of
Truth clearly point to the present age; and the Eternal Fiat has
gone forth from the Universal King: “Write, for these words are
faithful and true”—“Behold, I make all things new.” (Revelation xxi,
5.)

-----

Footnote 79:

  The Queen of the South or Zenith (_i.e._ the most supreme point of
  the Heavens) who shall rise in judgment with this generation (see
  Matthew xii, 42), She’ba represents two Hebrew words (_Shebhā_ and
  _Shebhȧ_). The first of these is an obscure term, compared by
  Gesenius with the Ethiopic for “man”; the second signifies an oath
  or covenant.

Footnote 80:

  _i.e._, The Christ, the Messiah.

Footnote 81:

  _i.e._, The man of “Sol” or the Sun. Hence, Christians worship on
  Sunday instead of on the Sabbath or on Saturday, as the Jews
  worship.

-----

It is fashionable in the world to covertly sneer at the things of
the Spirit, and to regard the Living God in Heaven as a Being either
unable or unwilling to manifest His Almighty Power and Presence to
the world in this orthodox nineteenth century. To all who may be
inclined to ignorantly hold what I have here written to be the
outcome of a disordered imagination I would say, in the words of
Paul, an apostle: “not of men, neither by men.”—“We speak wisdom
among the full-grown, yet a wisdom, not of this world, nor of the
rulers of this world, _which are coming to nought_: but we speak
God’s wisdom in a mystery, even the wisdom that hath been hidden,
which God foreordained before the worlds unto our glory, _which none
of the Rulers of this world knoweth_.”[82] “Now the natural man
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
foolishness unto him; and he cannot know them because they are
spiritually examined. But he that is spiritual examineth all things
and is himself examined of no man.” (See 1 Corinthians, ii.)

-----

Footnote 82:

  _i.e._, Theosophy, or the hidden outcome of the hidden wisdom of
  the ages.

-----

The year 1887 heralds the spiritual activity which will eventually
culminate in the glorious consummation of the age.

                                                  W. ELDON SERJEANT.

                           AN INFANT GENIUS.

The idea of re-incarnation, that is to say of a succession of
earth-lives passed through by each individual monad, seems so new
and so daring to the Western World, that we are always being asked,
“Where are your proofs? Are we to take such a startling hypothesis
as this simply on your _ipse dixit_, or on the authority of some
ancient Oriental book or ‘problematical’ Mahatma?”

To such a question the reply cannot be given in two or three words;
for, while maintaining that there is at least as much reliance to be
placed upon the Sacred Books of the East as on those of any other
religion, and while holding firm to the belief that there _are_
beings of a higher order of intelligence living upon this earth, and
mixing even in its great life-currents, we cannot expect that merely
because we say “Man does not leave this earth for good and all at
Death,” we therefore shall gain credence. Before the world of
Science our position would have to be that of a Young with his
undulatory hypothesis of light, or a Dalton with his atomic theory.
We cannot bring proof positive to those who desire an Euclidic
demonstration; we can only offer to them a hypothesis, and bid them
treat it calmly and dispassionately, not flying straightway into a
fury of abuse at our great impudence in daring to suggest a heresy,
but weighing it with care, and trying whether or no it will explain
some of the dark riddles of existence.

To ourselves, merely as a working hypothesis, the doctrine of
reincarnation seems to throw so much long-sought-for light upon the
bewildering enigmas of life, and the strange vagaries of a fickle
fortune, that we could not, even if we would, lay aside so fluent an
interpreter of the utterances of the Sphinx—Existence. The seeming
injustices in the lot of man fall into line as units of the great
battalion of cause and effect; “What a man sows that must he also
reap.” How else account for all the misery that cries aloud on every
hand, the starving multitudes, the good man persecuted, the
charlatan triumphant? In the small purview of a life summed up in
three-score years and ten, where is the indication of a Divine
intelligence that metes to each his due?

But if this brief existence be not the only one that man incarnate
must pass through, if it be, as we are assured, but one short link
in a chain that spans a fathomless expanse of myriad years, then
does the eternity of justice proclaim itself, handed on from birth
to birth in the dark fuel of the torch of life.

Our purpose now, however, is not to strive to catalogue the
countless instances where destiny appears to cry aloud, into the
deaf ears of man, that life is fraught with dire responsibility for
future life, but to point to a case where she, in kindlier mood, has
shown the gracious aspect of her face.

For the last few months London has been taken by storm by the
marvellous musical talent of a child whose life, in this incarnation
at least, is barely ten years old. We allude, of course, to Josef
Hofmann. None of our readers who have heard this boy but must have
wondered whence this phenomenal skill could have been derived. Other
children have come before the public, and roused its listlessness a
little with exhibitions of infantile precocity. But this young Josef
has taken at once front rank among the stars of the musical world,
and won a place only to be compared to that of the fairy-child
Mozart.

Whence comes this breadth of feeling, this grasp of musical
expression? It is certain that it comes not from his teacher; for
his father alone has filled that capacity, and it does not show
itself in _his_ performance; and again, the only unsatisfactory part
of the boy’s playing is clearly the result of mannerisms such as the
second-rate conductor of a provincial orchestra would, without fail,
extol and inculcate. No; it is clear that the swing of rhythm, the
determination of attack, the delicacy of sentiment, must come from a
man’s heart beating within that boyish frame, and a man’s mind
shining through that childish head. Could one forget the name of the
performer for one instant, and shut from one’s eyes his physical
presence, it were a _man_ that was revealing to us the secrets of
the notes. The rife experience of years must needs precede such
rendering of musical thought; an experience earned in many a fight
with varying fortune, in sympathy with many a tale of woe, in
rejoicing over many a glimpse of Love and Brotherhood.

Yet ten short years are all his tale! What magician could crowd into
that tiny space the parti-coloured pictures of a fevered life of
energy? No, it must be that the child has lived upon this earth
before, has borne his lance in the thickest of the fray, has
achieved distinction in some great branch of art and garnered up a
store of thought and feeling, into the inheritance of which his
heir, himself, has entered. He may squander it again; alas, so many
have before; but there it is, for him to use aright or wrongly, and
serious is the charge imposed upon his guardians that they shall lay
the lesson to heart that to whom much is given, from him shall much
be expected. But with that aspect of the case it is not for us here
to deal. We have only adduced this boy’s genius as one of the
indications that life is in its succession a far more complex
problem than the materialists or the orthodox religionists would
lead us to believe. There are countless other suggestive little
facts of early talent that must have come within the circle of the
daily life of each of us; but without the thread of Karma whereon to
string them, we pass them by; and it is only when some remarkable
phenomenon, such as that of Josef Hofmann, bursts upon the world,
that men fall to wondering. Yet it is by the accumulation of small
details that a philosopher like Darwin worked out his scheme of
natural evolution; and it is by the testing of such a theory as that
of re-incarnation by many a little hitherto unexplained incident
that we shall find its worth. Nor is it merely as a curious prying
into mysteries that we should regard such research; for, once let a
man convince himself that though “Art is long,” yet Life, in its
recurrence, is longer, he will find in the thought that he is really
laying up treasure in heaven (the _lives_ to come), encouragement,
despite all temporary failure, to do whatsoever his hand findeth to
do with all his might.

                                                    W. ASHTON ELLIS.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                                 FEAR.

            Why fearest thou the darksome shades
                That creep across the path of life?
                Why tremble at the thought of strife
            That oftentimes the soul invades?

            Why sicken at the thought of ills?
                The horrors that invade thy dreams,
                The shadowland of forms, that seems
            Dark terror to the soul it fills?

            Why weary of the onward way,
                Or dread the roughness of the road?
                Why fear to struggle ’gainst the load,
            The heavy burthen of life’s clay?

            Hast thou not seen?—when gone the night
                And stilled the dropping of the shower,
                The weary drooping wayside flower
            Drink in new life from sunbeams bright.

            Hast thou not loved, at dawn, to feast,
                The longing of thy mortal eyes
                With vivid colours of the skies,
            Burst free from floodgates of the East?

            And hast thou never tried, in thought,
                To gain a clearer, truer view?
                A mystic glimpse, a vision new,
            That shows the darkness as it ought?

            A phantom of material fear
                Unworthy of a moment’s dread;
                For darkness would itself be dead,
            Unless its mother light were near!

            Then learn to grasp the purer light,
                And learn to know the holier creed—
                The brighter glow—the greater need,
            The nearer day—the murkier night.

                                                            P. H. D.




                 THE ESOTERIC CHARACTER OF THE GOSPELS.

                           (_Continued._)

                                  II.

The word Chréstos existed ages before Christianity was heard of. It
is found used, from the fifth century B.C., by Herodotus, by
Æschylus and other classical Greek writers, the meaning of it being
applied to both things and persons.

Thus in Æschylus (Cho. 901) we read of Μαντεύματα πυθόχρηστα
(_pythochrésta_) the “oracles delivered by a Pythian God”
(_Greek-Eng. Lex._) through a pythoness; and _Pythochréstos_ is the
nominative singular of an adjective derived from _chrao_ χράω
(Eurip. _Ion_, 1, 218). The later meanings coined freely from this
primitive application, are numerous and varied. Pagan classics
expressed more than one idea by the verb χράομαι “consulting an
oracle”; for it also means “fated,” _doomed_ by an oracle, in the
sense of a _sacrificial victim to its decree_, or—“to the WORD”; as
_chrésterion_ is not only “the seat of an oracle” but also “an
offering to, or for, the oracle.”[83] _Chrestés_ χρήστης is one who
expounds or explains oracles, “a _prophet_, a _soothsayer_;”[84] and
_chrésterios_ χρηστὴριος is one who belongs to, or is in the service
of, an oracle, a god, or a “Master”;[85] this Canon Farrar’s efforts
notwithstanding.[86]

-----

Footnote 83:

  The word χρεών is explained by Herodotus (7. 11. 7.) as that which
  an oracle declares, and τὸ χρεών is given by Plutarch (Nic. 14.)
  as “fate,” “necessity.” _Vide_ Herod, 7. 215; 5. 108; and
  Sophocles, Phil. 437.

Footnote 84:

  See Liddell and Scott’s Greek-Engl. Lex.

Footnote 85:

  Hence of a _Guru_, “a teacher,” and _chela_, a “disciple,” in
  their mutual relations.

Footnote 86:

  In his recent work—“The Early Days of Christianity,” Canon Farrar
  remarks:—“Some have supposed a pleasant play of words founded on
  it, as ... between _Chréstos_ (‘sweet’ Ps. xxx., iv., 8) and
  Christos (Christ)” (I. p. 158, _foot-note_). But there is nothing
  to suppose, since it began by a “play of words,” indeed. The name
  _Christus_ was _not_ “distorted into Chrestus,” as the learned
  author would make his readers believe (p. 19), but it was the
  adjective and noun _Chréstos_ which became distorted into
  _Christus_, and applied to Jesus. In a foot-note on the word
  “Chrestian,” occurring in the First Epistle of Peter (chap. iv.,
  16), in which in the _revised_ later MSS. the word was changed
  into _Christian_, Canon Farrar remarks again, “Perhaps we should
  read the ignorant heathen distortion, _Chréstian_.” Most decidedly
  we should; for the eloquent writer should remember his Master’s
  command to render unto Cæsar that which is Cæsar’s. His dislike
  notwithstanding, Mr. Farrar is obliged to admit that the name
  _Christian_ was first INVENTED, by the sneering, mocking
  Antiochians, as early as A.D. 44, but had not come into general
  use before the persecution by Nero. “Tacitus,” he says, “uses the
  word Christians with something of apology. It is well known that
  in the N. T. it only occurs three times, and always involves a
  hostile sense (_Acts_ xi. 26, xxvi. 28, as it does in iv. 16).” It
  was not Claudius alone who looked with alarm and suspicion on the
  Christians, so nicknamed in derision for their carnalizing a
  subjective principle or attribute, but all the pagan nations. For
  Tacitus, speaking of those whom the masses called “Christians,”
  describes them as a set of men _detested for their enormities_ and
  crimes. No wonder, for history repeats itself. There are, no
  doubt, thousands of noble, sincere, and virtuous _Christian-born_
  men and women now. But we have only to look at the viciousness of
  Christian “heathen” converts; at the _morality_ of those
  proselytes in India, whom the missionaries themselves decline to
  take into their service, to draw a parallel between the converts
  of 1,800 years ago, and the modern heathens “touched _by grace_.”

-----

All this is evidence that the terms Christ and Christians, spelt
originally _Chrést_ and _Chréstians_ χρηστιανοὶ[87] were
directly borrowed from the Temple terminology of the Pagans, and
meant the same thing. The God of the Jews was now substituted
for the Oracle and the other gods; the generic designation
“Chréstos” became a noun applied to one special personage; and
new terms such as _Chréstianoï_ and _Chréstodoulos_ “a follower
or servant of Chrestos”—were coined out of the old material.
This is shown by Philo Judæus, a monotheist, assuredly, using
already the same term for monotheistic purposes. For he speaks
of θεόχρηστος (_théochréstos_) “God-declared,” or one who is
declared by god, and of λόγια θεόχρηστα (_logia théochrésta_)
“sayings delivered by God”—which proves that he wrote at a time
(between the first century B.C., and the first A.D.) when
neither Christians nor Chrestians were yet known under these
names, but still called themselves the Nazarenes. The notable
difference between the two words χράω—“consulting or obtaining
response from a god or oracle” (χρεω being the Ionic earlier
form of it), and χριω (_chrio_) “to rub, to anoint” (from which
the name Christos), have not prevented the ecclesiastical
adoption and coinage from Philo’s expression θεόχρηστος of that
other term θεόχριστος “anointed by God.” Thus the quiet
substitution of the letter ι for η for dogmatic purposes, was
achieved in the easiest way, as we now see.

-----

Footnote 87:

  Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Lactantius, Clemens Alexandrinus, and
  others spelt it in this way.

-----

The secular meaning of _Chréstos_ runs throughout the classical
Greek literature _pari passu_ with that given to it in the
mysteries. Demosthenes’ saying ω χρηστέ (330, 27), means by it
simply “you nice fellow”; Plato (in Phaed. 264 B) has χρηστός ει ὅτι
ἣγεῖ—“you are an excellent fellow to think....” But in the esoteric
phraseology of the temples “chrestos,”[88] a word which, like the
participle _chréstheis_, is formed under the same rule, and conveys
the same sense—from the verb χράομαι(“to consult a god”)—answers to
what we would call an adept, also a high _chela_, a disciple. It is
in this sense that it is used by Euripides (Ion. 1320) and by
Æschylus (1 C). This qualification was applied to those whom the
god, oracle, or any superior had proclaimed this, that, or anything
else. An instance may be given in this case.

-----

Footnote 88:

  _Vide_ Liddell and Scott’s Greek and English Lexicon. _Chréstos_
  is really one who is continually warned, advised, guided, whether
  by oracle or prophet. Mr. G. Massey is not correct in saying that
  “... The Gnostic form of the name Chrest, or Chrestos, denotes the
  _Good God_, not a human original,” for it denoted the latter,
  _i.e._, a good, holy man; but he is quite right when he adds that
  “_Chrestianus_ signifies ... ‘Sweetness and Light.’” “The
  _Chrestoi_, as the _Good People_, were pre-extant. Numerous Greek
  inscriptions show that the departed, the hero, the saintly
  one—that is, the ‘Good’—was styled _Chrestos_, or the Christ; and
  from this meaning of the ‘Good’ does Justin, the primal apologist,
  derive the Christian name. This identifies it with the Gnostic
  source, and with the ‘Good God’ who revealed himself according to
  Marcion—that is, the Un-Nefer or Good-opener of the Egyptian
  theology.”—(_Agnostic Annual._)

-----

The words χρῆσεν οικιστῆρα used by Pindar (p. 4-10) mean “the oracle
_proclaimed_ him the coloniser.” In this case the genius of the
Greek language permits that the man so proclaimed should be called
χρήστος (_Chréstos_). Hence this term was applied to every Disciple
recognised by a Master, as also to every good man. Now, the Greek
language affords strange etymologies. Christian theology has chosen
and decreed that the name Christos should be taken as derived from
χρίΩ, χρίσω (Chriso), “anointed with scented unguents or oil.” But
this word has several significances. It is used by Homer, certainly,
as applied to the rubbing with oil of the body after bathing (_Il._
23, 186; also in _Od._ 4, 252) as other ancient writers do. Yet the
word χρίστης (_Christes_) means rather a _white-washer_, while the
word Chrestes (χρήστης) means priest and prophet, a term far more
applicable to Jesus, than that of the “Anointed,” since, as Nork
shows on the authority of the Gospels, he never was anointed, either
as king or priest. In short, there is a deep mystery underlying all
this scheme, which, as I maintain, only a thorough knowledge of the
Pagan mysteries is capable of unveiling.[89] It is not what the
early Fathers, who had an object to achieve, may affirm or deny,
that is the important point, but rather what is now the evidence for
the real significance given to the two terms _Chréstos_ and
_Christos_ by the ancients in the pre-Christian ages. For the latter
had no object to achieve, therefore nothing to conceal or disfigure,
and their evidence is naturally the more reliable of the two. This
evidence can be obtained by first studying the meaning given to
these words by the classics, and then their correct significance
searched for in mystic symbology.

-----

Footnote 89:

  Again I must bring forward what Mr. G. Massey says (whom I quote
  repeatedly because he has studied this subject so thoroughly and
  so conscientiously).

  “My contention, or rather explanation,” he says, “is that the
  author of the Christian name is the Mummy-Christ of Egypt, called
  the _Karest_, which was a type of the immortal spirit in man, the
  Christ within (as Paul has it), the divine offspring incarnated,
  the Logos, the Word of Truth, the _Makheru_ of Egypt. It did not
  originate as a mere type! The preserved mummy was the _dead body
  of any one_ that was _Karest_, or mummified, to be kept by the
  living; and, through constant repetition, this became a type of
  the resurrection from (not of!) the dead.” See the explanation of
  this further on.

-----

Now _Chrestos_, as already said, is a term applied in various
senses. It qualifies both Deity and Man. It is used in the former
sense in the Gospels, and in Luke (vi., 35), where it means “kind,”
and “merciful.” “χρηστός ἑστιν επι τους,” in 1 Peter (ii, 3), where
it is said, “Kind is the Lord,” χρηστός ὁ κύριος. On the other hand,
it is explained by Clemens Alexandrinus as simply meaning a good
man; _i.e._ “All who believe in _Chrést_ (a good man) both _are_,
and _are called Chréstians_, that is good men.” (Strom. lib. ii.)
The reticence of Clemens, whose Christianity, as King truly remarks
in his “_Gnostics_,” was no more than a graft upon the congenial
stock of his original Platonism, is quite natural. He was an
Initiate, a new Platonist, before he became a Christian, which fact,
however much he may have fallen off from his earlier views, could
not exonerate him from his pledge of secrecy. And as a Theosophist
and a _Gnostic_, one who _knew_, Clemens must have known that
_Christos_ was “the WAY,” while _Chréstos_ was the lonely traveller
journeying on to reach the ultimate goal through that “Path,” which
goal was _Christos_, the glorified Spirit of “TRUTH,” the reunion
with which makes the soul (the Son) ONE with the (Father) Spirit.
That Paul knew it, is certain, for his own expressions prove it. For
what do the words πάλιν ὠδίνω, ἅχρις οὕ μορφωθῆ χριστὸς ἐνὺμῖν, or,
as given in the authorised translations, “I am again in travail
until _Christ be formed in you_” mean, but what we give in its
esoteric rendering, _i.e._ “until you find _the_ Christos within
yourselves as your only ‘way.’” (_vide_ Galatians iv., 19 and 20.)

Thus Jesus, whether of Nazareth or Lüd,[90] was a Chréstos, as
undeniably as that he never was entitled to the appellation of
_Christos_, during his life-time and before his last trial. It may
have been as Higgins thinks, who surmises that the first name of
Jesus was, perhaps, χρεισος the second χρησος, and the third χρισος.
“The word χρεισος was in use before the H (cap. _eta_) was in the
language.” But Taylor (in his answer to Pye Smith, p. 113) is quoted
saying “The complimentary epithet Chrest ... signified nothing more
than a good man.”

-----

Footnote 90:

  Or Lydda. Reference is made here to the Rabbinical tradition in
  the Babylonian Gemara, called _Sepher Toledoth Jeshu_, about Jesus
  being the son of one named Pandira, and having lived a century
  earlier than the era called Christian, namely, during the reign of
  the Jewish king Alexander Jannæus and his wife Salome, who reigned
  from the year 106 to 79 B.C. Accused by the Jews of having learned
  the magic art in Egypt, and of having stolen from the Holy of
  Holies the Incommunicable Name, Jehoshua (Jesus) was put to death
  by the Sanhedrin at Lud. He was stoned and then crucified on a
  tree, on the eve of Passover. The narrative is ascribed to the
  Talmudistic authors of “Sota” and “Sanhedrin,” p. 19, Book of
  Zechiel. See “Isis Unveiled,” II. 201; Arnobius; Elephas Levi’s
  “_Science des Esprits_,” and “The Historical Jesus and Mythical
  Christ,” a lecture by G. Massey.

-----

Here again a number of ancient writers may be brought forward to
testify that _Christos_ (or _Chreistos_, rather) was, along with
χρησος = Hrésos, an adjective applied to Gentiles before the
Christian era. In _Philopatris_ it is said ει τυχοι χρηστος και εν
εθνεσιν, _i.e._ “if chrestos chance to be even among the Gentiles,”
etc.

Tertullian denounces in the 3rd chapter of his _Apologia_ the word
“_Christianus_” as derived by “crafty interpretation;”[91] Dr.
Jones, on the other hand, letting out the information, corroborated
by good sources, that _Hrésos_ χρησός was the name given to Christ
by the Gnostics, and even by unbelievers,” assures us that the real
name ought to be χρισος or Chrisos—thus repeating and supporting the
original “pious fraud” of the early Fathers, a fraud which led to
the carnalizing of the whole Christian system.[92] But I propose to
show as much of the real meaning of all these terms as lies within
my humble powers and knowledge. Christos, or the “Christ-condition,”
was ever the synonym of the “Mahatmic-condition,” _i.e._, the union
of the man with the divine principle in him. As Paul says (Ephes.
iii. 17) “κατοικησαι τον χριστον δια της πιστεως εν ταις καρδιαις
ὑμωι.” “That you may find Christos in your _inner_ man through
_knowledge_” not faith, as translated; for _Pistis_ is “knowledge,”
as will be shown further on.

-----

Footnote 91:

  “Christianus quantum interpretatione de unctione deducitas. Sed ut
  cum perferam Chrestianus pronunciatus a vobis (nam nec nominis
  certa est notitia penes vos) de suavitate vel benignitate
  compositum est.” Canon Farrar makes a great effort to show such
  _lapsus calami_ by various Fathers as the results of disgust and
  fear. “There can be little doubt,” he says (in _The Early Days of
  Christianity_) “that the ... name Christian ... was a nick-name
  due to the wit of the Antiochians.... It is clear that the sacred
  writers avoided the name (Christians) because it was employed by
  their enemies (Tac. Ann. xv. 44). It only became familiar when the
  virtues of Christians had shed lustre upon it....” This is a very
  lame excuse, and a poor explanation to give for so eminent a
  thinker as Canon Farrar. As to the “virtues of Christians” ever
  shedding _lustre_ upon the name, let us hope that the writer had
  in his mind’s eye neither Bishop Cyril, of Alexandria, nor
  Eusebius, nor the Emperor Constantine, of murderous fame, nor yet
  the Popes Borgia and the Holy Inquisition.

Footnote 92:

  Quoted by G. Higgins. (See Vol. I., pp. 569-573.)

-----

There is still another and far more weighty proof that the name
_Christos_ is pre-Christian. The evidence for it is found in the
prophecy of the Erythrean Sybil. We read in it ἹΗΣΟΥΣ ΧΡΕΙΣΤΟΣΘΕΟΝ
ὙΙΟΣ ΣΩΤΗΡ ΣΤΑΥΡΟΣ. Read esoterically, this string of meaningless
detached nouns, which has no sense to the profane, contains a real
prophecy—only not referring to Jesus—and a verse from the mystic
catechism of the Initiate. The prophecy relates to the coming down
upon the Earth of the Spirit of Truth (Christos), after which
advent—that has once more nought to do with Jesus—will begin the
Golden Age; the verse refers to the necessity before reaching that
blessed condition of inner (or subjective) theophany and
theopneusty, to pass through the crucifixion of flesh or matter.
Read exoterically, the words “_Iesous Chreistos theou yios soter
stauros_,” meaning literally “Iesus, Christos, God, Son, Saviour,
Cross,” are most excellent handles to hang a Christian prophecy on,
but they are _pagan_, not Christian.

If called upon to explain the names IESOUS CHREISTOS, the answer is:
study mythology, the so-called “fictions” of the ancients, and they
will give you the key. Ponder over Apollo, the solar god, and the
“Healer,” and the allegory about his son Janus (or Ion), his priest
at Delphos, through whom alone could prayers reach the immortal
gods, and his other son Asclepios, called the _Soter_, or Saviour.
Here is a leaflet from esoteric history written in symbolical
phraseology by the old Grecian poets.

The city of Chrisa[93] (now spelt Crisa), was built in memory of
Kreusa (or Creusa), daughter of King Erechtheus and mother of Janus
(or Ion) by Apollo, in memory of the danger which Janus escaped.[94]
We learn that Janus, abandoned by his mother in a grotto “to hide
the shame of the virgin who bore a son,” was found by Hermes, who
brought the infant to Delphi, nurtured him by his father’s sanctuary
and oracle, where, under the name of Chresis (χρησις) Janus became
first a _Chrestis_ (a priest, soothsayer, or Initiate), and then
very nearly a _Chresterion_, “a sacrificial victim,”[95] ready to be
poisoned by his own mother, who knew him not, and who, in her
jealousy, mistook him, on the hazy intimation of the oracle, for a
son of her husband. He pursued her to the very altar with the
intention of killing her—when she was saved through the pythoness,
who divulged to both the secret of their relationship. In memory of
this narrow escape, Creusa, the mother, built the city of Chrisa, or
Krisa. Such is the allegory, and it symbolizes simply the trials of
Initiation.[96]

-----

Footnote 93:

  In the days of Homer, we find this city, once celebrated for its
  mysteries, the chief seat of Initiation, and the name of
  _Chrestos_ used as a title during the mysteries. It is mentioned
  in the _Iliad_, ii., 520 as “Chrisa” (χρῖσα). Dr. Clarke suspected
  its ruins under the present site of _Krestona_, a small town, or
  village rather, in Phocis, near the Crissæan Bay. (See E. D.
  Clarke, 4th ed. Vol. viii. p. 239, “Delphi.”)

Footnote 94:

  The root of χρητός (_Chretos_) and χρηστος (_Chrestos_) is one and
  the same; χράω which means “consulting the oracle,” in one sense,
  but in another one “consecrated,” _set apart_, belonging to some
  temple, or oracle, or devoted to oracular services. On the other
  hand, the word χρε (χρεω) means “obligation,” a “bond, duty,” or
  one who is under the obligation of pledges, or vows taken.

Footnote 95:

  The adjective χρηστὸς was also used as an adjective before proper
  names as a compliment, as in Plat. Theact. p. 166A, “Ὁυτος ὁ
  Σωκράτης ὁ χρηστός;” (here Socrates is the _Chréstos_), and also
  as a surname, as shown by Plutarch (V. Phocion), who wonders how
  such a rough and dull fellow as Phocion could be surnamed
  _Chréstos_.

Footnote 96:

  There are strange features, quite suggestive, for an Occultist, in
  the myth (if one) of Janus. Some make of him the personification
  of _Kosmos_, others, of _Cælus_ (heaven), hence he is “two-faced”
  because of his two characters of spirit and matter; and he is not
  only “Janus _Bifrons_” (two-faced), but also _Quadrifrons_—the
  perfect square, the emblem of the Kabbalistic Deity. His temples
  were built with _four_ equal sides, with a door and _three_
  windows on each side. Mythologists explain it as an emblem of the
  _four_ seasons of the year, and _three_ months in each season, and
  in all of the twelve months of the year. During the mysteries of
  Initiation, however, he became the Day-Sun and the Night-Sun.
  Hence he is often represented with the number 300 in one hand, and
  in the other 65, or the number of days of the Solar year. Now
  _Chanoch_ (Kanoch and _Enosh_ in the Bible) is, as may be shown on
  Kabalistic authority, whether son of Cain, son of Seth, or the son
  of Methuselah, one and the same personage. As _Chanoch_ (according
  to Fuerst), he is the _Initiator_, _Instructor_—of the
  astronomical circle and solar year,” as son of Methuselah, who is
  said to have lived 365 years and been taken to heaven alive, as
  the representative of the Sun (or god). (See Book of Enoch.) This
  patriarch has many features in common with Janus, who,
  exoterically, is Ion but IAO cabalistically, or Jehovah, the “Lord
  God of Generations,” the mysterious Yodh, or ONE (a phallic
  number). For Janus or Ion is also _Consivius, a conserendo_,
  because he presided over generations. He is shown giving
  hospitality to Saturn (_Chronos_ “time”), and is the _Initiator_
  of the year, or time divided into 365.

-----

Finding then that Janus, the solar God, and son of Apollo, the Sun,
means the “Initiator” and the “Opener of the Gate of Light,” or
secret wisdom of the mysteries; that he is born from Krisa
(esoterically _Chris_), and that he was a _Chrestos_ through whom
spoke the God; that he was finally Ion, the father of the Ionians,
and, some say, an _aspect_ of Asclepios, another son of Apollo, it
is easy to get hold of the thread of Ariadne in this labyrinth of
allegories. It is not the place here to prove side issues in
mythology, however. It suffices to show the connection between the
mythical characters of hoary antiquity and the later fables that
marked the beginning of our era of civilization. Asclepios
(Esculapius) was the divine physician, the “Healer,” the “Saviour,”
Σωτηρ as he was called, a title also given to Janus of Delphi; and
IASO, the daughter of Asclepios was the goddess of healing, under
whose patronage were all the candidates for initiation in her
father’s temple, the novices or _chrestoi_, called “the sons of
Iaso.” (_Vide_ for name, “Plutus,” by Aristoph. 701).

Now, if we remember, firstly, that the names of IESUS in their
different forms, such as Iasius, Iasion, Jason and Iasus, were very
common in ancient Greece, especially among the descendants of Jasius
(the Jasides), as also the number of the “sons of Iaso,” the
_Mystoï_ and future Epoptai (Initiates), why should not the
enigmatical words in the Sibylline Book be read in their legitimate
light, one that had nought to do with a Christian prophecy? The
secret doctrine teaches that the first two words ΙΗΣΟΥΣ ΧΡΕΙΣΤΟΣ
mean simply “son of Iaso, a Chrestos,” or servant of the oracular
God. Indeed IASO (Ιασω) _is in the Ionic dialect IESO_ (Ἱησὼ), and
the expression Ιησους (_Iesous_)—in its archaic form, ΙΗΣΟΥΣ—simply
means “the son of Iaso or _Ieso_, the healer,” _i.e._ ο Ιησοῦς
(υῖος). No objection, assuredly, can be taken to such rendering, or
to the name being written _Ieso_ instead of _Iaso_, since the first
form is _attic_, therefore incorrect, for the name is _Ionic_.
“Ieso” from which “O’ Iesous” (son of Ieso)—_i.e._ a genitive, not a
nominative—_is Ionic and cannot_ be anything else, if the age of the
Sibylline book is taken into consideration. Nor could the Sibyl of
Erythrea have spelt it originally otherwise, as Erythrea, her very
residence, was a town in Ionia (from Ion or Janus) opposite Chios;
and that the _Ionic_ preceded the _attic_ form.

Leaving aside in this case the mystical signification of the now
famous Sibylline sentence, and giving its literal interpretation
only, on the authority of all that has been said, the hitherto
mysterious words would stand; “Son of IASO, CHRESTOS (the priest or
servant) (of the) SON of (the) GOD (Apollo) the SAVIOUR from the
CROSS”—(of flesh or matter).[97] Truly, Christianity can never hope
to be understood until every trace of dogmatism is swept away from
it, and the dead letter sacrificed to the eternal Spirit of Truth,
which is Horus, which is Crishna, which is Buddha, as much as it is
the Gnostic Christos and the true Christ of Paul.

In the _Travels_ of Dr. Clarke, the author describes a heathen
monument found by him.

-----

Footnote 97:

  _Stauros_ became the cross, the instrument of crucifixion, far
  later, when it began to be represented as a Christian symbol and
  with the Greek letter T, the Tau. (Luc. Jud. Voc.) Its primitive
  meaning was phallic, a symbol for the male and female elements;
  the great serpent of temptation, the body which had to be killed
  or subdued by the dragon of wisdom, the seven-vowelled solar
  chnouphis or Spirit of Christos of the Gnostics, or, again, Apollo
  killing Python.

-----

  “Within the sanctuary, behind the altar, we saw the fragments of a
  _marble cathedra_, upon the back of which we found the following
  inscription, exactly as it is here written, no part of it having
  been injured or obliterated, affording perhaps the only instance
  known of a sepulchral inscription upon a monument of this
  remarkable form.”

The inscription ran thus: ΧΡΗΣΤΟΣ ΠΡΩΤΟΥ ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΣ ΛΑΡΙΣΣΑΙΟΣ
ΠΕΛΑΣΓΙΟΤΗΣ ΕΤΩΝ ΙΗ or, “Chrestos, the first, a Thessalonian from
Larissa, Pelasgiot 18 years old Hero,” Chrestos the _first_
(_protoo_), why? Read literally the inscription has little sense;
interpreted esoterically, it is pregnant with meaning. As Dr. Clarke
shows, the word Chrestos is found on the epitaphs of almost all the
ancient Larissians; but it is preceded always by a proper name. Had
the adjective Chrestos stood after a name, it would only mean “a
good man,” a posthumous compliment paid to the defunct, the same
being often found on our own modern tumular epitaphs. But the word
Chrestos, standing alone and the other word, “protoo,” following it,
gives it quite another meaning, especially when the deceased is
specified as a “hero.” To the mind of an Occultist, the defunct was
a neophyte, who had died in his 18th year _of neophytism_,[98] and
stood in the first or highest class of discipleship, having passed
his preliminary trials as a “hero;” but had died before the last
mystery, which would have made of him a “Christos,” an _anointed_,
one with the spirit of Christos or Truth in him. He had not reached
the end of the “Way,” though he had heroically conquered the horrors
of the preliminary theurgic trials.

-----

Footnote 98:

  Even to this day in India, the candidate loses his name and, as
  also in Masonry, his age (monks and nuns also changing their
  Christian names at their taking the order or veil), and begins
  counting his years from the day he is accepted a chela and enters
  upon the cycle of initiations. Thus Saul was “a child of one
  year,” when he began to reign, though a grown-up adult. See 1
  Samuel ch. xiii. 1, and Hebrew scrolls, about his initiation by
  Samuel.

-----

We are quite warranted in reading it in this manner, after learning
the place where Dr. Clarke discovered the tablet, which was, as
Godfrey Higgins remarks, there, where “I should expect to find it,
at Delphi, in the temple of the God IE.,” who, with the Christians
became Jah, or Jehovah, one with Christ Jesus. It was at the foot of
Parnassus, in a gymnasium, “adjoining the Castalian fountain, which
flowed by the ruins of Crisa, probably the town called Crestona,”
etc. And again. “In the first part of its course from the
(Castalian) fountain, it (the river) separates the remains of the
gymnasium ... from the valley of Castro,” as it probably did from
the old city of Delphi—the seat of the great oracle of Apollo, of
the town of Krisa (or Kreusa) the great centre of initiations and of
the _Chrestoi_ of the decrees of the oracles, where the candidates
for the last _labour_ were anointed with sacred oils[99] before
being plunged into their last trance of forty-nine hours’ duration
(as to this day, in the East), from which they arose as glorified
adepts or _Christoi_.”

  “In the Clementine Recognitions it is announced that the father
  anointed his son with ‘oil that was taken from the wood of the
  Tree of Life, and from this anointing he is called the Christ:’
  whence the Christian name. This again is Egyptian. Horus was the
  anointed son of the father. The mode of anointing him from the
  Tree of Life, portrayed on the monuments, is very primitive
  indeed; and the Horus of Egypt was continued in the Gnostic
  Christ, who is reproduced upon the Gnostic stones as the
  intermediate link betwixt the _Karest_ and the Christ, also as
  the Horus of both sexes.” (“_The name and nature of the
  Christ._”—GERALD MASSEY.)

-----

Footnote 99:

  Demosthenes, “De Corona,” 313, declares that the candidates for
  initiation into the Greek mysteries were anointed with oil. So
  they are now in India, even in the initiation into the _Yogi_
  mysteries—various ointments or unguents being used.

-----

Mr. G. Massey connects the Greek Christos or Christ with the
Egyptian _Karest_, the “mummy type of immortality,” and proves it
very thoroughly. He begins by saying that in Egyptian the “Word of
Truth” is _Ma-Kheru_, and that it is the title of Horus. Thus, as he
shows, Horus preceded Christ as the Messenger of the Word of Truth,
the Logos or the manifestor of the divine nature in humanity. In the
same paper he writes as follows:

  The Gnosis had three phases—astronomical, spiritual, and
  doctrinal, and all three can be identified with the Christ of
  Egypt. In the astronomical phase the constellation Orion is called
  the _Sahu_ or _mummy_. The soul of Horus was represented as rising
  from the dead and ascending to heaven in the stars of Orion. The
  mummy-image was the preserved one, the saved, therefore a portrait
  of the Saviour, as a type of immortality. This was the figure of a
  dead man, which, as Plutarch and Herodotus tell us, was carried
  round at an Egyptian banquet, when the guests were invited to look
  on it and eat and drink and be happy, because, when they died,
  they would become what the image symbolised—that is, they also
  would be immortal! This type of immortality was called the
  _Karest_, or _Karust_, and it _was_ the Egyptian Christ. To
  _Kares_ means to embalm, anoint, to make the Mummy as a type of
  the eternal; and, when made, it was called the _Karest_; so that
  this is not merely a matter of name for name, the _Karest_ for the
  _Christ_.

  This image of the _Karest_ was bound up in a woof without a seam,
  the proper vesture of the Christ! No matter what the length of the
  bandage might be, and some of the mummy-swathes have been unwound
  that were 1,000 yards in length, the woof was from beginning to
  end without a seam.... Now, this seamless robe of the Egyptian
  _Karest_ is a very tell-tale type of the mystical Christ, who
  becomes historic in the Gospels as the wearer of a coat or chiton,
  made without a seam, which neither the Greek nor the Hebrew fully
  explains, but which is explained by the Egyptian _Ketu_ for the
  woof, and by the seamless robe or swathing without seam that was
  made for eternal wear, and worn by the Mummy-Christ, the image of
  immortality in the tombs of Egypt.

  Further, Jesus is put to death in accordance with the instructions
  given for making the _Karest_. Not a bone must be broken. The true
  _Karest_ must be perfect in every member. “This is he who comes
  out sound; whom men know not is his name.”

  In the Gospels Jesus rises again with every member sound, like the
  perfectly-preserved _Karest_, to demonstrate the physical
  resurrection of the mummy. But, in the Egyptian original, the
  mummy transforms. The deceased says: “I am spiritualised. I am
  become a soul. I rise as a God.” This transformation into the
  spiritual image, the _Ka_, has been omitted in the Gospel.

  This spelling of the name as Chrest or Chrést in Latin is
  supremely important, because it enables me to prove the identity
  with the Egyptian _Karest_ or _Karust_, the name of the Christ as
  the embalmed mummy, which was the image of the resurrection in
  Egyptian tombs, the type of immortality, the likeness of the
  Horus, who rose again and made the pathway out of the sepulchre
  for those who were his disciples or followers. _Moreover, this
  type of the Karest or Mummy-Christ is reproduced in the Catacombs
  of Rome._ No representation of the supposed historic resurrection
  of Jesus has been found on any of the early Christian monuments.
  But, instead of the missing fact, we find the scene of Lazarus
  being raised from the dead. This is depicted over and over again
  as the typical resurrection where there is no real one! The scene
  is not exactly in accordance with the rising from the grave in the
  Gospel. It is purely Egyptian, and Lazarus is an Egyptian mummy!
  Thus Lazarus, in each representation, _is_ the mummy-type of the
  resurrection; Lazarus _is_ the Karest, who was the Egyptian
  Christ, and who is reproduced by Gnostic art in the Catacombs of
  Rome as a form of the Gnostic Christ, who _was not and could not
  become an historical character_.

  Further, as the thing is Egyptian, it is probable that the name is
  derived from Egyptian. If so, Laz (equal to Ras) means to be
  raised up, while _aru is_ the mummy by name. With the Greek
  terminal _s_ this becomes Lazarus. In the course of humanising the
  mythos the typical representation of the resurrection found in the
  tombs of Rome and Egypt would become the story of Lazarus being
  raised from the dead. This Karast type of the Christ in the
  Catacombs is not limited to Lazarus.

  By means of the _Karest_ type the Christ and the Christians can
  both be traced in the ancient tombs of Egypt. The mummy was made
  in this likeness of the Christ. It was the Christ by name,
  identical with the _Chrestoi_ of the Greek Inscriptions. Thus the
  honoured dead, who rose again as the followers of Horus-Makheru,
  the Word of Truth, are found to be the Christians οι χρηστοι, on
  the Egyptian monuments. _Ma-Kheru_ is the term that is always
  applied to the faithful ones who win the crown of life and wear it
  at the festival which is designated ‘Come thou to me’—an
  invitation by Horus the Justifier to those who are the ‘Blessed
  ones of his father, Osiris’—they who, having made the Word of
  Truth the law of their lives, were the Justified—οι χρηστοι, the
  Christians, on earth.

  In a fifth century representation of the Madonna and child from
  the cemetery of St. Valentinus, the new-born babe lying in a box
  or crib _is_ also the _Karest_, or mummy-type, further identified
  as the divine babe of the solar mythos by the disk of the sun and
  the cross of the equinox at the back of the infant’s head. Thus
  the child-Christ of the historic faith is born, and visibly begins
  in the _Karest_ image of the dead Christ, which was the mummy-type
  of the resurrection in Egypt for thousands of years before the
  Christian era. This doubles the proof that the Christ of the
  Christian Catacombs was a survival of the _Karest_ of Egypt.

  Moreover, as Didron shows, there was a portrait of the Christ who
  had his body _painted red_![100] It was a popular tradition that
  the Christ _was_ of a red complexion. This, too, may be explained
  as a survival of the Mummy-Christ. It was an aboriginal mode of
  rendering things _tapu_ by colouring them red. The dead corpse was
  coated with red ochre—a very primitive mode of making the mummy,
  or the anointed one. Thus the God Ptah tells Rameses II. that he
  has “_re-fashioned his flesh in vermilion_.” This anointing with
  red ochre is called _Kura_ by the Maori, who likewise made the
  Karest or Christ.

  We see the mummy-image continued on another line of descent when
  we learn that among other pernicious heresies and deadly sins with
  which the Knights Templars were charged, was the impious custom of
  adoring a Mummy that had red eyes. Their Idol, called Baphomet, is
  also thought to have been a mummy.... The Mummy was the earliest
  human image of the Christ.

  I do not doubt that the ancient Roman festivals called the
  _Charistia_ were connected in their origin with the _Karest_ and
  the _Eucharist_ as a celebration in honour of the manes of their
  departed kith and kin, for whose sakes they became reconciled at
  the friendly gathering once a year.... It is here, then, we have
  to seek the essential connection between the Egyptian Christ, the
  Christians, and the Roman Catacombs. These Christian Mysteries,
  ignorantly explained to be inexplicable, can be explained by
  Gnosticism and Mythology, but in no other way. It is not that they
  are insoluble by human reason, as their incompetent, howsoever
  highly paid, expounders now-a-days pretend. That is but the
  puerile apology of the unqualified for their own helpless
  ignorance—they who have never been in possession of the gnosis or
  science of the Mysteries by which alone these things can be
  explained in accordance with their natural genesis. In Egypt only
  can we read the matter to the root, or identify the origin of the
  Christ by nature and by name, to find at last that the Christ was
  the Mummy-type, and that our Christology is mummified
  mythology.—(_Agnostic Annual._)

-----

Footnote 100:

  _Because he is cabalistically the new Adam, the “celestial man,”
  and Adam was made of red earth._

-----

The above is an explanation on purely scientific evidence, but,
perhaps, a little too _materialistic_, just because of that
science, notwithstanding that the author is a well-known
Spiritualist. Occultism pure and simple finds the same mystic
elements in the Christian as in other faiths, though it rejects as
emphatically its dogmatic and _historic_ character. It is a fact
that in the terms Ιησοῦς ὁ χριστος (See _Acts_ v. 42, ix. 14; 1
Corinth. iii. 17, etc.), the article ὁ designating “Christos,”
proves it simply a surname, like that of Phocion, who is referred
to as Φωκίων ὁ χρηστός (Plut. v.). Still, the personage (Jesus) so
addressed—whenever he lived—was a great Initiate and a “Son of
God.”

For, we say it again, the surname Christos is based on, and the
story of the Crucifixion derived from, events that preceded it.
Everywhere, in India as in Egypt, in Chaldea as in Greece, all these
legends were built upon one and the same primitive type; the
voluntary sacrifice of the _logoï_—the _rays_ of the one LOGOS, the
direct manifested emanation from the One ever-concealed Infinite and
Unknown—whose _rays_ incarnated in mankind. They consented to _fall
into matter_, and are, therefore, called the “Fallen Ones.” This is
one of those great mysteries which can hardly be touched upon in a
magazine article, but shall be noticed in a separate work of mine,
_The Secret Doctrine_, very fully.

Having said so much, a few more facts may be added to the etymology
of the two terms. Χριστος being the verbal adjective in Greek of
χρίω “to be rubbed on,” _as ointment_ or salve, and the word being
finally brought to mean “the Anointed One,” in Christian theology;
and _Kri_, in Sanskrit, the first syllable in the name of Krishna,
meaning “to pour out, or rub over, to cover with,”[101] among many
other things, this may lead one as easily to make of Krishna, “the
anointed one.” Christian philologists try to limit the meaning of
Krishna’s name to its derivation from _Krish_, “black”; but if the
analogy and comparison of the Sanskrit with the Greek roots
contained in the names of Chrestos, Christos, and _Ch_rishna, are
analyzed more carefully, it will be found that they are all of the
same origin.[102]

-----

Footnote 101:

  Hence the memorialising of the doctrine during the MYSTERIES. The
  pure monad, the “god” incarnating and becoming _Chrestos_, or man,
  on his trial of life, a series of those trials led him to the
  _crucifixion of flesh_, and finally into the Christos condition.

Footnote 102:

  On the best authority the derivation of the Greek _Christos_
  is shown from the Sanskrit root _ghársh_ = “rub”; thus:
  _ghársh-ā-mi-to_, “to rub,” and ghársh-tá-s “flayed, sore.”
  Moreover, Krish, which means in one sense to plough and make
  furrows, means also to cause pain, “to torture to torment,”
  and ghrsh-tā-s “rubbing”—all these terms relating to Chrestos
  and Christos conditions. One has _to die in Chrestos_, _i.e._,
  kill one’s personality and its passions, to blot out every
  idea of separateness from one’s “Father,” the Divine Spirit in
  man; to become one with the eternal and absolute _Life_ and
  _Light_ (SAT) before one can reach the glorious state of
  _Christos_, the regenerated man, the man in spiritual freedom.

-----

“In Bockh’s ‘Christian Inscriptions,’ numbering 1,287, there is no
single instance of an earlier date than the third century, wherein
the name is not written _Chrest_ or _Chreist_.” (_The Name and
Nature of the Christ_, by G. Massey, “The Agnostic Annual.”)

Yet none of these names can be unriddled, as some Orientalists
imagine, merely with the help of astronomy and the knowledge of
zodiacal signs in conjunction with phallic symbols. Because, while
the sidereal symbols of the mystic characters or personifications in
Puranâs or Bible, fulfil astronomical functions, their spiritual
anti-types rule invisibly, but very effectively, the world. They
exist as abstractions on the higher plane, as manifested ideas on
the astral, and become males, females and androgyne powers on this
lower plane of ours. _Scorpio_, as _Chrestos-Meshiac_, and Leo, as
_Christos-Messiah_ antedated by far the Christian era in the trials
and triumphs of Initiation during the Mysteries, Scorpio standing as
symbol for the latter, Leo for the glorified triumph of the “sun” of
truth. The mystic philosophy of the allegory is well understood by
the author of the “Source of Measures”; who writes: “One (Chrestos)
causing himself to go down into the pit (of Scorpio, or incarnation
in the womb) for the salvation of the world; this was the Sun, shorn
of his _golden rays_, and _crowned with blackened_[103] _ones_
(symbolizing this loss) as the thorns; _the other_ was the
triumphant _Messiah_, mounted up to the _summit of the arch of
heaven_, personated as the _Lion of the tribe of Judah_. In both
instances he had the Cross; once in humiliation (as the son of
copulation), and once holding it in his control, as the law of
creation, he being Jehovah”—in the scheme of the authors of dogmatic
Christianity. For, as the same author shows further, John, Jesus and
even Apollonius of Tyana were but epitomizers of the history of the
Sun “under differences of aspect or condition.”[104] The
explanation, he says, “is simple enough, when it is considered that
the names _Jesus_, Hebrew יש and Apollonius, or Apollo, are alike
names of the _Sun in the heavens_, and, necessarily, the history of
the one, as to his travels through _the signs_, with the
personifications of his sufferings, triumphs and miracles, could be
but the _history of the other_, where there was a wide-spread,
common method of describing those travels by personification.” The
fact that the Secular Church was founded by Constantine, and that it
was a part of his decree “that the venerable day of the _Sun_ should
be the day set apart for the worship of Jesus Christ as _Sun_-day,”
shows that they knew well in that “Secular Church” “that the
allegory rested upon an astronomical basis,” as the author affirms.
Yet, again, the circumstance that both Purânas and Bible are full of
solar and astronomical allegories, does not militate against that
other fact that all such scriptures in addition to these two are
_closed_ books to the scholars “having authority.”(!) Nor does it
affect that other truth, that all those systems are _not the work of
mortal man_, nor are they his invention in their origin and basis.

-----

Footnote 103:

  The Orientalists and Theologians are invited to read over and
  study the allegory of Viswakarman, the “Omnificent,” the Vedic
  God, the architect of the world, who sacrificed himself _to
  himself_ or the world, after having offered up all worlds, _which
  are himself_, in a “Sarva Madha” (general sacrifice)—and ponder
  over it. In the Purânic allegory, his daughter _Yoga-siddha_
  “Spiritual consciousness,” the wife of _Surya_, the Sun, complains
  to him of the too great effulgence of her husband; and Viswakarmâ,
  in his character of _Takshaka_, “wood cutter and carpenter,”
  placing the Sun upon his lathe cuts away a part of his brightness.
  Surya looks, after this, crowned with dark thorns instead of rays,
  and becomes Vikarttana (“shorn of his rays”). All these names are
  terms which were used by the candidates when going through the
  trials of Initiation. The Hierophant-Initiator personated
  Viswakarman; the father, and the general _artificer_ of the gods
  (the adepts on earth), and the candidate-Surya, the Sun, who had
  to kill all his fiery passions and wear the crown of thorns _while
  crucifying his body_ before he could rise and be re-born into a
  new life as the glorified “Light of the World”—Christos. No
  Orientalist seems to have ever perceived the suggestive analogy,
  let alone to apply it!

Footnote 104:

  The author of the “Source of Measures” thinks that this “serves to
  explain why it has been that the _Life of Apollonius of Tyana, by
  Philostratus_ has been so carefully kept back from translation and
  popular reading.” Those who have studied it in the original have
  been forced to the comment that either the “_Life of Apollonius_
  has been taken from the New Testament, or that New Testament
  narratives have been taken from the _Life of Apollonius_, because
  of the manifest sameness of the _means of construction_ of the
  narrative.” (p. 260).

-----

Thus “Christos,” under whatever name, means more than _Karest_, a
mummy, or even the “anointed” and the _elect_ of theology. Both of
the latter apply to _Chréstos_, the man of sorrow and tribulation,
in his physical, mental, and psychic conditions, and both relate to
the Hebrew _Mashiac_ (from whence Messiah) condition, as the word is
etymologised[105] by Fuerst, and the author of “The Source of
Measures,” p. 255. Christos is the crown of glory of the suffering
Chréstos of the mysteries, as of the candidate to the final UNION,
of whatever race and creed. To the true follower of the SPIRIT OF
TRUTH, it matters little, therefore, whether Jesus, as man and
Chrestos, lived during the era called Christian, or before, or never
lived at all. The Adepts, who lived and died for humanity, have
existed in many and all the ages, and many were the good and holy
men in antiquity who bore the surname or title of Chrestos before
Jesus of Nazareth, otherwise Jesus (or Jehoshua) Ben Pandira was
born.[106] Therefore, one may be permitted to conclude, with good
reason, that Jesus, or Jehoshua, was like Socrates, like Phocian,
like Theodorus, and so many others surnamed _Chréstos_, _i.e._, the
“good, the excellent,” the gentle, and the holy Initiate, who showed
the “way” to the Christos condition, and thus became himself “the
Way” in the hearts of his enthusiastic admirers. The Christians, as
all the “Hero-worshippers” have tried to throw into the background
all the other Chréstoï, who have appeared to them as rivals of
_their_ Man-God. But if the voice of the MYSTERIES has become silent
for many ages in the West, if Eleusis, Memphis, Antium, Delphi, and
Crèsa have long ago been made the tombs of a Science once as
colossal in the West as it is yet in the East, there are successors
now being prepared for them. We are in 1887 and the nineteenth
century is close to its death. The twentieth century has strange
developments in store for humanity, and may even be the last of its
name.

                                                            H. P. B.

-----

Footnote 105:

  The word שיה _shiac_, is in Hebrew the same word as a verbal,
  signifying _to go down into the pit_. As a noun, _place of thorns,
  pit_. The _hifil_ participle of this word is [Hebrew] or Messiach,
  or the Greek _Messias_, _Christ_, and means “he who causes to go
  down into the pit” (or hell, in dogmatism). In esoteric
  philosophy, this going down _into the pit_ has the most mysterious
  significance. The Spirit “Christos” or rather the “Logos” (_read_
  Logoï), is said to “go down into the pit,” when it incarnates in
  flesh, _is born as a man_. After having robbed the _Elohim_ (or
  gods) of their secret, the _pro-creating_ “fire of life,” the
  Angels of Light are shown cast down into the pit or abyss of
  matter, called _Hell_, or the bottomless pit, by the kind
  theologians. This, in Cosmogony and Anthropology. During the
  Mysteries, however, it is the _Chréstos_, _neophyte_, (as man),
  etc., who had to descend into the crypts of Initiation and trials;
  and finally, during the “Sleep of Siloam” or the final _trance_
  condition, during the hours of which the new Initiate has the last
  and final mysteries of being divulged to him. Hades, Schéol, or
  Patala, are all one. The same takes place in the East now, as took
  place 2,000 years ago in the West, during the MYSTERIES.

Footnote 106:

  Several classics bear testimony to this fact. Lucian, c. 16, says
  Φωκίων ὁ χρηστὸς, and Φωκίων ὁ ἐπὶκλην (“λεγόμενος,” surnamed
  “χρηστος.”) In Phædr. p. 226 E, it is written, “you mean Theodorus
  the Chrestos.” “Τὸν χρηστὸν λεγεις Θεὸδωρον”. Plutarch shows the
  same; and Χρηστος—Chrestus, is the proper name (see the word in
  _Thesaur._ Steph.) of an orator and disciple of Herodes Atticus.

-----

                        (_To be continued._)

[Illustration: decorative separator]




                       SIMILITUDES OF DEMOPHILUS.

It is the business of a musician to harmonize every instrument, but
of a well educated man to adapt himself harmoniously to every
fortune.

It is necessary that a well educated man should depart from life
elegantly, as from a banquet.

                  ------------------------------------

                    GOLDEN SENTENCES OF DEMOCRITUS.

It is beautiful to impede an unjust man; but if this be not
possible, it is beautiful not to act in conjunction with him.

Sin should be abstained from, not through fear, but, for the sake of
the becoming.

Many who have not learnt to argue rationally, still live according
to reason.

Vehement desires about any one thing render the soul blind with
respect to other things.

The equal is beautiful in everything, but excess and defect to me do
not appear to be so.

It is the property of a divine intellect to be always intently
thinking about the beautiful.


                        =Correspondence.=

                         A LAW OF LIFE: KARMA.

[The following letter has been received by the editors, in criticism
on Mr. Keightley’s article on “Karma”; and as it raises many rather
important points, an attempt has been made to answer them. Mr.
Beatty’s letter is somewhat difficult to deal with, for though it
asks many questions, they are so inextricably mingled with its
author’s thoughts that it would be unfair to disentangle them from
the context. It is a pity that Mr. Beatty, in his haste to
criticize, did not wait for the conclusion of the article, as he
might have saved himself some trouble. If his real desire is to
learn, it would be well that he should approach the endeavour in a
less flippant spirit and evolve the critic out of the criticaster.
In many of his arguments he has, so to say, “given himself away,”
but, in the interests of space and of the readers of LUCIFER, only
those questions and arguments which bear directly on the points at
issue have been selected for answer. The point which Mr. Beatty does
“not care to discuss,” and which refers to the mystery of Godliness,
has been omitted. Perhaps, if Mr. Beatty continues to read, mark,
learn, _and inwardly digest_, he may in some _future incarnation_
solve the mystery.]

In an article in LUCIFER, under the above heading, Mr. Keightley
declares it to be “very difficult, if not well-nigh impossible,” to
understand Karma, and I grant him that his essay is a practical
demonstration of his allegation. The difficulty (1.) does not,
however, hinder him from attempting to define the refractory term.
“Karma,” he says, “is the working of the great law which governs
reincarnation,” or “a manifestation of the One, Universal, Divine
Principle in the phenomenal world,” or again, “the great law of
harmony which governs the universe.” Now, waiving altogether the
question of reincarnations, I shall proceed to examine whether Mr.
Keightley makes good his contention that “harmony,” in his sense of
the word, “governs the Universe.” He says, “the man who denies the
existence of harmony in the universe has transgressed the law and is
experiencing punishment. He does this unconsciously to himself,
because the law of harmony forms an unconscious impulse to its
readjustment when it has been broken.” Here there are several things
to be considered. In the first place, it may be asked: (2.) Does a
man, by merely denying the existence of a law of Nature or the
universe, transgress that law? I think not.[107] Secondly. Can a law
of the universe be “broken”? Here again I must reply in the
negative; for who is going to contend that the law of gravitation
has ever been “broken,”[108] has ever ceased to act, has ever
required “re-adjustment”? A man can break no law of Nature in the
sense of bringing that law into abeyance. If then, a law of harmony
governs the universe there can be no such thing as discord. (3.) Yet
Mr. Keightley admits that there _is_ discord, that the law of
harmony has been “broken” and needs “readjustment” This is a
surrendering of his position and a patent admission that harmony is
not constant or universal. He then proceeds to draw an illustration
from music. “In musical chords, the composing notes, if taken by
twos and threes, will be found in discord, but, when taken together,
produce a harmony.” This is a particularly unfortunate subject of
illustration. For does it not show that discord is an element in the
universe as well as harmony? Why are discords introduced into music?
Simply to make the harmony more effective. The reason for this,
however, does not lie in any so-called universal law of harmony, but
rather in the constitution of animate existences. Fundamentally,
sensation is the consciousness of difference. Where the difference
is great the feeling is great. If we wish to have the keenest
sensation of sweetness we must first taste something bitter. Thus it
is that occasional discords heighten harmony. But are the discords
any less real on that account? Certainly not; for there can no more
be harmony without discord, than there can be an up without a down.
This, moreover, is only another illustration of the fact that human
knowledge is merely relative. Must we, however, admit that the
universal law may be harmony while our experience tells us that
there are discords without number? Unless ignorance be considered as
superior to positive knowledge, I see no room for the admission. If
a man’s house tumbles about his ears, does it become any less a fact
by trying to persuade himself and his neighbours that it is still
standing? This seems to be the method of Mr. Keightley. He has,
however, yet another argument “The universe ... is essentially an
evidence of harmony; otherwise it could not exist, for it would fall
to pieces.” This is a palpable begging of the question, and,
besides, very absurd. The universe is a harmony, because a universe
must be a harmony! “Otherwise it could not exist.” Now how does our
harmonist know whether it could exist or not? Of what other universe
has he experience or knowledge? “It would fall to pieces.” Where, I
wonder, would it fall to? Perhaps it is even now fast falling to
pieces, and who can tell us differently? As far as ordinary people
can judge, it seems, as regards the parts we are acquainted with, to
be falling into more or less concrete masses, but not many sane
people believe it can fall into nothingness. After all this vain
contention for universal harmony we find Mr. Keightley settling down
like ordinary mortals to the conviction that the world is far from
harmonious or perfect. One unfortunate individual who cannot be
persuaded that all is harmony, is told that “he is incapable of
understanding it because his attention is solely devoted to that
which produces discord.” How comes it that the universe does not
fall to pieces as a result of this discord? Surely we are in a
precarious condition, if every obstinate fool who persists in crying
out when he has been hurt, endangers the stability of the universe.
Did ever anyone meet with a universe where there is less evidence of
harmony? One brute force ever in conflict with another. Infernal
forces piling up mountain on the top of mountain; supernal forces
blasting, rending, excoriating and tumbling these mountains down
again into the valleys; the oak struggling against the inwarping
ivy, the fawn attempting vainly to escape from the claws of the
tiger, the child agonising while parasites eat slowly and
mercilessly into its lungs, liver, or brain; the strong everywhere
victorious over the weak; each sect and each party exerting itself
ferociously to scoop out the viscera of its rival. Such is the
world, such all records declare it to have been, and such it gives
ample promise of continuing. But if the world is not really so, and
on the contrary is one immensity of joyous harmony, who can tell us
why the evidence is so deceptive? Here again, Mr. Keightley
introduces to us a most remarkable statement. “The one Divine
principle is divided by man’s actions into two opposing forces of
good and evil, and man’s progress depends on the exertion of his
will to preserve harmony and prevent deviation to one side or the
other.” Give us by all means in preference to this for common sense,
for rationality and for every other quality that makes it
digestible, the childish story of Eve, the apple and the fall.

-----

Footnote 107:

  Mr. Keightley’s meaning (and it is difficult for the words to bear
  any other interpretation) was that the denial of harmony is
  evidence that, at some previous time, the man who denies has set
  himself in opposition to the law, in virtue of those very desires
  and instincts of his animal personality to which Mr. Beatty
  alludes later on. In this sense, Mr. Beatty is right in saying
  that a law of the universe cannot be broken; but its limits may be
  transgressed, and consequently an attempt made by man to make
  himself into a small, but rival universe. It is the old story of
  the china pot and the iron kettle, and the fact that china gets
  the worst of it is conclusive that the china is struggling
  _against_ Nature.

Footnote 108:

  Will Mr. Beatty explain the phenomenon of a comet flirting its
  tail round the sun in defiance of the “_law_ of gravitation”?

-----

Beyond doubt, Mr. Keightley has a profound faith in man as a power
in the universe and an instrument for evil. By a most singular
process of metaphysical alchemy man decomposes the “Divine
principle” into “two opposing forces of good and evil.” It seems
from this revised version of an old story that man introduced evil
into the universe. Why is man so important that a universe should be
polluted for his sake? Surely man did not make himself, and whatever
powers were in him for evil or for good must have been potential in
that from which he sprang. Man can create nothing, neither evil nor
good, neither a tendency to do right nor an inclination to do wrong.
“Man’s will” is always a tremendous force for good or evil in the
hands of theologians and metaphysicians. Did man make his own
“will?” If not, how can he be responsible for what he does?
Everybody knows that man can act according to his likes or dislikes.
But does anybody imagine that he can make his own likes or dislikes?
(4.) He can do as he wishes, but he wishes according to his nature,
and this he cannot transcend, consequently he is not responsible to
the Author of his nature for what his nature inclines him to do. But
what are we to understand by the rest of the sentence? Man’s will is
“to preserve harmony and prevent deviation to one side or the
other.” First the will brings about evil in the “Divine principle,”
destroying harmony, then it is to reproduce harmony and at the same
time to maintain a balance between good and evil, and “prevent
deviation to the one side or the other.” This to Mahatmas and
possessors of the “sixth sense” may seem plain logic, but it far
surpasses my comprehension.[109] I am, perhaps, as averse to “the
pernicious doctrine of reward and punishment after death, in heaven
or in hell” as Mr. Keightley can be, but I can by no means deduce
from it the results which to him appear so inevitable. “Nothing,” he
says, “could have been found more calculated to circumscribe the
view of life as a whole, and concentrate man’s attention on
temporary matters.... He either rejected the idea of soul as
altogether worthless, or else he transferred his interest to the
soul’s welfare in heaven—in either case concentrating his attention
on what is inevitably transient.” How the idea of never-ending
existence in heaven or in hell can have the effect of circumscribing
“the view of life as a whole,” and of concentrating “man’s attention
on temporary matters,” is to me an insolvable puzzle. That it should
have quite the opposite effect, does not seem to require proof. Why,
in the name of mystery, should he “reject the idea of soul as
worthless,” and how can transferring “his interest to the soul’s
welfare in heaven” be called a concentrating of “his attention on
what is inevitably transient?” Truly this Karma is a bewildering
subject![110]

-----

Footnote 109:

  Very little doubt that it does. Mankind is only very gradually
  developing its fifth sense on the intellectual plane. Intuition
  might have carried our critic over the difficulty, but in some
  parts of his criticism he seems hardly to have begun to evolute
  the intellectual sense.

Footnote 110:

  “This Karma,” as Mr. Beatty expresses it, would not be quite so
  bewildering a subject if critics would bear in mind the context
  and not fall foul of a detached expression—not even a sentence.
  The “interest of the soul’s welfare in heaven” is concentrated by
  John Smith on John Smith as John Smith in heaven, and in order
  that the said John Smith may go on enjoying the things he loved on
  earth. As his earth life has ended, John Smith has changed and is
  “transient.” If he were not transient a very natural inference
  would follow, that progress, evolution, &c., on whatever plane of
  being does not prevail.

-----

Do plants and animals come under the law of Karma? is the next
question discussed by Mr. Keightley. An extract from the
_Theosophist_ seems to discountenance such a thing. But are its
arguments really conclusive against it? I do not think so. It says,
“A piece of iron is attracted to a magnet without having any desire
in the matter.” Now, in the first place, this is pure assumption,
and has its origin in vainglorious human egotism.[111] It is evident
that from objective data alone we cannot decide what is the
subjective state of the molecules of the attracted iron. In the
second place, we are only acquainted with the iron as a cause
producing changes in us. No matter how we interpret these changes,
they cannot even tell us the real nature of iron, merely considered
objectively. Again the extract proceeds: “An animal usually follows
the instincts of its nature without any merit or demerit for so
doing; a child or an idiot may smilingly kick over a lamp, which may
set a whole city on fire.... A person can only be held responsible
according to his ability to perceive justice, and to distinguish
between good and evil.” According to this doctrine, man is not an
“animal,” and does not follow his instincts. To those who are
acquainted, even slightly, with the method and regularity of Nature,
this contention will appear, on the face of it, untenable. For why
should there be an exception in the case of man?[112] Has man
instincts, desires, and inclinations, or has he not? If he has, why
should he have them if he is not to follow them? And if in any case
he does not follow them, is it not with him as with the “animals”?
Is it not because he is deterred by influences from without, or
hereditary influences from within? And of all these instincts,
desires and influences, how is he to know which to obey, to know
which is of Divine sanction? He has conscience, of course, but
conscience is a very variable quantity, and indeed, it might not be
too much to say that there is hardly a crime in the world that has
not, at one time or another, been commended by conscience.
Conscience is only one phase of the man’s mental activity, and was
no more created by him than was his power of vision. We talk of
“children and idiots,” and their being irresponsible, but are not
untamed savages also irresponsible? And if we admit that there may
be beings as much higher than we, as we are higher than children,
idiots, and savages, will they not, with reason and justice, regard
us as irresponsible? The truth is, there never was a greater chimera
conjured up by unreasoning fancy than that one of man’s
responsibility to a Supreme Power. Man is responsible only to man,
and man’s conduct is without merit except from a human view-point.
We are good or bad by reason of all the forces that act on and
through us.

My object in writing what I have written is to show to Theosophists
the dense darkness in which I wander. Will some God-illumined mind
not take pity upon, and draw me up from the labyrinthian gloom,
where illusions mislead me at every step? My “sixth sense” seems
wholly dormant, and Nirvana, that haven of rest, seems distant, by
many a weary league of rocky path and burning desert. Pity me.

      Adyar, 17th October, 1887.         H. S. OLCOTT, P.T.S.

-----

Footnote 111:

  Mr. Beatty hardly maintains his position of consistent materialism
  here; and it is at least as vainglorious to deny as to assert.

Footnote 112:

  Man has the “animal” in him of course, but he has also the power
  of judgment or discrimination. Mr. Beatty’s wish to be
  critically pessimistic seems here to run away with his power of
  discrimination.

-----

(1.) The difficulty experienced in fathoming the mysteries of Karmic
Law arises from the conditions of our present intellectual
environment and general evolutionary status. It has been, also,
frequently stated that a _complete_ comprehension of its workings is
reserved for the Initiate who has transcended the domain of
terrestrial activity—viz., the necessity for soul-evolution through
successive births. But, passing over this consideration, it is
evident that, in the process of bringing down fragments of the
Divine Truth on to the plane of mere intellectual interpretation, an
inevitable distortion must ensue. The rays of spiritual light will
be split up and refracted as they pass through the prism of the
brain. Mr. Beatty will recognise this fact more clearly owing to his
belief “that _human_ knowledge is _merely relative_.” Surely, when
that most familiar fact of our experience, the “perception of
matter,” is, metaphysically speaking, an illusion, the relativity of
_mental_ conceptions of spiritual truths would appear to be a
necessity. According to Huxley, Spencer, Du Bois Reymond, and all
leading thinkers, we know nothing of things as they are even on this
plane, which to the materialist is “All in all.” The essence of the
thing “perceived” escapes us; all we really grasp is its
presentation in consciousness. It is, therefore, clear that in
interpreting realities on the superphysical plane, we cannot advance
beyond word-symbols and adumbrations. The intuition of the
individual must effect the rest.

Such considerations, however, in no way militate against the
successful defence of Esoteric philosophy on purely intellectual
lines. Translated into terms of human thought, its metaphysics must
be shown to blend intimately with the _facts_ of science and
psychology, and its ability to solve the enigmas of life
demonstrated. “Philosophy is chaos,” remarks the author of “Absolute
Relativism,” referring to modern thought. If we are to avoid the
spectacle of a future “moral chaos,” also, as the fruit of the
materialistic Upas tree, some fresh impulse must be infused into the
dry bones of Western metaphysics—some _raison d’être_ assigned to
life, and an ideal worthy of man’s noblest efforts presented to the
multitude of _laissez-faire_ pessimists. Such is an aspect of the
work now before us.

(2.) A man may certainly injure himself[113] by shutting his eyes to
a spiritual interpretation of the Universe and its workings. The
only acquisition he can carry with him after physical death is the
_aroma_ of the vast aggregate of mental states generated in one
incarnation. The _personality_ or brain-consciousness of the
physical man is, after all, a mere feeler projected into this
objective plane to harvest experience for its individual Self. It
does not at all follow that any experience may be acquired which the
Monad is enabled to assimilate. Abstract thinking, religious
aspirations, scientific lore; poetry, the nobler emotions, and all
such efflorescences of human consciousness, furnish the “material”
which go to build up the _transcendental individuality_ of the Ego
progressing towards the Nirvana. The materialist presents a frequent
instance of soul-death—so far as the fruitage of the personality is
concerned. His knowledge may be enormous, but being unspiritualised,
a mere creature of the physical brain, it cannot blossom into
luxuriance in the Devachanic interim between successive births.
Consequently, as the True Self—the “transcendental subject” of the
neo-Kantian German school—only assimilates experience suitable to
its own exalted nature, it becomes evident that, ideals apart, the
philosophy of a man is of very great importance. At the same time,
it need not be said that sectarian “religion” is almost more
pernicious than materialism, inasmuch as it combines the two factors
of crass ignorance and spiritual torpor.

Footnote 113:

  No law of Nature can be set aside, but a man _transgresses_ a law
  of his [mental] being when he deliberately places himself under
  the sway of certain “evil” forces. The gist of Mr. Beatty’s
  criticism is not quite evident here.

-----

(3.) Harmony _is_ essentially the law of the Universe. The
contrasted aspects of Nature come into being subsequently to the
differentiation of matter from its several _protyles_ in the
commencement of a cycle of becoming, or Manwantara, and can have no
reality except in the experience of conscious Egos.[114] For beneath
the surface of the great ocean of cosmic illusion—beneath the clash
of apparently clashing forces—lies the Eternal Harmony. The
semblance of discord is but a ripple on the stream of Maya, or
illusion. One aspect of esoteric solution of apparent evils is dealt
with in the last issue of LUCIFER (_vide_ art., “Origin of Evil”).
But Mr. Beatty will not find himself in a position to accept its
validity so long as he continues to “waive the question of
reincarnation,” the acceptance of that doctrine lying at the root of
the real explanation.

-----

Footnote 114:

  The _phenomenal_ contrast is not denied, but it is representative
  of no fundamental want of harmony. In the same way the contrast of
  Subject and Object is essential to our present finite
  consciousness, although it has no basis of reality beyond the
  limits of conditional being. Moreover, even in this phenomenal
  Universe, equilibrium (harmony) is most certainly maintained by
  the very conflict of the contrasted forces alluded to.

-----

The Universe must, at bottom, be a Harmony. Why?[115] The
equilibrating action of the forces around us is a sufficient proof
of the fact; the apparent discord existing, as argued by Spinoza,
solely in the sensations of conscious beings. The matter in reality
involves the re-opening of the much debated question as to whether
an optimistic or pessimistic pantheism is the creed of the true
philosopher. Can we with von Hartmann postulate the strange
contradiction of an absolutely wise (though from our standpoint
unconscious) cause behind phenomena confronted with a “worthless
universe?” Obviously not. Moreover, as pantheists necessarily regard
the individual mind as only a rushlight compared with the blazing
sun of the Universal Mind, its source, how is a final conclusion as
to the “unfathomable folly” of manifested being possible? On the
other hand, a non-recognition of the Maya of appearances is a tacit
impeachment of the wisdom of the Absolute. The pantheist—and
pantheism alone accounts for consciousness itself—is, at least,
logically driven into the admission that the “nature of things” is
sound and that, probably, apparent flaws in the mechanicism of the
Universe would, if viewed from a wider standpoint than the human,
altogether vanish.

-----

Footnote 115:

  Mr. Beatty asks how the Universe would come to a stand-still, if
  the law of Harmony was suspended. Now suppose, for instance, the
  law of “gravity” was not _counterbalanced_ by the action of other
  “forces,” what would happen? Science assures us that everything
  would have long before gravitated to a common centre, and a
  universal dead-lock have ensued! _Vice versa_, if “gravity” were
  to lapse. _Verb. Sap._

-----

If, however, the Spinozistic axiom that evil _exists only in us_, is
true—and it is not for a relativist of our critic’s type to deny the
fact—pessimism is rooted in the recognition of the equilibrating
action of the law of Karma. The examples cited by Mr. Beatty of
brute forces “one in conflict with another;” of the sufferings of
animals in the struggle for existence; and more especially of human
suffering in no way controvert the views of the “Harmonists.” The
first group is representative of those forces which balance one
another by oscillating about a common centre of equilibrium,
producing harmony by conflict, just as in the case of the so-called
centripetal and centrifugal forces, which regulate the earth’s
orbital journey. The second group is, undoubtedly, characterised by
the infliction of much incidental pain. But in all instances where
Nature immolates the individual organism on the altar of natural
selection, she does it for the benefit of the species or the
“survival of the fittest”—the individuals borne down by violence in
the struggle, reaping, one and all, the results of a compensatory
Karma. In the domain of _human_ suffering, moral debasement, etc.,
an entirely new factor supervenes—the equilibrating influence of a
_positive_ Karma, which in biblical language demands “an eye for an
eye and a tooth for a tooth.”

(4). “Why,” asks our critic, “is man so important that the Universe
was polluted for his sake?” In the first place, Humanity is, by no
means, unimportant; the panorama of evolution only existing in order
to evolve the Ego from the animal stage up to that of a conscious
God. The designation of nature as divided into “good” and “evil”
principles, has been taken by Mr. Beatty in its absolute, as opposed
to its relative, aspect. Man pollutes only himself and his fellows
by “sin”; nature remaining constant _per se_. “How can he be
responsible for what he does?” he continues. He is only so within
certain wide limits defined by his previous Karma—the tendencies
moral, mental and spiritual, generated in previous lives,
continually driving him on to certain lines of action. The “Free
Will absolute” of the theologians is as unpsychological and
worthless a concept as it is possible to formulate. Not so the
doctrine that the Ego is able to _mould_ its tendencies of thought
and emotion within “constitutional limits.” It was the recognition
of this fact which led John Stuart Mill to take up a midway position
between the equally absurd extremes of Free Will and Necessarianism.
The same conviction led the prophet of Materialism, Dr. Louis
Büchner, to contradict his whole system by admitting human liberty
within a certain area mapped out by “Heredity” and Environment, and
Professor Clifford to invest the “conscious, automaton” Man with the
power to control his own ideas!! Responsibility varies enormously,
and is, perhaps, almost wanting in the savage (who, however, is in
all cases the degraded relic of primæval civilisation). In all
cases, the human Ego must be held to be the evolver of the group of
tendencies which make up the personality of each re-birth. The
sensualist is the victim of a “Frankenstein’s monster,” into which
he has infused strength through many lives. We really cannot follow
Mr. Beatty when he writes: “Has man instincts, desires, and
inclinations, or has he not? If he has, _why should he have them if
he is not to follow them_?” He has them because they are the
heritage handed down to him from past lives, and also because his
Karma as an individual is bound up with that of the race to which he
belongs. It rests with him as to how far he chooses to _modify_ them
“for weal or woe,” for every moment the exhaustion of past Karma
runs parallel with the creation of new. It is certainly a strange
doctrine here enunciated by Mr. Beatty, that the possession of
certain “instincts, etc,” justifies their gratification. Crime,
debauchery and cruelty would be difficult to deal with on this
hypothesis! It is certainly true—to some extent—that “we are good or
bad by reason of all the forces that act on or through us.” These
latter are the stimuli to action (_subject to the control of the
will_), but are in their turn the resultant of previous Karma.
Judging from the general tone of his criticism, it would appear that
his first acquaintance with the esoteric philosophy does not date
back to a very remote antiquity.

                                                               A. K.

                           ------------------

                  “THE LATEST ATTACK ON CHRISTIANITY.”

In the July number of the _Quarterly Review_ there is an article
reviewing the recent book of J. C. Morrison upon “The Service of Man
or the Future Religion.” And although Mr. Morrison, in his book,
writes to urge that the chief and primary principle of religion is
“to promote the spirit of self-sacrifice, and to direct men’s
energies to the service of their fellow creatures,” yet the
_Quarterly Review_ pours every kind of insult and obloquy on Mr.
Morrison.

But herein is the gross contradiction, that the _Quarterly Review_
admits that the primary principle of Christianity has the very same
objects in view, as Mr. Morrison urges the future religion should
have. And yet the _Quarterly Review_ ridicules Mr. Morrison, and
describes his book as an attack upon Christianity.

Then, surely, when two persons thus fall out with one another,
whilst both advocate the same lofty and noble principles, there must
be some gross misunderstanding between them!

The error thus which they both labour under, is one and the same;
for the _Quarterly Review_ errs, in assuming that the teaching or
doctrine of the Church is indisputably, and infallibly, the teaching
or doctrine of Christ. And Mr. Morrison errs in assuming that the
teaching or doctrine of Christ is the same as the doctrine of the
Church.

So that if the teaching of the Church is not the teaching of Christ,
then Mr. Morrison in attacking the supposed Christianity of the
Church is not really attacking Christianity, but only attacking the
spurious doctrine of the Church, which has passed current as
Christianity; _ex gr._, Isaiah, Jeremiah and Elijah, in denouncing
the religion of the priests, did not attack true religion (as the
priests would assert), but only their adulterated and spurious
religion.

And Christ tells us that the Priests and Pharisees made the word of
God of none effect by their traditions. And St Paul tells us that,
with the authority of the Chief Priest, he had, before conversion,
imprisoned and put men to death, and made them blaspheme (Acts
xxvi., 11) against God and the Church.

Therefore, before we accept the Church and Christianity to be
synonymous terms, and not only signifying but being actually the
Church of Christ, and so, verily, Christianity, we must have a clear
and definite understanding as to what we mean, and wish others to
understand what we mean, by “the Church.”

For the world, outside of Christianity, and often inside, is at its
wits’ end to know which of the numerous churches and sects, which
all claim to be the Church of Christ, is really and truly the Church
of Christ; because the World witnesses that they all reject one
another.

Then surely, whilst the world witnesses rival and hostile churches
all claiming to be “the Church” and Christianity, Mr. Morrison is
not at all necessarily attacking the Church of Christ, or true
Christianity, when he attacks the doctrine, or the Christianity of
the churches.

And this proposition of course, opens and raises the question as to
what is Christianity, which the _Quarterly Review_ either avoids or
assumes to be established, as being “_a sound belief in the merits
of the Saviour_,” which of course means belief in the Atonement as
commonly taught. But how can the truth of Christianity be possibly
established, whilst to this day the doctrine of Atonement taught by
the Church as Christianity, cannot be reconciled as either good or
true; and is moreover a mystery to the leaders of it, a stumbling
block to the Jews, and foolishness to the world, making the
preaching of the Church as Canon Liddon admits, utterly powerless?
The _Quarterly Review_ assumes that the doctrine of the Church has
been taught as Christianity for 1,800 years; and that 1,800 years’
teaching of it has proved it to be Christianity, because the
_Quarterly Review_ assumes that there has been liberty for 1,800
years to disprove the doctrine of the Church, and that the doctrine
of the Church, not having been disproved, is a proof that it cannot
be disproved. But the fact that to this very day there is no liberty
allowed in the pulpits of the National Churches to discuss the
doctrine of the Church (it being a law with the rulers of the Church
that “the doctrine of the Church may not be touched”), utterly
refutes all the assumptions of the _Quarterly Review_.

For whilst there is no liberty, even for fair and candid criticism
in the pulpit, on the doctrine of the Church, even in this age of
liberty and education, there could have been none when the Church,
for centuries, had power to imprison, slay, and excommunicate or
boycott; and used it against those who even questioned the doctrine
of the Church.

But we are told, by the great Bishop Butler, in his “Analogy of
Religion” (and whom the _Quarterly Review_ admits to be an authority
of the very highest class), that the doctrine of Atonement is
positively immoral, excepting for the supposed divine authority; and
the Bishop himself looked forward to the day, when the progress of
liberty and education should throw greater light upon this doctrine
of the Church, and indisputably determine whether or no it has the
divine authority, it was then supposed or asserted to have.

So great has been our progress in education and liberty that _The
Guardian_ of the 3rd August, in its review of this book of Mr.
Morrison’s, says, if Christianity is Calvinism with its doctrine of
substitution and justification, then it is _madness_ any longer to
attempt defending the morality of Christianity.

It is true that it is one thing to make this admission in the review
of a book, and another thing to publish it from the pulpit; and it
is true that the admission would be withdrawn or crucified by
silence; but the _Quarterly Review_ itself, in its argument by
analogy of the human and divine mind, admits that this doctrine of
Atonement is immoral, because it admits that no authority could be
divine which called immorality morality, as it asserts that
_whatever is moral humanly speaking, is also moral divinely
speaking, only in an infinitely greater degree_, and the converse.
So that an attack on an immoral doctrine of the Church is not an
attack on Christianity, if the doctrine of the Church is not the
teaching of Christ, as it can be shown that it is not, as soon as
liberty is allowed in the pulpits of the National Churches, for
explaining the truth of a _Crucified Christ_, and removing the
mystery that has been created, which causes it to be a stumbling
block to the Jews, and foolishness to the world.

We are told that the late Archbishop Whately said, that if the
Christian Religion did not come from God, miraculously (in the sense
commonly taught), yet the religion, nevertheless, exists, and
therefore the phenomenon has to be explained how it could have
arisen and been propagated without miracles.

But the _Quarterly Review_ asserts that for 1,800 years all the
attempts to explain it, without the aid of miracles, have utterly
failed, and therefore it must be assumed to be miraculous.

But before there can be any justification for such a bold
assumption, as that what is taught as Christianity is infallibly,
and indisputably, the teaching of Jesus Christ, what is meant by the
term Christianity, or Christian religion must be clearly defined:
for the Roman Catholic Church denounces the Protestant, and the
Protestant denounces the Roman Church, as having naught to do with
Christianity; so that even if there is anything held in common
between these Churches (as “the faith of the Primitive Church,” or
“the faith once delivered to the Saints,” or any other faith), yet
whatever it is, or is called, it would seem to be of not the
slightest value whatever, in saving them from rejecting one another
absolutely.

Canon Liddon, however, asserts that all the doctrine and teaching of
the Church derives its authority from a miraculous resurrection of
Jesus, with a material and physical body of flesh, blood, and bones,
in direct defiance of the teaching of Jesus, that the flesh
profiteth nothing, and that it was the words which He spoke, “_They
were_ spirit, _they_ were life.” (John vi., 63.)

And if we believe that the Holy Spirit of God could speak without
the aid of a material body, composed of flesh, blood, and bones, in
a still small voice to the conscience or soul of Moses and Elijah (1
Kings xix., 12); and if we believe that the same Holy Spirit is
_present_ even now (where two or three are gathered together—Matt,
xvii., 23), why should not the presence of the still small voice of
the Holy Spirit, speaking to the conscience or soul of the Apostles,
be of itself deemed sufficient, without needing the aid of a
material body?

Again, if the _presence_ of the still small voice of the Holy
Spirit, speaking to the soul of man, has been deemed sufficient by
the world both before the crucifixion of Christ, and since the
crucifixion of Christ, why should it be deemed necessary to raise up
the crucified One, with a body of flesh, blood and bones, only to
teach what the still small voice of the Holy Spirit was able,
willing, and _present_ to teach, and to doubt which would be
Atheism? And, moreover, whilst such teaching was sufficient, it
would be a contradiction to vouchsafe more.

Therefore, if the still small voice of the Holy Spirit is sufficient
and _present_ to guide us into all truth, it must have been
sufficient for the Apostles also (John xvi., 13); and, therefore,
Christ’s religion is not dependent upon a material resurrection of
the body, with flesh, blood and bones.

Here, once more, we see the necessity of liberty being allowed in
the pulpit, for fair and candid criticism on the doctrine of the
Church, for the purpose of eliminating error and eliciting truth; so
that it may be clearly seen and known what is Christ’s religion, as
it might indeed be possible that a material resurrection would seem
necessary to support the doctrine of the Church, though wholly
unnecessary for the support of Christ’s religion, or gospel.

Although the _Quarterly Review_ asserts that men have failed for
1,800 years to account for the existence of Christianity, unless it
had a miraculous resurrection to support it, yet it by no means
follows that, because a miracle is supposed to be needed to support
a doctrine of the Church, therefore a miracle is needed for
supporting the doctrine, gospel, or religion of Christ; which
exists, and will continue to exist, without needing the aid of
belief in a miraculous resurrection of the material body, to support
it. And it only needs that there should be liberty allowed in the
pulpits of the National Churches to show the deficiency of faith in
Christ’s spiritual resurrection, to see there is no need for belief
in that carnal, gross, and material resurrection of the body, with
flesh, blood and bones.

Then, let there be liberty allowed in the pulpits of the National
Churches; because it is not true that there has ever been liberty
for 1,800 years to explain the Mystery of a Crucified Christ; for,
it is refused to the present day. If any man, on behalf of the
Church, contradicts this, and asserts there is liberty to explain,
in the Church, the truth of a crucified Christ, let him mention one
Church, or one clergyman that will allow it, and I will test its
truth by asking for the same permission that the rulers of the
Synagogue accorded to St Paul at Antioch, Acts xiii., 15.

The _Quarterly Review_ says the clergy have no objection to free
discussion—that it is the very air they breathe, and that it has
been the life of Christian Truth. These are bold and brave words,
but where is there even one clergyman that will endorse them, and
act upon them? Where?

Isaiah says, “Open ye the gates that the truth may enter in” (xxvi.,
2). But instead of reverencing the just and righteous “Son of Man,”
the chief priests and rulers of the Ancient Church condemned “the
Just One,” to be slain as a blasphemer, whose blood ought to be shed
for an Atonement. And the chief priests of our Church have combined
that this doctrine should not be touched, so that by their practice
they make their statement of the _Quarterly Review_ utterly untrue.
For if there is one clergyman, A.D. 1887, who will support the
_Quarterly Review’s_ statement, and open his pulpit for explaining
the truth of “Christ crucified” and proclaiming Christian truth, as
taught by Christ—Where is he? and who is he?

And if there is not one, then need the Church be surprised that men
attack, not the Christianity of Jesus Christ, but only an erroneous
doctrine of the Church, miscalled Christianity?

                                               (REV.) T. G. HEADLEY.

_Manor House, Petersham, S. W._

P.S.—Although the _Quarterly Review_ admits that Mr. Morrison has
established a high position in literature, and that he seeks to
promote the same lofty and noble principles as true Christianity
inculcates; yet it speaks of Mr. Morrison’s book as bad and
incomplete; feeble and illogical; full of perversities,
monstrosities, misrepresentations, and misquotations; adding, that
it is bitter, unscrupulous, ignorant, inconsistent, offensive,
bullying, brow-beating, overbearing, absurd, and ridiculous, as well
as indecent and false; insulting and flagrant; inconsecutive and
unjust; full of jugglery and a disgrace.

Is this an exhibition of how theologians, or the clergy, as the
reviewer is most probably a clergyman, love free discussion, and
crucify those from whom they differ by damning them in this gross
manner?

                           ------------------

                        ISLAM AND CHRISTIANITY.

                    _To the Editors of_ LUCIFER.

In the numerous letters that have repeatedly appeared recently in
the _Times_ opposing the statements of the Rev. Canon Isaac Taylor,
in his speech at the late Church Congress, on the very great
progress of Islam, and the comparative failure of Christianity (as
taught), in India and Africa, it is frequently asserted that _“Islam
is the only religion that has laid an immutable barrier on human
progress;”_ and that _“no system could have been devised with more
consummate skill (than the Koran of Islam) for shutting out the
light of truth, from the Nations over which Islam has sway.”_

But surely this is equally as true of our Church, whilst it also
makes it an immutable law, as it has done to this day, that “_the
doctrine of the Church may not be touched_”? For how could any
system have been devised with more consummate skill for shutting out
the light of truth, than to delude the people to crucify “the Just
One,” as a blasphemer whose blood ought to be shed for an atonement,
and afterwards to quote Scripture in support of this doctrine (as
necessary to be believed in order to escape being cursed here and
damned hereafter), and stamp out and boycott all who doubted it?

And yet this is the present state of things.

And therefore, whilst the clergy have power to say that “_the
doctrine of the Church may not be touched_,” how is the mystery of a
Crucified Christ to be explained and translated, so that it may be
seen to be “_a light to lighten the Gentiles, and also the glory of
Israel_,” instead of being, as it is now, a stumbling block to the
Jews, foolishness to the world, and a mystery to the teachers of it,
making those who accept it, in India and Africa, worse than they
were before?

Then is there not a cause for demanding that liberty should be
allowed in the Church, for explaining, in the pulpit, the mystery of
a Crucified Christ, so that it may no longer remain a mystery for
want only of this liberty?

                                               (REV.) T. G. HEADLEY.

                           ------------------

                       HYLO-IDEALISM.—AN APOLOGY.

My attention has been directed to a somewhat slighting notice of the
above theory of human nature, on pages 72 and 75 of your issue for
September, the contents of which are, doubtless, most suggestive of
the _nouvelles couches mentales_ at the basis of all _nouvelles
couches sociales_, and which Physical Science, in its vulgar
realism, has altogether missed.

My main position, to which all else is but subsidiary, is that the
worlds both of thought and thing, which thus become identified and
unified, _must_ be a product of _our own_ personality or Egoity,
which thus constitutes each Ego Protagonist and Demiurge, from
whose tribunal there can be no possible appeal. This being
granted, and even Max Müller, in his “Science of Thought,”
considers the position _impregnable_, it matters not one jot, at
least in the first line and as far as my main object is concerned,
whether the Ego be a Body or a “Spirit.” Our own individuality, as
sum and substance of all “things,” is the only essential point of
the question. So that it may be argued either on the somatic
(hylozoic) or “Spiritual” hypothesis of life and mind. I have
always contended that Hylo-Idealism, or Auto-centricism, is the
only thorough and legitimate outcome of the phenomenal world
theory—this representative _Weltanschanung_ having been, for some
generations past, the accredited creed both of physical science
and philosophy. It is well summed up in Kant’s negation of “_Das
Ding an sich_.$1“$2”$3 Vulgar Physical Science, as interpreted by
its greatest hierophants, from Newton to Huxley and Darwin, from
its incarnate dualism, is fatally handicapped in its search after
the _final_ “good, beautiful, and true.” Even Cardinal Newman is
in a similar case, when he predicates _two_ luminous spectra, God
and Self, as the sole entities. The former Spectrum, on the
Hylo-ideal, or visional, or phenomenal hypothesis, _must_ be only
the functional _imago_ of the latter; Self being thus proved to be
“Alpha and Omega, beginning and ending, first and last.” Beyond
Self, it is manifest, mortal mind can never range. Whether Self be
body or “spirit” is, I repeat, for my chief contention, quite
immaterial—I sit on both sides of the stile, facing both ways.

                                                 ROBERT LEWINS, M.D.

                           ------------------

                             HYLO-IDEAISM.

                    _To the Editors of_ LUCIFER.

As a hostile notice of the above philosophy has appeared in your
columns, will you kindly permit me to say a few words in its
defence? Not, of course, that I can hope in these few lines to
really make clear to the casual reader the greatest change in human
thought ever witnessed on earth (a change not merely as regards the
form or matter of existence, but as regards its very nature)—yet I
may hope that a few seasonable words may be the means of inducing at
least a few to enquire further into a theory, the self-evident
simplicity of which is so great, that, I am convinced, it needs but
to be understood to command universal acceptance.

The term Hylo-Ideaism is no self-contradiction, but undeniable
verity, based on the first two facts of all existence; viz., the
assumption of the material on the one hand, and the actuality of the
ideal on the other. The primary, undeniable and necessary assumption
of the “reality” of existence supplies us with the first half of our
designation, and the recognition of the correlative truism that this
existence—based on our own assumption—is, therefore, only our own
idea, completes our title, and amply vindicates the self-sufficiency
of Hylo-Ideaistic philosophy. For here is not a mere unended
argument, leaving us at both ends stranded on mere metaphysical
speculation, but a self-sustaining circle[116] where both ends meet,
and materiality and ideality are blended as one, and indissoluble.

-----

Footnote 116:

  Yet, unless _metaphysical_ speculation comes to the rescue of the
  new philosophy, and, completing, explains it on the old Vedantic
  lines, the “circle,” instead of being a “self-sustaining” one, is
  more than likely to become a—“vicious circle.”—ED.

-----

It matters not on what basis we proceed, whether we speak of
existence as material or ideal, or “spiritual” or anything else—a
moment’s reflection is sufficient to establish us in a position of
consistent monism. For all thought or knowledge is but sensation,
and sensation is and must be purely subjective, existing in, and by,
the ego itself. As now we cannot outstrip our own sensations (only a
madman could controvert this proposition—which includes
_everything_)—therefore are we absolutely, and for ever, limited to
self-existence, and the same holds good of all possible or imaginary
existence whatsoever. For the first essential of any conscious
existence—that which indeed constitutes it—is a sentient subject,
and inasmuch as all connected with this subject—thought, knowledge,
feeling, fancy, sentiment—are all _purely subjective_, _i.e._, in
the subject itself, so must the subject be to itself the sum of all
things, and objective existence only its own fancy by which it
realises itself. This then utterly disposes of all fancied objective
dualism by reducing all existence within the ring-fence of the ego
itself, and this not as mere speculative theory but as positive
fact, which, whether we recognise it or not, remains fact still—we
_are_ limited to Self, whether we know it or not.

Then finally, _in self_, we harmonise the antithesis between the
material and the ideal by recognising the two as absolutely
inter-dependent, each upon the other, and therefore one consistent
and indivisible whole. The ideal (thought, fancy, sentiment) is, and
must be, but the property and outcome of the material (the nominal
reality), which, on the other hand, is itself (and can be) but the
assumption of the ideal. Destroy reality and thought is dead, blind
thought and reality is a blank; and thus are the ideal and the
material but the two sides of one and the self-same shield, and the
line of our argument joins itself in one consistent circle, which
constitutes the existence of the Ego—He who creates light and
darkness, heaven and earth, pleasure and pain, God and devil—who is,
in Himself, the sum of all things, (viz. “thinks”) beyond which is
naught, naught, naught, for the fancy of His own which imagines a
“beyond” is, itself, but fancy—self-contained in Self.

              Thou Unity of force sublime,
              Th’ eternal mystery of thy time
                  Runs on unstay’d for ever;
              Yet, self-containing God of all,
              As raptur’d at thy feet I fall
                  In thee myself I worship.
                                 HERBERT L. COURTNEY.

Cambridge, November, 1887.

  [EDITOR’S NOTE.—In reference to the supposed “slighting
  remark” of which Dr. Lewins speaks, and the no less supposed
  “hostile notice,” as Mr. Herbert L. Courtney puts it—contained
  in our September number—we demur to the accusation. Both
  gentlemen will find it, however, fully answered in the
  “Literary Jottings” of this number; where, also, their
  respective pamphlets “AUTO-CENTRICISM,” “HUMANISM _versus_
  THEISM,” and “The New Gospel of Hylo-Idealism”—are amply
  noticed by the “Adversary.”]

                      ----------------------------

                          ANSWERS TO QUERIES.

A CORRESPONDENT from New York writes:

  .... “The Editors of LUCIFER would confer a great benefit on those
  who are attracted to the movement which they advocate, if they
  would state:

  “(1.) Whether a would-be-theosophist-occultist is required to
  abandon his worldly ties and duties such as family affection, love
  of parents, wife, children, friends, etc.?

  “I ask this question because it is rumoured here that some
  theosophical publications have so stated, and would wish to know
  whether such a _sine quâ non_ condition really exists in your
  Rules? The same, however, is found in the New Testament. ‘He that
  loveth father or mother more than Me, is not worthy of Me; and he
  that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me,
  etc., etc.,’ is said in Matthew (x. 37). Do the MASTERS of
  Theosophy demand as much?

                                   “Yours in the Search of Light,
                                                          “L. M. C.”

This is an old, old question, and a still older charge against
theosophy, started first by its enemies. We emphatically answer, NO;
adding that no _theosophical_ publication could have rendered itself
guilty of such a FALSEHOOD and calumny. No follower of theosophy,
least of all a disciple of the “Masters of Theosophy” (the _chela_
of a _guru_), would ever be accepted on such conditions. Many were
the candidates, but “few the chosen.” Dozens were refused, simply
because married and having a sacred duty to perform to wife and
children.[117] None have ever been asked to forsake father or
mother; for he who, being necessary to his parent for his support,
leaves him or her to gratify his own selfish consideration or thirst
for knowledge, however great and sincere, _is “unworthy”_ of the
Science of Sciences, “or ever to approach a holy MASTER.”

-----

Footnote 117:

  We know but two cases of _married_ “chelas” being accepted; but
  both these were Brahmins and had _child-wives_, according to Hindu
  custom, and they were _Reformers_ more than _chelas_, trying to
  abrogate child-marriage and slavery. Others had to obtain the
  consent of their wives before entering the “Path,” as is usual in
  India since long ages.

-----

Our correspondent must surely have confused in his mind Theosophy
with Roman Catholicism, and Occultism with the dead-letter teachings
of the Bible. For it is only in the Latin Church that it has become
a meritorious action, which is called serving God and Christ, to
“abandon father and mother, wife and children,” and every duty of an
honest man and citizen, in order to become a monk. And it is in St.
Luke’s Gospel that one reads the terrible words, put in the mouth of
Jesus: “If any _man_ come to me, and _hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters_, yea,
_his own life_ also, HE CANNOT BE MY DISCIPLE.” (xiv. 26.)

_Saint_ (?) Jerome teaches, in one of his writings, “If thy father
lies down across thy threshold, if thy mother uncovers to thine eyes
the bosom which suckled thee, _trample on thy father’s lifeless
body_, TRAMPLE ON THY MOTHER’S BOSOM, and _with eyes unmoistened and
dry, fly to the Lord, who calleth thee_!”

Surely then, it is not from any _theosophical_ publication that our
correspondent could have learnt such an infamous charge against
theosophy and its MASTERS—but rather in some _anti-Christian_, or
_too_ dogmatically “Christian” paper.

Our society has never been “more Catholic than the Pope.” It has
done its best to follow out the path prescribed by the Masters; and
if it has failed in more than one respect to fulfil its arduous
task, the blame is certainly not to be thrown on either Theosophy,
nor its Masters, but on the limitations of human nature. The
_Rules_, however, of _chelaship_, or discipleship, are there, in
many a Sanskrit and Tibetan volume. In Book IV. of _Kiu-ti_, in the
chapter on “_the Laws of Upasans_” (disciples), the qualifications
expected in a “regular _chela_” are: (1.) Perfect physical
health.[118] (2.) Absolute mental and physical purity. (3.)
Unselfishness of purpose; universal charity; pity for all animate
beings. (4.) Truthfulness and unswerving faith in the laws of Karma.
(5.) A courage undaunted in the support of truth, even in face of
peril to life. (6.) An intuitive perception of one’s being the
vehicle of the manifested divine _Atman_ (spirit). (7.) Calm
indifference for, but a just appreciation of, everything that
constitutes the objective and transitory world. (8.) Blessing of
both parents[119] and _their permission to become an Upasan_
(chela); and (9.) Celibacy, and freedom from any obligatory duty.

-----

Footnote 118:

  This rule 1. applies only to the “temple chelas,” who must be
  _perfect_.

Footnote 119:

  Or one, if the other is dead.

-----

The two last rules are most strictly enforced. No man _convicted of
disrespect to his father or mother_, or _unjust abandonment of his
wife_, can ever be accepted even as a _lay chela_.

This is sufficient, it is hoped. We have heard of chelas who, having
_failed_, perhaps in consequence of the neglect of some such duty,
for one or another reason, have invariably thrown the blame and
responsibility for it on the teaching of the Masters. This is but
natural in poor and weak human beings who have not even the courage
to recognise their own mistakes, or the rare nobility of publicly
confessing them, but are always trying to find a scapegoat. Such we
pity, and leave to the Law of Retribution, or Karma. It is not these
weak creatures, who can ever be expected to have the best of the
enemy described by the wise Kirátárjuniya of Bharavi:—

          “The enemies which rise within the body.
          Hard to be overcome—the evil passions—
          Should manfully be fought, _who conquers these
          Is equal to the conqueror of worlds_.” (xi. 32.)

                                                               [ED.]

                                  ---

We have received several communications for publication, bearing on
the subjects discussed in the editorial of our last issue, “Let
every man prove his own work.” A few brief remarks may be made, not
in reply to any of the letters—_which, being anonymous, and
containing no card from the writers, cannot be published_ (nor are
such noticed, as a general rule)—but to the ideas and accusations
contained in one of them, a letter signed “M.” Its author takes up
the cudgels on behalf of the Church. He objects to the statement
that this institution lacks the enlightenment necessary to carry out
a true system of philanthropy. He appears, also, to demur to the
view that “the practical people either go on doing good
unintentionally and often do harm,” and points to the workers amid
our slums as a vindication of Christianity—which, by-the-bye, was in
no sense attacked in the editorial so criticized.

To this, repeating what was said, we maintain that more mischief has
been done by emotional charity than sentimentalists care to face.
Any student of political economy is familiar with this fact, which
passes for a truism with all those who have devoted attention to the
problem. No nobler sentiment than that which animates the unselfish
philanthropist is conceivable; but the question at issue is not
summed up in the recognition of this truth. The practical results of
his labours have to be examined. We have to see whether he does not
sow the seeds of a greater—while relieving a lesser—evil.

The fact that “thousands are making great efforts in all the cities
throughout our land” to meet want, reflects immense credit on the
character of such workers. It does not affect their creed, for such
natures would remain the same, whatever the prevailing dogmas
chanced to be. It is certainly a very poor illustration of the
fruits of centuries of dogmatic Christianity that England should be
so honeycombed with misery and poverty as she is—especially on the
biblical ground that a tree must be judged by its fruits! It might,
also, be argued, that the past history of the Churches, stained as
it is with persecutions, the suppression of knowledge, crime and
brutality, necessitates the turning over of a new leaf. The
difficulties in the way are insuperable. “Churchianity” has, indeed,
done its best to keep up with the age by assimilating the teachings
of, and making veiled truces with, science, but it is incapable of
affording a true spiritual ideal to the world.

The same Church-Christianity assails with fruitlesss pertinacity,
the ever-growing host of Agnostics and Materialists, but is _as
absolutely ignorant, as the latter, of the mysteries beyond the
tomb_. The great necessity for the Church, according to Professor
Flint, is to keep the leaders of European thought within its fold.
By such men it is, however, regarded as an anachronism. The Church
is eaten up with scepticism within its own walls; free-thinking
clergymen being now very common. This constant drain of vitality has
reduced the true religion to a very low ebb, and it is to infuse a
new current of ideas and aspirations into modern thought, in short,
to supply a logical basis for an elevated morality, a science and
philosophy which is suited to the knowledge of the day, that
Theosophy comes before the world. Mere physical philanthropy, apart
from the infusion of new influences and ennobling conceptions of
life into the minds of the masses, is worthless. The gradual
assimilation by mankind of great spiritual truths will alone
revolutionize the face of civilization, and ultimately result in a
far more effective panacea for evil, than the mere tinkering of
superficial misery. Prevention is better than cure. Society creates
its own outcasts, criminals, and profligates, and then condemns and
punishes its own Frankensteins, sentencing its own progeny, the
“bone of its bone, and the flesh of its flesh,” to a life of
damnation on earth. Yet that society recognises and enforces most
hypocritically Christianity—_i.e._ “Churchianity.” Shall we then, or
shall we not, infer that the latter is unequal to the requirements
of mankind? Evidently the former, and most painfully and obviously
so, in its present dogmatic form, which makes of the beautiful
ethics preached on the Mount, a Dead Sea fruit, a whitened
sepulchre, and no better.

Furthermore, the same “M.,” alluding to Jesus as one with regard to
whom there could be only two alternatives, writes that he “was
either the Son of God or the vilest impostor who ever trod this
earth.” We answer, not at all. Whether the Jesus of the New
Testament ever lived or not, whether he existed as an historical
personage, or was simply a lay figure around which the Bible
allegories clustered—the Jesus of Nazareth of Matthew and John, is
the ideal for every would-be sage and Western candidate Theosophist
to follow. That such an one as he, was _a_ “Son of God,” is as
undeniable as that he was neither the _only_ “Son of God,” nor the
first one, nor even the last who closed the series of the “Sons of
God,” or the children of Divine Wisdom, on this earth. Nor is that
other statement that in “His life he (Jesus) has ever spoken of
himself as co-existent with Jehovah, the Supreme, the Centre of the
Universe,” correct, whether in in its dead letter, or hidden mystic
sense. In no place does Jesus ever allude to “_Jehovah_”; but, on
the contrary, attacking the Mosaic laws and the alleged Commandments
given on Mount Sinai, he disconnects himself and his “Father” most
distinctly and emphatically from the Sinaitic tribal God. The whole
of Chapter V., in the Gospel of Matthew, is a passionate protest of
the “man of peace, love and charity,” against the cruel, stern, and
selfish commandments of “the man of war,” the “Lord” of Moses (Exod.
xv., 3). “Ye have heard that it was said by them of old times,”—so
and so—“But I say unto you,” quite the reverse. Christians who still
hold to the Old Testament and the Jehovah of the Israelites, are at
best _schismatic Jews_. Let them be that, by all means, if they will
so have it; but they have no right to call themselves even
_Chréstians_, let alone _Christians_.[120]

It is a gross injustice and untruth to assert, as our anonymous
correspondent does, that “the freethinkers are notoriously unholy
in their lives.” Some of the noblest characters, as well as
deepest thinkers of the day, adorn the ranks of Agnosticism,
Positivism and Materialism. The latter are the worst enemies of
Theosophy and Mysticism; but this is no reason why strict justice
should not be done unto them. Colonel Ingersoll, a rank
materialist, and the leader of freethought in America, is
recognised, even by his enemies, as an ideal husband, father,
friend and citizen, one of the noblest characters that grace the
United States. Count Tolstoi is a freethinker who has long parted
with the orthodox Church, yet his whole life is an exemplar of
Christ-like altruism and self-sacrifice. Would to goodness every
“Christian” should take those two “_infidels_” as his models in
private and public life. The munificence of many freethinking
philanthropists stands out in startling contrast with the apathy
of the monied dignitaries of the Church. The above fling at the
“enemies of the Church,” is as absurd as it is contemptible.

“What can you offer to the dying woman who fears to tread alone the
DARK UNKNOWN?” we are asked. Our Christian critic here frankly
confesses (_a._) that Christian dogmas have only developed _fear_ of
death, and (_b._) the _agnosticism_ of the _orthodox believer_ in
Christian theology as to the future _post-mortem_ state. It is,
indeed, difficult to appreciate the peculiar type of bliss which
orthodoxy offers its believers in—_damnation_.

The dying man—the average Christian—with a _dark_ retrospect in life
can scarcely appreciate this boon; while the Calvinist or the
Predestinarian, who is brought up in the idea that God may have
pre-assigned him from eternity to everlasting misery, through no
fault of that man, but simply because he is God, is more than
justified in regarding the latter as ten times worse than any devil
or fiend that unclean human fancy could evolve.

Theosophy, on the contrary, teaches that _perfect, absolute justice_
reigns in nature, though short-sighted man fails to see it in its
details on the material and even psychic plane, and that every man
determines his own future. The true Hell is life on Earth, as an
effect of Karmic punishment following the preceding life during
which the evil causes were produced. The Theosophist fears _no
hell_, but confidently expects rest and bliss during the _interim_
between two incarnations, as a reward for all the unmerited
suffering he has endured in an existence into which he was ushered
by Karma, and during which he is, in most cases, as helpless as a
torn-off leaf whirled about by the conflicting winds of social and
private life. Enough has been given out at various times regarding
the conditions of post-mortem existence, to furnish a solid block of
information on this point. Christian theology has nothing to say on
this burning question, except where it veils its ignorance by
mystery and dogma; but Occultism, unveiling the symbology of the
Bible, explains it thoroughly.—[ED.]

-----

Footnote 120:

  See “The Esoteric Character of the Gospels,” in this number.

-----


                       =LITERARY JOTTINGS=

       HYLO-IDEALISM _versus_ “LUCIFER,” and the “ADVERSARY.”

Under the head of CORRESPONDENCE in the present number, two
remarkable letters are published. (See Text.) Both come from fervent
Hylo-Idealists—a Master and Disciple, if we mistake not—and both
charge the “Adversary,” one, of a “slighting,” the other, of a
“hostile notice” of Hylo-Idealism, in the September number of
“_Lucifer_.”

                              *      *

Such an accusation is better met and answered in all sincerity; and,
therefore, the reply is, a flat denial of the charge. No
_slight_—nor _hostility_ either, could be shown to “Hylo-Idealism,”
as the “little stranger” in the happy family of philosophies was
hitherto as good as unknown to “Lucifer’s” household gods. It was
_chaff_, if anything, but surely no hostility; and even that was
concerned with only some dreadful words and sentences, with
reference to the new teaching, and had nothing whatever to do with
Hylo-Idealism proper—a _terra incognita_ for the writer at the time.
But now that three pamphlets from the pens of our two correspondents
have been received in our office, for review, and carefully read,
Hylo-Idealism begins to assume a more tangible form before the
reviewer’s eye. It becomes easier to separate the grain from the
chaff, the theory from the (no doubt) scientific, nevertheless, most
irritating, words in which it is presented to the reader.

                              *      *

This is meant in all truth and sincerity. The remarks which our two
correspondents have mistaken for expressions of hostility, were as
justified _then_, as they are _now_. What ordinary mortal, we ask,
before he had time (to use Dr. Lewins’ happiest expressions) to
“_asself_ or _cognose_”—let alone _intercranialise_[121] (!!)—the
hylo-idealistic theories, however profound and philosophical these
may be, who, having so far come into direct contact with only the
_images_ thereof “subjected by his own _egoity_” (_i.e._ as words
and sentences), who could avoid feeling his hair standing on end,
over “_his organs of mentation_,” while spelling out such
terrible words as “_vesiculo-neurosis_ in conjunction with
_medico-psychological symptomatology_,” “_auto-centricism_,” and the
like? Such interminable, outlandish, multisyllabled and
multicipital, newly-coined compound terms and whole sentences,
maybe, and no doubt are, highly learned and scientific. They may be
most expressive of true, real meaning, to a specialist of Dr.
Lewins’ powers of thought; nevertheless, I make bold to say, that
they are far more calculated to obscure than to enlighten the
ordinary reader. In our modern day, when new philosophies spring out
from the spawn of human overworked intellect like mushrooms from
their mycelium after a rainy morning, the human brain and
its capacities ought to be taken into a certain thoughtful
consideration, and spared useless labour. Notwithstanding Dr.
Lewins’ praiseworthy efforts to prove that brain (as far as we
understand his aspirations and teachings) is the only reality in the
whole kosmos, its limitations are painfully evident, on the whole.
As philanthropists and theosophists, we entreat the founder of
Hylo-Idealism and his disciples to be merciful to their new god, the
“Ego-Brain,” and not tax too heavily its powers, if they would see
it happily reign. For otherwise, it is sure to collapse before the
new theory—or, let us call it philosophy—is even half appreciated by
that “Ego-Brain.”

-----

Footnote 121:

  “AUTO-CENTRICISM, or, _The Brain Theory of Life and Mind_,” p. 41.

-----

                             *       *

By speaking as we do, we are only pursuing a life-long policy. We
have criticized and opposed the coinage of hard Greek and Latin
words by the New York Pantarchists; laughed at Hæckel’s pompous
tendency to invent thirty-three syllabled terms, and speak of the
_perigenesis_ of _plastidules_, instead of honest whirling atoms—or
whatever he means; and derided the modern psychists for calling
simple thought transference “telepathic impact.” And now, we
tearfully beg Dr. Lewins, in the interests of humanity, to have pity
on his poor readers: for, unless he hearkens to our advice, we shall
be compelled, in dire self-defence, to declare an open war to his
newly-coined words. We shall fight the usurper “Solipsism” in favour
of the legitimate king of the Universe—EGOISM—to our last breath.

                             *       *

At the same time, as we have hitherto been ignorant of the latest
philosophy, described by Mr. H. L. Courtney as “the greatest change
in human thought,” may we be permitted to enquire whether it is
spelt as its Founder spells it, namely, “Hylo-Idealism,” or as his
disciple, Mr. Courtney does, who writes Hylo-Ideaism? Is the latter
a _schism_, an improvement on the original name, a _lapsus calami_,
or what? And now, having disburdened our heart of a heavy weight, we
may proceed to give an opinion (so far very superficial), on the
three Hylo-Idealistic (or _Ideaistic_) pamphlets.

                                  ---

_Under the extraordinary title of_ “AUTO-CENTRICISM” and “HUMANISM
_versus_ THEISM,” or “Solipsism (Egoism)=Atheism” (W. Stewart & Co.,
41, Farringdon Street, E.C.; and Freethought Publishing Co., 63,
Fleet Street, E.C.)—Dr. Lewins publishes a series of letters on the
subject of the philosophy of which he is the founder. It is
impossible not to feel admiration for the manner in which these
letters are written. They show a great deal of sincere conviction
and deep thought, and give evidence of a most wide and varied
reading. However his readers may dissent from the writer’s
conclusions, the research with which he has strengthened his theory,
cannot fail to attract their attention, and smooth their way through
the somewhat tortuous labyrinth of arguments before them. But—

Dr. Lewins is among those who regard consciousness as a function of
the nerve-tissue; and in this aspect, he is an uncompromising
materialist. Yet, on the other hand, he holds that the Universe,
God, and thought, have no reality whatever, apart from the
individual Ego. The Ego is again resolvable into brain-process. We
thus arrive at the doctrine that Brain is the workshop in which all
our ideas of external things are originated. Apart from brain there
is no Ego, no external world. What, then, is the Brain itself—this
solitary object in a void universe? Hylo-Idealism does not say.
Thus, the author cannot escape the confusion of thought which his
unique working-union of materialism and idealism involves. The
_oscillation_ between these two poles is strikingly apparent in the
subjoined quotations. At one point Matter is discussed as if it were
an objective reality; at another, it is regarded as a mere “phantasm
of the Ego.” The Brain alone survives throughout in solitary state.
We quote from the two pamphlets—

                           MATTER ASSERTED.

  “_Matter_, organic and inorganic, is now fully known ... to
  perform all _material_ operations.”

                                          —_Auto-Centricism_, p. 40.

  “Man is _all body and matter_.”

                                             —_Do_, p. 40.

  “Abstract thought [is] _neuropathy_ ... disease of the _nervous
  centres_.”

                                   —_Humanism versus Theism_, p. 25.

  “What we call mind ... is a function of certain _nerve structures
  in the organism_.”

                                       —_Humanism v. Theism_, p. 24.

                            MATTER DENIED.

  “_All discovery_ is ... a _subjective phenomenon_.”

                                       —_Humanism v. Theism_, p. 17.

  “_All things_ are for us but _modes of perception_.”—[Mental
  figments].

  The “celestial vault and garniture of Earth,” are “a _mere
  projection of our own inner consciousness_.”

                                       —_Humanism v. Theism_, p. 17.

  “We _get rid of Matter altogether_.”

                                       —_Humanism v. Theism_, p. 17.

  “The whole objective world ... is _phenomenal or ideal_.”

                                           —_Auto-Centricism_, p. 9.

  “_Everything_ is spectral” (_i.e._, unreal).

                                                     —_Ibid_, p. 13.

Matter is at one time credited with a real being, and again resolved
into a mere mental figment as _circumstances demand_. If Matter is,
as the author frequently states, unreal, it is, at least clear that
the brain, one of its many phases, goes with it!!

As to the learned doctor’s assertion that perception is relative, a
theory which runs through his whole work, we have but one answer.
This conception is, in no sense whatever, a monopoly of
Hylo-Idealists, as Dr. Lewins appears to think. The illusory nature
of the phenomenal world—of the things of sense—is not only a belief
common to the old Brahminical metaphysics, and to the majority of
modern psychologists, but it is also a vital tenet of Theosophy. The
latter distinctly realises matter as a “bundle of attributes,”
ultimately resolvable into the subjective sensations of a
“percipient.” The connection of this simple truth with the
hylo-idealistic denial of soul is not apparent. Its acceptance has,
also, no bearing on the problem as to whether there may not exist a
duality—_within the limits of manifested being_—or contrast between
Mind and the Substance of matter. This Cosmic Duality is symbolised
by the Vedantins in the relations between the Logos and
Mulaprakriti—_i.e._, the Universal Spirit and the “material” basis
(or root) of the objective planes of nature. The _Monism_, then, of
Dr. Lewins and other negative thinkers of the day, is evidently at
fault, when applied to unify the contrast of mental and material
facts in the conditioned universe. Beyond the latter, it is indeed
valid, but that is scarcely a question for practical philosophy.

To close with a reference this once to Dr. Lewins’ letter (see
“Correspondence” in the text), in which he makes his subsequent
assertion to the effect that God is the “functional (_sic_) image,”
of the Ego, we should prefer to suggest that all individual “selves”
are but dim reflections of the universal soul of the Kosmos. The
orthodox concept of God is not, as he contends, a myth or phantasm
of the brain; it is rather an expression of a vague consciousness of
the universal, all-pervading Logos. It is because SELF pinions man
within a narrow sphere “beyond which mortal mind can never range,”
that the destruction of the personal sense of separateness is
indispensable to the Occultist.

                                  ---

“THE NEW GOSPEL OF HYLO-IDEALISM, _or Positive Agnosticism_,”
(Freethought Publishing Co., 73, Fleet Street, E. C. Price 3d.), is
another pamphlet on the same subject, in which Mr. Herbert L.
Courtney contributes his quota to the discussion of the “Brain
Theory of mind and matter.” He is, if we mistake not, an avowed
disciple of Dr. Lewins, and, perhaps, identical with the “C. N.,”
who watched over the cradle of the “new philosophy.” The whole gist
of the latter may be summed up as an attempt to frame a
working-union of Materialism and Idealism. This result is effected
on two lines (1) in the acceptance of the idealistic theorem, that
the so-called external world only exists in our consciousness; and
(2) in the designation of that consciousness, in its turn, as a mere
function of Brain. The first of these contentions is unquestionably
valid, in so far as it concerns the world of appearances, or _Maya_;
it is, however, as “old as the hills,” and incorporated into the
Hylo-Ideal argument from anterior sources. The second is untenable,
for the simple reason that on the premises of the new creed itself,
the brain, as an object of perception, can possess no reality
outside of the Ego. Hegelians might reply that Brain is but an
_i.e._ of the Ego, and cannot hence determine the existence of the
latter—its creator.

                                  ---

Metaphysicism will, however, find much to interest them in Mr.
Courtney’s brochure, representative, as it is, of the new and more
subtle phase into which modern scepticism is entering. Some
expressions we may demur to—_e.g._, “That which we see is not
Sirius, but the light-wave.” So far from the light-wave being
“seen,” it is a mere working hypothesis of Science. All we
experience is the retinal sensation, the objective counterpart to
which is a matter of pure inference. So far as we can learn,
Hylo-Idealism is chiefly based upon gigantic paradoxes, and even
contradictions in terms. For, with regard to the speculations anent
the Noumenon (p. 8.) what justification can be found for terming it
“MATTER,” especially as it is said to be “unknowable”? Obviously it
may be of the nature of mind, or—_something_ HIGHER. How is the
Hylo-Idealist to know?

                                  ---

“LAYS OF ROMANCE AND CHIVALRY,” by Mr. W. Stewart Ross. (Stewart and
Co., Farringdon Street.) In this neat little volume the author
presents to the reader a collection of vigorous verse, mostly of
chivalrous character. Some of these pieces, such as the “Raid of
Vikings” and “Glencoe,” are of merit, despite an occasional echo of
Walter Scott, whose style seems to have had a considerable modifying
influence on the author’s diction. It is in the “Bride of Steel”
that this feature is most noticeable—

               “I love thee with a warrior’s love,
               My Sword, my Life, my Bride!
                 Dear, dear as ever knighthood bore,
                 Though yet no gout of battle-gore
               Thy virgin blade hath dyed!”

Apart from this unconscious influence of the great Scottish bard,
the ring of originality and feeling which characterises Mr. Stewart
Ross’s poetry is most refreshing. The little volume sparkles with
the vein of romance, and after perusing it, in spite of occasional
anachronisms and other literary errors, we are not surprised to hear
of the favourable reception hitherto accorded to it.

                                  ---

In the _Secular Review_ for November 26th, Mr. Beatty makes an
attack upon a former article in LUCIFER, entitled “The Origin of
Evil.” We find, however, Mr. Beatty exhibiting crass ignorance of
the ideas he criticises, as when, for instance, he speaks of the
“_Buddhistic_” Parabram (_sic_). To begin with, every tyro in
Oriental philosophy knows that “Parabrahm” is a Hindu Vedantic idea,
and has no connection whatever with Buddhist thought. If Mr. Beatty
wishes to become a serious critic, he must first learn the _a_, _b_,
_c_, of the subject with which he professes to deal. His article is
unfinished, but it seems only fair at the present stage to call his
attention to so glaring an error.

                                  ---

THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS, ANCIENT AND MEDIÆVAL. By C. W. King,
M.A. Second Edition. David Nutt, 270 Strand, London, 1887. pp. 466,
8vo.

It would be unfair to the erudite and painstaking author of “_The
Gnostics and Their Remains_” for a reviewer to take the title of his
book as altogether appropriate, for it suggests too high a standard
of criticism. Mr. King says in the introduction that his book is
intended to be subsidiary to the valuable treatise of M. Matter,
adding: “I refer the reader to him for the more complete elucidation
of the _philosophy_ of Gnosticism, and give my full attention to its
_Archæological_ side.” The italics are the author’s, and they disarm
criticism as far as the philosophical side of Gnosticism is
concerned; for thus italicised, this passage is, at the outset, as
plain a confession as could, in conscience, be expected of an author
of a fact which the reader would probably have found out for
himself, before he closed the volume: namely, that the work is
chiefly valuable as an Archæological compendium of “Gnostic
Remains.” Unfortunately, the most interesting point about the
Gnostics is their philosophy, of which their Archæological remains
are, properly speaking, little more than illustrations. But the fact
is, that the hard-shelled Archæologist is the last man in the world
to appreciate the real esoteric signification of symbolism. All true
symbols have many meanings, and for the purposes of descriptive
Archæology the more superficial of these meanings are sufficient.
Ignorance of the deeper meaning may indeed be bliss for the
Archæologist, for it necessitates an amount of ingenuity in the
fitting together of “remains,” that commands the admiration of the
public, and is productive in the Archæological bosom of that
agreeable sensation known as “fancying oneself.” As a laborious
collector and compiler, and an ingenious worker-up of materials into
interesting reading, too much can hardly be said in Mr. King’s
praise, and had he a greater intuitional power, and a knowledge of
esoteric religion, his great industry and erudition would make his
writings valuable even to students of Occultism.

Since the publication of the former edition of his work,
twenty-three years ago, Mr. King has come across and read the
_Pistis Sophia_. The discovery of this, the only remaining Gnostic
Gospel, or rather, Gospel fragment, is attributed to Schwartze, and
the Latin translation to Petermann (in 1853). But Mr. King does not
seem to be aware that as far back as 1843, another and ampler copy
than that in the British Museum was in the hands of a Russian
Raskolnik (dissident), a Cossack, who lived and married in
Abyssinia; and another is in the possession of an Englishman, an
Occultist, now in the United States, who brought it from Syria. It
seems a pity that in the interim Mr. King did not also read _Isis
Unveiled_, by H. P. Blavatsky, published by Bouton in New York in
1876, as its perusal would have saved him a somewhat absurd and
ludicrous blunder. In his _Preface_, Mr. King says:—“There seems to
be reason for suspecting that the Sibyl of Esoteric Buddhism drew
the first notions of her new religion from the analysis of the
_inner man_, as set forth in my first edition.”[122] The only person
to whom this passage could apply is one of the Editors, the author
of _Isis Unveiled_. And this, her first publication, contains the
same and only doctrine she has always, or ever, promulgated. _Isis
Unveiled_ has passed through eight editions, and has been read by
many thousands of persons; and not only they, but everyone who is
not strangely ignorant of the very literature with which it was Mr.
King’s business to make himself conversant, are perfectly aware that
the two large volumes which compose that work are entirely devoted
to a defence of the philosophy, science, and religion of the
ancients, especially of the old Aryans, whose religion can hardly be
called a “new” one, still less—“Esoteric Buddhism.” If properly
spelt, however, the latter word, or Buddhism, ought to be written
with one “d,” as in this case it means Wisdom. But “Budhism,” or the
wisdom-religion of the Aryans, was still less a religion, in the
exoteric sense, than is Buddhism, but rather a philosophy. In that
part of _Isis Unveiled_ which treats of the Gnostics, Mr. King will
find a few quotations from his writings side by side with quotations
from other writers on the same subject; but he will find no “new
religion” there, or anywhere else, in the works of H. P. Blavatsky.
And, if anyone drew the “first notions” of their religion from his
“analysis of the inner man,” it must have been the early Aryans,
who, unfortunately, have neglected to acknowledge the obligation.
What makes Mr. King’s self-complacency the more ridiculous, is that
in his preface he himself accuses someone else of “the grave error
of representing their (the Gnostics’) doctrines as _novel_, and the
pure _inventions_ of the persons who preached them.” And in another
place he confesses that he owes to Matter the first idea which has
now become a settled conviction with him, that “the seeds of the
_gnosis_ were originally of Indian growth.” If Matter “faintly
discerned” this truth, on the other hand Bailly, Dupuis, and others
had seen it quite clearly, and had declared it most emphatically. So
that Mr. King’s “discovery” is neither very new nor very original.

-----

Footnote 122:

  This modest assumption is followed by the generous promise to
  furnish “investigators of the same order” as the supposed “Sibyl,”
  with “a still more profound theosophy.” This is extremely
  considerate and kind. But if it is _Pistis-Sophia_ which the
  author had in his mind, then he had better apply to Theosophists
  for the explanation of the most recondite points in that gnostic
  fragment, while translating it, as he proposes doing from Latin.
  For though the world of the Orientalists “of the same order” as
  _himself_, may labour under the mistaken impression that no one
  except themselves knew or know anything about _Pistis-Sophia_ till
  1853—Theosophists know better. Does Mr. King really imagine that
  no one besides himself knows anything about the Gnostics “and
  their remains,” or what _he_ knows is the only correct thing to
  know? Strange delusion, if so; yet quite a harmless one, we
  confess.

-----

Mr. King must be aware that of late years immense additions have
been made to western knowledge of eastern philosophies and
religions—a new region in ancient literature having, in fact, been
opened up by the labours of Orientalists, both European and Eastern.
A study of these Oriental systems throws a strong though often a
false light upon the inner meaning of Gnostic symbolism and ideas
generally, which Mr. King acknowledges to have come from Indian
sources; and certainly the reader has a right to expect a little
more knowledge in that direction from a writer of Mr. King’s
pretensions, than is displayed. For example, in the section about
Buddhism in the work before us: one is tempted sometimes to ask
whether it is flippancy or superficiality that is the matter with
the author—when he calls the ancient Indian gymnosophists “fakirs,”
and confounds them with Buddhists. Surely he need hardly be told
that fakirs are Mahomedans, and that the Gymnosophists he mentions
were Brahmin Yogis.

The work, however, is a valuable one in its way; but the reader
should not forget that “there seems reason for suspecting” that the
author does not always know exactly what he is talking about,
whenever he strays too far from Archæology, on which he is no doubt
an authority.

                                  ---

THE JEWISH WORLD enters bravely enough (in its issue of the 11th
November 1887) on its new character of professor of symbology and
History. It accuses in no measured terms one of the editors of
LUCIFER of ignorance; and criticises certain expressions used in our
October number, in a foot-note inserted to explain why the “Son of
the Morning” LUCIFER is called in Mr. G. Massey’s little poem, “Lady
of Light.” The writer objects, we see, to Lucifer-Venus being called
in one of its aspects “the Jewish Astoreth;” or to her having ever
been offered cakes by the Jews. As explained in a somewhat confused
sentence: “There _was no Jewish Astoreth_, though the Syrian
goddess, Ashtoreth, or Astarte, often appears in Biblical
literature, the moon goddess, the complement of Baal, the Sun God.”

This, no doubt, is extremely learned and conveys quite _new_
information. Yet such an astounding statement as that the whole of
the foot-note in LUCIFER is “pure imagination and bad history” is
very risky indeed. For it requires no more than a stroke or two of
our pen to make the whole edifice of this denial tumble on the
_Jewish World_ and mangle it very badly. Our contemporary has
evidently forgotten the wise proverb that bids one to let “sleeping
dogs lie,” and therefore, it is with the lofty airs of superiority
that he informs his readers that though the Jews in Palestine lived
surrounded with (? _sic_) this pagan form of worship, and _may, at
times_, (?!) have wandered towards it, they HAD NOTHING IN THEIR
WORSHIP IN COMMON WITH CHALDEAN OR SYRIAN BELIEFS IN MULTIPLICITY OF
DEITIES? (!!)

This is what any impartial reader might really term “bad history,”
and every Bible worshipper describe as a _direct lie_ given to the
Lord God of Israel. It is more than _suppressio veri suggestio
falsi_, for it is simply a cool denial of facts in the face of both
Bible and History. We advise our critic of the _Jewish World_ to
turn to _his_ own prophets, to Jeremiah, foremost of all. We open
“Scripture” and find in it: “the Lord God” while accusing _his_
“backsliding Israel and treacherous Judah” of following in “the ways
of Egypt and of Assyria,” of drinking the waters of Sihor, and
“serving strange Gods” enumerating his grievances in this wise:

  “According _to the number of thy cities_ are thy gods, O Judah,
  (Jer. ii. 28.).

  “Ye have turned back to the iniquities of your forefathers who
  went after other gods to serve them (xi.) ... _according to the
  number of the streets of Jerusalem_ have ye set up altars to that
  shameful thing, even altars unto Baal” (_Ib._).

So much for Jewish _monotheism_. And is it any more “pure
imagination” to say that the Jews offered cakes to their Astoreth
and called her “Queen of Heaven”? Then the “Lord God” must, indeed,
be guilty of more than “a delicate expansion of facts” when
thundering to, and through, Jeremiah:—

  “Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah, and in the
  streets of Jerusalem? The children gather wood, and the fathers
  kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough TO MAKE CAKES _to
  the Queen of Heaven_, and to pour out drink offerings _unto the
  gods_.” (Jer. vii. 17-18).

“The Jews _may_ AT TIMES” only (?) have wandered towards pagan forms
of worship but “had _nothing in common_ in it with Syrian beliefs in
multiplicity of deities.” Had they not? Then the ancestors of the
editors of the _Jewish World_ must have been the victims of
“suggestion,” when, snubbing Jeremiah (and not entirely without good
reason),they declared to him:

  “As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the
  Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But we will certainly do
  whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense
  unto the Queen of Heaven[123] ... _as we have done, we_, AND OUR
  FATHERS, _our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and
  in the streets of Jerusalem_, for _then_ had we plenty of
  victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. But _since we left off
  to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven_, and to _pour out drink
  offerings unto her_ ... and (_to_) _make her cakes to worship her
  ... we have wanted all things_, and have been consumed by the
  sword and by the famine....” (Jer. xliv. 16, 17, 18, 19).

-----

Footnote 123:

  Astoreth-Diana, Isis, Melita, Venus, etc., etc.

-----

Thus, according to their own confession, it is not “at times” that
the Jews made cakes for, and worshipped Astoreth and the strange
gods, but constantly: doing, moreover, _as their forefathers_, kings
and princes _did_.

“_Bad_ history”? And what was the “golden calf” but the sacred
heifer, the symbol of the “Great Mother,” first the planet Venus,
and then the moon? For the esoteric doctrine holds (as the Mexicans
held) that Venus, the morning star, was _created before the sun and
moon; metaphorically_, of course, not astronomically,[124] the
assumption being based upon, and meaning that which the _Nazars_ and
the Initiate alone understood among the Jews, but that the writers
of the _Jewish World_ are not supposed to know. For the same reason
the Chaldeans maintained that the moon was produced before the sun
(_see Babylon—Account of Creation, by George Smith_). The morning
star, Lucifer-Venus was dedicated to that Great Mother symbolized by
the heifer or the “Golden Calf.” For, as says Mr. G. Massey in his
lecture on “The Hebrews and their Creations,” “This (the Golden
Calf) being of either sex, it supplied a twin-type for Venus, as
Hathor or Ishtar (Astoreth), the double star, that was male at
rising, and female at sunset” She is the “Celestial Aphrodite,”
_Venus Victrix_ νιχηφόρος associated with _Ares_ (see Pausanias i,
8, 4, 11, 25, 1).

-----

Footnote 124:

  Because the stars and planets are the symbols and houses of Angels
  and Elohim, who were, of course, “created,” or evoluted before the
  physical or cosmic sun or moon. “The sun god was called the child
  of the moon god Sin, in Assyria, and the lunar god Taht, is called
  the father of Osiris, the sun god ‘in Egypt.’” (G. Massey.)

-----

We are told that “happily for them (the Jews) there was no Jewish
Astoreth.” The _Jewish World_ has yet to learn, we see, that there
would have been no Greek Venus Aphrodite; no _Ourania_, her earlier
appellation; nor would she have been confounded with the Assyrian
Mylitta (Herod, 1, 199; Pausan., 1, 14, 7; Hesiod, Μυληταν την
Ουρανιαν Ασσυριοι) had it not been for the Phœnicians and other
Semites. We say the “Jewish Astoreth,” and we maintain what we say,
on the authority of the Iliad, the Odyssey, of Renan, and many
others. Venus Aphrodite is one with the Astarte, Astoreth, etc. of
the Phœnicians, and she is one (as a planet) with “Lucifer” the
“Morning Star.” So far back as the days of Homer, she was confounded
with _Kypris_, an Oriental goddess brought by the Phœnician Semites
from their Asiatic travels (_Iliad_, V, 330, 422, 260). Her worship
appears first at Cythere, a Phœnician settlement depôt or
trade-establishment (_Odys._, VIII. 362.; Walcker, _griech.
götterl._ I, 666.) Herodotus shows that the sanctuary of Ascalon, in
Syria, was the most ancient of the fanes of Aphrodite Ourania (I,
105): and Decharme tells us in his _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_,
that whenever the Greeks alluded to the origin of Aphrodite they
designated her as _Ourania_, an epithet translated from a _semitic
word_, as Jupiter _Epouranios_ of the Phœnician inscriptions, was
the _Samemroum_ of Philo of Byblos, according to Renan (_Mission de
Phenicie_). Astoreth was a goddess of generation, presiding at human
birth (as Jehovah was _god of generation_, foremost of all). She was
the moon-goddess, and a planet at the same time, whose worship
originated with the Phœnicians and Semites. It flourished most in
the Phœnician settlements and colonies in Sicily, at Eryax. There
hosts of _Hetairae_ were attached to her temples, as hosts of
_Kadeshim_, called by a more sincere name in the Bible, were, to the
house of the Lord, “where the women wove hangings for the grove”
(II. Kings, xxiii, 7). All this shows well the Semitic provenance of
Astoreth-Venus in her capacity of “great Mother.” Let us pause. We
advise sincerely the _Jewish World_ to abstain from throwing stones
at other peoples’ beliefs, so long as its own faith is but a house
of glass. And though Jeremy Taylor may think that “to be proud of
one’s learning is the greatest ignorance,” yet, in this case it is
but simple justice to say that it is really desirable for our
friends the Jews that the writer in LUCIFER of the criticised note
about Astoreth _should know less_ of history and the Bible, and her
unlucky critic in the _Jewish World_ learn a little more about it.

                                                        “ADVERSARY.”




      =THEOSOPHICAL= <br> =AND MYSTIC PUBLICATIONS=


THE THEOSOPHIST for October opens with the first of a series of
articles on the “Elohistic Cosmogony.” The views put forward by the
writer are certainly both striking and original, and, although Dr.
Pratt diverges very considerably from the recognised standard of
kabalistic orthodoxy, his interpretation of the Jewish version of
cosmic evolution will assuredly excite considerable interest.

Following on Dr. Pratt’s learned article, come a few—unfortunately,
too few—pages of extremely interesting notes on the Folk-lore of the
Himalayan tribes, contributed by Captain Banon. The _Theosophist_
has often been indebted to Captain Banon for similar notes
respecting such little known tribes and people; and it is much to be
regretted that the many members of the Theosophical Society who
reside in or visit such out-of-the-way places, do not make it a rule
to collect these traditions and send them for publication in the
_Theosophist_ or one of the other Theosophical magazines.

Dr. Hartmann continues his series of “Rosicrucian Letters,” with a
number of extracts from the papers of Karl von Eckartshausen, who
died in 1792. Dr. Hartmann deserves the gratitude of all students
for rendering accessible these records and notes of past generations
of “seekers after the Truth.”

Dr. Buck contributes a pithy and thoughtful article on “The Soul
Problem,” and Mr. Lazarus continues his exposition of the kabalistic
doctrine of the Microcosm. Besides these there are further
instalments of two valuable translations from Hindu works of great
antiquity and authority; the “Crest Jewel of Wisdom,” by
Sankaracharya and the “Kaivalyanita.” It is much to be desired that
one of our Hindu brothers, who adds to a knowledge of his own mystic
literature, an acquaintance with Western modes of thought and
expression, would devote a series of articles to the exposition of
the fundamental standpoint and ideas of such works as these. Such an
article would add enormously to the value of these translations to
the Western world.

In the _November_ number, Dr. Pratt takes up the _Jehovistic_
cosmogony, which he contrasts and compares with the _Elohistic_
version already referred to. In his view, the Jehovistic teaching
embodies the conception of the world as “created” and “ruled” by an
_extra-natural_ and _personal_ deity, as opposed to the more
philosophical and pantheistic conception of the earlier Elohistic
writers.

Under the title of _An Ancient Weapon_, this issue contains an
instructive account of the evocation of certain astral forces
according to the ancient Vedic rites. As here described, the _evil
intention_, with which the rite is performed, transforms it into a
ceremony of _Black Magic_, but this does not render the account any
less valuable.

This is followed by the first of a series of articles on _The
Allegory of the Zoroastrian Cosmogony_, which promises to furnish
much food for thought and study.

_Rosicrucian Letters_ contains this time an extract from an old MS.,
headed _The Temple of Solomon_, which is well worthy of careful
attention.

Besides these we have a sketch of the life and writings of
Madvachary, the great teacher of Southern India, and some further
testimonies to the fact of “self-levitation” from eye-witnesses.
Rama Prasad gives some most valuable details of the “Science of
Breathing,” one of the most curious branches of occult physics,
while the remainder of the number is occupied by an article on
“Tetragrammaton,” which may be interesting to students of the
Kabbala, and continuations of the “Kabbala and the Microcosm,” and
of the translations from Indian books mentioned in connection with
the October number.

These two numbers contain much valuable matter and well maintain the
reputation which the _Theosophist_ originally gained for itself.

                                  ---

In THE PATH for October we notice especially the following articles:

_Nature’s Scholar_, a most poetically-conceived and well-worked-out
Idyll, by J. C. Ver Plank, in which the underlying occult truth is
presented to the reader in a most attractive form.

Following this is a much needed warning against the dangers of
_Astral Intoxication_. Admirably expressed, it points out the true,
and indicates the false, path with great clearness; and we desire to
call the earnest attention of such of our readers as are engaged in
_psychic_ development to its importance.

“Pilgrim” contributes some further _Thoughts in Solitude_, the
leading idea of which may be indicated by its concluding lines,
which are quoted from Sir Philip Sydney of heroic fame:

            “Then farewell, World! thy uttermost I see,
            Eternal Love, maintain thy life in me!”

_Tea-Table Talk_ is even more interesting and suggestive than usual,
and, besides those above mentioned, this well-filled number contains
