Part IV. of the series of articles on _The Poetry of Re-incarnation
in Western Literature_, which deals with the _Platonic Poets_.

The _November_ number opens with an able continuation of Mr.
Brehon’s article on _The Bhagavat-Gita_, commenced so long ago as
last April, of which we hope to peruse a further instalment.
Following this is a short article indicating the term “Medium” from
the loathsome connotations which phenomenal spiritualism has
attached to it. We then come to a paper on Goethe’s _Faust_, read
before one of the branches of the Theosophical Society in America.
It is of great interest to students of literature and will furnish a
clue to the real meaning of much of the poet’s writing.

Mr. Johnston makes some most suggestive remarks on _Cain and Abel_;
Harij speaks in no uncertain tones of _Personalities_ and Truth,
while Hadji Erinn points out the _Path of Action_, and warns the
members of the T. S. that they must not expect their road to become
easier and plainer before them, while yet the society is undergoing
the trials of its education.

Zadok gives some able answers to questions on various points of
practical occultism and Julius, in _Tea-Table Talk_, points out how
many people are really entering on the path of Theosophy—even though
unconsciously.

                                  ---

LE LOTUS, for October and November, is even more interesting than
usual. In the October number are contained two very valuable
articles. The first of these is a paper on Paracelsus from the pen
of Dr. Hartmann, who is especially qualified to handle the subject
by his profound study of the work, and especially the manuscripts,
of that great occultist. M. “Papus” contributes a most lucid and
able exposition of some Kabbalistic doctrines, the _practical_ value
of which has been hitherto but little realised even by professed
students of mysticism.

The opening article in the November issue is headed, _The
Constitution of the Microcosm_. It is written in a clear and
attractive style, and contains a most thorough and complete
explanation of the various classifications of the principles which
enter into the constitution of man.

“Amaravella” has evidently studied the whole subject very deeply,
and he shows the relation of these various classifications to one
another in a way which will clear up many of the misconceptions
which have arisen.

M. “Papus” writes on Alchemy in a manner which shows how conversant
he is with this little-understood topic. We therefore look forward
with great anticipations to the perusal of his book “_Traité
élémentaire de science occulte_,” the fourth chapter of which
contains the article referred to.

It is very evident that Theosophy is making great and rapid progress
in France, and this is in great measure due to the untiring and
unselfish devotion of the editor of _Le Lotus_, M. Gaboriau, whom we
congratulate most warmly on the success which has attended his
efforts.

                                  ---

_L’Aurore_ for October contains an article on the so-called “Star of
Bethlehem,” which repeats the assurance that the world is entering
on a new and happier life-phase.

Unfortunately, it seems more than probable that before this
amelioration takes place, the world must pass through the valley of
the shadow of Death, and endure calamities far worse than any it has
yet seen. Lady Caithness continues her erudite and interesting
article on the lost ten tribes of Israel. Her thesis is put forward
in admirable language, and supported by a great wealth of biblical
quotations. Unfortunately, the task undertaken is an impossible one.
There never were twelve tribes of Israel—two only—Judah and the
Levites, having had a real existence in the flesh. The remainder are
but euhemerizations of the signs of the Zodiac, and were introduced
because they were necessary to the Kabalistic scheme on which the
“History” of the Jews was written.

Lady Barrogill relates the well-known story of an English bishop and
the ghost of a Catholic priest, who haunted his former residence in
order to secure the destruction of some notes he had taken (contrary
to the rule of the Church) of an important confession which he had
heard.

Besides these articles we find the continuation of the serial
romance, “L’amour Immortel,” and LUCIFER has to thank the editor for
the appreciative notice contained in this number.




                                LUCIFER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

         VOL. I.     LONDON, JANUARY 15TH, 1888.     NO. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                           =1888.=


People usually wish that their friends shall have a happy new
year, and sometimes “prosperous” is added to “happy.” It is not
likely that much happiness or prosperity can come to those who are
living for the truth under such a dark number as 1888; but still
the year is heralded by the glorious star Venus-Lucifer, shining
so resplendently that it has been mistaken for that still rarer
visitor, the star of Bethlehem. This too, is at hand; and surely
something of the Christos spirit must be born upon earth under
such conditions. Even if happiness and prosperity are absent, it
is possible to find something greater than either in this coming
year. Venus-Lucifer is the sponsor of our magazine, and as we
chose to come to light under its auspices, so do we desire to
touch on its nobility. This is possible for us all personally, and
instead of wishing our readers a happy or prosperous New Year, we
feel more in the vein to pray them to make it one worthy of its
brilliant herald. This can be effected by those who are courageous
and resolute. Thoreau pointed out that there are artists in life,
persons who can change the colour of a day and make it beautiful
to those with whom they come in contact. We claim that there are
adepts, masters in life who make it divine, as in all other arts.
Is it not the greatest art of all, this which affects the very
atmosphere in which we live? That it is the most important is seen
at once, when we remember that every person who draws the breath
of life affects the mental and moral atmosphere of the world, and
helps to colour the day for those about him. Those who do not help
to elevate the thoughts and lives of others must of necessity
either paralyse them by indifference, or actively drag them down.
When this point is reached, then the art of life is converted into
the science of death; we see the black magician at work. And no
one can be quite inactive. Although many bad books and pictures
are produced, still not everyone who is incapable of writing or
painting well insists on doing so badly. Imagine the result if
they were to! Yet so it is in life. Everyone lives, and thinks,
and speaks. If all our readers who have any sympathy with LUCIFER
endeavoured to learn the art of making life not only beautiful but
divine, and vowed no longer to be hampered by disbelief in the
possibility of this miracle, but to commence the Herculean task at
once, then 1888, however unlucky a year, would have been fitly
ushered in by the gleaming star. Neither happiness nor prosperity
are always the best of bedfellows for such undeveloped mortals as
most of us are; they seldom bring with them peace, which is the
only permanent joy. The idea of peace is usually connected with
the close of life and a religious state of mind. That kind of
peace will however generally be found to contain the element of
expectation. The pleasures of this world have been surrendered,
and the soul waits contentedly in expectation of the pleasures of
the next. The peace of the philosophic mind is very different from
this and can be attained to early in life when pleasure has
scarcely been tasted, as well as when it has been fully drunk of.
The American Transcendentalists discovered that life could be made
a sublime thing without any assistance from circumstances or
outside sources of pleasure and prosperity. Of course this had
been discovered many times before, and Emerson only took up again
the cry raised by Epictetus. But every man has to discover this
fact freshly for himself, and when once he has realised it he
knows that he would be a wretch if he did not endeavour to make
the possibility a reality in his own life. The stoic became
sublime because he recognised his own absolute responsibility and
did not try to evade it; the Transcendentalist was even more,
because he had faith in the unknown and untried possibilities
which lay within himself. The occultist fully recognises the
responsibility and claims his title by having both tried and
acquired knowledge of his own possibilities. The Theosophist who
is at all in earnest, sees his responsibility and endeavours to
find knowledge, living, in the meantime, up to the highest
standard of which he is aware. To all such LUCIFER gives greeting!
Man’s life is in his own hands, his fate is ordered by himself.
Why then should not 1888 be a year of greater spiritual
development than any we have lived through? It depends on
ourselves to make it so. This is an actual fact, not a religious
sentiment. In a garden of sunflowers every flower turns towards
the light. Why not so with us?

And let no one imagine that it is a mere fancy, the attaching of
importance to the birth of the year. The earth passes through its
definite phases and man with it; and as a day can be coloured so can
a year. The astral life of the earth is young and strong between
Christmas and Easter. Those who form their wishes now will have
added strength to fulfil them consistently.


                          TO THE MORNING STAR.

        Lucifer, Lucifer Son of the Morning,
          Trembling and fair on the opening skies,
        Heralding, truly, a day that is dawning,
          Telling the “Light of the World” shall arise.

        Lucifer, Lucifer, all through the Ages
          Weary hearts struggled and watched for the light,
        Now it is coming, and thou the forerunner,
          Mystical prophet, the herald of Right.

        There in the desert of Night where thou dwellest,
          Round thee in myriads the feebler lights stand;
        Lucifer, Lucifer, ever thou tellest
          The glorious Kingdom of Right is at hand.

        Rising and setting, O, Star of the Morning!
          Strangely prophetic, thou atom of light;
        Revealing in silence the law of creation.
          Out from the unseen abyss of the night,

        Into a world where the stars, sympathetic,
          Seem to be fraught with a pulsating breath;
        Brilliant, yet shining like tear-drops pathetic,
          But sinking at last in oblivion of death!

        Sinking, but wrapped in the shroud of the Morning,
          Folded in splendour as light shall arise;
        Lucifer, herald of Truth that is dawning,
         Ride through thy glorious pathway, the skies!

        Soon in the east, with a splendour triumphant,
          Morning shall break like a great altar-fire,
        Ignorance, darkness, and gross superstition,
          Shall melt in its beams, and in silence expire!

                                                         HELEN FAGG.

                        -----------------------

  .... “THE faith that you call sacred—‘sacred as the most delicate
  or manly or womanly sentiment of love and honour’—is the faith
  that nearly all of your fellow men are to be lost. Ought an honest
  man to be restrained from denouncing that faith because those who
  entertain it say that their feelings are hurt? You say to me:
  ‘There is a hell. A man advocating the opinions you advocate will
  go there when he dies.’ I answer: ‘There is no hell, the Bible
  that teaches it is not true.’ And you say: ‘How can you hurt my
  feelings?’”—R. G. INGERSOLL.—_Secular Review._


                     “TO THE READERS OF ‘LUCIFER.’”


Our magazine is only four numbers old, and already its young life is
full of cares and trouble. This is all as it should be; _i.e._, like
every other publication, it must fail to satisfy _all_ its readers,
and this is only in the nature of things and the destiny of every
printed organ. But what seems a little strange in a country of
culture and freethought is that LUCIFER should receive such a number
of _anonymous_, spiteful, and often abusive letters. This, of
course, is but a casual remark, the waste-basket in the office being
the only addressee and sufferer in this case; yet it suggests
strange truths with regard to human nature.[125]

-----

Footnote 125:

  “VERBUM SAP.” It is not our intention to notice anonymous
  communications, even though they should emanate in a round-about
  way from Lambeth Palace. The matter “_Verbum Sap_” refers to is
  not one of taste; the facts must be held responsible for the
  offence; and, as the Scripture hath it, “Woe to them by whom the
  offence cometh!”

-----

Sincerity is true wisdom, it appears, only to the mind of the moral
philosopher. It is rudeness and insult to him who regards
dissimulation and deceit as culture and politeness, and holds that
the shortest, easiest, and safest way to success is to let sleeping
dogs and old customs alone. But, if the dogs are obstructing the
highway to progress and truth, and Society will, as a rule, reject
the wise words of (St.) Augustine, who recommends that “no man
should prefer custom before reason and truth,” is it a sufficient
cause for the philanthropist to walk out of, or even deviate from,
the track of truth, because the selfish egoist chooses to do so?
Very true, as remarked somewhere by Sir Thomas Browne that not every
man is a proper champion for the truth, nor fit to take up the
gauntlet in its cause. Too many of such defenders are apt, from
inconsideration and too much zeal, to charge the troops of error so
rashly that they “remain themselves as trophies to the enemies of
truth.” Nor ought all of us (members of the Theosophical Society) to
do so personally, but rather leave it only to those among our
numbers who have voluntarily and beforehand sacrificed their
personalities for the cause of Truth. Thus teaches us one of the
Masters of Wisdom in some fragments of advice which are published
further on for the benefit of the Theosophists (see the article that
follows this). While enforcing upon such public characters in our
ranks as editors, and lecturers, etc., the duty of telling
fearlessly “the Truth to the face of LIE,” he yet condemns the habit
of private judgment and criticism in every individual Theosophist.

Unfortunately, these are not the ways of the public and readers.
Since our journal is entirely unsectarian, since it is neither
theistic nor atheistic, Pagan nor Christian, orthodox nor heterodox,
therefore, its editors discover eternal verities in the most
opposite religious systems and modes of thought. Thus LUCIFER fails
to give full satisfaction to either infidel or Christian. In the
sight of the former—whether he be an Agnostic, a Secularist, or an
Idealist—to find divine or occult lore underlying “the rubbish” in
the Jewish Bible and Christian Gospels is sickening; in the opinion
of the latter, to recognise the same truth as in the Judeo-Christian
Scriptures in the Hindu, Parsi, Buddhist, or Egyptian religious
literature, is vexation of spirit and blasphemy. Hence, fierce
criticism from both sides, sneers and abuse. Each party would have
us on its own sectarian side, recognising as truth, only that which
its particular _ism_ does.

But this cannot nor shall it be. Our motto was from the first, and
ever shall be: “THERE IS NO RELIGION HIGHER THAN—TRUTH.” Truth we
search for, and, once found, we bring it forward before the world,
whencesoever it comes. A large majority of our readers is fully
satisfied with this our policy, and that is plainly sufficient for
our purposes.

It is evident that when toleration is not the outcome of
indifference it must arise from wide-spreading charity and
large-minded sympathy. Intolerance is preeminently the consequence
of ignorance and jealousy. He who fondly believes that he has got
the great ocean in his family water-jug is naturally intolerant of
his neighbour, who also is pleased to imagine that he has poured the
broad expanses of the sea of truth into his own particular pitcher.
But anyone who, like the Theosophists knows how infinite is that
ocean of eternal wisdom, to be fathomed by no one man, class, or
party, and realizes how little the largest vessel made by man
contains in comparison to what lies dormant and still unperceived in
its dark, bottomless depths, cannot help but be tolerant. For he
sees that others have filled their little water-jugs at the same
great reservoir in which he has dipped his own, and if the water in
the various pitchers seems different to the eye, it can only be
because it is discoloured by impurities that were in the vessel
before the pure crystalline element—a portion of the one eternal and
immutable truth—entered into it.

There is, and can be, but one absolute truth in Kosmos. And little
as we, with our present limitations, can understand it in its
essence, we still know that if it is absolute it must also be
omnipresent and universal; and that in such case, it must be
underlying every world-religion—the product of the thought and
knowledge of numberless generations of thinking men. Therefore, that
a portion of truth, great or small, is found in every religious and
philosophical system, and that if we would find it, we have to
search for it at the origin and source of every such system, at its
roots and first growth, not in its later overgrowth of sects and
dogmatism. Our object is not to destroy any religion but rather to
help to filter each, thus ridding them of their respective
impurities. In this we are opposed by all those who maintain,
against evidence, that their particular pitcher alone contains the
whole ocean. How is our great work to be done if we are to be
impeded and harassed on every side by partisans and zealots? It
would be already half accomplished were the intelligent men, at
least, of every sect and system, to feel and to confess that the
little wee bit of truth they themselves own must necessarily be
mingled with error, and that their neighbours' mistakes are, like
their own, mixed with truth.

Free discussion, temperate, candid, undefiled by personalities and
animosity, is, we think, the most efficacious means of getting rid
of error and bringing out the underlying truth; and this applies to
publications as well as to persons. It is open to a magazine to be
tolerant or intolerant; it is open to it to err in almost every way
in which an individual can err; and since every publication of the
kind has a responsibility such as falls to the lot of few
individuals, it behoves it to be ever on its guard, so that it may
advance without fear and without reproach. All this is true in a
special degree in the case of a theosophical publication, and
LUCIFER feels that it would be unworthy of that designation were it
not true to the profession of the broadest tolerance and
catholicity, even while pointing out to its brothers and neighbours
the errors which they indulge in and follow. While thus keeping
strictly, in its editorials, and in articles by its individual
editors, to the spirit and teachings of pure theosophy, it
nevertheless frequently gives room to articles and letters which
diverge widely from the esoteric teachings accepted by the editors,
as also by the majority of theosophists. Readers, therefore, who are
accustomed to find in magazines and party publications only such
opinions and arguments as the editor believes to be unmistakably
orthodox—from his peculiar standpoint—must not condemn any article
in LUCIFER with which they are not entirely in accord, or in which
expressions are used that may be offensive from a sectarian or a
_prudish_ point of view, on the ground that such are unfitted for a
theosophical magazine. They should remember that precisely because
LUCIFER is a theosophical magazine, it opens its columns to writers
whose views of life and things may not only slightly differ from its
own, but even be diametrically opposed to the opinion of the
editors. The object of the latter is to elicit truth, not to advance
the interest of any particular _ism_, or to pander to any hobbies,
likes or dislikes, of any class of readers. It is only snobs and
prigs who, disregarding the truth or error of the idea, cavil and
strain merely over the expressions and words it is couched in.
Theosophy, if meaning anything, means truth; and truth has to deal
indiscriminately and in the same spirit of impartiality with vessels
of honour and of dishonour alike. No theosophical publication would
ever dream of adopting the coarse—or shall we say terribly
sincere—language of a Hosea or a Jeremiah; yet so long as those holy
prophets are found in the Christian Bible, and the Bible is in every
respectable, pious family, whether aristocratic or plebeian; and so
long as the Bible is read with bowed head and in all reverence by
young, innocent maidens and school-boys, why should our Christian
critics fall foul of any phrase which may have to be used—if truth
be spoken at all—in an occasional article upon a scientific subject?
It is to be feared that the same sentences now found objectionable,
because referring to Biblical subjects, would be loudly praised and
applauded had they been directed against any gentile system of faith
(_Vide certain missionary organs_). A little charity, gentle
readers—charity, and above all—_fairness_ and JUSTICE.

Justice demands that when the reader comes across an article in this
magazine which does not immediately approve itself to his mind by
chiming in with his own peculiar ideas, he should regard it as a
problem to solve rather than as a mere subject of criticism. Let him
endeavour to learn the lesson which only opinions differing from his
own can teach him. _Let him be tolerant, if not actually
charitable_, and postpone his judgment till he extracts from the
article the truth it must contain, adding this new acquisition to
his store. One ever learns more from one’s enemies than from one’s
friends; and it is only when the reader has credited this hidden
truth to LUCIFER, that he can fairly presume to put what he believes
to be the errors of the article, he does not like, to the debit
account.

[Illustration: decorative]

                              ADAPTATIONS.

We have been asked to give permission for Mr. Gerald Massey’s lines
on LUCIFER, Lady of Light, to be “adapted” and sung to the “Lord
Jesus Christ” in a chapel. This is flattering for both parties
concerned. The editors have no objection, but Mr. Massey is obdurate
enough to refuse his permission and sufficiently unfeeling to have
called the pretty “adaptation” a PARODY. The “Lady of Light” was to
have run in this wise:—

                “Star of the Day and the Night,
                Star of the Dark that is dying,
                Star of the Dawn that is nighing,
                Jesu, our Saviour, our Light!” etc.

But how truly appropriate it would be if Mr. Massey’s lines on
Shakspeare were also “adapted” and applied to the Lord Buddha.

              “FOR HIM NO MARTYR-FIRES HAVE BLAZED,
              NO RACK BEEN USED, NOR SCAFFOLDS RAISED;
              FOR HIM NO LIFE WAS EVER SHED
              TO MAKE THE CONQUEROR’S PATHWAY RED.
              OUR PRINCE OF PEACE IN GLORY HATH GONE,
              WITHOUT A SINGLE SWORD BEING DRAWN;
              WITHOUT ONE BATTLE-FLAG UNFURLED,
              TO MAKE HIS CONQUEST OF OUR WORLD.
              AND FOR ALL TIME HE WEARS HIS CROWN
              OF LASTING, LIMITLESS, RENOWN;
              HE REIGNS WHATEVER MONARCHS FALL,
              HIS THRONE IS AT THE HEART OF ALL.”

                       SOME WORDS ON DAILY LIFE.

                 (_Written by a Master of Wisdom._)

“It is divine philosophy alone, the spiritual and psychic blending
of man with nature, which, by revealing the fundamental truths that
lie hidden under the objects of sense and perception, can promote a
spirit of unity and harmony in spite of the great diversities of
conflicting creeds. Theosophy, therefore, expects and demands from
the Fellows of the Society a great mutual toleration and charity for
each other’s shortcomings, ungrudging mutual help in the search for
truths in every department of nature—moral and physical. And this
ethical standard must be unflinchingly applied to daily life.

“Theosophy should not represent merely a collection of moral
verities, a bundle of metaphysical ethics, epitomized in theoretical
dissertations. Theosophy _must be made practical_; and it has,
therefore, to be disencumbered of useless digressions, in the sense
of desultory orations and fine talk. Let every Theosophist only do
his duty, that which he can and ought to do, and very soon the sum
of human misery, within and around the areas of every Branch of your
Society, will be found visibly diminished. Forget SELF in working
for others—and the task will become an easy and a light one for
you....

“Do not set your pride in the appreciation and acknowledgment of
that work by others. Why should any member of the Theosophical
Society, striving to become a Theosophist, put any value upon his
neighbours’ good or bad opinion of himself and his work, so long as
he himself knows it to be useful and beneficent to other people?
Human praise and enthusiasm are short-lived at best; the laugh of
the scoffer and the condemnation of the indifferent looker-on are
sure to follow, and generally to out-weigh the admiring praise of
the friendly. Do not despise the opinion of the world, nor provoke
it uselessly to unjust criticism. Remain rather as indifferent to
the abuse as to the praise of those who can never know you as you
really are, and who ought, therefore, to find you unmoved by either,
and ever placing the approval or condemnation of your own _Inner
Self_ higher than that of the multitudes.

“Those of you who would know yourselves in the spirit of truth,
learn to live alone even amidst the great crowds which may sometimes
surround you. Seek communion and intercourse only with the God
within your own soul; heed only the praise or blame of that deity
which can never be separated from your _true_ self, _as it is verily
that God itself_: called the HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS. Put without delay
your good intentions into practice, never leaving a single one to
remain only an intention—expecting, meanwhile, neither reward nor
even acknowledgment for the good you may have done. Reward and
acknowledgment are in yourself and inseparable from you, as it is
your Inner Self alone which can appreciate them at their true degree
and value. For each one of you contains within the precincts of his
inner tabernacle the Supreme Court—prosecutor, defence, jury and
judge—whose sentence is the only one without appeal; since none can
know you better than you do yourself, when once you have learned to
judge that Self by the never wavering light of the inner
divinity—your higher CONSCIOUSNESS. Let, therefore, the masses,
which can never know your true selves, condemn your outer selves
according to their own false lights....

“The majority of the public Areopagus is generally composed of
self-appointed judges, who have never made a permanent deity of any
idol save their own personalities—their lower selves; for those who
try in their walk in life, to follow their _inner light_ will never
be found judging, far less condemning, those weaker than themselves.
What does it matter then, whether the former condemn or praise,
whether they humble you or exalt you on a pinnacle? They will never
comprehend you one way or the other. They may make an idol of you,
so long as they imagine you a faithful mirror of themselves on the
pedestal or altar which they have reared for you, and while you
amuse or benefit them. You cannot expect to be anything for them but
a temporary _fetish_, succeeding another fetish just overthrown, and
followed in your turn by another idol. Let, therefore, those who
have created that idol destroy it whenever they like, casting it
down with as little cause as they had for setting it up. Your
Western Society can no more live without its Khalif of an hour than
it can worship one for any longer period; and whenever it breaks an
idol and then besmears it with mud, it is not the model, but the
disfigured image created by its own foul fancy and which it has
endowed with its own vices, that Society dethrones and breaks.

“Theosophy can only find objective expression in an all-embracing
code of life, thoroughly impregnated with the spirit of mutual
tolerance, charity, and brotherly love. Its Society, as a body, has
a task before it which, unless performed with the utmost discretion,
will cause the world of the indifferent and the selfish to rise up
in arms against it. Theosophy has to fight intolerance, prejudice,
ignorance, and selfishness, hidden under the mantle of hypocrisy. It
has to throw all the light it can from the torch of Truth, with
which its servants are entrusted. It must do this without fear or
hesitation, dreading neither reproof nor condemnation. Theosophy,
through its mouthpiece, the Society, has to tell the TRUTH to the
very face of LIE; to beard the tiger in its den, without thought or
fear of evil consequences, and to set at defiance calumny and
threats. _As an Association_, it has not only the right, but the
duty to uncloak vice and do its best to redress wrongs, whether
through the voice of its chosen lecturers or the printed word of its
journals and publications—making its accusations, however, as
impersonal as possible. But its Fellows, or Members, have
_individually_ no such right. Its followers have, first of all, to
set the example of a firmly outlined and as firmly applied morality,
before they obtain the right to point out, even in a spirit of
kindness, the absence of a like ethic unity and singleness of
purpose in other associations or individuals. No Theosophist should
blame a brother, whether within or outside of the association;
neither may he throw a slur upon another’s actions or denounce him,
lest he himself lose the right to be considered a Theosophist. For,
as such, he has to turn away his gaze from the imperfections of his
neighbour, and centre rather his attention upon his own
shortcomings, in order to correct them and become wiser. Let him not
show the disparity between claim and action in another, but, whether
in the case of a brother, a neighbour, or simply a fellow man, let
him rather ever help one weaker than himself on the arduous walk of
life.

“The problem of true Theosophy and its great mission are, first, the
working out of clear unequivocal conceptions of ethic ideas and
duties, such as shall best and most fully satisfy the right and
altruistic feelings in men; and second, the modelling of these
conceptions for their adaptation into such forms of daily life, as
shall offer a field where they may be applied with most
equitableness.

“Such is the common work placed before all who are willing to act on
these principles. It is a laborious task, and will require strenuous
and persevering exertion; but it must lead you insensibly to
progress, and leave you no room for any selfish aspirations outside
the limits traced.... Do not indulge personally in unbrotherly
comparison between the task accomplished by yourself and the work
left undone by your neighbours or brothers. In the fields of
Theosophy _none is held to weed out a larger plot of ground than his
strength and capacity will permit him_. Do not be too severe on the
merits or demerits of one who seeks admission among your ranks, as
the truth about the actual state of the inner man can only be known
to Karma, and can be dealt with justly by that all-seeing LAW alone.
Even the simple presence amidst you of a well-intentioned and
sympathising individual may help you magnetically.... You are the
free volunteer workers on the fields of Truth, and as such must
leave no obstruction on the paths leading to that field.

         .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

“_The degree of success or failure are the landmarks the masters
have to follow, as they will constitute the barriers placed with
your own hands between yourselves and those whom you have asked
to be your teachers. The nearer your approach to the goal
contemplated—the shorter the distance between the student and
the Master._”


                  =THE BLOSSOM AND THE FRUIT=:

                  _THE TRUE STORY OF A MAGICIAN_.

                           (_Continued._)

                         ---------------------

                         BY MABEL COLLINS.

                         ---------------------

                              CHAPTER VII.

The cloud lifted to reveal Fleta’s face. She was bending over him;
she was at his side; she was almost leaning her face on his.

“My dear, my dear,” she said in a soft whispering voice, “has the
blow been too great? Tell me, Hilary, speak to me? Have you still
your senses?”

“And you love that man?” was Hilary’s sole answer, fixing his eyes
in a cold strange gaze on her.

“Oh! Hilary, you talk of what is unknown to you! I love him, yes,
and with a love so profound it is unimaginable to you.”

“And you tell me this! You tell this to the man who loves you, and
who has already devoted his whole life to you! Do you want a madman
for your service?”

“A life!” exclaimed Fleta, with a strange tone that had a ring as of
scorn in it. “What is a life? I count it nothing. Our great aims lie
beyond such considerations.”

Hilary raised himself and looked into her face.

“Then you are mad,” he said, “and if so, a madman in your service is
but fit. Nevertheless, my Princess, do not forget with what forces
you have to contend. I am but a man; you have accepted my love. Only
just now you have made me a murderer at heart—in desire. How soon
shall I be one in reality? That depends on you, Fleta. The next time
I see your gaze fixed on that man’s face as I saw it but now I will
kill him.”

Fleta rose to her full height and lifted her face to the sky; as she
stood there a sort of shiver passed through her, a shiver as of
pain. Instantly Hilary’s humour changed. “You are ill,” he
exclaimed. She turned her eyes on him.

“When that murderous mood is on you, it will not be Father Ivan that
you kill, but me, whom you profess to love. Do you understand that?”

“Ah!” cried Hilary, uttering a sound as if his heart was bursting
under the torture, “that is because you love him so! Well, I can
only long and serve. I have no power to protest. Yet I ask you, oh!
Princess, is it fit to use a man’s heart to play at your queenly
coquetries with? A king, your betrothed—a mysterious priest, the man
you love—are not these enough but that you must take a boy, obscure
and untaught in such misfortunes, and trample on his love? It is
unlike the nobility I have seen in you. Good-bye, for this,
Princess! I am never your lover again as I was before. I can never
believe in your pure sweet heart—only this morning it seemed to me
as a pearl, as a drop of limpid water. Good-bye, my idol! Yet I am
your servant to obey always, for I gave you my life to do with as
you would. Call me, and I come, like your dog; but I will not stay
by you, for no longer is it anything but pain to do so.”

With these wild, fierce reproaches, which seemed to stir the quiet
air of the woodland, and make it seethe and burn with passion and
despair, he turned and went from her. Fleta stood motionless, and
her eyes drooped heavily; only she murmured, “We were born under the
same star!”

Her voice was very low, yet it reached Hilary’s ear. The words
seemed to lash his heart.

“Under the same star!” he repeated, in a voice of agony, standing
suddenly still. “No, Fleta. You are the queen, I the subject. Not
only so, but you know it, and use your power to the full. Did you
not promise yourself utterly to me to be mine?”

“I promised to give you my love for yours; I promised to give you
all that you can take of me. My love is greater than you can even
imagine, else I would not have listened to one word of your
reproaches. They have humbled me, but I have borne it.”

“Ah, Fleta! you talk enigmas,” exclaimed Hilary, moving rapidly back
to her side; “you are enough to madden a man; yet I cannot but love
you. Why is this? Every act of yours proves you heartless,
faithless, and yet I love you! Why is this? Oh, that I could read
the riddle of your existence! Who are you?—What is this mysterious
place?—Who is that priest whose rule you acknowledge? I _will_
know!”

Fleta turned on him a sudden sweet smile, that seemed to light up
his inner being as the flame of a lamp illumines a dusky room.

“Yes,” she said, “find out. I cannot tell you, yet I desire you—oh!
indeed, I desire you to know. Compel the secret—force it. Yes, yes,
Hilary!”

She spoke eagerly, with a bright ring in her voice that thrilled his
soul. He forgot the Princess, the conspirator, the religieuse—he
only remembered the girl he loved—young, fresh, flower-like, with
the fair sweet face close to his own. With an unutterable cry of
love he held out his arms to her.

“Oh, my dear, my love, come!” he said, in trembling tones that
vibrated with his passion. But Fleta turned away without a word and
walked through the tall ferns, her robe trailing on the ground. No
backward glance, no turn of the head, not even a movement of those
white statuesque hands which hung at her sides. In one was a long
grass which she had plucked before she came to him. Even that,
though it fluttered in the wind, had a strangely stiff air, as if it
had become a part of that statue which but a moment since was a
woman. Hilary stood gazing after this retreating figure, powerless
to move, powerless to rouse in his mind any thought but one; and
that was not a thought. It was knowledge—consciousness. He knew, he
felt, that he dared not follow Fleta and address her as men address
the women they love; he dared not woo her with the fever on his lips
that burned there. And why? Not because of her royal birth, or her
beauty, or her power. He knew not why—he could not understand
himself. It was as though a spell were cast on him that held him
silent and motionless.

When at last she was out of sight a sudden reaction took place. The
whole burning force of the strong young man’s nature broke loose and
raged wildly through his whole system; he no longer was capable of
thought, he only felt the blood that rushed to his head and made his
brain reel as though he had drunk strong wine. He suddenly became
aware that he had aged, grown, become a new creature in these last
moments of experience. He had called himself a man five minutes ago;
but now he knew that when he had uttered those words, he was only a
boy. Across a great gulf of feeling he looked back at the love that
was in him when he had so spoken. Now his passion burned like a fire
on the altar of life; every instant the flames grew stronger and
mounted more fiercely to his inflamed brain.

The savage had burst forth. The savage untamed man, which smoulders
within, and hides behind the cultivated faces of a gentle age. One
strong touch on the chord of passion, and Hilary Estanol, a
chivalric and courteous product of a refined time, knew himself to
be a man, and knew that man to be a savage. A savage, full of
desire, of personal longing, thinking of nothing but his own needs.
And to Hilary this sudden starting forth of the nature within him
seemed like a splendid unfolding. He remained standing, erect,
strong, resolute. His seething mind hastily went over his whole
position and Fleta’s. Everything suddenly bore a new, vivid,
stirring aspect.

“This is a nest of conspirators!” he exclaimed to himself. “That
man, Ivan, is a conspirator or worse, else he would not hide here.
What crowned head is it that he threatens? He is a criminal. I will
discover his secret; I will rescue Fleta from him; by the strength
of my love I will win her love from him; I will make her my own.
Come, I must calm myself—I must be sober, for I have to find out the
meaning of this mysterious place.”

He walked slowly through the wood, trying to still the throbbing in
his brain, to check the fierce pulsations of his heart and blood. He
knew that now he needed all his instincts, all his natural
intelligence, all his power of defence; for, in his present humour,
he walked as an enemy to all men; by his new tide of feeling he had
made every man his enemy. The young King Otto had a prior right to
the Fleta whom he desired to make his own; King Otto was indeed his
enemy. Ivan had her love; how bitterly did Hilary hate that priest!
And Adine, the false Fleta—what was she but a mere tool of the
priest’s, a creature used to baffle and blind him? She was the one
most likely to trip his steps, for she defied even the knowledge
which his love gave him of Fleta’s face!

He was full of energy and activity, and his blood desired to be
stilled by action. He had quickly decided that he must immediately
do two things: inspect the whole exterior of the house, so as to get
some notion of what rooms were in it, and what their uses; and
explore the outer circle of the grounds, to see if there was any
difficulty about leaving them. As the latter task involved most
exercise, he chose to undertake it first, and swiftly, with long
strides, made his way through the woodlands in the direction where
the boundaries must lie. It did not take him long to traverse a
considerable distance; for he felt stronger than ever in his life
before. He had been a delicate lad, now he knew himself to be a
strong man, as if new blood ran in his veins. The moon was high in
the heavens, it was nearly full, and its light was strong. By it he
soon discovered that the strange place in which he was had a more
cunning and effective defence than any high wall or iron barrier. It
was surrounded by tangled virgin woodland growth, where, as it
seemed, no man’s foot could have ever trodden.

Hilary found it hard to believe that such wild land existed within a
drive of the city. But it was there, and there was no passing
through it, unless he worked his way with a wood-axe, inch by inch,
as men do when they make a clearing. Such a task was hopeless, even
if he had the tools, for it was impossible to tell in what direction
to move.

He returned at last, after many fruitless efforts; there seemed to
be no vestige of a path. He had discovered the gate by which their
entrance had been made; and discovered also that it was guarded. A
figure moved slowly to and fro in the shadow of the trees; not with
the air of one strolling for pleasure, but with the regular
movements of a sentry. It was an unfamiliar figure, but dressed in
the garb of the order.

Hilary went quietly along by the side of the path that led to the
house. It was useless to waste more time on this investigation;
quite clearly he was a prisoner. And it seemed to him equally clear
that unless he could escape, no information would be of any use to
him. He must be able to carry it to the city, where he would be free
to take it to Fleta’s father, or even to other crowned heads in
other countries, according to its nature. As he walked quietly on,
revolving his position, he saw that the task he had set himself was
no light one, even for a strong man possessed by love. These monks
belonged to an extraordinarily powerful order, and were men of great
ability.

Here he was, in the very heart of one of their secret centres, which
was, presumably, political. Fleta and King Otto were under their
influence. And they were magicians; very certain he felt that they
knew some of Nature’s secrets, and had trained Fleta in her
mysterious powers. And from this hidden and carefully guarded place
he was determined to escape, taking with him its secret—and Fleta!
Fleta, his love, his own, yet whom he had to win by his strength.

                             CHAPTER VIII.

In the long corridor through which Fleta had led Hilary to Father
Ivan’s room there was another door, which was fastened in a very
different manner. It was held in its place by iron clamps which
would puzzle the beholder, for they fastened on the outside as
though they secured the door of a prison instead of being any
protection for the inhabitant of the room beyond. It was inside this
door that Fleta was now lying down to rest for the night. Had Hilary
known this what agony would have torn him! He would have felt that
he must break those bars and release the prisoner within them,
however supernatural the strength might be which would be needed. He
was spared the sharp pain of knowing this, however, and he was not
likely to learn it, for a strange sentinel patrolled the long
corridor with even step—Father Ivan himself. Without any pause he
went steadily to and fro.

It was about midnight that Father Ivan went into his room and
glanced at a clock on the chimney-piece; not quite midnight, but
very nearly. Hilary was lying awake in his room, tossing to and fro
on a very luxurious and tempting bed, which gave him, however, no
hope of rest. He had wandered round and round the house a dozen
times, only to find himself bewildered by its strange shape, and the
shrubberies which grew up close to the walls, and disheartened by
the solid barricading of those windows which it was easy to
approach. And yet at last he found a window wide open, and a room
brightly lit; a lamp stood on the table and showed the pleasant
room, well-furnished, and with a bed in it, dressed in fine linen
and soft laces such as perhaps only members of an ascetic order know
how to offer to their guests. Hilary stood a moment on the
threshold, and then suddenly recognised it as his own room. It gave
him an odd feeling, this, as if he had been watched and arranged
for; treated like a prisoner. Well, it was useless to evade that
dark fact—a prisoner he was. Recognising defeat for the moment,
Hilary determined to accept it as gracefully as might be. He
entered, closed his window and the strong shutters which folded over
it, and then quickly laid himself down with intent to sleep. But
sleep would not come, and he found all his thoughts and all his
interest centred on Father Ivan. He tried to prevent this but could
not; he chased Fleta’s image in vain—he could scarcely remember her
beautiful face! What was its shape and colour? He tortured himself
in trying to recall the face he loved so dearly. But always Father
Ivan’s figure was before his eyes; and suddenly it struck him that
this vision was almost real, for he saw Ivan raise his hand in a
commanding gesture which seemed to be directed towards himself. A
moment later and he fell fast asleep, like a tired child. At this
moment Ivan was standing in his own room, looking for an instant at
the clock. He stood, perhaps, a little longer than was needed in
order to see the time; and a frown came on his fine clear forehead
which drew the arched eyebrows together. Then he turned quickly,
left his room, and closed its door behind him. He went to the door
which was so strongly barred, and noiselessly loosened its
fastenings, which swung heavily yet quite softly away from it. He
opened the door and went in.

In a sort of curtained recess was a low divan, which quite filled
it, rising hardly a foot from the ground. This was covered with
great rugs made of bear and wolf skin. Fleta lay stretched upon
them, wrapped in a long cloak of some thick white material, which
was bordered all round with white fur, and, indeed, lined with it,
too. And yet when Ivan stooped and touched her hand it was cold as
ice.

“Come,” he said; and turning, went slowly away from her. Fleta rose
and followed him. Her eyes were half-closed, and had something of
the appearance of a sleep-walker’s, and yet not altogether, for
though they appeared dim and unseeing yet there was purpose, and
consciousness, and resolution in them. No one who had not seen Fleta
before in this state could have recognised those eyes, so set and
strange were they. Ivan approached a large curtained archway, and
drawing the curtain aside he motioned to Fleta to pass through. As
she did so he touched one of her hands, as it hung at her side.
Immediately she raised it, and throwing the cloak aside showed that
she held a white silk mask. Her dress beneath the cloak was of white
silk. Slowly she raised the mask to her face and was about to put it
on when a change of state came so suddenly upon her that it was like
a tropical tornado. She opened her starry eyes wide and vivid light
flashed from them; she flung the mask away upon the floor and
clasped her hands violently together, while her whole frame shook
with emotion.

“Why must I mask myself?” she exclaimed. “You have not told me why.”

“I have,” said Ivan, very quietly. “No woman has ever entered there
till now.”

“What then?” cried Fleta, fiercely. “There is no shame in being a
woman! Have I not assailed that door in vain in a different
character? Now, a woman, I demand entrance. Master, I will not
disguise myself.”

“Be it so,” said Ivan, “yet take the mask with you lest your mood
should change again. You were willing, you remember, but a while
since.”

Fleta stood motionless regarding the mask as it lay on the floor.
Then she lifted her head suddenly and looked Ivan straight in the
eyes.

“I will cast my sex from me, and mask my womanhood without any such
help as that.”

Immediately that she had spoken Ivan walked on. They were in a long
corridor, lit, and with the walls faintly coloured in pale pink on
which shone some silver stars. Yet, bright though it was, this
corridor seemed strangely solemn. Why was it so? Fleta looked from
side to side, and could not discover. There was something new to her
which she did not understand. Though she had been instructed in so
many of the mysteries, and so much of the knowledge of the order,
she had never entered this corridor, nor indeed had she before known
of its existence. They slowly neared the end of it where was a high
door made of oak, and seemingly very solidly fastened; but Father
Ivan opened it easily enough.

“My God!” cried Fleta instantly, in a low voice of deep amazement.
“Where am I? What country am I in? Father, was that corridor a magic
place? This is no longer my own country! How far have you carried me
in this short time?”

“A long way my daughter; come, do not delay.”

A vast plain, prairie-like, stretched before them, encircled on the
right by the narrowing end of a huge arm of mountains which
disappeared upon the far horizon. Upon the plain was one spot, was
one place, where a livid flame-like light burned, and could be seen,
though the whole scene was bathed in strong moonlight. Ivan
commenced to rapidly take his way down a steep path which lay before
them. And then Fleta became aware that they were themselves upon a
height and had to descend into the plain. She did not look back; all
her thoughts were centred on that vivid light which she now saw came
from the windows of a great building. Then she suddenly saw that a
number of persons were in the plain; although it was so large yet
there were enough people to look like a crowd, which was gathering
together from different directions. All were approaching the
building.

“Father,” she said to Ivan, who was leading the way rapidly. “Will
they go in?”

“Into the Temple? Those on the plain? Indeed no. They are outside
worshippers; that crowd is in the world and of it, and yet has
courage to come here often when there is no light, and the icy winds
blow keen across the plain.”

“And they never enter. Why, my master, they can have no strength.”

Ivan glanced back for an instant, a curious look in his eyes.

“It is not always strength that is needed,” he said in a low voice.
Fleta did not seem to hear him; her eyes were fixed on the temple
windows. Suddenly she stopped and cried out:

“Is this a dream?”

“You are not asleep,” said Ivan with a smile.

“Asleep! no,” she answered, and went on her way with increased
rapidity.

Very soon they stood on the plain and advanced with great speed
towards the temple. Fleta was naturally hardy; but now it seemed to
her that the very idea of fatigue was absurd. She could scale
mountains in order to reach that light. And yet what was it in it
that drew her so? None but herself could have told. But Fleta’s
heart beat passionately with longing at the sight of it. Ivan turned
on her a glance of compassion.

“Keep quiet,” he said.

He was answered with a look and tone of fervour.

“Yes: if it is in human power,” she replied.

The great crowds were slowly gathering towards the temple and formed
themselves into masses of silent and scarcely moving figures. Fleta
was now among them and though so absorbed by the idea of the goal
before her, she was attracted by the strange appearance of these
people. They were of all ages and nationalities, but more than
two-thirds of them were men; they one and all had the appearance of
sleep-walkers, seeming perfectly unconscious of the scene in which
they moved and of their object in reaching it. Their whole nature
was turned inwards; so it appeared to Fleta. Why then had they come
to this strange place, so difficult of access, if when come they
could neither see nor hear? Fleta considered these things rapidly in
her mind and would again have asked an explanation of Father Ivan
but that while her steps slackened a little, his had hastened. He
had already reached the door of the temple—when Fleta reached it he
was not there. Of course he had entered, and Fleta, without fear or
hesitation, put her hand on the great bar which held the door and
lifted it. It was not difficult to lift; it seemed to yield to her
touch, and swung back smoothly. With a slight push the great door
opened a little before her—not wide; only as far as she had pushed
it. Ah! there was the light! There, in her eyes! It was like life
and joy to Fleta. She turned her eyes up to gaze on it, and stood an
instant with her hands clasped, in ecstacy.

Someone brushed lightly by, and, passing her, went straight in. That
reminded her that she, too, desired to go straight in. She nerved
herself for the supreme effort. For she was learned enough to know
that only the initiate in her faith could enter that door; and she
had not, in any outward form, passed the initiation. But she
believed she had passed it in her soul; she had tested her emotions
on every side and found the world was nothing to her; she had flung
her mask away believing her woman’s shape and face to be the merest
outward appearance, which would be unseen at the great moment. And
now it hardly seemed as if she were a woman—she stood transfigured
by the nobility of her aspirations—and some who stood on the step
outside remained there awestruck by her majestic beauty. By a
supreme effort she resolved to face all—and to conquer all. She
boldly entered the door and went up the white marble steps within
it. A great hall was before her, flooded with the clear, soft light
she loved; an innumerable number of objects presented themselves to
her amazed eyes, but she did not pause to look at them—she guessed
that the walls were jewelled from their sparkling—she guessed that
the floor was covered with flowers, which lay on a polished silver
surface, from the gleaming and the colour—and who were these, the
figures in silver dresses with a jewel like an eye that saw, clasped
at the neck? A number came towards her. She would not allow herself
to feel too exultant—she tried to steady herself—and yet joy came
wildly into her heart, for she felt that she was already one of this
august company. But their faces, as they gathered nearer, were all
strange and unfamiliar. She looked from one to another.

“Where is Ivan?” she murmured.

Suddenly all was changed. The white figures grew in numbers till
there seemed thousands—with outstretched hands they pushed Fleta
down the steps—down, down, down, resist how she might. She did more!
She fought, she battled, she cried aloud, first for justice, then
for pity. But there was no relenting, no softening in these
superhuman faces. Fleta fled at last from their overpowering numbers
and inexorable cruelty, and then there came a great cry of voices,
all uttering the same words;

“You love him! Go!”

Fleta fell, stunned and broken, at the foot of the outer step, and
the great door closed behind her. But she was not unconscious for
more than a few minutes. She opened her eyes and looked at the
starry sky. Then she felt suddenly that she could not endure even
that light and that the stars were reading her soul. She rose and
hurried away, blindly following in any path that her feet found. It
did not take her to any familiar place. She found herself in a dark
wood. The moss was soft and fragrant and violets scented it. She lay
down upon it, drawing her white cloak round her and hiding her eyes
from the light.

                              CHAPTER IX.

It seemed to her that for long ages she was alone. Her mind achieved
great strides of thought which at another time would have appeared
impossible to her. She saw before her clearly her own folly, her own
mistake. Yesterday she would not have credited it—yesterday it would
have been unmeaning to her. But now she understood it, and
understood too how heavy and terrible was her punishment; for it was
already upon her. She lay helpless, her eyes shut, her whole body
nerveless. Her punishment was here. She had lost all hope, all
faith.

A gentle touch on her hand roused her consciousness, but she was too
indifferent to open her eyes. It mattered little to her what or who
was near her. The battle of her soul was now the only real thing in
life to her.

A voice that seemed strangely familiar fell on her ears; yet last
time she had heard it it was loud, fierce, arrogant; now it was
tender and soft, and full of an overwhelming wonder and pity.

“You, Princess Fleta, here? My God! what can have happened? Surely
she is not dead? No! What is it, then?”

Fleta slowly opened her eyes. It was Hilary who knelt beside her;
she was lying on the dewy grass, and Hilary knelt there, the morning
sun shining on his head and lighting up his beautiful boy’s face.
And Fleta as she lay and looked dully at him felt herself to be
immeasurably older than he was; to be possessed of knowledge and
experience which seemed immense by his ignorance. And yet she lay
here, nerveless, hopeless.

“What is it?” again asked Hilary, growing momently more distressed.

“Do you want to know?” she said gently, and yet with an accent of
pity that was almost contempt in her tone. “You would not
understand.”

“Oh, tell me!” said Hilary. “I love you—let me serve you!”

She hardly seemed to hear his words, but his voice of entreaty made
her go on speaking in answer:

“I have tried,” she said, “and failed.”

“Tried what?” exclaimed Hilary, “and how failed? Oh, my Princess, I
believe these devils of priests have given you some fever—you do not
know what you are saying!”

“I know very well,” replied Fleta; “I am in no fever. I am all but
dead—that is no strange thing, for I am stricken.” Hilary looked at
her as she lay, and saw that her words were true. How strange a
figure she looked, lying there so immovably, as if crushed or dead,
upon the dewy grass; wrapped in her white robes. And her face was
white with a terrible whiteness; the great eyes looked out from the
white face with a sad, smileless gaze; and would those pale drawn
lips never smile again? Was the radiant, brilliant Fleta changed for
ever into this paralysed white creature? Hilary knew that even if it
was so he loved her more passionately and devotedly than before. His
soul yearned towards her.

“Tell me, explain to me, what has done this?” he cried out, growing
almost incoherent in his passionate distress. “I demand to know by
my love for you. What have you tried to do in this awful past
night?”

Fleta opened her eyes, the lids of which had drooped heavily, and
looked straight into his as she answered:

“I have tried for the Mark of the White Brotherhood. I have tried to
pass the first initiation of the Great Order. I did not dream I
could fail, for I have passed through many initiations which men
regard with fear. But I have failed.”

“I cannot believe,” said Hilary, “that you could fail in anything.
You are—dreaming—you are feverish. Let me lift you, let me carry you
into the house.”

“Yes, I have failed,” answered Fleta dully; “failed, because I had
not measured the strength of my humanity. It is in me—in me still! I
am the same as any other woman in this land. I, who thought myself
supreme—I, who thought myself capable of great deeds! Ah, Hilary,
the first simple lesson is yet unlearned. I have failed because I
loved—because I love like any other fond and foolish woman! And yet
no spark of any part of love but devotion is in my soul. That is too
gross. Is it possible to purge even that away? Yes, those of the
White Brotherhood have done it. I will do it even if it take me a
thousand years, a dozen lifetimes!”

She had raised herself from the ground as she spoke, for a new
fierce passion had taken the place of the dull despair in her
manner; she had raised herself to her feet, and then unable to stand
had fallen on to her knees. Hilary listened yet hardly heard; only
some of her words hurried into his mind. He bent down till his face
touched her white cloak where it lay on the grass, and kissed it a
dozen times.

“You have failed because of love? Oh, my Princess, then it is not
failure! Men live for love, men die for love! It is the golden power
of life. Oh, my Princess, let me take you from this terrible
place—come back with me to the world where men and women know love
to be the one great joy for which all else is well lost. Fleta,
while I doubted that you loved me I was as wax; but now that I know
you do, and with a love so great that it has power to check the
career of your soul, now I am strong, I am able to do all that a
strong man can do. Come, let me raise you and take you away from
here to a place of peace and delight!”

He had risen to his feet and stood before her, looking magnificent
in the morning sunshine. He was slight of build, yet that slightness
was really indicative of strength; when Hilary Estanol had been
effeminate it was because he had not cared to be anything else. He
stood grandly now, his hands stretched towards her; a man, lofty,
transformed by the power of love. Fleta looking at him saw in his
brilliant eyes the gleam of the conquering savage. She rose suddenly
and confronted him.

“You are mistaken,” she said abruptly. “It is not you that I love.”

Then, as suddenly as Fleta had moved and spoken, the man before her
vanished, with his nobility, and left the savage only, unvarnished,
unhumanised.

“My God,” gasped Hilary, almost breathless from the sudden blow,
“then it is that accursed priest?”

“Yes,” answered Fleta, her eyes on his, her voice dull, her whole
form like that of a statue, so emotionless did she seem, “it is that
accursed priest.”

She moved away from him and looked about her. The spot was familiar.
She was in the woodland about the monastery. She could find her way
home now without difficulty. And yet how weak she was, and how hard
it was to take each footstep! After moving a few paces she stood
still and tried to rouse herself, tried to use her powerful will.

“Where are my servants?” she said in a low voice. “Where are those
who do my bidding?”

She closed her eyes, and standing there in the sunlight, used all
her power to call the forces into action which she had learned to
control. For she was a sufficiently learned magician to be the
mistress of some of the secrets of Nature. But now it seemed she was
helpless—her old powers were gone. A low, bitter cry of anguish
escaped from her lips as she realised this awful fact. Hilary,
terrified by the strange sound of her voice, hastily approached her
and looked into her face. Those dark eyes, once so full of power,
were now full of an agony such as one sees in the eyes of a hunted
and dying creature. Yet Fleta did not faint or fail, or cling to the
strong man who stood by her side. After a moment she spoke, with a
faint yet steady voice.

“Do you know the way to the gate?” she asked.

“Yes,” replied Hilary; who indeed had but recently explored the
whole demesne.

“Take my hand,” she said, “and lead me there.”

She used her natural power of royal command now; feeble though she
was, she was the princess. Hilary did not dream of disobeying her.
He took the cold and lifeless hand she extended to him, and led her
as quickly as was possible over the grass, through the trees and
flowering shrubs, to the gateway. As they neared it she spoke:

“You are to go back to the city,” she said. “Do not ask why—you must
go; yet I will tell you this—it is for your own safety. I have lost
my power—I can no longer protect you, and there are both angels and
devils in this place. I have lost all! all! And I have no right to
risk your sanity as well as my own. You must go.”

“And leave you here?” said Hilary, bewildered.

“I am safe,” she answered proudly. “No power in heaven or earth can
hurt me now, for I have cast my all on one stake. Know this, Hilary,
before we part; I shall never yield or surrender. I shall cast out
that love that kills me from my heart—I shall enter the White
Brotherhood. And, Hilary, you too will enter it. But, oh! not yet!
Bitter lessons have you yet to learn! Good-bye, my brother.”

The sentinel who guarded the gate now approached them in his walk;
Fleta moved quickly towards him. After a few words had passed
between them he blew a shrill, fine whistle. Then he approached
Hilary.

“Come,” he said, “I will show you the way for some distance and will
then obtain you a horse and a guide to the city.”

Hilary did not hesitate in obeying Fleta’s commands; he knew he must
go. But he turned to look once more into her mysterious face. She
was no longer there. He bowed his head, and silently followed the
monk through the gate into the outer freedom of the forest.

Fleta meantime crept back to the house through the shelter of the
trees. Her figure looked like that of an aged woman, for she was
bowed almost double and her limbs trembled as she moved. She did not
go to the centre door of the house, but approached a window which
opened to the ground and now stood wide. It was the window of
Fleta’s own room; she hurried towards it with feeble, uncertain
steps. “Rest! Rest! I must rest!” she kept murmuring to herself. But
on the very threshold she stumbled and fell. Someone came
immediately to her and tried to raise her. It was Father Ivan. Fleta
disengaged herself, tremblingly yet resolutely. She rose with
difficulty to her feet and gazed very earnestly into his face.

“And you knew why I should fail?” she said.

“Yes,” he answered, “I knew. You are not strong enough to stand
alone amid the spirit of humanity. I knew you clung to me. Well have
you suffered from it. I know that very soon you will stand alone.”

“Of what use would that mask have been?” demanded Fleta, pursuing
her own thoughts.

“None. If you had obeyed me and worn it you would have been of so
craven a spirit you could never have reached the temple, never have
seen the White Brotherhood. You have done these things, which are
more than any other woman has accomplished.”

“I will do yet more,” said Fleta. “I will be one of them.”

“Be it so,” answered Ivan. “To do so you must suffer as no woman has
yet had strength to suffer. The humanity in you must be crushed out
as we crush a viper beneath our feet.”

“It shall be. I may die, but I will not pause. Good-bye, my master.
As I am a queen in the world of men and women, so you are king in
the world of soul, and to you I have done homage; that homage they
call love. It is so, perhaps. I am blind yet, and know not. But no
more may you be my king. I am alone, and all knowledge I gain I must
now gain myself.”

Ivan bowed his head as if in obedience to an unanswerable decree,
and in a moment had walked away among the trees. Fleta watched him
stonily till he was out of sight, then dragged herself within the
window to fall helplessly upon the ground, shaken by sobs and strong
shudders of despair.

                                  ---

                               CHAPTER X.

It was late in the day before Fleta again came out of her room. She
seemed to have recovered her natural manner and appearance; and yet
there was a change in her which anyone who knew her well must see.
She had not been into the general rooms, or greeted the other
guests; nor did she do so now. Her face was full of resolution, but
she was calm, at all events externally. Without going near the guest
rooms or the great entrance hall, she made her way round the house
to where a very small door stood almost hidden in an angle of the
wall. It was such a door as might lead to the cellars of a house,
and when Hilary had explored the night before he had scarcely
noticed it. But it was exceedingly solid and well fastened. Fleta
gave a peculiar knock upon it with a fan which she carried in her
hand. It was immediately opened, and Father Amyot appeared.

“Do you want me?” he asked.

“Yes; I want you to go on an errand for me.”

“Where am I to go?”

“I do not know; probably you will know. I must speak to one of the
White Brotherhood.”

Amyot’s face clouded and he looked doubtfully at her.

“What is there you can ask that Ivan cannot answer?”

“Does it matter to you?” said Fleta imperiously. “You are my
messenger, that is all.”

“You cannot command me as before,” said Father Amyot.

“What! do you know that I have failed? Does all the world know it?”

“The world?” echoed Amyot, contemptuously. “No; but all the
Brotherhood does, and all its servants do. No one has told me, but I
know it.”

“Of course,” said Fleta to herself. “I am foolish.” She turned away
and walked up and down on the grass, apparently buried in deep
thought. Presently she raised her head suddenly, and quickly moved
towards Amyot, who still stood motionless in the dim shadow of the
little doorway. She fixed her eyes on him; they were blazing with an
intense fire. Her whole attitude was one of command.

“Go,” she said.

Father Amyot stood but for a moment; and then he came out slowly
from the doorway, shutting it behind him.

“You have picked up a lost treasure,” he said. “You have found your
will again. I obey. Have you told me all your command?”

“Yes. I must speak to one of the White Brothers. What more can I
say? I do not know one from another. Only be quick!”

Instantly Amyot strode away over the grass and disappeared. Fleta
moved slowly away, thinking so deeply that she did not know any one
was near her till a hand was put gently on her arm. She looked up,
and saw before her the young king, Otto.

“Have you been ill,” he asked, looking closely into her face.

“No,” she answered. “I have only been living fast—a century of
experience in a single night! Shall I talk to you about it, my
friend?”

“I think not,” answered Otto, who now was walking quietly by her
side. “I may not readily understand you. I am anxious above all to
advance slowly and grasp each truth as it comes to me. I have been
talking a long time to-day to Father Ivan; and I feel that I cannot
yet understand the doctrines of the order except as interpreted
through religion.”

“Through religion?” said Fleta. “But that is a mere externality.”

“True, and intellectually I see that. But I am not strong enough to
stand without any external form to cling to. The precepts of
religion, the duty of each towards humanity, the principle of
sacrifice one for another, these things I can understand. Beyond
that I cannot yet go. Are you disappointed with me?”

“No, indeed,” answered Fleta. “Why should I be.”

Otto gave a slight sigh as of relief. “I feared you might be,” he
answered; “but I preferred to be honest. I am ready, Fleta, to be a
member of the order, a devout member of the external Brotherhood.
How far does that place me from you who claim a place among the wise
ones of the inner Brotherhood.”

Fleta looked at him very seriously and gravely.

“I claim it,” she said; “but is it mine? Yet I will win it, Otto;
even at the uttermost price, I will make it mine.”

“And at what cost?” said Otto. “What is that uttermost price?”

“I think,” she said slowly, “I already feel what it is. I must learn
to live in the plain as contentedly as on the mountain tops. I have
hungered to leave my place in the world, to go to those haunts where
only a few great ones of the earth dwell, and from them learn the
secret of how to finally escape from the life of earth altogether.
That has been my dream, Otto, put into simple words; the old dream
of the Rosicrucian and those hungerers after the occult who have
always haunted the world like ghosts, unsatisfied, homeless. Because
I am a strong-willed creature, because I have learned how to use my
will, because I have been taught a few tricks of magic I fancied
myself fitted to be one of the White Brotherhood. Well, it is not
so. I have failed. I shall be your queen, Otto.”

The young king turned on her a sudden look full of mingled emotions.
“Is that to be, Fleta? Then may I be worthy of your companionship.”

Fleta had spoken bitterly, though not ungently. Otto’s reply had
been in a strange tone, that had exultation, reverence, gladness, in
it; but not any of the passion which is called love. A coquette
would have been provoked by a manner so entirely that of friendship.

“Otto,” said Fleta, after a moment’s pause, during which they had
walked on side by side. “I am going to test your generosity. Will
you leave me now?”

“My generosity?” exclaimed Otto. “How is it possible for you to
address me in that way?” Without any further word of explanation he
turned on his heel and walked quickly away. Fleta understood his
meaning very well; she smiled softly as she looked for a moment
after him. Then, as he vanished, her whole face changed, her whole
expression of attitude, too. For a little while she stood quite
still, seemingly wrapt in thought. Then steadily and swiftly she
began to move across the grass and afterwards to thread her way
through the trees. Having once commenced to move, she seemed to have
no hesitation as to the direction in which she was going. And,
indeed, if you had been able to ask her how she knew what path to
take, she would have answered that it was very easy to know. For she
was guided by a direct call from Amyot, as plainly heard as any
human voice, though audible only to her inner hearing. To Fleta, the
consciousness of the double life—the spiritual and the natural—was a
matter of constant experience, and, therefore, there was no need for
the darkness of midnight to enable her to hear a voice from what
ordinary men and women call the unseen world. To Fleta it was no
more unseen than unheard. She saw at once, conquering time and
space, the spot where she would find Father Amyot at the end of her
rapid walk; and more, the state she would find him in. The sun
streamed in its full power and splendour straight on the strange
figure of the monk, lying rigidly upon the grass. Fleta stood beside
him and looked down on his face, upturned to the sky. For a little
while she did nothing, but stood there with a frown upon her
forehead and her dark eyes full of fierce and changing feeling.
Amyot was in one of his profound trances, when, though not dead, yet
he was as one dead.

“Already my difficulties crowd around me,” exclaimed Fleta aloud.
“What folly shall I unknowingly commit next? My poor servant—dare I
even try to restore you—or will Nature be a safer friend?”

Full of doubt and hesitation, she turned slowly away and began to
pace up and down the grass beside the figure of the priest.
Presently she became aware that she was not alone—some one was near
her. She started and turned quickly. Ivan stood but a pace from her,
and his eyes were fixed very earnestly upon her.

He was not dressed as a priest, but wore a simple hunting dress,
such as an ordinary sportsman or the king incognito might wear.
Simple it was, and made of coarse materials; but its easy make
showed a magnificent figure which the monkish robes had disguised.
His face had on it a deep and almost pathetic seriousness; and yet
it was so handsome, so nobly cut, and made so brilliant by the deep
blue eyes, which were bluer than their wont now, even in the full
blaze of the sun—that in fact as a man merely, here stood one who
might make any woman’s heart, queen or no queen, beat fiercely with
admiration. Fleta had never seen him like this before; to her he had
always been the master, the adept in mysterious knowledge, the
recluse who hid his love of solitude under a monkish veil. This was
Ivan! Young, superb, a man who must be loved. Fleta stood still and
silent, answering the gaze of those questioning, serious blue eyes,
with the purposeful, rebellious look which was just now burning in
her own. The two stood facing each other for some moments, without
speaking—without, as it seemed, desiring to speak. But in these
moments of silence a measuring of strength was made. Fleta spoke
first.

“Why have you come?” she demanded. “I did not desire your presence.”

“You have questions to ask which I alone can answer.”

“You are the one person who cannot answer them, for I cannot ask
them of you.”

“It is of me that you must ask them,” was all Ivan’s reply. Then he
added: “It is of me you have to learn these answers. Learn them by
experience if you like, and blindly. If you care to speak, you shall
be answered in words. This will spare you some pain, and save you
years of wasted time. Are you too proud?”

There was a pause. Then Fleta replied deliberately:

“Yes, I am too proud.”

Ivan bowed his head and turned away. He stooped over Father Amyot,
and taking a flask from his pocket, rubbed some liquid on the monk’s
white and rigid lips.

“I forbid you,” said Ivan, “to use your power over Amyot again.”

“You forbid me?” repeated Fleta in a tone of profound amazement.
Evidently this tone was entirely new to her.

“Yes, and you dare not disobey me. If you do, you will suffer
instantly.”

Fleta looked the amazement which was evidently beyond her power to
express in words. Ivan’s manner was cold, almost harsh. Never had he
addressed her without gentleness before. Hastily she recovered
herself, and without pausing to address to him any other word she
turned away and went quickly through the trees and back to the
house. Otto was standing at one of the windows; she went straight to
him.

“I wish to go back to the city at once,” she said, “will you order
my horses?”

“May I come with you?”

“No, but you may follow me to-morrow if you like.”

(_To be continued._)

[Illustration: decorative separator]


                              SPECULATION.

         Man’s reasoning faith can outlive and can ride
           O’er countless speculations. Navies float
           On changeful waves, and for this ark-like boat
         Winds from all quarters, every swelling tide
         Will serve. By all the virgin spheres that glide
           Like timid guests across sky-floor we note
           Where lies the pole-star. Those who only quote
         Their compass, fail, and antique charts must slide
         To error, in this shifting sand of thought
         And _new-found science_, where sweet isles of palm
         And olive sink, that were as land-marks sought,
         While others rise from Ocean’s fertile bed.
         No storm, nor heat, nor cold I fear; my dread
         Is lest the ship should meet a death-like calm.

                              REVOLUTION.

      Ah! wondrous happy rounding universe
        Where suns and moons alike as tears e’er mould
        Themselves to beauteous circles! He that rolled
      The planets, curved their paths; though seas immerse
      Both shattered ship and shell, naught _shall escape_
        Th’ inevitable wheel that must restore
        The seeming lost. The potent buried lore
      Of saint and sage revives to melt and shape
      Our thoughts to comeliness, and souls that leave
      Earth’s shores float back as craft that cruising sails;
      Each blessed gift that hourly from us flies,
      God will rain down albeit in other guise;—
      And e’en the very dew-drop _noon exhales_
      May find again the self-same rose at eve.

                                                       MARY W. GALE.


                           TWILIGHT VISIONS.

              “At evening time there shall be light.”
                                  —ZECH. xiv., 7.

       The day’s work done, I cast my pen aside
       And rose, with aching eye and troubled brain,
       Thinking how oft my fellow workers here
       Have suffered in the flesh for labours wrought
       In love to all mankind; and how the world
       Cares nought for words which teach not of itself;
       For to the world, itself is all in all,
       And nought outside it can the world conceive
       As real and true. And yet this earth must cease
       To be for ever to each mortal, when
       The Spirit casts off earth, and, in new life
       Will feel and know the world to be the vale
       Of deathly shadows compass’d round about
       With ignorance and error, sin and crime,
       With yearnings, longings, miseries, and griefs,
       And all that makes the “Breath of Lives” to seem
       As Angels wrestling with the powers of hell.

                        *     *     *     *

       A gentle Spirit with the twilight came
       And rested on my soul; then hope with peace,
       Long since to me as strangers, touched my heart,
       And, sitting at the organ, soft and sweet
       There streamed a flow of harmony, tho’ I
       Scarce seemed to touch the keys, yet simple hymns
       Called forth a train of Spirits bright and young,
       Amongst them saw I all that I had known
       And loved in days when life seem’d sweet to me.
       I was a child again, and saw myself
       As such—no aching eye—no troubled brain
       Had that young being who in faith and hope
       Sang songs of holiness, of peace and truth—
       There, resting on his Mother’s breast, with arms
       Clasped round her neck, with loving eyes that watched
       The loving face, whereon a parent’s smile
       Was ever present in the days now past,
       Now buried in the dust with former things.

                        *     *     *     *

       In saddened notes swelled forth “Thy will be done!”
       And then appeared a radiant spirit form
       Of one who, as a babe, was called away,
       From out this world of wretchedness and sin.
       An infant—which scarce breathed upon the earth
       Ere God, in His great mercy, took her home
       To dwell with Him, and she, an Angel bless’d,
       Now looks in pity on her parents here,
       A weeping witness of the vacant lives
       Which in the world their souls are forced to pass
       As, hung’ring for the love of One in heaven
       They stagger on from day to day in doubt—
       In misery, which none but they can know.

                        *     *     *     *

       Some cursed bonds can ne’er be snapped in twain,
       Save death or sin alone be brought to bear
       To shatter human customs hard and vile,
       And false and horrible as hell itself.
       For man exists in darkness, bound by laws
       Which curse and damn his very soul on earth;
       Mankind will not accept the Master’s words
       Or listen to His cry within the soul.
       And so the world in falsehood wanders on
       And dooms the inner Man of Light again
       To suffer crucifixion in the flesh;
       The Trinity—of Wisdom, Love and Truth—
       The Christ, is absent from this “Christian” World
       And ignorance with hatred lies and sin
       Reign rampant in their infidel abode.

                        *     *     *     *

       “Abide with me, fast falls the eventide.”
       O Lord! we suff’ring mortals here on earth
       Have nought but Thee, Thou Guide of all mankind
       To lead us in our wand’rings, and to turn
       Our falt’ring footsteps from the way of death;
       Thy Angels true are sent to fainting souls,
       And lovingly their voices soft are heard
       Peace! troubled hearts, hereafter all shall be
       Made up in heaven. Know that sufferings
       Are sent in love that we may minister,
       To all your needs, and bear you safely home
       To that good land ordained for all mankind—
       The kingdom bright—of happiness and love,
       Whereon your lives shall ever be a rest
       In one long summer day of light and joy.
       No mortal e’er can comprehend the peace
       Of God, which shall be yours, when, from the world
       Your glorious inner beings stand apart
       For ever! Soon shall you know all that we
       Would tell you now—yet hope and struggle on.
       “At evening time there shall be Light! and then—
       The Living Light shall lead you home to God,
       Home to the place which He hath made,—’tis yours
       For ever! We are sent to tell you this
       And by the Mighty One we do not lie!

                         *    *    *    *

       “O Glorious Angels of our Loving God!
       Pray tell us if this land, we fain would know,
       Contains the dear ones we have loved on earth?
       For what were heaven e’en to us, if we
       Could nevermore be all in all to those
       Who when on earth were all in all to us!”
       A voice replied—’twas one I oft have heard
       And learned to love with more than mortal love,
       “Look up, my own! and see me with thee now
       For ever on this earth. If then ’tis so,
       How canst thou think that I shall ever be
       Apart from thee in heav’n—the land of love
       Wherein alone life’s consummation finds
       A fullness in its own eternal self?
       For God is all—thus He is life and love
       And love eternal is the power that welds
       Each atom in the universal chain
       Of infinite expanse throughout the skies—
       Which ever shows to godly men on earth
       The Power of powers that reigneth over all!”

                         *    *    *    *

       Then in the gloom a glorious form appeared,
       And, standing by my side, it pressed its lips
       Upon the troubled brow which none could calm
       On earth, save she who was beside me then.
       And so an Angel from our loving God
       Came down to comfort, in the eventide—
       To show, by light of love, God’s holy truth,
       Which from the world—in darkness—hath been hid
       Because the world in darkness will exist,
       And, living thus, man sins against himself
       And so against his loving God of Life.
       The promised Light appeared at evening time,
       And by its living rays did I perceive—
       Mankind to wander on in sin and shame;
       Thus HELL prevails to-day where heaven should be....

                                              WM. C. ELDON SERJEANT.

London, _6th December, 1887_.


                  ESOTERICISM OF THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA.

           CREATION AS TAUGHT BY MOSES AND THE MAHATMAS.

                BY THE ABBÉ ROCA (_Honorary Canon_).

  [Extracts translated from the “LOTUS” _Revue des Hautes Etudes
  Theosophiques_. Journal of “Isis,” the French Branch of The
  Theosophical Society. December, 1887. Paris, George Carrés, 58,
  Rue St André des Arts.—VERBAL TRANSLATION.]

                                   I.

Thanks to the light which is now reaching us from the far East
through the Theosophical organs published in the West, it is easy to
foresee that the Catholic teaching is about to undergo a
transformation as profound as it will be glorious. All our dogmas
will pass from “the letter which killeth” to “the spirit which
giveth life,” from the mystic and sacramental to the scientific and
rational form, perhaps even to the stage of experimental methods.

The reign of faith, of mystery and of miracle, is nearing its close;
this is plain and was, moreover, predicted by Christ himself. Faith
vanishes from the brains of men of science, to make way for the
clear perception of the essential truths which had to be veiled at
the origin of Christianity, under symbols and figures, so as to
adapt them, as far as possible, to the needs and weaknesses of the
infancy of our faith.

Strange! It is at the very hour when Europe is attaining the age of
reason, and when she is visibly entering upon the full possession of
her powers, that India prepares to hand on to us those loftier ideas
which exactly meet our new wants, as much from the intellectual, as
from the moral, religious, social and other standpoints.

One might believe that the “BROTHERS” kept an eye from afar on the
movements of Christendom, and that from the summits of their
Himalayan watch towers, they had waited expectantly for the hour
when they would be able to make us hear them with some chance of
being understood....

It is certain that the situation in the West is becoming more and
more serious. Everyone knows whence comes the imminence of the
catastrophe which threatens us; hitherto men have only evoked the
animal needs, they have only awakened and unchained the brute forces
of nature, the passional instincts, the savage energies of the lower
Kosmos. Christianity does indeed conceal under the profound
esotericism of its Parables, those truths, scientific, religious,
and social, which this deplorable situation imperiously demands, but
sad to say, sad indeed for a priest, hard, hard indeed for Christian
ears to hear, all our priesthoods, that of the Roman Catholic Church
equally with those of the Orthodox Russian, the Anglican, the
Protestant, and the Anglo-American churches, seem struck with
blindness and impotence in face of the glorious task which they
would have to fulfil in these terrible circumstances. They see
nothing; their eyes are plastered and their ears walled up. They do
not discover; one is tempted to say, they do not even suspect what
ineffable truths are hidden under the dead letter of their
teachings.

Say, is it not into that darkness that we are all stumbling, in
State and in Church, in politics as in religion! A double calamity
forming but one for the peoples, which suffer horribly under it, and
for our civilisation which may be shipwrecked on it at any moment.
May God deliver us from a war at this moment! It would be a
cataclysm in which Europe would break to pieces in blood and fire,
as Montesquieu foresaw: “Europe will perish through the soldiers, if
not saved in time.” We must escape from this empiricism and this
fearful confusion. But who will save us? The Christ, the true
Christ, the Christ of esoteric science.[126] And how? Thus: the same
key which, under the eyes of the scientific bodies, shall open the
secrets of Nature, will open their own intellects to the secrets of
true Sociology; the same key which, under the eyes of the
priesthoods, shall open the Arcana of the mysteries and the gospel
parables, will open their intellects to these same secrets of
Sociology. Priests and savants will then develope in the radiance of
one and the same light.

-----

Footnote 126:

  “The Christ of esoteric science” is the _Christos_ of Spirit—an
  impersonal principle entirely distinct from any carnalised Christ
  or Jesus. Is it this Christos that the learned Canon Roca
  means?—[ED.]

-----

And this key—I can assert it, for I have proved it in application to
all our dogmas—THIS KEY IS THE SAME WHICH THE MAHATMAS OFFER AND
DELIVER TO US AT THIS MOMENT.[127]

-----

Footnote 127:

  The capitals are our own; for these “Mahatmas” are the real
  Founders and “Masters” of the Theosophical Society.—[ED.]

-----

There is here an interposition of Providence, before which we should
all of us offer up our own thanksgivings. For my part, I am deeply
touched by it; I feel I know not what sacred thrill! My gratitude is
the more keen since, if I confront the Hindu tradition with the
occult theosophic traditions of Judeo-Christianity, from its origin
to our own day, through the Holy Kabbala, I can recognise clearly
the agreement of the teaching of the “Brothers” with the esoteric
teaching of Moses, Jesus, and Saint Paul.

People are sure to say: “You abase the West before the East, Europe
before Asia, France before India, Christianity before Buddhism. You
are betraying at once your Country and your Church, your quality as
a Frenchman, and your character as a Priest.” Pardon me, gentlemen!
I abase nothing whatever; I betray nothing at all! A member of
Humanity, I work for the happiness of Humanity; a son of France, I
work for the glory of France; a Priest of Jesus Christ, I work for
the triumph of Jesus Christ. You shall be forced to confess it;
suspend, therefore, your anathemas, and listen, if you please!

We are traversing a frightful crisis. For the last hundred years we
have been trying to round the _Cape of Social Tempests_, which I
spoke of before; we have been enduring, without intermission, the
fires, the lightnings the thunders, and the earthquakes of an
unparalleled hurricane, and we feel, clearly enough, that everything
is giving way around us; under our feet and over our heads! Neither
pontiffs, nor savants, nor politicians, nor statesmen, show
themselves capable of snatching us from the abysses towards which we
are being, one is tempted to say, driven by a fatality! If, then, I
discover, in the distant East, through the darkness of this tempest,
the blessed star which alone can guide us, amidst so many shoals,
safe and sound to the longed-for haven of safety, am I wanting in
patriotism and religion because I announce to my brethren the rising
of this beneficent star?...

I know as well as you that it was said to Peter: “I _will_ give thee
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that thou mayest open its gates
upon earth”; yes, doubtless, but note the tense of this verb: I
_will give_ thee: in the future. Has the Christian Pontiff already
received them—those magic Keys? Before replying look and see what
Rome has made of Christendom; see the lamentable state of Europe;
not only engaged in open war with foreign nationalities, but also
exhausting herself in fratricidal wars and preparations to
consummate her own destruction; behold everywhere Christian against
Christian, church against church, priesthood against priesthood,
class against class, school against school, and, often in the same
family, brother against brother, sons against their father, the
father against his sons! What a spectacle! And a Pope presides over
it! And while, all around, men prepare for a general slaughter, he,
the Pope, thinks only of one thing—of his temporal domain, of his
material possessions! Think you that this state of things forms the
Kingdom of Heaven, and say you still that the Pontiff of Rome has
already received the Keys thereof?

It is written, perchance, in the decrees of Providence, that these
mysterious Keys shall be brought to the brethren of the West by the
“Brothers” of the East.... Such is, indeed, the expectation of all
the nations; the prophetic East sighs for the tenth incarnation of
Vishnu, which shall be the crown of all the Avatars which have
preceded it, and the Apocalypse, on its side, announces the
appearance of the _White Horse_ which is the symbol of the Christ
risen, glorious and triumphant before the eyes of all the peoples of
the earth.

This is how I, priest of Jesus Christ, betray Jesus Christ, when I
acclaim the wisdom of the Mahatmas and their mission in the West!

I have spoken of the opportuneness of the hour chosen by them for
coming to our help. I must insist upon this point.

[_The Abbé then enforces his argument by references to the position
of Modern Science, and concludes_:—TR.]

“The phenomena of motion,” by means of which men of science claim to
explain everything, explain nothing at all, because the very cause
of that motion is unknown to our physicists as they themselves
admit. “Consider, say to us the Mahatmas by the mouth of their
Adepts, that behind each physical energy is hidden another energy,
which itself serves as envelope to a spiritual force which is the
living soul of every manifested force.”

And thus Nature offers us an infinite series of forces one within
another, serving mutually as sheaths, which, as d’Alembert
suspected, produce all sensible phenomena and reach all points of
the circumference starting from a central point, which is God....

                                  II.

I can now, after these preliminaries, give an example of the
transformation which, thanks to the Mahatmas, will soon take place
in the teaching of the Christian Church. I will take particularly
the dogma of the _Creation_, informing my readers that they will
find in a book I am preparing, _The New Heavens and the New Earth_,
an analogous work on all the dogmas of the Catholic faith.

Matter exists in states of infinite variety, and, sometimes, even of
opposite appearance. The world is constituted in two poles, the
North or Spiritual, and the South or Material pole: these two poles
correspond perfectly and differ only in form, that is, in
appearance.

Regarded from above, as the Easterns regard it, the universal
substance presents the aspect of a spiritual or divine _emanation_;
looked at from below, as the Westerns are in the habit of viewing
it, it offers, on the contrary, the aspect of a material creation.

One sees at once the difference which must exist between the two
intellectualities and, consequently, between the two civilisations
of the East and the West. Yet there is no more error in the Genesis
of Moses, which is that of the Christian teaching, than there is in
the Genesis of the Mahatmas, which is that of the Buddhist doctrine.
The one and the other of these Geneses are absolutely founded on one
and the same reality. Whether one descends or ascends the scale of
being, one only traverses, in the East from above downwards, in the
West from below upwards, the same ladder of essences, more or less
spiritualised, more or less materialised, according as one
approaches to, or recedes from, _Pure Spirit_, which is God.

It was, therefore, not worth while to fulminate so much on one side
or the other, here, against the theory of _emanation_, there,
against the theory of _Creation_. One always comes back to the
principle of Hermes Trismegistus: the universe is dual, though
formed of a single substance. The Kabbalists knew it well, and it
was taught long ago in the Egyptian sanctuaries, as the occultists
have never ceased to repeat it in the temples of India.

It will soon be demonstrated, I hope, by scientific experiments such
as those of Mr. William Crookes, the Academician, that everywhere,
throughout all nature, _spirit_ and _matter_ are not _two_ but
_one_, and that they nowhere offer a real division in life. Under
every physical force there is a spiritual or a psychic force: in the
heart of the minutest atom is hidden a vital soul, the presence of
which has been perfectly determined by Claude Bernard in germs
imperceptible to the naked eye. “This soul, human, animal, vegetal
or mineral, is but a ray lent by the universal soul to every object
manifested in the Kosmos.”

“Corporeal man and the sensible universe, says the theosophical
doctrine, are but the appearance imparted to them by the cohesion of
the interatomic or inter-astral forces which constitute both
exteriorly. The visible side of a being is an ever-changing Maya.”
The language of St. Paul is in no way different: “The aspect of the
world,” he says, “is a passing vision, an image which passes and
renews itself continually—_transit figura hujus mundi_.”

“The real man, or the _microcosm_—and one can say as much of the
_macrocosm_—is an astral force which reveals itself through this
physical appearance, and which, having existed before the birth of
this form, does not share its fate at the hour of death: surviving
its destruction. The material form cannot subsist without the
spiritual force which sustains it; but the latter is independent of
the former, for form is created by spirit, and not spirit by form.”

This theory is word for word that of the “Brothers” and the Adepts,
at the same time it is that of the Kabbalists and the Christians of
the School of Origen, and the Johannine Church.

There could not be a more perfect agreement. Transfer this teaching
to the genesis of the Kosmos and you have the secret of the
formation of the World; at the same time you discover the profound
meaning of the saying of St. Paul: “The invisible things of God are
made visible to the eye of man through the visible things of the
creation,” a saying so well translated by Joseph de Maistre by the
following: “The world is a vast system of invisible things, visibly
organised.”

The whole of the Kosmos is like a two-faced medal of which both
faces are alike. The materialists know only the lower side, while
the occultists see it from both sides at once; from the front and
from the back. It is always nature, and the same nature, but _natura
naturata_ from below, _natura naturans_ from above; here,
intelligent cause; there, brute effect; spiritual above, corporeal
below, etherealised at the North, concreted at the South Pole.

The distinction accepted everywhere in the West down to our own day,
as essential and radical, between spirit on the one hand and matter
on the other, is no longer sustainable. The progress of science,
spurred on as it will be by Hindu ideas, will soon force the last
followers of this infantile belief to abandon it as ridiculous....

Yes, all, absolutely all in the world is life, but life differently
organised and variously manifested through phenomena which vary
infinitely from the most spiritualised beings, such as the Angels,
as well known to Buddhists as to Christians, though called by other
names, down to the most solidified of beings, such as stones and
metals. In the bosom of the latter, sleep, in a cataleptic
condition, milliards of vital elementary spirits. These latter only
await, to thrill into activity, the stroke of the pick or hammer to
which they will owe their deliverance and their escape from the
_limbus_, of which the Hindu doctrine speaks as well as the
Catholic. Here lies, for these souls of life, the starting point of
the _Resurrection_ and of the _Ascension_, taught equally by both
the Eastern and the Western traditions, but not understood among us.

[_The Abbé sketches in eloquent words the development of these
“spirits of the elements,” and then continues_:—TR.]

But as they ascend, so the spirits can also descend, for they are
always free to transfigure themselves in the divine light, or to
bury themselves in the satanic shadow of error and evil. Hence,
while time is time, “these ceaseless tears and gnashings of teeth”
of which the gospel Parables speak metaphorically, and which will
last as long as shall last the elaboration of the social atoms
destined for the collective composition of the beatific Nirvana.

Nature is ever placing under our eyes examples of organic
transformations, analagous to those I am speaking of, as if to aid
us in comprehending our own destiny. But it seems that many men
“have eyes in order not to see,” as Jesus said. See how in order to
remove these cataracts, science, even in the West, constantly
approaching more and more that of the East, is at work producing in
its turn phenomena, which corroborate at once the Parables of the
Gospels and the teachings of nature. I will not speak of the
Salpêtrière and the marvels of hypnotism in the hands of M. Charcot
and his numerous disciples throughout the whole world. There are
things which strike me even more.

M. Pictet, at Geneva, is creating diamonds with air and light. This
should not astonish those who know that our coal mines are nothing
but “stored-up sunlight.” With an even more marvellous industry, do
not the flowers extract from the atmosphere the luminous substance
of which they weave their fine and joyous garments? And “all that is
sown in the earth under a material form, does it not rise under a
spiritual form,” as St. Paul says?

The glorious entities, which we call celestial spirits, have
themselves an organic form. It is defined in the canons of our
dogma, whatever the ignorance-mongers of ultramontanism may pretend.
God alone has no body, God alone is _pure Spirit_—and even to speak
thus we must consider the Deity apart from the person of Jesus
Christ, for in the “_Word made flesh_” God dwells _corporeally_,
according to the true and beautiful saying of St. Paul.

And it is because God has no body that he is present everywhere in
the infinite, under the veils of cosmic light and ether, which serve
as his garment and under the electric, magnetic, interatomic,
interplanetary, interstellar and sound fluids, which serve him as
vehicles....

And it is also because God has no created form that the Kabbala
could, without error, call him _Non-Being_. Hegel probably felt this
esoteric truth when he spoke, in his heavy and cumbrous language, of
the equivalence of Being and Non-Being.

All visible forms are thus the product, at the same time as they are
the garment and the manifestation, of spiritual forces. All sensible
order is, in reality, an _organic concretion_, a sort of living
_crystallisation_ of intelligent powers fallen from the state of
_spirituality_ into the state of materiality; in other words, fallen
from the North to the South pole of nature, in consequence of a
catastrophe called by Holy Scripture the _Fall from Eden_. This
cataclysm was the punishment of a frightful crime, of an audacious
revolt spoken of in the traditions of all Temples and called in our
dogma _original sin_. The primary priesthood of the Christian church
has hitherto lacked the light needed to explain this biological
phenomenon, which is an ascertained fact of physiology and
sociology, as I hope to prove. Questioned on this point, the priests
have always replied: It is a mystery. Now there are no mysteries
save for ignorance, and the Christ announced that “every hidden
thing should be brought to light, and proclaimed on the house-tops.”

This is why so many new lights, coming from the East and elsewhere,
enter scientifically, in our day, into the Christian mind. Glory to
the Theosophists, glory to the Adepts, glory to the Kabbalists,
glory above all to the Hermetists everywhere, glory to those new
missionaries whose coming M. de Maistre foresaw, and whom M. de
Saint-Ives d’Alveydre lately hailed as the elect of God, charged by
him to establish a communion of knowledge and of love between all
the religious centres of the earth!

Priests of the Roman Catholic Church, we shall enter in our turn
this wise communion of saints, on the day when we shall consent to
read anew our sacred texts, no longer in “the dead letter” of their
exotericism, but in the “living spirit” of their esotericism, and in
the threefold sense which Christian tradition has always canonically
recognised in them.

                                           L’ABBE ROCA (_Chanoine_).

Chateau de Pallestres, France.

  [This is a very optimistic way of putting it, and if realized
  would be like pouring the elixir of life into the decrepit body of
  the Latin Church. But what will his Holiness the Pope say to
  it?—ED.]


                            THE GREAT QUEST.

             CONTINUED from the December (1887) number.

The Religionist, of course, denies that man can become a god or ever
realise in himself the attributes of Deity. He may recognise the
necessity of re-incarnation for ordinary worldly men, and even for
those who are not constant in their detachment and devotion, but he
denies the necessity for that series of trials and initiations which
must cover, at all events, more than one life-time—probably many. It
would appear as if the theory of evolution might be called in, to
aid this latter view. If it is acknowledged that we, as individuals,
have been for ever whirling on the wheel of conditioned existence;
if at the beginning of each manwantara the divine monad which
through the beginningless past has inhabited in succession the
vegetable, animal, and human forms, takes to itself a house of flesh
in exact accordance with previous Karma, it will be seen that (while
inhabiting a human body) during no moment in the past eternity have
we been nearer the attainment of Nirvana than at any other. If then
there is no thinkable connection between evolution and Nirvana, to
imagine that evolution, through stages of Adeptship, conducts to
Nirvana, is a delusion. “It is purely a question of divine
grace”—says the Religionist. If in answer to this view, it is
contended that the light of the Logos is bound, eventually, to reach
and enlighten every individual, and that the steady progress to
perfection through Chelaship and Adeptship would, therefore, be a
logical conclusion, it is objected that to assert that the light of
the Logos must eventually reach and enlighten all, would involve the
ultimate extinction of the objective Universe, which is admitted to
be without beginning or end, although it passes through alternate
periods of manifestation and non-manifestation. If to escape from
this untenable position we postulate fresh emanations of Deity into
the lowest organisms at the beginning of each manwantara, to take
the place of those who pass away into Nirvana, we are met by other
difficulties. Firstly, putting out of consideration the fact that
such a supposition is expressly denied by what is acknowledged as
revelation, the projection into the evolutionary process of a monad
free from all Karma, makes the law of Karma inoperative, for the
monad’s first association with Karma remains unexplained; and also
it becomes impossible to say what the monad was, and what was the
mode of its being prior to the projection into evolution. It must be
noted that although the law of Karma does not explain _why_ we are,
yet it satisfactorily shows _how_ we are what we are; and this is
the _raison d’être_ of the law. But the above theory takes away its
occupation. It makes Karma and the monad independent realities,
joined together by the creative energy of the Deity, while Karma
ought to be regarded as a mode of existence of the monad—which mode
ceases to be when another mode, called liberation, takes its place.
Secondly, if the monad in attaining liberation only attains to what
it was before its association with Karma, _à quoi bon_ the whole
process; while, if it is stated that the monad was altogether
non-existent before its projection, the Deity becomes responsible
for all our sufferings and sins, and we fall into either the
Calvinist doctrine of predestination as popularly conceived, or into
the still more blasphemous doctrine of the worshippers of Ahriman,
besides incurring many logical difficulties. The teaching of our
eastern philosophers is that the real interior nature of the monad
is the same as the real interior essence of the Godhead, but from
beginningless past time it has a transitory nature, considered
illusive, and the mode in which this illusion works is known by the
name of Karma.

But were we not led astray in the first instance? Ought we not to
have acquiesced in the first above given definition of the theory of
evolution? The premiss was satisfactory enough—the mistake was in
allowing the religionist’s deduction as a logical necessity. When
the religionist states that there is no thinkable connection between
evolution and Nirvana, he merely postulates for the word evolution a
more limited scope than that which the Occultist attaches to it,
viz., the development of soul as well as that of mere form. He is
indeed right in stating that the natural man, while he remains such,
will never attain the ultimate goal of Being. True it is, for the
Occultist as for the religionist, that, to free himself from the
fatal circle of rebirths, he must “burst the shell which holds him
in darkness—tear the veil that hides him from the eternal.” The
religionist may call this the act of divine grace; but it may be
quite as correctly described as the “awakening of the slumbering God
within.” But the error of the religionist is surely in mistaking the
first glimmer of the divine consciousness for a guarantee of final
emancipation, at, say, the next death of the body, instead of merely
the first step of a probationary stage in the long vista of work for
Humanity on the higher planes of Being!

To provide ourselves with an analogy from the very theory of
Evolution which we have been discussing, is it not more logical to
imagine that, in the same way in which we see stretched at our feet
the infinite gradations of existence, through the lower animal,
vegetable, and mineral kingdoms—between which indeed, thanks to the
recent investigations of scientific men—there is no longer
recognised to be any distinct line of demarcation—so the heights
(necessarily hidden from our view) which still remain to be scaled
by us in our upward progress to Divinity, should be similarly filled
with the gradations of the unseen hierarchy of Being? And that, as
we have evolved during millions of centuries of earth-life through
these lower forms up to the position we now occupy, so may we, if we
choose, start on a new and better road of progress, apart from the
ordinary evolution of Humanity, but in which there must also be
innumerable grades?

That there will be progress for Humanity as a whole, in the
direction of greater spirituality, there is no doubt, but that
progress will be partaken of by continually decreasing numbers.
Whether the weeding out takes place at the middle of the “great
fifth round,” or whether it be continually taking place during the
evolutionary process, a ray of light is here thrown on the statement
met with in all the Bibles of Humanity as to the great difficulty of
the attainment. “For straight is the gate, and narrow is the way
that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it; but wide is
the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth unto destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat.” This and parallel passages
doubtless refer to the weeding out of those who are unfit to
continue the progress, on which the more spiritualized Humanity will
then have entered. The most vivid picture of the comparative handful
of elect souls, who are fit to achieve the great quest, will be
obtained by contemplating the fact already stated, that the
objective universe, with its myriads of inhabitants, will never, in
the vast abysses of the future, cease to be; and that the great
majority of humanity—the millions of millions—will thus for ever
whirl on the wheel of birth and death.

But though Nature may give us an almost infinite number of chances
to attempt the great quest, it were madness to put by the chance
offered now, and allow the old sense-attractions to regain their
dominance, for it must be remembered that the barbarism and anarchy
which every civilisation must eventually lapse into, are periods of
spiritual deadness, and that it is when “the flower of civilisation
has blown to its full, and when its petals are but slackly held
together,” that the goad within men causes them to lift their eyes
to the sunlit mountains, and “to recognise in the bewildering
glitter the outlines of the Gates of Gold.”

There are no doubt realms in the Devaloka where the bliss of heaven
may be realised by those who aspire to the selfish rewards of
personal satisfaction, but these cease to exist with the end of the
manwantara, and with the beginning of the next the devotee will
again have to endure incarceration in flesh. The eighth chapter of
the Bhagavad Gita does indeed state that there is a path to Nirvana
through the Devaloka, and amongst the countless possibilities of the
Infinite who shall assert that this is not so? but the context
surely implies such a detachment and devotion through life as is
difficult for us even to contemplate, much less to realize.

However distant, therefore, may appear to us the achievement of the
great quest, when we consider how much more closely we are allied to
the animal than to the God, it must necessarily seem an infinitely
far-off goal, but though we may have to pass through many life-times
before we reach it, our most earnest prayer should be, that we may
never lose sight of that celestial goal, for surely it is the one
thing worthy of achievement!

To many the foregoing may appear as mere speculations, and the
firmest faith indeed can scarcely call itself knowledge, but,
however necessary the complete knowledge may be, we may at least
hope that its partial possession is adequate to the requirements of
the occasion. To us whose feet tread, often wearily, towards the
path of the great quest, and whose eyes strain blindly through the
mists that wrap us round, steady perseverance and omnipotent hope
must be the watch-words—perseverance to struggle on, though the
fiends of the lower self may make every step a battle, and hope that
at any moment the entrance to the path may be found.

As an example of these two qualities, and also because all words
that strike a high key are bound to awaken responsive echoes in
noble hearts, let us conclude with the following extract from the
Ramayana:—

“Thus spoke Rama. Virtue is a service man owes himself, and though
there were no heaven nor any God to rule the world, it were not less
the binding law of life. It is man’s privilege to know the right and
follow it. Betray and persecute me brother men! Pour out your rage
on me O malignant devils! Smile, or watch my agony in cold disdain
ye blissful Gods! Earth, hell, heaven combine your might to crush
me—I will still hold fast by this inheritance! My strength is
nothing—time can shake and cripple it; my youth is transient—already
grief has withered up my days; my heart—alas! it is well-nigh broken
now. Anguish may crush it utterly, and life may fail; but even so my
soul that has not tripped shall triumph, and dying, give the lie to
soulless destiny that dares to boast itself man’s master.”

                                                          “PILGRIM.”

[Illustration: decorative description]

                           WHISPER OF A ROSE.

         Behold me! an offspring of Darkness and Light.
         With soft, tender petals of radiant white,
         With golden heart mystery, full of perfume
         That is Soul of my Breath—the Secret of Bloom.

         Infinity’s centre is heart of the rose,
         And th’ breath of Creation its perfume that flows
         Through ages and eons and time yet untold—
         But the _Soul_ of the _Breath_ I may not unfold.

                                                               MORA.

                      THE SECLUSION OF THE ADEPT.

 [CONTINUATION OF “COMMENTS ON LIGHT ON THE PATH,” BY THE AUTHOR.]

  “Before the voice can speak in the presence of the Masters, it
  must have lost the power to wound.”

Those who give a merely passing and superficial attention to the
subject of occultism—and their name is Legion—constantly inquire
why, if adepts in life exist, they do not appear in the world and
show their power. That the chief body of these wise ones should be
understood to dwell beyond the fastnesses of the Himalayas, appears
to be a sufficient proof that they are only figures of straw.
Otherwise, why place them so far off?

Unfortunately, Nature has done this and not personal choice or
arrangement. There are certain spots on the earth where the advance
of “civilisation” is unfelt, and the nineteenth century fever is
kept at bay. In these favoured places there is always time, always
opportunity, for the realities of life; they are not crowded out by
the doings of an inchoate, money-loving, pleasure seeking society.
While there are adepts upon the earth, the earth must preserve to
them places of seclusion. This is a fact in nature which is only an
external expression of a profound fact in super-nature.

The demand of the neophyte remains unheard until the voice in which
it is uttered has lost the power to wound. This is because the
divine-astral life[128] is a place in which order reigns, just as it
does in natural life. There is, of course, always the centre and the
circumference as there is in nature. Close to the central heart of
life, on any plane, there is knowledge, there order reigns
completely; and chaos makes dim and confused the outer margin of the
circle. In fact, life in every form bears a more or less strong
resemblance to a philosophic school. There are always the devotees
of knowledge who forget their own lives in their pursuit of it;
there are always the flippant crowd who come and go——Of such,
Epictetus said that it was as easy to teach them philosophy as to
eat custard with a fork. The same state exists in the super-astral
life; and the adept has an even deeper and more profound seclusion
there in which to dwell. This place of retreat is so safe, so
sheltered, that no sound which has discord in it can reach his ears.
Why should this be, will be asked at once, if he is a being of such
great powers as those say who believe in his existence? The answer
seems very apparent. He serves humanity and identifies himself with
the whole world; he is ready to make vicarious sacrifice for it at
any moment—_by living not by dying for it_. Why should he not die
for it? Because he is part of the great whole, and one of the most
valuable parts of it. Because he lives under laws of order which he
does not desire to break. His life is not his own, but that of the
forces which work behind him. He is the flower of humanity, the
bloom which contains the divine seed. He is, in his own person, a
treasure of the universal nature, which is guarded and made safe in
order that the fruition shall be perfected. It is only at definite
periods of the world’s history that he is allowed to go among the
herd of men as their redeemer. But for those who have the power to
separate themselves from this herd he is always at hand. And for
those who are strong enough to conquer the vices of the personal
human nature, as set forth in these four rules, he is consciously at
hand, easily recognised, ready to answer.

-----

Footnote 128:

  Of course every occultist knows by reading Eliphas Levi and other
  authors that the “astral” plane is a plane of unequalised forces,
  and that a state of confusion necessarily prevails. But this does
  not apply to the “divine astral” plane, which is a plane where
  wisdom, and therefore order, prevails.

-----

But this conquering of self implies a destruction of qualities which
most men regard as not only indestructible but desirable. The “power
to wound” includes much that men value, not only in themselves, but
in others. The instinct of self-defence and of self-preservation is
part of it; the idea that one has any right or rights, either as
citizen, or man, or individual, the pleasant consciousness of
self-respect and of virtue. These are hard sayings to many; yet they
are true. For these words that I am writing now, and those which I
have written on this subject, are not in any sense my own. They are
drawn from the traditions of the lodge of the Great Brotherhood,
which was once the secret splendour of Egypt. The rules written in
its ante-chamber were the same as those now written in the
ante-chamber of existing schools. Through all time the wise men have
lived apart from the mass. And even when some temporary purpose or
object induces one of them to come into the midst of human life, his
seclusion and safety is preserved as completely as ever. It is part
of his inheritance, part of his position, he has an actual title to
it, and can no more put it aside than the Duke of Westminster can
say he does not choose to be the Duke of Westminster. In the various
great cities of the world an adept lives for a while from time to
time, or perhaps only passes through; but all are occasionally aided
by the actual power and presence of one of these men. Here in
London, as in Paris and St. Petersburgh, there are men high in
development. But they are only known as mystics by those who have
the power to recognise; the power given by the conquering of self.
Otherwise how could they exist, even for an hour, in such a mental
and psychic atmosphere as is created by the confusion and disorder
of a city? Unless protected and made safe their own growth would be
interfered with, their work injured. And the neophyte may meet an
adept in the flesh, may live in the same house with him, and yet be
unable to recognise him, and unable to make his own voice heard by
him. For no nearness in space, no closeness of relations, no daily
intimacy, can do away with the inexorable laws which give the adept
his seclusion. No voice penetrates to his inner hearing till it has
become a divine voice, a voice which gives no utterance to the cries
of self. Any lesser appeal would be as useless, as much a waste of
energy and power, as for mere children who are learning their
alphabet to be taught it by a professor of philology. Until a man
has become, in heart and spirit, a disciple, he has no existence for
those who are teachers of disciples. And he becomes this by one
method only—the surrender of his personal humanity.

For the voice to have lost the power to wound, a man must have
reached that point where he sees himself only as one of the vast
multitudes that live; one of the sands washed hither and thither by
the sea of vibratory existence. It is said that every grain of sand
in the ocean bed does, in its turn, get washed up on to the shore
and lie for a moment in the sunshine. So with human beings, they are
driven hither and thither by a great force, and each, in his turn,
finds the sunrays on him. When a man is able to regard his own life
as part of a whole like this he will no longer struggle in order to
obtain anything for himself. This is the surrender of personal
rights. The ordinary man expects, not to take equal fortunes with
the rest of the world, but in some points, about which he cares, to
fare better than the others. The disciple does not expect this.
Therefore, though he be, like Epictetus, a chained slave, he has no
word to say about it. He knows that the wheel of life turns
ceaselessly. Burne Jones has shown it in his marvellous picture—the
wheel turns, and on it are bound the rich and the poor, the great
and the small—each has his moment of good fortune when the wheel
brings him uppermost—the King rises and falls, the poet is _fêted_
and forgotten, the slave is happy and afterwards discarded. Each in
his turn is crushed as the wheel turns on. The disciple knows that
this is so, and though it is his duty to make the utmost of the life
that is his, he neither complains of it nor is elated by it, nor
does he complain against the better fortune of others. All alike, as
he well knows, are but learning a lesson; and he smiles at the
socialist and the reformer who endeavour by sheer force to
re-arrange circumstances which arise out of the forces of human
nature itself. This is but kicking against the pricks; a waste of
life and energy.

In realising this a man surrenders his imagined individual rights,
of whatever sort. That takes away one keen sting which is common to
all ordinary men.

When the disciple has fully recognised that the very thought of
individual rights is only the outcome of the venomous quality in
himself, that it is the hiss of the snake of self which poisons with
its sting his own life and the lives of those about him, then he is
ready to take part in a yearly ceremony which is open to all
neophytes who are prepared for it. All weapons of defence and
offence are given up; all weapons of mind and heart, and brain, and
spirit. Never again can another man be regarded as a person who can
be criticised or condemned; never again can the neophyte raise his
voice in self-defence or excuse. From that ceremony he returns into
the world as helpless, as unprotected, as a newborn child. That,
indeed, is what he is. He has begun to be born again on to the
higher plane of life, that breezy and well-lit plateau from whence
the eyes see intelligently and regard the world with a new insight.

I have said, a little way back, that after parting with the sense of
individual rights, the disciple must part also with the sense of
self-respect and of virtue. This may sound a terrible doctrine, yet
all occultists know well that it is not a doctrine, but a fact. He
who thinks himself holier than another, he who has any pride in his
own exemption from vice or folly, he who believes himself wise, or
in any way superior to his fellow men, is incapable of discipleship.
A man must become as a little child before he can enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

Virtue and wisdom are sublime things; but if they create pride and a
consciousness of separateness from the rest of humanity in the mind
of a man, then they are only the snakes of self re-appearing in a
finer form. At any moment he may put on his grosser shape and sting
as fiercely as when he inspired the actions of a murderer who kills
for gain or hatred, or a politician who sacrifices the mass for his
own or his party’s interests.

In fact, to have lost the power to wound, implies that the snake is
not only scotched, but killed. When it is merely stupefied or lulled
to sleep it awakes again and the disciple uses his knowledge and his
power for his own ends, and is a pupil of the many masters of the
black art, for the road to destruction is very broad and easy, and
the way can be found blindfold. That it is the way to destruction is
evident, for when a man begins to live for self he narrows his
horizon steadily till at last the fierce driving inwards leaves him
but the space of a pin’s-head to dwell in. We have all seen this
phenomenon occur in ordinary life. A man who becomes selfish
isolates himself, grows less interesting and less agreeable to
others. The sight is an awful one, and people shrink from a very
selfish person at last, as from a beast of prey. How much more awful
is it when it occurs on the more advanced plane of life, with the
added powers of knowledge, and through the greater sweep of
successive incarnations!

Therefore I say, pause and think well upon the threshold. For if the
demand of the neophyte is made without the complete purification, it
will not penetrate the seclusion of the divine adept, but will evoke
the terrible forces which attend upon the black side of our human
nature.

                  .     .     .     .     .     .

  “Before the soul can stand in the presence of the Masters its feet
  must be washed in the blood of the heart.”

The word soul, as used here, means the divine soul, or “starry
spirit.”

“To be able to stand is to have confidence;” and to have confidence
means that the disciple is sure of himself, that he has surrendered
his emotions, his very self, even his humanity; that he is incapable
of fear and unconscious of pain; that his whole consciousness is
centred in the divine life, which is expressed symbolically by the
term “the Masters;” that he has neither eyes, nor ears, nor speech,
nor power, save in and for the divine ray on which his highest sense
has touched. Then is he fearless, free from suffering, free from
anxiety or dismay; his soul stands without shrinking or desire of
postponement, in the full blaze of the divine light which penetrates
through and through his being. Then he has come into his inheritance
and can claim his kinship with the teachers of men; he is upright,
he has raised his head, he breathes the same air that they do.

But before it is in any way possible for him to do this, the feet of
the soul must be washed in the blood of the heart.

The sacrifice, or surrender of the heart of man, and its emotions,
is the first of the rules; it involves the “attaining of an
equilibrium which cannot be shaken by personal emotion.” This is
done by the stoic philosopher; he, too, stands aside and looks
equably upon his own sufferings, as well as on those of others.

In the same way that “tears” in the language of occultists expresses
the soul of emotion, not its material appearance, so blood
expresses, not that blood which is an essential of physical life,
but the vital creative principle in man’s nature, which drives him
into human life in order to experience pain and pleasure, joy and
sorrow. When he has let the blood flow from the heart he stands
before the Masters as a pure spirit which no longer wishes to
incarnate for the sake of emotion and experience. Through great
cycles of time successive incarnations in gross matter may yet be
his lot; but he no longer desires them, the crude wish to live has
departed from him. When he takes upon him man’s form in the flesh he
does it in the pursuit of a divine object, to accomplish the work of
“the Masters,” and for no other end. He looks neither for pleasure
nor pain, asks for no heaven, and fears no hell; yet he has entered
upon a great inheritance which is not so much a compensation for
these things surrendered, as a state which simply blots out the
memory of them. He lives now not in the world, but with it; his
horizon has extended itself to the width of the whole universe.

                                                                   Δ


                            THE WHITE MONK.

            By the Author of the “Professor of Alchemy.”

                         PART I.—RALPH’S STORY.

“It was after this manner, as they say,” began Ralph, swinging
himself on to a bench and pouring out for himself a tankard of our
good home-brewed, as I crouched in the hay opposite to him. “Two
centuries agone and thirty years or so, there dwelt in this very
house which I serve—and which one day, young master, you shall
rule!—Sir Gilbert de Troyes, your ancestor, and his lady, and four
fair sons, and a lovely daughter. Of these sons, twain were at the
wars, one was in his nurse’s lap, and another was gone to Italy, to
finish his studies at Parma. Thus did the old nobles use to ruin
their sons!

“This young foregoer of yours (a goodly youth!) fell in with the
usual temptations of Satan. He held, with the poets, that the world
is the best book for men to read; and he studied it, I ween, with
diligence. Now there was a certain damsel, winsome enough, I doubt
not, in the Italian style, with black hair and the devil—save the
mark!—in her wandering eyes. So it came to pass that Master Gilbert,
younger, wooed her for his bride, like an honest gentleman, as the
old tales say he was; and so great is the power of one upright soul
amongst others, that the young witch—she was but young, poor soul!
and teachable—was charmed herself from her Italian ways, and vowed
to love and follow only him; and the day before their marriage, she
was walking with him in the streets of Parma, by night—for Master
Gilbert had a governor along with him in Italy, who must be
hoodwinked—when there chanced to espy them one Pietro Rinucci, a
clerkly fellow (with a curse upon him!) who was even studying also
at Parma, and who loved the Italian witch himself.

“This Rinucci had been favoured of the girl, and only when she saw
the Englishman, with his blue eyes and his honest ways, had she
scorned her countryman and left him. Rinucci, after the manner of
his race-fellows, then dogged her steps, tracked her to her early
meetings with young Gilbert de Troyes, who was his unsuspecting
friend, and listened to their innocent ravings of love conjoined to
virtue.

“Afterward, had he gone to the damsel’s poor lodging and there, with
Heaven knows what direful threats! conjured her to renounce her
honest lover and return to himself. The signorina was not like an
English girl—she neither stormed nor yielded—she cajoled and blinded
him. ‘If he would go, she would consider; perchance she did not love
the Briton truly; perchance it was a whim; she knew not. Might she
but think? it was a whirl, and her heart, alas! was o’er
susceptible; ’twould pass; he must leave her now, at least, and she
would see. Meantime Pietruccino should wear this pretty crimson
ribbon of hers till they met again.’ After even such words, and for
a kiss, he left her. But the cunning villain was more than her
match, and waited all the next day round the corners, whence he
could see her goings out and comings in. He saw her glide to her
trysting-place; he followed cautiously; he heard her give a
signalling whispered call; he heard it answered by a short, low
whistle; young Gilbert de Troyes swung merrily round the corner and
fell into his Italian sweetheart’s arms.

“He met his death, poor, noble young fellow! ’Tis an old tale
repeated. I need scarce have wasted all these words upon it—but that
one’s heart must needs ache at these things. In the course of nature
that Italian snake, Rinucci, was bound to finish his rival there and
then. So he got behind the unwary schoolboy—for the lad was, indeed,
little more—and stabbed him, all too deep, in the back of the neck.

“Folk say Rinucci triumphed as he set his foot on his dying
college-mate, and wiped his dagger, with a laugh, before the
horror-stricken girl. Myself can scarcely believe it; he was too
young in murder then for that.

“Be this as it may, certain it is that he dragged away the mourning
damsel from the corpse of the man who would have saved her soul, and
took her back to himself.

“A sickening story, boy. Wilt thou have more, young master? Yea?
Why, there is worse to come. For Mistress Italiana—no tradition
tells her name—was spirited as any gipsy woman, and full of crafty
lore, such as her race delight in. She broke her heart over her
English lover’s corpse; but she had still the Southern amusement
left her of revenge. She concocted an evil greenish powder, and
coloured Signor Pietro’s sweetmeats with it.

“The fellow ate largely, praising the daintiness of the confection.
It was deadly enough, I daresay, in all conscience, but it killed
him not. These reptiles live on poison; morally, ’tis certain,
belike, and also physically it agreed with him. Perchance he may
have felt a qualm or two, though tradition says nought of it.
Anyway, the next fytte of this story shows us the mysterious
disappearance of the Italian girl, of whom no word hath ever since
been told.

“She left behind her, whether willingly or no, a quantity of the
false seasoning, which Master Pietro had caused to be analysed, and
which he seems to have carefully preserved.

“Some time after these events, we find Signor Pietro Rinucci entered
into the Monastery of Dominicans at Brescia, a repentant neophyte.
He had turned remorseful, no doubt, and in good time! The fellow had
ever strong imaginations. He was received in due time as a brother;
wore the garb of the Order, and cast his eyes down. Tradition saith
he was in great turmoil of soul at this time—judge for yourself,
young master, by what followed.

“One fine morning Brother Petrus was missing from his small, damp
cell, and none could tell what had become of him. None, that is,
save the poverty-stricken ropemaker who had supplied him with cords
to scale the monastery walls; and his discretion had been paid for.
The fact being, I doubt not, that discipline being ever repugnant to
our young bravo’s manners, he had fled it.

“In the meantime, the news of Gilbert de Troyes’ death had been
brought to these very doors, and certainly the grooms who then
tended the good horses of your ancestors must, even in this
saddle-room, have spent their sorrow in each other’s company. But
Ambrose de Troyes, newly back from the wars, and second-born of the
family, rose in his wrath, and swore to avenge his brother. For all
might know that the death blow had been dealt by one Pietro Rinucci,
fellow-scholar of Gilbert’s, whose absence afterward from the
University had puzzled the doctors and caused inquisition into the
matter.

“So away went Ambrose, the soldier, to Parma. And mind ye, Ambrose
was no careless school-boy, no mean foe to a man, but a great,
staunch fellow who had seen service, and who was, moreover, by
Nature something stern and hard of purpose.

“But at Parma they told him Rinucci was escaped into a monastery
which they named, and showed a painted portrait of him, and did so
minutely, point by point, describe the man, that Ambrose swore he
should know him, should he meet him in Heaven. And that was a strong
assertion, note ye.

“Well, Ambrose journeyed on towards the secluded spot where the
Monastery of Dominicans lay, and was enforced to rest one night at
the village of Santa Rosa on his road. Having stabled his steed,
refreshed it and himself, and practised his arm some moments with
the good sharp sword, he slung the weapon round him and went forth
for a stroll to pass the time.

“He came to the equivalent of what would be to us in England an
ale-house, but some way out of the village, meet for travellers to
pause and rest a moment on their way. Ambrose went in to look about
him and ordered drink for himself. He lacked a companion to pledge,
but looking round the little room saw no one but a moody man who
seemed lost in thought, though enjoying some passing sour wine.
Ambrose himself could stomach neither the fare nor the company, so
he quickly got him on his way a little further; when, meeting with a
simple shrine to the Virgin, the God-fearing soldier took his rosary
from under his baldrick, and knelt him down to pray. For something
had sore perplexed him; he had seemed to see in the features of that
morose comrade at the inn the most exact resemblance of Rinucci. But
Rinucci was safe at the Monastery, waiting till his time should
come, and the avenger should denounce him. But even as he rose from
prayer did Ambrose see a mounted messenger speeding to him, who told
him breathlessly the news had just reached Santa Rosa that the Monk
Petrus was escaped and roaming at large somewhere in the country.

“Then Ambrose de Troyes knew he had his man; and natheless, like the
large-hearted fellow he was, he would but meet him quite alone. So
he rewarded the newsbringer and sent him away. Once more he fell on
his knees before our Lady’s image, and besought that his cause might
find Heaven’s favour, and his action in it be in every point just
and serviceable. (For he looked upon himself as sent to do such
things as might cause his brother’s soul to rest in peace.) Then he
went rapidly retracing his steps towards the inn again, and, led by
Destiny, out came Pietro Rinucci, unarmed, to meet him. Ambrose de
Troyes looked into the assassin’s eyes and knew him. Stranger still,
the piercing eyes of the cunning Italian saw, in the traits of this
bronzed warrior, relationship to the Gilbert who had been his friend
and victim.

“‘I arrest thee, Pietro Rinucci, for the murder of my brother,
Gilbert de Troyes, and, though I may not draw upon a tonsured monk
(yea, I know thee through all thy false disguises!), yet, before I
hale thee to the ecclesiastical courts, I will show thee, snake,
what I think of thee, and of all such!’

“And Ambrose de Troyes smote the villain a shameful blow upon the
face.

“Even at that instant, the monk whips me Ambrose’s sword from its
scabbard, and, with the fatal dexterity of his race, ran in upon the
stately Englishman and laid him, bleeding quick to death, upon the
hot white road.

“‘Oh Margaret, my sister Margaret!’ the dying man raved, as if he
thirsted for help from the hand that had been kind to him.

“‘A right pestilent breed of Britons! but easy to kill—easy to
kill,’ quoth the Monk, as he laid down the red sword by the dying
man’s side and left him alone in his agony.

“This scene was witnessed by a terrified young country-girl, who
crouched behind a heap of stones, meanwhile, until the murderer’s
flight, and then ran to assist De Troyes, who thought she was his
sister Margaret, and said marvellous tender words, of home and of
her kindness, and of the little brother he had left in the nursery.

“After this, there comes a period of Rinucci’s life of which we know
but little. He seems to have raced about the country, in hiding
always, but doing little harm for him. Italy, however, is debateable
ground for one of her own recreant monks, so we find Messer Pietro
fleeing Justice and coming over here to England. Whether he had had
some of his heart-searchings that he knew so often, I know not, but
deem it very likely. Here is the flaw, to my mind, in the
foreigners’ constitutions. They recognize their sins as such, not so
we English! We say our evil deeds are fate, congenital infirmity,
ignorance, negligence, or even virtues; they say their sins are
sins, and yet they do them. Had I but half the talent of sinning
that Messer Pietro seems to have owned, my faith, I would have
gloried in it! So did not he, however; he went to a father
confessor, fell on the earth, and implored absolution—for life was
still sweet to him, he said, and he would not die yet awhile.

“The father sent him for penance to travel as a pilgrim, in a white
penitential garb to England, there to walk to the shrine of St.
Thomas à Becket, foully slain on earth by violence.

“The father did well for his mother-country, but evilly for us.

“The monk Petrus performed at all points the penalty enjoined him,
and afterward, having no especial call to Italy again, he followed
his roving instincts and wandered about England, even till chance
brought him to this, our, town. In this country he knew no men well
enough to desire to kill them; besides, at this period, one of his
fits of penitence seems to have been on him. Certes, he wore the
monkish habit, only different in its white colour from that of other
fraternities, and the folk grew acquainted with his white figure as
he roamed the land in deepest meditation, with his eyes bent upon
the ground.

“Now, one day, say the chronicles (which are made up of village
tales), the White Monk, as our townsfolk called him, was sitting in
a thicket by a brook in which he was bathing his travelled feet,
when there came by the sister of his victims, even Mistress Margaret
de Troyes herself, and walked the pleasant fringes of the forest,
very near to where the wanderer sat, on the further side the elders.
She was accompanied by her mother and by another lady, both of whom
were pressing the claims of some noble suitor upon her.

“The other ladies were in deepest mourning for Gilbert and for
Ambrose, and Mistress Margaret herself, though she wore no such
signs of grief, was most plainly clad in a pale, pure garb of
lavender. She listened quietly to all they urged, then spoke and
said:

“‘My mother, he is a light, false man. I care not for him.’

“It was protested to her, her high birth, the respect in which he
would hold her for herself; above all, her fair beauty, would all
ensure his faithfulness. But Margaret said:

“‘I beseech ye, press me no further. Heaven knows I wish the
gentleman much good, and that he may aspire to higher things. I will
pray for him, weep for him if need be; but, ladies, though I be but
a simple English maiden, I hold myself all too good for such as he
to marry and draw down, perchance, to like thoughts with himself. I
hate all evil—not the doers, mother; but the evil. We are all weak
and changeable, and I dare not come in contact of my free will with
evil influence. God might punish me by weakness of resolve against
infection.’

“They urged her yet once more; she might triumph and convert a soul.

“‘In truth,’ confessed fair Margaret de Troyes, ‘ye wound me sorely,
dearest ladies mine! At such a time, when good Ambrose de Troyes is
scarce cold in his grave, to bid his sister make her choice amongst
his townsfolk; and celebrate the marriage feast with a breaking
heart! My Ambrose—to think that thou, who, if I but spake of a
moment’s weariness, would quickly place a cushion for my head, and
sit by the hour on our window-seat chafing my feet, that thou
should’st be bleeding in the death-struggles, on the hard, parched
road, in a foreign land, and I be far away, not able so much as to
raise thy dear head upon my knee! Oh, I loved him so tenderly,
strong brother of mine! I gloried in my brown-maned soldier. We
prayed together the night before he left on his sacred errand, and,
at his entreaty, I laid my hand upon his head and blessed him in Our
Lady’s name. He was a grave, good man; and you would have me turn my
thoughts from him to that other! What though I know Ambrose to be
now one of God’s angels; yet he hath left me behind him on the
earth—the first unkindness he hath ever done me! And his mother and
mine would have me think of wedlock!’

“The fair, pale Englishwoman bent her head, and Pietro heard her
weeping.

“Well, it is but guesswork thenceforth. Folk say, in their coarse
way of speaking, that the White Monk ‘loved’ the lady Margaret.
Forfend! The love of such a man were an insult all too gross to
offer to the memory of any Damoiselle de Troyes. Say, rather, he
kindled to the worship of goodness in that form first of all.

“We know that from that hour when he first saw and heard her,
Rinucci, the stained wretch, wandered ever where there was a chance
to see her, even from afar. Once, indeed he even spoke with her.
Under the favour of his sacred garment he dared to near her, and
asked:

“‘Maiden, how say you? Is there mercy in Heaven for the worst
sinners, or no?’

“‘Nay, holy father,” answered the damsel, smiling, ‘thou must be
better seen in these high mysteries than I who dwell in the world,
where we all need mercy. We can but hope that our God is more
pitiful than are our fellow creatures to our faults.’

“‘Maiden,’ besought the White Monk further, ‘can such as thou look
pityingly upon a vice-stained fellow man?’

“But Margaret wept, and answered him:

“‘Oh, father, search me not over this problem. I have lost the
dearest to me in the world, two brothers, by an assassin’s hand. If
that man stood before me, tell me, _could_ I look at him
forgivingly? Oh, never, father! Human nature is too weak.’

“The rencounter was over, for Pietro dared speak no more. But,
according to the custom of that day, Mistress Margaret bent her fair
head to receive the blessing of the holy father.

“The monk started back in horror; even he was not too base to feel
that. But as the maiden still stood humbly waiting, he was forced to
stretch his hands forth from the distance, and murmur: ‘Benedicite!’

“The days went by and the townsfolk noted how the White Monk wasted,
and how strange he was. He would mutter to himself like a madman. He
never said a word of holy import to the cottagers with whom he
lodged at small cost. He ate almost nothing and appeared to spend
his days in solitary musing. His conduct smacked so oddly of mania
that Giles Hughson, his landlord, took to watching whither he went
and what he did. He saw him always following Margaret, but seeking
to avoid her if she turned where she might see him. He seemed to
dread her greatly, yet, to worship her, or, at least to follow her
like a lost soul looking after the light from some vanishing angel’s
wing.

“Once Margaret turned and saw him, but recognised him not as the man
she had spoken withal. She, taking him for a _frère quetant_,
silently, without looking upon him, pressed into his hand money,
which he took, and which was found on him when he died, as you shall
hear.”

                                                         PERCY ROSS.

(_To be continued._)

[Illustration: decorative separator]

The following remarkable passage was published some five years ago
in the _Theosophist_, of Madras (1883); and it is needless to call
attention in more detail to the fidelity with which it is being
since then verified.

Protesting against the arbitrary chronology of the Sanskritists in
the question of Indian antiquity who make it dependent on the Greeks
and Chandragupta—whose date is represented as “the sheet-anchor of
Indian chronology” that “nothing will ever shake” (Prof. Max Müller
and Weber), the author of the prophecy remarks that “it is to be
feared that as regards India, the chronological ship of the
Sanskritists has already broken from her moorings and gone adrift
with all her precious freight of conjectures and hypotheses.” And
then adds:—

“We are at the end of a cycle—geological and other—and at the
beginning of another. Cataclysm is to follow cataclysm. The pent-up
forces are bursting out in many quarters; and not only will men be
swallowed up or slain by thousands, “new” land appear and “old”
subside, volcanic eruptions and tidal waves appal; but secrets of an
unsuspected past will be uncovered to the dismay of Western
theorists and the humiliation of an imperious science. This drifting
ship, if watched, may be seen to ground upon the upheaved vestiges
of ancient civilisations, and fall to pieces. We are not emulous of
the prophet’s honours: but still, let this stand as a prophecy.”
(See also “_Five Years of Theosophy_,” p. 388.)


                          LOVE WITH AN OBJECT.

Some distinguished contributors to theosophical literature have of
late been describing what qualities are necessary to constitute a
perfect man, _i.e._, an Adept. They said that among other things it
was absolutely and indispensably necessary, that such a being should
possess Love—and not merely Love in the abstract—but love regarding
some object or objects. What can they possibly mean by speaking of
“love with an object,” and could there possibly be love without any
object at all? Can that feeling be called love, which is directed
solely to the Eternal and Infinite, and takes no cognizance of
earthly illusions? Can that be love which has no object or—in other
words—is the love of forms or objects the true love at all? If a man
loved all things in the universe alike, without giving any
preference to any of them, would not such a love be practically
without any object; would it not be equal to loving nothing at all;
because in such a case the individuality of any single object would
be lost to sight?

A love which is directed towards all things alike, an universal
love, is beyond the conception of the mortal mind, and yet this kind
of love, which bestows no favours upon any one thing, seems to be
that eternal love, which is recommended by all the sacred books of
the East and the West; because as soon as we begin to love one thing
or one being more than another, we not only detract from the rest an
amount of love which the rest may rightfully claim; but we also
become attached to the object of our love, a fate against which we
are seriously warned in various pages of these books.

The _Bhagavad Gita_ teaches that we should not love or hate any
object of sense whatsoever, nor be attached to any object or thing,
but renounce all projects and fix our thoughts solely on It, the
Eternal, which is no-thing and no object of cognition for us, but
whose presence can be only subjectively experienced by, and within
ourselves. It says: “He is esteemed, who is equal-minded to
companions, friends, enemies, strangers, neutrals, to aliens and
kindred, yea to good and evil men” (Cap. vi., 14); and further on it
says: “He whose soul is united by devotion, seeing the same in all
around, sees the soul in everything and everything in the soul. He
who sees Me (Brahmâ) everywhere and everything in Me, him I
forsake not and he forsakes not me.... He who sees the same in
everything—Arjuna!—whether it be pleasant or grievous, from the
self-resemblance, is deemed to be a most excellent Yogin” (Cap. vi.,
29, 32).

On almost every page of the _Bhagavad Gita_ we are instructed only
to direct our love to that which is eternal in every form, and let
the form itself be a matter of secondary consideration. “He must be
regarded as a steadfast renouncer, who neither hates nor
desires.”... “In a learned and modest Brahman, in a cow, in an
elephant, in a dog, and a Swapāka; they who have knowledge see the
same thing.”... “Let no man rejoice in attaining what is pleasant,
nor grieve in attaining what is unpleasant; being fixed in mind,
untroubled, knowing Brahma and abiding in Brahma.”... “He who is
happy in himself, pleased with himself, who finds also light in
himself, this Yogin, one with Brahmâ, finds _Nirvana_ in Him.”

The great _Hermes Trismegistus_ teaches the same identical doctrine;
for he says: “Rise and embrace me with thy whole being, and I will
teach thee whatsoever thou desirest to know.” The _Bible_ also tells
us that “God is Love” (1. John iv., 8), and that we should love Him
with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind (Math.
xxii., 37), and while it teaches that we should love nothing else
but God (Math. xx., 37), who is All in All (Ephes. i., 23), yet it
affirms, that this God is omnipresent, eternal and incomprehensible
to the finite understanding of mortals (1. Timoth. vi., 16). It
teaches this love to be the most important of all possessions,
without which all other possessions are useless (1. Corinth, xiii.,
2), and yet this God, whom we are to love, is not an “object” (John
i., 5), but everywhere. He is in us and we in Him (Rom. xii., 5). We
are to leave all objects of sense and follow Him alone (Luc. v., 2),
although we have no means of intellectually knowing or perceiving
Him, the great Unknown, for whose sake we are to give up house and
brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife, children and lands (Mark
x., 29).

What can all this mean, but that love itself is the legitimate
object of love? It is a divine, eternal, and infinite power, a
light, which reflects itself in every object while it seeks not the
object, but merely its own reflection therein. It is an
indestructible fire and the brighter it burns, the stronger will be
the light and the clearer will its own image appear. Love falls in
love with nothing but its own self, it is free from all other
attractions. A love which becomes attached to objects of sense,
ceases to be free, ceases to be love, and becomes mere desire. Pure
and eternal love asks for nothing, but gives freely to all who are
willing to take. Earthly love is attracted to persons and things,
but Divine spiritual love seeks only that which is divine in
everything, and this can be nothing else but love, for love is the
supreme power of all. It holds together the worlds in space, it
clothes the earth in bright and beautiful colours, it guides the
instincts of animals and links together the hearts of human beings.
Acting upon the lower planes of existence it causes terrestrial
things to cling to each other with fond embrace; but love on the
spiritual plane is free. Spiritual love is a goddess, who
continually sacrifices herself for herself and who accepts no other
sacrifice but her own self, giving for whatever she may receive,
herself in return. Therefore the _Bhagavad Gita_ says: “Nourish ye
the gods by this and let the gods nourish you. Thus nourishing each
other ye shall obtain the highest good” (Cap. iii., ii.,); and the
Bible says: “To him who has still more shall be given, and from him
who has not, even what he has shall be taken away” (Luke xix., 26).

Love is an universal power and therefore immortal, it can never die.
We cannot believe that even the smallest particle of love ever died,
only the instruments through which it becomes manifest change their
form; nor will it ever be born, for it exists from eternity, only
the bodies into which it shines are born and die and are born again.
A Love which is not manifest is non-existent for us, to come into
existence means to become manifest. How then could we possibly
imagine a human being possessed of a love which never becomes
manifest; how can we possibly conceive of a light which never shines
and of a fire which does not give any heat?

But “as the sun shines upon the lands of the just and the unjust,
and as the rain descends upon the acres of the evil-minded as well
as upon those of the good”; likewise divine love manifesting itself
in a perfect man is distributed alike to every one without favour or
partiality. Wherever a good and perfect human being exists, there is
divine love manifest; and the degree of man’s perfection will depend
on the degree of his capacity to serve as an instrument for the
manifestation of divine love. The more perfect he is, the more will
his love descend upon and penetrate all who come within his divine
influence. To ask favours of God is to conceive of Him as an
imperfect being, whose love is not free, but subject to the guidance
of, and preference to, mortals. To expect favours of a Mahatma is to
conceive him as an _imperfect_ man.

True, “prayer,” _i.e._ the elevation and aspiration of the soul “in
spirit and in truth” (John xiv., 14), is useful, not because it will
persuade the light to come nearer to us, but because it will assist
us to open our eyes for the purpose of seeing the light that was
already there. Let those who desire to come into contact with the
Adepts enter their sphere by following their doctrines; seeking for
love, but not for an object of love, and when they have found the
former, they will find a superabundance of the latter throughout the
whole extent of the unlimited universe; they will find it in
everything that exists, for love is the foundation of all existence
and without love nothing can possibly continue to exist.

Love—divine love—is the source of life, of light, and happiness. It
is the creative principle in the Macrocosm and in the Microcosm of
man. It is _Venus_, the mother of all the gods, because from her
alone originates Will and Imagination and all the other powers by
which the universe was evolved. It is the germ of divinity which
exists in the heart of man, and which may develop into a life-giving
sun, illuminating the mind and sending its rays to the centre of the
universe; for it originates from that centre and to that centre it
will ultimately return. It is a divine messenger, who carries Light
from Heaven down to the Earth and returns again to Heaven loaded
with sacrificial gifts.

It is worshipped by all, some adore it in one form and some in
another, but many perceive only the form and do not perceive the
divine spirit. Nevertheless the spirit alone is real, the form is an
illusion. Love can exist without form, but no form can exist without
love. It is pure Spirit, but if its light is reflected in matter, it
creates desire and desire is the producer of forms. Thus the visible
world of perishable things is created. “But above this visible
nature there exists another, unseen and eternal, which, when all
created things perish, does not perish” (Bh. G. viii. 20), and “from
which they who attain to it never return.” This is the supreme abode
of Love without any object, unmanifested and imperishable, for there
no object exists. There love is united to love, enjoying supreme and
eternal happiness within her own self and that peace, of which the
mortal mind, captivated by the illusion of form, cannot conceive.
Non-existent for us, and yet existing in that Supreme _Be-ness_, in
which all things dwell, by which the universe has been spread out,
and which may be attained to by an exclusive devotion.

                                                            EMANUEL.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                             SELF MASTERY.

                            (A SONNET.)

         O! for the power to lay this burden low!
           This weight of self; to kill all vain desire
           To clasp to our outer selves the scorching fire,
         So that the God within shall live and grow!
         O! for the strength to face the hidden foe,
           To raise our being higher still and higher,
           To breathe the breath that Holy ones inspire,
         To break the bonds that bind to Earth below!

         Great, Infinite Soul! that broodeth o’er us ever,
           Say, can the human will _unaided_ win
         The Victor’s crown (and earthly bondage sever),
           —A Heavenly flight, triumphant over sin?
         O Human and Divine, forsake us never,
           Thine is the power by which we enter in!

                                                   DUM SPIRO, SPERO.

                           =Reviews.=

  A MODERN MAGICIAN. A ROMANCE, by J. Fitzgerald Molloy, in Three
      Volumes. Ward & Downey, 12, York Street, Covent Garden.

Opinions may be greatly divided as to the merits of this book; and
to those who look for unexceptionable literary style as a primary
element in fiction, it may not be satisfactory. But to all those who
regard ideas as the first requisite, this work will probably prove
of great interest. It has been somewhat curious to note the
reception with which Mr. Molloy has met. The _Pall Mall Gazette_,
for instance, devotes considerable length to him, and somewhat
smartly calls him “a novelist born, but not made”; after which it
proceeds, with more apparent animus than judiciousness, to criticise
the pedantic style of conversation and narrative which the author
occasionally makes use of. Curiously enough, the critic selects for
his worst blows the phrases used by the chief inspector of the
detectives. Now, if there is one thing more common than another, it
is to find the half educated, but uncultured, men of the class from
which police inspectors are drawn, using the longest words and
phrases, not so much as a proof of their culture, as with the object
of impressing their hearers. The reviewer was perhaps right to
assail Mr. Molloy for sending his hero to Scotland Yard to hunt up
news of his erring wife, who, as he was perfectly aware, had fled
with another man. But this, and other trifling mistakes of similar
character, are venial errors, and could only be so strongly
animadverted upon in a paper which devotes itself to hunting
plagiarisms in impossible places, through envy of successful
authors; or by a reviewer who is a personal enemy of the author. As
Macintosh well said: “The critic who is discerning in nothing but
faults, may care little to be told that this is the mark of
unenviable disposition, but he might not feel equally easy, were he
convinced that he thus gives absolute proofs of ignorance and want
of taste.” To make matters worse, and more interesting to LUCIFER,
the reviewer is plainly a partisan of the Society for Psychical
Research, to which Mr. Molloy somewhat unfeelingly alludes as the
“Society of Scientific Cackle.” The review in the _Pall Mall
Gazette_ starts with smartness and intelligence, but allows itself
to run off into partisanship and prejudice. But all that is in
strict keeping with the tone of a “Gazette” which generally starts
useful work well, continues it badly, and ends by throwing mud out
of the gutter at anybody or anything which happens to run counter to
it. For instance, here is a specimen of the reviewer:

  “As a story teller he (the author) is the Bobadil of fashionable
  mysticism: as a literary workman he is a pretentious bungler: his
  syntax is inconceivable, his dialogue impossible, his style a
  desperately careful expression of desperately slovenly thinking,
  his notions of practical affairs absurd, and his conception of
  science and philosophy a superstitious guess; yet he has an
  indescribable flourish, a dash of half-ridiculous poetry, a
  pathetic irresponsibility, a captivating gleam of Irish
  imagination, and, above all, an unsuspicious good nature, that
  compel a humane public to read his books rather than mortify him
  by a neglect which he has done nothing malicious to deserve.”

Such criticism can only be met from the point of view of the
reviewer, by “Set a thief to catch a thief,” and from that of Mr.
Molloy, by “Heaven save me from the penny-a-liners, actuated by
personal animus!”

The reviewer may be allowed to have pointed out a few glaring errors
in Mr. Molloy’s style and syntax, but we add that, in pointing these
out, he has only exposed himself.

As regards the central figure of Benoni, the adept in the book,
LUCIFER may, perhaps, say a few words. Slightly as the character is
drawn, and startling as are the deeds of this personage, there is a
majesty about him which commands respect, and we may congratulate
Mr. Molloy on his effort. We do not entirely accord with the author
in the deeds which he sets Benoni to do, but with regard to the
words and precepts which he puts into the adept’s mouth, we do
absolutely agree, and recommend our readers, and especially all the
Theosophists, to read Mr. Molloy’s book. Here the _Pall Mall_
reviewer—being, as said, an admiring follower of the Society for
Psychical Research—again falls foul of Mr. Molloy; but we may safely
quote the impressive and truthful words of Benoni, and leave the
rest to others.

Amerton, the hero of the book, reproaches the adept with having seen
trouble approaching him, and with having neglected to warn him.
Benoni replies:

  “That is true. It was not permitted that I should serve you then;
  to test your strength it was necessary that you should bear the
  trial unaided. When, some years ago. you came to me in Africa, and
  asked me to solve experiences which perplexed you, and later
  besought Amuni, the faithful One, to show you the pathway leading
  towards light, you but obeyed a dictate of your nature impossible
  to resist. That within you urged you forward to seek the sacred
  mysteries of life and death. But these cannot be obtained by those
  who are not prepared to endure with patience, and grow strong in
  spirit. You have suffered, and thus taken the first step towards
  the attainment of your desires.”

  “But, surely,” said Philip, “you might have warned me.”

  “I should have but inflicted additional pain on you.”

  “Was there no escape?”

  “None, indeed,” replied the mystic.

  “Then I was destined to meet humiliation and pain.”

  Benoni looked at him with mingled pity and affection in his gaze.

  “A child,” he said, in his low, sonorous voice, “is grieved for a
  broken toy, or is humiliated by correction.”

  “But you don’t compare my wrongs to a child’s grievances?”

  “His sorrows are as real and bitter to him as your afflictions are
  to you. It is only when time has passed, he reviews his distress
  with wonder, seeing the pettiness of its cause. So will it be with
  you. Ten years hence, you will regard this grief, desolating your
  life, with equanimity; forty years later, you will remember it
  with indifference, as an item in your fate. Then shall you look
  back upon the brightness and darkness of your existence as one
  regards the lights and shadows chequering his pathway through
  woods in spring. How futile seem woe and joy, weighed with the
  consideration that all men are as shadows that fade, and as
  vapours which flee away.... Think, my friend,” continued the
  mystic earnestly, “of your existence but as a journey towards a
  goal, on which hardships must be suffered by the way. You are now
  but working out the fulfillment of your fate. Remember, those who
  would ascend must suffer; affliction is the flame which purifies;
  pain teaches compassion.” (pp. 89, 90. Vol. III.)

When asked of himself, Benoni replies:

  “Misfortune cannot compass, distress overwhelm, nor
  disappointments assail me, because the things of the world are as
  naught to my senses, and man’s life seems but a dream. Before this
  stage affliction must have crucified the senses; self must be
  conquered, slain, and entombed.” (p. 91, Vol. III.)

There are other passages equally true from the occult standpoint,
and we trust their readers will benefit by them and appreciate them.

As regards Amerton’s character, we see the natural, born, mystic
turning aside and voluntarily taking upon himself, though warned,
the bonds of married life. These become intolerable to him, and the
unhappiness of two persons results. Occultism is a jealous mistress,
and, once launched on that path, it is necessary to resolutely
refuse to recognise any attempt to draw one back from it. Amerton
wanted to crush out his natural tendencies to occultism, and failed.
It is as hard to draw back from them, and turn attention solely to
the things of the world, as it is, when studying occultism, to turn
our attention solely to the invisible regions, and neglect
absolutely the physical world.

The other characters in the novel make it light, graceful and
pleasant reading. The interest is ever preserved from the first to
the last scene, and certainly no one could find, in all the three
volumes, one dull page in them. Moreover, Mr. Fitzgerald Molloy
seems an acute observer. Some of his secondary heroes, such as the
wealthy widow, Mrs. Henry Netley, a plebeian enamoured of rank and
title, and Lord Pompey Rokeway, “a gay, though ancient, personage,”
who uses rouge, wig, and corsets, and imagines every woman in love
with him—are portraits from nature, to one who knows anything of
modern society. In short, “The Modern Magician,” as a work of
fiction, can fearlessly bear comparison with any of the modern
productions written lately upon occult subjects, with the solitary
exception of Rider Haggard’s “She,” and surpasses some in unabated
interest. We might be more exacting and severe, perhaps, were it a
purely theosophical work. As it stands, however, we must
congratulate Mr. Molloy in having clothed the subject of mysticism
in such graceful robes; had he been as good a literary workman as he
is an excellent constructor of plots, the book should have met with
unqualified approval. Meanwhile, we wish it the greatest success.

                           ------------------

“THE TWIN SOUL: A PSYCHOLOGICAL AND REALISTIC ROMANCE,” in two
  volumes, by an Anonymous Author. Ward & Downey, 12, York Street,
  Covent Garden.

This is quite another kind of literary production than the “Modern
Magician,” just reviewed. It aspires to more serious and
philosophical mysticism, but fails rather ungloriously. There are
passages in it which, taken out of the work, especially at the
beginning of Volume I., might be made the subjects of short and
rather useful little treatises upon mystic theories; but, as a
whole, the book is one of the most disappointing novels published
for some time. It begins well, goes on from bad to worse, promises
much, holds nothing, and ends nowhere, seeming to be written not as
a work of fiction, but simply to ventilate the author’s ideas.
These—the work being anonymous—have to be judged by the novel alone.
It is rumoured that the “Twin Soul” is the occasional work of twelve
years’ labour, and the disconnected character of its events bears
out the rumour. Its style is pedantic, though good in writing, while
the matter and plot are heavy, and delivered in a long-winded and
didactic manner.

The story is that of one Mr. Rameses, an exceedingly virtuous,
learned, and solemn Oriental millionaire, whose real nationality
remains to the end a mystery, and whose story is narrated by a
somewhat cynical English philosopher, called De Vere. The latter
tells the story in the style which suits him best, and is perfectly
natural. He is humorous and amusing, even if slightly ponderous. But
alas for the reader! Mr. De Vere suddenly stops short at an early
stage, and the story is taken up, without any apparent cause or
reason, by a man unknown, who “had less sympathy with Mr. Rameses,”
and who has all the defects of Mr. De Vere’s qualities, and a good
many of his own besides, for he is even more ponderous and more
cynical, without his humour. Mr. Rameses is a peculiar character,
but, as sketched, he is quite in keeping with his Oriental origin.
He believes in many theories: re-incarnation, socialism, certain
occult doctrines, the possibility of recovering the memory of past
incarnations, and, as a matter of course, the modern craze of the
day, the theory of “twin souls.” He is perpetually in search of his
“twin,” and hunts her with the pertinacity of a sleuth-hound under
all forms, and in all places. Mr. De Vere is the possessor of an
Assyrian collection, Egyptian papyri, and also of two female
mummies—Amenophra and Lurulâ, the first the daughter of a Pharaoh,
the second a priestess of Isis—of which the sarcophagi are covered
with hieroglyphics, which Mr. Rameses reads with most surprising
ease. The hero, claiming his memory as a palimpsest, which by
certain processes clearly discovers the obliterated record of his
past incarnations, cannot, in spite of this, make up his mind which
of the two mummies was formerly the body of his twin-soul. Finally,
he solves the doubt by declaring them both to have been the mortal
casket of his beloved—with Lurulâ for choice. The reader here has
great hopes held out to him that there will be a grand ceremony, at
which the mummies are to be unrolled, and at which the soul of the
deceased mummy will be summoned back to shuffle on a mortal coil
again. Alas! such hopes are fallacious; for the ceremony never takes
place, owing to Mr. Rameses falling in love with the sister of a
Hindu lady married to an English baronet. After much hesitation the
lady so honoured by his choice is also declared to be the vehicle of
his twin-soul, _i.e._, to save appearances—to be a re-incarnation of
the ego which formerly dwelt in the mummy or mummies. Finally, after
a long-winded oration over the mystic properties of a magnificent
present of jewels, Mr. Rameses wins “the fair Niona,” as she is
called—who, although a Hindu, is a Zoroastrian Sun-worshipper. They
are married, notwithstanding their “paganism,” according to Roman
Catholic rites, and the pair start to spend the honeymoon in Egypt,
where, in the Temple of Isis at Thebes, they are to be again united
according to the—to them—more sacred ritual of Sun-worship. After a
very interesting dream about the Deluge, which broke through an
isthmus uniting Gibraltar to North Africa, and destroyed a vast
civilization which occupied the floor of the present Mediterranean
Sea, they arrive safely in Egypt. Here the fair Hindu of Zoroastrian
persuasion and Italian name, has another interesting psychic vision,
an interview with the Sphinx, which makes her incontinently faint,
and lose consciousness. Then they proceed to Thebes, and, after due
care, make selection of the site of the Temple of Isis. They build
their bonfire and ignite it, but at the supreme moment Niona gives a
gasp, faints, and this time dies outright, with as little reason for
it as every other incident in the novel has. The return to Cairo is
immediately commenced, and here Niona, in strict keeping with Mr.
Rameses’s habits, is at once converted into a mummy. It must be
rather interesting to possess the body of three defunct twin souls,
and reflect upon their virtues.

The rest of the book is occupied by various disquisitions of the
author, disguised flimsily under conversations of his characters on
the social and political customs of the Nineteenth century. Read
carefully, the conversations contain ideas, but are likely to offend
on account of their length and ponderousness. As regards the
construction of the book and the characters, Mr. Rameses is
interesting, in spite of his solemnity and his love of mummies, and
Mr. De Vere is amusing. The other _dramatis personæ_ seem to have
been created merely as pegs upon which to hang the author’s
opinions. What, for instance, is the object of entering into detail
upon the passionate episodes in the career of Mr. Rameses’s
secretary, or the mercenary marriage of Lady Gwendoline Pierrepoint
with “Old Methusaleh”? Their only excuse can be that they may serve
to increase the contrast between such marriages and that with a twin
soul. Taken as a whole, the ideas are interesting, and the mystic
utterances in the first volume almost correct from the orthodox
occult point. But the manner in which they are displayed is
irritating, and this chiefly because the reader is perpetually being
brought up to a point of interest, and as perpetually left
disappointed.

                        -----------------------


                       POSTHUMOUS HUMANITY.[129]

-----

Footnote 129:

  _Posthumous Humanity_, a study of Phantoms, by Adolphe d’Assier,
  Member of the Bordeaux Academy of Sciences. Translated and
  annotated by Henry S. Olcott, President of the Theosophical
  Society. George Redway, London, 1887. 8vo. pp. 360.

-----

This is a translation from the French by Colonel H. S. Olcott,
President of the Theosophical Society, of the remarkable work of
that name, by a well-known _savant_, Adolphe d’Assier. The original
work appeared a few years ago, and produced a stir both in the
sceptical public and unbelieving science, and an outcry among the
spiritists of France, whose pet theories about the “spirits” of the
dead it upset. “Posthumous Humanity” was not only a singularly
interesting work, but it was one of the first, and perhaps the
loudest, of the bugle notes that heralded the last act of the fierce
battle between materialistic science and spiritualism; for it ended
in the virtual defeat of the former, at any rate, upon one line: it
forced the hand of the majority of sceptics in the recognition of
what is called in mysticism the “astral body” of man and animal, and
by more pretentious than wise investigators “the _phantasms_ of the
living,” forgetting those of the dead.

That a learned member of an academy of science should, of all men,
write a serious book on the phenomena of “the Borderland,” accepting
as facts in nature such things as ghostly appearances, and the
projection of the double, is almost a phenomenon in itself. And what
makes the case the more remarkable as an indication of a new current
in public opinion, is the fact that these things, which it has
hitherto been the fashion to consign with a laugh or a shudder to
the limbo of exploded superstitions, are treated by the author in a
perfectly scientific spirit. He accounts for them, not by the usual
supposition of hallucination or stupidity on the part of observers,
but by an exceedingly ingenious and plausible postulation of forces
at work in us, and around us, which are as little “supernatural” as
any of the recognised forces of nature, or portions of man’s
constitution. Not only has M. d’Assier the courage to face the
probable ridicule of the wiseacres, but he has the audacity to turn
the tables upon “men of science,” by actually making fun of their
unmeasured pretensions, and twitting them mercilessly about their
past mistakes. Not the least remarkable feature in the case is the
fact that the author, who started into these researches an ardent
positivist, has come out of them an ardent positivist still. He
believes that what he has accomplished is to extend the reign of
matter into a region previously believed to belong to spirit, thus
planting the standard of positivism in a wider and more fruitful
region, which he has happily reclaimed from the winds and tides of
superstition. But the fact is, that although our author has gone a
good deal further than most of those who start out “on their own
hook” to explore the realms of the Occult, he cannot be said to have
penetrated very far into the mysteries of being. He has peeped in at
the door of the psychic antechamber to the spiritual world
proper—the ante-chamber in which the members of Psychical Research
Societies amuse themselves and others by playing blindman’s buff
with hypothesis—and his interesting volume tells us of the wonderful
things that go on there. The result of his researches, as he says in
his _Preface_, is the conclusion that “posthumous humanity is, in
fact, but a special example of posthumous animality, and that the
latter presents itself as the immediate consequence of the living
world.” Every tyro in theosophy knows that this conclusion is a fair
approximation to the truth, and were man nothing but an animal of
high degree, it might possibly be the whole truth. But man is an
animal, plus _something_, and this something _more_, is precisely
what M. d’Assier leaves entirely out of sight, as indeed he could
hardly help doing if he attached any importance to remaining a
Positivist. It is this _something more_, of whose very existence our
author seems profoundly unconscious, that has the chief interest for
us, for that is the spiritual and eternal part of man, in
contradistinction to the psychic portion which fades away and
disappears after a time, as M. d’Assier very justly declares.

It seems a pity that a learned and ingenious man, like our author,
should not have begun investigations of this kind by making himself
familiar with at least the bare outline of the metaphysical and
psychological system that underlies the schools of philosophy of
India. This system is the result of very profound research into such
phenomena as our author deals with, and also into other far deeper
and more important manifestations that he has not considered at all;
and these researches have for thousands of years occupied, to a
greater or lesser degree, almost every thinking man among races
which are acknowledged to be possessed of a very high degree of
intellectual acuteness and spiritual insight. Were our Western
adventurers into the borderland between spirit and matter—the astral
world—to take this obvious precaution, they would know that the
ground over which they now laboriously make their way, has not only
been traversed before, but pretty fully surveyed and mapped out, and
that their supposed discoveries amount virtually to no more than a
verification of results long ago obtained by others. This very
needed exception in the work under review has been obviated by the
translator’s notes and supplement, without diminishing the practical
value of M. d’Assier’s treatise as a useful contribution to occult
literature. For, as his labours do actually confirm much of the
teachings of Theosophy, with regard to that part of the constitution
of man, which is common to him and the animals, the work, as it now
stands, is really a valuable occult treatise as to facts. The
important question with the world, in these times, being not so much
_what is said_, as _who it is that says it_, the fact that an
incorrigible positivist, has published his belief in the actuality
of a psychic plane of existence, and of the temporary survival in it
after death of a certain part or principle of the animal (including
man), is of the greatest help and importance to theosophy. It will
probably affect public opinion far more profoundly than if a
thousand Eastern sages proclaimed the same elementary fact of
Occultism in chorus. No better illustration of, and testimony to,
the reality of plain, broad facts in connection with wraiths,
“doubles,” and other such apparitions, can be found than in
d’Assier’s “Posthumous Humanity” in its new English garb, by Colonel
Olcott, and with the translator’s _Preface_ and annotations to the
text. These add greatly to the value of the book for the student of
Occultism. In fact, these additions serve the same purpose which a
notice of the work in LUCIFER might have been expected to have in
view; for they correct the author in some particulars, add
additional information in others, and generally forestall the critic
who writes from the Theosophical standpoint. Besides this, the
translator has added a highly interesting and unique _appendix_,
giving the opinions of numerous Hindus of various castes and sects
upon psychic phenomena of that kind, collected from various parts of
India, which, by itself, has considerable value to the student of
mystical sciences. In conclusion, we may record almost a general
opinion—save, of course, that of rank materialists—that no work yet
published on the subject dealt with by our author is better
calculated to reach the scientifically-minded enquirer. It is
written with calmness and logical clearness that takes the scoffer’s
laugh out of his mouth. It goes as far as anyone new to the subject
could be reasonably expected to follow; and the direction it takes
is the right one. It is preeminently _the_ book for the too
sceptical and ignorant enquirer to begin with.

                        -----------------------

ספר יצירה, _Sepher Yetzirah, The Book of Formation, and the
Thirty-two Paths of Wisdom_; _translated from the Hebrew, and
collated with Latin Versions. By Dr. W. Wynn Westcott, Bath: Robert
H. Fryar_, 1887.

This is a treatise of about 30 quarto pages on that well-known
Hebrew occult work, the Sepher Yetzirah. It consists of an
introduction, giving the historic aspects of the matter, an English
translation of the Sepher Yetzirah and the Thirty-two Paths, and
several pages of notes, giving remarks on and variant readings of
difficult and disputed passages.

The introductory pages bear the stamp of considerable literary
research, and the translation of the Book of Formation itself is
intelligible and concise. But we can hardly say as much for the
Thirty-two Paths, which, abstruse and difficult of comprehension in
the original, are, we are afraid, no more intelligible in the
translation. Owing to the unpopularity of the subject, there are
readers who will be readily drawing the conclusion that Dr. Westcott
himself does not altogether understand their mystical bearing and
symbolism. Yet the notes on the actual text of the “Sepher Yetzirah”
are valuable, and show considerable occult knowledge. But a still
greater error is made by the translator. We notice that Dr. Westcott
has invariably rendered the word Elohim by “God,” notwithstanding
that it is a plural noun, as shown by the plural word “Chiim” joined
thereto in the ninth section of the first chapter. This will, no
doubt, prove grateful to the staff and readers of the _Jewish
World_, whose editors pride themselves, against all fact and truth,
on the _Monotheism_ of their early ancestors. It cannot fail to
strike the Kabalists as an unfortunate deviation from the original
meaning in favour of one laboriously fabricated by both Jewish and
Christian falsificators.

The “Book of Formation” is a treatise consisting of 6 chapters and
33 sections, and thus its compilation is pentacular. The 6 chapters
refer to the Yetziratic World, the 6 periods of Genesis; while the
33 sections have a close analogy with the Thirty-two Paths which are
added at the end of the work. It is a philosophical disquisition on
the occult meanings of the ten numbers of the decimal scale, and the
22 letters of the Hebrew sacred alphabet. The first chapter deals
with the numbers, which it divides into a Tetrad (symbolising
Spirit, Air, Water, and Fire), and a Hexad (symbolising Height,
Depth, East, West, South and North). The second chapter treats
generally of the 22 letters, produced from the Air or the number 2,
and divided into 3 Mother-letters, 7 double-letters, and 12 simple
letters. The third chapter shows the symbolic reference of the 3
Mother-letters to Air, Water, and Fire; the fourth chapter that of
the 7 double-letters to the Planets &c.; the fifth chapter that of
the 12 simple letters to the signs of the Zodiac, &c.; and the sixth
chapter forms the synthesis.

The 32 paths are no other than symbolical developments of the 10
Sephiroth or numbers, and the 22 letters which form the connecting
links between them.

Altogether the work is interesting and worthy of careful study.

                           ------------------

                             TREBLE CHORDS.

                  POEMS BY CATHERINE GRANT FURLEY.

                    Edinburgh: R. and R. Clark.

This is an inviting little book of verse, with an ill-chosen title.
Why “Treble Chords,” when the author cannot compose anything more
than a single part? The octave is spanned by treble or threefold
chords, but Miss Furley has not yet reached the octave of
attainment! No, the book must be re-christened at its second birth;
and the protest of the _Girton Girl_, and the more sustained poem of
the _Other Isolt_, are assuredly good enough to interest and delight
a sufficient number of women to send it into a second edition. The
writer has a distinct faculty of seeing, as well as the tendency to
take the “other side,” as she does in _Isolt of Brittany_ and in
_Galatea to Pygmalion_. The moral of the latter poem is thus
presented:

            “O, frequent miracle! so often seen
            We scarcely pause to think what it may mean—
            Man’s power to raise within a woman’s heart
            A love he does not know, nor could impart;
            To wake a soul within the marble breast,
            Then long to soothe it back to stony rest;
            For, though the woman’s sweeter to caress,
            The statue’s more convenient to possess.”

Here is a specimen of the sonnets, not the best, perhaps, but to the
purpose:

                               CIRCE.

        Men call me Circe, but my name is Love;
          And my cup holds the draught of sweet and sour,
          Of gain, joy, loss, renouncement, all the dower
        That woman’s love brings man. I hold above
        Your outstretched hand the chalice; ere you prove
          Its potency, bethink you; it has power
          To test your soul. If in a sinful hour
        You touch it, you shall sink as those who strove
          Of old to win my heart. Lo! there they be,
        Not men but beasts; for with impure desire
          They sought me, and Love holds _that_ blasphemy;
        And for their sin doth bid them dwell in mire
        Nor know their shame. Had they been pure in thought,
        My cup had strengthened them and injured not.

It is but a tiny handful, this, of first flowers; not even a
gathering of first-fruits. But they have the fragrance of promise,
and a freshness of real rarity. Whether the fruit will set and
mature must depend upon the sunshine and the rain and other
surroundings of the struggling life, and on the depth of soil and
strength of rootage. Of these we cannot judge; but the first-flowers
are sweet and pretty and worth a word of welcome.

                                                               G. M.

                           ------------------

   THE CREATOR, AND WHAT WE MAY KNOW OF THE METHOD OF CREATION.[130]

-----

Footnote 130:

  The Fernley Lecture, 1887, by Dr. Dallinger. T. Woolmer, 2, Castle
  Street, City Road, London E.C. (1s. 6d., paper covers.)

-----

The above is the title of a lecture, forming the seventeenth of what
are known as the “Fernley Lectures,” delivered annually, by the
leading minds in the Ministry of the Wesleyan Methodist Society.
This specific lecture is the latest of the series, and was delivered
in Manchester, August 1st in present year, by the Rev. W. H.
Dallinger, LL.D., F.R.S., Pres. R.M.S., etc., Governor of Wesley
College, Sheffield.

The lecture occupies an unique position amongst its fellows, and
will bear a most favourable comparison with any that have been
delivered by the various Presidents of the Royal Society on the
sciences of the day. For clearness of argument and lucidity of
thought—_as far as it goes_—it is unsurpassed, and, as a specimen of
the power of English language, it is a treat to all who can estimate
its value. It is all this, and more, and here its significance and
suggestiveness comes in, and I can do no less than characterise its
delivery under the circumstances, to an auditory that represents (in
the eyes of the sect itself, at all events) the purest form of
Evangelical religion, as a startling phenomenon, and as such I
consider a notice of it in no way out of place in a theosophical
journal. That such a lecture should be allowed to be delivered and
favourably received, not only by the audience, but by the Wesleyan
body at large, is a “sign of the times” that the intelligent
observer cannot fail to discern. It is, undoubtedly, an index finger
that marks a large advance in the progress of human emancipation
from the increasingly intolerable yoke of Churchianic or
Ecclesiastical tyranny; and all “friends of progress” will
cheerfully render to the worthy and eloquent lecturer the thanks
that are due for his manly and outspoken views upon the profoundest
question of the age. The strangest part is the spectacle of a
“Minister of the Gospel,” himself a scientist of no mean order,
proclaiming from a Methodist platform his adherence to, and
acceptance of, the doctrines of Charles Darwin, as true exponents of
the “Method of Creation,” which means that “Natural Selection,” and
survival of the “Fittest,” accounts for the origin of species and
the indefinite variety of extinct and extant animal forms of life.
Why not include vegetable forms as well? Methinks the fabulous
“missing link” between the vegetable and animal kingdoms may,
without much difficulty, be actually spotted. Nature, as delineated
by the great “Naturalist,” must have been very peevish and unkind to
her worshippers, when she mocks them by destroying every vestige,
even to the veriest fragmentary fossil, of this anxiously looked for
and expectant missing link, between the animal (brute) and man! To
my view, the continuous chain of sequential life forms, as presented
in the Darwinian theory, evinces a vast number of “missing links,”
and, unless these can be supplied, it will not bear the strain when
tested by the unclouded intellect of man. The philosopher of
Materialism may accept the Darwinian theories (for as yet they are
nothing less or more) as gospel, but the spiritual philosopher will
not, nor can he accept them as truth, simply because he recognises a
factor, which is an abomination in the eyes of the materialistic
“wise ones.” It is this factor that the eloquent and learned
lecturer pleads for, without suspecting what it really is. I have
reason to know that our reverend scientist regards this “Spiritual”
factor with the utmost contempt. But I leave this, and pass on to
notice some of the really valuable thoughts and facts that ennoble
the lecture, which is addressed to “thoughtful and earnest minds,
not concerned specially with questions of philosophy, metaphysics,
and science, but alive to the advanced knowledge and thought of our
times, and anxious to know how the great foundation of religious
belief, the existence of Deity, is affected by the splendid advance
of our knowledge of nature.”

This expression “existence of Deity” is conveniently elastic enough
to cover the ground of argument by a scientific theologian, inasmuch
as it may be taken to mean a personal God, according to sound
Evangelical belief, and thus assume a plausible defence of Theism
versus Atheism; or, it may admit of a much wider application to an
“Unknown God”; for when the lecturer does venture to delineate the
characteristic of Deity as the Creator, it is such terms as
“Inscrutable Power or Creator,” “Eternal Mind,” “Infinite
Intelligence,” &c., which is tantamount to saying that the Primal
Cause of all that is, is unknowable; and if this is what Dr.
Dallinger really means, he is at one with the Spiritual Philosopher;
but this will be a curious weapon in the hands of an ecclesiastical
theologian—as dangerous as it is curious. By the use of these terms
the reverend author shields himself from the charge of materialistic
heresy, albeit to the clear-sighted one there are several, if not
many, weak and vulnerable points in the defensive armour; but if the
adherents and votaries of the “faith once delivered to the saints”
might be a little chary in their acceptance of him as a “sound”
exponent of religious truth, yet all progressive minds will hail him
as a fearless champion for the truth as delivered by the Book of
Nature and interpreted by the splendid achievements of modern
science.

  “The study of phenomena, their succession and their
  classification, is the essential work of science. It has no
  function, and is possessed of no instrument with which to look
  behind or below the sequence, in quest of some higher relation.
  The eye and mind of the experimentalist know only of antecedent
  and consequent. These fill the whole circle of his research; let
  him find these, and he has found all.”

Here the domain of “science” is defined by a master mind, which
tells us that “the researches of science are physical.” The
observable, finite contents of space and time are the subjects of
its analysis. Existence, not the cause of existence, succession, not
the reason of succession, method, not the origin of method, are the
subjects of physical research. A primordial cause cannot be the
subject of experiment nor the object of demonstration. It must for
ever transcend the most delicate physical re-action, the profoundest
analysis, and the last link in the keenest logic. Science refuses
absolutely to recognise mind as the primal cause of the sequences of
matter. This is just—within the strict region of its research—for
phenomena, their sequences and classification, are its sole domain.
But observe; science universally puts _force_ where the reason asks
for cause. The forces affecting matter are tacitly assumed to be
competent to account for every activity, every sequence, every
phenomenon, and all the harmonies of universal being, a nexus for
the infinite diversities and harmonies, a basis for all the
equilibrium of nature, is found by modern science in force. But
force is as absolutely inscrutable as mind. Force can never be known
in itself; it is known by its manifestations. It is not a
phenomenon, it produces phenomena. We cannot know it; but we know
nothing without it. The ultimate analysis of physical science is the
relations of matter and force. In irreducible terms, therefore, the
final analysis of science is _matter as affected by motion_.

We now see, from the above excerpta, the goal to which the “splendid
discoveries” of modern science lead its votaries, as portrayed by an
authority that claims to speak not as other men; and if it is not a
veritable dismal swamp, leading to nothing or negation; a miasma
suffocating the aspirations of those who are trusting to the
leadership of _savants_ to guide them in the path that conveys them
to the habitat of true wisdom and knowledge of themselves; then I
can only say of such, “miserable comforters are ye all.”

But the question intervenes here: is this a true definition of the
end and aim of science? It may be to the majority of the Royal
Society; but I may tell those who claim to be the conservators of
science, and who arrogate to themselves the right to define the
boundaries of even physical science, that they do not possess the
_all_ of human intelligence, and that there are, outside their
societies, men who refuse to bow the knee to the modern scientific
Baal, who refuse to be cajoled by the use of terms that mystify but
certainly do not enlighten. For instance, who is one wit the wiser
when, having reached the end of its tether, science discovers that
“matter and motion” govern and regulate all things observable by the
human eye, or within the range of the human mind? To the credit of
the author of the last Fernley Lecture, he sees and acknowledges the
dilemma into which “materialistic” science is driven; but whether
“theological” science, so ably represented by himself, can
altogether evade it, is a question that I do not here stay to
propound. This much, however, I may say, scientific dicta
notwithstanding, there is another department of scientific research
which _does_ form the _nexus_—the _veritable_ missing link—between
the known and their unknown, and this is the science of psychology,
which commences just where the professors of science (physical)
confess themselves baffled, and are unable, or rather unwilling, to
advance further in this to them _terra incognita_. The wilful
ignoring of this by Materialistic leaders of thought ends by putting
them out of court in the discussion of the profound problems arising
out of the discoveries of the psychological scientist. In
presence of facts, the evidence for which are world wide and as
demonstrable—_on their own plane or ground_—as geological, or
astronomical facts which the psychologist adduces, of what
conceivable use are the “relations of matter and force” of the
physicist, as explanatory of the laws, &c., pertaining to the new
world discovered by psychological _Savants_?

It will be new to many of your readers to find the Rev. Dr.
“hob-nobbing” with Professor Huxley, who is quoted as—_not_ a
Materialist! The learned professor appears to be indignant with
those who are zealous for “the fundamental article of the faith
materialistic,” who “parade force and matter as the Alpha and Omega
of existence,” and says, “If I were forced to choose between
Materialism and Idealism, I would elect for the latter”; and the
lecturer adds, “Truly, if our choice must be between them, this is
the normal alternative.” It were better had the Professor given some
inkling as to what _he_ meant by this high-sounding term
“Idealism.”[131]

-----

Footnote 131:

  Both the Idealism of Mr. Herbert Spencer, and the Hylo-Idealism of
  Dr. Lewins are more materialistic and atheistic than any of the
  honestly declared materialistic views—Buchner’s and Molaschott’s
  included.—[ED.]

-----

The author again says—“I adopt gladly the language of Professor
Huxley: Belief, in the scientific sense of the word, is a serious
matter, and needs, strong foundations. If it were given me to look
beyond the abyss of geologically recorded time to the still more
remote period when the earth was passing through physical and
chemical conditions, I should expect to be a witness of the
evolution of living protoplasm from not-living matter.”

“So should I,” adds the Rev. Dr., who brings in Mr. Crooks (?), of
whom the lecturer says, “I do not forget the recent and splendid
service done by Mr. Crooks to the philosophical side of chemistry.
It is a most subtle and exquisite means of endeavouring to deduce
the _method_, the ‘_law_’ according to which what we know as the
‘chemical elements’ were built up. He obtains indications of a
primitive element—a something out of which the elements were
evolved. He calls it _protyle_ or first stuff, and from its presence
concludes that the elements, as we know them, have been evolved from
simpler matter—or perhaps, indeed, from one sole kind of matter.” In
the following sentences he tries hard to depreciate this “splendid
discovery” by Mr. Crooks, the reason for which is anything but
difficult to discover. Dr. Dallinger _knows_ that Mr. Crooks
published a work entitled “Researches in the Phenomena of
Spiritualism,” containing his _Experimental_ Investigations in
Psychic Force, which he, in conjunction with his friend Huxley,
thinks it beneath him to notice.

But _I_ claim the “splendid discovery” of Mr. Crooks to be of far
more transcendent importance than the learned scientist will admit.
It comes marvellously near to the scientific demonstration of the
ethic propounded by the “philosophy of spirit,” “There is but one
life, and one substance, by which life is manifested in an
infinitude of forms in all universes, from the simplest to the most
complex organic.”

On this subject the Lecture contains the following eloquent, and, I
may add, brilliant peroration.

  “Life, it is well known, has its phenomena inherent in, and
  strictly confined to, a highly complex compound, with fixed
  chemical constituents. This compound, in its living state, is
  known as protoplasm. It is clear, colourless, and to our finest
  optical resources, devoid of discoverable structure. There is
  not a living thing on earth but possesses its life in
  protoplasm, from a microscopic fungus, to Man. To depict the
  properties of Life in irreducible simplicity, take one of the
  lowliest instances within the range of science. Let it be one of
  the exquisitely minute, almost infinitely prolific, and
  universally diffused living forms that set up, and carry on,
  putrefaction. The lesser of them may, when considered as solid
  specks, vary from the fifty-thousand-millionth of a cubic inch
  to the twenty-billionth of a cubic inch (evidently far beneath
  the unaided optic power of the human eye to see). I select one
  that is oval in shape. Its mission as an organism, is to break
  up and set free the chemical elements that had been locked up in
  dead organic compounds. (Query—Was this tiny creature
  self-generated, or was it the product of the _dead_ organism?)
  Its own substance wears out by this and other means; and it has
  the power to renovate the waste from the dead decomposition in
  which it lives, constructing, in the lavatory of its protoplasm,
  new living matter. But more; this vital and inconceivably minute
  speck multiplies with astounding rapidity in two ways; by the
  first and common process, in the course of a minute and a half,
  the entire body is divided into two precisely similar bodies,
  each one perfect; almost immediately these again divide, and so
  on in geometric ratio through all the populated fluid; the
  rapidity of this intense and wonderful vital action transcending
  all thought. By this process alone, a single form may, in three
  hours, give rise to a population of organisms as great as the
  human population of the globe. This is life—whether vegetable or
  animal none can determine—in the simplest form in which it can
  be known, and which distinguish it for ever and everywhere from
  what is not life.”

Several equally interesting examples of recent scientific
discoveries are given, but space forbids me to more than mention
them. Science, as represented by the _Savants_, evidently believes
in an unbridged chasm between the forms of life and not-life. The
Scientist and Philosopher of Spirit join issue on this, for they
declare that “Life is present everywhere, and _in_ all forms,
organic or non-organic, and without the presence of Life no
forms—not even mineral—could be phenomenal or _ex_istent.”

Your space does not permit me to deal with more than one other, and,
to many, the more important subject of Biblical records coming
within the domain of science. Here is a specimen of how the learned
scientist and theologian deals with the biblical account of
Creation.

  “And God said, ‘Let the earth bring forth the living creature
  after his kind.’ That is the utterance of the human conception,
  which can alone represent to us the divine resolve to fill the
  earth with life—and the joy of living things. ‘And it was so.’ But
  what epochs of countless ages filled the incalculable
  interval?”[132]

-----

Footnote 132:

  A few years—and, who knows? perhaps only few months more, and
  Protestant England will have reverend scientists explaining to
  their congregations from the pulpits that Adam and Eve were but
  the “missing link”—_two tailless baboons_.—[ED.]

-----

The boldness of this utterance from one in the position of the
Reverend Lecturer can be well imagined. It contains the elements of
combustion which need but the spark of investigation to deal a death
blow to the established Churchianic dogma of Biblical infallibility
in its literal sense. I conclude by repeating that such a
deliverance by a ministerial representative of the Wesleyan
denomination is a phenomenon that strikingly indicates the “Signs of
the times,” and which shows that the emancipation of the human mind
from the bonds of theological presumption is not far distant.

                                                      WILLIAM OXLEY.

Higher Broughton, Manchester, _December_ 11th, 1887.

                           ------------------

ABSOLUTE MONISM; OR, MIND IS MATTER AND MATTER IS MIND. By SUNDARAM
IYER, F.T.S. Madras, 1887.

Under the above title the author issues an address delivered at the
last convention of the delegates of the Theosophical Society at
Adyar. Metaphysicians, who note with interest all criticisms of
Western psychology from the Oriental standpoint, will welcome the
appearance of this extremely able and instructive _brochure_, which
constitutes the first instalment of Absolute Monism. The object of
the writer is to discuss the point whether an examination of all
theories, as to relations of mind and body, “does not lead us to the
Unistic theory that Mind is Matter, and Matter is Mind.” He
endeavours to merge the apparent dualism of subject and object into
a fundamental unity:—

  “Is mind a product of organized matter? No ... for organized
  matter is only a combination of material particles, as is
  unorganized matter. How is it, then, that there is the
  manifestation of Mind in the one case, and not in the other?...
  Can subjective facts ever emerge out of a group of molecules?
  Never; as many times never as there are molecules in the group.
  And why? Because Mind cannot issue from No Mind.” (p. 13.)

The line of argument adopted _versus_ Materialism—the doctrine that
mental facts are the _resultant_ of chemical changes in the brain;
force and matter being the only Ultimates of Existence—is
unquestionably forcible. Mind can never be resolved into a
“bye-product” of brain activity, for several valid reasons. In the
first place, in its aspect of thought, it exhibits _concentration on
an end_, _intelligence_ and _interest_ in the subject under
consideration, all of which characteristics, according to
Tyndall and Du Bois Reymond, are necessarily absent from those
remarshallings of atoms and molecules which are declared to
“cerebrate out” mental phenomena! In the second place, the gulf
between consciousness and molecular change has never been bridged;
an admission to which the leading physicists and physiologists of
the day lend all the weight of their authority. The terms
“consciousness” and “matter” are expressive of things so utterly
contrasted, that all attempts to deduce the former from the latter
have met with signal discredit. Nevertheless, materialists assume
the contrary, whenever the necessities of their philosophy demand
it. Hence, we find men, like Büchner, admitting in one place that
“in the relation of soul and brain, phenomena occur which _cannot be
explained by ... matter and force_,” and elsewhere resolving
mind into the “_activity of the tissues of the brain_,” “a
mode of motion”—contradictions, the flagrancy of which is
enhanced by the fact that the same author invests the physical
automaton Man with a power to control his actions! Lastly, the
degradation of consciousness into “brain-function” by constituting
philosophers, theologians, scientists, and all alike “conscious
automata”—(machines whose thoughts are determined _for_, not _by_
their conscious Egos)—knocks away the basis of argument. The only
resource becomes universal scepticism; a denial of the possibility
of attaining truth. Can impartiality, correct thinking and
agreement, be expected on the part of controversialists who form
part of a comedy of Automata?

If mind is not inherent in matter, it cannot be evolved by mere
nervous complexity. The combination of two chemical elements cannot
result in a compound in which something more than the constituent
factors are present. It is sometimes urged that, since the
properties of substances are often altogether changed in the course
of chemical combinations—new ones arising with the temporary lapse
of the old—consciousness may be explained as a “peculiar property”
of matter under some of its conditions. Mr. Sundaram Iyer meets this
objection ably. “Aquosity,” it is said, is a property of oxygen and
hydrogen in combination, though not in isolation. To this he
answers, “chemical properties are either purely subjective facts or
objectivo-subjective ones” (p. 57). They exist only in the
consciousness of the percipient, and represent no external and
independent reality. Psychologists of the type of Huxley would do
well to recall this fact, apart from the considerations springing
from other data.

Our author is loud in his praises of _Panpsychism_, that phase of
pantheism which regards all matter as saturated with a potential
psyche. He speaks of the “catholicity, sublimity and beauty ... not
to say the philosophy, and logic, and truthfulness of this creed of
thought.” It is, however, clear that some of the authorities he
cites in support of this view, more especially Clifford, Tyndall,
and Ueberweg, represent a phase of thought which is too
materialistic to do justice to an elevated pantheistic concept.
Clifford’s _conscious_ mind-_stuff_ is sublimated materialism, and
Ueberweg speaks of those “sensations” present in “inanimate” objects
which are “concentrated” in the human brain, as if they represented
so many substances to be weighed in scales. Instructive and
thoughtful as is the discussion of this subject (pp. 32-63), its
value would have been increased by a survey of the pantheistic
schools of German speculation, so many of whose conclusions are
absolutely at one with esoteric views as to the Logos and the
metaphysics of consciousness.

After discussing the primary and secondary (so-called) qualities of
matter, as tabulated by Mill, Hamilton and others, Mr. Sundaram Iyer
passes on the question: “What is force?”

  “Force _is_ matter ... it may be related to matter in ... four
  ways:—firstly, it may be an extraneous power to matter, acting
  upon it from without; secondly, it may be an inherent power in
  matter, influencing it from within, but yet distinct from the
  substance of matter; thirdly, it may be an innate power in matter,
  influencing it from within, and not distinct from the substance of
  matter; or fourthly, it may be a function of the substance of
  matter.” (p. 76-7.)

After an interesting criticism of current theories, he concludes
that:—

  “Function is simply the phenomenal effect of the latent cause,
  namely force, but never force itself. This potential existence,
  which is in matter, _is a physical existence_. If not it cannot,
  as shown before, produce any impression whatsoever upon or in the
  substance of matter.”

Matter is force and force is matter. It is not quite evident,
however, whether this position is strictly reconcilable with the
remark that “the primary qualities of matter are all simplifiable
into ... extension and (its) motion (actual or possible).”

If force is a _physical existence_, and the real _substance_ of
matter at the same time, we get back no further into the mystery of
what things-in-themselves really are. Physical existence remains the
reality behind physical existence and the realization of matter and
force, as aspects only of one basis, in no way simplifies the crux.

It is not clear, moreover, what is the exact meaning the author
intends by the use of the word “force.” Is it motion—molar or
molecular—or the unknown cause of motion? According to Professor
Huxley, “force” is merely an expression used to denote the _cause_
of motion, whatever that may be. We only _know_ this cause in its
_aspect_ of motion, and cannot penetrate behind the veil in order to
grasp the Noumenon of which motion is the phenomenal effect. The
necessity, therefore, of recognising the fact that _motion_ is all
that falls within the cognizance of sense, forbids the (profane)
scientist to use the term “force” as representative of anything but
an abstraction. The question is complicated by the consideration
that the _substantiality_ of various so-called “forces” appears most
probable, and that this substantiality becomes objectively real to
sense, only on a plane beyond this—the domain of matter in its order
of physical differentiations.

The materialistic doctrine that force merely = a motion of matter is
contradicted by the fact that, as shown by Mill, _motion can be
temporarily neutralized_. Lift a heavy weight on to a shelf and the
mechanical energy expended in the act is latent in the potentiality
of the weight to fall to the ground again. There is _no immediate
equivalent_, as the attraction of the earth for the object remains
the same (the now greater distance tending to diminish the amount
though in a very minute degree.)

It may be further noted that, granting Mr. Sundaram Iyer’s
definition of matter as “_extension pure and simple_,” to be correct
(p. 112), it is difficult to understand how he predicates this
barren content as endowed with _motion_ (p. 83.) What moves?

The rest of the _brochure_ is taken up with some excellent criticism
of current conceptions of atoms, space and heterogenealism (a creed
now so sorely wounded by Mr. Crooke’s “Protyle.”) Dealing with one
of the late Mr. G. H. Lewe’s utterances, the author remarks
with great truth: “By some mysterious law of occurrence the
self-contradictions of the bulk of the erudite and enlightened are
in point of gravity, palpableness, and number in direct proportion
to their erudition and enlightenment.” With how many contrasted
dicta from the pages of our Büchners, Spencers, Bains etc., etc.,
could this conclusion be supported.

One word before we close. Is the title of the work well chosen? It
appears to us the least satisfactory sentence which has been traced
by the writer’s pen. The definition of “mind as matter and matter as
mind” not only offers no solution of the great psychological problem
discussed, but does injustice to the contents of the work itself.

In the process of definition we “assemble representative examples of
the phenomena,” under investigation and “our work lies in
generalizing these, in detecting community in the midst of
difference.” Now, there is _no community whatever_ between mental
and material facts. For as Professor Bain writes:

“Extension is but the first of a long series of properties all
present in matter, _all absent in mind_ ... our mental experience,
our feelings and thoughts, have no _extension_, no _place_, no
_form_[133] or _outline_, or _mechanical division_ of parts; and we
are incapable of attending to anything mental until we shut off the
view of all that.”—“_Mind and Body._” pp. 125 and 135.

-----

Footnote 133:

  Nevertheless _objectively_ viewed thoughts are actual entities to
  the occultist.

-----

The phenomenal contrast of mind and matter is not only at the root
of our present constitution but an essential of our terrestrial
consciousness. Duality is illusion in the ultimate analysis; but
within the limits of a Universe-cycle or Great Manwantaræ it holds
true. The _two_ bases of manifested Being—the Logos (spirit) and
Mulaprakriti, (Matter, or rather its Noumenon) are unified in the
absolute reality, but in the Manvantaric Maya, under space and time
conditions, they _are contrasted though mutually interdependent
aspects of the_ ONE CAUSE.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                            EDITORS’ NOTES.

We have a good deal of correspondence now in type, but must stand
over till next month owing to lack of space.

In particular we wish to acknowledge a letter on Hylo-Idealism,
signed C. N., forwarded to us by Dr. Lewins from a correspondent of
his now in the East. This letter places Hylo-Idealism in a new and
very different light, and its straightforward style and language are
in strong contrast to the turgid effusions of such writers as G. M.
McC. An extract from one of the latter’s letters to the “_Secular
Review_” (January 7, 1888), for instance, says that “Specialism _is_
Superficialism, and _vice versa_, both being _fractionalism_;
and that the true desideratum is generalisationism (_i.e._
_all-roundism_ and _all-throughism_), whereby and wherein the
Kantian and Hegelian metaphysic may be precipitated and modern
Materialism sublimed? There is only one alembic for both, and that
is Solipsism—that true ‘wisdom of the ages,’ in which the
profoundest thinker is at one with the little child.—G. M.
McC.”!!![134]

                           ------------------

The following books have been received and will be noticed in due
course:—

“Absolute Relativism; or, the Absolute in Relation,” by W. B.
McTaggart. (W. Stewart & Co.)

“Spirit Revealed,” by Captain William C. Eldon Serjeant. (George
Redway.)

“A Modern Apostle,” and other Poems, by Constance C. W. Naden.
(Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.)

“Manuel of Etheropathy,” by Dr. Count Manzetti.

-----

Footnote 134:

  See also his letter under Correspondence.

-----

                        =Correspondence.=

                                -------

               THE CHURCH AND THE DOCTRINE OF ATONEMENT.

                    _To the Editors of_ LUCIFER.

As it is often supposed that the clergy are required to be united as
one man in teaching a doctrine called Atonement, and that this
doctrine requires the clergy either to teach that “God required the
blood of Jesus to be shed and offered as a sacrifice for an
Atonement,” or to leave the Church if they reject it; therefore,
since I reject this doctrine, it is sometimes wondered how I can
either have been admitted to ordination, or, being admitted, how I
can remain in, or expect to have a hearing in, the pulpits of the
National Churches.

_The explanation_ of my position is as follows:

I offered myself as a candidate for ordination much later than is
usual; and _one_ of the three beneficed clergy, whose testimonials,
as to the candidate’s religious views being orthodox, each candidate
is required to provide before being accepted as a candidate for
examination and ordination, _informed_ the Bishop of London
(Jackson) that I did not hold Church of England views on the
Atonement. The Bishop, therefore, before accepting me as a
candidate, required a personal interview; when I told the Bishop, in
reply to his question, whether I had any difficulty in accepting the
doctrine of Atonement as taught in the second of the XXXIX.
Articles, that I was entering the Church in order to teach, that it
was the work of Jesus Christ to devote His life a living sacrifice
to persuade us to believe that in His love, His mind, His spirit
towards us, we saw (so far as it could be manifested in the human
form) the love, mind, and spirit of God towards us; and that the
sacrifice of Jesus consisted in His leaving nothing undone that love
could do or suffer, even to drinking to its very dregs the cup of
our hatred, whilst blind and ignorant, in order that we might accept
and believe His testimony.

And, in addition, I told the Bishop that if the XXXIX. Articles did
not allow of this teaching, and demanded of the clergy to believe
and teach that “God required the blood of Jesus to be shed and
offered as a sacrifice for an Atonement, either to appease God’s
wrath, satisfy His justice, or propitiate His favour,” then such a
doctrine was immoral, anti-Christian, contrary to the Scriptures,
and made God to be no better than Shylock, a wolf, or a devil. And I
dared the Bishop to refuse accepting me as a candidate.

The Bishop made no reply, neither assenting nor dissenting, and I
returned to Petersham to await the result of this interview. After a
day or two the Bishop’s chaplain wrote that I might consider my
proposal to come to the Bishop’s examination for Orders accepted;
and I was ordained without one word of comment upon the conversation
at this private interview. But my first vicar only allowed me to
preach three times, and then for the rest of the year he boycotted
me from either preaching, reading, or even speaking in the parish,
excepting only in a particular part of it. My second vicar, after
allowing me to preach three times, also boycotted me entirely. I
appealed to the Bishop, but he declined to interfere. So after
striving in vain to find a clergyman who would allow me to preach
what I was ordained to teach, I published pamphlets, and delivered
them by the hundred and thousand at the church doors after the
service, wherever there was a large congregation; but after a time
the Bishop was appealed to to stop me; when he not only denied me,
as Peter denied Jesus, but he threatened to instruct the police to
prevent me; and the ruling powers at St Paul’s Cathedral did
instruct the chief of the police to prevent me.

As a last resort, I write letters in the Press wherever I can find a
newspaper willing to open its columns, to explain my views and
appeal to the people to obtain liberty in the Church for teaching
the truth of “Christ Crucified.” But so great is the opposition to
this, that the chief organ of the Church and the Press (the _Times_)
refuses even to allow me to advertise for a pulpit, on the ground
that it is _inadmissible_; notwithstanding all the minutest details
of divorce trials are freely _admissible_, thus proving that
everything is admissible excepting one thing, viz.: the truth of
Christ Crucified.

And yet the Archbishop of Canterbury has recently told the world
that “the Church wishes the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, to be told,” and the Bishops of Carlisle, Durham,
Peterborough, Manchester, Liverpool and Bedford, have also used
words to the same effect. But although I have spent the best part of
my life (17 years) in striving to find one clergyman (from the
highest to the lowest), I have not found one who would allow this
liberty to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, concerning Christ Crucified. And I appeal to the rulers of
the Church to allow this liberty—and to the people to demand and
obtain this liberty, if the rulers of the Church refuse it. For I
have a letter from Canon Liddon, in which he says to me, “I can
believe with all my heart, although I only know you from the two
letters which you have written to me (upon my sermons), that if you
were to preach, people would go to hear you as they go to hear me.”
Is there not a cause then, why I should complain of being thus
cruelly and unjustly boycotted for 17 years without any reason?

The chief organ of the Church and the Press (the _Times_) in the
supposed chief Christian city in the world, refused to publish, even
as an advertisement, any one of the three following appeals, on the
ground that they were _inadmissible_. Yes, _inadmissible_, whilst
all the minutest details of the Barrett trial, the Dilke trial, the
Colin Campbell trial, the Seabright trial, and a host of others of a
like nature, were all _freely admissible_.

                                   I.

“A pulpit wanted, in the National Church, in which liberty will be
allowed to teach the truth of Christ Crucified, openly and
fearlessly, in order that it may no longer remain either a
stumbling-block to the Jews, foolishness to the world, or a mystery
to the teachers of it (as it is to this day, for want only of this
liberty), but may verily be seen to be, as it is, and as St. Paul
asserted it to be, the power of God, and wisdom of God for the
salvation of all men.”

                                  II.

“The Rev. T. G. Headley, of Petersham, S.W., appeals to the Clergy
and people of the Church of England for a pulpit in which he may be
allowed to preach seven sermons: I. on Unbelief; II. the Trial of
Abraham; III. the Day of Judgment; IV. Mary Magdalene; V. Conversion
of St. Paul; VI. Jesus, only; VII. Inspiration.”

                                  III.

“The Rev. T. G. Headley, of Petersham, S.W., appeals to the Clergy
for a pulpit in which he may be allowed to explain the mystery of
Christ Crucified, that it may no longer remain a mystery.”

                                                 Rev. T. G. HEADLEY.

Manor House, Petersham, S.W.

                                  ---

[This persistent refusal is the more remarkable as other preachers
are allowed to teach worse, _from an orthodox standpoint, of
course_. Is it _inadmissible_ “to explain the mystery of Christ
Crucified,” as the Rev. Mr. Headley is likely to, lest it should
interfere with the explanation and description of Jehovah—“_one with
Christ Jesus_” in the orthodox dogma—by the Rev. H. R. Haweis, M.
A.? Says this truthful and cultured if not very pious orator: “At
first the chief attributes of Satan were given to Jehovah. It was
God who destroyed the world, hardened Pharaoh, tempted David,
provoked to sin, and punished the sinner. This way of thinking
lingered even as late as 700 B.C.: ‘I the Lord make peace and create
evil’ (Isa. xlv. 7). We have an odd survival of this identification
of God with the Devil in the word ‘_Deuce_,’ which is none other
than ‘_Deus_,’ but which to us always means the Devil. As the Jew
grew more spiritual he gradually transferred the devilish functions
to a ‘Satan,’ or accusing spirit. The transition point appears in
comparing the early passage (2 Sam. xxiv.), when _God_ is said to
‘move’ David to number the people, with the later (1 Chron. xxi.),
where _Satan_ is said to be the instigator who ‘provoked’ the
numbering. But Satan is not yet the King Devil. We can take up our
Bible and trace the gradual transformation of Satan from an accusing
angel into the King Devil of popular theology.”—(_The Key_, etc p.
22.) This, we believe, is an even more damaging teaching for the
Orthodox Church than any theory about “Christ Crucified.” Mr.
Headley seeks to prove Christ, the Rev. Haweis ridiculing and making
away with the Devil, _destroys and makes away for ever with Jesus_,
as Christ, also. For, as logically argued by Cardinal Ventura de
Raulica, “_to demonstrate the existence of Satan, is to
re-establish_ ONE OF THE FUNDAMENTAL DOGMAS OF THE CHURCH, _which
serves as a basis for Christianity, and without which_, Satan (and
Jesus) would be but names”; or to put it in the still stronger terms
of the pious Chevalier des Mousseaux, “_The Devil is the chief
pillar of Faith_ ... if it was not for him, the Saviour, the
Crucified, the Redeemer, would be but the most ridiculous of
supernumeraries, and the Cross an insult to good sense.” (See _Isis
Unveil._ vol. i., 103; vol. ii., 14.) Truly so. Were there no Devil,
a Christ to save the World from him would be hardly wanted! Yet, the
Rev. Haweis says: (p. 24) “I cannot now discuss the teaching of the
N. T. on the King Devil, or I might show that Jesus did not endorse
the popular view of one King Devil, and ... notice the way in which
our translators have played fast and loose with the words _Diabolus
and Satan_;” adding that the Tree and Serpent worship was an
Oriental cult, “of which the narrative of Adam and Eve is a Semitic
form.” Is this _admissible_ orthodoxy?—ED.]

                        SOCIALISM AND THEOSOPHY.

                    _To the Editors of_ LUCIFER.

MESDAMES,—In the December number of LUCIFER Mr. J. B. Bright takes
exception to some remarks on Socialism in an article on
“Brotherhood,” which appeared in your pages a month previously.

As the writer of that article, I think it right to accept Mr.
Bright’s challenge, and endeavour to replace my somewhat hasty
generalisations by a more precise statement of the teachings of
Theosophy, as they appear to me to bear on the question at issue.

Mr. Bright objects to my use of the phrase “_materialistic_
Socialism.” My intention was to draw a distinction between that
which “concerns itself primarily with the material or physical
condition of mankind,” and that other form of purely voluntary
association, springing, as regards each of its members, from a
recognition of their unity of purpose, and the realisation of the
idea of brotherhood, for an example of which we may turn to the
communistic system of the early Christian Church. I would point out
that this is not a fanciful distinction, as in the first case what
is described as “a juster distribution of wealth” is the very
essence of the Socialistic idea, while in the second it is only an
incident, arising from the conviction that worldly possessions have
in themselves no value in comparison with “the things of the
spirit.” I maintain then that the teachings of Theosophy are opposed
to “modern materialistic Socialism,” and I will endeavour to point
out, as briefly as possible, in what this opposition consists.

There is at the outset a fundamental difference between Theosophy
and Socialism in the value they attach to the “material and
physical” well-being of mankind. Theosophy regards any given earth
life as an infinitesimal link in the chain of lives which leads from
the first glimmerings of a separate consciousness up to the very
threshold of Divinity and All-knowledge. And taking the doctrines of
Re-incarnation and Karma, as interacting laws, it sees in the
apparent injustices of physical life, and in the inequalities of
intellectual and moral development among mankind, the results of
good or bad use made of opportunities in previous incarnations. The
Universe is governed by the great law of Harmony, whose agent is
Karma, and infractions of this law, or rebellion against it, are
punished by the action of Karma, whether in the individual or the
race. Thus the position of every individual in respect to his fellow
men, and the position of every nation (the compound, as it were, of
individual Karmas) in respect to other nations, is the direct result
of previously acquired characteristics and affinities. The
re-incarnation of an individual will be governed by his personal
affinities; firstly, to the general Karma of his nation: secondly,
to the particular circumstances of his parentage and condition in
life. Theosophy therefore teaches that so far as regards his
individual Karma, a man’s place in Society is what he has made it,
and he has no right to cry out against the injustice of the law
which he has broken, and which inexorably exacts the penalty of his
default. This does not however quite hold good as regards the
national or the cyclic Karma. It is quite possible that by the
action of cyclic Karma injustice may be done to individuals, to be
atoned for no doubt in future existences, but at the same time
calculated to impede their due and regular development. The
combating of this cyclic Karma, in so far as it deals unjustly with
individuals, is the work of the great and wise ones of this earth,
and every true Theosophist will to the best of his ability take part
in the struggle. But the Socialist movement is itself a part of the
cyclic Karma, and in its endeavour to rectify what seem, from its
limited point of view, injustices, it cannot fail to be unjust to
those the justice of whose position in life it declines to
recognise. Thus it cannot be otherwise than that it should meet with
opposition from those whose object is the improvement of humanity as
a whole.

I must in the second place point out that the teaching of Theosophy
is entirely opposed to the idea that any very great progress can be
made by humanity as a whole, within the space of a few generations.
Speaking of the destruction of evil in the human heart, the author
of “Light on the Path” says, “Only the strong can kill it out. The
weak must wait for its growth, its fruition, its death. And it is a
plant which lives and increases throughout the ages. It flowers when
man has accumulated unto himself innumerable existences.” This is
undoubtedly Theosophical teaching, but I do not think it tallies
with Mr. Bright’s view that “this self same society——contains within
it all the germs of such a reconstruction of the physical
environment as shall shortly place the means of spiritual and
psychical regeneration within the reach of all.” It is impossible
that Socialism or any other external organisation can “raise the
intellectual and instinctive moral standard of the whole community
to such an extent that all will, in the next generation after the
Social Revolution, be amenable to the truths” of Theosophy. This
would be equivalent to saying that every member of the community was
prepared definitely to undertake the task of self-conquest, and it
happens unfortunately that almost all the external work of Socialism
is in the opposite direction. Further, it must be distinctly pointed
out that this task of self-conquest must be undertaken and carried
through by each man for himself, and only those who have reached a
certain point in human evolution are ready for the struggle. There
is one other point on which I feel some stress must be laid. It
seems to me impossible that Theosophy, recognising as it does the
immense gulf which exists between ordinary humanity (in which term I
of course include all its followers), and those who are on the
threshold of Divinity, can fail to recognise at the same time the
principle of hierarchy in its best and noblest sense. I mean of
course a spiritual hierarchy, but even this is incompatible with
that innate hatred of domination which is so obvious in Socialism.
There is no doubt some inconsistency in this hatred of domination,
as in practice Socialists are prepared to substitute for the
existing domination of intelligence that of mere numbers, but this,
if anything, only makes the contrast between the two ideas somewhat
stronger. It is only right to point out that an accepted disciple
(not a mere student) practically surrenders his personal liberty,
and pledges himself to obedience to those great ones who are the
initiators of the Theosophical movement.

I have endeavoured thus far to particularise my general statement
that the teachings of Theosophy were opposed to Socialism. I think
Mr. Bright’s objections to my other statements are in effect
answered in what I have already said, but I may perhaps be permitted
to deal with them separately. If Mr. Bright has understood the
meaning of the article on Brotherhood, he will, I think, see that
whereas the Theosophical idea of brotherhood is based on the
identity of the Divine spirit inherent in humanity, and thence
working downwards, the brotherhood of Socialism is based on the
assumption of equality on the material, or intellectual plane, and
has, _per se_, no existence at all on the higher plane. The
brotherhood of Theosophy, once rightly understood, will no doubt be
manifested on the lower planes, but that does not make it the same
thing as an idea of Brotherhood which begins and ends in physical
existence.

As to my remark that Socialism is an attempt to interfere with the
action of the Laws of Karma, I should perhaps have added the word
“individual,” which, in conjunction with my reference to the parable
of the talents, should make the meaning clear. Socialism aims at the
levelling of classes, which is nothing else than a redistribution of
the responsibilities of life. I understand the parable of the
talents to indicate the true meaning of the differences in
opportunities accorded to individuals during their life on earth.
Every opportunity is also a responsibility, and from those to whom
much is given much will be demanded. Further, responsibility is
thrust upon those who can bear it, and to relieve them from it, and
transfer it to the shoulders of the weaker brethren, is an
interference with the laws of Karma, and can only lead to a
retardation of the general evolution of humanity. I will only say in
conclusion that I have endeavoured to confine my remarks to the view
of Socialism advanced by Mr. Bright. It is indeed hardly necessary
to point out that Theosophy can never be a party to the incitements
to violence, and the appeals to the baser passions which Mr. Bright
rightly deprecates, but which are unfortunately too often the
stock-in-trade of the Socialist orator.

I feel that there are many points in Mr. Bright’s letter to which I
should be glad to reply more in detail, but I fear that in so doing
I might be considered as trenching too much on those purely
political aspects of the question which are outside the scope of
Theosophical work.

                                   I am, Mesdames,
                                            Your obedient servant,
                                                 THOS. B. HARBOTTLE.

                        -----------------------

                           WHAT IS THEOSOPHY?

_The question is answered by Schopenhauer as follows_:

“... Starting from the plane of _mental conception_ (_Vorstellung_),
and proceeding on our way towards the attainment of _objective
knowledge_, we shall never be able to arrive at a higher point than
our own conception (imagination), _i.e._ of the external appearance
of the object of our observation; but we shall never be able to
penetrate into the interior of the things and to find out what they
really are (not what they merely appear to be). So far I agree with
_Kant_. But as a counterpoise to this truth I have called attention
to another one; namely, that we are not merely the _cognising
subject_, but we are also ourselves a part of object of our
cognition, we are ourselves the _Thing itself_. There is
consequently an interior way open to us from that self-existing and
interior essence of things, which we cannot approach from the
outside; a kind of subterranean passage, a secret connection, by
which we by treason, as it were, may at once penetrate into a
fortress which was impregnable from the outside. The _Thing itself_
can as such enter our consciousness only in a direct manner, _i.e._
_by becoming conscious of its own self_. To attempt to know it
objectively is to ask for a self-contradiction.” (_The World as Will
and Conception._ Vol. ii., Cap. 18).

What Schopenhauer expresses in modern philosophical language might
perhaps be stated in a few words by saying, that man cannot become
conscious of the truth unless the truth is in him, and in that case
it is not the man who recognises the truth, but the truth which
recognises itself in man. He who wants to know it objectively must
separate himself from it, because no one can see his own face
without the help of a mirror; but if he separates himself from it,
the truth exists in him no longer. It is therefore the truth itself
which may become self-conscious in man, provided there exists any
truth in him.

                                                               F. H.

                        -----------------------

                         A NOTE OF EXPLANATION.

I would much rather suffer an unintentional misrepresentation of my
meaning than take the trouble to reply, and have no desire to
magnify small matters of difference. But a very critical friend
calls my attention to certain statements and apparent discrepancies
in the “Esoteric Character of the Gospels,” on which I will beg
leave to say a word.

I find it affirmed on p. 300, in a foot-note, that “Mr. G. Massey
is not correct in saying that ‘_The Gnostic form of the name
Chrest or Chrestos denotes the Good God, not a human original,’
for it denoted the latter, that is, a good, holy man._” But either
the statement has no meaning as an answer to me, or it is based on
a misunderstanding of mine.[135] I was showing that the _original_
Christ of the Gnosis was not one particular form of human
personality, like the supposed historic Christ, and that the name
denoted a divine, and not a human _original_. I was perfectly well
aware, as your quotations show, that the name was _afterwards_
conferred on the “good” as the Chrestoi or Chrestiani. Nor do I
say, or anywhere imply, that the “_Karest_,” or mummy-type of
immortality _was_ the _only form of the Christ_, as your
quotations again will prove. I have written enough about that
Gnostic Christ who was the Immortal Self in man, the reflection
of, or emanation from, the divine nature in humanity, and in both
sexes, not merely in one.[136] This is the Christ that never could
become a one person or be limited to one sex. This you accept and
preach; yet you can add “_Still the personage (Jesus) so addressed
by Paul—wherever he lived—was a great initiate, and a ‘Son of
God.’_”[137] But the Christos of Paul, being the Gnostic Christ,
as you admit (301), it cannot be a personage named Jesus, or a
great Initiate, who was addressed by him. It appears to me that in
passages like these, you are giving away all that is worth
contending for, and vouching for that which never has been, and
never can be, proved. I have searched for Jesus many years in the
Gospels and elsewhere without being able to catch hold of the hem
of the garment of any human personality. Ben-Pandira we know a
little of, but cannot make him out in the Christ of the Gospels.
The Christ of the Gnosis can be identified, but not with any
historic Jesus.

-----

Footnote 135:

  The remark made has never been meant as “an answer,” but simply as
  an observation that the word “Chrestos” applied to a “good man,” a
  “human original,” and not to a “good God only.” If such was not
  the intention of Mr. Massey, and he amplifies his idea elsewhere,
  it was not so amplified in his article in the “Agnostic Annual.”
  It is, therefore, simply a bare statement of facts referring to
  that particular article and no more. I do not for one moment
  oppose Mr. Massey’s conclusions, nor doubt his undeniable learning
  in the direction of those particular researches, _i.e._, about the
  words “Christos” and “Chrestos.” What I say is, that he limits
  them to the negation of an historical Christ, and, for reasons no
  doubt very weighty, does not touch upon their principal esoteric
  meaning in the temple-phraseology of the Mysteries.—H.P.B.

Footnote 136:

  This is absolutely and preeminently a Theosophical doctrine taught
  ever since 1875, when the Theosophical Society was founded.—[ED.]

Footnote 137:

  This, I am afraid, is a misunderstanding (due, no doubt, to my own
  fault) on the part of our learned correspondent, of the meaning
  that was intended to be conveyed in the articles now criticized.
  If he goes to the trouble of reading over again the paragraph that
  misled him (see p. 307, 5th paragraph), he will, perhaps, see that
  it is so. That which was really meant was that, though the terms
  _Christos_ and _Chréstos_ are generic surnames, still, the
  personage so addressed (not by Paul, necessarily, but by any one),
  was a great Initiate and a “Son of God.” It is the name “Jesus,”
  placed in the sentence in parentheses that made it both clumsy and
  misleading. Whether Paul knew of Jehoshua Ben Pandira (and he must
  have heard of him), or not, he could never have applied the
  surname used by him to Jesus or any other _historic_ Christ.
  Otherwise his _Epistles_ would not have been withheld and exiled
  as they were. The sentence which precedes the two incriminated
  statements, shows that no such thing, as understood by Mr. Massey,
  could have been really meant, as it is said “Occultism pure and
  simple finds the same mystic elements in the Christian as in other
  faiths, _though it rejects emphatically its dogmatic and historic
  character_.” The two statements, viz., that Jesus or Jehoshua Ben
  Pandira _whenever he lived_, was a great Initiate and the “Son of
  God”—just as Apollonius of Tyana was—and that Paul never meant
  either him or any other living Initiate, but a metaphysical
  Christos present in, and _personal_ to, every mystic Gnostic as to
  every initiated Pagan—are not at all irreconcileable. A man may
  know of several great Initiates, and yet place his own ideal on a
  far higher pedestal than any of these.—[H.P.B.]

-----

We do not go to the Christian Gospels to learn the true nature of
the Christ, or the incarnation according to the Gnostic religion
(I use this term in preference to yours of the “Wisdom-Religion,”
as being more definite and explanatory; not as a religion,
supposed by the _Idiotai_ to have followed in the wake of Historic
Christianity!). These were known in Egypt, more than six thousand
years ago. When the monuments began the Cult of the Supreme God
Atum was extant. We know not how many æons earlier, but six
thousand years will do. Atum = Adam was the divine father of an
eternal soul which was personated as his son, named Iu-em-hept
(the Greek Imothos or Æsculapius), an image of whom used to be
seen (on shelf 3,578, b. 1874), in the British Museum. He was the
second Atum = Adam, and is called the “Eternal Word” in the
Ritual. In external phenomena this type represented the Solar God,
re-born monthly or annually in the lunar orb; in human phenomena
the Christ or Son of God as the essential and eternal soul in man.
But he was neither a man nor an Initiate. He was just what the
Logos, the Word of Truth or Ma-Kheru, the Buddha or Christ is in
other Cults.[138]

-----

Footnote 138:

  Nor shall I dispute this statement in general. But this does not
  invalidate in one iota _my_ claim. The temple priests assumed
  the names of the gods they served, and this is as well known a
  fact, as that the defunct Egyptian became an “Osiris”—was
  “osirified”—after his death. Yet Osiris was assuredly neither
  “man nor an Initiate,” but a being hardly recognised as such by
  the Royal Society of materialistic science. Why, then, could not
  an “Initiate,” who had succeeded in merging his spiritual being
  into the _Christos state_, be regarded as a Christos after his
  last and supreme initiation, just as he was called _Chrestos_
  before that? Neither Plotinus, Porphyry nor Apollonius were
  Christians, yet, according to esoteric teaching, Plotinus
  realized this sublime state (of becoming or uniting himself with
  his _Christos_) six times, Apollonius of Tyana four times, while
  Porphyry reached the exalted state only once, when over sixty
  years of age. The Gnostics called the “_Word_” “Abraxas” and
  “Christos” indiscriminately, and by whatever name we may call
  it, whether Ma-Kheru, or Christos or Abraxas, it is all one.
  That mystic state which gives to our inner being the impulse
  that attracts “the soul toward its origin and centre, the
  Eternal good,” as Plotinus teaches, and makes of man a god, the
  Christos or the unknown made manifest, is a preeminently
  theosophical condition. It belonged to the temple mysteries, and
  the teachings of the Neo-Platonists.—[H.P.B.]

-----

I cordially agree with “M,” a correspondent whom you quote, and wish
that all our orthodox friends would as frankly face the facts. If
any historic Jesus ever did claim to be the Gnostic Christ made
flesh[139] once for all, he would be the supremest impostor in
history.

Let us define to ourselves very strictly what it is we do mean, or
we shall introduce the direst confusion into the conflict, and we
shall be unable to distinguish the face of friend from foe in the
cloud of battle-dust which we may raise. What I find is, that
Historic Christianity was based either upon the suppression or the
perversion of all that _was_ esoteric in Gnostic Christianity. And
to bring any aid from the one to the support of the other is to try
and re-establish with the left hand all that you are knocking down
with the right.

I am also taken to task on page 307 for alluding to the Bible as a
“Magazine of falsehoods already exploded, or just going off,” by the
writer who adds force to my words later on in characterizing these
same writings as a “Magazine of (_wicked_) falsehoods”[140] (p.
178), which was going farther than I went, who do set down as much
to ignorance as to knavery. What I meant was, that the “Fall of Man”
in the Old Testament, is a falsification of fable, now exploded, and
that the redemption from that fall, which is promised in the New,
whether by an “Initiate” or “Son of God” is a fraud based on the
fable, and a falsehood that is going to be exploded. There is no
call to mix up the Book of the Dead, the Vedas, or any other sacred
writings, in this matter. Each tub must stand on its own bottom, and
the one that won’t, can’t hold water.[141]

                                                      GERALD MASSEY.

P.S. By the by, I see the Adventists, and other misleading
Delusionists are all agog just now about the wonderful fulfilment of
prophecy, and corroboration of historic fact, that we are now
witnessing. The “Star of Bethlehem” has reappeared, so they say, to
prove the truth of the Christian story. But, sad to say, it is not
the star of Christ that is now visible in the south-east before
sunrise every morning. It is Venus in her heliacal rising. It is
Venus as the Maleess, or Lucifer as “Sun of the Morning.” This
particular Star of Bethlehem—there are various others less brilliant
and less noticeable—generally does return once every nineteen months
or so, when the planet Venus is the Morning Star. Only the gaping
camel-swallowers, who know all about the “Star of Bethlehem,” and
the fulfilment of prophecy, are not up in Astronomy, and they will
no doubt squirm and strain at this small gnat of real fact offered
to them by way of an explanation.

                                                               G. M.

-----

Footnote 139:

  “Christ made flesh,” would be a claim worse than imposture, as it
  would be _absurdity_, but a man of flesh assuming the
  _Christ-condition_ temporarily, is indeed an occult, yet living,
  fact.—[ED.]

Footnote 140:

  Just so, if it has been originally written to be accepted in its
  dead letter sense. But, as I entirely agree with Mr. Massey, that
  historic Christianity was based upon the suppression, and
  especially the _perversion_ of that which was esoteric in
  gnosticism, it is difficult to see in what it is that we disagree?
  The perversion of esoteric facts in the gospels is not so cleverly
  done as to prevent the true occultist from reading the Gospel
  narratives between the lines.—[H.P.B.]

Footnote 141:

  If Mr. G. Massey kindly waits till the conclusion of “the Esoteric
  character of the gospels” to criticise the statements, he may
  perhaps arrive at the conviction that we are not so far apart in
  our ideas upon this particular question as he seems to think. Of
  course my critic being an Egyptologist, opposed to the Aryan
  theory, and arriving at his conclusions only by what he finds in
  strictly authenticated and accepted documents—and I, as a
  Theosophist and an Occultist of a certain school, accepting my
  proofs on data which he rejects—_i.e._ esoteric teachings—we can
  hardly agree upon every point. But the question is not whether
  there was or never was an _historical_ Christ, or Jesus, between
  the years 1 and 33 A.D.—but simply were the Gospels of the
  gnostics (of Marcion and others, for instance) perverted later by
  Christians—esoteric allegories founded on _facts_, or simply
  meaningless fictions? I believe the former, and esoteric teachings
  explain many of the allegories.—[H.P.B.]

-----

                        -----------------------

  [_We give room to this remarkable letter with the object of
  comparison. The Secularists are loud in proclaiming the modes of
  expression of the Theosophists as “stultic profundity,” and the
  Esoteric Doctrine as “a hopeless chaos,” a “rudely methodised
  madness.” At the same time the Hylo-Idealists are_ PERSONÆ
  GRATISSIMÆ _in the “Secular Review,” and no such remarks are
  passed about their theories and style_. Readers please to compare.
  “Fiat Justitia, ruat Saladinus!”—ED.]

                   HYLO-IDEALISM—THE SECRET OF JESUS.

           “Behold, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you.”

The primacy of Self is indisputable, if by reason of one fact
only—that this, self-same, Self is the initial postulate of all sane
philosophy. And, when Philosophy soars to Metaphysic, Scientific
Analysis “takes up the wondrous tale,” and its burden is Self-hood
also. All roads lead to Rome. All analysis runs into the Egoistic
Synthesis. “The One [Ego] remains, the Many change and pass.” Yet
the passing is only the flux and ebb of the One. In Hegel’s words,
“that which passes away passes away into its own self: only the
passing away passes away.” Which things are an allegory, and yet
“_solvitur ambulando_.” A recent traveller in the United States
tells us, that, in the Emerson country, he chanced upon cross-roads,
and found there an apparently contradictory direction-post. One arm
of it bore the inscription, “This is the way to Concord,” the other,
pointing in the opposite direction, was similarly worded, “This is
the way to Concord.” The Hylo-Ideal Thesis is this Ideal Concord, to
be reached whether you travel by way of Eastern Idealism, or by the
route of plainer Western Materialism. For, and here all
contradictions are reconciled, in the one Subject-object which is
Self, there is no diversity, neither Jew nor Greek, neither Idealism
only, nor Materialism only, or exclusively, but all is one.[142] And
in Unity there is no class distinction, no nomenclature, no
“otherness,” no Ebal _and_ Gerizim, but only the Mount of God. What
the Ego is, _all_ is.[143] It is the _x_ of every problem and
answers to any value save the spurious and indifferent one of the
Dualist.

-----

Footnote 142:

  Hence the Spirit of _Non-Separateness_ in esoteric philosophy must
  be the ONE _truth_.—ED.

Footnote 143:

  Only this “Ego” is _universal_, not _individual_: _Absolute_
  Consciousness, not the _human_ Brain.—ED.

-----

I find Hylo-Idealism (Auto-centricism)—this “pearl of great
price”—canvassed and examined by many modern thinkers, only to be
contemptuously cast away, though it would have made each one of them
in turn “richer than all his tribe.” But it was ever thus. In this
rejection there is no despair in the view of the _illuminati_. All
is ours, and paltering with the central truth of SOLIPSISM, as men
have ever paltered, does not change or diminish the truth itself, or
lessen the assurance of its ultimate victory, since to go from, or
flee from, the Egoistic presence is an impossibility. We wander here
and there, but to seek to transcend ourselves is vain. There must,
sooner or later, be the _resipiscentia_, the coming home at last to
Self, and Self only, as to the better home at last.

In this view there is no _Logos_—save that indisputable one, which
maketh all things to every one of us—no “true Light” save that
effulgent one which “lighteth every man that cometh into the world,”
namely, his own creative and illuminating Egoity—_sans_ which there
is but nothingness. Such a Gospel as this should be termed the
Evangel of common-sense were it not that that phrase shows only one
side of the question—“_Virginibus, puerisque est_” but it is also
the very acme of the exalted intelligence, “the last and sharpest
height” of human thought where the atmosphere is all too rare for
mortal breath.

The highest and the lowliest[144] are ever thus akin—“Aryan worship
secreted in the Holy of Holies the utensils of the dairy.” Grasp but
the centre truth of truths—that the Ego and its products are _one_,
that every one of us spins, from his own consciousness, the web of
thing and circumstance, which envelopes him—and you see at once and
as it were instinctively, that in this Universe-circle of Egoity
there is no “otherness” even thinkable, no lower and no higher, no
difference, nothing essentially common or unclean, everything being,
not so much cleansed of God, as very THEOBROMA,[145] God’s food and
nutrient element, seeing that in it, and by it, and through it, we
and all things CONSUBSTANTIALLY EXIST.

-----

Footnote 144:

  Then why not term the philosophy “_High-Low_-Idealism” _vice_
  “Hylo-Idealism”?—ED.

Footnote 145:

  “Theobroma”—the same as _cacao-butter_. We take exception _to the
  phraseology_, not to Dr. Lewins’ ideas.—ED.

-----

Thus _veræ causæ_ and other figments are not so much unsearchable,
or past finding out, as out of court or indifferent. Whether all be
of God, or all be from a “clam-shell,” does not matter—does not, by
one jot, affect our Thesis. Indifferently we are by origin,
patricians or “gutter-snipes.” The Ego is free of the Cosmos—equal
to either fortune, high or low, makes _its own_ universe, calls it
by its own name, and it “lives and moves and has its being.”

                                                          G. M. McC.

                        -----------------------

                      GERALD MASSEY ON SHAKSPEARE.

  Mr. Massey has sent us a circular, the contents of which should be
  of interest to the lovers of Shakspeare and the buyers of rare
  books. The writer says:

“My work on the Secret Drama of Shakspeare’s Sonnets, with Sketches
of his Private Friends, and of his own Life and Character, first
published in the year 1866, the Second Edition of which was issued,
with a Supplement, for Subscribers in 1872, has now been out of
print many years. It is frequently enquired for, and very rarely to
be found in the catalogues of second-hand booksellers. Therefore I
am about to reproduce the work. It will have to be re-cast and
re-written where necessary, as the writing can now be more
definitely done. Errors must be confessed and corrected. The new
volume will be on lines similar to those of the earlier work,
accentuated in many of the details, but modified in others. There
will be something new and more decisive to say concerning both sets
of the Sonnets, which I call the Southampton and Herbert series; and
not without reason or warrant will the Comparative method be pushed
much farther than before. The work will be written up to date in the
light of the latest knowledge. The most recent data, the latest
results of Shakspearian Siftings, will be utilised; and something
will have to be said concerning the current Baconian Craze, which
was no doubt foreseen by the Great Humourist when he wrote, ‘_A most
fine figure! To prove you a Cypher!_’ is my aim to fight one last
battle on this field for what I maintain to be the cause of truth
and right; to entrust a final answer on the Sonnet question to the
types of John Guttenberg, and leave in his safe keeping a plea that
shall be heard hereafter, as a permanent memorial to the writer’s
love and admiration for Shakspeare the Poet and Man. After twenty
years the ground is felt to be firmer underfoot. The building will
have a more concrete base. I am enabled to give a closer clinch to
my conclusions, and, as I think, complete my case. Necessarily the
book must be large, 700 or 800 pp. The price will be One Guinea.”




[Illustration: decorative separator]




                        =CORRESPONDENCE=

                    INTERESTING TO ASTROLOGERS.

                     ASTROLOGICAL NOTES—No. 3.

                    _To the Editor of_ LUCIFER.

Question, at London, 11.45 a.m., Feb. 26th, 1887.

Will the quesited die from his present illness?

Hearing by letter that my uncle, an octogenarian, was seriously ill
from pneumonia, I drew a figure for the moment of the impression to
do so, which occurred while reading the communication. His illness
had commenced about February 7th, and he was now confined to his
bed.

The following are the elements of the figure:—

                       Cusp of  10th house 0° ♓.

                          —     11th house 3° ♈.

                          —     12th house 20° ♉.

                          —     1st  house 4°
                                     38’♋.

                          —     2nd  house 20° ♋.

                          —     3rd  house 8° ♌.

Planets’ places: ♆ 25° 10’ ♉; ♅ 11° 46 R ♎; ♄ 15° 54’ R ♉. ♃ 5° 48’
R ♏; ♂ 20° 31’ 31” ♓; ☉ 7° 35’ 50” ♓; ♀ 27° 53’ 14” ♓; ☿ 23° 18’ 58”
♓; ☽ 16° 22’ 36” ♈. Caput Draconis 27° 35’ ☊; ⨁ 13 24’ ♌.

As the quesited was the 4th of my mother’s brothers and sisters, my
mother being the 8th and last, I took the 10th house of the figure
for herself, the 12th (or 3rd from the 10th) for her eldest brother
or sister, the 2nd for the 2nd, the 4th for the 3rd, the 6th for the
4th—the quesited—and the 1st (the 8th from the 6th) for his 8th, or
house of death. ♂ was lord of his first house, and ☽ of his 8th. The
aspect was ☽ 25° 51’ 5” ♂, separating from the quindecile, and
applying to the semisextile. As the significators were in good
aspects, separating from one and applying to the other, and within
orbs of both, it signified sure recovery; more especially as ♂
received ☽ by house, and was dignified by triplicity. Nevertheless,
the severity of the illness was shown by _Cauda Draconis_ in
quesited’s 4th house; by ♄, lord of quesited’s 4th, posited in
quesited’s 8th, retrograde, in his detriment, and in close □ to ☽,
lady of quesited’s 8th and posited in his 6th. Furthermore, as ☽,
the applying planet of the two significators, was in a cardinal sign
and in a succeedent house of the figure, each degree signified a
week; therefore as ☽ wanted 4° 8’ 55” of the perfect semisextile
aspect, I judged that he would be convalescent in 4 weeks and 1 day,
or March 27th. _On March 29th he walked out in his garden for the
first time_, and fully recovered from his attack.

                                                               NEMO.

                           ------------------

      ERRATUM.—Page 76, 2nd column, line 2, _for_ ♍ _read_ ♏.

                                LUCIFER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

        VOL. I.     LONDON, FEBRUARY 15TH, 1888.     NO. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            “WHAT IS TRUTH?”

          “_Truth_ is the Voice of Nature and of Time—
          _Truth_ is the startling monitor _within us_—
          Nought is without it, it comes from the stars,
          The golden sun, and every breeze that blows....”

          —W. THOMPSON BACON.

          “... Fair Truth’s immortal sun
          Is sometimes hid in clouds; not that her light
          Is in itself defective, but obscured
          By my weak prejudice, imperfect faith
          And all the thousand causes which obstruct
          The growth of goodness....”

                                                       —HANNAH MORE.

“What is Truth?” asked Pilate of one who, if the claims of the
Christian Church are even approximately correct, must have known it.
But He kept silent. And the truth which He did not divulge, remained
unrevealed, for his later followers as much as for the Roman
Governor. The silence of Jesus, however, on this and other
occasions, does not prevent his present followers from acting as
though they had received the ultimate and absolute Truth itself; and
from ignoring the fact that only such Words of Wisdom had been given
to them as contained a share of the truth, itself concealed in
parables and dark, though beautiful, sayings.[146]

-----

Footnote 146:

  Jesus says to the “Twelve”—“Unto you is given the mystery of the
  Kingdom of God; but _unto them that are without, all things are
  done in parables_,“ etc. (Mark iv. II.)

-----

This policy led gradually to dogmatism and assertion. Dogmatism in
churches, dogmatism in science, dogmatism everywhere. The possible
truths, hazily perceived in the world of abstraction, like those
inferred from observation and experiment in the world of matter, are
forced upon the profane multitudes, too busy to think for
themselves, under the form of _Divine revelation_ and _Scientific
authority_. But the same question stands open from the days of
Socrates and Pilate down to our own age of wholesale negation: is
there such a thing as _absolute truth_ in the hands of any one party
or man? Reason answers, “there cannot be.” There is no room for
absolute truth upon any subject whatsoever, in a world as finite and
conditioned as man is himself. But there are relative truths, and we
have to make the best we can of them.

In every age there have been Sages who had mastered the absolute and
yet could teach but relative truths. For none yet, born of mortal
woman in _our_ race, has, or could have given out, the whole and the
final truth to another man, for every one of us has to find that (to
him) final knowledge _in_ himself. As no two minds can be absolutely
alike, each has to receive the supreme illumination _through_
itself, according to its capacity, and from no _human_ light. The
greatest adept living can reveal of the Universal Truth only so much
as the mind he is impressing it upon can assimilate, and no more.
_Tot homines, quot sententiæ_—is an immortal truism. The sun is one,
but its beams are numberless; and the effects produced are
beneficent or maleficent, according to the nature and constitution
of the objects they shine upon. Polarity is universal, but the
polariser lies in our own consciousness. In proportion as our
consciousness is elevated towards absolute truth, so do we men
assimilate it more or less absolutely. But man’s consciousness
again, is only the sunflower of the earth. Longing for the warm ray,
the plant can only turn to the sun, and move round and round in
following the course of the unreachable luminary: its roots keep it
fast to the soil, and half its life is passed in the shadow....

Still each of us can relatively reach the Sun of Truth even on this
earth, and assimilate its warmest and most direct rays, however
differentiated they may become after their long journey through the
physical particles in space. To achieve this, there are two methods.
On the physical plane we may use our mental polariscope; and,
analyzing the properties of each ray, choose the purest. On the
plane of spirituality, to reach the Sun of Truth we must work in
dead earnest for the development of our higher nature. We know that
by paralyzing gradually within ourselves the appetites of the lower
personality, and thereby deadening the voice of the purely
physiological mind—that mind which depends upon, and is inseparable
from, its medium or _vehicle_, the organic brain—the animal man in
us may make room for the spiritual; and once aroused from its latent
state, the highest spiritual senses and perceptions grow in us in
proportion, and develop _pari passu_ with the “divine man.” This is
what the great adepts, the Yogis in the East and the Mystics in the
West, have always done and are still doing.

But we also know, that with a few exceptions, no man of the world,
no materialist, will ever believe in the existence of such adepts,
or even in the possibility of such a spiritual or psychic
development. “The (ancient) fool hath said in his heart, There is no
God”; the modern says, “There are no adepts on earth, they are
figments of your diseased fancy.” Knowing this we hasten to reassure
our readers of the Thomas Didymus type. We beg them to turn in this
magazine to reading more congenial to them; say to the miscellaneous
papers on Hylo-Idealism, by various writers.[147]

-----

Footnote 147:

  _e.g._, to the little article “Autocentricism”—on the same
  “philosophy,” or again, to the apex of the Hylo-Idealist pyramid
  in this Number. It is a letter of protest by the learned Founder
  of the School in question, against a _mistake_ of ours. He
  complains of our “coupling” his name with those of Mr. Herbert
  Spencer, Darwin, Huxley, and others, on the question of atheism
  and materialism, as the said lights in the psychological and
  physical sciences are considered by Dr. Lewins too flickering, too
  “compromising” and weak, to deserve the honourable appellation of
  Atheists or even Agnostics. See “Correspondence” in Double Column,
  and the reply by “The Adversary.”

-----

For LUCIFER tries to satisfy its readers of whatever “school of
thought,” and shows itself equally impartial to Theist and Atheist,
Mystic and Agnostic, Christian and Gentile. Such articles as our
editorials, the Comments on “Light on the Path,” etc, etc.—are not
intended for Materialists. They are addressed to Theosophists, or
readers who know in their hearts that Masters of Wisdom _do_ exist:
and, though _absolute_ truth is not on earth and has to be searched
for in higher regions, that there still are, even on this silly,
ever-whirling little globe of ours, some things that are not even
dreamt of in Western philosophy.

To return to our subject. It thus follows that, though “general
_abstract_ truth is the most precious of all blessings” for many of
us, as it was for Rousseau, we have, meanwhile, to be satisfied with
relative truths. In sober fact, we are a poor set of mortals at
best, ever in dread before the face of even a relative truth, lest
it should devour ourselves and our petty little preconceptions along
with us. As for an absolute truth, most of us are as incapable of
seeing it as of reaching the moon on a bicycle. Firstly, because
absolute truth is as immovable as the mountain of Mahomet, which
refused to disturb itself for the prophet, so that he had to go to
it himself. And we have to follow his example if we would approach
it even at a distance. Secondly, because the kingdom of absolute
truth is not of this world, while we are too much of it. And
thirdly, because notwithstanding that in the poet’s fancy man is

              “... the abstract
              Of all perfection, which the workmanship
              Of heaven hath modelled....”

in reality he is a sorry bundle of anomalies and paradoxes, an empty
wind bag inflated with his own importance, with contradictory and
easily influenced opinions. He is at once an arrogant and a weak
creature, which, though in constant dread of some authority,
terrestrial or celestial, will yet—

           “... like an angry ape,
           Play such fantastic tricks before high Heaven
           As make the angels weep.”

Now, since truth is a multifaced jewel, the facets of which it is
impossible to perceive all at once; and since, again, no two men,
however anxious to discern truth, can see even one of those facets
alike, what can be done to help them to perceive it? As physical
man, limited and trammelled from every side by illusions, cannot
reach truth by the light of his terrestrial perceptions, we
say—develop in you the _inner_ knowledge. From the time when the
Delphic oracle said to the enquirer “Man, know thyself,” no greater
or more important truth was ever taught. Without such perception,
man will remain ever blind to even many a relative, let alone
absolute, truth. Man has to _know himself_, _i.e._, acquire the
_inner_ perceptions which never deceive, before he can master any
absolute truth. Absolute truth is _the symbol of Eternity_, and no
_finite_ mind can ever grasp the eternal, hence, no truth in its
fulness can ever dawn upon it. To reach the state during which man
sees and senses it, we have to paralyze the senses of the external
man of clay. This is a difficult task, we may be told, and most
people will, at this rate, prefer to remain satisfied with relative
truths, no doubt. But to approach even terrestrial truths requires,
first of all, _love of truth for its own sake_, for otherwise no
recognition of it will follow. And who loves truth in this age for
its own sake? How many of us are prepared to search for, accept, and
carry it out, in the midst of a society in which anything that would
achieve success _has to be built on appearances, not on reality, on
self-assertion, not on intrinsic value_? We are fully aware of the
difficulties in the way of receiving truth. The fair heavenly maiden
descends only on a (to her) congenial soil—the soil of an impartial,
unprejudiced mind, illuminated by pure Spiritual Consciousness; and
both are truly rare dwellers in civilized lands. In our century of
steam and electricity, when man lives at a maddening speed that
leaves him barely time for reflection, he allows himself usually to
be drifted down from cradle to grave, nailed to the Procrustean bed
of custom and conventionality. Now conventionality—pure and
simple—is a congenital LIE, as it is in every case a “_simulation_
of feelings according to a received standard” (F. W. Robertson’s
definition); and where there is any simulation _there cannot be any
truth_. How profound the remark made by Byron, that “truth is a gem
that is found at a great depth; whilst on the surface of this world
all things are weighed _by the false scales of custom_,” is best
known to those who are forced to live in the stifling atmosphere of
such social conventionalism, and who, even when willing and anxious
to learn, dare not accept the truths they long for, for fear of the
ferocious Moloch called Society.

Look around you, reader; study the accounts given by world-known
travellers, recall the joint observations of literary thinkers, the
data of science and of statistics. Draw the picture of modern
society, of modern politics, of modern religion and modern life in
general before your mind’s eye. Remember the ways and customs of
every cultured race and nation under the sun. Observe the doings and
the moral attitude of people in the civilized centres of Europe,
America, and even of the far East and the colonies, everywhere where
the white man has carried the “benefits” of so-called civilization.
And now, having passed in review all this, pause and reflect, and
then name, _if you can_, that blessed _Eldorado_, that exceptional
spot on the globe, _where_ TRUTH _is the honoured guest, and_ LIE
_and_ SHAM _the ostracised outcasts_? YOU CANNOT. Nor can any one
else, unless he is prepared and determined to add his mite to the
mass of falsehood that reigns supreme in every department of
national and social life. “Truth!” cried Carlyle, “truth, though the
heavens crush me for following her, no falsehood, though a whole
celestial Lubberland were the prize of Apostasy.” Noble words,
these. But how many think, and how many will _dare_ to speak as
Carlyle did, in our nineteenth century day? Does not the gigantic
appalling majority prefer to a man the “paradise of Do-nothings,”
the _pays de Cocagne_ of heartless selfishness? It is this majority
that recoils terror-stricken before the most shadowy outline of
every new and unpopular truth, out of mere cowardly fear, lest Mrs.
Harris should denounce, and Mrs. Grundy condemn, its converts to the
torture of being rent piecemeal by her murderous tongue.

SELFISHNESS, the first-born of Ignorance, and the fruit of the
teaching which asserts that for every newly-born infant a new soul,
_separate and distinct_ from the Universal Soul, is “created”—this
Selfishness is the impassable wall between the _personal_ Self and
Truth. It is the prolific mother of all human vices. _Lie_ being
born out of the necessity for dissembling, and _Hypocrisy_ out of
the desire to mask _Lie_. It is the fungus growing and strengthening
with age in every human heart in which it has devoured all better
feelings. Selfishness kills every noble impulse in our natures, and
is the one deity, fearing no faithlessness or desertion from its
votaries. Hence, we see it reign supreme in the world and in
so-called fashionable society. As a result, we live, and move, and
have our being in this god of darkness under his trinitarian aspect
of Sham, Humbug, and Falsehood, called RESPECTABILITY.

Is this Truth and Fact, or is it slander? Turn whichever way you
will, and you find, from the top of the social ladder to the bottom,
deceit and hypocrisy at work for dear Self’s sake, in every nation
as in every individual. But nations, by tacit Agreement, have
decided that selfish motives in politics shall be called “noble
national aspiration, patriotism,” etc.; and the citizen views it in
his family circle as “domestic virtue.” Nevertheless, Selfishness,
whether it breeds desire for aggrandizement of territory, or
competition in commerce at the expense of one’s neighbour, can never
be regarded as a virtue. We see smooth-tongued DECEIT and BRUTE
FORCE—the _Jachin_ and _Boaz_ of every International Temple of
Solomon—called Diplomacy, and we call it by its right name. Because
the diplomat bows low before these two pillars of national glory and
politics, and puts their masonic symbolism “in (cunning) strength
shall this my house be established” into daily practice; _i.e._,
gets by deceit what he cannot obtain by force—shall we applaud him?
A diplomat’s qualification—“dexterity or skill in securing
advantages“—for one’s own country at the expense of other countries,
can hardly be achieved by speaking _truth_, but verily by a wily and
deceitful tongue; and, therefore, LUCIFER calls such action—a
_living_, and an evident LIE.

But it is not in politics alone that custom and selfishness have
agreed to call deceit and lie virtue, and to reward him who lies
best with public statues. Every class of Society lives on LIE, and
would fall to pieces without it. Cultured, God-and-law-fearing
aristocracy being as fond of the forbidden fruit as any plebeian, is
forced to lie from morn to noon in order to cover what it is pleased
to term its “little peccadillos,” but which TRUTH regards as gross
immorality. Society of the middle classes is honeycombed with false
smiles, false talk, and mutual treachery. For the majority religion
has become a thin tinsel veil thrown over the corpse of spiritual
faith. The master goes to church to deceive his servants; the
starving curate—preaching what he has ceased to believe
in—hood-winks his bishop; the bishop—his God. _Dailies_, political
and social, might adopt with advantage for their motto Georges
Dandin’s immortal query—“Lequel de nous deux trompe-t-on ici?”—Even
Science, once the anchor of the salvation of Truth, has ceased to be
the temple of _naked_ Fact. Almost to a man the Scientists strive
now only to force upon their colleagues and the public the
acceptance of some personal hobby, of some new-fangled theory, which
will shed lustre on their name and fame. A Scientist is as ready to
suppress damaging evidence against a current scientific hypothesis
in our times, as a missionary in heathen-land, or a preacher at
home, to persuade his congregation that modern geology is a lie, and
evolution but vanity and vexation of spirit.

Such is the actual state of things in 1888 A.D., and yet we are
taken to task by certain papers for seeing this year in more than
gloomy colours!

Lie has spread to such extent—supported as it is by custom and
conventionalities—that even chronology forces people to lie. The
suffixes A.D. and B.C. used after the dates of the year by Jew and
Heathen, in European and even Asiatic lands, by the Materialist and
the Agnostic as much as by the Christian, at home, are—a _lie_ used
to sanction another LIE.

Where then is even relative truth to be found? If, so far back as
the century of Democritus, she appeared to him under the form of a
goddess lying at the very bottom of a well, so deep that it gave but
little hope for her release; under the present circumstances we have
a certain right to believe her hidden, at least, as far off as the
ever invisible _dark_ side of the moon. This is why, perhaps, all
the votaries of hidden truths are forthwith set down as lunatics.
However it may be, in no case and under no threat shall LUCIFER be
ever forced into pandering to any universally and tacitly
recognised, and as universally practised lie, but will hold to fact,
pure and simple, trying to proclaim truth whensoever found, and
under no cowardly mask. Bigotry and intolerance may be regarded as
orthodox and sound policy, and the encouraging of social prejudices
and personal hobbies at the cost of truth, as a wise course to
pursue in order to secure success for a publication. Let it be so.
The Editors of LUCIFER are Theosophists, and their motto is chosen:
_Vera pro gratiis_.

They are quite aware that LUCIFER’S libations and sacrifices to
the goddess Truth do not send a sweet savoury smoke into the noses
of the lords of the press, nor does the bright “Son of the
Morning” smell sweet in their nostrils. He is ignored when not
abused as—_veritas odium paret_. Even his friends are beginning to
find fault with him. They cannot see _why it should not be a
purely Theosophical magazine_, in other words, why it refuses to
be dogmatic and bigoted. Instead of devoting every inch of space
to theosophical and occult teachings, it opens its pages “to the
publication of the most grotesquely heterogeneous elements and
conflicting doctrines.” This is the chief accusation, to which we
answer—why not? Theosophy is divine knowledge, and knowledge is
truth; every _true_ fact, every sincere word are thus part and
parcel of Theosophy. One who is skilled in divine alchemy, or even
approximately blessed with the gift of the perception of truth,
will find and extract it from an erroneous as much as from a
correct statement. However small the particle of gold lost in a
ton of rubbish, it is the noble metal still, and worthy of being
dug out even at the price of some extra trouble. As has been said,
it is often as useful to know what a thing _is not_, as to learn
what it _is_. The average reader can hardly hope to find any fact
in a sectarian publication under all its aspects, _pro_ and _con_,
for either one way or the other its presentation is sure to be
biassed, and the scales helped to incline to that side to which
its editor’s special policy is directed. A Theosophical magazine
is thus, perhaps, the only publication where one may hope to find,
at any rate, the unbiassed, if still only approximate truth and
fact. Naked truth is reflected in LUCIFER under its many aspects,
for no philosophical or religious views are excluded from its
pages. And, as every philosophy and religion, however incomplete,
unsatisfactory, and even foolish some may be occasionally, must be
based on a truth and fact of some kind, the reader has thus the
opportunity of comparing, analysing, and choosing from the several
philosophies discussed therein. LUCIFER offers as many facets of
the One universal jewel as its limited space will permit, and says
to its readers: “Choose you this day whom ye will serve: whether
the gods that were on the other side of the flood which submerged
man’s reasoning powers and divine knowledge, or the gods of the
Amorites of _custom_ and _social falsehood_, or again, the Lord of
(the highest) Self—the bright destroyer of the dark power of
illusion?” Surely it is that philosophy that tends to diminish,
instead of adding to, the sum of human misery, which is the best.

At all events, the choice is there, and for this purpose only have
we opened our pages to every kind of contributors. Therefore do you
find in them the views of a Christian clergyman who believes in his
God and Christ, but rejects the wicked interpretations and the
enforced dogmas of his ambitious proud Church, along with the
doctrines of the Hylo-Idealist, who denies God, soul, and
immortality, and believes in nought save himself. The rankest
Materialists will find hospitality in our journal; aye, even those
who have not scrupled to fill pages of it with sneers and personal
remarks upon ourselves, and abuse of the doctrines of Theosophy, so
dear to us. When a journal of _free thought_, conducted by an
Atheist, inserts an article by a Mystic or Theosophist in praise of
his occult views and the mystery of Parabrahmam, and passes on it
only a few casual remarks, then shall we say LUCIFER has found a
rival. When a Christian periodical or missionary organ accepts an
article from the pen of a free-thinker deriding belief in Adam and
his rib, and passes criticism on Christianity—its editor’s faith—in
meek silence, then it will have become worthy of LUCIFER, and may be
said truly to have reached that degree of tolerance when it may be
placed on a level with any Theosophical publication.

But so long as none of these organs do something of the kind, they
are all sectarian, bigoted, intolerant, and can never have an idea
of truth and justice. They may throw innuendoes against LUCIFER and
its editors, they cannot affect either. In fact, the editors of that
magazine feel proud of such criticism and accusations, as they are
witnesses to the absolute absence of bigotry, or arrogance of any
kind in theosophy, the result of the divine beauty of the doctrines
it preaches. For, as said, Theosophy allows a hearing and a fair
chance to all. It deems no views—if sincere—entirely destitute of
truth. It respects thinking men, to whatever class of thought they
may belong. Ever ready to oppose ideas and views which can only
create confusion without benefiting philosophy, it leaves their
expounders personally to believe in whatever they please, and does
justice to their ideas when they are good. Indeed, the conclusions
or deductions of a philosophic writer may be entirely opposed to our
views and the teachings we expound; yet, his premises and statements
of facts may be quite correct, and other people may profit by the
adverse philosophy, even if we ourselves reject it, believing we
have something higher and still nearer to the truth. In any case,
our profession of faith is now made plain, and all that is said in
the foregoing pages both justifies and explains our editorial
policy.

To sum up the idea, with regard to absolute and relative truth, we
can only repeat what we said before. _Outside a certain highly
spiritual and elevated state of mind, during which Man is at one
with the_ UNIVERSAL MIND—_he can get nought on earth but relative
truth,_ _or truths, from whatsoever philosophy or religion_. Were
even the goddess who dwells at the bottom of the well to issue from
her place of confinement, she could give man no more than he can
assimilate. Meanwhile, every one can sit near that well—the name of
which is KNOWLEDGE—and gaze into its depths in the hope of seeing
Truth’s fair image reflected, at least, on the dark waters. This,
however, as remarked by Richter, presents a certain danger. Some
truth, to be sure, may be occasionally reflected as in a mirror on
the spot we gaze upon, and thus reward the patient student. But,
adds the German thinker, “I have heard that some philosophers in
seeking for Truth, to pay homage to her, have seen their own image
in the water and adored it instead.”...

It is to avoid such a calamity—one that has befallen every founder
of a religious or philosophical school—that the editors are
studiously careful not to offer the reader only those truths which
they find reflected in their own personal brains. They offer the
public a wide choice, and refuse to show bigotry and intolerance,
which are the chief landmarks on the path of Sectarianism. But,
while leaving the widest margin possible for comparison, our
opponents cannot hope to find _their faces_ reflected on the clear
waters of our LUCIFER, without remarks or just criticism upon the
most prominent features thereof, if in contrast with theosophical
views.

This, however, only within the cover of the public magazine, and so
far as regards the merely intellectual aspect of philosophical
truths. Concerning the deeper spiritual, and one may almost say
religious, beliefs, no true Theosophist ought to degrade these by
subjecting them to public discussion, but ought rather to treasure
and hide them deep within the sanctuary of his innermost soul. Such
beliefs and doctrines should never be rashly given out, as they risk
unavoidable profanation by the rough handling of the indifferent and
the critical. Nor ought they to be embodied in any publication
except as hypotheses offered to the consideration of the thinking
portion of the public. Theosophical truths, when they transcend a
certain limit of speculation, had better remain concealed from
public view, for the “evidence of things not seen” is no evidence
save to him who sees, hears, and senses it. It is not to be dragged
outside the “Holy of Holies,” the temple of the impersonal divine
_Ego_, or the indwelling SELF. For, while every fact outside _its_
perception can, as we have shown, be, at best, only a relative
truth, a ray from the absolute truth can reflect itself only in the
pure mirror of its own flame—our highest SPIRITUAL CONSCIOUSNESS.
And how can the darkness (of illusion) comprehend the LIGHT that
shineth in it?

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                        THE SOLDIER’S DAUGHTER.

                      (Judges xi., 6-xi., 39.)

In the early days of Israel’s history, whilst Israel was struggling
to be a nation and a kingdom, there was a people called the
Ammonites, who were making war upon the Israelites.

And we are told that the Israelites, in great distress and fear,
went out of their country, into the land of Tob, to find a man named
Jephthah, who was a man of mighty valour, in order to persuade him
to return with them, and be the captain and leader of their army, to
fight against, and save them from the Ammonites.

Now this man Jephthah was himself an Israelite by birth, but because
his mother had not been legally married to his father, Gilead, the
sons of Gilead’s lawful wife conspired together to drive him from
his hearth, home, and country, as a disgrace to the family and to
Israel; but the true reason was that they were envious and jealous
of him, in like manner as the brethren of Joseph who had previously
conspired against him.

For Jephthah himself was wholly innocent of having done anything to
disgrace either the family or the nation. And therefore, in common
justice, he ought not to have been made to suffer merely for the
form and manner of his birth; over which neither Jephthah nor any of
us have any control, either as to the time, when, or the manner, in
which we should be born. But although Jephthah was despised and cast
out as a dog, in the days of Israel’s prosperity, yet in the day of
Israel’s adversity and weakness, Israel no longer allowed any mean
and petty distinctions to prevent her from recognising the noble
character of Jephthah, and she entreated him to forget past
ill-usage, and return to be her captain and leader to save her from
the Ammonites.

And as this proposal of Israel afforded Jephthah the long wished-for
opportunity of returning to his country, and of establishing an
honourable reputation, _therefore_ he was not only ready to forget
and forgive the insults and injuries which he had received in the
past from his brethren, but he was also ready to return with them,
and share their troubles and dangers, even to sacrificing his life,
if need be, in order to save their lives and property.

Jephthah was the more willing to return and make this sacrifice
because he had a daughter, an only daughter and child; and she was
all the world to him, as he was to her; “for beside her he had
neither son nor daughter,” and she had patiently and willingly
suffered with him, and borne all his sorrows as her own.

But imagine the horror of Jephthah, after having saved the lives and
property of his brethren and countrymen by risking his own life, at
being then required, by these very brethren and countrymen, to shed
the blood of his only child! Immediately after the war was over,
Jephthah was required to sacrifice his daughter as a burnt offering
to the Lord of Battles, for having assisted Israel to overcome the
Ammonites; and so great was the love of this heroine for her father,
and for everything that concerned his honour and glory, that she
willingly consented to be sacrificed as a burnt offering.

Can anything be conceived more heartrending and terrible than that
Jephthah should thus be required by these very brethren and
countrymen whom he had saved, to shed the blood of his only child as
a sacrifice, in acknowledgment that he owed his victory to
miraculous assistance and favour, and not to his own skill and
valour?

What to him was the deliverance either of Israel or of his brethren
(who had cared naught for him), if they now required him to
sacrifice the only being in the world that he loved, and that loved
him, and who was therefore all the world to him?

It is true that Jephthah had made a foolish and rash vow, in the mad
excitement of the moment before going into battle, that if he came
out of the battle victorious, he would sacrifice, as a burnt
offering to the Lord, the first thing that came to meet him from his
house as he returned from the battle; but when the first person that
met Jephthah was his only daughter, _what could that Deity be, which
accepted as a sacrifice the blood of this child?_ What could the
religion of Jephthah’s brethren and countrymen be, that allowed and
required him to commit such an evil deed?

For if Jephthah had saved his brethren and countrymen from their
enemies, could they not now save Jephthah from shedding the blood of
his daughter as a sacrifice, in the name of religion, _when_ the
very deed itself proclaimed the religion, and their conception both
of religion and of the Deity, to be evil? And if his brethren and
countrymen would not save his daughter, but even required him to
fulfil his vow, could not Jephthah save himself and his child by
refusing to commit this evil deed? But if, in order to save his own
blood from being shed as a blasphemer for an atonement, Jephthah had
to flee from the country as an outcast and a criminal, whither could
he flee to, that would make life worth keeping? For surely the world
would be no desirable place for an honest man to live in, if he had
to live at enmity with men both at home and abroad, because he had
made a rash and foolish vow, which no Deity worthy of being
worshipped could or would require him to perform?

Because under such a sanguinary conception of religion, and of the
Deity, there was no remission, or redemption either, with, or
without, the shedding of blood. If Jephthah refused to shed the
blood of his daughter, then both his own and his daughter’s would be
shed by his brethren and countrymen, whilst if Jephthah shed the
blood of his daughter, as a sacrifice to save his own, what
remission or redemption was there in this? None!

And he cried for a deliverer to save him and his daughter, from this
great trouble. For he had staked his life and his all upon obtaining
a position and reputation for himself and his daughter at home in
Israel; and now, to give up hope of this for ever, and to shed the
blood of his daughter, or again flee as an outcast—what was it but a
living death to Jephthah, either way, whether he remained and
sacrificed his daughter, or fled to save her?

But who, in this agonising moment of Jephthah’s trouble, could raise
his voice to demand, in the name of religion, this diabolical
sacrifice of his innocent child?

Yes; diabolical. For what spirit, or voice, but that of a devil or
fiend could _counsel_ men to shed the blood of this pure and noble
girl? And where could the devil or fiend be found who would _commit_
the deed itself?

Jephthah is mockingly told that he is the fiend who must sacrifice
his child, as Abraham is said to have offered Isaac. And Jephthah is
told that he has no one to blame but himself, for having made the
vow. But who heard the vow? or who accepted the vow? Who could he,
or they be, who would require the fulfilling of it?[148]

-----

Footnote 148:

  Jehovah, of course, in his own national character of Baal, Moloch,
  Typhon, etc. The final and conclusive identification of the “Lord
  God” of Israel with Moloch, we find in the last chapter of
  _Leviticus_, concerning _things devoted not to be redeemed_.... “A
  man shall devote unto the Lord of all that he hath, _both of man_
  and beast.... None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall
  be redeemed, _but shall surely be put to death_ ... for it is
  _most holy unto the Lord_.” (See Leviticus xxvii., 28, 29, 30.)

  “Notwithstanding the numerous proofs that the Israelites
  worshipped a variety of gods, and even offered human sacrifices
  until a far later period than their Pagan neighbours, they have
  contrived to blind posterity in regard to truth. They sacrificed
  human life as late as 169 B.C. (_Vide_ “_Joseph. contra Apion_,”
  11, 8—what Antiochus Epiphanius found in the Temple), and the
  _Bible_ contains a number of such records. At a time when the
  Pagans had long abandoned the abominable practice, and had
  replaced the sacrificial man by the animal, and the ox of
  Dionysius was sacrificed at the Bacchic Mysteries (“Anthon,” p.
  365), Jephthah is represented sacrificing his own daughter to the
  ‘Lord’ for a burnt-offering.” _Isis Unveiled_, vol ii., pp. 524,
  525.

-----

Are they worthy of the name of brethren and countrymen who would
persuade Jephthah _to assassinate_ his daughter, in the name of
religion, or even look on at such an assassination? Would it not be
blasphemy to say that a good Deity required Jephthah to kill his
innocent child? And would not a good Deity release Jephthah from his
vow, and forbid him to sacrifice his daughter, in like manner as the
Scriptures teach us Abraham was forbidden to sacrifice his son
Isaac? And if it is said, it would have been faithless and sinful of
Jephthah after returning from the battle victorious, to have refused
the offering of his daughter as a sacrifice; yet surely to bind
Jephthah to break the Sixth Commandment, and to shed innocent blood
in the name of religion, would be making the Deity that required
such a sacrifice to be evil, and His worshippers to be the doers of
evil; and thus Jephthah would be required to sell himself to the
devil.

And how could men be other than the doers of evil, and the priests
of evil, who would counsel Jephthah to commit this evil deed, and be
ready to commit it themselves if he hesitated? How? Whether Jephthah
received any miraculous assistance or not, in the war, yet he was in
no wise bound to surrender his personality and to become an abject
slave to the supposed power that helped him. For Jephthah’s personal
services were needed as an instrument to deliver and save the
Israelites, or his services would not have been asked for. It was
also possible that he might have given certain services, which even
a miraculous power was unable to give—as we read in the Book of
Judges that “Judah could not drive out the inhabitants of the
valley, because they had chariots of iron.” (Judges i. 19.)[149]

-----

Footnote 149:

  It is said in the “Holy Book,” that it was “the Lord (who) was
  with Judah,” who “could not drive out the inhabitants of the
  valley, because they had chariots of iron,” (Judges i. 19), and
  not “Judah” at all. This is but natural, according to popular
  belief and superstition that “the Devil is afraid of _iron_.” The
  strong connection and even identity between Jehovah and the Devil
  is ably insisted upon by the Rev. Haweis. See his “Key” (p.
  22).—ED.

-----

And again, if all the glory of Jephthah’s victory had to be ascribed
to a miraculous power, then likewise all the shame would have to be
ascribed to that power also, for having ordained that Jephthah’s
daughter should be the first person to meet him after the war, to
pay _the price of victory_ to Jephthah, with _death to his
child_—for whom, alone, he coveted victory.

Victory on such terms was defeat and shame, not glory; for surely
such views of religious worship must be the _d’evil_ worship which
the Psalmist speaks of (Psalm cvi., 37), and not the service or
worship of a good God who would have mercy and _not_ sacrifice, as
Abraham learnt when he went out of the Philistine city into the
wilderness, and communed with God alone on Mount Moriah.

But it was one thing for a single individual like Abraham, at the
close of a long life, to acquire the knowledge “that God would have
mercy and not sacrifice”; and quite another thing for a Town, a
City, a Nation, or the World, to have acquired this knowledge in its
infancy; as even Abraham only acquired this knowledge by going out
of the city into the wilderness, and communing alone with God.

We can well understand how impossible it would have been for Abraham
even to have attempted, on his return from the mountain, to teach
the Philistines the faith or gospel (that God would have mercy and
not sacrifice), from the very fact that when Jesus Christ came _into
the world_ to teach the faith or gospel, which Abraham had gone _out
of the world_ to learn, Jesus was condemned by Caiaphas to be
crucified with malefactors, as a blasphemer. And to this very day
this doctrine of the power of Caiaphas, the adversary of Jesus,
continues to be taught as the doctrine of the Church, which it is
necessary to believe in order to obtain the blessing of the Church
here and of God hereafter.

Therefore it is manifestly evident that after Abraham had acquired
the knowledge that God would have mercy and not sacrifice, yet he
could not publish it, but could only lay it up in his heart as a
secret treasure, to be disclosed in the distant future, which in the
vision of his mind he saw. Meanwhile he prayed that the Lord would
raise up messengers and stewards to prepare the world to receive
this faith or gospel, because of its being too Herculean a task for
any one person to alter suddenly the religion of a people.

For whilst priests continued to teach, and the people to believe
that sacrifices of human beings were acceptable to God, how was the
man who dared (suddenly and without the cloak of a parable) to
reveal and publish the contrary, to escape being himself slain as a
blasphemer, whose blood it would be doing God service to shed for an
atonement? And until the world was sufficiently educated to declare
the generation of him who should be unjustly slain (Isaiah liii.),
it could only be like throwing pearls to swine for such an one to
attempt the task.

Then from whence, and from whom could Jephthah, who had saved
others, now look for the salvation of his daughter, or of himself,
if he refused to sacrifice that daughter?

And, in the anguish of his soul, Jephthah rent his clothes, and
bemoaned his trouble, whilst his daughter fled to the mountains to
pour out the sorrow of her soul, during the few short days she had
yet to live.

It is true that, in order to save her father from the cruel pain of
assassinating his devoted child, the noble girl may have voluntarily
leapt into the sulphurous flames on the burning altar; just as the
noble Roman soldier Curtius on his horse leapt down into the dark
and awful volcanic gulf as a sacrifice to save his countrymen.

But the more heroic and divine these persons were, the more
demoniacal and diabolical must be the religion of those persons who
required them thus to suffer.[150]

-----

Footnote 150:

  And yet it is this “demoniacal and diabolical religion” that
  passed part and parcel into Protestantism.—ED.

-----

It is true that the priests of such a religion may have believed in
it themselves, and may have been ready to sacrifice their own sons
and daughters in like manner; but that in no wise lessens the crime,
but on the contrary it intensifies it a hundred fold. How were the
people to be saved from a religion, of which the priests themselves
needed to be saved, whilst the priests had the sole education of the
people from infancy upwards, as well as the Chief power in the State
to make and unmake its laws, even to making and unmaking its kings?

Whilst the priests and rulers of the church taught such a cruel
religion,[151] would not the people and priests need a Mediator to
deliver and save them from practising it?

-----

Footnote 151:

  So “the people and priests” do now. And as the late Rev. Henry
  Ward Beecher once said in a sermon, “could Jesus come back and
  behave in the streets of Christian cities as he did in those of
  Jerusalem, he would be declared an impostor and then confined in
  prison.”—ED.

-----

If He who mediated to deliver and save us was Himself condemned to
be slain, and crucified with thieves as a blasphemer whose blood
ought to be shed for an Atonement, what hope of salvation can there
be for the world from such a Religion, until the people not only
uplift the Crucified Jesus as having been no blasphemer, but also
expose the doctrine to be evil and false which is quoted as an
authority for requiring the blood of “the Just one” to be shed for
an Atonement? And if it is said that we have no longer women brought
like Jephthah’s daughter to be assassinated and burnt as a
sacrifice, or noble men condemned to be burnt as heretics, yet we
have to the present day noble men and women condemned by the Church
as evil (to be accursed here and damned hereafter), simply and
solely because they refuse to believe this evil doctrine of
Atonement, which is oftentimes such a burden to their soul (either
to accept or reject) that they are driven to the very verge of
madness.

It is no uncommon thing to hear priests revile even our Queen as
being no true Christian, simply because they suppose she does not
believe in this evil doctrine of atonement, which is the doctrine of
Caiaphas, the enemy of Christ, and not Christ’s doctrine, teaching,
or gospel.

Should not such scriptural stories as these of the assassination of
Jephthah’s noble daughter, of the crucifixion of Jesus, and the
spilling of the blood of a whole host of martyrs, awaken men who
have slumbered to rise, to hear, to see, to speak, and run to save
the world from having to believe in this sanguinary doctrine, which
is a stumbling-block to the Jews, foolishness to the world, and a
mystery even to the teachers of it. This doctrine of Atonement can
not be reconciled as either good or true; and therefore it is the
cause of all progress being prevented so far as the world is
dependent on the Church for progress.

Yet the man who doubts or denies the goodness of this doctrine is
branded by the Church, to the present day, as a Sceptic and Atheist,
whom all sound Churchmen should avoid. And for sixteen centuries the
Church used its sovereign power to condemn those who rejected its
doctrine of Atonement as criminals, whom it would be doing God
service to burn as heretics; and the Church is only prevented from
doing so now _because_ (to its great regret) it has no longer the
power which it formerly had in the days of “the Inquisition.” The
doctrine remains the same still, and therefore the people owe it, as
a duty to the long roll of martyrs, to expose it. For it has been
the cause of much evil, and even to this day it assassinates the
souls of noble men and women, who incarcerate themselves in
monasteries and nunneries in the vain attempt to attain a sound
belief in it.

But when the Church is willing to allow (what it has refused to the
present day) liberty in the pulpit for explaining the mystery and
translating the truth of a “Crucified Christ,” then it will be seen
that the truth is not only a light to the Gentiles, but also the
glory of Israel; and the truth shall make us free.[152] (John viii.,
32.)

      Adyar, 17th October, 1887.         H. S. OLCOTT, P.T.S.

-----

Footnote 152:

  Only, as such _truth_ and _freedom_ amounts to the Church
  committing suicide and burying herself with her own hands, she
  will never allow such a thing. She will die her natural death the
  day when there will not exist a man, woman or child to believe any
  longer in her dogmas. And this beneficent result might be achieved
  within her own hierarchy, were there many such sincere, brave and
  honest clergymen who, like the writer of this article, fear not to
  speak the truth—whatever may come—[ED.]

-----




                              LUNIOLATRY.

A friend has just informed me of the fact that when President
Cleveland was making his recent tour through the States an old negro
presented him with _the left hind foot of a grave-yard rabbit, which
had been killed in the dark of the moon_. In making his present the
negro said he had sent it because he desired the reelection of
President Cleveland. “_Tell him to preserve it carefully, and that
as long as he keeps it he will always get there._”

The friend whom I speak of had just been reading a lecture of mine
on “Luniolatry,” in which the imagery and significance of the hare
and rabbit in the moon were spoken of all too briefly, and he wishes
to know if I can interpret the meaning of the negro’s gift. I guess
so. As previously explained the hare and the rabbit are both
zootypes or living images of lunar phenomena. A rabbit pounding rice
in a mortar is a Chinese sign of the moon. Swabian children are
still forbidden to make the likeness of a rabbit or hare in shadow
on the wall, as it would be a sin against the moon. The hare in the
moon is a well-known Hindu type of Buddha. It is mythically
represented that Buddha once took the form of a hare on purpose to
offer himself as food for a poor famishing creature, and so the
Buddha was translated in that shape to be eternized as the hare in
the moon. That is one illustration of the way in which the book of
external nature was filled full of mystic meanings, the essence of
which escapes altogether in trying to read such things as
historical, no matter whether they are related of Buddha, Horus, or
Jesus. This hare or rabbit in the moon is a symbol or superstition
with various races, Black, Brown, Red, Yellow, and White. When the
meaning was understood it was a symbol; when the clue is lost it
becomes a superstition of the ignorant; thus the ancient symbolism
survives in a state of dotage with the negroes as well as with the
“noble Caucasian.”

The frog in the moon was another lunar type. In a Chinese myth—that
is, a symbolic representation—the lunar frog has three legs, like
the Persian ass in the Bundahish. In both cases the three legs stand
for three phases of the moon reckoned at ten days each in a
luni-solar month of thirty days. Now it happens that the rabbit’s
period of gestation is thirty days; and the early races included
very curious observers amongst their naturalists, who had to think
in things and express their thought in gesture-signs and _zootypes_
before there were such things as printer’s types. Hence the frog
that dropped its tail, the serpent that sloughed its skin, the
rabbit with its period of thirty days, were all symbols of the moon.
Enough that the rabbit _was_ a zootype of the moon, and the rabbit
is equal to the hare. Hor-Apollo tells us that when the Egyptians
would denote “an opening,” they delineate a hare, because this
animal always has its eyes open (B. I. 26). This can be corroborated
in several ways. The name of the hare in Egyptian is “Un,” which
means open, to open, the opener. It was applied to Osiris,
“Un-Nefer,” in his lunar character as the good opener, otherwise the
splendid or glorious hare, because “Nefer” means the handsome,
beautiful, perfect, or glorious. Also the city of Unnut was that of
the hare, “Un,” and this was the metropolis of the 15th Nome of
Upper Egypt, which is another mode of identifying the open-eyed hare
with the moon at the full, called the “Eye of Horus,” and with the
woman of the moon who brings her orb to the full on the 15th day of
the month (Egyptian Ritual, ch. lxxx). The hare was also a symbol of
the opening period at puberty, a sign therefore of being open,
unprohibited, or “it is lawful” (Sharpe). Hence the Namaqua
Hottentots would only permit the hare to be eaten by those who had
attained the age of the adult male. The proverb, “_Somnus
leporinus_,” relates to the hare that sleeps with its eyes open; and
in our old English pharmacopœia of the folk-lore or leech-craft, the
brains and eyes of the hare are prescribed as a cure for somnolency,
and a sovereign medicine for making or keeping people wide-awake.
The rabbit equates with the hare, and has the same symbolical value.
Now it is sometimes said that the hare-rabbit is of both sexes. So
the moon was both male and female in accordance with the dual
lunation. The new moon with the horns of the bull or the long ears
of the ass, the rabbit, or hare was considered to be male. The dark
lunation or hinder part was female. In the ancient symbolism the
front or fore-part is masculine, the hinder-part or the tail is
feminine. The two were head and tail in the earliest coinage as well
as on the latest coins. In Egypt the South was front and is male;
the North was the hinder-part and is female. Hence the old Typhon of
the Northern part was denoted by the tail-piece, and it follows that
Satan with the long tail is of feminine origin, and so the devil was
female from the first. The same symbolism was applied to the moon.
In the light half it was the male moon, in the dark half female. The
new moon was the Lord of Light, the Increaser, the sign of new life,
of saving and healing. The new moon was the messenger of immortality
to men in the form of the hare or the rabbit. The waning moon
represented the devil of darkness, the Typhonian power that said to
men “even as I die and do not rise again so will it be with you.”
Offerings were made to the new moon. When the moon was at the full
the Egyptians sacrificed a black pig to Osiris. This represented
Typhon, his conquered enemy. But in the dark half of the lunation
Typhon had the upper hand when he tore Osiris into fourteen parts
during the fourteen nights of his supremacy. The lunar zootype then
is male in front, and female in the hinder-part of the animal. In
the hieroglyphics the khepsh-leg or hind-quarter is the ideographic
type of Typhon, the evil power personified. Further, the left side
is female and Typhonian; the right is male. Ergo, _the left hind leg
of the grave-yard animal that was killed in the dark of the moon_,
stood for the hind (or last) quarter of the moon; literally the end
of it. And if the negro laid hold of that rabbit’s foot the right
way, we can read the symbol that he probably did not understand,
although he knew the rabbit’s hind foot was a good fetish. It shows
the survival of _intended_ symbolism, which represents some sort of
victory over the power of darkness analogous to taking the brush of
the fox (another Typhonian animal) after it has been hunted to
death. This was the last leg that the devil of darkness had to stand
on, and so it was a trophy snatched from the Typhonian power to be
worn in triumph as a token of good luck, of repetition or renewal,
thence a second term.

It would be a sort of equivalent for taking the scalp of Satan, who
could only be typified by the tail or hinder leg. The gift was
tantamount to wishing “_A Happy New Moon to You!_” expressed in the
language of symbolism, which was acted instead of being spoken. The
negroes consider this particular talisman bequeathed by “_Brer
Rabbit_” represents all the virtues and powers of renewal that are
popularly attributed to the New Moon. But do not let me be
misunderstood by those who know that in the Negro Märchen the rabbit
is the good one of the typical two, and that the fox plays the
Typhonian part. The rabbit or hare of the moon may be pourtrayed in
two characters or in one of two. In both he is the hero, the Lord of
Light and conqueror of the Power of Darkness, the rabbit, so to say,
that rises again from the graveyard in or as the New Moon. The
figure of the hind quarter and latter end of the dying moon is thus
a type of the conquered Typhon, but the magical influence depends
upon its being also a type of the conqueror, the rabbit of the
resurrection or the New Moon. It is a curious coincidence that the
luckiest of all Lucky Horse-Shoes in England is one that has been
cast off the _left hind foot_ of a Mare.

Lastly, this hind leg of the lunar rabbit is a fellow-type with the
leg of pig that is still eaten in England on Easter Monday, which is
a survival of the ancient sacrifice of the pig Typhon, in the solar
or annual reckoning, as pourtrayed in the planisphere of Denderah,
where we see the god Khunsu offering the pig by the leg in the disc
of the full moon. It must have been a potent fetish long ages ago in
Africa, and a medicine of great power according to the primitive
mysteries of the dark land. It may be surmised that much of this
fetishtic typology is still extant amongst the negroes in the United
States, and it is to be hoped that the Bureau of Ethnology at
Washington, which has done, and is doing, such good work under the
direction of Major J. W. Powell in collecting and preserving the
relics of the Red Men, will extend the range of its researches to
the black race in America, and not leave those matters to
irresponsible story-tellers.

                                                      GERALD MASSEY.




                  =THE BLOSSOM AND THE FRUIT=:

                  _THE TRUE STORY OF A MAGICIAN_.

                           (_Continued._)

                         ---------------------

                         BY MABEL COLLINS.

                         ---------------------

                              CHAPTER XII.

It was the day of the Princess Fleta’s wedding and the whole city
was _en fête_.

Hilary Estanol paced the streets wildly, like a creature distracted.
He had never seen her face since the day he returned from the secret
monastery. He could not trust himself to go near her. He felt that
the savage in him must kill, must destroy, if too much provocation
were given him.

He held this savage in check as well as he could. He would not trust
himself under the same roof with the woman he loved as he loved
nothing else in life, and who had given him her love while she gave
herself to another man. Herself! How much that meant Hilary seemed
only now to know, now that he heard her marriage bells ringing, now
that she was absolutely given. Yes, she had given herself away to
another man. Was it possible? Hilary stood still now and again in
the midst of the crowded street trying to remember the words she had
said to him in that wood in the early morn when she had accepted his
love. What had she taken from him then? He had never been the same
since. His heart lay cold, and chill, and dull within him save when
her smile or its memory woke him to life and joy. Were these gone
for ever? Impossible. He was still young—a mere boy. She could not
have stolen so much from him! No—he had the first right—he would be
her lover still and always, to whoever else she gave herself in
name. This was the point of thought to which Hilary perpetually
returned. Undoubtedly she was his, and he would claim her. But
obscured and excited as his mind was he had sufficient intelligence
to know that his must be a secret claim even though it stood before
all others. He could not go and claim her at the altar, for she had
not given him any right to. What she had said was, “Take from me
what you can.” Well, he could not make her his wife. He could not
marry a royal Princess. She was not of his class. This being so,
what could he hope for? Nothing—and yet he had her love—yes, the
last kind touch of her hand, the last sweet smile on her lips, were
still with him, and drove his blood rioting through his veins.

At last the procession is coming—the soldiers have already cleared
the way and with their horses keep back the crowd. Hilary stands
now, still as a carven figure, watching only for one face. He sees
it suddenly—ah! so beautiful, so supremely beautiful, so
mysterious—and everything in Heaven and earth becomes invisible,
non-existent, save that one dear face. A voice rang out on the air,
clear, shrill, above all other voices.

“Fleta! Fleta! My love! my love!”

What a cry! It penetrated to Fleta’s ears; it reached the ears of
her bridegroom.

In the church, amid the pomp and ceremony, and the crowd of great
people, Otto did a thing which made those near him stare. He went to
meet his bride and touched her hand.

“Fleta,” he said, “that voice was the voice of one who loves you.
What answer do you make to it?”

Fleta put her hand in his.

“That is my answer,” she said.

And so they stepped up the broad low steps to the altar. None heard
what had been said except the king.

Fleta’s father was strangely unlike herself. He was a rugged,
morose, sombre man, ill-disposed towards all humanity, as it would
seem, save those few who held the key to his nature. Of these, his
daughter was one; some said she was the only one. Others said her
power lay in the fact that she was not his daughter, but a child of
other parents altogether than those reputed to be hers; and that a
State secret was involved in the mystery of her birth.

At all events, it was seldom indeed that the king interfered with
Fleta. But he did so now, at this moment, with all the eyes of the
Court upon them.

He spoke low into her ear, he stood beside her.

“Fleta,” he said, “is this marriage right?”

Fleta turned on him a face so full of torture, of deathly pain, that
he uttered an ejaculation of horror.

“Say no word, my father,” she said, “it is right.”

And then she turned her head again, and fixed her glorious eyes on
Otto.

What a strangely beautiful bride she was! She was dressed with
extraordinary simplicity; her robe had been arranged by her own
hands in long, soft lines that fell from her neck to her feet, and a
long train lay on the ground behind her, but it was undecked by any
lace or flowers. No flowers were in her hair, no jewels on her neck.
Never had a princess been dressed so simply, a princess who was to
be a queen. The Court ladies stared in amazement. But they knew well
that there was a grace so supreme, a dignity so lofty, in this royal
girl, that however simple her dress she outshone them all, and would
outshine any woman who stood beside her.

No one heard any of what passed between the three chief actors in
this scene; yet everyone was aware that there was something unusual
in it. There was an atmosphere of mystery, of excitement, of
strangeness. And yet what else would be possible where the Princess
Fleta was concerned? In her father’s Court she was looked upon as a
wild, capricious, imperious creature whose will none could resist.
None would have wondered had they believed her carriage to have
passed over the body of an accepted lover, now thrown aside and
discarded. So did these people interpret the character of Fleta.
Otto knew this, felt it, understood it; knew that those creatures of
intrigue and pleasure would have thought her far less worthy had
they judged her character more nearly as he did. To him she was
pure, stainless, unattainable; virgin in soul and thought. This he
said to her when, on leaving the cathedral, they entered a carriage
together and alone. They had together passed through crowds of
congratulators, nobles, great ladies, diplomats from different parts
of Europe. They had bowed and smiled, and answered courteously the
words addressed to them. And yet how far away were their thoughts
all the while! They neither of them knew who they had met, who they
had spoken to. All was lost in one absorbing thought. But it was not
the same thought. No, indeed, their minds were separated widely as
the poles.

Fleta was filled with the sense of a great purpose. This marriage
was but the first step in a giant programme. Her thoughts had flown
now from this first step and were dwelling on the end, the
fulfilment; as an artist when he draws his first sketch sees in his
own mind the completed picture.

Otto had but one overwhelming thought; a very simple one, expressed
instantly, in the first words he uttered when they were alone:

“Fleta, you did not fancy that I doubted you? I never meant that!
And yet it seemed as if there was reproach in your eyes! No, Fleta,
never that. But the cry was so terrible—it cut my heart. You did not
fancy I meant any doubt?—assure me, Fleta!”

“No, I did not,” replied Fleta quietly. “You know whose voice it
was.”

“No—it was unrecognisable—it was nothing but a cry of torture.”

“Ah! but I knew it,” said Fleta. “It was Hilary Estanol who cried
out my name.”

“He said ‘Fleta, my love, my love,’” added Otto. “Is he that?”

“Yes,” said Fleta unmoved, indeed strangely calm. “He is. More,
Otto; he has loved me long centuries ago, when this world wore a
different face. When the very surface of the earth was savage and
untaught so were we. And then we enacted this same scene. Yes Alan,
we three enacted it before, without this pomp, but with the natural
splendour of savage beauty and undimmed skies. Otto, I sinned then I
expiated my sin. Again and again have I expiated it. Again and again
has Nature punished me for my offence against her. Now at last I
know more, I see more, I understand more. The sin remains. I desired
to take, to have for myself, to be a conqueror. I conquered—I have
conquered since! how often! That has been my expiation: satiety. But
now I will no longer enjoy. I will stand on that error, that folly,
and win from it strength which shall lift me from this wretched
little theatre where we play the same dramas for ever through the
fond weariness of recurring lives.”

Otto had drawn back from her, and gazed intently upon her as she
spoke, passion and vehemence gradually entering her low voice. As
she ceased he passed his hand over his forehead.

“Fleta,” he said, “is this some spell of yours upon me? While you
spoke I saw your face change, and become the face of one familiar to
me, but far, far back! I smelled the intense rich scent of
innumerable fruit blossoms——Fleta, tell me, are you dreaming or
speaking fables, or is this thing true? Have I lived for you before,
loved you, served you, ages back, when the world was young?”

“Yes,” said Fleta.

“Ah!” cried Otto suddenly, “I feel it—there is blood on you—blood on
your hand!”

Fleta raised her beautiful hand, and looked at it with an infinite
sadness on her face.

“It is so,” she answered. “There is blood on it, and there will be,
until I have got beyond the reign of blood and of death. You held me
down then, Otto; you triumphed by brute force, not knowing that in
me lay a power undreamed of by you—a vital, stirring will. I could
have crushed you. But already I had used my will once, and found the
bitter, unintelligible suffering it produced. I determined to try
and understand Nature before I again used my power. So I submitted
to your tyranny; you learned to love it, and through many lives have
learned to love it more. It has brought you a crown at last, and a
little army of soldiers to defend it for you, and half-a-dozen
crafty old diplomats who want you to keep it, and who think they can
make you do just as their respective monarchs wish. Move your
puppets, Otto. No such kingdom satisfies me. I mean to win my own
crown. I will be a queen of souls, not of bodies; a queen in
reality, not in name.”

She seemed to wrap herself in an impenetrable veil of scorn as she
ceased speaking and leaned back in the carriage.

Some great emotion was stirring Otto through and through. At last he
spoke; and the man seemed changed—a different being. From under the
gentle manner, the docile, ready air, came struggling up the fierce
spirit of opposition.

“You despise the crown you married me for? Is that so? Well, I will
teach you to respect it.”

A smile dawned on Fleta’s clouded face and then was gone again in a
moment. This was all the answer she vouchsafed to the kingly threat.
Otto turned and looked at her steadily.

“A magnificent creature,” he said, “beautiful, and with a brain of
steel, and perhaps for all I know, a heart like it. You won a great
deal from me, Fleta, a little while since. Did I not submit to the
masquerading of your mysterious Order? Did I not trust my life to
those treacherous monks of yours, submit to be blindfolded and led
into their haunt by secret ways. For what end? Ivan told me of
aspirations, of ideas, of thoughts, which only sickened my soul and
filled me with shame and despair. For I am a believer in order, in
moral rule, in the government of the world in accordance with the
principles of religion. I told you I was willing to become a member
of the order; yes, because my nature is in sympathy with its avowed
tenets. But its secret doctrines as I have heard them from you, as I
have heard them from the man you call your master, are to me
detestable. And it is for the carrying out of this unholy theory or
doctrine that you propose to surrender your life? No, Fleta; you are
now my queen.”

“Yes,” said Fleta. “I am now your queen. I know that I have chosen
the lot willingly. You need not again tell me that I have the crown
I purposed to obtain.”

At this moment they arrived at the palace. There was yet a weary
mass of ceremony and speaking of polite nothings to be passed
through before there was any chance of their being alone again. Otto
relapsed into the pleasant and kindly manner which was habitual with
him. Fleta fell into one of her abstracted moods, and the court
adopted its usual policy under such circumstances—let her be
undisturbed. Few of the men cared to risk the satirical answers that
came readiest to her lips when she was roused out of such a mood as
this.

And yet at last someone did venture to rouse her; and a smile,
delicious as a burst of sunshine, came swiftly and suddenly on her
mouth.

It was Hilary Estanol. Pale, worn, the mere ghost of himself, his
dark eyes looking strangely large in the white face they were set
in. They were fixed on her as though there were nothing else in the
world to look at.

Fleta held out her hand to him; his companion—a military officer who
had brought him under protest, and in some doubt, for Hilary had no
friends at Court—drew back in amazement. He understood now Hilary’s
importunity.

Hilary bent over Fleta’s hand and held his lips near it for an
instant, but did not touch it. A sort of groan came to her ear from
his lips.

“You have resigned me?” she asked in a low vibrating whisper.

“You have cast me off,” he answered.

“Be it so,” she replied, “but you have lived through it, and you now
claim nothing. Is it not so? I read it in the dumb pain in your
eyes.”

“Yes,” said Hilary, straightening himself and standing upright close
beside her, and looking down upon her beautiful dark head. “It is
so. I will not cry for the moon, nor will I weary any woman with my
regret or entreaty, even you, Fleta, though it is no dishonour to
humble oneself at the feet of such as you. No; I will bear my pain
like a man. I came here to say good-bye. You are still something
like the Fleta that I loved. To-morrow you will not be.”

“How can you tell?” she said with her inscrutable smile. “Still, I
think you are right. And now that we are no longer lovers will you
enter with me another bond? Will you be my comrade in undertaking
the great task? I know you are fearless.”

“The great task?” said Hilary vaguely, and he put his hand to his
forehead.

“The one great task of this narrow life—To learn its lesson and go
beyond it.”

“Yes, I will be your comrade,” said Hilary in an even voice and
without enthusiasm.

“Then meet me at two this very morning at the gate of the
garden-house where you used to enter.”

It was now just midnight. Hilary noticed this as he turned away, for
a little clock stood on a bracket close by. He looked at it, and
looked back at Fleta. Could she mean what she said? But already the
Fleta he knew had vanished; a cold, haughty, impassive young queen
was accepting the uninteresting homage of a foreign minister. The
guests were beginning to take their departure. Fleta and Otto did
not propose to take any journey in honour of their wedding as is the
custom in some places; the king opened for their use the finest set
of guests’ chambers in the palace, and these they occupied,
remaining among the visitors until all had departed. On the next day
Otto was to take his queen home; but he had had to give way to the
wishes of Fleta and her father as to the postponing of the journey.

From the great drawing-rooms Fleta went quietly away when the last
guest had departed; she moved like a swift shadow noiselessly along
the corridors. She entered her own room, and there began, without
summoning any attendant, to hastily take off her bridal robes. On a
couch was lying the white robe and cloak which she had worn when she
had endeavoured to enter the hall of the mystics. These she put on,
and wrapping the cloak round her turned to leave the room. As she
did so she came face to face with Otto, who had entered noiselessly,
and was standing in silence beside her. She seemed scarcely to
notice him, but changed her direction and proceeded towards another
door. Otto quickly placed himself again in her way.

“No,” he said; “you do not leave this room to-night.”

“And why?” asked Fleta, looking gravely at his set face.

“Because you are now my wife. I forbid it. Stay here, and with me.
Come, let me take off that cloak, without any trouble; the white
gown under it suits you even better than your wedding-dress.”

He unfastened the clasps which held the cloak together. Fleta made
no opposition, but kept her eyes on his face; he would not meet her
gaze, though his face was white and rigid with the intensity of his
passion and purpose.

“Do you remember,” said Fleta, “the last thing that you did when you
were with Father Ivan? Do you remember kneeling before him and
uttering these words—‘I swear to serve the master of truth and the
teacher of life——’”

“That master—that teacher!” interrupted Otto hotly. “I reserved my
reason even in that incense-scented room. That master—that
teacher—is my own intelligence—so I phrased it in my own mind—I
recognise no other master.”

“Your own intelligence!” repeated Fleta. “You have not yet learned
to use it. You did not so phrase the vow then; you only rephrased it
so afterwards, when you were away, and alone, and began again to
struggle for your selfish freedom. No, Otto, you have not begun to
use your intelligence. You are still the slave of your desires,
eaten up with the longing for power and the lust of the tyrannical
soul. You do not love me—you only desire to possess me. You fancy
your power is all you wish it to be. Well, put it to the test. Take
this cloak from my shoulders.”

Otto came close, and took the cloak in his hands; and then a
sudden passion filled him—he seized her in his arms and pressed
his lips to hers—yet he did not do so, either, for the attempt was
instantaneously surrendered. He staggered back, white and
trembling.

Fleta stood erect and proud before him.

“That vow you took,” she said quietly, “you knew very well in the
inner recesses of your soul, in your true unblinded self, to make
you a slave of the Great Order. That vow may yet save you from
yourself, if you do not resent it too fiercely. But remember this; I
am a neophyte of that order, and you being its slave, are under my
command. I am your queen, Otto, but not your wife.”

She passed him as she said this, and he made no effort to detain
her; indeed, the trembling had not yet left him, and his whole
strength was taken by the attempt to control it. As she reached the
door he succeeded in speaking:

“Why did you marry me?”

“Did I not tell you?” she said, pausing a moment and turning to look
at him. “I think I did. Because I have to learn to live on the plain
as contentedly as on the mountain tops. There is but one way for me
to do this, and that is to devote my life as your queen to the same
great purpose it would serve were I the silver-robed initiate I
desire to be. I go now to commence my work, with the aid of a lover
who has learned to surrender his love.”

She moved magnificently from the room, looking much taller even than
her natural height. And Otto let her go without any word or sign.

                             CHAPTER XIII.

It was a fragrant night—a night rich with sweet flower-scents, not
only from the flower beds near, but coming from afar on the breeze.
Hilary stood at the gate, leaning on it and looking away at the sky,
where a faint streak of different light told of the sun’s coming. It
was quite clear, though there had been no moonlight; one of those
warm, still nights when it is easy to find one’s way, though hard to
see into the face of one near by, a night when one walks in a dream
amid changing shadows, and when the outer mysteriousness and the
dimness of one’s soul are as one. So with Hilary; so had he walked
to the gate. He waited for the woman he loved, the only woman any
man could ever love, having once known her. And yet no fever burned
now in his veins, no intoxication mounted from his heart to his
brain. Standing there, and regarding himself and his own feelings
very quietly in the stillness, it seemed to him as if he had died
yesterday when that wild cry had been unknowingly uttered; as if his
soul or his heart, or, indeed, his very self had gone forth in it.

A light touch was laid on his shoulder, and then the gate was
opened. He passed through and walked by Fleta up the flower-bordered
pathway. She moved on without speaking, her white cloak hanging
loose from her neck, and her bare arms gleaming as it fell back from
them.

“You who know so much tell me something,” said Hilary. “Why are you
so wise?”

“Because I burned my soul out centuries ago,” said Fleta. “When you
have burned out your heart you will be strong as I am.”

“Another question,” said Hilary. “Why did you fail in that
initiation?”

Fleta stopped suddenly, and fixed fierce questioning eyes upon him.
She was terrible in this quick rush of anger. But Hilary looked on
her unmoved. It seemed to him that nothing would ever be able to
move him again. Was he dead indeed that he could thus endure the
scorching light of those brilliant eyes?

“What makes you ask me that?” cried Fleta in a voice of pain. “Do
you demand to know?”

“Yes; I do wish to know.”

For a moment Fleta covered her face with her hands, and her whole
form shrank and quivered. But only for a moment; then she dropped
her hands at each side and stood erect, her queenly head poised
royally.

“It is my punishment,” she said in a murmuring voice, “to discover
so soon how absolute are the bonds of the Great Order; how the pupil
can command the master as well as the master the pupil.”

Then she turned abruptly upon Hilary, approaching him more nearly,
while she spoke in a quick, fierce voice.

“Because, though I have burned out my soul, I have not burned out my
heart! Because, though I cannot love as men do, and have almost
forgotten what passion means, yet I can still worship a greater
nature than my own so deeply that it may be called love. I have not
learned to stand utterly alone and to know myself as great as any
other with the same possibilities, the same divinity in myself. I
still lean on another, look to another, hunger for the smile of
another. O, folly, when I know so well that I cannot find any rest
while that is in me. O, Ivan, my teacher, my friend, what torture it
is to wrest the image of you from its shrine within me. Powers and
forces of indifferent Nature, I demand your help!”

She raised her arms as she uttered this invocation, and it struck
Hilary at the moment how little like a human being she looked. She
might have been the spirit of the dawn. Her voice had become
unutterably weird and mournful, like the deep cry of a broken soul.

Without pausing for any answer she dropped her arms, drew her cloak
around her, and walked away over the dewy grass. Hilary, as silent,
as mournful, but seemingly without emotion, dropped his head and
quietly followed her track. Of old—only yesterday—what an age
ago!—he would have kept his eyes fixed on her shining dark hair or
the movements of her delicate figure. Suddenly Fleta stopped, turned
and confronted him. He raised his eyes in surprise and looked at
her.

“You are no longer devoured by jealousy,” she said. “You can hear me
speak as I did just now without its turning you into a savage. What
has happened?”

Her eyes seemed to penetrate his impassive and languid expression,
looking for the soul beneath. She was longing that his answer should
be the one she needed.

“I am hopeless,” answered Hilary.

“Of what?”

“Of your love. I understand at last that you have a great purpose in
your life, and that I am a mere straw on a stream. I thought I had
some claim on you; I see I cannot have. I surrender myself to your
will. That is all I have left to do.”

Fleta stood meditatively for a moment Then she looked up very sadly
in his face.

“It is not enough,” she said. “Your gift must be a positive one.”

Then she again turned and went on her way to the house. Here
everything was silent and even dark, for the shutters were all
closed, and evidently the place was deserted. Fleta opened a side
door with a key which was attached to her girdle; they entered and
she locked it behind them. She led the way through the quiet dim
house to the door of the laboratory; they entered the room in
silence. It wore a quite new aspect to Hilary’s eyes, and he looked
round in wonder. All was pale; there was no incense burning, no
lamps were lit; the colour had gone from the walls; a faint grey
light through a skylight, which had always hitherto been curtained,
dimly broke on the darkness of the room which still lurked deeply in
the lower part. But Hilary found enough light to see that the thing
he so hated was not present; that lay figure which was to him always
such a horror was gone.

“Where is it?” he said after a moment, wondering at the sense of
relief with which its absence filled him.

“What?—oh! the figure. Again you ask a question which I am compelled
to answer. Well, I cannot use that power at present; I have again to
win the right.”

“How did you win the right before?” asked Hilary, fixing his eyes on
her; a fierce desire to know this possessed him.

Fleta started, turned towards him, and for a moment the proud
imperiousness which ordinarily characterised her came over her form
and her features. But in another moment it was gone. She stood
before him, pale, gentle and sublime.

“I will tell you,” she said in a clear yet very low voice. “By
taking your life.”

Hilary looked at her in complete perplexity and bewilderment.

“Do you not remember,” she said, “that forest, that new earth and
sky, all so sweet and strong, that wealth of apricot blossom that
came between us and the sky? Ah, Hilary, how fresh and vivid life
was then, while we lived and loved and understood not that we did
either! Was it not sweet? I loved you. Yes, I loved you—loved you.”

Her voice broke and trembled. Hilary’s numbed heart suddenly sprang
again to life. Never had her voice contained such tones of
tenderness and passion before.

“Oh, my dear, my Fleta, you love me still—now!”

He sprang towards her, but she seemed to sweep him aside with one
majestic action of her bare arm.

“With that passion,” she said, with a pale solemnity, “I can never
love now. I have not forgotten entirely what such love is—no,
Hilary, I have not forgotten—else how should I have found you again
among the multitudes of the earth?” She held out her hand to him,
and, as he clasped it, he felt it was soft and tender, that the warm
life blood of a young creature responded to his touch. “I knew you
by your dear eyes which once were so full of pure love for me that
they were like stars in my life.”

“What came between us?” asked Hilary.

She looked strangely at him, drew her hand away, folded her cloak
round her and then answered in one word:

“Passion!”

“I remember it now!” cried Hilary in sudden excitement “My God! I
see your beautiful wild face before me, I see your lips as lovely as
the soft blossom above us. Fleta, I loved you as men love—I hungered
for you—what harm lay in that?”

“None,” she answered, standing now motionless and statue-like,
wrapped in her long, white cloak, seeming like a lovely ghost rather
then a living woman. “None—for men who care only to be men, to
reproduce men, to be and to do nothing more than that! But I had
another power within me, that seemed stronger than myself—a stirring
of the dumb soul within. When that moment came, Hilary, then came
the great decision, the fierce struggle between two souls hurled
together out of the dimness of life, and finding light in the fever
of love—yes, light!—the fire that is love makes it possible for men
to live. It gives them hope, it animates them, it makes them believe
in a future, it enables them to create men to fill that future.

“In those old days beneath those apricot blossoms, you and I,
Hilary, were but children on this earth, new to its meaning, knowing
nothing of its purpose. How could we guide ourselves? We were
ignorant of the great power of sex, we were only at the beginning of
its lesson. So it must be with all. They must go through with the
lesson, they cannot guess it from the first! Nor could we. I did not
know what I did, Hilary, my lover, when I took your life. Had I
known I should only have been like a beast of prey. But I did not
know. You asserted your power—you claimed me. I asserted mine—I
conquered. I wanted power; and killing you as I did with that one
emotion only stirring within me, I got what I longed for. Not at
once—not till I had suffered patiently, not till I had struggled
hard to understand myself and the force that was at work within me.
And this for life after life, incarnation after incarnation. You not
only loved me but you were mine—I conquered you and used your life
and love for my own ends—to add to my power, to actually create the
life and strength I needed. By your life, by your strength, I became
a magician, read by my insight the mysteries of alchemy and the
buried secrets of power. Yes, Hilary, it is so. To you I owe myself.
I have become free from the common burdens of humanity, its
passions, its personal desires, its weary repetitions of experiences
till their edge grows blunted by long usage. I have seen the
Egyptian and the Roman, men of the old superb civilisations, trying
to reproduce their past pleasures, their past magnificence to-day,
in this modern life. It is useless, life after life full of
selfishness and pleasure, ends in the weariness of living that kills
men’s souls and darkens their thought. But you and I, Hilary, have
escaped from this dismal fate. I would not be content to live again
as I had lived before, to use the life principle which lies in love,
only for pleasure or the bringing of eidolons on to the earth. I
determined to rise, to raise myself, to raise you, and out of our
love perpetually to create something nobler than we ourselves. I
have succeeded, Hilary, I have succeeded. We stand now before the
gate of the first initiation. I tried to enter it and failed for
want of strength—for want of strength, Hilary! I could not pluck my
master’s image utterly out of my soul—I looked for him to lean on—at
least to find comfort in seeing that face I knew. Give me strength,
Hilary! Be my comrade! Help me to enter and your strength shall come
back to you a hundredfold. For your reward shall be that you too
shall enter with me.”

She had changed from moment to moment as she spoke. She looked like
an inspired priestess—like a Divine being. Now she stood like a
flame with a strange appearance, as if her whole soul and self,
spirit and body, rose upwards in adoration. The dawn had come; the
first rays of the sun shot through the skylight and fell on her
transfigured face and gleaming hair.

Hilary looked at her as a worshipper might look at his idol.

“I am yours,” he said, “but I know not how to prove it.”

She held out her hand to him, and lowered her eyes from the light to
which they had been raised until they met his.

“We must discover the great secret together, Hilary. No longer may
you give yourself to me without knowledge. Hitherto our lives have
been but the lives of the blossom; now we must be wise and enter the
state when the fruit comes. We have to find out what that power is
which the sun represents to us; to discover the pure creative power.
But we have not strength yet, Hilary; alas! I dread and fear
sometimes. More strength means more sacrifice.”

She drew her cloak closer round her, the light faded from her eyes
and face, and turning away she went and sat down on a couch which
was back in the shadow. Hilary felt a profound sense of sadness, of
sympathy, of sorrow, sweep over his being. He followed her and sat
down beside her. One pale hand lay on the couch, outside her cloak.
He laid his upon it, and fell deep into thought. Thus they sat,
silent, breathing softly, for long hours, till the sun was high. But
still, even then, the room was very dim and cool, and full of
shadows.

                              CHAPTER XIV.

On the next day, the same day rather, for they sat together in the
laboratory till long after the sun was high, Hilary, to his own
amazement, found that he had an official post in the household of
the young Queen which would keep him continually about her. Indeed,
he had to pack up instantly on being informed of the fact, in order
to follow Fleta to her own dominions. How this had been effected
none could tell—Hilary, least of all, for he saw immediately on
presenting himself in King Otto’s presence that he was regarded by
him with dislike and distrust. Before, Otto had scarcely noticed
him. The present state of things was decidedly a change for the
worse. However, Hilary had already perceived very clearly that to
serve under Fleta was to serve under a hard master. And he had no
longer any kind of choice. Life was inconceivable without
her—without the pain caused by her difficult service. He had rather
suffer that than enjoy any other kind of pleasure. And, indeed,
pleasure, apart from Fleta, did not appear to him to exist.

And yet he was still capable of doubting her.

Fleta had chosen a companion of royal birth to travel with her; a
young duchess who bore the same family name as Fleta herself. This
girl had been reared in a nunnery, and then taken to court, where
she took part in all the pageants and immediately found herself
surrounded by suitors. She was not very pretty, and certainly not at
all clever. To go with Fleta seemed to her delightful, as it would
introduce her to a new court and a fresh series of suitors. It
struck Hilary as quite extraordinary that Fleta should choose this
child as her companion—not that the Duchess was any younger than
Fleta—indeed, they were almost of an age; but Fleta appeared to
carry within her beautiful head the wisdom of centuries, while the
Duchess was a mere school-girl trained in court etiquette.

These three were to travel together in Fleta’s own favourite
travelling carriage. She simply refused to travel with her husband.
When he addressed her on the subject, she merely replied:

“You would weary me; and, moreover, I have work to do.”

And so they started; and as Hilary took his place, he thought of
that strange drive when he and Fleta, and Father Amyot, had been the
three. Recollecting this made him wonder what had become of Father
Amyot; for the priest had not returned to his duties in the city. He
asked Fleta, while the thought was in his mind, why Amyot was not
with her now.

“He is of no use to me,” she answered coldly.

The journey was a very long and a very weary one to Hilary; for the
Duchess, finding no one else to flirt with, insisted upon flirting
with him; while Fleta lay back in her corner of the carriage hour
after hour, with her eyes closed. What was the work she had to do?
Hilary, who had overheard her answer to the King, wondered very
much. And yet, as he watched her intently he saw that her face
changed. It grew darker, more inscrutable, more set in purpose.

Late one evening, and when they were indeed travelling later than
usual, hoping to reach their destination that same night, a curious
thing happened. All day long Fleta had been silent, seemingly buried
in thought; but sometimes when Hilary was watching her he noticed
her lips move as if in speech. He sat opposite her whenever he
could; this was not always possible, as the young Duchess would talk
to him, and the carriage being very large and roomy, he had to
change his position, and go nearer to her in order to carry on a
conversation with any comfort. But as it grew dark the Duchess grew
tired, and leaned back half asleep, for indeed they had had a long
day’s journey.

Hilary withdrew himself to the corner opposite Fleta. It grew so
dark he could no longer see her; they had a swinging-lamp in the
roof of the carriage, but he did not want to light it unless Fleta
wished it so; and, indeed, he longed for the quiet and the darkness
very much. It made him feel more alone with her, he could try to
follow and seize her thoughts then without the perpetual disturbance
of the little Duchess’s quick eyes on him and her light voice in his
ears.

He sat still and thought of Fleta—Fleta herself in her glorious
beauty—sitting there opposite him shrouded by the darkness. He could
endure it no longer—the man rose up in him and asserted itself—he
leaned forward and put his hand upon her. He had scarcely done so
when the Duchess uttered a shrill cry.

“My God!” she exclaimed, in a voice of horror, “who is in the
carriage with us?”

She flung herself across and knelt upon the floor between Hilary and
Fleta; her terror was so great she did not know what she was doing.

Hilary leaned across her and instantly discovered that she was
right—that there was another man in the carriage besides himself.

“Oh, kill him! kill him!” cried the little Duchess, in an agony of
fear; “he is a thief, a murderer, a robber!”

Hilary rose up and precipitated himself upon this person whom he
could not see. A sense of self-defence, of defence of the women with
him, seized him as we see it seize the animals. He discovered that
this man had risen also. Blindly and furiously he attacked him, and
with extraordinary strength. Hilary was young and full of vigour,
but slight and not built like an athlete. Now, however, he seemed to
be one. He found his adversary to be much larger and stronger than
himself.

A fearful struggle followed. The carriage drove on through unseen
scenery as fast as possible; Fleta could have stopped it had she
thrown the window down and cried out to the postilions. But Fleta
remained motionless—she might have fainted, she was so still. The
little Duchess simply cowered on the ground beside her, clinging to
her motionless figure. This terrified girl had not the presence of
mind to think of stopping the carriage, and so obtaining help. She
was too horror-struck to do anything. And, indeed, it was horrible,
for the swaying struggling forms sometimes were right upon the two
women, sometimes at the other side of the carriage; it was a deadly,
horrible, ghastly struggle, all the more horrid for the silence.
There were no cries, no exclamations, for indeed, so far as Hilary
was concerned, he had no breath to spare for them. There were only
gasps, and heavy breathings, and the terrible sound that comes from
a man’s throat when he is fighting for his life. How long this
hideous battle lasted none could tell—Hilary had no idea of the
passage of time. The savage in him had now come so entirely
uppermost and drowned all other consciousness, that his one thought
was he must kill—kill—kill—and at last it was done. There was a
moment when his adversary was below him, when he could use his whole
force upon him—and then came a gasp and an unearthly cry—and
silence.

Absolute silence for a little while. No one moved, no one stirred.
The Duchess was petrified with horror. Hilary had sunk exhausted on
the seat of the carriage—not only exhausted, but bewildered, for a
host of other emotions besides savage fury began to rise within him.
What—who—-was this being he had destroyed? At that moment they were
urged into a gallop, for they were entering the city gates. Hilary
threw down the window next him with a crash. “Lights, lights!” he
cried out, “bring lights.” The carriage stopped, and there was a
crowd immediately at the windows, and the glare of torches fell into
the carriage, making it bright as day. The little Duchess was
crouched in the corner on the ground in a dead faint. Fleta sat up,
strangely white, but calm. Nothing else was to be seen, alive or
dead, save Hilary himself; and so horror-struck was he at this
discovery that he turned and buried his face in the cushions of the
carriage, and he never knew what happened—whether he wept, or
laughed, or cursed—but some strange sound of his own voice he heard
with his ears.

There was a carriage full of servants behind Fleta’s carriage; when
hers stopped so suddenly they all got out and came quickly to the
doors.

“The Duchess has fainted,” said Fleta, rising so as to hide Hilary;
“the journey has been too long. Is there a house near where she can
lie still a little while, and come on later to the palace?”

Immediately offers of help were made, and the servants and those who
were glad to help them carried the poor little Duchess away.

“On to the palace!” cried Fleta, and shut the door and drew down the
blinds. The postilion started the horses with all speed.

Suddenly the blood in Hilary’s body began to surge and burn. Was it
Fleta’s arms that clung round him? Fleta’s lips that printed warm,
living kisses on his neck, his face, his hair? He turned and faced
her.

“Tell me the truth,” he said. “Are you a devil?”

“No,” she answered, “I am not. I want to find my way to the pure
good that governs life. But there are devils about me, and you have
killed one of them to-night. Hush, calm yourself; remember what we
are in the eyes of the world. For we are at the palace door, and
Otto is standing there to receive us.”

She stepped out, the young queen.

Hilary followed her, stumbling, broken. He said he was ill, to those
who spoke to him; and stood staring in wonder at the brilliant sight
before him.

                              CHAPTER XV.

The great hall of the palace was illuminated gloriously by huge
dragons made of gold, placed high up on the walls; within these
strange creatures were powerful lamps, which shed their light not
only through the eyes and opened mouths, but from the gleaming
claws. The whole place was filled with a blaze of light from them;
and the dresses of the household assembled below seemed to Hilary
another blaze of light, so gay were they. Yet this was only a
domestic reception. It was late, and Otto had refused to allow any
more general demonstration to take place that night. Yet Fleta, when
she threw off her travelling cloak and hood, might have been the
centre of any pageant. She showed no trace of the weariness of
travel, or even of the strange excitement she had passed through.
She was pale, but her face was calm and wore its most haughty and
unapproachable expression. Her dress of black lace hung about her
slender form like clouds. Otto was filled with pride as he noted her
superb dignity and beauty; with hatred, as he observed that her eyes
never met his own, that she treated him with just the same civility
as the steward, or any servant of the establishment. No one could
notice this but himself and perhaps Hilary, supposing the latter to
be capable of regarding anyone but Fleta herself; for she was too
much a woman of the world, this mystic, this wild girl, to admit
anyone even to the most evident of the secrets of her life.

After a few moments passed among the little crowd assembled in the
great hall, Fleta proposed to go to her own rooms for the night, and
a stately little procession formed itself at once to conduct her
there. But before going she beckoned to Hilary.

“The Duchess must come to me to-night,” she said. “I wish her to be
in my own room. Send a carriage and servants to fetch her.”

How her eyes glittered! Had he ever seen them shine so vividly
before?

“Tell me one thing,” he said hoarsely. “I believe you have taken to
yourself that creature’s life and very body that I killed for you.
Is it not true?”

“You are shrewd,” she said with a laugh. “Yes, it is true. My whole
being is stronger for his death; I absorbed his vital power the
instant you wrenched it from him.”

“And he?” said Hilary, with wild eyes.

“Was one of those half-human, half-animal creatures that haunt men
to their ill, and which fools call ghosts or demons. I have done him
a service in taking his life into my own.”

Hilary shuddered violently.

“You doubt me,” said Fleta very quietly. “You still doubt if it is
not I who am the devil. Be it so. I am indifferent to your opinion
of me, Hilary; you cannot help loving and serving me. We were born
under the same star. Now go and give orders about the Duchess.”

Under the same star! Those words had not come to his mind for a long
while; yet how horribly true they were. For he, Hilary, it was who
had actually done this dreadful deed and killed this unseen,
unknown, unimaginable creature. Horror made him clutch his hands
together as he thought that he had touched this thing, more, had
killed it hideously. Might it not have been some good thing striving
to baffle Fleta? Ah, yes! he still doubted her. And yet to doubt her
so completely made the very earth to sink away from under his feet.
He himself, his life, his all, were given to her, be she good or
evil! Staggering and overpowered by the terrible thoughts that
crushed his wearied brain, Hilary found his way to a supper-table;
and too exhausted to think of anything else but recruiting his
strength, sat down to drink wine—and to try to eat. This latter
seemed impossible, but the wine revived him; and presently he
remembered that it was his business to look after the Duchess.

By-and-bye she was carried into the palace; she could not yet stand,
for she had only come out of one fainting fit to fall into another.

And now came a strange and dreadful scene—one which only a few
witnessed, Hilary as it happened being among those few, for he
saw the Duchess taken to the suite of rooms Fleta occupied. In
the corridor Fleta came out to them; she was still in her
travelling-dress, and looked very quiet and even subdued. But at
the sight of her the young Duchess screamed as if she saw some
awful thing; she would not let Fleta touch her, she absolutely
refused to enter her room.

“But you must be with me,” said Fleta in a low voice.

“I will not,” answered the Duchess with a firm resolution which
amazed everyone who knew her. She rose up and walked unassisted
along the corridor and down the great staircase; she met the young
king coming up it; he had heard her shrill cries and came to see
what was happening.

“What is the matter, little cousin?” seeing her tear-stained and
agitated face.

“Fleta wants me to be in her room all night! I would not do it for
all the world! She is a devil—she would kill me or make her lover
kill me, and then no one would ever hear of me or even find my body.
No! No!”

And so she ran on, down the wide stairs, leaving Otto thunderstruck.
He noticed that a number of persons were gathering on the landing
and stairs, and so, with a stern and quiet face, he passed through
the little throng, making no observation. He went down the corridor
and straight into Fleta’s room. Here he found her standing silent,
dark, like a sombre statue. One other person was in the room—Hilary
Estanol. He was in the most extraordinary state of agitation,
pouring out words and accusations; some horror appeared to possess
and blind him, for he took no notice of the king’s entrance. Fleta
did, however; she looked up at him and smiled—such a strange, sweet,
subtle smile. Seldom, indeed, had Fleta given him a look like this.
Otto’s heart leaped within him, and he knew himself her slave. For
he loved her increasingly with every passing moment; and she had but
to turn her face on him softly to make the loving soul in him burn
with ardour. But that burning was fiery indeed. He turned upon
Hilary and stayed his words by a sudden sharp order:

“Leave the room,” he said. “And you had better go and see Doctor
Brandener before you go to bed, for you are either in a fever or
mad. Go at once.”

Hilary was in a condition in which an order given in such a tone
took the place of the action of his own brain, and he mechanically
obeyed it. This was the best possible thing that could have happened
to him; for he was in fact in a high fever, and if he had not,
without thinking about it, done as he was told and gone to the
resident doctor of the palace, he would probably have wandered
raving about all night. As it was he was obliged to drink a strong
sleeping draught, and was placed in his bed, where he fell at once
into a sleep so profound it seemed like death.

Hilary gone, Fleta closed the door behind him.

“Do not let there be any struggle of wills between us to-night,”
said Fleta very softly. “I warn you, I am much stronger than I was;
I am very much stronger than you are, now. And you found before that
you could not even come near enough to touch me. Let me rest, and
that quietly; I wish to retain my beauty, both for your sake and my
own.”

Otto paused a few moments before he made any answer to this
extraordinary speech. Then he spoke with difficulty; and as he did
so raised his hand to brush away some great drops of sweat which had
gathered on his forehead.

“I know I am powerless against you to-night, Fleta,” he said. “I
cannot even move nearer to you. But be warned; I intend to probe the
mystery of your being. I intend to conquer you at last. I will do it
if I have to visit hell itself for the magic which shall be stronger
than yours.”

                        (_To be continued._)

                               ——*———




                           TWILIGHT VISIONS.

                         PART II.—THE CRESCENT.

  “_The_ LORD _appeared of old unto me, saying, ‘Yea, I have loved
  thee with an everlasting love: therefore with loving-kindness have
  I drawn thee.’_”—JER. xxxi., 3.

    “In life, in death, O Lord! abide with me!”
    Thou, Ruler o’er the Living Rosy Cross—
    Great Master Mason of the mortal frame,
    Which is the temple of the Holy Ghost—
    Grand Power of all who through the secret sun
    Dost hold the soul in tenement of clay
    To guide it safely through the gloom of night
    Into the golden morn, when all things then
    In Light of Love—thine own Eternal Self—
    Shall truly stand revealed to those that strive
    In truth to know the Power which all mankind
    Shall worship in the Universal King.

    *     *     *     *     *

    My children! saith the living God of Love,
    Now “if with all your hearts ye truly seek,”[153]
    Ye surely shall find me your King in Heaven,
    And finding me shall know yourselves to be
    Anointed Princes—Rulers of the Earth—
    The Powers of Light sent by me in the flesh,
    And named Michael! You are here to fight,
    To hurl down Satan to his black abyss,
    Where ignorance and error, sin and crime,
    And hellish spirits dark for ever dwell
    With all who in the bonds of slavery
    Lead deathly lives as creatures of the world—
    The wretched earth-worms of that bounden sphere,
    Which is the only Hell mankind can know!

    *     *     *     *     *

    The night is now far spent, and in the sky
    From out a dark blue setting there hath shone
    In ages past, as now, full many a star
    Proclaiming to mankind the Light of Heaven,
    Each with its own peculiar brilliancy
    Illumining the minds of men with rays
    Which point to other realms beyond this world,
    And ever tell of one star differing
    In glory from its fellow star on high.

    What great and hidden meaning lieth here!
    Why are the stars above held forth to man
    As entities which tell of other states?
    The Stars of Heaven are never seen by man;
    As man, he cannot know that glorious light
    Sent forth—from States of Wisdom not in skies—
    Through brilliant rays which meet not mortal gaze,
    And are invisible save to the one
    Who—seeing through perception—contacts light,
    That Light of ancient days, since passed away
    Into the sombre gloom of deepest night;
    Because in ignorance and selfishness
    Man willed to dwell in darkness on this earth.
    And now behold the fallen Lucifer!—
    Thou Morning Star of Truth—again arise—
    To touch with thy bright rays the mind of man
    And open to his gaze the Light of Love,
    Reflected in the silv’ry Crescent now
    About to crown the Living Cross of Truth.

    *     *     *     *     *

    Shine forth, fair Luna! Man hath waited long
    For thee—O bringer of the Golden Light.
    Surmount the Cross—thou Goddess of the Gods—
    Which suff’ring mortals here in agony
    Have borne along, desiring of their King—
    Of whom thou art—those better things on earth,
    Which He hath promised them in days of old,
    Shall take the place of former things to pass—
    With mourning, weeping, bitterness, and death—
    Away for ever, as the first-born states
    Of Heaven and earth and sea no more to be.[154]

    *     *     *     *     *

    Fair Keeper of the rays shed by the Sun!
    Whilst feeble mortals now deny thy power,
    We of the morn declare thee as thou art;
    The mediate force to govern all mankind,
    The force of love which mortals cannot know.
    For that man holds as love is passion foul:
    It hath transformed the earth into a hell,
    And none save thou can mediately stand
    To rid the earth—by Truth who comes from thee—
    From that curs’d tyrant in the world or hell,
    The devil—Satan—he that doth deceive,
    Accuser of our brethren, soon to be
    Bound hand and foot in heaven, then cast to earth,
    When angels dark and all who fight for him
    Shall fall with him through Michael’s power and might.[155]

    *     *     *     *     *

    The grandest vision seen in heaven from earth
    Has burst upon the wond’ring mind of man,
    For woman has appear’d with Sun array’d—
    She stands on Luna, o’er her holy brow
    A coronet of twelve bright golden stars:
    She crieth out and travaileth in pain
    To be delivered of the Child of Truth,
    Which is, in love, to rule mankind as one,
    The one great body in the Spirit CHRIST[156]
    Who cometh now a second time to man
    Through her who clothes him with a mortal form,
    Our Holy Mother in the Living God.
    And yet about the woman, as of old,
    Damned Satan’s lurks, with seven diadems—
    The dragon stands as knowledge of the World,
    Which would devour the holy child of God.
    But so-called knowledge is not ever true,
    Frail mortals know not that the states of Heaven
    Permit below themselves the states of Hell
    To be—that mortals there may feel the Truth—
    The everlasting fire, consuming Self—
    Destroying all the former things in man
    Through fiery sufferings induced by self,
    Through freedom granted by a Loving God.
    The Universal King in love ordains
    That man shall ever reap the crop he sows,
    And so the Woman clothed with the Sun,
    Who sows the seed of love amongst mankind,
    Shall reap the fruits of love in Heaven—her home—
    Where happiness and peace eternal reign,
    Wherein the dragon hath no place—no power.
    All hail! thou glorious Bride, in Light array’d,
    O, woman, clothed with the Bridegroom’s Power,[157]
    Arise and shine! The time is now at hand
    To change this earth into a heaven bright,
    This hell into a paradise of Saints;
    Through thee alone can mortals rise from earth
    To soar into Eternity—God’s Peace;
    Through thee alone can man perceive the light—
    The Sun of Wisdom,[158] which shall soon appear
    Acknowledged King supreme of all that is,
    Which He hath made in love for all mankind.
    Woman! behold a groaning world awaits
    The crushing of the Serpent’s power through thee;
    Look on the fairest cities of this globe,
    In misery the love-starved of the earth
    Now walk the streets; whilst degradation vile
    Confronts them in their daily—hourly lives,
    Because mankind will sell itself for gold
    To one, who is the prince of hell; he rules
    The States of falsehood in this mortal world
    Wherein the moaning of tormented souls
    Appeals to God[159] in mortal agony
    To ease the burdens of their earthly lives
    By teaching them of thee, O Queen of Heaven!

    *     *     *     *     *

    Woman, behold the sighing, wretchedness,
    Depravity, disease and death on earth!
    Pure life has left these mortals who transgress
    The laws of God by being of the world;
    They know not happiness and peace and thee.
    Thou art of nations all, the Saving Health.
    Stretch forth thine hands and save, O Queen of Heaven!

    *     *     *     *     *

    Woman! behold the man of war exists
    Whose work it is to shed the blood of him
    Who truly is a portion of thyself;
    Nay more, thine ALL, within this weary state;
    The Father of thy loved ones in the flesh!
    How long wilt thou permit ungodly strife
    To keep thee from thy lawful throne on earth,
    The one great Empire that shall bow to thee,
    That thou alone can’st rule, Queen of the South?[160]
    O, Bride of Heaven, thou knowest well that He—
    The Son of Man—thy bridegroom—came to save,
    Not to destroy, the lives of men on earth![161]

    *     *     *     *     *

    Great Spirit Love! Bright Queen of Highest Heaven,
    Send forth thy potent force, and let it fire
    The hearts of all within this little sphere;
    Show worldly rulers in their sinful states
    That thou alone art Queen of all Mankind;
    And in these petty princes of the earth
    Destroy, we pray thee, all the mortal lusts
    Of self, of gold, and praise, and feeble power,
    Implanted in their natures by the one
    Who rules them with their subjects in this hell
    Created by themselves through ignorance
    Of thee, O, Spirit Love, Blest Queen of Heaven!

                                              WM. C. ELDON SERJEANT.

London, 28th January, 1888.

-----

Footnote 153:

  See Deut. iv.

Footnote 154:

  See Rev. xxi.

Footnote 155:

  See Rev. xii.

Footnote 156:

  _i.e._, The invisible, universal, and eternal principle which
  mortals can only conceive of as the sum total of the combined
  spirits of Truth, Love, and Wisdom, when manifested in that “Son
  of Man,” or HUMANITY, which is also the “Son of God,” collectively
  and individually.

Footnote 157:

  In the Kabala, the Bride of the “Heavenly Man,” _Tetragrammaton_,
  is Malkuth—the foundation or kingdom. It is our earth, which, when
  _regenerated_ and purified (as matter), will be united to her
  bridegroom (Spirit). But in Esotericism there are two aspects of
  the LOGOS, or the “Father-Son,” which latter becomes his own
  father; one is the UNMANIFESTED Eternal, the other the manifested
  and periodical LOGOS. The “Bride” of the former is the universe as
  nature in the abstract. She is also his “MOTHER”; who, “clothed
  with the bridegroom’s power,” gives birth to the manifested
  universe (the second _logos_) through her own inherent, mystic
  power, and is, therefore, the Immaculate Mother; “the woman
  clothed with the sun, and travailing” in child birth, in
  Revelation, ch. xii.—ED.

Footnote 158:

  See Psalm lxxxiv., 11.

Footnote 159:

  _i.e._ The Universal Spirit in whom all things exist and have
  being. That Eternal Principle which fills all Space and Time, and
  is SPACE and Time (in its abstract sense, as otherwise it would be
  an _extra-Cosmic_ God), and is perfect in perfection.

Footnote 160:

  See Matt. xii., 42.

Footnote 161:

  Luke ix., 56.

-----

                           ------------------

                            EDITORS’ NOTE.

  This second part of the three which form the bulk of the poem
  called “Twilight Visions” by their author—from a purely Kabalistic
  standpoint of universal symbolical Esotericism, is most
  suggestive. Its literary value is apparent. But literary form in
  occultism counts for nothing in such mystic writing if its spirit
  is sectarian—if the symbolism fails in universal application or
  lacks correctness. In this, Part II., however (of the third to
  come we can yet say nothing), the Christian-Judæan names may be
  altered and replaced by their Sanskrit or Egyptian equivalents,
  and the ideas will remain the same. It seems written in the
  universal “mystery-language,” and may be readily understood by an
  occultist, of whatever school or nationality. Nor will any true
  mystic, versed in that international tongue, whose origin is lost
  in the dark night of pre-historic ages, fail to recognise a true
  Brother, who has adopted the phraseology of the Initiates of the
  ancient Judæan Tanaim—Daniel and St. John of the Apocalypse—and
  partially that of the Christian Gnostics, only to be the more
  readily understood by the profane of Christian lands. Yet the
  author means precisely the same thing that would be in the mind of
  any Brahminical or Buddhist Initiate, who, while deploring the
  present degenerated state of things, would place all his hope in
  the transient character of even the _Kali Yuga_, and trust in the
  speedy coming of the Kalki Avatar. We say again, the divine
  Science and Wisdom—_Theosophia_—is universal and common property,
  and the same under every sky. It is the physical type and the
  outward appearance in the dress, that make of one individual a
  Chinaman and of another a European, and of a third a red-skinned
  American. The inner man is one, and all are “Sons of God” by
  birth-right.

  The editors regret that, by an over-sight, the sub-title, “The
  Cross,” that headed Part I. of “Twilight Visions,” published in
  our January number, should have been omitted.

                            THE WHITE MONK.

             By the Author of “A Professor of Alchemy.”

                           (_Continued._)

“Margaret had been in grief so sad and potent since her brother’s
death, that it at last brought her into a fever, from which, with
difficulty, she recovered, and which kept her long to her chamber.

“During this time the monk roamed like a restless spirit, seeming to
seek her, and despairing because he found her not. Giles Hughson
even went so far as to suspect he was no true priest at all, until
he had seen his tonsure. Even then he was drawn into most
sacrilegious surmises by what he beheld some few nights after.

“Having some work to do in Castle Troyes garden, he noted the White
Monk, his lodger, glide noiselessly through the grounds, hidden
behind the thick black walls of yew, and pause under the casement of
Mistress Margaret and stand there listening intently for a certain
space. At last, with a gesture of despair, he slung himself with
infinite agile stillness up some feet of the ivy that covered the
wall, from which insecure footing he did long and earnestly search
if he might see her shadow cross the room. Giles, the gardener,
swore afterwards that the sight of that priest, with his cowl fallen
back from his dark face, and that look of straining, terrified
attention had in it something so partaking of the unearthly, that
for the life of him he dared not accost the daring intruder. ‘Time
enough if there were need,’ he excused himself afterwards, ‘but
Castle Troyes is ever well enow defended, and at that time there
must have been enough of inmates watching over Margaret, the
beautiful, to win her back to life.’

“The horrible recklessness of an act such as this, with the carbines
of a round thirty men within a few yards of him, made the monk seem
to Giles a creature of charmed life, who may not be addressed as
ordinary mortals.

“But the White Monk saw his discoverer when he descended and glided
away again, scared by some noise made by Margaret’s attendants. And
thus there occurred a tragedy, which you shall learn as far as it
was ever known.

“Now Giles Hughson had a young son afflicted with total dumbness,
but whom Mistress Margaret de Troyes had taught to write; and it is
through this scholarship of his that we come to know as much as we
do of what really happened. The White Monk appeared fond of this
boy, possibly because he had seen Margaret kiss him. Thus the lad
had greater access to the monk’s small attic than any other; and
this is the tale he tells of the night after Giles had espied his
lodger clinging to the wall of Castle Troyes.

“The boy had noiselessly, so as not to disturb the often musings of
the solitary one, stepped up the attic stairs to fetch some trifle
he wanted of the monk. Pausing timidly at the door, he beheld the
familiar white-clad figure, with an air of terrible malignity,
mixing some powder of a greenish colour, which, at the sight of the
intruder, he hastily laid aside, thinking it had not been seen.

“But the lad was unnerved by the expression he had caught on the
monk’s face, and he forgot not so lightly.

“At the frugal supper, that very night, he observed the monk ate
even less than was his wont, and of one dish only, the which he also
pressed upon the young lad by his side, seeming to wish to keep the
others from him. The others of the family, Giles Hughson and his
dame, did eat as usual, and were both found dead on the morrow.

“The monk strove to comfort the poor boy by every means in his
power, but it was all of no avail. The lad seized a moment, fled
into the wood, and there wrote down all that he had seen and
suspected, with which account he presently did seek the justices.
These caused proper inquiry into the manner of the deaths of the
workman and his wife to be made, and, finding they had died of
potent poison, instituted careful search for the person of the White
Monk, who had vanished from the cottage.

“At length they found him, in a strange state for one of his way of
living. Into the wood had he gone, but not so far as that he could
hide him. He had stopped beside a little brook, where he had sat
when first he saw fair Margaret, the sister of his victims. There,
even there, was he found, in so deep contemplation that he never
heard his pursuers’ footsteps. He had made a cross of two elder
branches (folk about us say that the elder-wood formed the Cross
whereon Christ died), and having set it on the summit of a bank, was
deep in prayer, as it seemed, before it.

“One of his Italian repentances, I doubt not.

“He seemed in sore distress of mind, and lost to all thought of his
surroundings.

“So they took him; the foreign wild beast, tracked at last. But not
without trouble for he fought like the panther he was. Escaping
lissomely from their hands at the moment when they would have bound
him, the ex-bravo snatched a genuine stiletto from the folds of his
monastic frock and stabbed one man to death, laughing coarsely at
the stupid astonishment of the harquebusiers to see this weapon in
so unseemly a hand.

“He had no chance, being taken thus unawares, and exhaustion came
upon him; so, with tremours, the officers of justice held him fast.
Before the first cord was fastened round his struggling wrists, he
fell back, rigid, in their arms; sighed once or twice, smiled
bitterly to himself at their consternation, and flung his head back,
dead.

“A small quantity of a green powder was found on him (a large dose,
I ween, had killed so hardy a villain!), and by comparing the signs
of death with those of Giles Hughson and his wife, they saw he had
poisoned himself some time within the last five hours. Whether he
had seen Margaret again, and by seeing her upon the earth, had come
to know himself too bad for it; or whether the weariness attendant
upon sins so heavy had worn him out at last, remains a mystery. The
leeches said a man so wasted and wan as this could scarce, in the
way of Nature, have lived many years longer; but I question this,
and so did the men who had so great trouble to hold him!

“News travelled slowly in those days from Italy to England, and it
was not until very shortly after the White Monk’s death that our
town learnt it had harboured Pietro Rinucci, the slayer of the two
good brothers, Ambrose and Gilbert de Troyes. No one ever told
Mistress Margaret that she had spoken with such a man. And now the
beautiful maiden rose from her bed, and asked for her mostly costly
gowns, of amber, blue and rosy colours; and went amongst her friends
brightly, wreathed with pearls and radiant in smiles. She was
thought to have recovered, though she looked ethereal as a daisy or
white cloud; but she said and averred that she was dying, and that
her brother Ambrose had appeared to her in a vision, bidding her
make all speed to do what remained to her upon the earth and be soon
ready, when he should come behind the angels to fetch her hence. Her
kinsfolk thought she wandered in her mind. She asked for the man who
had wooed her, and held long speech with him, very merrily, and yet
with tears; beseeching him to pause e’er he rashly threw away his
life on this earth, since we know not in the beginning, whither our
pleasant sins may carry us, and when we have no enjoyment of them,
save by memory, what are they to us? The instruments of our present
ruin.

“‘All this,’ said the lovely Margaret with a smile, ‘hath right off,
my Lord, been heard, by you and others; but from a lady’s lips (and
that lady who is even now bent to consider the past failings of her
own life, soon to be taken from her) it hath been made evident to
me, these poor oft-repeated words shall have some power. God bless
you, my Lord—farewell.’

“The gentleman came out from her boudoir exceeding sobered, and
essaying as he might to conceal his tears.

“The words of this dying angel—for so indeed she seemed—he vowed
should be as a challenge to him from God to purify his ways. And
indeed from that day the gentleman made such progress in godliness
as can be made by one of his complexion.

“And now a strange and terrible portent was observed.

“Those who watched by the Lady Margaret, began to see a vision, and
of that most dreaded being, the White Monk!

“Night or day, it mattered not; with a chill like to that of Death
itself, the horrified watchers knew the presence of the phantom. In
the dark corners of the room would shape themselves dimly the
features of the murderer, Rinucci, and his monastic gown, so glaring
white in its dimness through the dark that the eye could not search
it, and gone, ever gone, if some bold spirit neared the spot where
he had thought he saw it.

“No one said aught of this to the Lady Margaret, in fear to fright
her; and she alone, of all who watched, did never see nor feel the
constant presence. It seemed sometimes as though the phantom yearned
to make itself visible to her kind, half-divine eyes, but her
thoughts were too high-set for it to be given her to see a sight so
horrible.

“She was much upheld by visions then—her contemplative soul shaped
to itself many fair sights and sounds that others knew not. Sitting
by the open casement in her sun-coloured gown, with white arms,
pearl encircled, leaning out, and her smile ever brighter as she
murmured to herself, she would stretch far over the lattice and
grasp at rosy clouds, which she said floated past her in the peopled
air. She would reply, still leaning out and smiling, to what she
vowed was said to her by wandering happy spirits. And all this
while, behind her, there would stand the White Mystery, with slight
hand lifting the cowl from a face whose eyes were as deep as death
and more despairing.

“Small marvel that the murderer’s ghost should cling to our saint
while she yet lived on earth! He may have known that, once dead,
restored to Heaven, she would thenceforth move in worlds where such
as he should never have the force to breathe.

“And in her due hour she died; and after that for a space no one saw
aught of the dread ghost. His spirit, drawn by some power to enter
our house, wherein was held all he knew of goodness, had now no
further business there, for a while. His loathed name, fraught with
horror to your ancestors’ home, was now never spoken. It was
thought, doubtless, that since Margaret de Troyes—the innocent
avenger—had unwittingly caused the murderer’s death, the house he
had so deeply injured was for ever free from his godless presence.
And, indeed, for a while, the chronicles are silent respecting him.
The next two generations were happy, and no great misfortune blasted
the house. But in the third generation there were harsh feuds in the
city, and much bloodshed, and several of your name came to violent
and sometimes mysterious ends. Then it was that there arose a
searching into past traditions to discover the secret of a certain
white spectre said to appear about the castle previous to each
calamity. Not all saw it; but still it grew known, and it bore a
marked resemblance to an ancient portrait—hung up for curiosity’s
sake—of Pietro Rinucci.

“Well, young master, I myself served your grandfather, and I myself
can bear witness to the presence of the White Monk’s ghost on one of
the shrewd moments of the family destinies. Wilt hear it? So your
father was then a stalwart young man, away at the wars in Spain.
Your uncles, two blithe young gallants, were at home at the time I
speak of, and there was some merry-making toward in the castle.
Myself was seeing to the torches in the garden, when I chanced to
see your uncle, Geoffrey de Troyes, come hastily into the yew-walk
with his rapier drawn, followed by another youth whom I knew well,
his rival, and in some sort, his enemy.

“As the guests danced within, these nobles fought without. A man
dared not have interposed; it was matter of life and death to them,
and they were there to prove it.

“I was glad, as I stood on the further side the hedge, to mark the
vigour and the skill of our Geoffrey. Methought the vantage was with
him, and with my whole heart I hated his opponent, the cold, selfish
Ernle Deane, and wished him to succumb.

“And so, by mine honour, he should have done, for my boy was the
pride of us all for swordsmanship; but it was not to be.

“Geoffrey de Troyes never suffered more from his mortal wound than I
did in my heart and my pride, as I led him, bleeding piteously to
this very stable-room, where he sank on the hay and said he must
die.

“‘Look to it,’ groaned the poor young noble, as he lay dying, ‘that
Mistress Beatrice Savile has this token from me—my gold chain—warn
her from me when I am dead, that she wed not Ernle Deane—he is bad
to the core, and she is too good to mend him. Oh! but for that
hateful vision!’

“‘What vision, a God’s name?’ I cried.

“And he told me trembling—he who had never trembled of his whole
life!—that even at the moment when he had thought to subdue his
enemy—even as he raised his sword to strike home to a worthless
heart—even then had his arm fallen paralysed and a frightful shiver
quite unmanned him at the sight of a poor monk in white, who stood
some yards away, and raised his cowl with a thin white hand, and
fixed unearthly eyes upon him with a steadfast look that drew the
soul away from the deadliest earthly peril.

“‘And so I fell!’ cried the shamed noble, crimsoning though the
pallor of exhaustion. ‘_I_—a practised hand, a not unworthy
courage—a De Troyes! I fell—for this!—and so would any man have
fallen,’ he defiantly ended, ‘for ’twas a devil—’twas Pietro Rinucci
himself, who came from hell to lure me from my hopes of earthly
happiness. O, life! O, Beatrice!’

“And I nursed him and wept over him like any woman, whilst one
young, bright life more departed,

“In truth, young master,” ended honest Ralph, “the noble Geoffrey
may have been deceived, and fancied this; but, you shall pardon me,
I would rather think that armies of devils nightly march these
grounds than that one De Troyes was ever seen to quail, save under
magic! Thus it is that I, and that many of us yet believe in the
spectre of Pietro Rinucci, ‘the White Monk.’”

Oh these faithful servitors, they would die for us children of the
house, I believe, and yet they have ever this curious bent to
terrify the childish minds. I know not when it was precisely that I
thus first heard the White Monk’s story, but this I know, I was
young enough to sit with my clenched fistlets supporting my chin,
and my eyes and mouth very wide open.

“And was he always in _white_, that fearful man?” I asked, somewhere
toward the middle of the story. “_Always in white?_” I know not why,
but this detail struck my child’s phantasy more powerfully than all
the rest; _this_ was awful, this was the pith of the whole matter,
and from that moment I sat trembling, and drinking in the history
with reluctant suspense, until it became the bane of my life for a
term of years.

For hours I lay shuddering ofttimes in my bed, dreading with my body
and my soul lest the Monk should appear to me! And never had I
courage to speak of this to anyone of the many loving house mates
who would so promptly have put an end to my fears by leaving me no
more alone at night. There is a keen, hard honour for children to
maintain, and to them the confession of nocturnal terror is as
flight to the soldier. So, as the banquet sped its course below, I
shuddered lonely in my bed in the oaken room, often weeping angrily
amidst my fears because I alone, the only son of the house, was the
only soul in it left desolate.

A little later I was comforted in some sort by my baby sister
Margaret, who was put to sleep in an adjacent cot, and being too
tiny for Fear to reach, would sleep secure, all gold and white in
the dusky gleam of our rushlight—the one oasis of hope throughout
the terrible oaken room. Yet she in her turn, became a source of
fear to me. Should the Monk appear, and should the dire extremity
cause me to shriek, what would become of Marguerite? She would die
of sudden terror. Worse—if he should stand by her bedside, raising
his cowl off the awful face, and her blue eyes should open at that
instant? How should I protect her?

But before I wander further, I must begin straight and tell how we
lived, and where, and to what end.

                                                         PERCY ROSS.

                        (_To be continued._)




                       AN AUTO-HYPNOTIC RHAPSODY.

 “_When all desires_ that dwell in the heart _cease, then the mortal
    becomes immortal, and obtains Brahman_.
 _When all the fetters of the heart_ here on earth _are broken_;
 _When all that bind us to_ this life _is undone, then the mortal
    becomes immortal—here my teaching ends_.”

                                                   —KATHA UPANISHAD.

I (Âtman) have crossed the sea—I have reached the other shore—I have
triumphed over gravitation, my soul is in the sun-currents, moving
sunwards with the sun.

Where the currents are bearing me to I scarcely know, but yet
something has been revealed.

I died the mystical death, I was received by the Dawn-Maidens—the
bright ones of the eternal twilights, the two bright Ushas, Ahana
and Antigone, Isis, and Nephtys of Aanru.[162]

-----

Footnote 162:

  _Aanru_ is the celestial field where the defunct’s soul received
  wheat and corn, growing therein _seven cubits high_. (See “Book of
  the Dead,” 124 _et seq._)—ED.

-----

The Ahana-Aurora of Eternity laid me asleep on her bosom, giving me
_amrita_[163] to drink, as Hebe gave to Herakles, and then I at once
knew that I (_Atman_) was immortal; the Mask of Personality had
fallen to earth, the Âtma was revealed—my true SELF—I knew my name,
and found myself soaring sunwards. Then the Voice of that DAWN said,
“I give you the ‘Amrita’ of the cessation of deaths,” and her lips
burning with sun-ardours, kissed my forehead, and said, “I bring you
to the sun; when blind—on earth, that Sanskara of sorrow—you fancied
your sun was nothing but a great centre of physical force—light and
heat, and their equivalents; but it was Maya, the Earth-Queen of
illusions, who thus deceived your earth eyes. Look now, and you can
see nothing but a vast group of mighty spirit-wills clustered round
a yet mightier Spirit centre, drawing from thence inspiration, and
ever-radiating sun effluxes, for the good and advancement of those
unhappy lower wills yet sunk in the earth. What you called light was
intelligence, and heat was—love. Did not Koré suggest this to you, O
my weak child, for she, too, was one of the Ushas, a Maiden of the
Dawn, kindling your soul to love?”

-----

Footnote 163:

  _Amrita_ (immortal) applied to the Soma juice, and called the
  “Water of Life.”—ED.

-----

I was silent to this question, for a dread sorrow clung to me.

“Though” (began again the Voice) “the sun-souls attract the
earth-souls, the lost ones, for a while, to bring them up to
themselves by the path that leads to Nirvana[164] ‘where there is no
sorrow’; yet the sun-groups of Spirits are themselves attracted by a
grander centre of force, and the Sun, with his planet-children, are
speeding in a mighty orbit round a far mightier Soul-centre—the lost
Pleiad—lost on earth to be found in Heaven. Dost thou not hear the
solemn music of that tempest flight?” And then she touched my ears,
and I heard the myriad voiced song of the blessed ones as they
passed on rejoicing, and the Voice continued: “That lost Pleiad, the
dove-woman, the ‘Woman Clothed with the Sun,’ who, as Jeremiah
prophesied, should ‘compass man,’ is that eternal womanhood which
attracts all men.” And the chorus of the psalm I heard them sing, as
they passed on Pleiad-ward, was “Freedom and Love—Love in Bi-unity.
The Two in One foretold has come even to earth.” And the souls in
that Pleiad-world are infinite in number as the sands of the seas of
countless worlds, elective affinities attract like to like, forming
celestial choirs, each member of which breathes the akasian air
synchronously with the other, and what you call in your
earth-symbol-language their “hearts,” beat and throb in unison
together as one heart, and thus become coalesced in, and by, love.

-----

Footnote 164:

  This is a doctrine of the Visishtadwaita sect of the Vedantins.
  The _Jiva_ (spiritual life principle, the living _Monad_) of one
  who attained Moksha or Nirvana, “breaks through the Brahmarandra
  and goes to _Suryamandala_ (the region of the sun) through the
  Solar rays. Then it goes, through a dark spot in the Sun, to
  Paramapeda to which it is directed by the Supreme Wisdom acquired
  by _Yoga_, and helped thereinto by the _Devas_ (gods) called
  Archis, the “Flames,” or Fiery Angels, answering to the Christian
  archangels.—ED.

-----

“Listen, O my child, to the music of their breathing,” and I said,
“Is Koré there?” Then I heard voices in Heaven, and I began to
breathe the interior akasa breath synchronously with her—our breaths
became one, I was mingled with, and melted in her; and lo! a great
mystery! that Dawn-maiden changed to Koré, and Koré gave me the
amrita of the Pleiad, and I knew that our biune love was immortal.

I have passed over the deep waters, I am free, I have infinite peace
and infinite joy, at rest for ever.

Have I not, like Herakles, slept on the bosom of Athéné, breathing
the wisdom of her breaths? I, too, breathe internally akasian
love-breaths, I live in the love-choirs of the Pleiad Sun, I am in
the true Nirvana, where there is no sorrow and no desire, for desire
is lost in an ever-abiding and eternal fruition. The Lotus has
bloomed in the Sun-fire,[165] and my soul is newborn in the pure
white calyx, and floats down the golden waters that wash the eternal
shores. I have found the “Path,” “suffering, and the cause of
suffering” (separation from the loved one) have been seen, and have
passed away, whilst we ever rise and pass onwards by the star-paths.
I am no more blind, but, like Orion of old, gazing eastwards on that
rising sun, the red flush of whose dawn is ever blushing in our
central souls. I have received my sight.—OM....

                                                            A. J. C.
                                                            Lucerne.

-----

Footnote 165:

  _Vide_ Legend of Jyotishka, mentioned in “Life of Buddha from the
  Bkah-Hgyur.”

-----

                                  ---

Since writing the foregoing, A. J. C. has met with the following
note contained in Mr. Edwin Arnold’s interesting essay, “Death and
Afterwards,” which throws light on the views in said Rhapsody: “That
which safely bears our ‘solid world’ in the gulfs of space is no
base or basis, no moveless central rock, but _throbbing energies_ in
complex and manifold action, _in swing and wave and thrill_;
whirling us onward in mighty sweeps of three-fold rythm _to which
our hearts are set_. So therefore not solidity of base in fixity of
status is our supreme and vital need, but moving _power beyond our
ken or senses_; known to us in _energising action_, and working
through blue ‘void’; impelling us in rings of spiral orbit round a
moving sun in which we are dependent.”

The same book contains Walt Whitman’s beautiful and striking poem on
Death, in which the poet says:

      “Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome?”

Yes, one other, the writer of the foregoing Rhapsody, has attempted
a song in praise of Death the deliverer, and the Italian poet,
Leopardi, stated in beautiful verse years ago that the world had two
good things in it—Love and Death.

                    “Due belle cose ho il mondo
                    L’amor e la Morte”...

                               ----------

                            OUR OTHER HALF.

When our ancient brethren, the Kabalists, Jewish as well as
Oriental, taught that the divine monad, starting on its long journey
from the bosom of the Infinite One was divided into halves, they had
a double meaning, one exoteric, the other esoteric. The exoteric
one, being that the two halves, swept through cycles upon cycles of
time, in search of each other; and, that, when they finally met, in
a perfect union, or marriage, the two halves became one on earth,
and after death, united again. The true explanation, however, the
esoteric one, is, that each and every one of us, contains within
himself, both the halves: the feminine predominating through some
incarnations, the masculine through others. It adds that, when we
evolute into the perfect being, the Adept, the Mahatma, both
principles are in perfect harmony. Or, as the Kabalists have
recorded it, harmony is in equilibrium, and equilibrium exists by
the analogy of contraries. How often we discern in the most
masculine of men, distinct feminine traits of character, and _vice
versa_, in the gentlest of the fair sex, discover masculine traits.

The Jewish Kabbalists represented these two principles in the
letters forming their Ineffable Name. Its first three characters
mean Eve, or Eva, or Hâyah היה or woman, or by another reading it
means mother, and is, in fact, the proper name as given in Genesis
for Eve, “the mother of all living.” Adding the character י Yodh or
Yah, the male, the number one, the masculine, we have Jehovah, or
Jah-eve, or being as male-female, the perfect number—10, symbolised
by the Sephirothal Adam Kadmon.

A few evenings ago, while pondering on this subject, in a room
devoted to occult research, where an Eastern incense burning with a
ruddy glow on the triangular-shaped altar, sent its refreshing
fragrance through the apartment, my outer senses were lulled, and
the inner ones came into play, and I became conscious of my other
“half.” I saw standing before me, a being, whom I had hitherto
considered as my guardian angel stretching out her hands to me, and
saying—“my beloved one, know thy-_self_.”

The fire on the altar burnt low. The north-east wind, which had been
blowing in furious gusts outside, lashing the bosom of the lake into
white foam, died away, sounding like some far distant choral chant.
An unearthly silence ensued, and seemed to pervade the infinitudes
of space. A thousand voices spoke to me, saying, “Man, know
thyself.” Shadowy, ghostly forms filled the apartment. One, more
distinct than the rest, tall in form, clad in a long flowing garment
of pure white, the long black hair falling in curly locks over his
shoulders, the silky beard reaching to his waist, the light of
centuries of centuries gleaming forth from his dark eyes—extended
his right hand toward me. A thrill of unutterable delight passed
through my being. Slowly I emerged from my earthly casket, looked
for an instant at its sleeping form, then felt irresistibly drawn to
the fair being, who still stood with outstretched hands, and seemed
to lose myself in her. The twain had become one. The mystic union
had taken place. For a few brief moments I realized the
possibilities of _jnânayoga_, the wisdom-power of the adepts. Space
was annihilated. I could see systems upon systems of worlds,
galaxies of stars, suns and systems of suns, whirling through space.
I thought of some distant place, and I was there. Complex problems
solved themselves quite naturally: I had become all THOUGHT....

The extended hand of the tall form flashed before my eyes, and I
became unconscious. When I awoke, I found lying on the altar a
full-blown white rose. The north-east wind was again roaring in
fierce gusts, the fire on the altar had died out. The mirrors had
draped themselves with their curtains of black. The two interlaced
triangles had merged into a circle, of pure gold in colour. Once
more I took upon myself my objective life. But I had solved the
problem which has taken me seven years to solve. I was content....

                                           “BERTRAND STONEX,” F.T.S.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                           THE THREE DESIRES.

The first three of the numbered rules of “Light on the Path” must
appear somewhat of an unequal character to bracket together. The
sense in which they follow each other is purely spiritual. Ambition
is the highest point of personal activity reached by the mind, and
there is something noble in it, even to an Occultist. Having
conquered the desire to stand above his fellows, the restless
aspirant, in seeking what his personal desires are, finds the thirst
for life stand next in his way. For all that are ordinarily classed
as desires have long since been subjugated, passed by, or forgotten,
before this pitched battle of the soul is begun. The desire for life
is entirely a desire of the spirit, not mental at all; and in facing
it a man begins to face his own soul. But very few have even
attempted to face it; still fewer can guess at all at its meaning.

The connection between ambition and the desire of life is of this
kind. Men are seldom really ambitious in whom the animal passions
are strong. What is taken for ambition in men of powerful physique
is more often merely the exercise of great energy in order to obtain
full gratification of all physical desires. Ambition pure and simple
is the struggle of the mind upwards, the exercise of a native
intellectual force which lifts a man altogether above his peers. To
rise—to be preeminent in some special manner, in some department of
art, science, or thought, is the keenest longing of delicate and
highly-tuned minds. It is quite a different thing from the thirst
for knowledge which makes of a man a student always—a learner to the
end, however great he may become. Ambition is born of no love for
anything for its own sake, but purely for the sake of oneself. “It
is I that will know, I that will rise, and by my own power.”

           “Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition;
           By that sin fell the angels.”

The place-seeking for which the word was originally used, differs in
degree, not in kind, from that more abstract meaning now generally
attached to it. A poet is considered ambitious when he writes for
fame. It is true; so he is. He may not be seeking a place at court,
but he is certainly seeking the highest place he knows of. Is it
conceivable that any great author could really be anonymous, and
remain so? The human mind revolts against the theory of the Baconian
authorship of Shakespeare’s works, not only because it deprives the
world of a splendid figure, but also because it makes of Bacon a
monster, unlike all other human beings. To the ordinary intelligence
it is inconceivable that a man should hide his light in this
purposeless manner. Yet it is conceivable to an occultist that a
great poet might be inspired by one greater than himself, who would
stand back entirely from the world and all contact with it. This
inspirer would not only have conquered ambition but also the
abstract desire for life, before he could work vicariously to so
great an extent. For he would part with his work for ever when once
it had gone to the world; it would never be his. A person who can
imagine making no claim on the world, neither desiring to take
pleasure from it nor to give pleasure to it, can dimly apprehend the
condition which the occultist has reached when he no longer desires
to live. Do not suppose this to mean that he neither takes nor gives
pleasure; he does both, as also he lives. A great man, full of work
and thought, eats his food with pleasure; he does not dwell on the
prospect of it, and linger over the memory, like the gluttonous
child, or the gourmand pure and simple. This is a very material
image, yet sometimes these simple illustrations serve to help the
mind more than any others. It is easy to see, from this analogy,
that an advanced occultist who has work in the world may be
perfectly free from the desires which would make him a part of it,
and yet may take its pleasures and give them back with interest. He
is enabled to give more pleasure than he takes, because he is
incapable of fear or disappointment. He has no dread of death, nor
of that which is called annihilation. He rests on the waters of
life, submerged and sleeping, or above them and conscious,
indifferently. He cannot feel disappointment, because although
pleasure is to him intensely vivid and keen, it is the same to him
whether he enjoys it himself or whether another enjoys it. It is
pleasure, pure and simple, untarnished by personal craving or
desire. So with regard to what occultists call “progress”—the
advance from stage to stage of knowledge. In a school of any sort in
the external world emulation is the great spur to progress. The
occultist, on the contrary, is incapable of taking a single step
until he has acquired the faculty of realizing progress as an
abstract fact. Someone must draw nearer to the Divine in every
moment of life; there must always be progress. But the disciple who
desires that he shall be the one to advance in the next moment, may
lay aside all hope of it. Neither should he be conscious of
preferring progress for another or of any kind of vicarious
sacrifice. Such ideas are in a certain sense unselfish, but they are
essentially characteristic of the world in which separateness
exists, and form is regarded as having a value of its own. The shape
of a man is as much an _eidolon_ as though no spark of divinity
inhabited it; at any moment that spark may desert the particular
shape, and we are left with a substantial shadow of the man we knew.
It is in vain, after the first step in occultism has been taken,
that the mind clings to the old beliefs and certainties. Time and
space are known to be non-existent, and are only regarded as
existing in practical life for the sake of convenience. So with the
separation of the divine-human spirit into the multitudes of men on
the earth. Roses have their own colours, and lilies theirs; none can
tell why this is when the same sun, the same light, gives the colour
to each. Nature is indivisible. She clothes the earth, and when that
clothing is torn away, she bides her time and re-clothes it again
when there is no more interference with her. Encircling the earth
like an atmosphere, she keeps it always glowing and green, moistened
and sun-lit. The spirit of man encompasses the earth like a fiery
spirit, living on Nature, devouring her, sometimes being devoured by
her, but always in the mass remaining more ethereal and sublime than
she is. In the individual, man is conscious of the vast superiority
of Nature; but when once he becomes conscious that he is part of an
indivisible and indestructible whole, he knows also that the whole
of which he is part stands above nature. The starry sky is a
terrible sight to a man who is just self-less enough to be aware of
his own littleness and unimportance as an individual; it almost
crushes him. But let him once touch on the power which comes from
knowing himself as part of the human spirit, and nothing can crush
him by its greatness. For if the wheels of the chariot of the enemy
pass over his body, he forgets that it is his body, and rises again
to fight among the crowd of his own army. But this state can never
be reached, nor even approached, until the last of the three desires
is conquered, as well as the first. They must be apprehended and
encountered together.

Comfort, in the language used by occultists, is a very comprehensive
word. It is perfectly useless for a neophyte to practise discomfort
or asceticism as do religious fanatics. He may come to prefer
deprivation in the end, and then it has become his comfort.
Homelessness is a condition to which the religious Brahmin pledges
himself; and in the external religion he is considered to fulfil
this pledge if he leaves wife and child, and becomes a begging
wanderer, with no shelter of his own to return to. But all external
forms of religion are forms of comfort, and men take vows of
abstinence in the same spirit that they take pledges of boon
companionship. The difference between these two sides of life is
only apparent. But the homelessness which is demanded of the
neophyte is a much more vital thing than this. It demands the
surrender from him of choice or desire. Dwelling with wife and
child, under the shelter of a familiar roof-tree, and fulfilling the
duties of citizenship, the neophyte may be far more homeless, in the
esoteric sense, than when he is a wanderer or an outcast. The first
lesson in practical occultism usually given to a pledged disciple is
that of fulfilling the duties immediately to hand with the same
subtle mixture of enthusiasm and indifference as the neophyte would
imagine himself able to feel when he had grown to the size of a
ruler of worlds and a designer of destinies. This rule is to be
found in the Gospels and in the Bhagavad Gita. The immediate work,
whatever it may be, has the abstract claim of duty, and its relative
importance or non-importance is not to be considered at all. This
law can never be obeyed until all desire of comfort is for ever
destroyed. The ceaseless assertions and re-assertions of the
personal self must be left behind for ever. They belong as
completely to the character of this world as does the desire to have
a certain balance at the bank, or to retain the affections of a
loved person. They are equally subject to the change which is
characteristic of this world; indeed, they are even more so, for
what the neophyte does by becoming a neophyte is simply to enter a
forcing-house. Change, disillusionment, disheartenment, despair will
crowd upon him by invitation; for his wish is to learn his lessons
quickly. And as he turns these evils out they will probably be
replaced by others worse than themselves—a passionate longing for
separate life, for sensation, for the consciousness of growth in his
own self, will rush in upon him and sweep over the frail barriers
which he has raised. And no such barriers as asceticism, as
renunciation, nothing indeed which is negative, will stand for a
single moment against this powerful tide of feeling. The only
barrier is built up of new desires. For it is perfectly useless for
the neophyte to imagine he can get beyond the region of desires. He
cannot; he is still a man, Nature must bring forth flowers while she
is still Nature, and the human spirit would loose its hold on this
form of existence altogether did it not continue to desire. The
individual man cannot wrench himself instantly out of that life of
which he is an essential part. He can only change his position in
it. The man whose intellectual life dominates his animal life,
changes his position; but he is still in the dominion of desire. The
disciple who believes it possible to become selfless in a single
effort, will find himself flung into a bottomless pit as the
consequence of his rash endeavour. Seize upon a new order of
desires, purer, wider, nobler; and so plant your foot upon the
ladder firmly. It is only on the last and topmost rung of the
ladder, at the very entrance upon Divine or Mahatmic life, that it
is possible to hold fast to that which has neither substance or
existence.

The first part of “Light on the Path” is like a chord in
music; the notes have to be struck together though they must
be touched separately. Study and seize hold of the new desires
before you have thrust out the old ones; otherwise in the
storm you will be lost. Man while he is man has substance and
needs some step to stand on, some idea to cling to. But let it
be the least possible. Learn as the acrobat learns, slowly and
with care, to become more independent. Before you attempt to
cast out the devil of ambition—the desire of something,
however fine and elevated, outside of yourself,—seize on the
desire to find the light of the world within yourself. Before
you attempt to cast out the desire of conscious life, learn to
look to the unattainable or in other language to that which
you know you can only reach in unconsciousness. In knowing
that your aim is of this lofty character, that it will never
bring conscious success, never bring comfort to you, that it
will never carry you _in your own temporary personal self_ to
any haven of rest or place of agreeable activity, you cut away
all the force and power of the desires of the lower astral
nature. For what avail is it, when these facts have been once
realised, to desire separateness, sensation or growth?

The armour of the warrior who rises to fight for you in the battle
depicted in the second part of “Light on the Path,” is like the
shirt of the happy man in the old story. The king was to be cured of
all his ills by sleeping in this shirt; but when the one happy man
in his kingdom was found, he was a beggar, without care, without
anxiety—and shirtless. So with the divine warrior. None can take his
armour and use it, for he has none. The king could never find
happiness like that of the careless beggar. The man of the world,
however fine and cultivated he may be, is hampered by a thousand
thoughts and feelings which have to be cast aside before he can even
stand on the threshold of occultism. And, be it observed, he is
chiefly handicapped by the armour he wears, which isolates him. He
has personal pride, personal respect. These things must die out as
the personality recedes. The process described in the first part of
“Light on the Path,” is one which takes off that shell, or armour,
and casts it aside for ever. Then the warrior arises, armourless,
defenceless, offenceless, identified with the afflicters and the
afflicted, the angered and the one that angers; fighting not on any
side, but for the Divine, the highest in all.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                    GOLDEN SENTENCES OF DEMOCRITUS.

It is beautiful to impede an unjust man; but if this be not
possible, it is beautiful not to act in conjunction with him.

Sin should be abstained from, not through fear, but, for the sake of
the becoming.

Many who have not learnt to argue rationally, still live according
to reason.

Vehement desires about any one thing render the soul blind with
respect to other things.

The equal is beautiful in everything, but excess and defect to me do
not appear to be so.

It is the property of a divine intellect to be always intently
thinking about the beautiful.




                THE RELATION OF COLOUR TO THE INTERLACED
                    TRIANGLES, OR THE PENTACLE.[166]

-----

Footnote 166:

  A paper read before the Chicago Branch of the Theosophical
  Society, by its Secretary, M. L. Brainard.

-----

Colour registers grades of vibration. Vibration registers grades of
life. Life, esoterically considered, is ascent towards its
source—the great First Cause, the celestial sun which lights
universal creation.

If a ray of white light is passed through a triangular piece of
glass, called a prism, it becomes separated into the seven colours
known as the “solar spectrum.” Careful scientific analysis has
proven that these colours are produced by different rates of
vibration.

It has shown that the slowest vibrations are red, the quickest
violet. The red ray of the spectrum gives 477 millions of millions
(or billions) of vibrations in a second, the orange 506, the yellow
535, the green 577, the blue 622, Indigo 658, and violet 699.

Thus there is a regular ascent in the colour-scale from red to
violet, and the trans-violet rays go on octaves higher, becoming
invisible to the physical eye as their rates of vibration increase.

It has also been discovered that these seven prismatic rays of the
solar spectrum correspond to the seven notes on the musical scale,
the ray of slowest vibration, red, being a correlate of the base
note of the musical gamut, and the violet ray answering to the
highest musical note.

When the vibrations exceed a certain limit, the tympanum of the ear
has not time to recoil before a succeeding impulse arrives, and it
remains motionless. Darkness and silence are, therefore, equivalents
for the cessation of vibrations on the retina of the eye and
tympanum of the ear respectively. Incidentally it may be stated that
cold is also considered to be the cessation of vibrations through
the nerves of feeling.

Colour, therefore, is to light what pitch is to sound—both depend on
length of vibrations.

The thought will immediately suggest itself in this connection that
if colour and music are thus correlated, the perfect clairvoyant
might _see_ a concert as well as hear it. This is true, and there
are instances on record of such transcendent views. In one case of
this kind, it was not alone a poetical play of colour springing into
life under the touch of a German professor’s hands, but a host of
airy sprites clothed in the various rays which called them forth.

_Isis_ declares that “sounds and colours are all spiritual numerals;
and as the seven prismatic rays proceed from one spot in Heaven, so
the seven powers of Nature, each of them a number, are the seven
radiations of the unity, the central spiritual sun.”[167]

-----

Footnote 167:

  “ISIS UNVEILED,” Vol 1., p. 514.

-----

It is easy to follow along the lines of these suggestions, and trace
the origin of chanting the seven vowels to one of their gods, among
the Egyptians, as a hymn of praise at sunrise. In the so-called
mythical Golden Age this must have been the mode of putting
themselves _en rapport_ or _in tune_ with the Cosmic powers, and
ensuring harmony while the vibrations were synchronous.

The third necessary correlation to be considered in this analysis is
that of form. Scientific research has proven that not only are music
and colour due to rates of vibration, but form also marshals itself
into objective being in obedience to the same mysterious law. This
is demonstrated by the familiar experiment of placing some dry sand
on a square of glass, and drawing a violin bow across the edge.
Under the influence of this intonation, the sand assumes star shapes
of perfect proportion; if other material is placed on the square of
glass at the same time, other shapes are assumed, varying in
proportion to the power resident in the atoms to _respond_ to the
vibrations communicated.

It is noticeable, however, that the vibration makes the spaces, and
the sand falls into the _rest_ places.

We have now discovered a triangular key—light, music, form—which
will disclose to us the exact relations which colour sustains to the
interlaced triangles, the six-rayed star, universal symbol of
creative force acting upon matter.[168] This triangular key is
simply three modes of one being, three differential expressions of
one force—vibration.

-----

Footnote 168:

  Hence in Kabalistic symbolism the _pentacle_, or the six-pointed
  star, is the sign of the _manifested_ “Logos,” or the “Heavenly
  man,” the Tetragrammaton. “The four-lettered Adni (_Adonai_, “the
  Lord”), is the _Eheieh_ (the symbol of _life_ or existence), is
  the Lord of the six limbs (6 Sephiroth) and his Bride (_Malkuth_,
  or physical nature, also Earth) is his seventh limb.” (Ch. _Book
  of Numbers_ viii. 3-4.)—ED.

-----

That which causes the vibration we can only represent by the
Ineffable Name, behind which burns the quenchless glory of En Soph,
the Boundless.

Thus, in our symbology we start from the centre of a circle, which
should be represented by white light.

The seven rays issuing therefrom, must first pass through the
interior and invisible triangle of Akasa, the prism A.U.M., before
they can flow outward, and by their action upon chaos, wheel the
myriad forms of physical life into consonance with their rates of
vibration. In this manner is the visible formulated from the
invisible. By such subtle music is born the gorgeous flora of our
tropics, drinking its wealth of colour from the yellow and warm rays
of the sunlight; and in accord with the same harmony is produced the
subdued vegetation of colder climes. The blue and violet beams carry
the quick pulses of the parent flame deep within the earth, and
by-and-bye she gives back that which she has received, transformed
into a thousand brilliant hues woven in the magic loom of Love,
presided over by the solar spectrum. Or, as Egyptian myth phrases
it, Osiris (the sun) weds Isis (the earth), and the child,
Horus-Apollo, glorifies all things as the product of this divine
union.

The culmination of light resides in the yellow ray, and hence to
that colour is given the East point in our symbolised centre of
radiation.[169] The others follow in the order of the solar
spectrum.

-----

Footnote 169:

  It is the secret of the great reverence shown in the East for this
  colour. It is the colour of the _Yogi_ dress in India, and of the
  _Gelupka_ sect (“Yellow caps”) in Thibet. It symbolizes _pure
  blood_ and sunlight, and is called “the stream of life.” Red, as
  its opposite, is the colour of the _Dugpas_, and black
  magicians.—ED.

-----

But it is noticeable in this connection, that _in_ that order, the
coarsest and warmest of the visible rays—red—is placed next to the
coldest and most refined ray, the violet. Here we have the analogy
of contraries. The ray of lowest refrangibility and the ray of
highest refrangibility become next-door neighbours in the divergent
circle of necessity. What is the result? It is not hard to discover,
when we know that the cooling colours are essential to the balanced
action of the thermal rays. “A small amount of blue when combined
with other rays will even increase the heat, because it kindles into
activity its opposite warm principle, red, through chemical
affinity.”

Having determined the law which should govern the symbology of
colours at the centre of our circle, we come next to the interlaced
triangles.

The truly Theosophical Pentacle should be made by the interlacing of
a white triangle with a black triangle—the white representing pure
spirit, the black, gross matter. This is the true symbology, for the
reason that white reflects all colours, and black absorbs all
colours. It is the face of the White Ancient looking into the face
of the Black Ancient.

Absolute blackness appears to give back nothing; nor does it ever,
save through processes of slow evolution, wrought by continued
vibration upon its molecules from the Divine Centre of Light.

Continuous vibration polarizes these particles, so that at last
rising from the lowest grade of refrangibility to the highest, into
the invisible octaves of being, our planetary chain in its
culmination will reach a point where every atom will give an
answering thrill of resonance to the throbbing of the heart of the
Universe—the Central Spiritual Sun.

As every substance in Nature has its colour, so the human family
publish their grades of advancement to the clairvoyant eye by their
astral colours; and seekers after the true Light may know what “ray”
they are in, by a comparison of their own auras with the colours of
the overshadowing soul.

The middle rays of the solar spectrum—blue, green, and yellow—give a
very powerful triangle, a wonderful _working_ triangle of forces;
for green is Hermetic silver, yellow is Hermetic gold, and blue is a
despatch-messenger from the “Lord of the Worlds,” Jupiter.

The blue and the yellow of this group, on account of their
position—the third and the fifth reckoned both ways—have been chosen
as the colours of our incense-holders, alternating on the points of
the Pentacle. As odours are also correlated with colours, and as
sandal-wood is the perfume which belongs to the sun, we use that
incense to intensify the vibrations from the radiating points, in
order to increase the volume of accord which will reach other
centres at a distance; for the akasa is more sensitive than an
Eolian harp—it registers the very aroma of our thoughts. It was,
therefore, no exaggeration of the poet when he said:

                “Guard well thy thought:
                Our thoughts are _heard_ in Heaven.”

But if colours and sounds are spiritual numerals, then the seven
symbolical points of the Pentacle represent numbers of the greatest
importance in world-building, and in soul-building also. For we must
all build our own souls. And the symbology of the interlacing of the
triangle of spirit with the triangle of matter, finds its
correspondence in man, the little world, who, though a spiritual
ego, yet dwells in a physical house, and whose business it is to
merge himself completely into the region of the white triangle.

When Man has raised his vibrations into perfect harmony with the
universal sun, he has then unbound himself from the wheel of
re-birth—the Zodiac—and is ready to enter Nirvana.

The word “heaven” in Hebrew signifies the abode of the sun. When,
therefore, the Nazarene said “The Kingdom of Heaven is within you,”
he virtually declared that all the seven cosmic powers are resident
within us.

Esoteric science recognises man as a septenary, working in
conjunction with other orders of numerals which register divine
vibrations.

All nature listens to that universal song, and the music of the
spheres is no fable. The swarming zöospores in the protoplasm of
plants hear it, and thrilled by that enchantment, fall into
invisible rhythm, bringing up by quick marches into the region
of Day the tiny dwellers in stem and leaf. How do we know that
the mystery of the six-sided cell of the honey-bee may not find
its solution here? Perhaps the bee is susceptible only to
vibrations which fall into these lines, and faithfully obeys the
master-musician in the construction of its hexagonal house. The
great law of cosmic and microcosmic correspondence was revealed
ages ago to the Sages who _listened_, and listening, _heard_ the
wondrous revelations breathed forth from the harp of Akasa.
Sighing winds from other worlds passed over the delicate
strings, and as they passed, uttered in soundless tones the
profound mystery of near and remote planets. These Sages dwelt
in that White Palace—the Lotus of the Heart—the sun-palace
indeed. From centre to circumference their vast circle of vision
was permeated by the reflected _All_, and from the White Palace
they ascended the sacred mountain Meru, where dwelleth wisdom
and love.

The key which opens the White Palace is held by the seven mystic
children of the Royal Arch of the Rainbow, guarding the seven gates
of the Sun, every gate of which answers to a musical note, and every
note of which enfolds three tones.

Hence, if we understand the analogies of colour, we may open the six
doors of Nature, and also the seventh, to Nirvana.

                                                     M. L. BRAINARD.

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                               QUESTIONS.

            What can we do in temptation’s hour?
            How shall we conquer its fiery power?
            How can we master it—standing _alone_,
            Just on the threshold of things unknown?

            Strong is its power as Death and Hell,
            Led by its lure, even angels fell!
            Dazed by the glare of a rising light
            How shall poor mortals see aright?

            Tempted we were in the morning of life,
            With earth’s simple joys that are ever rife,
            To idly bask in the sun’s warm beam
            And to care no jot for a holier dream.

            Tempted again in the heyday sun,
            To choose fair paths and in gardens run,
            _Claiming_ as ours, all joy—all love,
            Flowerets of bliss from the Heavens above.

            Temptings come now, in life’s later prime,
            Deeper and stronger than in past time,
            To feed with fuel the inward fire,
            The passionate dream of the _soul’s desire_!

                        -----------------------

            Two feet are creeping on paths unknown,
            Weary and mournful, sad and lone;
            Two eyes are looking and longing for light,
            Two hands are locked in a desperate fight.

            A heart is breaking with pain and grief,
            A soul in strong agony cries for relief;
            Echoes no kindred chord above?
            Stretcheth no Hand in responsive love?

            Is our Great God, but a God of stone?
            Are we—His people—dazed and alone?
            Is there no Ear that can hear us cry?
            No Christ,—to succour us e’er we die?

                                                           L. F. Ff.




                         A THEORY OF HAUNTINGS.


Very few persons realise the powerful and long-lasting effects of
human “auras”—those mysterious psychical emanations which are
mentally cognised, and which silently impress one as to the
character of a locality, the idiosyncrasies of a nation, a family,
or an individual. Personal auras are strictly speaking the effects
of the innate, and presumably hidden natures, of individuals, and
are entirely the effluence of soul and mind. A house, or a
neighbourhood, becomes imbued with the individual or collective
auras of its inhabitants, which convey to the psychic senses, and
thence to the mind, a powerful impression of character. At the same
time within the aura of individuals, or families, are indelibly
imprinted their thought-pictures, which may, or may not, have been
embodied in acts; the faces and forms of relatives, friends,
visitors, of the very animals they pet, the image of their pursuits,
in short the whole life. These are imprinted in the _astral_ element
which surrounds each individual soul, as the atmosphere surrounds
our bodies; and as the air we breathe becomes changed in
respiration, so this ethereal atmosphere becomes transformed by
personal impress.

Education, morality, religion, health, disease, happiness or misery,
are largely the effects of the widely diffused auras of individuals
continually given forth into the ambient atmosphere. As a man, or
body of men, think, act, and live, such is the quality of the aura,
or odylic sphere they emanate. This has an effect for good or evil
upon all who approach within its radius; a formative, educating
effect upon the ignorant, if it is of a high, intellectual, or
spiritual quality; or a depressing, stultifying, deforming effect
upon the minds and souls of innocent, or negative sensitives, when
it is of an impure, debased, or brutal character.

Thought governs the world. It is by thought, and its embodiment in
acts, that progress is made. Every thought has its aura, and nothing
can prevent its diffusion in the atmospheres, both the astral and
the natural or physical. Hence being continually surrounded by the
effects of thoughts universally diffused, we are insensibly governed
by their aura of good or evil, and we grow in beauty, or are warped
in deformity, mental and bodily, from infancy, under the moulding
consequences of the local thought-auras of the family, neighbourhood
and nation in which we happen to be born.

Psychometry proves that even stones retain the impression of the
scenes which have been enacted in their neighbourhood. That is, the
stone having been bathed in the psychic emanations of creatures,
human and animal, during, perhaps, centuries, retains such auras
indestructibly in its atmosphere; and a psychometric clairvoyant
will gradually perceive the most trivial details of the more active
life which has daily passed in the vicinity of the stone. A fragment
from the Temple of Diana of Ephesus, for instance, were it
procurable, would enable a good psychometrist to describe every
minute particular of the ancient temple worship and ceremonies. A
stone from the Colosseum held in the hand, or to the forehead of a
psychometrist, would produce a vision of the scenes in the arena
which were wont to attract the Roman population. A fossil of some
antediluvian animal would bring before the mind’s eye surroundings
corresponding to the period in which the animal had lived. In truth,
upon the plane of more ethereal matter adjacent to this, are to be
found the images of all things, subject neither to time nor the
changes of time; and there our image-producing faculties,
temporarily divested of the blinding veil of flesh, may call them up
at will.

The aura of a great crime becomes diffused in the neighbourhood of
its commission, and concealment would be impossible if the psychic
vision of men were open instead of being closed. A picture of the
deed committed becomes impressed upon the astral atmosphere, with
the faces and forms of those engaged in its commission. This effect
is never destroyed, but may be recalled at will by a good
clairvoyante. At the same time the aura of good deeds is equally
powerful and indestructible. The one is like a transitory
convulsion, disturbing the beauty of order and harmony with Nature;
the other is the fixed and equable moral atmosphere arising from
thoughts and actions consonant with wisdom. In short, the aura of
good thoughts and deeds is the _pabulum_ of souls; the invigorating
and supporting air they inspire and respire, producing health,
happiness, mental activity, and inciting to progress. If it were not
for the good on the earth, we might doubtless often cry in
vain—“Heaven help us!”—for we should be so smothered under evil
auras that spiritual breathing, and rapport with purer realms of
life, would be a radical impossibility.

A crime is the insane product of an unbalanced, disordered mind. It
causes a species of astral electric disturbance, which is as
sensibly felt by sensitives as any explosion or convulsion on the
natural plane. Astral, or ethereal molecules become violently
displaced, and forced into new conditions of juxtaposition. A
mysterious terror pervades the air, which affects all neighbouring
minds, even to the very animals. It is as if the living soul of
Nature had been violently wrenched from its normal condition of
peace and happiness, and stood electrified with horror, whilst upon
its veil of ethereal matter is fixed an indestructible image of the
painful tragedy which has been suddenly enacted.

We are, in fact, surrounded, upon the soul plane of life, by an
atmosphere which receives, so to speak, a photographic impression of
even our very thoughts, which is a mirror to reflect our whole life,
an image-world, retaining sounds as well as forms. It may be made
subject to our will, which can call up before the mind, and make
visible to the eye of the soul whatsoever, without exception, we
will to see, to hear, or to know. The phantoms or apparitions of
which we so frequently hear, are matters of fact to all psychic
seers; are things as absolutely existent as any objects on the more
familiar plane of dense matter. Once to realise this great fact, and
to understand some of the laws which would enable us consciously to
control, and illustrate to our satisfaction, certain of the hidden
mysteries of the inner world of ethereal matter, from which our own
proceeds as an effect from a cause, would set us upon a mountain
height of knowledge whence all clouds of superstition, doubt, and
uncertainty, would roll away.

There are many stories extant of certain haunting apparitions which
have been seen at various times during the lapse of centuries,
reappearing again and again in the same families as warnings, or
otherwise; or it may be a mysterious sound, such as the cry of the
“banshee” in Ireland. The popular fallacy regarding such apparitions
is that a _human_ soul, or “spirit”—it may be wrongly called—is
compelled, as a retribution for the commission of some crime, to
remain on the earth haunting the scene of its former sins. Or, if
the visitant be a benevolent ghost, it is supposed that it is some
ancestor or ancestress, ever present in loving watchfulness over the
destinies of the family, giving warning of death or danger. The idea
of a human soul being chained in this melancholy fashion to the
earth is exceedingly repugnant to most minds, and naturally excites
the utmost compassion for the poor ghost which has to wear out so
dreary a doom. Such a hypothesis contradicts all those religious
teachings which assign to souls either a state of absolute
unconscious sleep, until the day of judgment, or an abode,
presumably in a conscious state, in heaven or hell. It contradicts
all those more modern teachings of “progress” after death, of the
gradual ascension of the soul to its place of rest. If we accept the
ideas of Eastern teachers concerning those occult mysteries—that the
higher self, the spiritualised entity, gradually separates from its
more animal, or lower principles of organism, which adhere together
for a longer or shorter period as a shell-like or shadowy
personality—even then, these principles or ethereal molecules which
go to form an astral body, disintegrate after a time. They would not
be likely, at all events, to endure over a century. Apparitions of
persons deceased _within_ a century might be considered as
essentially ghosts, or shades—the shadowy, sidereal shapes of
personalities passed away from the physical plane, and in a
condition of gradual separation from all that can attach them to the
earth. And it is presumable that a phantom which is seen repeatedly
during the lapse of centuries, is merely a reflection in the astral
light, called up by the will of a seer; or projected upon the plane
of soul-vision either by some psychological disturbance, or by some
change of condition on the part of those who see the phantom. The
immediate action may be due to “_elementals_,” those mysterious
entities called by Liebnitz “Monads,” which are in close attendance
upon mankind, and have so much to do with his very existence that he
would fare but indifferently without them. Not only are they as
intimately consociated with him as his own thoughts, but certain
grades of them depend upon him also for their existence. These
beings often become tutelary, or “house-spirits,” and the _rôle_ of
re-appearing again and again, as a sort of hereditary ghost, to give
warning of death or danger, is not incompatible with their condition
of existence. Time does not exist for them, and one century would be
like any other. They live in the personal or family aura, and become
intimately blended with the daily lives of its members. When, as in
the case of royal or noble houses, the family aura remains
undisturbed in its ancient palaces or castles during centuries, a
haunting elemental would find it an easy matter to make itself
visible, frequently by a semi-materialisation, or a condensation of
the ethereal atoms of its body. In such a case it would be seen
objectively by anyone who happened to be present. In other cases,
when an apparition is only a reflection in the astral light, a
sensitive in moments of abnormal or psychic lucidity would perceive
it. Others sympathetically inclined would perceive the same. At
length, after repeated similar visions, the locality would get the
name of being haunted. The image so repeatedly beheld becomes fixed
in the atmosphere of that particular spot. Upon entering a locality
with such a reputation a species of psychological inebriation would
assail every individual so constituted as to fall under the effects
of the aura already established, and they would then always behold
the spectre thus ideally produced. These mental or astral spectres
need not necessarily be merely immovable pictures. They will move,
or walk, threaten, or act a pantomime exactly as they may have the
reputation of doing; or as the person who beholds them expects or
imagines them to be doing.

In some respects these apparitions or warning cries may be mental
legacies left indelibly impressed in the astral light by the
powerful will of a departed ancestor, friendly or inimical, as a
blessing or a curse; or even by a member of some alien family, as a
pursuing Nemesis which falls as a retribution upon the perpetrator
of evil, but can possess no power over the innocent and good.

                                                    FRANK FAIRHOLME.

                        (_To be continued._)

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                 THE ESOTERIC CHARACTER OF THE GOSPELS.

                                III.


No one can be regarded as a Christian unless he professes, or is
supposed to profess, belief in Jesus, by baptism, and in salvation,
“through the blood of Christ.” To be considered a good Christian,
one has, as a _conditio sine quâ non_, to show faith in the dogmas
expounded by the Church and to profess them; after which a man is at
liberty to lead a private and public life on principles
diametrically opposite to those expressed in the Sermon on the
Mount. The chief point and that which is demanded of him is, that he
should have—or _pretend to have_—a blind faith in, and veneration
for, the ecclesiastical teachings of his special Church.

                 “Faith is the key of Christendom,”

saith Chaucer, and the penalty for lacking it is as clearly stated
as words can make it, in St. Mark’s Gospel, Chapter xvi., verse
16th: “He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned.”

It troubles the Church very little that the most careful search for
these words in the oldest texts during the last centuries, remained
fruitless; or, that the recent revision of the Bible led to a
unanimous conviction in the truth-seeking and truth-loving scholars
employed in that task, that no such _un-Christ_-like sentence was to
be found, except in some of the latest, fraudulent texts. The good
Christian people had assimilated the consoling words, and they had
become the very pith and marrow of their charitable souls. To take
away the hope of eternal damnation, for all others except
themselves, from these chosen vessels of the God of Israel, was like
taking their very life. The truth-loving and God-fearing revisers
got scared; they left the forged passage (an interpolation of eleven
verses, from the 9th to the 20th), and satisfied their consciences
with a foot-note remark of a very equivocal character, one that
would grace the work and do honour to the diplomatic faculties of
the craftiest Jesuits. It tells the “believer” that:—

  “The two oldest Greek MSS. and some other authorities OMIT from
  verse 9 to the end. Some authorities _have a different ending_ to
  the Gospel.”[170]—

—and explains no further.

-----

Footnote 170:

  Vide “Gospel according to St. Mark,” in the _revised_ edition
  printed for the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, 1881.

-----

But the two “oldest Greek MSS.” _omit_ the verses _nolens volens_,
as these _have never existed_. And the learned and truth-loving
revisers know this better than any of us do; yet the wicked
falsehood is printed at the very seat of Protestant Divinity, and it
is allowed to go on, glaring into the faces of coming generations of
students of theology and, hence, into those of their future
parishioners. Neither can be, nor are they deceived by it, yet both
_pretend_ belief in the authenticity of the cruel words worthy of a
_theological Satan_. And this Satan-Moloch is their own _God of
infinite mercy and justice_ in Heaven, and the incarnate symbol of
love and charity on Earth—blended in one!

Truly mysterious are your paradoxical ways, oh—Churches of Christ!

I have no intention of repeating here stale arguments and logical
_exposés_ of the whole theological scheme; for all this has been
done, over and over again, and in a most excellent way, by the
ablest “Infidels” of England and America. But I may briefly repeat
a prophecy which is a self-evident result of the present state of
men’s minds in Christendom. Belief in the Bible _literally_, and
in a _carnalised_ Christ, will not last a quarter of a century
longer. The Churches will have to part with their cherished
dogmas, or the 20th century will witness the downfall and ruin of
all Christendom, and with it, belief even in a Christos, as pure
Spirit. The very name has now become obnoxious, and theological
Christianity must die out, _never to resurrect again_ in its
present form. This, in itself, would be the happiest solution of
all, were there no danger from the natural reaction which is sure
to follow: crass materialism will be the consequence and the
result of centuries of blind faith, unless the loss of old ideals
is replaced by other ideals, unassailable, because _universal_,
and built on the rock of eternal truths instead of the shifting
sands of human fancy. Pure immateriality must replace, in the end,
the terrible anthropomorphism of those ideals in the conceptions
of our modern dogmatists. Otherwise, why should Christian
dogmas—the perfect counterpart of those belonging to other
exoteric and pagan religions—claim any superiority? The bodies of
all these were built upon the same astronomical and physiological
(or phallic) symbols. Astrologically, every religious dogma the
world over, may be traced to, and located in, the Zodiacal signs
and the Sun. And so long as the science of comparative symbology
or any theology has only two keys to open the mysteries of
religious dogmas—and these two only very partially mastered, how
can a line of demarcation be drawn, or any difference made between
the religions of say, Chrishna and Christ, between salvation
through the blood of the “first-born primeval male” of one faith,
and that of the “only _begotten_ Son” of the other, far younger,
religion?

Study the Vedas; read even the superficial, often disfigured
writings of our great Orientalists, and think over what you will
have learnt. Behold Brahmans, Egyptian Hierophants, and Chaldean
Magi, teaching several thousand years before our era that the gods
themselves had been only mortals (in previous births) until they won
their immortality by _offering their blood to their Supreme God_ or
chief. The “Book of the Dead,” teaches that mortal man “became one
with the gods through an interflow of a common life in the common
blood of the two.” Mortals gave the blood of their first-born sons
in sacrifice to the Gods. In his _Hinduism_, p. 35, Professor Monier
Williams, translating from the _Taitiriya Brâhmana_, writes:—“By
means of the sacrifice the gods obtained heaven.” And in the _Tandya
Brâhmana_:—“The lord of creatures offered himself a sacrifice for
the gods.”... And again in the _Satapatha Brâhmana_:—“He who,
knowing this, sacrifices with the _Purusha-madha_ or the sacrifice
of the primeval male, becomes everything.”

Whenever I hear the Vedic rites discussed and called “disgusting
human sacrifices,” and cannibalism (_sic._), I feel always inclined
to ask, where’s the difference? Yet there is one, in fact; for while
Christians are compelled to accept the allegorical (though, when
understood, highly philosophical) drama of the New Testament
Crucifixion, as that of Abraham and Isaac literally,[171]
Brahmanism—its philosophical schools at any rate—teaches its
adherents, that this (_pagan_) sacrifice of the “primeval male” is a
purely allegorical and philosophical symbol. Read in their
dead-letter meaning, the four gospels are simply slightly altered
versions of what the Church proclaims as Satanic plagiarisms (by
anticipation) of Christian dogmas in Pagan religions. Materialism
has a perfect right to find in all of them the same sensual worship
and “solar” myths as anywhere else. Analysed and criticised
superficially and on its dead-letter face, Professor Joly (“Man
before Metals,” pp. 189-190) finding in the _Swastika_, the _crux
ansata_, and the cross pure and simple, mere sexual symbols—is
justified in speaking as he does. Seeing that “the father of the
sacred fire (in India) bore the name of _Twashtri_, that is the
divine carpenter who made the _Swastika_ and the _Pramantha_, whose
friction produced the divine child _Agni_, in Latin _Ignis_; that
his mother was named _Maya_; he himself, styled _Akta_ (_anointed_,
or _Christos_) after the priests had poured upon his head the
spirituous _soma_ and on his body butter purified by sacrifice”;
seeing all this he has a full right to remark that:—

  “The close resemblance which exists between certain ceremonies of
  the worship of _Agni_ and certain rites of the Catholic religion
  may be explained by their common origin. _Agni_ in the condition
  of _Akta_, or anointed, is suggestive of Christ; _Maya_, Mary, his
  mother; _Twashtri_, St. Joseph, the carpenter of the Bible.”

-----

Footnote 171:

  _Vide_ “The Soldier’s Daughter,” in this number, by the Rev. T. G.
  Headley, and notice the desperate protest of this _true_
  Christian, against the _literal_ acceptance of the “blood
  sacrifices,” “Atonement by blood,” etc., in the Church of England.
  The reaction begins: another _sign of the times_.

-----

Has the professor of the Science Faculty of Toulouse explained
anything by drawing attention to that which anyone can see? Of
course not. But if, in his ignorance of the esoteric meaning of the
allegory he has added nothing to human knowledge, he has on the
other hand destroyed faith in many of his pupils in both the
“_divine_ origin” of Christianity and its Church and helped to
increase the number of Materialists. For surely, no man, once he
devotes himself to such comparative studies, can regard the religion
of the West in any light but that of a pale and enfeebled copy of
older and nobler philosophies.

The origin of all religions—Judaeo-Christianity included—is to be
found in a few primeval truths, not one of which can be explained
apart from all the others, as each is a complement of the rest in
some one detail. And they are all, more or less, broken rays of the
same Sun of truth, and their beginnings have to be sought in the
archaic records of the Wisdom-religion. Without the light of the
latter, the greatest scholars can see but the skeletons thereof
covered with masks of fancy, and based mostly on personified
Zodiacal signs.

A thick film of allegory and _blinds_, the “dark sayings” of
fiction and parable, thus covers the original esoteric texts from
which the New Testament—_as now known_—was compiled. Whence, then,
the Gospels, the life of Jesus of Nazareth? Has it not been
repeatedly stated that no human, _mortal_ brain could have
invented the life of the Jewish Reformer, followed by the awful
drama on Calvary? We say, on the authority of the esoteric Eastern
School, that all this came from the Gnostics, as far as the name
Christos and the astronomico-mystical allegories are concerned,
and from the writings of the ancient _Tanaïm_ as regards the
Kabalistic connection of Jesus or Joshua, with the Biblical
personifications. One of these is the mystic esoteric name of
Jehovah—not the present fanciful God of the profane Jews ignorant
of their own mysteries, the God accepted by the still more
ignorant Christians—but the compound Jehovah of the pagan
Initiation. This is proven very plainly by the glyphs or mystic
combinations of various signs which have survived to this day in
the Roman Catholic hieroglyphics.

The Gnostic Records contained the epitome of the chief scenes
enacted during the mysteries of Initiation, since the memory of man;
though even that was given out invariably under the garb of
semi-allegory, whenever entrusted to parchment or paper. But the
ancient Tanaïm, the Initiates from whom the wisdom of the Kabala
(_oral tradition_) was obtained by the later Talmudists, had in
their possession the secrets of the mystery language, and it is _in
this language that the Gospels_ were written.[172] He alone who has
mastered the esoteric cypher of antiquity—the secret meaning of the
numerals, a common property at one time of all nations—has the full
proof of the genius which was displayed in the blending of the
purely Egypto-Jewish, Old Testament allegories and names, and those
of the pagan-Greek Gnostics, the most refined of all the mystics of
that day. Bishop Newton proves it himself quite innocently, by
showing that “St. Barnabas, the companion of St. Paul, in his
epistle (ch. ix.) discovers ... the name of Jesus crucified in the
number 318,” namely, Barnabas finds it in the mystic Greek I H T—the
_tau_ being the glyph of the cross. On this, a Kabalist, the author
of an unpublished MS. on the Key of Formation of the Mystery
Language, observes:—“But this is but a play upon the Hebrew letters
_Jodh_, _Chith_, and _Shin_, from whence the I H S as the monogram
of Christ coming down to our day, and this reads as יהש or 381, the
sum of the letters being 318 or the number of Abraham and his Satan,
and of Joshua and his Amalek ... also the number of Jacob and his
antagonist ... (Godfrey Higgins gives the authority for the number
608).... It is the number of Melchizedek’s name, for the value of
the last is 304 and Melchizedek was the priest of the most high God,
without beginning nor ending of days.” The solution and secret of
Melchizedek are found in the fact that “in the ancient Pantheons the
two planets which had existed from eternity (_æonic_ eternity) and
were eternal, were the Sun and the Moon, or Osiris and Isis, hence
the terms of _without beginning nor ending of days_. 304 multiplied
by two is 608. So also the numbers in the word Seth, who was a type
of the year. There are a number of authorities for the number 888 as
applying to the name of Jesus Christ, and as said this is in
antagonism to the 666 of the Anti-Christ.... The staple value in the
name of Joshua was the number 365, the indication of the Solar year,
while Jehovah delighted in being the indication of the Lunar
year—and Jesus Christ was both Joshua and Jehovah in the Christian
Pantheon....”

-----

Footnote 172:

  Thus while the three Synoptics display a combination of the pagan
  Greek and Jewish symbologies the _Revelation_ is written in the
  mystery language of the Tanaïm—the relic of Egyptian and Chaldean
  wisdom—and St John’s Gospel is purely Gnostic.

-----

This is but an illustration to our point to prove that the Christian
application of the compound name Jesus-Christ is all based on
Gnostic and Eastern mysticism. It was only right and natural that
Chroniclers like the initiated Gnostics, pledged to secresy, should
veil or _cloak_ the final meaning of their oldest and most sacred
teachings. The right of the Church fathers to cover the whole with
an epitheme of euhemerized fancy is rather more dubious.[173] The
Gnostic Scribe and Chronicler deceived no one. Every Initiate into
the Archaic gnosis—whether of the pre-Christian or post-Christian
period—knew well the value of every word of the “mystery-language.”
For these Gnostics—the inspirers of primitive Christianity—were “the
most cultured, the most learned and most wealthy of the Christian
name,” as Gibbon has it. Neither they, nor their humbler followers,
were in danger of accepting the dead letter of their own texts. But
it was different with the victims of the fabricators of what is now
called _orthodox_ and _historic_ Christianity. Their successors have
all been made to fall into the mistakes of the “foolish Galatians”
reproved by Paul, who, as he tells them (Galat. iii. 1-5), having
begun (by believing) in the Spirit (of Christos), “ended by
believing in _the flesh_,”—_i.e._, a _corporeal_ Christ. For such is
the true meaning of the Greek sentence,[174] “ἐναρξάμενοι Πνεύματι
νῦν σαρκι ἐπιτελεῖσθε.” That Paul was a gnostic, a founder of a new
sect of _gnosis_ which recognized, as all other gnostic sects did, a
“Christ-Spirit,” though it went against its opponents, the rival
sects, is sufficiently clear to all but dogmatists and theologians.
Nor is it less clear that the primitive teachings of Jesus, whenever
he may have lived, could be discovered only in Gnostic teachings;
against which discovery, the falsifiers who dragged down Spirit into
matter, thus degrading the noble philosophy of primeval
Wisdom-Religion, have taken ample precautions from the first. The
works of Basilides alone—“The philosopher devoted to the
contemplation of Divine things,” as Clement describes him—the 24
volumes of his _interpretations upon the Gospels_—were all burned by
order of the Church, Eusebius tells us (H. E., iv. 7).

-----

Footnote 173:

  “The claim of Christianity to possess Divine authority rests on
  the ignorant belief that the mystical Christ could and did become
  a Person, whereas the gnosis proves the corporeal Christ to be
  only a counterfeit Presentment of the trans-corporeal man;
  consequently, historical portraiture is, and ever must be, a fatal
  mode of falsifying and discrediting the Spiritual Reality.” (G.
  Massey, “Gnostic and Historic Christianity.”)

Footnote 174:

  This sentence analyzed means “Shall you, who in the beginning
  looked to the _Christ-Spirit_, now _end_ by believing in a Christ
  of flesh,” or it means nothing. The verb ἐπιτελοῦμαι has not the
  meaning of “becoming perfect,” but of “ending by,” becoming so.
  Paul’s lifelong struggle with Peter and others, and what he
  himself tells of his vision of a Spiritual Christ and not of Jesus
  of Nazareth, as in the _Acts_—are so many proofs of this.

-----

As these _Interpretations_ were written at a time when the Gospels
we have now, were not yet in existence,[175] here is a good proof
that the Evangel, the doctrines of which were delivered to Basilides
by the Apostle Matthew, and Glaucus, the disciple of Peter (_Clemens
Al._ “_Strom._” vii. 7, § 106), must have differed widely from the
present New Testament Nor can these doctrines be judged by the
distorted accounts of them left to posterity by Tertullian. Yet even
the little this partisan fanatic gives, shows the chief gnostic
doctrines to be identical, under their own peculiar terminology and
personations, with those of the _Secret Doctrine_ of the East. For,
discussing Basilides, the “pious, god-like, theosophic philosopher,”
as Clement of Alexandria thought him, Tertullian exclaims:

  “After this, Basilides, the _heretic_, broke loose.[176] He
  asserted that there is a Supreme God, by name Abraxas, by whom
  Mind (_Mahat_) was created, which the Greeks call _Nous_. From
  this emanated the Word; from the Word, Providence; from
  Providence, Virtue and Wisdom; from these two again, Virtues,
  _Principalities_,[177] _and Powers_ were made; thence infinite
  productions and emissions of angels. Among the lowest angels,
  indeed, and those that made this world, he sets _last of all_ the
  god of the Jews, whom he denies to be God himself, affirming that
  he is but one of the angels.”[178] (Isis Unv. vol. ii.)

-----

Footnote 175:

  See “Supern. Relig.,” vol. ii., chap. “Basilides.”

Footnote 176:

  It was asked in “Isis Unveiled,” were not the views of the
  Phrygian Bishop Montanus, also deemed a HERESY by the Church of
  Rome? It is quite extraordinary to see how easily that Church
  encourages the abuse of one _heretic_, Tertullian, against another
  _heretic_, Basilides, when the abuse happens to further her own
  object.

Footnote 177:

  Does not Paul himself speak of “_Principalities_ and _Powers_ in
  heavenly places” (Ephesians iii. 10; i. 21), and confess that
  there be _gods_ many and _Lords_ many (Kurioi)? And angels, powers
  (Dunameis), and _Principalities_? (See 1 Corinthians, viii. 5; and
  Epistle to Romans, viii. 38.)

Footnote 178:

  Tertullian: “Præscript.” It is undeniably owing only to a
  remarkably casuistical, sleight-of-hand-like argument that
  Jehovah, who in the _Kabala_ is simply a Sephiroth, the third,
  left-hand power among the Emanations (Binah), has been elevated to
  the dignity of the _One_ absolute God. Even in the Bible he is but
  one of the _Elohim_ (See Genesis, chapter iii. v. 22. “The Lord
  God” making no difference between himself and others.)

-----

Another proof of the claim that the Gospel of Matthew in the usual
Greek texts is not the original gospel written in Hebrew, is given
by no less an authority than S. Jerome (or Hieronymus). The
suspicion of a conscious and gradual _euhemerization_ of the Christ
principle ever since the beginning, grows into a conviction, once
that one becomes acquainted with a certain confession contained in
book ii. of the “Comment. to Matthew” by Hieronymus. For we find in
it the proofs of a deliberate substitution of the whole gospel, the
one now in the Canon having been evidently re-written by this too
zealous Church Father.[179] He says that he was sent toward the
close of the fourth century by “their Felicities,” the Bishops
Chromatius and Heliodorus to Cæsarea, with the mission to compare
the Greek text (the only one they ever had) with the Hebrew original
version preserved by the Nazarenes in their library, and to
translate it. He translated it, but under protest; for, as he says,
the _Evangel_ “exhibited matter _not for edification, but for
destruction.”_[180] The “destruction” of what? Of the dogma that
Jesus of Nazareth and the _Christos_ are one—evidently; hence for
the “destruction” of the newly planned religion.[181] In this same
letter the Saint (who advised his converts to kill their fathers,
trample on the bosom that fed them, by walking over the bodies of
their mothers, if the parents stood as an obstacle between their
sons and Christ)—admits that Matthew did not wish his gospel to be
_openly written_, hence that the MS. _was a secret_ one. But while
admitting also that this gospel “was written in Hebrew characters
and _by the hand of himself_” (_Matthew_), yet in another place he
contradicts himself and assures posterity that _as it was tampered
with, and re-written by a disciple of Manicheus, named Seleucus_ ...
“the ears of the Church properly refused to listen to it.”
(_Hieron._, “Comment. to Matthew,” book ii. chapter xii., 13.)

-----

Footnote 179:

  This is _history_. How far that _re-writing_ of, and tampering
  with, the primitive gnostic fragments which are now become the New
  Testament, went, may be inferred by reading “Supernatural
  Religion,” which went through over twenty-three editions, if I
  mistake not. The host of authorities for it given by the author,
  is simply appalling. The list of the English and German Bible
  critics alone seems endless.

Footnote 180:

  The chief details are given in “Isis Unveiled,” vol. ii pp.
  180-183, _et seq._ Truly faith in the infallibility of the Church
  must be _stone-blind_—or it could not have failed being killed
  and—dying.

Footnote 181:

  See Hieronymus: “De Viros,” illust. cap. 3; Olshausen: “Neuen
  Test.,” p. 32. The Greek text of Matthew’s Gospel is the only one
  used or ever possessed by the Church.

-----

No wonder that the very meaning of the terms _Chrestos_ and
_Christos_, and the bearing of both on “Jesus of Nazareth,” a name
coined out of Joshua the _Nazar_, has now become a dead letter for
all with the exception of non-Christian Occultists. For even the
Kabalists have no original data now to rely upon. The _Zohar_ and
the Kabala have been remodelled by Christian hands out of
recognition; and were it not for a copy of the Chaldean _Book of
Numbers_ there would remain no better than garbled accounts. Let not
our Brothers, the so-called Christian Kabalists of England and
France, many of whom are Theosophists, protest too vehemently; for
_this is history_ (See Munk). It is as foolish to maintain, as some
German Orientalists and modern critics still do, that the Kabala has
never existed before the day of the Spanish Jew, Moses de Leon,
accused of having forged this pseudograph in the 13th century, as to
claim that any of the Kabalistical works now in our possession are
as original as they were when Rabbi Simeon Ben Jochaï delivered the
“traditions” to his son and followers. Not a single of these books
is immaculate, none has escaped mutilation by Christian hands. Munk,
one of the most learned and able critics of his day on this subject,
proves it, while protesting as we do, against the assumption that it
is a post-Christian forgery, for he says:

“It appears evident to us that the author made use of ancient
documents, and among these of certain _Midraschim_ or collections of
traditions and Biblical expositions, which we do not now possess.”

After which, quoting from Tholuck (l. c. pp. 24 and 31), he adds:

“Haya Gaon, who died in 1038, is to our knowledge the first author
who developed the theory of the Sephiroth and he gave to them the
names which we find again to be among the Kabalists (Tellenik, Moses
ben Schem Tob di Leon, p. 13, note 5); this doctor, _who had
intimate intercourse with the Syrian and Chaldean Christian savans_,
was enabled by these last to acquire a knowledge of some of the
Gnostic writings.”

Which “Gnostic writings” and esoteric tenets passed part and parcel
into the Kabalistic works, with many more modern interpolations that
we now find in the _Zohar_, as Munk well proves. The Kabala is
Christian now, not Jewish.

Thus, what with several generations of most active Church Fathers
ever working at the destruction of old documents and the
preparation of new passages to be interpolated in those which
happened to survive, there remains of the _Gnostics_—the
legitimate offspring of the Archaic Wisdom-religion—but a few
unrecognisable shreds. But a particle of genuine gold will glitter
for ever; and, however garbled the accounts left by Tertullian and
Epiphanius of the Doctrines of the “Heretics,” an occultist can
yet find even in them traces of those primeval truths which were
once universally imparted during the mysteries of Initiation.
Among other works with most suggestive allegories in them, we have
still the so-called _Apocryphal Gospels_, and the last discovered
as the most precious relic of Gnostic literature, a fragment
called _Pistis-Sophia_, “Knowledge-Wisdom.”

In my next article upon the Esoteric character of the Gospels, I
hope to be able to demonstrate that those who translate _Pistis_ by
“Faith,” are utterly wrong. The word “faith” as _grace_ or something
to be believed in through unreasoned or blind faith, is a word that
dates only since Christianity. Nor has Paul ever used this term in
this sense in his Epistles; and Paul was undeniably—an INITIATE.

                                                            H. P. B.

(_To be continued._)

                           =Reviews.=

                                  ---

                        “SPIRIT REVEALED.”[182]

-----

Footnote 182:

  By Captain Wm. C. Eldon Serjeant. Published by Geo. Redway, York
  Street, Covent Garden. Price 7s. 6d.

-----

The new work by Captain Serjeant (New Dispensationist and Fellow of
the Theosophical Society) is certainly what he describes it as
being, the “book for the age,” if, at least, it be admitted that the
age requires arousing. I have no hesitation in saying that no such
book has before been presented to the public. It sounds forth like a
trumpet to arouse the sleepers from their crass forgetfulness of
every law of Brotherly Love and Spiritual Truth. One might almost
imagine, in reading it, the sensation produced upon his
contemporaries by Ezekiel, when first he gave forth his prophecies
to a wondering world; or by Bunyan, when he startled the English of
his time with the magnificent allegory of the “Pilgrim’s Progress.”
It is true that here and there whole passages are bodily
transplanted from St John’s “Revelation,” but they are so
marvellously dovetailed into the context that, without constant
reference to the Apocalypse, it is almost impossible to say where
the quotations begin and where they end. From a literary point of
view this may be a fault; but if we recognise the one Spirit
speaking through many voices we cannot deny that the same truth may
call for repetition and expansion, and the same Spirit may emit
again, with fuller details, what it has emitted before.

Were this an _orthodox_ journal, I am aware that I dare not advance
such tenets for fear the luckless editors should be deemed
blasphemous by their subscribers. But LUCIFER at least must allow
that the Universal Spirit has not in the sacred books of olden times
breathed its last words. Then, again, Captain Serjeant disclaims all
_personal_ responsibility for these utterances when he states that
the very passages which the reader will find the most glowing in the
fierceness of their heat, are not words conceived by his own
personality, but given to him by processes well-known to
Spiritualists as “direct” and “automatic” writing.

The root idea of the volume is that _one Spirit_ permeates all men
and all things, and that this Spirit is that of Wisdom, Love and
Truth; yet that this Spirit is denied or hidden out of sight by its
own children; and that not till it is again made manifest in the
public affairs of the world, can mankind hope for that happiness
which it is now vainly pursuing in every other direction save the
right one, namely, _within_. The dedication of the book sounds the
key-note of its contents; for it is inscribed to “Love, the Queen of
Heaven; and to Faith, the Star of the Soul.” The inscription closes
with the words “Follow after Love—Love never faileth,” and the
reader is intentionally left to supply the third term, “God is
Love.” It is in this conception of the Supreme that we shall find
the whole meaning of the work. The words “God” and the “Father,” as
also the “Mother” and “Christ,” are employed pretty freely; yet with
this clue, we shall see that the writer believes in no _personal_
Deity, but in one Universal Spirit, of whom each intelligence is a
manifestation in the flesh, little though such being may show or
know it.

It is impossible in a short review to touch upon all the striking
features of “Spirit Revealed,” and I must, therefore, content myself
with noticing but a very few, referring the readers of LUCIFER to
the book itself; for they will find in it a “Guide, Philosopher and
Friend.”

The preface reminds one of a passage in Ezekiel too often forgotten.
“And they were _scattered_, because there is no shepherd: and they
became meat to all the beasts of the field, _when they were
scattered_.” Captain Serjeant points out the necessity of a bond of
_union_ in these words:—

“The contentions amongst many religious sects have been to a
considerable extent responsible for the rise, growth, and
development of numerous societies of professed religious, as well as
of an anti-religious character. Each and every one of these
Societies possesses its own peculiar views on the Deity, as well as
on life and death, and though the majority of the more enlightened
of them have evidently the same fundamental principles underlying
the teachings which they endeavour to inculcate in the minds of men
generally, yet the manifest confusion generated by what are
seemingly conflicting opinions, tends, unhappily, to increase the
bewilderment and distrust experienced in connection with the truths
of the Spirit throughout all classes of Society in the nineteenth
century.”

He then proceeds to claim for his work that it “places in the hands
of Christian Ministers” (Note, that he employs the word “Christ”
continually in the sense of the divine Spirit within mankind) “many
powerful weapons wherewith to establish and uphold the universal
Church of the Living God.” The preface, which is conceived
throughout in the most elevated style of address, concludes with an
appeal to “all who, in their hearts, are ready and willing to labour
loyally in the interests of their less enlightened fellow creatures
existing in this ignorant, selfish, and love-starved world.”

After a brief Introduction, couched in a prophetic form, the writer
deals with the nature of God, man, matter, the power of Spirit
manifest in and through matter, the omnipresence of Spirit, the
Intelligent Principle, and the Seven Rays of Truth. In these seven
chapters is comprised what I may call the theoretical part of the
book. The following quotations must suffice to show in what vein
these world-riddles are worked out. “We are endued with two natures,
one of which is human or mortal, and subject to chemical change,
commonly termed dissolution or death; the other, immortal or
spiritual, capable of adding to itself by an inherent power to
comprehend the nature, qualities and capabilities of all created
visible things, which comprehension signifies the reconversion of
all material existences into true ideas.” “It is an absolute fact
that _everything is literal_. To the spiritual man symbols are
literal; they are indeed more literal than the natural man considers
what he terms facts or realities.“ ”_The ultimate atom is Spirit._
Finite wills are points on which the Infinite Will acts, for no
creature can will without being a manifestation of the Supreme
Intelligence who first wills that it shall will.“

The subsequent portion of the book deals partly with an expansion of
the general tenets laid down in these seven chapters, and their
application to the present _practical_ needs of the world; partly
with prophetic utterances as to the near approach of an awakening of
the peoples to their real position as members of one great Spiritual
community. Under the first heading a very important document is
presented to the world, being a form for enrolment in the “Universal
Rights Support Association,” which if generally adopted in the true
spirit would indeed herald the millennium. Under the second heading
in Chapter XIII. a remarkable reading of part of the Apocalypse is
given, commencing with the words from Daniel, “and at that time
shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which standeth for the
children of the people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such
as never was since there was a Nation even to that same time: At
that time the people shall be delivered, every one that shall be
found written in the book.” Such words as these are not to be
understood on the first reading, and indeed will probably meet with
nothing but derision from many. Yet LUCIFER will see in them another
and a most powerful battery opened against the powers of darkness to
wage war with which is his own chief mission.

In conclusion I can only add that, in my humble opinion, few men
have shown such courage in facing the ridicule of society as Captain
Serjeant, and that he has chosen to risk the forfeiture of a place
in social circles to which his right is undeniable, rather than give
way to the temptation to prophesy smooth things. He is one of the
foremost in the New Dispensation movement, and a man whose working
power must be enormous, if it be measured by the labours which he
daily and voluntarily undertakes. His peculiar style of writing lays
him open to the accusation of calling himself the coming Messiah. If
his accusers would only meet him face to face, they would find that
no man is humbler than he, and none is more fully conscious nor more
loudly proclaims that “individuality is but an emanation from the
one Great Spirit,” in which alone he recognises the true Christ, the
Saviour of the world. He would tell them that in _themselves_ is
incarnate the Spirit of Wisdom, and that it only awaits its union
with the Spirit of Love, to manifest itself as the Spirit of Truth.
How little he values his own personality and his own well-being or
fame, those who know him best can testify. If Theosophy is to be a
living thing, and not a mere intellectual amusement, it is by such
men as this that it must be followed. Were there many such the world
would soon be freed from its misery, by the force of their united
volition. Verily their reward is at hand.

                                               WILLIAM ASHTON ELLIS.

                        -----------------------

           TRAITÉ ÉLÉMENTAIRE DE SCIENCE OCCULTE, par PAPUS.

       Published by Georges Carré, 58, Rue St Audré des Arts.

This, the latest of the admirable publications now being issued by
M. Georges Carré, under the auspices of “L’Isis,” the French branch
of the Theosophical Society, deserves a hearty welcome at the hands
of all students of Occultism, as it fulfils the promise of its
title, which is high praise indeed.

The book is written and constructed on correct Occult principles; it
contains seven chapters, three devoted to theory and four to the
application and practical illustration of that theory.

After an eloquent introductory chapter, M. Papus proceeds to lead
his readers by easy transitions into the mysterious science of
numbers. This—the first key to _practical_ Occultism—is at once the
simplest and the most subtle of sciences. Hitherto there has existed
no really elementary exposition of its primary, fundamental
principles. And, as this science of numbers lies at the base of
every one of those applications of occult science which are still to
any extent studied, a knowledge of it is almost indispensable.

Astrology, Chiromancy, Cartomancy, in short, all the arts of
divination, rest ultimately on numbers and their occult powers, as a
foundation.

And yet, though the students of each of these several arts must,
perforce, acquire a certain knowledge of numerical science, yet very
few of them possess that knowledge in a systematic and co-ordinated
form.

Of course M. Papus does not, and cannot, give anything like a
complete textbook on the subject, but he does give, in clear
language, the fundamental guiding principles of this science.
Moreover, he illustrates the methods of numerical working, by
numerous and well-chosen examples—an aid which is simply invaluable
to the student who is making his first entrance into this field of
study. In the third chapter these abstract formulæ are given as they
relate to man, as an individual, and as a member of that larger
whole, called humanity. This completes the purely theoretical
portion of the book, and in the fourth chapter we are shown how
these general principles work in their application.

Signs and symbols are proved to be the _natural_ expressions of
ideas in accordance with fixed laws, and the method is applied by
way of illustration to the interpretation of the Emerald Tablet of
Hermes Trismegistus. The relation between number and form is shown
as exhibited in geometrical figures, and M. Papus gives a clue to a
subject which has puzzled many—the actual _influence_ in life of
_names_. This chapter is most enthralling, but lack of space forbids
any detailed comments, for so much would have to be said.

Chapters five and six are almost equally interesting; full of
lucid illustration and valuable hints to the practical student,
they form almost a manual in themselves. But on one point M. Papus
is certainly in error, though, since it is on a matter of history,
its importance is relatively small. He attaches _far_ too much
weight to the Jews and to their national system of occultism—the
Kabbala. True, that system is the most familiar in Europe; but it
has been so much overlaid by a semi-esoteric veil, and additions
and interpolations by Christian Occultists, that its inner
grossness is lost sight of; so that students are apt to be led
away from the truth, and to form erroneous conceptions as to the
value and meaning of many symbols, the importance of which in
practical work is very great. What esoteric knowledge the Jews
possessed, they derived either from the Egyptians or the
Babylonians during the captivity. Hence M. Saint-Ives d’Alvidre,
his gigantic erudition notwithstanding, is altogether mistaken in
the stress he lays on their knowledge, their place in history and
their mission as a nation. This, however, is but a matter of small
moment in a book, the practical value of which it would be
difficult to over-estimate.

                        -----------------------

                        THE NEW WAGNER JOURNAL.

We have received from Mr. Geo. Redway, Publisher, 15, York Street,
W.C., the prospectus of a new Journal, “THE MEISTER,” which is about
to be edited for the _Richard Wagner Society_ by Mr. Wm. Ashton
Ellis, author of “Theosophy in the Works of Richard Wagner”
(Theosophical Society’s Transactions), and of “Richard Wagner as
Poet, Musician and Mystic,” read before the Society of Fine Arts. As
Mr. Ellis is a member of the Committee of the Wagner Society, and a
member of Council of the London Lodge of the Theosophical Society,
we hope that prominence will be given to the esoteric side of
Richard Wagner’s works; and for this hope we have justification not
only in the pamphlets above alluded to but also in the words of the
prospectus of the MEISTER. “Religion, Art, and Social Questions are
in these works (Wagner’s) presented to his readers under novel
aspects, and such as are of the greatest interest to a generation
which is eagerly scanning the horizon for some cloud which may be
the harbinger of refreshing rain long looked for to quench the
thirst of the arid sands of Materialistic Science.”

The prospectus presents us with a specimen of the cover of the
journal, designed by Mr. Percy Anderson, an artist who has already
made a name for himself in other walks of the decorative art, and
whose first attempt in this direction shows great power of broad
effects of light and shade, and considerable expertness in
symbolism. We hope in our next issue to review the first number of
the MEISTER which, we understand, will appear on the 13th inst. It
will be published for the present _quarterly_, at the subscription
rate of 4s. per annum, but we trust that it may shortly become a
full-fledged “monthly.”

[Illustration: decorative separator]

                            NEW YEAR’S EVE.

         All sound was hushed, except the sad sad bells,
         Chanting their requiem o’er the dying year;
         Alone I knelt beneath the watchful stars,
         And held communion with my restless soul.

         *     *     *     *     *

         The Old Year died, the sad bells all were stilled,
         And o’er a silent city, shone the pure cold moon.
         Then unrestrained my soul poured forth its cry,
         “O God Eternal, Changless, Sacred, O. M.
         Let my past die with the Old Year to-night.
         And when the joy-bells hail the New Year’s birth,
         Let each sweet note waft up a pæan of praise,
         Straight from a new-born Soul unto its Maker.”

         *     *     *     *     *

         The New Year dawned, madly the bells clashed forth
         Beneath the stars, I still knelt on—in peace.

                                                  KATIE DUNCAN KING.

                        =Correspondence.=

                                  ---

                          AUTOCENTRICISM.[183]

-----

Footnote 183:

  “Autocentricism; or, the Brain Theory of Life and Mind,” being the
  substance of letters written to the Secular Review (1883-4). By
  Robert Lewins, M.D. “The New Gospel of Hylo-Idealism, or Positive
  Agnosticism.” By Herbert L. Courtney.

-----

Man has made God in his own image. Taking his thoughts and passions,
fears, hope and aspirations, with part thereof he endows his
fellow-men, whose natures he knows only as figured and interpreted
by his own, and thus he becomes a social being; with part thereof he
inspires the inanimate world—“the sun, the moon, the stars, the sea,
the hills, and the plains,” and thus he becomes a poet; “with the
residue” he forms his God, and “falleth down unto it, and
worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me, for thou
art my God.”

The first of these processes is legitimate, indeed necessary, for
there is a foundation of unity in human nature, however diverse and
complex are its varied developments; and the humanity which dwells
in all can recognize itself under strange disguises.

The second process is innocent and elevating, so long as it is kept
within just limits, and claims to reach results subjectively, not
objectively, true.

The third process is inevitable at a certain stage of racial
evolution, but beyond that stage becomes absolutely noxious and
degrading, because it extols as truth that which conscience and
reason have begun to condemn as untruth.

Dead are the Gods of Egypt, those supreme plutocrats, under whom
costly mummification and burial in a sculptured tomb were the
conditions of posthumous life, so that a poor man could by no means
enter into the kingdom of Osiris. Dead are Jupiter, Apollo, Pallas,
Aphrodite, the products and reflexes of Greek majesty, beauty and
intellect; or, if not dead, they are immortalised only by the art of
their human creators. Dead, or dying, as a power to be loved and
feared, is that Jehovah who reproduces the cruelty, selfishness and
stubbornness of the typical Jew, with his substratum of conscience,
showing itself from time to time in a more or less wrong-headed zeal
for righteousness.

In its infancy, every race unconsciously forms an ideal, and makes
this ideal its God. As the race grows in civilisation the ideal is
modified, and for some time the god continues to undergo
corresponding changes, and is, so to speak, kept up to date. But
increasing experience and knowledge bring increasing secularism of
thought and feeling, and incapacitate the mind for reconstructing
its Divinity. Religion loses its life-blood. In this stage, the
Deity is either an anachronism, incompatible with the highest
instincts of his worshippers, and therefore holding them back
morally and intellectually, or else he becomes a nonentity, an
abstraction, which can have no influence on life and conduct. It is
this effete conception which Dr. Lewins combats in the tract
entitled “Autocentricism, or the Brain Theory of Life and Mind.”

Man, in brief, is his own God. Saints and mystics, and all the most
beautiful souls of all religions, have seen this truth as in a glass
darkly. Christ expressed it in mystic form when he said, “The
Kingdom of Heaven is within you,” and, “I and my Father are one.”
But in Christ’s time Animism was so ingrained in human nature that
it was impossible he could escape it.[184] He had not the scientific
data on which to found a true cosmology; and even had he possessed
the data, he would have lacked the power to use them. Scientific
habits of thought were necessarily alien to the mind of the Galilean
peasant.[185] He could _feel_ rather than _comprehend_ the unity of
God, Man, and the World; but he could not know that this unity is
centred in the thought-cells of the cerebral hemispheres, and that
the Divine glory is the offspring of a material organism.[186]
Scientific synthesis can now give a solid basis to Christian and
Buddhist mysticism, to Berkleyan and Kantian Idealism, by declaring
that the brain is the one phenomenon which certifies its own nomenal
existence. It thinks, therefore it is; it creates, therefore it
exists. Yet Dualism is condemned, whatever stand-point we adopt.
“For my main argument ... it matters not a jot or tittle whether you
proceed on the nöetic or hyloic basis. A European ought to take the
latter, which admits of scientific research and discovery. An
Asiatic or African, who has not the genius for original realistic
research, may safely be left to the former.”[187] Beyond himself, no
man can think. We are apt to be deluded by the exigencies of
language, and to look upon “our” ideas, “our” imaginations, as in
some way separable from ourselves; as possessions rather than
components of the Ego. Yet nothing is clearer than that the sum of
these sentient states actually _constitutes_ the Ego, so far as it
knows itself; and that a “dominant” idea, engrossing the attention
to the exclusion of all others, is for the time absolutely identical
with and equivalent to the mind which it is said to “rule.” For
moments which are eternities, because the sense of time is
abolished, the musician may be “absorbed in” or identified with his
sonata, the poet with his verse, the mystic with his vision of the
Divine Essence. “I am as great as God, and He as small as I,” sings
Angelus Silesius; but we may rather say that in such states of
rapture the relations of “great” and “small,” of “internal” and
“external,” of “space” and “infinitude,” of “time” and “eternity,”
are annihilated, and the whole universe fused into one point of
light.

-----

Footnote 184:

  “Autocentricism,” &c., p. 10.

Footnote 185:

  _Christ_—A Galilean peasant! [ED.]

Footnote 186:

  Nor does Dr. Lewins _know_: assumption is no proof. [ED.]

Footnote 187:

  “Autocentricism,” &c., p. 33.

-----

This feeling, rationalised and stripped of mystery, though not of
wonder and solemnity, is the truth and life of Hylo-Idealism.
Worship is done away with, not by iconoclasm, but by apotheosis. “By
it we are, indeed, for ever and entirely relieved from the
humiliating and overwhelming sense of human insignificance, thus
making ourselves quite at home in the more than terrestrial
grandeurs of the universe, in which our planet is but a
sand-grain.”[188]

-----

Footnote 188:

  Ibid, p. 19.

-----

In conclusion, I should like to recommend Dr. Lewins’s tractate,
with its Introduction by Mr. Courtney, and its succinct and luminous
Appendix by G. M. Mc., and also Mr. Courtney’s articles reprinted
from “Our Corner” to the attention of all sincere souls.
Hylo-Idealism, or “Autocentricism,” has the merit of not being
negative merely, but also positive and constructive, substituting
for the “renunciation” preached by Christ and Buddha, a perfect
fulfilment of self, and conquering selfishness by self-expansion. It
is thus especially potent in the fields of theoretical and practical
ethics, indeed the central idea of Spinoza’s admirable and still
unsurpassed analysis of the Passions is distinctly deducible from
our thesis, though generally regarded as an excrescence rather than
a natural growth from his own. Upon all this I cannot, at present,
dwell, but must content myself with the bare indication of fields of
thought and action which are “white already to the harvest.”

On the Nile, _Dec._ 1887.

                                                               C. N.

                             --------------

                           WHAT OF PHENOMENA?

                     _To the Editors of_ LUCIFER:

  “I avail myself of your invitation to correspondents, in order to
  ask a question.

  “How is it that we hear nothing now of the signs and wonders with
  which Neo-theosophy was ushered in? Is the ‘age of miracles’ past
  in the Society?

                                                “Yours respectfully,
                                                                 “*”

“Occult phenomena,” is what our correspondent apparently refers to.
They failed to produce the desired effect, but they were, in no
sense of the word, “miracles.” It was supposed that intelligent
people, especially men of science, would, at least, have recognised
the existence of a new and deeply interesting field of enquiry and
research when they witnessed physical effects produced at will, for
which they were not able to account. It was supposed that
theologians would have welcomed the proof, of which they stand so
sadly in need in these agnostic days, that the soul and the spirit
are not mere creations of their fancy, due to ignorance of the
physical constitution of man, but entities quite as real as the
body, and much more important. These expectations were not realized.
The phenomena were misunderstood and misrepresented, both as regards
their nature and their purpose.

In the light which experience has now thrown upon the matter the
explanation of this unfortunate circumstance is not far to seek.
Neither science nor religion acknowledges the existence of the
Occult, as the term is understood and employed in theosophy; in the
sense, that is to say, of a super-material, but not super-natural,
region, governed by law; nor do they recognise the existence of
latent powers and possibilities in man. Any interference with the
every-day routine of the material world is attributed, by religion,
to the arbitrary will of a good or an evil autocrat, inhabiting a
supernatural region inaccessible to man, and subject to no law,
either in his actions or constitution, and for a knowledge of whose
ideas and wishes mortals are entirely dependent upon inspired
communications delivered through an accredited messenger. The power
of working so-called miracles has always been deemed the proper and
sufficient credentials of a messenger from heaven, and the mental
habit of regarding any occult power in that light is still so strong
that any exercise of that power is supposed to be “miraculous,” or
to claim to be so. It is needless to say that this way of regarding
extraordinary occurrences is in direct opposition to the scientific
spirit of the age, nor is it the position practically occupied by
the more intelligent portion of mankind at present. When people see
wonders, nowadays, the sentiment excited in their minds is no longer
veneration and awe, but curiosity.

It was in the hope of arousing and utilizing this spirit of
curiosity that occult phenomena were shown. It was believed that
this manipulation of forces of nature which lie below the
surface—that surface of things which modern science scratches and
pecks at so industriously and so proudly—would have led to enquiry
into the nature and the laws of those forces, unknown to science,
but perfectly known to occultism. That the phenomena did excite
curiosity in the minds of those who witnessed them, is certainly
true, but it was, unfortunately, for the most part of an idle kind.
The greater number of the witnesses developed an insatiable appetite
for phenomena for their own sake, without any thought of studying
the philosophy or the science of whose truth and power the phenomena
were merely trivial and, so to say, accidental illustrations. In but
a few cases the curiosity which was awakened gave birth to the
serious desire to study the philosophy and the science themselves
and for their own sake.

Experience has taught the leaders of the movement that the vast
majority of professing Christians are absolutely precluded by their
mental condition and attitude—the result of centuries of
superstitious teaching—from calmly examining the phenomena in their
aspect of natural occurrences governed by law. The Roman Catholic
Church, true to its traditions, excuses itself from the examination
of any occult phenomena on the plea that they are necessarily the
work of the Devil, whenever they occur outside of its own pale,
since it has a lawful monopoly of the legitimate miracle business.
The Protestant Church denies the personal intervention of the Evil
One on the material plane; but, never having gone into the miracle
business itself, it is apparently a little doubtful whether it would
know a _bona-fide_ miracle if it saw one, but, being just as unable
as its elder sister to conceive the extension of the reign of law
beyond the limits of matter and force, as known to us in our present
state of consciousness, it excuses itself from the study of occult
phenomena on the plea that they lie within the province of science
rather than of religion.

Now science has its miracles as well as the Church of Rome. But, as
it is altogether dependent upon its instrument maker for the
production of these miracles, and, as it claims to be in possession
of the last known word in regard to the laws of nature, it was
hardly to be expected that it would take very kindly to “miracles,”
in whose production apparatus has no part, and which claim to be
instances of the operation of forces and laws of which it has no
knowledge. Modern science, moreover, labours under disabilities with
respect to the investigation of the Occult quite as embarrassing as
those of Religion; for, while Religion cannot grasp the idea of
natural law as applied to the supersensuous Universe, Science does
not allow the existence of any supersensuous universe at all to
which the reign of law could be extended; nor can it conceive the
possibility of any other state of consciousness than our present
terrestrial one. It was, therefore, hardly to be expected that
science would undertake the task it was called upon to perform with
much earnestness and enthusiasm; and, indeed, it seems to have felt
that it was not expected to treat the phenomena of occultism less
cavalierly than it had treated divine miracles. So it calmly
proceeded at once to pooh-pooh the phenomena; and, when obliged to
express some kind of opinion, it did not hesitate, without
examination, and on hearsay reports, to attribute them to fraudulent
contrivances—wires, trap-doors and so forth.

It was bad enough for the leaders of the movement, when they
endeavoured to call the attention of the world to the great and
unknown field for scientific and religious enquiry which lies on the
borderland between matter and spirit, to find themselves set down as
agents of his Satanic Majesty, or as superior adepts in the
charlatan line; but the unkindest cut of all, perhaps, came from a
class of people whose own experiences, rightly understood, ought
certainly to have taught them better: the occult phenomena were
claimed by the Spiritualists as the work of their dear departed
ones, but the leaders in Theosophy were declared to be somewhat less
even than mediums in disguise.

Never were the phenomena presented in any other character than that
of instances of a power _over perfectly natural though unrecognised
forces_, and incidentally over matter, possessed by certain
individuals who have attained to a larger and higher knowledge of
the Universe than has been reached by scientists and theologians, or
can ever be reached by them, by the roads they are now respectively
pursuing. Yet this power is latent in all men, and could, in time,
be wielded by anyone who would cultivate the knowledge and conform
to the conditions necessary for its development. Nevertheless,
except in a few isolated and honourable instances, never was it
received in any other character than as would-be miracles, or as
works of the Devil, or as vulgar tricks, or as amusing gape-seed, or
as the performances of those dangerous “spooks” that masquerade in
séance rooms, and feed on the vital energies of mediums and sitters.
And, from all sides, theosophy and theosophists were attacked with a
rancour and bitterness, with an absolute disregard alike of fact and
logic, and with malice, hatred and uncharitableness that would be
utterly inconceivable, did not religious history teach us what mean
and unreasoning animals ignorant men become when their cherished
prejudices are touched; and did not the history of scientific
research teach us, in its turn, how very like an ignorant man a
learned man can behave, when the truth of his theories is called in
question.

An occultist can produce phenomena, but he cannot supply the world
with brains, nor with the intelligence and good faith necessary to
understand and appreciate them. Therefore, it is hardly to be
wondered at, that _word_ came to abandon phenomena and let the ideas
of Theosophy stand on their own intrinsic merits.

                             --------------

                      MR. MOHINI M. CHATTERJI.
                    _To the Editors of_ LUCIFER.

Will you kindly afford publicity in the pages of Lucifer to the
enclosed letter I have just received from Mr. Mohini M. Chatterji
who has been staying for a few months at Rome, with English friends,
on his way back to India.—Yours very truly,

                                                      A. P. SINNETT.

 TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE LONDON LODGE OF THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY.

SIR,—I understand that among the members of your Society there is a
rumour to the effect that I have joined the Roman Catholic Church,
which has caused much annoyance to my friends and also to myself. I
beg therefore that you will do me the justice to make it known that
the rumour is entirely false and that I have no desire to join any
Christian Church.—I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

                                                MOHINI M. CHATTERJI.

ROME (Italy), _January 30th, 1888_.

                           ------------------

                    _To the Editors of_ LUCIFER.

On behalf of the members of the London Lodge, I beg to state that
the rumour referred to in Mr. Mohini’s letter emanated from two
acquaintances of his belonging to the Romish Church, who themselves
derived their information from the R. C. priesthood. As for the
members of the L. L. they never believed in this report.

                                        BERTRAM KEIGHTLEY, Hon. Sec.




                        =CORRESPONDENCE=


  [The editors have received the two following letters—one from the
  learned Founder of Hylo-Idealism, the other from a gentleman, a
  casual correspondent, of whom they know _absolutely nothing_
  except his most extraordinary way of expressing his thoughts in
  words and terms hitherto unheard by ordinary mortals. Both take
  the editors to task for using their undeniable right of criticism
  and editorial judgment. As LUCIFER, however, is a magazine _sui
  generis_, and as its policy is the greatest possible tolerance and
  fairness to all parties concerned, it will abstain from its legal
  prerogative of leaving the letters without reply or notice.
  LUCIFER hands them over, therefore, to the “ADVERSARY,” to be
  dealt with according to their respective merits. The editors have
  never pretended to an “understanding of Hylo-Idealism” nor do they
  entertain any such rash hope for the future. They belong to that
  humble class of mortals who labour to their dying day under the
  belief that 2 × 2 = 4, and can by no means, even hylo-idealistic,
  make 5. “C. N.”’s letter placed the new “philosophy” in an
  entirely different light; firstly, because it is written in good
  English, and because the style of the writer is extremely
  attractive; and secondly, because at least one point has now been
  made clear to the editors: “Hylo-Idealism” is, like modern
  spiritualism, the _essence of transcendental materialism_. If in
  Mr. Huxley’s opinion Comte’s Positivism is, in practice,
  “Catholicism _minus_ Christianity,” in the views of the editors of
  LUCIFER Hylo-Idealism is “Metaphysics _minus_ psychology
  and—_physics_.” Let its apostles explain away its flagrant
  contradictions, and then LUCIFER will be the first to render
  justice to it as a philosophy. Meanwhile, it can only acknowledge
  a number of remarkably profound thoughts that are to be found
  scattered in independent solitude throughout the letters of Dr.
  Lewins (Humanism _v._ Theism) and others, and—no more.]

                          _re_ HYLO-IDEALISM.

                     To the Editors of LUCIFER.

Perhaps space may be found in the February or other early issue of
your interesting and suggestive serial for the present curt
communication. In a footnote of your January number I am coupled
with Mr. H. Spencer as being more Atheist than Moleschott and
Büchner—to say nothing of such compromising and irresolute
scientists as Darwin, Huxley, and Co. Now, that atheistic or
non-animist standpoint is the pivot on which my whole synthesis
revolves; and is, I contend, the burning problem at this
epoch—ethical and intellectual—of the human mind—_thoroughly_ to
establish on certain concrete, rational and scientific _data_, that
is to say—not on the Utopias of Speculation and Metaphysics. My
principle is exactly that of Kant (inter alios) when he formulates
the “Thing in Itself.” But we have only to study the short and handy
“Critique of Kant,” referred to in your columns—by Kuno Fischer,
translated by Dr. Hough, to see how fast and loose that
“all-shattering” metaphysician played with his all-destructive
theme. Not only does he entirely reverse it and its corollaries in
his critique of the “Practical Reason,” and of “Judgment,” but also
in the second edition of the “Critique of Pure Reason” itself, in
which originally, as its corollary, or rather concomitant, he, like
myself, only on less sure premises, disposes of God, the Soul (Anima
or Vital Principle), and Immortality—that is of another “personal”
life after death. I hold with Lucretius, Epicurus, and others in
ancient and modern times, of whom Shelley is a typical case, that no
greater benefit can be bestowed on humanity than the elimination
from sane thought of this ghastly and maddening Triune Spectre. God
alone is quite “l’infame” Voltaire dubs the Catholic Church. Looking
through Nature “red in tooth and claws” to its _pseudo_ Author, we
must expect to find a _Pandemon_. For any omnipotent Being who,
unconditioned and unfettered in all respects, “_willed_” such a
world of pain and anguish for sentient creatures, must be a Demon
_worse_ than mythology has fabled of Satan, Moloch, Mammon, or other
fiends. It must be noted that in the classic Pantheon, the Fates, or
Fatal Sisters, are “above” all the Immortals of Olympus, including
Jove himself—a saving provision quite inadmissible in modern
Monotheism, which endows its Divinity[189] with absolute omnipotence
and fore-knowledge.

                                                 ROBERT LEWINS, M.D.

-----

Footnote 189:

  Deuce, _i.e._, Devil, is the synonym of _Deus_.

-----

                                  ---

                             HYLO-IDEALISM.

                     To the Editors of LUCIFER.

I have to thank you for your kind insertion of my note on above in
January issue of the Magazine.

I have not the slightest desire to quarrel with your prefaced
comments on my style of writing. It seems to you to be “turgid,” and
you take advantage of some unkind epithets lately dealt out to
Theosophy in the _Secular Review_ to return the compliment to me
with interest added. Be it so. It would seem but fair to, let me
say, compliment those, and those only, who have directly
complimented you; but I have no wish, as I have just said, to find
fault with _any_ comment on Hylo-Idealism or on the methods of its
advocacy. _All_ criticism is, I know, received by the excogitator of
the system with thanks, and, save that both he and I think your note
_re “Theobroma”_ not a little at fault (for explanation I refer you
to the well-known Messrs. Epps), I can say the same for myself.

I can see, however, in spite of the raillery with which you honour
us, that a right understanding of Hylo-Idealism—I beg pardon,
_High-low_ Idealism—is still very far from being yours. Why, in a
recent issue of LUCIFER the old difficulty of, as I call it, the
“Coincident assumption of Materiality” is started as if it had never
before been thought of. It is, in point of fact, fully dealt with in
my “Appendix” to the “Auto-Centricism” pamphlet, which has already
passed under your review! It is not worth while to enter once more
upon this point; suffice it then to say, in addition, that I
explained it also, at full length, to a Theosophical writer—Mr. E.
D. Fawcett—in the _Secular Review_, some months ago. He had started
the same venerable objection, but after my reply, he so far honoured
me as not to return to the charge. Let him do so now, and then a
Theosophical attack and a Hylo-Ideal defence will be before you.
But, really, it is no argument against my position to extract some
half-dozen lines of my writing from a contemporary and to follow
this _soupçon_ with three printer’s “shrieks.”

I shall wait with interest the promised letter from “C. N.,” placing
Hylo-Idealism in a “new and very different light,” as you say. This
is something quite new. Dr. Lewins, C. N., and I have, none of us,
been able, hitherto, to find any material difference between our
several presentations of the system.

                                  I have the honour to be, Mesdames,
                                        Your most obedient servant,
                                                          G. M. McC.

            TO DR. LEWINS, AND THE HYLO-IDEALISTS AT LARGE.

The several learned gentlemen of the above persuasion, who have
honoured LUCIFER with their letters and articles, will please to
accept the present as a collective Reply. Life is too short to
indulge very often in such lengthy explanations. But “une fois n’est
pas coutume.”

In “coupling” Dr. Lewins’ name with those he mentions—especially
with Mr. Herbert Spencer’s—the Editors had assuredly no intention of
saying anything derogatory to the dignity of the founder of
Hylo-Idealism. They have called the latter system—its qualification
of _Idealistic_ notwithstanding——“atheistical,” and to this Dr.
Lewins himself does not demur. Quite the contrary. If his protest
(against a casual remark made in a footnote of two lines!) means
anything at all, it means that he feels hurt to find his name
associated with the names of such “compromising and (in _atheism_)
irresolute scientists as Darwin, Huxley, and Co.” What is it that
our erudite correspondent demurs to, then? Just that, and nothing
more. His prefixed adjectives refer to the half-heartedness of these
gentlemen in the matter of atheism and materialism, not surely, to
their scientific achievements. Indeed, these illustrious naturalists
are timid enough to leave half-opened doors in their speculations
for something to enter in which is not quite matter, and yet what it
is they do not, or _do not wish_ to know.

Indeed, they derive man, his origin and consciousness, _only_ from
the lower forms of animal creation and the brutes, instead of
attributing life, mind and intellect—as the followers of the new
System do—simply to the pranks played by _Prakriti_ (the great
Ignorance and Illusion) on our “diseased nervous centres”—_abstract
thought_ being synonymous with _Neuropathy_ in the teachings of the
Hylo-Idealists (see _Auto-Centricism_, p. 40). But all this has been
already said and _better said_ by Kapila, in his _Sankhya_, and is
very old philosophy indeed; so that Messrs. Darwin and Co. have
been, perhaps, wise in their generation to adopt another theory. Our
great Darwinists are practical men, and avoid running after the hare
and the eagle at the same time, as the hare in such case would be
sure to run away, and the eagle to be lost in the clouds. They
prefer to ignore the ideas and conceptions of the Universe, as held
by such “loose,” and—as philosophically expressed by our
_uncompromising_ opponent—“all-shattering metaphysicians as Kant
was.” Therefore letting all such “metaphysical crack-brained
theories” severely alone, they made man and his thinking _Ego_ the
lineal descendant of the revered ancestor of the now tailless
baboon, our beloved and esteemed first cousin. This is only logical
_from the Darwinian standpoint_. What is, then, Dr. Lewins’ quarrel
with these great men, or with us? They have their theory, the
inventor of Hylo-Idealism has his theory, we, Metaphysicians, have
our ideas and theories; and, the _Moon_ shining with impartial and
equal light on the respective occiputs of Hylo-Idealists,
Animalists, and Metaphysicians, she pours material enough for every
one concerned to allow each of them to “live and let live.” No man
can be at once a Materialist and an Idealist, and remain consistent.
Eastern philosophy and occultism are based on the _absolute unity_
of the Root Substance, and they recognise only one infinite and
universal CAUSE. The Occultists are UNITARIANS _par excellence_. But
there is such a thing as conventional, time-honoured terms with one
and the same meaning attached to them all—at any rate on this plane
of illusion. And if we want to understand each other, we are forced
to use such terms in their generally-accepted sense, and avoid
calling mind matter, and vice versâ. The definition of a
_materialised “Spirit”_ as frozen whiskey is in its place in a
humouristic pun: it becomes an absurdity in philosophy. It is Dr.
Lewins’ argument that “the very first principle of logic is, that
two ‘causes’ are not to be thought of when one is sufficient;” and
though the first and the ultimate, the Alpha and the Omega in the
existence of the Universe, is one absolute cause, yet, on the plane
of manifestations and differentiations, matter, as phenomenon, and
Spirit as noumenon, cannot be so loosely confused as to merge the
latter into the former, under the pretext that one self-evident
natural cause (however secondary in the sight of logic and reason)
is “sufficient for our purpose,” and we need not “transcend the
proper conditions of thought” and fall back upon the lower level of
“lawless and uncertain fancy”—i.e., metaphysics. (_Vide_ “Humanism
_v._ Theism,” pp. 14, 15.)

We have nothing whatever, I say it again, against “Hylo-Idealism”
with the exception of its compound and self-contradictory name. Nor
do we oppose Dr. Lewins’ earlier thoughts, as embodied in “C. N’s”
“HUMANISM _versus_ THEISM.” That which we permit ourselves to object
to and oppose is the later system grown into a _Bifrontian_,
Janus-like monster, a hybrid _duality_ notwithstanding its forced
mask of Unity. Surely it is not because Dr. Lewins calls “Spirit—a
_fiction_” and attributes Mind, Thought, Genius, Intellect, and all
the highest attributes of thinking man to simple effects or
functions of Hylo-zoism, that the greatest problem of psychology,
_the relation of mind to matter_, is solved? No one can accuse “The
Adversary” of too much tenderness or even regard for the conclusions
of such rank materialists as the Darwinians generally are. But
surely no impartial man would attribute their constant failure to
explain the relations of mind to matter, and the confessions of
their ignorance of the ultimate constitution of that matter itself,
to timidity and irresoluteness, but rather to the right cause:
_i.e._, the _absolute impossibility of explaining spiritual effects
by physical causes_, in the first case; and the presence of that in
matter which baffles and mocks the efforts of the physical senses to
perceive or feel, and therefore to explain it, in the second case.
It is not, evidently, a desire to _compromise_ that forced Mr.
Huxley to confess that “in strictness we (the Scientists) know
nothing about the composition of matter,” but the _honesty_ of a man
of science in not speculating upon what he did not believe in, and
knew nothing about. Does J. Le Conte insult the majesty of physical
science by declaring that the creation or destruction, increase or
diminution of matter, “_lies beyond the domain of science?_”[190]
And to whose prejudices does Mr. Tyndall pander, he, who once upon a
time shocked the whole world of believers in spiritual existence, by
declaring in his Belfast address that in matter alone was “the
promise and potency of every form and quality of life” (just what
Dr. Lewins does) when he maintains that “the passage _from the
physics of the brain to the corresponding facts of_ CONSCIOUSNESS
_is unthinkable_,” and adds:

  “Granted that a definite thought and a molecular action in the
  brain occur simultaneously; we do not possess the intellectual
  organ nor apparently any rudiments of the organ, which would
  enable us to pass by a process of reasoning from one to the other.
  They appear together, but _we do not know why_. Were our minds and
  senses so expanded, strengthened and illuminated, as to enable us
  to see and feel the very molecules of the brain; were we capable
  of following all their motions, all their groupings, all their
  electric discharges, if such there be; and were we intimately
  acquainted with the corresponding states of thought and feeling,
  we should be as far as ever from the solution of the problem. ‘How
  are these physical processes connected with the facts of
  consciousness?’ The chasm between the two classes of phenomena
  would still remain intellectually impassable.”[191]

-----

Footnote 190:

  “_Correl._ of _Vital with Chem. and Physical Forces_.” Appendix.

Footnote 191:

  “Fragments of Science.”

-----

To our surprise, however, we find that our learned
correspondent—Tyndall, Huxley & Co., notwithstanding—has passed the
_intellectually impassable_ chasm by modes of perception,
“anti-intellectual,” so to speak. I say this in no impertinent mood;
but merely following Dr. Lewins on his own lines of thought. As his
expressions seem absolutely antiphrastic in meaning to those
generally accepted by the common herd, “anti-intellectual” would
mean with the Hylo-Idealists “anti-spiritual” (spirit being a
_fiction_ with them). Thus their Founder must have crossed the
impassable chasm—say, by a hylo-zoistic process of perception,
“starting from the region of rational cogitation” and not from “that
lower level of lawless and uncertain fancy,” as Theosophists,
Mystics, and other _hoi polloi_ of thought, do. He has done it to
his own “mental satisfaction,” and this is all a Hylo-Idealist will
ever aspire to, as Dr. Lewins himself tells us. He “cannot deny that
there may be _behind_ (?) nature a ‘cause of causes,’[192] but if
so, it is a god who hides himself, or itself, from mortal thought.
Nature is at all events vice-regent plenipotentiary, and with _her_
thought has alone to deal.” Just so, and we say it too, for reasons
given in the footnote. “There is a natural solution for everything,”
he adds. “Of course, if there be no ‘cause,’ this solution is the
arrangement and co-ordination of invariable sequences in our own
minds ... rather than an ‘explanation’ or ‘accounting for’
phenomena. Properly speaking we can ‘account for’ nothing. _Mental
satisfaction_—unity between microcosm and macrocosm, not the search
after ‘First Causes.’ ... is the true chief end of man.” (Hum. _v._
Theism, p. 15.)

-----

Footnote 192:

  We Theosophists, who do not _limit_ nature, do not see the “cause
  of causes” or the _unknowable_ deity _behind_ that which is
  limitless, but identify that abstract Nature with the deity
  itself, and explain its visible laws as secondary effects on the
  plane of Universal Illusion.

-----

This seems the backbone of Hylo-Idealistic philosophy, which
thus appears as a cross breed between Epicurianism and the
“Illusionism” of the Buddhist Yogachâras. This stands proven
by the contradictions in his system. Dr. Lewins seems to have
achieved that, to do which every mortal scientist has hitherto
failed, firstly, by declaring (in Hum. _v._ Theism, p. 17) the
whole objective world—“_phenomenal_ or _ideal_”,[193] and
“everything in it _spectral_” (Auto-Centricism, p. 9), and yet
_admitting the reality of matter_. More than this. In the
teeth of all the scientific luminaries, from Faraday to
Huxley, who all confess to knowing NOTHING of matter, he
declares that—“Matter organic and inorganic _is now fully
known_” (Auto-Centricism, p. 40)!!

-----

Footnote 193:

  We call the _noumenal_—the “ideal.”

-----

I humbly beg Dr. Lewins’ pardon for the rude question; but does he
really mean to say what he does say? Does he want his readers to
believe that up to his appearance in this world of matter, thinking
men did not know what they were talking about, and that among all
the “Ego Brains” of this globe his brain is the one omniscient
_reality_, while all others are empty phantasms,or _spectral_
balloons? Besides which, matter cannot surely be _real_ and _unreal_
at the same time. If _unreal_—and he maintains it—then all Science
can know about it is that it knows _nothing_, and this is precisely
what Science confesses. And if _real_—and Dr. Lewins, as shown,
declares it likewise—then his _Idealism_ goes upside down, and
_Hylo_ alone remains to mock him and his philosophy. These may be
trifling considerations in the consciousness of an _Ego_ of Dr.
Lewins’ power, but they are very serious contradictions, and also
impediments in the way of such humble thinkers as Vedantins,
Logicians, and Theosophists, toward recognising, let alone
appreciating, “Hylo-Idealism.” Our learned correspondent pooh-poohs
Metaphysics, and at the same time not only travels on purely
metaphysical grounds, but adopts and sets forth the most
metaphysical tenets, the very gist of the PARA-metaphysical Vedanta
philosophy, tenets held also by the Buddhist “Illusionists”—the
_Yogachâras_ and _Madhyamikas_. Both schools maintain that all is
void (_sarva sûnya_), or that which Dr. Lewins calls spectral and
phantasmal. Except internal sensation or intelligence (_vijnâna_)
the Yogachâras regard everything else as illusion. Nothing that is
material can have any but a _spectral_ existence with them. So far,
our “Bauddhas” are at one with _the_ Hylo-Idealists, but they part
at the crucial moment. The New School teaches that the Brain (the
originator of consciousness) is the only factor and Creator of the
visible Universe; that in _it_ alone all our ideas of external
things are born, and that, apart from it, nothing has real
existence, everything being illusion. Now what has that Brain, or
rather the material its particles and cells are composed of,
distinct in it from other matter that it should be rendered such
honours? _Physically_, it differs very little indeed from the brain
stuff and cranium of any anthropoid ape. Unless we divorce
consciousness, or the EGO, from matter, one materialistic philosophy
is as good as the other, and none is worth living for. What his
Brain-Ego _is_, Dr. Lewins does not show anywhere. He urges that his
“atheistic or _non-animist_ (soulless) standpoint is the _pivot_” on
which his “whole synthesis revolves.” But as that “pivot” is no
higher than the physical brain with its hallucinations, then it must
be a broken reed indeed. A philosophy that goes no further than
superficial Agnosticism, and says that “what Tennyson says of Deity
_may_ be true, but it is not in the region of natural cogitation;
for it transcends the logical _Encheiresis naturæ_“ (Hum. _v._
Theism)—is no philosophy, but simply _unqualified negation_. And one
who teaches that ”_savants_, or specialists, are the last to reach
the _summa scientiæ_, for the constant _search_ after knowledge must
ever prevent its _fruition_” (ibid), cuts the ground himself under
his feet, and thus loses the right, not only to be considered a man
of science, but likewise his claim to the title of philosopher, for
he rejects all knowledge. Dr. Lewins, quoting Schiller, “to the
effect that truth can never be reached while the mind is in its
analytic throes,” shows the poet-philosopher saying that:—“To
capture the fleeting phantom he (the analyst) must fetter it by
rules, must anatomatise its fair body into concepts, and imprison
_its living spirit_ into a bare skeleton of words”—and thus brings
this as a prop and proof of his own arguments that we need not
trouble ourselves with the “cause of causes.” But Schiller believed
in spirit and immortality, while the Hylo-Idealists deny them _in
toto_. What he says above is accepted by every Occultist and
Theosophist, simply because _he refers to the purely intellectual_
(not Spiritual) _analysis_ on the physical plane, and according to
the present scientific methods. Such analysis, of course, will never
help man to reach the real _inner_ soul-knowledge, but must ever
leave him stranded in the bogs of fruitless speculation.

The truth is, that Hylo-Idealism is at best QUIETISM—only on the
purely material plane. “Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we
die,” seems its motto. Dr. Lewins tells us that he holds his views
with Epicurus. I beg leave to contradict again. Epicurus insisted
upon the necessity of making away with an unphilosophical,
anthropomorphic deity— a bundle of contradictions—and so do we,
the Theosophists. But Epicurus believed in gods, finite and
conditioned in space and time, still _divine_ when compared to
objective ephemeral man: again, just as we, Theosophists, believe
in them.

We feel sorry to have to say unpleasant truths. The Founder of
Hylo-Idealism is evidently a marvellously well-read man, his
learning is great and undeniable; and, we have always had an
instinctive respect for, and sympathy with, thinkers of his calibre.
But, we have been sent pamphlets and books on Hylo-Idealism for
review, and one would be truant to his duty to conceal one’s
honest and sincere views on anything. Therefore, we say that,
contradictions and inconsistencies in the Hylo-Idealistic system
apart, we find in it a mass of ideas and _arguments_ which come
forcibly home to us, because they are part and parcel of the Eastern
Idealism. Our premises and propositions seem to be almost identical
in some respects, but the conclusions we come to disagree in every
point, the most important of which is the true nature of matter.
This, which “has been _fabled_ as ‘Spirit,’” writes Dr. Lewins in
1878, “is really merely the ‘_vis insita_’ of matter or ‘nature’—the
latter a misnomer if creation or birth is a delusion, as it must be
on the hypothesis of the eternity of matter.”

Here the Doctor speaks evidently of “Spirit” from the Christian
stand-point, and criticises it from this aspect. And from this
stand-point and aspect he is perfectly right; but as wrong from
those of Eastern philosophy. Did he but view Spirit, _as one with
eternal matter_, which, though eternal _in esse_ is but finite and
conditioned during its periodical manifestations, he would not so
materialise its _vis insita_—which is _vis vitæ_ but when applied to
individual manifestations, the living subjects of illusion, or
animated bodies. But this would lead us too far, and we must close
the subject with one more protest. There is a casual remark in
“Humanism _v._ Theisms” to the effect (on the authority of Ueberweg)
that “the early Greek thinkers and Sages were Hylo-Zoists.” Aye,
learned Doctor; but the early Greek thinkers understood Hylo-Zoism
(from “_Hyle_” _primordial_ matter, or what the greatest chemist in
England, Mr. Crookes, has called “protyle” _undifferentiated
matter_, and “_Zoe_,” life) in a way very different from yours. So
are we, Theosophists and Eastern Occultists, “Hylo-Zoists”; but it
is because with us “life” is the synonym both of Spirit and Matter,
or the ONE eternal and infinite LIFE whether manifested or
otherwise. That LIFE is both the eternal IDEA and its periodical
LOGOS. He who has grasped and mastered this doctrine completely has
thereby solved the mystery of BEING.

                                                    “THE ADVERSARY.”

P.S.—We have in type a very excellent article by Mr. L. Courtney,
which could not find room in this present number, but will appear in
March. In it, the writer says all that he _can_ possibly say in
favour of Hylo-Idealism, and that is all one can do. Thus, LUCIFER
will give one fair chance more to the new System; after which it
will have gained a certain right to neither answer at such length,
nor accept any article on Hylo-Idealism that will go beyond a page
or so.—“A.”

                  ------------------------------------




                      INTERESTING TO ASTROLOGERS.

                     ASTROLOGICAL NOTES—No. 4.

                    _To the Editor of_ LUCIFER.

QUESTION, at London, 1887, March 2nd, 6.8 p.m. What will be the
duration of quesited’s life?

Though the preceding figure showed that my relative would recover
from his illness,[194] yet it was obvious that the end could not be
far distant; and I drew the present figure for the minute of the
impression, to interrogate the stars.

-----

Footnote 194:

  NOTE.—This was shown by the preceding figure; a weak aspect in
  horary astrology can only symbolize a weak result. Hence, though
  the weakly good semisextile was sufficient to indicate
  convalescence from a self-limited disease like pneumonia, yet it
  did not denote complete restoration to health. Had the
  significators been applying to a Trine, I should have judged not
  only convalescence from the acute attack, but a continuance of a
  vigorous old age.

-----

The following are the elements of the figure:—

                      Cusp of 10th house 14 ♊.
                        — 11th house 21 ♋.
                        — 12th house 22 ♌.
                        — 1st house 17° 45’ ♍.
                        — 2nd house 10 ♎.
                        — 3rd house 9 ♏.

                   Planets’ places are:
                       ♆ 25. 13. 15 ♉.
                       ♅ 11. 37. 30 R. ♎.
                       ♄ 15. 46. 30 R ♋.
                       ♃ 5. 41. 30 R ♏.
                       ♂ 23. 50. 45 ♓.
                       ☉ 11. 52. 19 ♓.
                       ♀ 3. 10. 30 ♈.
                       ☿ 29. 36. 15 ♓.
                       ☽ 8. 28. 15 ♊.
                     Caput Draconis 27. 21. 38 ♌.
                       ⨁  14. 20. 56 I.

As in the previous figure the 6th house is the quesited’s 1st, and
the 1st house is his 8th. As the time of the question was after
sunset, ☿ ruling ♏ by night was lord of his 8th, and ♅ ruling ♒ by
night was lord of his 1st. The aspect of the significators is ☿ 167°
58’ 45” ♅, separating from the Quincunx and applying to the
Opposition. The Quincunx is, like the Conjunction and Parallel,
convertible in nature, being good with benefics and evil with
malefics, and when a benefic and malefic are thus joined, the
stronger rules. It was therefore in this case doubly evil, as the
significators were separating from one evil aspect and applying to
another though not within orbs of either. As ☿, the applying planet,
was in a common sign, and is an angle of the figure, each degree
signified a week; and as 12° 1′ 15´´ were wanted to complete the
opposition, the critical period was shown to be a fraction over 12
weeks, or May 25th.

Danger to life was also shown by _Cauda Draconis_ in quesited’s 1st
house; by ☉ in quesited’s 1st afflicted by a very close Quincunx of
♅ lord of his 1st, ♅ moreover receiving ☉ in his Detriment, and ☉
receiving ♅ in his Fall; and by ☽, lady of quesited’s 6th, posited
in his 4th, and afflicted by a rather close Quartile of ☉ posited in
his 1st, ☉ moreover receiving ☽ in his Anti-triplicity (_sit venia
verbo_). Nevertheless, as the significators were not actually in any
evil aspect, ☿ moreover receiving ♅ in his Triplicity, and being
almost out of ♓ his Fall and Detriment, and the Detriment of ♅; ☽,
lady of his 6th, and posited in his 4th, applying to a Trine of ♅
lord of his 1st; and ☿ lord of his 8th applying to Conjunction with
♀ lady of his 4th, ♀ moreover receiving ☿ in her exaltation;—all
this denoted that May 25th would be the time, not indeed of certain
death, but of imminent danger, the beginning of the end.

⨁ being in the 4th house of the figure, almost on the cusp, denoted
a legacy to my father.

The actual result was as follows: After having been for some time in
fair health, considering his age and recent illness, _he was
suddenly taken ill and in great danger on the night of May 27th, and
on the morning of May 31st was in articulo mortis, and given up by
his two physicians_. From this, however, he rallied; relapsed on the
night of July 6th; rallied again; but _died on July 19th_ at 8.30
a.m., after a sudden seizure of only 15 minutes’ duration, _and my
father received a legacy under his will_.

The quesited suffered much in his last illness from cough and
dyspnœa. The certificate of death was—“_Primary_: emphysema, morbus
cordis. _Secondary_: thrombus, syncope.” With this may be compared ♄
in ♋, having dignity in quesited’s 8th house, and afflicting ♅ lord
of quesited’s 1st. ♄ in ♋ denotes “phthisis, ulceration in lungs,
obstructions and bruises in breast, ague, scurvy, cancer, and
cough.”

                                                               NEMO.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         Transcriber’s Note

Some longer stories and articles are continued from number to number
of the publication. Where the continued text appears in this volume,
the ‘to be continued’ note a the bottom of each section is linked to
the next. On occasion, the promised continuation is not to be found
in thi text, and no link is provided.

On p. 236, the footnote now numbered 56 was referenced both in the
title of the review and on the repetition of that phrase in the body
of the review. The first of these has been removed as redundant. On
occasion, diacritical marks in foreign words were not printed, and
have not been added here.

The copious quotations give rise to the occasional puzzle with
quotation marks, which make it difficult to say what the authors
intended. Where there is no simple resolution, the text is given
here as printed. The problematic paragraphs appear on p. 151, p.
164, p. 179, p. 205, p. 277, p. 295, p. 305.

Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been
corrected as noted below.

The references are to the page and line in the original. Where the
page is printed in columns, ‘L’ and ‘R’ refer to the left and right
columns. Those referenced with three numbers indicate the page,
footnote and line within the note. Since footnotes have sometimes
been moved to follow a paragraph, all references are to their
position in the printed text.

  3.1.2    How art thou [f]allen from Heaven              Restored.

  20.1     in which the Zoroast[r]ian Mitra               Inserted

  22.1.1   tha[t] John saw                                Restored.

  22.2.9   it literally means ‘to howl.’[”]               Added.

  38.4     I have p[re/er]suaded my aunt                  Transposed.

  44.16    chapters of the Bha[ga]vadgita                 Inserted.

  51.1     self-contained and harmonious within[.]        Added.

  55.31    the high plateaux of Central Asia[.]           Added.

  55.40    some amount of injustice in it[.]              Added.

  60.6     Count Tolstoi considers it nec[e]ssary         Inserted.

  67.2     in [leasurely] fashion                         _sic_

  69.13    in the Villa Torcello[.]                       Added.

  72L.33   my books been par[a/o]died                     Replaced.

  75L.55   by [C/G]. H. Pember                            Replaced.

  79R.43   But as LU[FIC/CIF]ER hopes shortly to deal     Transposed.

  74R.15   [“]That the first human beings                 Added.

  80R.33   [“]The famous cynic, Cratus,                   Removed.

  84.41    his theosop[h]ical views.                      Inserted.

  85.19    the social respectabili[l/t]y it panders to    Replaced.

  87.40    [innoculated] with vice,                       _sic_

  87.41    in his subsequent life[.]                      Added.

  104.44   it grew importunate[.]                         Added.

  116.8    the Hindu philosophical tenet[.]               Added.

  122.24   if he changes his a[l/t]titude                 Replaced.

  122.33   that marriage is consummated.[”]               Added.

  124.32   [“]Not one would have the courage              Added.

  131.3    By  [C/G]. H. Pember, M.A.                     Replaced.

  132.32   by such cavalier treatment[.]                  Added.

  134.12   this [insistance] upon the letter              _sic_

  147.29   are pearls of wisdom[.]                        Added.

  147.32   of the Ros[i]crucians                          Inserted.

  152.28   ‘the Great Goddess[’]                          Added.

  152.29   in the minds of Theosophists.[”]               Added.

  158R.43  is the day[-]house of ♅                        Inserted.

  164.6    members of that society who[ who] always find  Removed.

  172.15   and a benefic[i]ent power                      Removed.

  179.3.12 principle of the Theosophists,[)]              Added.

  185.35   all occupied with [“/‘]Fou;[”/’]               Replaced.

  195.22   clos[e] to the great fire                      Restored.

  204.45   Life-renewal and Life-tran[s]mission           inserted.

  201.26   draw it from you[r] own beautiful soul!        Added.

  205.38   and is himself examined of no man.[”]          Added.

  206.1    not for my life, assuredly[,/.]                Replaced.

  206.13   because it can give _me_[,] pleasure.          Removed.

  206.17   I am surr[r]ounded with a whole world          Removed.

  206.31   may be made comfortable.[”]                    Added.

  209.36   within his soul.[”]                            Removed.

  218.44   most wonderfull[l]y                            Removed.

  217.23   aim of this work[,] the bias of the writer     Added.

  224.33   the irrational[i]ty                            Inserted.

  226.40   the p[h]yschic-astral and the divine-astral    Removed.

  230.11   in[ ]dulge in the practice                     Removed.

  233.3    before the seventee[n]th century               Inserted.

  233.27   cons[e]quently the great cry                   Inserted.

  236.27   pheno[nem/men]a of modern spiritualism         Transposed.

  256.7    the lustre of the firma[n/m]ent                Replaced.

  260.38   uplifted to his were Fleta’s eyes[.]           Added.

  261.17   but [eat] nothing more                         _sic>_

  263.39   pushed the door open[,/.]                      Replaced.

  265.38   a passionate and adoring eagerness[.]          Added.

  273.59   [l]ife of the Spirit                           Restored.

  278.44   the only one to see me[,/.]                    Replaced.

  283.15   repugnant to a belie[t/f] in this law          Replaced.

  284.31   in a position to apprecia[i/t]e                Replaced.

  292.17   as in the Jubilee[e] coinage                   Removed.

  292.28   The question of what interpreta[ta]tion        Removed.

  293.68.2 (1 Corinthians xi, 11.[)]                      Added.

  296.7    or [“/‘]problematical[”/’] Mahatma?”           Replaced.

  299.29   since it beg[u/a]n by a “play of words,”       Replaced.

  301.1.5  the Word of Truth, th[e] _Makheru_ of Egypt.   Restored.

  301.1.6  The preserved mummy was the bod[y]             Restored.

  301.15   [“]χρηστός ἑστιν επι τους,”                    Added.

  302.16   and even by unbelievers,[”]                    _sic_

  302.1.1  [“]Christianus quantum interpretatione         Added.

  303.2.3  or devoted to oracul[e/a]r services            Replaced.

  304.25   “the son of Iaso or _Ieso_, the [“]healer,”    Removed.

  305.4    of this rema[r]kable form.                     Inserted.

  305.36   with [“/‘]oil that was taken from the wood     Replaced.

  305.37   he is called the Christ:[”/’]                  Replaced.

  305.41   also as the Horus of both sexes.[”]            Added.

  305.2.1  for in[t]itiation into the Greek               Removed.

  306.34   the name of the Christ as the e[n/m]balmed     Replaced.
           mummy

  306.47   With the Greek [t]erminal _s_                  Restored.

  307.30   our Christology is mummified mythology.”       Removed.

  309.2.1  [“]The word שיה _shiac_,                       Removed.

  310.19   ([“]λεγόμενος,” surnamed “χρηστος.”)           Added.

  303.3.3  [(]here Socrates is the _Chréstos_)            Added.

  303.4.12 circle and solar year,[”]                      _sic_

  311.36   tran[s]gress> that law?                        Inserted.

  313.1    while parasit[i]es eat slowly                  Removed.

  317.9    in the [mechanicism] of the Universe           _sic_

  317.13   pessimism is ro[u/o]ted in the recognition     Replaced.

  322.29   and that _[“] system_                          Added.

  326.22   from any obligatory duty.[”]                   Removed.

  326.28   thrown the blame and responsibi[i]lty          Removed.

  327.55   whether in[ it] its dead letter,               Removed.

  330L.14  having di[r/s]burdened our heart               Replaced.

  332L.18  they disarm cri[c/t]icism                      Replaced.

  333R.61  even altars unto Baal[”]                       Added.

  334R.51  [“]where the women wove hangings for the       Added.
           grove”

  335L.44  and the [“]Kaivalyanita.”                      Added.

  334L.29  and by the famine....[’/”]                     Replaced.

  349.32   knew that man to be a savage[.]                Added.

  351.36   recognised it as his own room[,/.]             Replaced.

  360.23   it was exceedingly solid and well fastened[.]  Added.

  361.20   [“]I may not readily understand you.           Added.

  366.13   were all in all to us![”]                      Added.

  367.27   that reigneth over all![”]                     Added.

  372.23   cannot subsist witho[n/u]t the spiritual force Inverted.

  373.42   have themselves an organic form[,/.]           Replaced.

  375.8    —probably many[.]                              Added.

  386.25   should he meet him in Heaven[,/.]              Replaced.

  387.25   [me] Ambrose’s sword                           _sic_ ?

  389.34   [“/‘]thou> must be                             Replaced.

  390.19   as you shall hear.[”]                          Added.

  404.11   vegetable forms [a]s well?                     Restored.

  406.30   from not[—/-]living matter.[’]”                Replaced/Removed.

  407.1.1  [“]missing link”                               Restored.

  409.47   (actual or possible)[”]                        Added.

  411.3    the root of [uo/ou]r present constitution      Transposed.

  412.19   in accepting the doct[r]ine of Atonement       Inserted.

  413.16   the[,] Church wishes the truth,                Removed.

  417.19   and transfer it [to ]the shoulders             Inserted.

  434.29   an hono[n/u]rable reputation                   Inverted.

  436.1.14 to the [‘]Lord’ for a burnt-offering           Restored.

  437.19   must be the _d[’]evil_ worship                 _sic_

  447.35   they were set in[.]                            Added.

  447.27   which was habitual with him[.]                 Added.

  450.2    learned to surrender his love.[”]              Added.

  456.14   follow and s[ie/ei]ze her thoughts             Transposed.

  469.7    [“]No one said aught                           Added.

  472.3.1  [“]breaks through the Brahmarandra             _sic_

  474.5    three-fold r[h]ythm                            Inserted.

  477.7    it would never [h/b]e his.                     Replaced.

  477.27   by personal craving or desire[.]               Added.

  481.10   the quickest violet[.]                         Added.

  484.10   the very ar[ô/o]ma of our thoughts             Replaced.

  486.5    the i[n]diosyncrasies of a nation              Removed.

  490.12   “Faith is the key of Christendom,[’/”]         Replaced.

  494.41   only a coun[f/t]erfeit Presentment             Replaced.

  495.23   _but for destruction_.[”]                      Added.

  502.35   the Deit[r]y is either an anachronism,         Removed.

  502.39   in the tract entitle[s/d] “Autocentricism, or  Replaced.
           the Brain Theory of Life and Mind.”

  503.10   which certifies it[s] own nomenal existence.   Added.

  503.13   the nöetic or hyloic basis[.]                  Added.

  503.14   admits of sci[e]ntific research                Inserted.

  503.28   such states of rapture the relatio[u/n]s       Replaced.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lucifer, by Various

