CHAPTER XXXIX.**

LEGES AND EPINOMIS.**


Leges, the longest of Plato's works--Persons of the dialogue   272

Abandonment of Plato's philosophical projects prior to the Leges
273

Untoward circumstances of Plato's later life--His altered tone in
regard to philosophy   _ib._

General comparison of Leges with Plato's earlier works   275

Scene of the Leges, not in Athens, but in Krete. Persons Kretan
and Spartan, comparatively illiterate   277

Gymnastic training, military drill, and public mess, in Krete and
Sparta   279

Difference between Leges and Republic, illustrated by reference to
the Politikus   280

Large proportion of preliminary discussions and didactic
exhortation in the Leges   281

Scope of the discussion laid down by the Athenian speaker--The
Spartan institutions are framed only for war--This is narrow and
erroneous   282

Principles on which the institutions of a state ought to be
defended--You must show that its ethical purpose and working is
good   284

Religious and ethical character postulated by Plato for a
community   _ib._

Endurance of pain enforced as a part of the public discipline at
Sparta   285

Why are not the citizens tested in like manner, in regard to
resistance against the seductions of pleasure?   _ib._

Drunkenness forbidden at Sparta, and blamed by the Spartan
converser. The Athenian proceeds to inquire how far such
unqualified prohibition is justifiable   286

Description of Sokrates in the Symposion--his self-command under
abundant potations   287

Sokrates--an ideal of self-command, both as to pain and as to
pleasure   288

Trials for testing the self-controul of the citizen, under the
influence of wine. Dionysiac banquets, under a sober president
289

The gifts of Dionysus may, by precautions, be rendered
useful--Desultory manner of Plato   _ib._

Theory of ethical and æsthetical education--Training of the
emotions of youth through the influence of the Muses, Apollo, and
Dionysus. Choric practice and ceremonies   290

Music and dancing--imitation of the voice and movements of brave
and virtuous men. Youth must be taught to take delight in this
291

Bad musical exhibitions and poetry forbidden by the lawgiver.
Songs and dances must be consecrated by public authority. Prizes
at the musical festivals to be awarded by select judges   292

The Spartan and Kretan agree with the Athenian, that poets must be
kept under a strict censorship. But they do not agree as to what
the poets are required to conform to   _ib._

Ethical creed laid down by the Athenian--Poets required to conform
to it   294

The Spartan and Kretan do not agree with him   296

Chorus of Elders are required to set an example in keeping up the
purity of the music prescribed   297

The Elders require the stimulus of wine, in order to go through
the choric duties with spirit   _ib._

Peculiar views of Plato about intoxication   298

General ethical doctrine held by Plato in Leges   299

Pleasure--Good--Happiness--What is the relation between them?
_ib._

Comparison of the doctrine laid down in Leges   300

Doctrine in Leges about Pleasure and Good--approximates more
nearly to the Protagoras than to Gorgias and Philêbus   301

Comparison of Leges with Republic and Gorgias   302

Plato here mistrusts the goodness of his own proof. He falls back
upon useful fiction   303

Deliberate ethical fiction employed as means of governing   304

Importance of music and chorus as an engine of teaching for Plato.
Views of Xenophon and Aristotle compared   305

Historical retrospect as to the growth of cities--Frequent
destruction of established communities, with only a small remnant
left   307

Historical or legendary retrospect--The Trojan war--The return of
the Herakleids   308

Difficulties of government--Conflicts about command--Seven
distinct titles to command exist among mankind, all equally
natural, and liable to conflict   309

Imprudence of founding government upon any one of these titles
separately--Governments of Argos and Messênê ruined by the
single principle--Sparta avoided it   310

Plato casts Hellenic legend into accordance with his own political
theories   311

Persia and Athens compared--Excess of despotism. Excess of liberty
312

Cyrus and Darius--Bad training of sons of kings   _ib._

Changes for the worse in government of Athens, after the Persian
invasion of Greece   313

This change began in music, and the poets introduced new modes of
composition--they appealed to the sentiment of the people, and
corrupted them   314

Danger of changes in the national music--declared by Damon, the
musical teacher   315

Plato's aversion to the tragic and comic poetry at Athens   316

This aversion peculiar to himself, not shared either by
oligarchical politicians, or by other philosophers   317

Doctrines of Plato in this prefatory matter   318

Compared with those of the Republic and of the Xenophontic
Cyropædia   319

Constructive scheme--Plato's new point of view   320

New Colony to be founded in Krete--its general conditions
_ib._

The Athenian declares that he will not merely promulgate
peremptory laws, but will recommend them to the citizens by
prologues or hortatory discourses   321

General character of these prologues--didactic or rhetorical
homilies   322

Great value set by Plato himself upon these prologues. They are to
serve as type for all poets. No one is allowed to contradict
them   323

Contrast of Leges with Gorgias and Phædrus   324

Regulations for the new colony--About religious worship, the
oracles of Delphi and Dodona are to be consulted   325

Perpetuity of number of citizens, and of lots of land, one to
each, inalienable and indivisible   326

Plato reasserts his adherence to the principle of the Republic,
though the repugnance of others hinders him from realising it
327

Regulations about land, successions, marriages, &c. The number
of citizens must not be allowed to increase   328

Position of the city and akropolis--Distribution of the territory
and citizens into twelve equal sections or tribes   329

Movable property--Inequality therein reluctantly allowed, as far
as four to one, but no farther   330

Census of the citizens--four classes, with graduated scale of
property. No citizen to possess gold or silver. No loans or
interest. No debts enforced by law   331

Board of thirty-seven Nomophylakes--general supervisors of the
laws and their execution--how elected 332

Military commanders--General council of 360--complicated mode of
election   _ib._

Character of the electoral scheme--Plato's views about wealth--he
caters partly for the oligarchical sentiment, partly for the
democratical   333

Meetings of council--other magistrates--Agoranomi--Astynomi,
&c.   335

Defence of the territory--rural police--Agronomi, &c.
_ib._

Comparison with the Lacedæmonian Kryptia   336

Priests--Exêgêtæ--Property belonging to temples   337

Superintendence of Music and Gymnastic. Educational function
_ib._

Grave duties of the Minister of Education--precautions in electing
him   338

Judicial duties   339

Private Causes--how tried   _ib._

Public Causes must be tried directly by the citizens--strong
feeling among Greeks about this   340

Plato's way of meeting this feeling--intermediate inquiry and
report by a special Commissioner   340

What laws the magistrates are to enforce--Many details must be
left to the Nomophylakes   341

Marriage-Laws--Rich husbands to choose poor wives--No
dowries--costly marriage festivals are forbidden   342

Laws about slavery. Slaves to be well fed, and never treated with
cruelty or insolence. The master must not converse with them
_ib._

Circular form for the city--Temples in the centre--No walls round
it   344

Mode of life prescribed to new-married couples They are to take
the best care about good procreation for the city   _ib._

Board of superintending matrons   345

Age fixed for marriage. During the first ten years the couple are
under obligation to procreate for the city--Restrictions during
these ten years   _ib._

How infants are to be brought up--Nurses--Perpetual regulated
movements useful for toning down violent emotions   346

Choric and orchestic movements, their effect in discharging strong
emotions   347

Training of boys and girls   348

Musical and literary teaching for youth--Poetry, songs, music,
dances, must all be fixed by authority, and never
changed--Mischief done by poets aiming to please   349

Boys and girls to learn letters and the lyre, from ten to thirteen
years of age. Masters will teach the laws and homilies of the
lawgiver, and licensed extracts from the poets   350

The teaching is to be simple, and common to both sexes   351

Rudiments of arithmetic and geometry to be taught   352

Astronomy must be taught, in order that the citizens may not
assert libellous falsehoods respecting the heavenly bodies   354

Hunting--how far permitted or advised   355

Large general sense which Plato gives to the word hunting   356

Number of religious sacrifices to be determined by lawgiver   357

Military muster of the whole citizen population once in each
month--men, women, and children   358

Gymnastic training must have reference to war, not to
athletic prizes   358

Regulation of sexual intercourse. Syssitia or public mess   359

Regulations about landed property--Boundaries--Limited power of
fining by magistrates   360

Regulations about artisans--Distribution of the annual landed
produce   361

Admission of resident Metics--conditions attached   362

Offences and penal judicature--Procedure of the Dikasts
_ib._

Sacrilege, the gravest of all crimes. High Treason   363

Theft punished by _poena dupli_. General exhortation
founded by Plato upon this enactment   364

All unjust men are unjust involuntarily.--No such thing as
voluntary injustice. Injustice depends upon the temper of the
agent--Distinction between damage and injury   365

Damage may be voluntary or involuntary--Injustice is shown often
by conferring corrupt profit upon another--Purpose of punishment,
to heal the distemper of the criminal   _ib._

Three distinct causes of misguided proceedings. 1. Painful
stimulus. 2. Pleasurable stimulus. 3. Ignorance   366

The unjust man is under the influence either of the first or
second of these causes, without controul of Reason. If he acts
under controul of Reason, though the Reason be bad, he is not
unjust   367

Reasoning of Plato to save his doctrine--That no man commits
injustice voluntarily   _ib._

Peculiar definition of injustice. A man may do great voluntary
hurt to others, and yet not be unjust, provided he does it under
the influence of Reason, and not of Appetite   368

Plato's purpose in the Laws is to prevent or remedy not only
injustice but misconduct   369

Varieties of homicide--modes of dealing with them penally   370

Homicide involuntary--Homicide under provocation   _ib._

Homicide voluntary   371

Homicide between kinsmen 372

Homicide justifiable--in what cases   _ib._

Infliction of wounds   _ib._

Infliction of blows   373

Plato has borrowed much from Attic procedure, especially in regard
to Homicide--Peculiar view of Homicide at Athens, as to procedure
374

Impiety or outrage offered to divine things or places   375

All impiety arises from one or other of three heresies. 1. No
belief in the Gods. 2. Belief that the Gods interfere very little.
3. Belief that they may be appeased by prayer and sacrifice   376

Punishment for these three heretical beliefs, with or without
overt act   _ib._

Heretic, whose conduct has been virtuous and faultless, to be
imprisoned for five years, perhaps more   _ib._

Heretic with bad conduct--punishment to be inflicted   377

No private worship or religious rites allowed. Every citizen must
worship at the public temples   _ib._

Uncertain and mischievous action of the religious sentiment upon
individuals, if not controuled by public authority   378

Intolerant spirit of Plato's legislation respecting uniformity of
belief   379

The persons denounced by Plato as heretics, and punished as such,
would have included a majority of the Grecian world   381

Proëm or prefatory discourse of Plato, for these severe laws
against heretics   383

The third variety of heresy is declared to be the worst--the
belief in Gods persuadable by prayer and sacrifice   384

Heretics censured by Plato--Sokrates censured before the Athenian
Dikasts   385

Kosmological and Kosmogonical theory announced in Leges   386

Soul--older, more powerful in the universe than Body. Different
souls are at work in the universe--the good soul and the bad soul
_ib._

Plato's argument is unsatisfactory and inconsistent   388

Reverence of Plato for uniform circular rotation   389

Argument of Plato to confute the second class of heretics
_ib._

Contrary doctrine of Plato in Republic   390

Argument of Plato to refute the third class of heretics   391

General belief in Greece about the efficacy of prayer and
sacrifice to appease the Gods   392

Incongruities of Plato's own doctrine   393

Both Herodotus and Sokrates dissented from Plato's doctrine   394

Great opposition which Plato's doctrine would have encountered in
Greece   395

Local infallibility was claimed as a rule in each community,
though rarely enforced with severity: Plato both claims it more
emphatically, and enforces it more rigorously   396

Farther civil and political regulations for the Magnetic
community. No evidence that Plato had studied the working of
different institutions in practice   397

Modes of acquiring property--legitimate and illegitimate
_ib._

Plato's general regulations leave little room for disputes about
ownership   398

Plato's principles of legislation, not consistent--comparison of
them with the Attic law about Eranoi   399

Regulations about slaves, and about freedmen   400

Provisions in case a slave is sold, having a distemper upon him
401

Retailers. Strict regulations about them. No citizen can be a
retailer   _ib._

Frauds committed by sellers--severe punishments on them   402

Comparison with the lighter punishment inflicted by Attic law
403

Regulations about Orphans and Guardians: also about Testamentary
powers   404

Plato's general coincidence with Attic law and its sentiment   406

Tutelage of Orphans--Disagreement of Married Couples--Divorce
_ib._

Neglect of Parents   407

Poison--Magic--Incantations--Severe punishment   _ib._

Punishment is inflicted with a view to future prevention or
amendment   408

Penalty for abusive words--for libellous comedy. Mendicity
forbidden   409

Regulations about witnesses on judicial trials   _ib._

Censure of forensic eloquence, and the teachers of it. Penalties
against contentious litigation   410

Many of Plato's laws are discharges of ethical antipathy. The
antipathy of Melêtus against Sokrates was of the same character
411

Penalty for abuse of public trust--wrongful appropriation of
public money--evasion of military service   412

Oaths. Dikasts, Judges, Electors, are to be sworn: but no parties
to a suit, or interested witnesses, can be sworn   413

Regulations about admission of strangers, and foreign travel of
citizens   414

Suretyship--Length of prescription for ownership, &c.   415

Judicial trial--three stages. 1. Arbitrators.
2. Tribe-Dikasteries. 3. Select Dikastery   _ib._

Funerals--proceedings prescribed--expense limited   _ib._

Conservative organ to keep up the original scheme of the lawgiver.
Nocturnal Council for this purpose--how constituted   _ib._

This Council must keep steadily in view the one great end of the
city--Mistakes made by existing cities about the right end   417

The one end of the city is the virtue of its citizens--that
property which is common to the four varieties of Virtue--Reason,
Courage, Temperance, Justice   _ib._

The Nocturnal** Council must comprehend this unity of Virtue,
explain it to others, and watch that it be carried out in detail
418

They must also adopt, explain, and enforce upon the citizens, an
orthodox religious creed. Fundamental dogmas of such creed   419

Leges close, without describing the education proper for the
Nocturnal Counsellors. _Epinomis_ supplying this defect   420

The Athenian declares his plan of education--Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy   _ib._

Theological view of Astronomy--Divine Kosmos--Soul more ancient
and more sovereign than Body   421

Improving effects of the study of Astronomy in this spirit   422

Study of arithmetic and geometry: varieties of proportion   423

When the general forms of things have thus been learnt, particular
individuals in nature must be brought under them   _ib._

Question as to education of the Nocturnal Council is answered in
the Epinomis   424

Problem which the Nocturnal Council are required to solve,
What is the common property of Prudence, Courage, Temperance,
Justice, by reason of which each is called Virtue?   425

The only common property is that all of them are essential to the
maintenance of society, and tend to promote human security and
happiness   _ib._

Tendency of the four opposite qualities to lessen human happiness
426

A certain measure of all the four virtues is required. In judging
of particular acts instigated by each, there is always a tacit
reference to the hurt or benefit in the special case   _ib._


Plato places these four virtues in the highest scale of Expetenda
or Bona, on the ground that all the other Bona are sure to flow
from them   428

In thus directing the attention of the Council to the common
property of the four virtues, Plato enforces upon them the
necessity of looking to the security and happiness of their
community as the paramount end   429

But he enjoins also other objectionable ends   _ib._

Intolerance of Plato--Comparison of the Platonic community with
Athens   _ib._




PLATO.

