
PLATO, AND THE OTHER COMPANIONS OF SOKRATES.




PLATO,

AND THE

OTHER COMPANIONS OF SOKRATES.



BY

GEORGE GROTE

AUTHOR OF THE 'HISTORY OF GREECE'.



_A NEW EDITION._

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. IV.

LONDON:

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

1888.

_The right of Translation is reserved._




CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XXXV.

PLATONIC REPUBLIC--ABSTRACT.


Declared theme of the Republic--Expansion and multiplication of
the topics connected with it   1

Personages of the dialogue   2

Views of Kephalus about old age   _ib._

Definition of Justice by Simonides--It consists in rendering to
every man what is owing to him   _ib._

Objections to it by Sokrates--There are cases in which it is not
right to restore what is owing, or to tell the truth   3

Explanation by Polemarchus--Farther interrogations by
Sokrates--Justice renders what is proper and suitable: but how?
in what cases, proper? Under what circumstances is Justice useful?   4

The just man, being good for keeping property guarded, must also
be good for stealing property--Analogies cited   5

Justice consists in doing good to friends, evil to enemies--But
how, if a man mistakes who his friends are, and makes friends of
bad men?   6

Justice consists in doing good to your friend, if really a good
man: hurt to your enemy, with the like proviso. Sokrates affirms
that the just man will do no hurt to any one. Definition of
Simonides rejected   _ib._

Thrasymachus takes up the dialogue--Repulsive portrait drawn of
him   7

Violence of Thrasymachus--Subdued manner of Sokrates--Conditions
of useful colloquy   _ib._

Definition given by Thrasymachus--Justice is that which is
advantageous to the more powerful. Comments by Sokrates. What if
the powerful man mistakes his own advantage?   8

Correction by Thrasymachus--if the Ruler mistakes, he is _pro
tanto_ no Ruler--The Ruler, _quâ_ Ruler--_quâ_
Craftsman--is infallible   9

Reply by Sokrates--The Ruler, _quâ_ infallible Craftsman,
studies the interest of those whom he governs, and not his own
interest   _ib._

Thrasymachus denies this--Justice is the good of another. The just
many are worse off than the unjust One, and are forced to submit
to his superior strength   10

Position laid for the subsequent debate and exposition   11

Arguments of Sokrates--Injustice is a source of weakness--Every
multitude must observe justice among themselves, in order to avoid
perpetual quarrels. The same about any single individual: if he is
unjust, he will be at war with himself, and perpetually weak
_ib._

Farther argument of Sokrates--The just man is happy, the unjust
man miserable--Thrasymachus is confuted and silenced. Sokrates
complains that he does not yet know what Justice is   _ib._

Glaukon intimates that he is not satisfied with the proof, though
he agrees in the opinion expressed by Sokrates. Tripartite
distribution of Good--To which of the three heads does Justice
belong?   12

Glaukon undertakes to set forth the case against Sokrates, though
professing not to agree with it     _ib._

Pleading of Glaukon. Justice is in the nature of a compromise for
all--a medium between what is best and what is worst   13

Comparison of the happiness of the just man derived from his
justice alone, when others are unjust to him with that of the
unjust man under parallel circumstances   14

Pleading of Adeimantus on the same side. He cites advice given by
fathers to their sons, recommending just behaviour by reason of
its consequences   15

Nobody recommends Justice _per se_, but only by reason of its
consequences   16

Adeimantus calls upon Sokrates to recommend and enforce Justice on
its own grounds, and to explain how Justice in itself benefits the
mind of the just man   17

Relation of Glaukon and Adeimantus to Thrasymachus   18

Statement of the question as it stands after the speeches of
Glaukon and Adeimantus. What Sokrates undertakes to prove
_ib._

Position to be proved by Sokrates--Justice makes the just man
happy _per se_, whatever be its results   20

Argument of Sokrates to show what Justice is--Assumed analogy
between the city and the individual   _ib._

Fundamental principle, to which communities of mankind owe their
origin--Reciprocity of want and service between individuals--No
individual can suffice to himself   _ib._

Moderate equipment of a sound and healthy city--Few wants   22

Enlargement of the city--Multiplied wants and services. First
origin of war and strife with neighbours--It arises out of these
multiplied wants   _ib._

Separate class of soldiers or Guardians. One man cannot do well
more than one business. Character required in the
Guardians--Mildness at home with pugnacity against enemies   23

Peculiar education necessary, musical as well as gymnastical   23

Musical education, by fictions as well as by truth. Fictions
addressed to the young: the religious legends now circulating are
often pernicious: censorship necessary   24

Orthodox type to be laid down: all poets are required to conform
their legends to it. The Gods are causes of nothing but good:
therefore they are causes of few things. Great preponderance of
actual evil   _ib._

The Guardians must not fear death. No terrible descriptions of
Hades must be presented to them: no intense sorrow, nor violent
nor sensual passion, must be recounted either of Gods or Heroes
25

Type for all narratives respecting men   26

Style of narratives. The poet must not practise variety of
imitation: he must not speak in the name of bad characters
_ib._

Rhythm and Melody regulated. None but simple and grave music
allowed: only the Dorian and Phrygian moods, with the lyre and
harp   _ib._

Effect of musical training of the mind--makes youth love the
Beautiful and hate the Ugly   27

Training of the body--simple and sober. No refined medical art
allowed. Wounds or temporary ailments treated; but sickly frames
cannot be kept alive   28

Value of Gymnastic in imparting courage to the mind--Gymnastic and
Music necessary to correct each other   29

Out of the Guardians a few of the very best must be chosen as
Elders or Rulers--highly educated and severely tested   _ib._

Fundamental creed required to be planted in the minds of all the
citizens respecting their breed and relationship   30

How is such a fiction to be accredited in the first instance?
Difficulty extreme, of first beginning; but if once accredited, it
will easily transmit itself by tradition   31

Guardians to reside in barracks and mess together; to have no
private property or home; to be maintained by contribution from
the people   32

If the Guardians fail in these precautions, and acquire
private interests, the city will be ruined   32

Complete unity of the city, every man performing his own special
function   33

The maintenance of the city depends upon that of the habits,
character, and education of the Guardians   34

Religious legislation--Consult the Delphian Apollo   _ib._

The city is now constituted as a good city--that is, wise,
courageous, temperate, just. Where is its Justice?   _ib._

First, where is the wisdom of the city? It resides in the few
elder Rulers   _ib._

Where is the Courage? In the body of Guardians or Soldiers   35

Where is the Temperance? It resides in all and each, Rulers,
Guardians, and People. Superiors rule and Inferiors obey
_ib._

Where is the Justice? In all and each of them also. It consists in
each performing his own special function, and not meddling with
the function of the others   36

Injustice arises when any one part of the city interferes with the
functions of the other part, or undertakes double functions   37

Analogy of the city to the individual--Each man is tripartite,
having in his mind Reason, Energy, Appetite. These three elements
are distinct, and often conflicting   _ib._

Reason, Energy, Appetite, in the individual--analogous to Rulers,
Guardians, Craftsmen in the city. Reason is to rule Appetite.
Energy assists Reason in ruling it   39

A man is just when these different parts of his mind exercise
their appropriate functions without hindrance   _ib._

Justice and Injustice in the mind--what health and disease are in
the body   40

Original question now resumed--Does Justice make a man happy, and
Injustice make him miserable, apart from all consequences?
Answer--Yes   _ib._

Glaukon requires farther explanation about the condition of the
Guardians, in regard to sexual and family ties   41

Men and women will live together and perform the duties of
Guardians alike--They will receive the same gymnastic and musical
training   41

Nature does not prescribe any distribution of functions between
men and women. Women are inferior to men in every thing. The best
women are equal to second-best men 42

Community of life and relations between the male and female
Guardians. Temporary marriages arranged by contrivance of the
Elders. No separate families   _ib._

Regulations about age, for procreation--Children brought up under
public authority   44

Perfect communion of sentiment and interest among the
Guardians--Causes of pleasure and pain the same to all, like parts
of the same organism   _ib._

Harmony--absence of conflicting interest--assured scale of equal
comfort--consequent happiness--among the Guardians   45

In case of war both sexes will go together to battle--Rewards to
distinguished warriors   46

War against Hellenic enemies to be carried on mildly--Hellens are
all by nature kinsmen   47

Question--How is the scheme practicable? It is difficult, yet
practicable on one condition--That philosophy and political power
should come into the same hands   _ib._

Characteristic marks of the philosopher--He contemplates and knows
Entia or unchangeable Forms, as distinguished from fluctuating
particulars or Fientia   48

Ens alone can be known--Non-Ens is unknowable. That which is
midway between Ens and Non-Ens (particulars) is matter only of
opinion. Ordinary men attain nothing beyond opinion   49

Particulars fluctuate: they are sometimes just or beautiful,
sometimes unjust or ugly. Forms or Entia alone remain constant
50

The many cannot discern or admit the reality of Forms--Their minds
are always fluctuating among particulars   51

The philosopher will be ardent for all varieties of knowledge--His
excellent moral attributes--He will be trained to capacity for
active life   _ib._

Adeimantus does not dispute the conclusion, but remarks that it is
at variance with actual facts--Existing philosophers are either
worthless pretenders, or when they are good, useless   52

Sokrates admits the fact to be so--His simile of the able
steersman on shipboard, among a disobedient crew   53

The uselessness of the true philosopher is the fault of the
citizen, who will not invoke his guidance   54

The great qualities required to form a philosopher, become sources
of perversion, under a misguiding public opinion   _ib._

Mistake of supposing that such perversion arises from the
Sophists. Irresistible effect of the public opinion generally, in
tempting or forcing a dissenter into orthodoxy   55

The Sophists and other private teachers accept the prevalent
orthodoxy, and conform their teaching to it   56

The people generally hate philosophy--A youth who aspires to it
will be hated by the people, and persecuted even by his own
relatives   57

The really great minds are thus driven away from the path of
philosophy--which is left to empty pretenders   58

Rare cases in which a highly qualified philosopher remains--Being
at variance with public opinion, he can achieve nothing, and is
lucky if he can obtain safety by silence   _ib._

The philosopher must have a community suitable to him, and worthy
of him   59

It must be such a community as Sokrates has been describing--But
means must be taken to keep up a perpetual succession of
philosophers as Rulers   60

Proper manner of teaching philosophy--Not to begin at a very early
age   _ib._

If the multitude could once see a real, perfect, philosopher, they
could not fail to love him: but this never happens   61

Course of training in the Platonic city, for imparting philosophy
to the Rulers. They must be taught to ascend to the Idea of Good.
But what is Good?   _ib._

Ancient disputes upon this point, though every one yearns after
Good. Some say Intelligence; some say Pleasure. Neither is
satisfactory   62

Adeimantus asks what Sokrates says. Sokrates says that he can not
answer: but he compares it by a metaphor to the Sun   63

The Idea of Good rules the ideal or intelligible world, as the Sun
rules the sensible or visible world   64

To the intelligible world there are applicable two distinct modes
of procedure--the Geometrical--the Dialectic. Geometrical
procedure assumes diagrams   65

Dialectic procedure assumes nothing. It departs from the highest
Form, and steps gradually down to the lowest, without meddling
with any thing except Forms   66

Two distinct grades of Cognition--Direct or
Superior--Nous--Indirect or Inferior--Dianoia    _ib._

Two distinct grades of Opinion also in the Sensible World--Faith
or Belief--Conjecture   67

Distinction between the philosopher and the unphilosophical
public, illustrated by the simile of the Cave, and the captives
imprisoned therein   _ib._

Daylight of philosophy contrasted with the firelight and shadows
of the Cave   69

Purpose of a philosophical training, to turn a man round from
facing the bad light of the Cave to face the daylight of
philosophy, and to see the eternal Forms   _ib._

Those who have emerged from the Cave into full daylight amidst
eternal Forms, must be forced to come down again and undertake
active duties--Their reluctance to do this   70

Studies serving as introduction to philosophy--Arithmetic, its
awakening power--shock to the mind by felt contradiction
_ib._

Perplexity arising from the One and Many, stimulates the mind to
an intellectual effort for clearing it up   72

Geometry conducts the mind to wards Universal Ens   _ib._

Astronomy--how useful--not useful as now taught--must be studied
by ideal figures, not by observation   73

Acoustics, in like manner--The student will be thus conducted
to the highest of all studies--Dialectic: and to the region of
pure intelligible Forms   74

Question by Glaukon--What is the Dialectic Power? Sokrates
declares that he cannot answer with certainty, and that Glaukon
could not follow him if he did   75

He answers partially--It is the consummation of all the sciences,
raising the student to the contemplation of pure Forms, and
especially to that of the highest Form--_Good_   _ib._

The Synoptic view peculiar to the Dialectician   76

Scale and duration of various studies for the Guardians, from
youth upwards   _ib._

All these studies, and this education, are common to females as
well as males   77

First formation of the Platonic city--how brought about:
difficult, but not impossible   78

The city thus formed will last long, but not for ever. After a
certain time, it will begin to degenerate. Stages of its
degeneracy   _ib._

1. Timocracy and the timocratical individual. 2 Oligarchy, and the
oligarchical individual   79

3. Democracy, and the democratical individual   80

4. Passage from democracy to despotism. Character of the despotic
city  81

Despotic individual corresponding to that city   82

The city has thus passed by four stages, from best to worse.
Question--How are Happiness and Misery apportioned among them?
_ib._

Misery of the despotised city   83

Supreme Misery of the despotising individual   _ib._

Conclusion--The Model city and the individual corresponding to it,
are the happiest of all--That which is farthest removed from it,
is the most miserable of all   84

The Just Man is happy in and through his Justice, however he may
be treated by others. The Unjust Man, miserable   84

Other arguments proving the same conclusion--Pleasures of
Intelligence are the best of all pleasures   _ib._

They are the only pleasures completely true and pure. Comparison
of pleasure and pain with neutrality. Prevalent illusions   86

Most men know nothing of true and pure pleasure. Simile of the
Kosmos--Absolute height and depth   87

Nourishment of the mind partakes more of real essence than
nourishment of the body--Replenishment of the mind imparts fuller
pleasure than replenishment of the body   88

Comparative worthlessness of the pleasures of Appetite and
Ambition, when measured against those of Intelligence   89

The Just Man will be happy from his justice--He will look only to
the good order of his own mind--He will stand aloof from public
affairs, in cities as now constituted   90

Tenth Book--Censure of the poets is renewed--Mischiefs of
imitation generally, as deceptive--Imitation from imitation   91

Censure of Homer--He is falsely extolled as educator of the
Hellenic world. He and other poets only deceive their hearers   92

The poet chiefly appeals to emotions--Mischiefs of such eloquent
appeals, as disturbing the rational government of the mind
_ib._

Ancient quarrel between philosophy and poetry--Plato fights for
philosophy, though his feelings are strongly enlisted for poetry
93

Immortality of the soul affirmed and sustained by argument--Total
number of souls always the same   _ib._

Recapitulation--The Just Man will be happy, both from his justice
and from its consequences, both here and hereafter   94




