CHAPTER XXXVI.

REPUBLIC--REMARKS ON ITS MAIN THESIS.


Summary of the preceding chapter   95

Title of the Republic, of ancient date, but only a partial
indication of its contents   96

Parallelism between the Commonwealth and the Individual   96

Each of them a whole, composed of parts distinct in function and
unequal in merit   97

End proposed by Plato. Happiness of the Commonwealth. Happiness
of the individual. Conditions of happiness   98

Peculiar view of Justice taken by Plato   99

Pleadings of Glaukon and Adeimantus _ib._

The arguments which they enforce were not invented by the
Sophists, but were the received views anterior to Plato   100

Argument of Sokrates to refute them. Sentiments in which it
originates. Panegyric on Justice   101

Different senses of justice--wider and narrower sense   102

Plato's sense of the word Justice or Virtue--self-regarding   104

He represents the motives to it, as arising from the internal
happiness of the just agents   105

His theory departs more widely from the truth than that which he
opposes. Argument of Adeimantus discussed   106

A Reciprocity of rights and duties between men in social
life--different feelings towards one and towards the other   109

Plato's own theory, respecting the genesis of society, is based on
reciprocity   111

Antithesis and correlation of obligation and right. Necessity of
keeping the two ideas together, as the basis of any theory
respecting society   112

Characteristic feature of the Platonic
Commonwealth--specialization of services to that function for
which each man is fit--will not apply to one individual separately   114

Plato has not made good his refutation--the thesis which he
impugns is true   116

Statement of the real issue between him and his opponents   117

He himself misrepresents this issue--he describes his opponents as
enemies of justice   _ib._

Farther arguments of Plato in support of his thesis. Comparison of
three different characters of men   118

His arguments do not go to the point which he professes to aim at
120

Exaggerated parallelism between the Commonwealth and the
individual man   121

Second Argument of Plato to prove the happiness of the just
man--He now recalls his previous concession, and assumes that the just
man will receive just treatment and esteem from others
_ib._

Dependence of the happiness of the individual on the society in
which he is placed   123

Inconsistency of affirming general positions respecting the
happiness of the just man, in all societies without distinction
124

Qualified sense in which only this can be done   125

Question--Whether the just man is orthodox or dissenter in his
society?--important in discussing whether he is happy   126

Comparison of the position of Sokrates at Athens, with that of his
accusers   _ib._

Imperfect ethical basis on which Plato has conducted the
discussion in the Republic   127

Plato in Republic is preacher, inculcating useful beliefs--not
philosopher, establishing scientific theory. State of Just and
Unjust Man in the Platonic Commonwealth   129

Comparative happiness of the two in actual communities. Plato is
dissatisfied with it--This is his motive for recasting society on
his own principles   130

Confusion between the preacher and the philosopher in the Platonic
Republic   131

Remarks on the contrast between ethical theory and ethical
precepts   _ib._


