CHAPTER XXXVIII.

TIMÆUS AND KRITIAS.


Persons and scheme of the Timæus and Kritias   215

The Timæus is the earliest ancient physical theory, which we
possess in the words of its author   216

Position and character of the Pythagorean Timæus   _ib._

Poetical imagination displayed by Plato. He pretends to nothing
more than probability. Contrast with Sokrates, Isokrates, Xenophon
217

Fundamental distinction between Ens and Fientia   219

Postulates of Plato. The Demiurgus--The Eternal Ideas--Chaotic
Materia or Fundamentum. The Kosmos is a living being and a God
220

The Demiurgus not a Creator--The Kosmos arises from his operating
upon the random movements of Necessity. He cannot controul
necessity--he only persuades   _ib._

Meaning of Necessity in Plato   221

Process of demiurgic construction--The total Kosmos comes
logically first, constructed on the model of the [Greek:
Au)tozô=on]   223

Body of the Kosmos, perfectly spherical--its rotations   225

Soul of the Kosmos--its component ingredients--stretched from
centre to circumference   _ib._

Regular or measured Time--began with the Kosmos   227

Divine tenants of the Kosmos. Primary and Visible Gods--Stars and
Heavenly Bodies   229

Secondary and generated Gods--Plato's dictum respecting them. His
acquiescence in tradition   230

Remarks on Plato's Canon of Belief   231

Address and order of the Demiurgus to the generated Gods   233

Preparations for the construction of man. Conjunction of three
souls and one body   _ib._

Proceedings of the generated Gods--they fabricate the cranium, as
miniature of the Kosmos, with the rational soul rotating within it
235

The cranium is mounted on a tall body--six varieties of
motion--organs of sense. Vision--Light   236

Principal advantages of sight and hearing. Observations of the
rotation of the Kosmos   237

The Kosmos is product of joint action of Reason and Necessity. The
four visible and tangible elements are not primitive   238

Forms or Ideas and Materia Prima--Forms of the Elements--Place, or
Receptivity   _ib._

Primordial Chaos--Effect of intervention by the Demiurgus   240

Geometrical theory of the elements--fundamental triangles--regular
solids   _ib._

Varieties of each element   242

Construction of man imposed by the Demiurgus upon the secondary
Gods. Triple Soul. Distribution thereof in the body   243

Functions of the heart and lungs. Thoracic soul   245

Abdominal Soul--difficulty of controuling it--functions of the
liver   _ib._

The liver is made the seat of the prophetic agency. Function of
the spleen   246

Length of the intestinal canal, in order that food might not be
frequently needed   247

Bone--Flesh--Marrow   _ib._

Nails--Mouth--Teeth. Plants produced for nutrition of man   248

General view of Diseases and their Causes   249

Diseases of mind--wickedness is a disease--no man is voluntarily
wicked   _ib._

Badness of mind arises from body   250

Preservative and healing agencies against disease--well-regulated
exercise, of mind and body proportionally   250

Treatment proper for mind alone, apart from body--supremacy of the
rational soul must be cultivated   251

We must study and understand the rotations of the Kosmos--this is
the way to amend the rotations of the rational soul   252

Construction of women, birds, quadrupeds, fishes, &c., all
from the degradation of primitive man   _ib._

Large range of topics introduced in the Timæus   254

The Demiurgus of the Platonic Timæus--how conceived by other
philosophers of the same century   _ib._

Adopted and welcomed by the Alexandrine Jews, as a parallel to the
Mosaic Genesis   256

Physiology of the Platonic Timæus--subordinate to Plato's views of
ethical teleology. Triple soul--each soul at once material and
mental 257

Triplicity of the soul--espoused afterwards by Galen   258

Admiration of Galen for Plato--his agreement with Plato, and his
dissension from Plato--his improved physiology   259

Physiology and Pathology of Plato--compared with that of Aristotle
and the Hippokratic treatises   260

Contrast between the admiration of Plato for the constructors of
the Kosmos, and the defective results which he describes   262

Degeneration of the real tenants of Earth from their primitive
type   263

Close of the Timæus. Plato turns away from the shameful results,
and reverts to the glorification of the primitive types   264

Kritias: a fragment   265

Prooemium to Timæus. Intended Tetralogy for the Republic. The
Kritias was third piece in that Tetralogy   _ib._

Subject of the Kritias. Solon and the Egyptian priests. Citizens
of Platonic Republic are identified with ancient Athenians   266

Plato professes that what he is about to recount is matter of
history, recorded by Egyptian priests   268

Description of the vast island of Atlantis and its powerful kings
_ib._

Corruption and wickedness of the Atlantid people   269

Conjectures as to what the Platonic Kritias would have been--an
ethical epic in prose   _ib._

Plato represents the epic Kritias as matter of recorded history
270


