PART VI.

_Of the resemblance emotions bear to their causes._


That many emotions bear a certain resemblance to their causes, is a
truth that can be made clear by induction; though, so far as I know, the
observation has not been made by any writer. Motion, in its different
circumstances, is productive of feelings that resemble it. Sluggish
motion, for example, causeth a languid unpleasant feeling; slow uniform
motion, a feeling calm and pleasant; and brisk motion, a lively feeling
that rouses the spirits and promotes activity. A fall of water through
rocks, raises in the mind a tumultuous confused agitation, extremely
similar to its cause. When force is exerted with any effort, the
spectator feels a similar effort as of force exerted within his mind. A
large object swells the heart. An elevated object makes the spectator
stand erect.

Sounds also produce emotions that resemble them. A sound in a low key,
brings down the mind. Such a sound in a full tone, hath a certain
solemnity, which it communicates to the emotion produced by it. A sound
in a high key, chears the mind by raising it. Such a sound in a full
tone, both elevates and swells the mind.

Again, a wall or pillar that declines from the perpendicular, produceth
a painful emotion, as of a tottering and falling within the mind. An
emotion somewhat similar is produced by a tall pillar that stands so
ticklish as to look like falling. For this reason, a column upon a base
looks better than upon the naked ground. The base, which makes a part of
the column, inspires a feeling of firmness and stability. The ground
supporting a naked column, is too large to be considered as its base.
And for the same reason, a cube as a base, is preferred before a
cylinder, though the latter is a more beautiful figure. The angles of a
cube, being extended to a greater distance from the centre than the
circumference of a cylinder, give the column a greater appearance of
stability. This excludes not a different reason, that the base, shaft,
and capital, of a pillar, ought, for the sake of variety, to differ from
each other. If the shaft be round, the base and capital ought to be
square.

A constrained posture, uneasy to the man himself, is disagreeable to the
spectator; which makes it a rule in painting, that the drapery ought not
to adhere to the body, but hang loose, that the figures may appear easy
and free in their movements. Hence the disagreeable figure of a French
dancing-master is one of Hogarth’s pieces. It is also ridiculous,
because the constraint is assumed and not forced.

The foregoing observation is not confined to emotions raised by still
life. It holds also in those which are raised by the qualities, actions,
and passions, of a sensible being. Love inspired by a fine woman,
assumes her qualities. It is sublime, soft, tender, severe, or gay,
according to its cause. This is still more remarkable in emotions raised
by human actions. It hath already been remarked[46], that any signal
instance of gratitude, beside procuring esteem for the author, raiseth
in the spectator a vague emotion of gratitude, which disposeth him to be
grateful. I now further remark, that this vague emotion, being of the
same kind with what produced the grateful action, hath a strong
resemblance to its cause. Courage exerted inspires the reader as well as
the spectator with a like emotion of courage. A just action fortifies
our love to justice, and a generous action rouses our generosity. In
short, with respect to all virtuous actions, it will be found by
induction, that they lead us to imitation by inspiring emotions
resembling the passions that produced these actions. And hence the
benefit of dealing in choice books and in choice company.

Grief as well as joy are infectious: the emotions they raise in a
spectator resemble them perfectly. Fear is equally infectious: and
hence in an army, fear, even from the slighted cause, making an
impression on a few, spreads generally through all, and becomes an
universal panic. Pity is similar to its cause. A parting scene betwixt
lovers or friends, produceth in the spectator a sort of pity, which is
tender like the distress. The anguish of remorse, produceth pity of a
harsh kind; and if the remorse be extreme, the pity hath a mixture of
horror. Anger I think is singular; for even where it is moderate and
causeth no disgust, it disposes not the spectator to anger in any
degree[47]. Covetousness, cruelty, treachery, and other vicious
passions, are so far from raising any emotion similar to themselves, to
incite a spectator to imitation, that they have an opposite effect. They
raise abhorrence, and fortify the spectator in his aversion to such
actions. When anger is immoderate, it cannot fail to produce the same
effect.




PART VII.

_Final causes of the more frequent emotions and passions._


It is a law in our nature, that we never act but by the impulse of
desire; which in other words is saying, that it is passion, by the
desire included in it, which determines the will. Hence in the conduct
of life, it is of the utmost importance, that our passions be directed
upon proper objects, tend to just and rational ends, and with relation
to each other be duly balanced. The beauty of contrivance, so
conspicuous in the human frame, is not confined to the rational part of
our nature, but is visible over the whole. Concerning the passions in
particular, however irregular, headstrong, and perverse, in an overly
view, they may appear, I propose to show, that they are by nature
adjusted and tempered with admirable wisdom, for the good of society as
well as for private good. This subject is extensive: but as the nature
of the present undertaking will not admit a complete discussion, it
shall suffice to give a few observations in general upon the sensitive
part of our nature, without regarding that strange irregularity of
passion discovered in some individuals. Such topical irregularities, if
I may use the term, cannot fairly be held an objection to the present
theory. We are frequently, it is true, misled by inordinate passion: but
we are also, and perhaps not less frequently, misled by wrong judgement.

In order to a distinct apprehension of the present subject, it must be
premised, that an agreeable object produceth always a pleasant emotion,
and a disagreeable object one that is painful. This is a general law of
nature, which admits not a single exception. Agreeableness in the object
or cause is indeed so essentially connected with pleasure in the emotion
its effect, that an agreeable object cannot be better defined, than by
its power of producing a pleasant emotion. Disagreeableness in the
object or cause, has the same necessary connection with pain in the
emotion produced by it.

From this preliminary it appears, that to inquire for what end an
emotion is made pleasant or painful, resolves into an inquiry for what
end its cause is made agreeable or disagreeable. And from the most
accurate induction it will be discovered, that no cause of an emotion is
made agreeable or disagreeable arbitrarily; but that these qualities are
so distributed as to answer wise and good purposes. It is an invincible
proof of the benignity of the Deity, that we are surrounded with things
generally agreeable, which contribute remarkably to our entertainment
and to our happiness. Some things are made disagreeable, such as a
rotten carcass, because they are noxious. Others, a dirty marsh, for
example, or a barren heath, are made disagreeable in order to excite our
industry. And with respect to the few things that are neither agreeable
nor disagreeable; it will be made evident, that their being left
indifferent is not a work of chance but of wisdom. Of such I shall have
occasion to give several instances.

Having attempted to assign the final causes of emotions and passions
considered as pleasant or painful, we proceed to the final causes of the
desires involved in them. This seems a work of some difficulty; for the
desires that accompany different passions have very different aims, and
seldom or never demand precisely the same gratification. One passion
moves us to cling to its object, one to fly from it; one passion impels
to action for our own good, and one for the good of others; one passion
prompts us to do good to ourselves or others, and one to do mischief,
frequently to others, and sometimes even to ourselves. Deliberating upon
this intricate subject, and finding an intimate correspondence betwixt
our desires and their objects, it is natural to think that the former
must be regulated in some measure by the latter. In this view, I begin
with desire directed upon an inanimate object.

Any pleasure we have in an agreeable object of this kind, is enjoyed by
the continuance of the pleasant impression it makes upon us; and
accordingly the desire involved in the pleasant emotion tends to that
end, and is gratified by dwelling upon the agreeable object. Hence such
an object may be properly termed _attractive_. Thus a flowing river, a
towering hill, a fine garden, are attractive objects. They fix the
attention of the spectator, by inspiring pleasant emotions, which are
gratified by adhering to these objects and enjoying them. On the other
hand, a disagreeable object of the same kind, raises in us a painful
emotion including a desire to turn from the object, which relieves us of
course from the pain; and hence such an object may be properly termed
_repulsive_. A monstrous birth, for example, a rotten carcass, a
confusion of jarring sounds, are repulsive. They repel the mind, by
inspiring painful or unpleasant emotions, which are gratified by flying
from such objects. Thus in general, with regard to inanimate objects,
the desire included in every pleasant passion tends to prolong the
pleasure, and the desire included in every painful passion tends to put
an end to the pain. Here the final cause is evident. Our desires, so
far, are modelled in such a manner as to correspond precisely to the
sensitive part of our nature, prone to happiness and averse to misery.
These operations of adhering to an agreeable inanimate object, and
flying from one that is disagreeable, are performed in the beginning of
life by means of desire impelling us, without the intervention of reason
or reflection. Reason and reflection directing self-love, become
afterward motives that unite their force with desire; because experience
informs us, that the adhering to agreeable objects and the flying from
those that are disagreeable, contribute to our happiness.

Sensible Beings considered as objects of passion, lead us into a more
complex theory. A sensible being that is agreeable by its attributes,
inspires us with a pleasant emotion; and the desire included in this
emotion has evidently different means of gratification. A man regarding
himself only, may be satisfied with viewing and contemplating this
being, precisely as if it were inanimate; or he may desire the more
generous gratification of making it happy. Were man altogether selfish,
it would be conformable to his nature, that he should indulge the
pleasant emotion without making any acknowledgement to the person who
gives him pleasure, more than to a pure air or temperate clime when he
enjoys these benefits. But as man is endued with a principle of
benevolence as well as of selfishness, he is prompted by his nature to
desire the good of every sensible being that gives him pleasure. And the
final cause of desire so directed, is illustrious. It contributes to a
man’s own happiness, by affording him more means of gratification than
he can have when his desire terminates upon himself alone; and at the
same time it tends eminently to improve the happiness of those with whom
he is connected. The directing our desires in this manner, occasions a
beautiful coalition of self-love with benevolence; for both are equally
promoted by the same internal impulse, and by the same external conduct.
And this consideration, by the way, ought to silence those minute
philosophers, who, ignorant of human nature, teach a most disgustful
doctrine. That to serve others unless with a view to our own good, is
weakness and folly; as if self-love only contributed to happiness and
not benevolence. The hand of God is too visible in the human frame, to
permit us to think seriously, that there ever can be any jarring or
inconsistency among natural principles, those especially of self-love
and benevolence, which regulate the bulk of our actions.

Next in order come sensible Beings that are in affliction or pain. It is
disagreeable to behold a person in distress; and therefore this object
must raise in the spectator an uneasy emotion. Were man purely a selfish
being, he would be prompted by his nature to turn from every object,
animate or inanimate, that gives him uneasiness. But the principle of
benevolence gives an opposite direction to his desire. It impels him to
afford relief; and by relieving the person from distress, his desire is
fully gratified. Our benevolence to a person in distress is inflamed
into an emotion of sympathy, signifying in Greek the painful emotion
that is raised in us by that person. Thus sympathy, though a painful
emotion, is in its nature attractive. And with respect to its final
cause, we can be at no loss. It not only tends to relieve a
fellow-creature from pain, but in its gratification is greatly more
pleasant than if it were repulsive.

We in the last place bring under consideration persons hateful by vice
or wickedness. Imagine a wretch who has lately perpetrated some horrid
crime. He is disagreeable to every spectator; and consequently raises in
every spectator a painful emotion. What is the natural gratification of
the desire that accompanies this painful emotion? I must here again
observe, that supposing man to be entirely a selfish being, he would be
prompted by his nature to relieve himself from the pain by averting his
eye, and banishing the criminal from his thoughts. But man is not so
constituted. He is composed of many principles, which, though seemingly
contradictory, are perfectly concordant. The principle of benevolence
influences his conduct, not less remarkably than that of selfishness.
And in order to answer the foregoing question, I must introduce a third
principle, not less remarkable in its influence than either of those
mentioned. It is that principle common to all, which prompts us to
punish those who do wrong. An envious, malicious, or cruel action, is
disagreeable to me even where I have no connection with the sufferer,
and raises in me the painful emotion of resentment. The gratification of
this emotion, when accompanied with desire, is directed by the principle
now unfolded. Being prompted by my nature to punish guilt as well as to
reward virtue, my desire is not gratified but by inflicting punishment.
I must chastise the wretch by indignation at least and hatred, if not
more severely. Here the final cause is self-evident.

An injury done to myself, touching me more than when done to others,
raises my resentment in a higher degree. The desire accordingly included
in this passion, is not satisfied with so slight a punishment as
indignation or hatred. It is not fully gratified without retaliation;
and the author must by my hand suffer mischief, as great at least as he
has done me. Neither can we be at any loss about the final cause of this
higher degree of resentment. The whole vigor of this passion is required
to secure individuals from the injustice and oppression of others[48].

A wicked or disgraceful action, is disagreeable not only to others, but
even to the delinquent himself. It raises in him as well as in others a
painful emotion including a desire of punishment. The painful emotion
which the delinquent feels, is distinguished by the name of _remorse_;
and in this case the desire he has to punish is directed against
himself. There cannot be imagined a better contrivance to deter us from
vice; for remorse is the severest of all punishments. This passion and
the desire of self-punishment derived from it, are touched delicately by
Terence.

      _Menedemus._ Ubi comperi ex iis, qui ei fuere conscii,
    Domum revortor mœstus, atque animo fere
    Perturbato, atque incerto præ ægritudine:
    Adsido, adcurrunt servi, soccos detrahunt:
    Video alios festinare, lectos sternere,
    Cœnam adparare: pro se quisque sedulo
    Faciebat, quo illam mihi lenirent miseriam.
    Ubi video hæc, cœpi cogitare: Hem! tot mea
    Solius solliciti sint causa, ut me unum expleant?
    Ancillæ tot me vestiant? sumptus domi
    Tantos ego solus faciam? sed gnatum unicum,
    Quem pariter uti his decuit, aut etiam amplius,
    Quod illa ætas magis ad hæc utenda idonea ’st,
    Eum ego hinc ejeci miserum injustitia mea.
    Malo quidem me dignum quovis deputem,
    Si id faciam. nam usque dum ille vitam illam colet
    Inopem, carens patria ob meas injurias,
    Interea usque illi de me supplicium dabo:
    Laborans, quærens, parcens, illi serviens,
    Ita facio prorsus: nihil relinquo in ædibus,
    Nec vas, nec vestimentum: conrasi omnia,
    Ancillas, servos, nisi eos, qui opere rustico
    Faciundo facile sumptum exercerent suum:
    Omnes produxi ac vendidi: inscripsi ilico
    Ædeis mercede: quasi talenta ad quindecim
    Coëgi: agrum hunc mercatus sum: hic me exerceo.
    Decrevi tantisper me minus injuriæ,
    Chreme, meo gnato facere, dum fiam miser:
    Nec fas esse ulla me voluptate hic frui,
    Nisi ubi ille huc salvos redierit meus particeps.
         _Heautontimerumenos, act 1. sc. 1._

Otway reaches the same sentiment:

      _Monimia._ Let mischiefs multiply! let ev’ry hour
    Of my loath’d life yield me increase of horror!
    Oh let the sun to these unhappy eyes
    Ne’er shine again, but be eclips’d for ever!
    May every thing I look on seem a prodigy,
    To fill my soul with terror, till I quite
    Forget I ever had humanity,
    And grow a curser of the works of nature!
         _Orphan, act 4._

The cases mentioned are, where benevolence alone or where desire of
punishment alone, governs without a rival. And it was necessary to
handle these cases separately, in order to elucidate a subject which by
writers is left in great obscurity. But neither of these principles
operates always without rivalship. Cases may be figured, and cases
actually exist, where the same person is an object both of sympathy and
of desire to punish. Thus the sight of a profligate in the venereal
disease, over-run with botches and sores, actuates both principles.
While his distress fixes my attention, sympathy exerts itself; but so
soon as I think of his profligacy, hatred prevails, and a desire to
punish. This in general is the case of distress occasioned by immoral
actions that are not highly criminal. And if the distress and the
immoral action be in any proportion, sympathy and hatred
counterbalancing each other will not suffer me either to afford relief
or to inflict punishment. What then will be the result of the whole? The
principle of self-love solves the question. Abhorring an object so
loathsome, I naturally avert my eye, and walk off as fast as I can, in
order to be relieved from the pain.

The present subject gives birth to several other observations, for which
I could not find room above, without relaxing more from the strictness
of order and connection, than with safety could be indulged in
discoursing upon a matter that with difficulty is made perspicuous, even
with all the advantages of order and connection. These observations I
shall throw out loosely as they occur, without giving myself any further
trouble about method.

No action good or bad is altogether indifferent even to a mere
spectator. If good, it inspires esteem; and indignation, if wicked. But
it is remarkable, that these emotions seldom are accompanied with
desire. The abilities of man are limited, and he finds sufficient
employment, in relieving the distressed, in requiting his benefactors,
and in punishing those who wrong him, without moving out of his own
sphere for the benefit or chastisement of those with whom he has no
connection.

If the good qualities of others excite my benevolence, the same
qualities in myself must produce a similar effect in a superior degree,
upon account of the natural partiality every man hath for himself. This
increases self-love. If these qualities be of a high rank, they produce
a feeling of superiority, which naturally leads me to assume some sort
of government over others. Mean qualities, on the other hand, produce in
me a feeling of inferiority, which naturally leads me to submit to
others. Unless such feelings were distributed among individuals in
society by measure and proportion, there could be no natural
subordination of some to others, which is the principal foundation of
government.

No other branch of the human constitution shows more visibly our
destination for society, nor tends more to our improvement, than
appetite for fame or esteem. The whole conveniencies of life being
derived from mutual aid and support in society, it ought to be a capital
aim, to form connections with others so strict and so extensive as to
produce a firm reliance on many for succour in time of need. Reason
dictates this lesson. But reason solely is not relied on in a matter of
such consequence. We are moved by a natural appetite, to be solicitous
about esteem and respect as we are about food when hungry. This
appetite, at the same time, is finely adjusted to the moral branch of
our constitution, by promoting all the moral virtues. For what
infallible means are there to attract love and esteem, other than a
virtuous course of life? If a man be just and beneficent, if he be
temperate modest and prudent, he will infallibly gain the esteem and
love of all who know him.

The communication of passion to related objects, is an illustrious
instance of the care of Providence, to extend social connections as far
as the limited nature of man can admit. This communication of passion is
so far unhappy as to spread the malevolent passions beyond their natural
bounds. But let it be remarked, that this unhappy effect regards savages
only, who give way to malevolent passions. Under the discipline of
society, these passions are subdued, and in a good measure eradicated.
In their place succeed the kindly affections, which, meeting with all
encouragement, take possession of the mind and govern our whole actions.
In this condition, the progress of passion along related objects, by
spreading the kindly affections through a multitude of individuals, hath
a glorious effect.

Nothing can be more entertaining to a rational mind, than the œconomy of
the human passions, of which I have attempted to give some faint notion.
It must however be confessed, that our passions, when they happen to
swell beyond their proper limits, take on a less regular appearance.
Reason may proclaim our duty, but the will influenced by passion, makes
gratification always welcome. Hence the power of passion, which, when in
excess, cannot be resisted but by the utmost fortitude of mind. It is
bent upon gratification; and where proper objects are wanting, it clings
to any object at hand without distinction. Thus joy inspired by a
fortunate event, is diffused upon every person around by acts of
benevolence; and resentment for an atrocious injury done by one out of
reach, seizes the first object that occurs to vent itself upon. Those
who believe in prophecies, even wish the accomplishment; and a weak mind
is disposed voluntarily to fulfil a prophecy, in order to gratify its
wish. Shakespear, whom no particle of human nature hath escaped, however
remote from common observation, describes this weakness:

    _K. Henry._ Doth any name particular belong
    Unto that lodging where I first did swoon?

    _Warwick._ ’Tis call’d _Jerusalem_, my Noble Lord.

    _K. Henry._ Laud be to God! even there my life must end.
    It hath been prophesy’d to me many years,
    I should not die but in Jerusalem,
    Which vainly I suppos’d the holy land.
    But bear me to that chamber, there I’ll lie:
    In that Jerusalem shall Henry die.
         _Second part, Henry IV. act 4. sc. last._

I could not deny myself the amusement of the foregoing observation,
though it doth not properly come under my plan. The irregularities of
passion proceeding from peculiar weaknesses and biasses, I do not
undertake to justify; and of these we have had many examples.[49] It is
sufficient that passions common to all and as generally exerted, are
made subservient to beneficial purposes. I shall only observe, that in a
polished society instances of irregular passions are rare, and that
their mischief doth not extend far.




CHAP. III.

BEAUTY.


Having discoursed in general of emotions and passions, I proceed to a
more narrow inspection of some particulars that serve to unfold the
principles of the fine arts. It is the province of a writer upon ethics,
to give a full enumeration of all the passions; and of each separately
to assign the nature, the cause, the gratification, and the effects. But
a treatise of ethics is not my province. I carry my view no farther than
to the elements of criticism, in order to show that the fine arts are a
subject of reasoning as well as of taste. An extensive work would be ill
suited to a design so limited; and to keep within moderate bounds, the
following plan may contribute. It has already been observed, that things
are the causes of emotions, by means of their properties and
attributes[50]. This furnisheth a hint for distribution. Instead of a
painful and tedious examination of the several passions and emotions, I
propose to confine my inquiries to such attributes, relations, and
circumstances, as in the fine arts are chiefly employed to raise
agreeable emotions. Attributes of single objects, as the most simple,
shall take the lead; to be followed with particulars that depend on the
relations of objects, and are not found in any one object singly
considered. Dispatching next some coincident matters, I approach nearer
to practice, by applying the principles unfolded in the foregoing parts
of the work. This is a general view of the intended method; reserving
however a privilege to vary it in particular instances, where a
different method may be more commodious. I begin with beauty, the most
noted of all the qualities that belong to single objects.

The term _beauty_, in its native signification, is appropriated to
objects of sight. Objects of the other senses may be agreeable, such as
the sounds of musical instruments, the smoothness and softness of some
surfaces: but the agreeableness denominated _beauty_ belongs to objects
of sight.

Of all the objects of the external senses, an object of sight is the
most complex. In the very simplest, colour is perceived, figure, and
length breadth and thickness. A tree is composed of a trunk, branches,
and leaves. It has colour, figure, size, and sometimes motion. By means
of each of these particulars, separately considered, it appears
beautiful: how much more so, when they enter all into one complex
perception? The beauty of the human figure is extraordinary, being a
composition of numberless beauties arising from the parts and qualities
of the object, various colours, various motions, figure, size, _&c._;
all uniting in one complex perception, and striking the eye with
combined force. Hence it is, that beauty, a quality so remarkable in
visible objects, lends its name to express every thing that is eminently
agreeable. Thus, by a figure of speech, we say a beautiful sound, a
beautiful thought or expression, a beautiful theorem, a beautiful event,
a beautiful discovery in art or science. But as figurative expression
is not our present theme, this chapter is confined to beauty in its
genuine signification.

It is natural to suppose, that a perception so various as that of
beauty, comprehending sometimes many particulars, sometimes few, should
occasion emotions equally various. And yet all the various emotions of
beauty maintain one general character of sweetness and gaiety.

Considering attentively the beauty of visible objects, we discover two
kinds. One may be termed _intrinsic_ beauty, because it is discovered in
a single object viewed apart without relation to any other object. The
examples above given, are of that kind. The other may be termed
_relative_ beauty, being founded on the relation of objects. The former
is a perception of sense merely; for to perceive the beauty of a
spreading oak or of a flowing river, no more is required but singly an
act of vision. The latter is accompanied with an act of understanding
and reflection; for of a fine instrument or engine, we perceive not the
relative beauty, until we be made acquainted with its use and
destination. In a word, intrinsic beauty is ultimate: relative beauty is
that of means relating to some good end or purpose. These different
beauties agree in one capital circumstance, that both are equally
perceived as spread upon the object. This will be readily admitted with
respect to intrinsic beauty; but is not so obvious with respect to the
other. The utility of the plough, for example, may make it an object of
admiration or of desire; but why should utility make it appear
beautiful? A principle mentioned above[51], will explain this doubt. The
beauty of the effect, by an easy transition of ideas, is transferred to
the cause, and is perceived as one of the qualities of the cause. Thus a
subject void of intrinsic beauty, appears beautiful from its utility. An
old Gothic tower that has no beauty in itself, appears beautiful,
considered as proper to defend against an enemy. A dwelling-house void
of all regularity, is however beautiful in the view of convenience; and
the want of form or symmetry in a tree, will not prevent its appearing
beautiful, if it be known to produce good fruit.

When these two beauties concur in any object, it appears delightful.
Every member of the human body possesses both in a high degree. The
slender make of a horse destined for running, pleases every taste;
partly from symmetry, and partly from utility.

The beauty of utility, being proportioned accurately to the degree of
utility, requires no illustration. But intrinsic beauty, so complex as I
have said, cannot be handled distinctly without being analized into its
constituent parts. If a tree be beautiful by means of its colour, its
figure, its size, its motion, it is in reality possessed of so many
different beauties, which ought to be examined separately, in order to
have a clear notion of the whole. The beauty of colour is too familiar
to need explanation. The beauty of figure requires an accurate
discussion, for in it many circumstances are involved. When any portion
of matter is viewed as a whole, the beauty of its figure arises from
regularity and simplicity. Viewing the parts with relation to each
other, uniformity, proportion, and order, contribute to its beauty. The
beauty of motion deserves a chapter by itself; and another chapter is
destined for grandeur, being distinguishable from beauty in a strict
sense. For the definitions of regularity, uniformity, proportion, and
order, if thought necessary, I remit my reader to the appendix at the
end of the book. Upon simplicity I must make a few cursory observations,
such as may be of use in examining the beauty of single objects.

A multitude of objects crowding into the mind at once, disturb the
attention, and pass without making any impression, or any lasting
impression. In a group, no single object makes the figure it would do
apart, when it occupies the whole attention[52]. For the same reason,
even a single object, when it divides the attention by the multiplicity
of its parts, equals not, in strength of impression, a more simple
object comprehended in a single view. Parts extremely complex must be
considered in portions successively; and a number of impressions in
succession, which cannot unite because not simultaneous, never touch the
mind like one entire impression made as it were at one stroke. This
justifies simplicity in works of art, as opposed to complicated
circumstances and crowded ornaments. There is an additional reason for
simplicity, in works that make an impression of dignity or elevation.
The mind attached to beauties of a high rank, cannot descend to inferior
beauties. And yet, notwithstanding these reasons, we find profuse
decoration prevailing in works of art. But this is no argument against
simplicity, For authors and architects who cannot reach the higher
beauties, endeavour to supply their want of genius by dealing in those
that are inferior. In all ages, the best writers and artists have been
governed by a taste for simplicity.

These things premised, I proceed to examine the beauty of figure, as
arising from the above-mentioned particulars, _viz._ regularity,
uniformity, proportion, order, and simplicity. To exhaust this subject,
would of itself require a large volume. I limit myself to a few cursory
remarks, as matter for future disquisition. To inquire why an object, by
means of the particulars mentioned, appears beautiful, would I am afraid
be a vain attempt. It seems the most probable opinion, that the nature
of man was originally framed with a relish for them, in order to answer
wise and good purposes. The final causes have not hitherto been
ascertained, though they are not probably beyond our reach. One thing is
clear, that regularity, uniformity, order, and simplicity, contribute
each of them to readiness of apprehension; and enable us to form more
distinct images of objects, than can be done with the utmost attention
where these particulars are not found. This final cause is, I
acknowledge, too slight, to account satisfactorily for a taste that
makes a figure so illustrious in the nature of man. That this branch of
our constitution hath a purpose still more important, we have great
reason to believe. With respect to proportion, I am still less
successful. In several instances, accurate proportion is connected with
utility. This in particular is the case of animals; for those that are
the best proportioned, are the strongest and most active. But instances
are still more numerous, where the proportions we relish the most, have
no connection, so far as we see, with utility. Writers on architecture
insist much upon the proportions of a column; and assign different
proportions to the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian. But no architect will
maintain, that the most accurate proportions contribute more to use,
than several that are less accurate and less agreeable. Neither will it
be maintained, that the proportions assigned for the length breadth and
height of rooms, tend to make them the more commodious. It appears then,
so far as we can discover, that we have a taste for proportion
independent altogether of utility. One thing indeed is certain, that any
external object proportioned to our taste, is delightful. This furnishes
a hint. May it not be thought a good final cause of proportion, that it
contributes to our entertainment? The author of our nature has given
many signal proofs, that this end is not below his care. And if so, why
should we hesitate in assigning this as an additional final cause of
regularity, and the other particulars above mentioned? We may be
confirmed in this thought, by reflecting, that our taste, with respect
to these, is not occasional or accidental, but uniform and universal,
making an original branch of human nature.

One might fill a volume with the effects that are produced by the
endless combinations of the principles of beauty. I have room only for a
slight specimen, confined to the simplest figures. A circle and a square
are each of them perfectly regular, being equally confined to a precise
form, and admitting not the slightest variation. A square however is
less beautiful than a circle, because it is less simple. A circle has
parts as well as a square; but its parts not being distinct like those
of a square, it makes one entire impression; whereas the attention is
divided among the sides and angles of a square. The effect of simplicity
may be illustrated by another example. A square, though not more
regular than a hexagon or octagon, is more beautiful than either; for
what other reason, than that a square is more simple, and the attention
less divided? This reasoning will appear still more solid when we
consider any regular polygon of very many sides; for of such figure the
mind can never have any distinct perception. Simplicity thus contributes
to beauty.

A square is more beautiful than a parallelogram. The former exceeds the
latter in regularity and in uniformity of parts. But this holds with
respect to intrinsic beauty only; for in many instances, utility comes
in to cast the balance on the side of the parallelogram. This figure for
the doors and windows of a dwelling-house, is preferred because of
utility; and here we find the beauty of utility prevailing over that of
regularity and uniformity.

A parallelogram again depends, for its beauty, on the proportion of its
sides. The beauty is lost by a great inequality of sides. It is also
lost, on the other hand, by the approximation toward equality.
Proportion in this circumstance degenerates into imperfect uniformity;
and the figure upon the whole appears an unsuccessful attempt toward a
square.

An equilateral triangle yields not to a square in regularity nor in
uniformity of parts, and it is more simple. But an equilateral triangle
is less beautiful than a square, which must be owing to inferiority of
order in the position of its parts. The sides of an equilateral triangle
incline to each other in the same angle, which is the most perfect order
they are susceptible of. But this order is obscure, and far from being
so perfect as the parallelism of the sides of a square. Thus order
contributes to the beauty of visible objects, not less than simplicity
and regularity.

A parallelogram exceeds an equilateral triangle in the orderly
disposition of its parts; but being inferior in uniformity and
simplicity, it is less beautiful.

Uniformity is singular in one capital circumstance, that it is apt to
disgust by excess. A number of things contrived for the same use, such
as chairs spoons, _&c._ cannot be too uniform. But a scrupulous
uniformity of parts in a large garden or field, is far from being
agreeable. Uniformity among connected objects, belongs not to the
present subject. It is handled in the chapter of uniformity and variety.

In all the works of nature, simplicity makes an illustrious figure. The
works of the best artists are directed by it. Profuse ornament in
painting, gardening, or architecture, as well as in dress and language,
shows a mean or corrupted taste.

    Poets, like painters, thus unskill’d to trace
    The naked nature and the living grace,
    With gold and jewels cover ev’ry part,
    And hide with ornaments their want of art.
         _Pope’s Essay on criticism._

No one property recommends a machine more than its simplicity; not
singly for better answering its purpose, but by appearing in itself more
beautiful. Simplicity hath a capital effect in behaviour and manners; no
other particular contributing more to gain esteem and love. The
artificial and intricate manners of modern times, have little of
dignity in them. General theorems, abstracting from their importance,
are delightful by their simplicity, and by the easiness of their
application to a variety of cases. We take equal delight in the laws of
motion, which, with the greatest simplicity, are boundless in their
influence.

A gradual progress from simplicity to complex forms and profuse
ornament, seems to be the fate of all the fine arts; resembling
behaviour, which from original candor and simplicity has degenerated
into artificial refinements. At present, written productions are crowded
with words, epithets, figures, _&c._ In music, sentiment is neglected,
for the luxury of harmony, and for difficult movement which surprises in
its execution. In _taste_ properly so called, poignant sauces with
complicated mixtures of different favours, prevail among people of
condition. The French, accustomed to the artificial red on their women’s
cheeks, think the modest colouring of nature displayed on a fine face
altogether insipid.

The same tendency appears in the progress of the arts among the
ancients. Of this we have traces still remaining in architecture. Some
vestiges of the oldest Grecian buildings prove them to be of the Doric
order. The Ionic succeeded, and seems to have been the favourite order,
while architecture was in its height of glory. The Corinthian came next
in vogue: and in Greece, the buildings of that order appear mostly to
have been erected after the Romans got footing there. At last came the
Composite with all its extravagancies, where proportion is sacrificed to
finery and crowded ornament.

But what taste is to prevail next? for fashion is in a continual flux,
and taste must vary with it. After rich and profuse ornaments become
familiar, simplicity appears by contrast lifeless and insipid. This
would be an unsurmountable obstruction, should any man of genius and
taste endeavour to restore ancient simplicity.

In reviewing what is said above, I am under some apprehension of an
objection, which, as it may possibly occur to the reader, ought to be
obviated. A mountain, it will be observed, is an agreeable object,
without so much as the appearance of regularity; and a chain of
mountains still more agreeable, without being arranged in any order. But
these facts considered in a proper light, afford not an objection.
Regularity, order, and uniformity, are intimately connected with beauty;
and in this view only, have I treated them. Every regular object, for
example, must in respect of its regularity be beautiful. But I have not
said, that regularity, order, and uniformity, are essential to beauty,
so as that it cannot exist without them. The contrary appears in the
beauty of colour. Far less have I said, that an object cannot be
agreeable in any respect independent of these qualities. Grandeur, as
distinguished from beauty, requires very little regularity. This will
appear more fully when that article is handled. In the mean time, to
show the difference betwixt beauty and grandeur with respect to
regularity, I shall give a few examples. Imagine a small body, let it be
a globe, in a continual flux of figure, from the most perfect regularity
till there remain no appearance of that quality. The beauty of this
globe, depending on its regular figure, will gradually wear away with
its regularity; and when it is no longer regular, it no longer will
appear beautiful. The next example shall be of the same globe, gradually
enlarging its size, but retaining its figure. In this body, we at first
perceive the beauty of regularity only. But so soon as it begins to
swell into a great size, it appears agreeable by its greatness, which
joins with the beauty of regularity to make it a delightful object. In
the last place, let it be imagined, that the figure as well as the
quantity of matter are in a continual flux; and that the body, while it
increases in size, becomes less and less regular, till it lose
altogether the appearance of that quality. In this case, the beauty of
regularity wearing off gradually, gives place to an agreeableness of a
different sort, _viz._ that of greatness: and at last the emotion
arising from greatness will be in perfection, when the beauty of
regularity is gone. Hence it is, that in a large object the want of
regularity is not much regarded by the spectator who is struck with its
grandeur. A swelling eminence is agreeable, though not strictly
regular. A towering hill is delightful, if it have but any distant
resemblance of a cone. A small surface ought to be smooth; but in a
wide-extended plain, considerable inequalities are overlooked. This
observation holds equally in works of art. The slightest irregularity in
a house of a moderate size hurts the eye; while the mind, struck with
the grandeur of a superb edifice, which occupies it totally, cannot bear
to descend to its irregularities unless extremely gross. In a large
volume we pardon many defects that would make an epigram intolerable. In
short, the observation holds in general, that beauty is connected with
regularity in great objects as well as in small; but with a remarkable
difference, that in passing from small to great, regularity is less and
less required.

The distinction betwixt primary and secondary qualities in matter, seems
now fully established. Heat and cold, though seeming to exist in bodies,
are discovered to be effects caused by these bodies in a sensitive
being. Colour, which the eye represents as spread upon a substance, has
no existence but in the mind of the spectator. Perceptions of this
kind, which, by a delusion of sense, are attributed to external
subjects, are termed _secondary qualities_, in contradistinction to
figure, extension, solidity, which are primary qualities, and which are
not separable, even in imagination, from the subjects they belong to.
This suggests a curious inquiry, Whether beauty be a primary or only a
secondary quality of objects? The question is easily determined with
respect to the beauty of colour; for if colour be a secondary quality
existing no where but in the mind of the spectator, its beauty must be
of the same kind. This conclusion must also hold with respect to the
beauty of utility, which is plainly a conception of the mind, arising
not merely from sight, but from reflecting that the thing is fitted for
some good end or purpose. The question is more intricate with respect to
the beauty of regularity. If regularity be a primary quality, why not
also its beauty? That this is not a good consequence, will appear from
considering, that beauty, in its very conception, refers to a
percipient; for an object is said to be beautiful, for no other reason
but that it appears so to a spectator. The same piece of matter which to
man appears beautiful, may possibly to another being appear ugly. Beauty
therefore, which for its existence depends upon the percipient as much
as upon the object perceived, cannot be an inherent property of either.
What else then can it be, but a perception in the mind occasioned by
certain objects? The same reasoning is applicable to the beauty of
order, of uniformity, of grandeur. Accordingly, it may be pronounced in
general, that beauty in no case whatever is a real quality of matter.
And hence it is wittily observed by the poet, that beauty is not in the
countenance, but in the lover’s eye. This reasoning is undoubtedly
solid: and the only cause of doubt or hesitation is, that we are taught
a different lesson by sense. By a singular determination of nature, we
perceive both beauty and colour as belonging to the object; and, like
figure or extension, as inherent properties. This mechanism is uncommon;
and when nature, to fulfil her intention, chuseth any singular method
of operation, we may be certain of some final cause that cannot be
reached by ordinary means. It appears to me, that a perception of beauty
in external objects, is requisite to attach us to them. Doth not this
mechanism, in the first place, greatly promote industry, by prompting a
desire to possess things that are beautiful? Doth it not further join
with utility, in prompting us to embellish our houses and enrich our
fields? These however are but slight effects, compared with the
connections which are formed among individuals in society by means of
this singular mechanism. The qualifications of the head and heart, are
undoubtedly the most solid and most permanent foundations of such
connections. But as external beauty lies more in view, and is more
obvious to the bulk of mankind than the qualities now mentioned, the
sense of beauty possesses the more universal influence in forming these
connections. At any rate, it concurs in an eminent degree with mental
qualifications, to produce social intercourse, mutual good-will, and
consequently mutual aid and support, which are the life of society.

It must not however be overlooked, that this sense doth not tend to
advance the interests of society, but when in a due mean with respect to
strength. Love in particular arising from a sense of beauty, loses, when
excessive, its sociable character[53]. The appetite for gratification,
prevailing over affection for the beloved object, is ungovernable; and
tends violently to its end, regardless of the misery that must follow.
Love in this state is no longer a sweet agreeable passion. It becomes
painful like hunger or thirst; and produceth no happiness but in the
instant of fruition. This discovery suggests a most important lesson,
that moderation in our desires and appetites, which fits us for doing
our duty, contributes at the same time the most to happiness. Even
social passions, when moderate, are more pleasant than when they swell
beyond proper bounds.




CHAP. IV.

Grandeur and Sublimity.


Nature hath not more remarkably distinguished us from the other animals
by an erect posture, than by a capacious and aspiring mind, inclining us
to every thing great and elevated. The ocean, the sky, or any large
object, seizes the attention, and makes a strong impression[54]. Robes
of state are made large and full to draw respect. We admire elephants
and whales for their magnitude, notwithstanding their unwieldiness.

The elevation of an object affects us not less than its magnitude. A
high place is chosen for the statue of a deity or hero. A tree growing
upon the brink of a precipice viewed from the plain below, affords by
that circumstance an additional pleasure. A throne is erected for the
chief magistrate, and a chair with a high seat for the president of a
court.

In some objects, greatness and elevation concur to make a complicated
impression. The Alps and the pike of Teneriff are proper examples; with
the following difference, that in the former greatness seems to prevail,
elevation in the latter.

The emotions raised by great and by elevated objects, are clearly
distinguishable, not only in the internal feeling, but even in their
external expressions. A great object dilates the breast, and makes the
spectator endeavour to enlarge his bulk. This is remarkable in persons,
who, neglecting delicacy in behaviour, give way to nature without
reserve. In describing a great object, they naturally expand themselves
by drawing in air with all their force. An elevated object produces a
different expression. It makes the spectator stretch upward and stand a
tiptoe. Great and elevated objects considered with relation to the
emotions produced by them, are termed _grand_ and _sublime_. Grandeur
and sublimity have a double signification. They generally signify the
quality or circumstance in the objects by which the emotions are
produced; sometimes the emotions themselves.

Whether magnitude singly in an object of sight, have the effect to
produce an emotion distinguishable from the beauty or deformity of that
object; or whether it be only a circumstance modifying the beauty or
deformity, is an intricate question. If magnitude produce an emotion of
its own distinguishable from others, this emotion must either be
pleasant or painful. But this seems to be contradicted by experience;
for magnitude, as it would appear, contributes in some instances to
beauty, in some to deformity. A hill, for instance, is agreeable, and a
great mountain still more so. But an ugly monster, the larger, the more
horrid. Greatness in an enemy, great power, great courage, serve but to
augment our terror. Hath not this an appearance as if grandeur were not
an emotion distinct from all others, but only a circumstance that
qualifies beauty and deformity?

I am notwithstanding satisfied, that grandeur is an emotion, not only
distinct from all others, but in every circumstance pleasant. These
propositions must be examined separately. I begin with the former, and
shall endeavour to prove, that magnitude produceth a peculiar emotion
distinguishable from all others. Magnitude is undoubtedly a real
property of bodies, not less than figure, and more than colour. Figure
and colour, even in the same body, produce separate emotions, which are
never misapprehended one for the other. Why should not magnitude produce
an emotion different from both? That it has this effect, will be evident
from a plain experiment of two bodies, one great and one little, which
produce different emotions, though they be precisely the same as to
figure and colour. There is indeed an obscurity in this matter,
occasioned by the following circumstance, that the grandeur and beauty
of the same object mix so intimately as scarce to be distinguished. But
the beauty of colour comes in happily to enable us to make the
distinction. For the emotion of colour unites with that of figure, not
less intimately than grandeur does with either. Yet the emotion of
colour is distinguishable from that of figure; and so is grandeur,
attentively considered: though when these three emotions are blended
together, they are scarce felt as different emotions.

Next, that grandeur is an emotion in every circumstance pleasant,
appears from the following considerations. Magnitude or greatness,
abstracted from all other circumstances, swells the heart and dilates
the mind. We feel this to be a pleasant effect; and we feel no such
effect in contracting the mind upon little objects. This may be
illustrated by considering grandeur in an enemy. Beauty is an agreeable
quality, whether in a friend or enemy; and when the emotion it raiseth
is mixed with resentment against an enemy, it must have the effect to
moderate our resentment. In the same manner, grandeur in an enemy,
undoubtedly softens and blunts our resentment. Grandeur indeed may
indirectly and by reflection produce an unpleasant effect. Grandeur in
an enemy, like courage, may increase our fear, when we consider the
advantage he hath over us by this quality. But the same indirect effect
may be produced by many other agreeable qualities, such as beauty or
wisdom.

The magnitude of an ugly object, serves, it is true, to augment our
horror or aversion. But this proceeds not from magnitude separately
considered. It proceeds from the following circumstance, that in a large
object a great quantity of ugly parts are presented to view.

The same chain of reasoning is so obviously applicable to sublimity,
that it would be losing time to show the application. Grandeur therefore
and sublimity shall hereafter be considered both of them as pleasant
emotions.

The pleasant emotion raised by large objects, has not escaped the poets:

    ---- He doth bestride the narrow world
    Like a Colossus; and we petty men
    Walk under his huge legs.
         _Julius Cæsar, act I. sc. 3._

      _Cleopatra._ I dreamt there was an Emp’ror Antony;
    Oh such another sleep, that I might see
    But such another man!
    His face was as the heav’ns: and therein stuck
    A sun and moon, which kept their course and lighted
    The little O o’ th’ earth.
    His legs bestrid the ocean, his rear’d arm
    Crested the world.
         _Antony and Cleopatra, act 5. sc. 3._

    ---- Majesty
    Dies not alone, but, like a gulf, doth draw
    What’s near it with it. It’s a massy wheel
    Fixt on the summit of the highest mount;
    To whose huge spokes, ten thousand lesser things
    Are mortis’d and adjoin’d; which when it falls,
    Each small annexment, petty consequence,
    Attends the boist’rous ruin.
         _Hamlet, act 3. sc. 8._

The poets have also made good use of the emotion produced by the
elevated situation of an object.

    Quod si me lyricis varibus inferes,
    Sublimi feriam sidera vertice.
         _Horace, Carm. l. 1. ode 1._

    Oh thou! the earthly author of my blood,
    Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
    Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up,
    To reach at victory above my head.
         _Richard II. act 1. sc. 4._

    Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
    The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne.
         _Richard II. act 5. sc. 2._

    _Anthony._ Why was I rais’d the meteor of the world,
    Hung in the skies and blazing as I travell’d,
    Till all my fires were spent; and then cast downward
    To be trod out by Cæsar?
         _Dryden, All for love, act 1._

Though the quality of magnitude produceth a pleasant emotion, we must
not conclude that the opposite quality of littleness produceth a painful
emotion. It would be unhappy for man, were an object disagreeable from
its being of a small size merely, when he is surrounded with so many
objects of that kind. The same observation is applicable to elevation of
place. A body placed high is agreeable; but the same body placed low, is
not by that circumstance rendered disagreeable. Littleness, and lowness
of place, are precisely similar in the following particular, that they
neither give pleasure nor pain. And in this may visibly be discovered
peculiar attention in fitting the internal constitution of man to his
external circumstances. Were littleness, and lowness of place agreeable,
greatness and elevation could not be so. Were littleness, and lowness of
place disagreeable, they would occasion uninterrupted uneasiness.

The difference betwixt great and little with respect to agreeableness,
is remarkably felt in a series when we pass gradually from the one
extreme to the other. A mental progress from the capital to the kingdom,
from that to Europe--to the whole earth--to the planetary system--to the
universe, is extremely pleasant: the heart swells and the mind is
dilated, at every step. The returning in an opposite direction is not
positively painful, though our pleasure lessens at every step, till it
vanish into indifference. Such a progress may sometimes produce a
pleasure of a different sort, which arises from taking a narrower and
narrower inspection. The same observation is applicable to a progress
upward and downward. Ascent is pleasant because it elevates us. But
descent is never painful: it is for the most part pleasant from a
different cause, that it is according to the order of nature. The fall
of a stone from any height, is extremely agreeable by its accelerated
motion. I feel it pleasant to descend from a mountain: the descent is
natural and easy. Neither is looking downward painful. On the contrary,
to look down upon objects, makes part of the pleasure of elevation.
Looking down becomes then only painful when the object is so far below
as to create dizziness: and even when that is the case, we feel a sort
of pleasure mixt with the pain. Witness Shakespear’s description of
Dover cliffs:

    ---- How fearful
    And dizzy ’tis, to cast one’s eyes so low!
    The crows and choughs, that wing the midway-air,
    Shew scarce so gross as beetles. Half-way down
    Hangs one, that gathers samphire; dreadful trade!
    Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
    The fishermen that walk upon the beach,
    Appear like mice; and yon tall anchoring bark
    Diminish’d to her cock; her cock, a buoy
    Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge,
    That on th’ unnumber’d idle pebbles chafes,
    Cannot be heard so high. I’ll look no more,
    Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
    Topple down headlong.
         _King Lear, act 4. sc. 6._

An observation is made above, that the emotions of grandeur and
sublimity are nearly allied. Hence it is, that the one term is
frequently put for the other. I give an example. An increasing series of
numbers produceth an emotion similar to that of mounting upward, and for
that reason is commonly termed _an ascending series_. A series of
numbers gradually decreasing, produceth an emotion similar to that of
going downward, and for that reason is commonly termed _a descending
series_. We talk familiarly of going up to the capital, and of going
down to the country. From a lesser kingdom we talk of going up to a
greater, whence the _anabasis_ in the Greek language when one travels
from Greece to Persia. We discover the same way of speaking in the
language even of Japan[55]; and its universality proves it the offspring
of a natural feeling.

The foregoing observation leads us naturally to consider grandeur and
sublimity in a figurative sense, and as applicable to the fine arts.
Hitherto I have considered these terms in their proper meaning, as
applicable to objects of sight only: and I thought it of importance, to
bestow some pains upon that article; because, generally speaking, the
figurative sense of a word is derived from its proper sense; which will
be found to hold in the present subject. Beauty in its original
signification, is confined to objects of sight. But as many other
objects, intellectual as well as moral, raise emotions resembling that
of beauty, the resemblance of the effects prompts us naturally to extend
the term _beauty_ to these objects. This equally accounts for the terms
_grandeur_ and _sublimity_ taken in a figurative sense. Every emotion,
from whatever cause proceeding, that resembles an emotion of grandeur or
elevation, is called by the same name. Thus generosity is said to be an
elevated emotion, as well as great courage; and that firmness of soul
which is superior to misfortunes, obtains the peculiar name of
_magnanimity_. On the other hand, every emotion that contracts the mind
and fixeth it upon things trivial or of no importance, is termed _low_,
by its resemblance to an emotion produced by a little or low object of
sight. Thus an appetite for trifling amusements, is called _a low
taste_. The same terms are applied to characters and actions. We talk
familiarly of an elevated genius, of a great man, and equally so of
littleness of mind. Some actions are great and elevated, others are low
and groveling. Sentiments and even expressions are characterised in the
same manner. An expression or sentiment that raises the mind, is
denominated _great_ or _elevated_; and hence the sublime[56] in poetry.
In such figurative terms, the distinction is lost that is made betwixt
_great_ and _elevated_ in their proper sense; for the resemblance is not
so entire, as to preserve these terms distinct in their figurative
application. We carry this figure still farther. Elevation in its proper
sense, includes superiority of place; and lowness, inferiority of place.
Hence a man of superior talents, of superior rank, of inferior parts, of
inferior taste, and such like. The veneration we have for our ancestors
and for the ancients in general, being similar to the emotion produced
by an elevated object of sight, justifies the figurative expression, of
the ancients being raised above us, or possessing a superior place. And
we may remark by the way, that as words are intimately connected with
ideas, many, by this form of expression, are led to conceive their
ancestors as really above them in place, and their posterity below them:

    A grandam’s name is little less in love
    Than is the doting title of a mother:
    They are as children but one step below.
         _Richard III. act 4. sc. 5._

The notes of the gamut, proceeding regularly from the blunter or grosser
sounds to those which are more acute and piercing, produce in the hearer
a feeling somewhat similar to what is produced by mounting upward; and
this gives occasion to the figurative expressions, _a high note_, _a low
note_.

Such is the resemblance in feeling betwixt real and figurative grandeur,
that among the nations on the east coast of Afric, who are directed
purely by nature, the different dignities of the officers of state are
marked by the length of the batoon each carries in his hand. And in
Japan, princes and great lords shew their rank by the length and size of
their sedan-poles[57]. Again, it is a rule in painting, that figures of
a small size are proper for grotesque pieces; but that in an historical
subject, which is grand and important, the figures ought to be as great
as the life. The resemblance of these feelings is in reality so strong,
that elevation in a figurative sense is observed to have the same effect
even externally, that real elevation has:

    _K. Henry._ This day is call’d the feast of Crispian.
    He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
    Will stand a tiptoe when this day is nam’d,
    And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
         _Henry V. act 4. sc. 8._

The resemblance in feeling betwixt real and figurative grandeur, is
humorously illustrated by Addison in criticising upon the English
tragedy. “The ordinary method of making an hero, is to clap a huge
plume of feathers upon his head, which rises so high, that there is
often a greater length from his chin to the top of his head, than to the
sole of his foot. One would believe, that we thought a great man and a
tall man the same thing. As these superfluous ornaments upon the head
make a great man, a princess generally receives her grandeur from those
additional incumbrances that fall into her tail. I mean the broad
sweeping train that follows her in all her motions, and finds constant
employment for a boy who stands behind her to open and spread it to
advantage[58].” The Scythians, impressed with the fame of Alexander,
were astonished when they found him a little man.

A gradual progress from small to great, is not less remarkable in
figurative than in real grandeur or elevation. Every one must have
observed the delightful effect of a number of thoughts or sentiments,
artfully disposed like an ascending series, and making impressions
stronger and stronger. Such disposition of members in a period, is
distinguished by a proper name, being termed a _climax_.

In order to have a just conception of grandeur and sublimity, it is
necessary to be observed, that within certain limits they produce their
strongest effects, which lessen by excess as well as by defect. This is
remarkable in grandeur and sublimity taken in their proper sense. The
strongest emotion of grandeur is raised by an object that can be taken
in at one view. An object so immense as not to be comprehended but in
parts, tends rather to distract than satisfy the mind[59]. In like
manner, the strongest emotion produced by elevation is where the object
is seen distinctly. A greater elevation lessens in appearance the
object, till it vanish out of sight with its pleasant emotion. The same
is equally remarkable in figurative grandeur and elevation, which shall
be handled together, because, as observed above, they are scarce
distinguishable. Sentiments may be so strained, as to become obscure, or
to exceed the capacity of the human mind. Against such licence of
imagination, every good writer will be upon his guard. And therefore it
is of greater importance to observe, that even the true sublime may be
carried beyond that pitch which produces the highest entertainment. We
are undoubtedly susceptible of a greater elevation than can be inspired
by human actions the most heroic and magnanimous; witness what we feel
from Milton’s description of superior beings. Yet every man must be
sensible of a more constant and pleasant elevation, when the history of
his own species is the subject. He enjoys an elevation equal to that of
the greatest hero, of an Alexander or a Cæsar, of a Brutus or an
Epaminondas. He accompanies these heroes in their sublimest sentiments
and most hazardous exploits, with a magnanimity equal to theirs; and
finds it no stretch to preserve the same tone of mind for hours
together, without sinking. The case is by no means the same in
describing the actions or qualities of superior beings. The reader’s
imagination cannot keep pace with that of the poet; and the mind, unable
to support itself in a strained elevation, falls as from a height; and
the fall is immoderate like the elevation. Where this effect is not
felt, it must be prevented by some obscurity in the conception, which
frequently attends the description of unknown objects.

On the other hand, objects of sight that are not remarkably great or
high, scarce raise any emotion of grandeur or sublimity; and the same
holds in other objects. The mind is often roused and animated without
being carried to the height of grandeur or sublimity. This difference
may be discerned in many sorts of music, as well as in some musical
instruments. A kettledrum rouses, and a hautboy is animating; but
neither of them inspire an emotion of sublimity. Revenge animates the
mind in a considerable degree; but I think it never produceth an
emotion that can be termed _grand_ or _sublime_; and I shall have
occasion afterward to observe, that no disagreeable passion ever has
this effect. I am willing to put this to the test, by placing before my
reader the most spirited picture of revenge ever drawn. It is a speech
of Antony wailing over the body of Cæsar.

    Wo to the hand that shed this costly blood!
    Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,
    (Which, like dumb mouths, do ope their ruby lips,
    To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue),
    A curse shall light upon the kind of men;
    Domestic fury, and fierce civil strife,
    Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
    Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
    And dreadful objects so familiar,
    That mothers shall but smile, when they behold
    Their infants quarter’d by the hands of war,
    All pity choak’d with custom of fell deeds.
    And Cæsar’s spirit, ranging for revenge,
    With _Atè_ by his side come hot from hell,
    Shall in these confines, with a monarch’s voice,
    Cry _Havock_, and let slip the dogs of war.
         _Julius Cæsar, act 3. sc. 4._

When the sublime is carried to its due height and circumscribed within
proper bounds, it inchants the mind and raises the most delightful of
all emotions. The reader, ingrossed by a sublime object, feels himself
raised as it were to a higher rank. When such is the case, it is not
wonderful that the history of conquerors and heroes should be
universally the favourite entertainment. And this fairly accounts for
what I once erroneously suspected to be a wrong bias originally in human
nature. The grossest acts of oppression and injustice, scarce blemish
the character of a great conqueror. We notwithstanding warmly espouse
his interest, accompany him in his exploits, and are anxious for his
success. The splendor and enthusiasm of the hero transfused into the
readers, elevate their minds far above the rules of justice, and render
them in a great measure insensible of the wrong that is done:

    For in those days might only shall be admir’d
    And valour and heroic virtue call’d;
    To overcome in battle, and subdue
    Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
    Manslaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
    Of human glory, and for glory done
    Of triumph, to be styl’d great conquerors,
    Patrons of mankind, gods, and sons of gods.
    Destroyers rightlier called, and plagues of men.
    Thus fame shall be atchiev’d, renown on earth,
    And what most merits fame in silence hid.
         _Milton, b. 11._

The attachment we have to things grand or lofty may be thought to
proceed from an unwearied inclination we have to be exalted. No desire
is more universal than to be respected and honoured. Upon that account
chiefly, are we ambitious of power, riches, titles, fame, which would
suddenly lose their relish, did they not raise us above others, and
command submission and deference[60]. But the preference given to things
grand and sublime must have a deeper root in human nature. Many bestow
their time upon low and trifling amusements, without showing any desire
to be exalted. Yet these very persons talk the same language with the
rest of mankind; and at least in their judgement, if not in their taste,
prefer the more elevated pleasures. They acknowledge a more refined
taste, and are ashamed of their own as low and groveling. This
sentiment, constant and universal, must be the work of nature; and it
plainly indicates an original attachment in human nature to every object
that elevates the mind. Some men may have a greater relish for an object
not of the highest rank: but they are conscious of the common nature of
man, and that it ought not to be subjected to their peculiar taste.

The irregular influence of grandeur, reaches also to other matters.
However good, honest, or useful, a man may be, he is not so much
respected, as one of a more elevated character is, though of less
integrity; nor do the misfortunes of the former affect us so much as
those of the latter. I add, because it cannot be disguised, that the
remorse which attends breach of engagement, is in a great measure
proportioned to the figure that the injured person makes. The vows and
protestations of lovers are an illustrious example of this observation;
for these commonly are little regarded when made to women of inferior
rank.

What I have said suggests a capital rule for reaching the sublime in
such works of art as are susceptible of it; and that is, to put in view
those parts or circumstances only which make the greatest figure,
keeping out of sight every thing that is low or trivial. Such judicious
selection of capital circumstances, is by an eminent critic styled
_grandeur of manner_[61]. The mind, from an elevation inspired by
important objects, cannot, without reluctance, be forced down to bestow
any share of its attention upon trifles. In none of the fine arts is
there so great scope for this rule as in poetry, which, by that means,
enjoys a remarkable power of bestowing upon objects and events an air of
grandeur. When we are spectators, every minute object presents itself
in its order. But in describing at second hand, these are laid aside,
and the capital objects are brought close together. A judicious taste in
selecting, after this manner, the most interesting incidents to give
them an united force, accounts for a fact which at first sight may
appear surprising, that we are more moved by a poetical narrative at
second hand, than when we are spectators of the event itself in all its
circumstanccs.

Longinus exemplifies the foregoing rule by a comparison of two
passages[62]. The first from Aristæus is thus translated.

    Ye pow’rs, what madness! how on ships so frail
    (Tremendous thought!) can thoughtless mortals sail?
    For stormy seas they quit the pleasing plain,
    Plant woods in waves and dwell amidst the main.
    Far o’er the deep (a trackless path) they go,
    And wander oceans in pursuit of wo.
    No ease their hearts, no rest their eyes can find,
    On heaven their looks, and on the waves their mind.
    Sunk are their spirits, while their arms they rear,
    And gods are wearied with their fruitless prayer.

The other from Homer I shall give in Pope’s translation.

    Bursts as a wave that from the cloud impends,
    And swell’d with tempests on the ship descends.
    White are the decks with foam: the winds aloud
    Howl o’er the masts, and sing through every shrowd.
    Pale, trembling, tir’d, the sailors freeze with fears,
    And instant death on every wave appears.

In the latter passage, the most striking circumstances are selected to
fill the mind with the grand and terrible. The former is a collection of
minute and low circumstances, which scatter the thought and make no
impression. The passage at the same time is full of verbal antitheses
and low conceit, extremely improper in a scene of distress. But this
last observation is made occasionally only, as it belongs not to the
present subject.

The following passage from the twenty-first book of the Odyssey,
deviates widely from the rule above laid down. It concerns that part of
the history of Penelope and her suitors, in which she is made to declare
in favour of him who should prove the most dexterous in shooting with
the bow of Ulysses.

    Now gently winding up the fair ascent,
    By many an easy step, the matron went:
    Then o’er the pavement glides with grace divine,
    (With polish’d oak the level pavements shine);
    The folding gates a dazling light display’d,
    With pomp of various architrave o’erlay’d.
    The bolt, obedient to the silken string,
    Forsakes the staple as she pulls the ring;
    The wards respondent to the key turn round;
    The bars fall back; the flying valves resound.
    Loud as a bull makes hill and valley ring;
    So roar’d the lock when it releas’d the spring.
    She moves majestic through the wealthy room
    Where treasur’d garments cast a rich perfume;
    There from the column where aloft it hung,
    Reach’d, in its splendid case, the bow unstrung.

Virgil sometimes errs against this rule. In the following passages
minute circumstances are brought into full view; and what is still
worse, they are described in all the sublimity of poetical description.
_Æneid, L. 1. l. 214. to 219. L. 6. l. 176. to 182. L. 6. l. 212. to
231._ And the last, which is a description of a funeral, is the less
excuseable, as it relates to a man who makes no figure in the poem.

The speech of Clytemnestra, descending from her chariot in the Iphigenia
of Euripides, beginning of act 3. is stuffed with a number of low,
common, and trivial circumstances.

But of all writers Lucan in this article is the most injudicious. The
sea-fight betwixt the Romans and Massilians[63], is described so much in
detail without exhibiting any grand or general view, that the reader is
quite fatigued with endless circumstances, and never feels any degree of
elevation. And yet there are some fine incidents, those for example of
the two brothers, and of the old man and his son, which, separated from
the rest, would affect us greatly. But Lucan once engaged in a
description, knows no bounds. See other passages of the same kind, _L.
4. l. 292. to 337. L. 4. l. 750. to 765._ The episode of the sorceress
Erictho, end of book 6. is intolerably minute and prolix.

To these I venture to oppose a passage from an old historical ballad:

    Go, little page, tell Hardiknute
      That lives on hill so high[64],
    To draw his sword, the dread of faes,
      And haste to follow me.
    The little page flew swift as dart
      Flung by his master’s arm.
    Come down, come down, Lord Hardiknute,
      And rid your king from harm.

This rule is also applicable to other fine arts. In painting it is
established, that the principal figure must be put in the strongest
light; that the beauty of attitude consists in placing the nobler parts
most in view, and in suppressing the smaller parts as much as possible;
that the folds of the drapery must be few and large; that
foreshortenings are bad, because they make the parts appear little; and
that the muscles ought to be kept as entire as possible, without being
divided into small sections. Every one at present is sensible of the
importance of this rule when applied to gardening, in opposition to the
antiquated taste of parterres split into a thousand small parts in the
strictest regularity of figure. Those who have succeeded best in
architecture, have governed themselves by this rule in all their models.

Another rule chiefly regards the sublime, though it may be applied to
every literary performance intended for amusement; and that is, to avoid
as much as possible abstract and general terms. Such terms, perfectly
well fitted for reasoning and for conveying instruction, serve but
imperfectly the ends of poetry. They stand upon the same footing with
mathematical signs, contrived to express our thoughts in a concise
manner. But images, which are the life of poetry, cannot be raised in
any perfection, otherwise than by introducing particular objects.
General terms, that comprehend a number of individuals, must be excepted
from this rule. Our kindred, our clan, our country, and words of the
like import, though they scarce raise any image, have notwithstanding a
wonderful power over our passions. The greatness of the complex object
over-balances the obscurity of the image.

What I have further to say upon this subject, shall be comprehended in a
few observations. A man is capable of being raised so much above his
ordinary pitch by an emotion of grandeur, that it is extremely difficult
by a single thought or expression to produce that emotion in perfection.
The rise must be gradual and the result of reiterated impressions. The
effect of a single expression can be but momentary; and if one feel
suddenly somewhat like a swelling or exaltation of mind, the emotion
vanisheth as soon as felt. Single expressions, I know, are often justly
cited as examples of the sublime. But then their effect is nothing
compared with a grand subject displayed in its capital parts. I shall
give a few examples, that the reader may judge for himself. In the
famous action of Thermopylæ, where Leonidas the Spartan King with his
chosen band fighting for their country, were cut off to the last man, a
saying is reported of Dieneces one of the band, which, expressing
chearful and undisturbed bravery, is well intitled to the first place in
examples of this kind. Talking of the number of their enemies, it was
observed, that the arrows shot by such a multitude would intercept the
light of the sun. So much the better, says he; for we shall then fight
in the shade[65].

    _Somerset._ Ah! Warwick, Warwick, wert thou as we are,
    We might recover all our loss again.
    The Queen from France hath brought a puissant power,
    Ev’n now we heard the news. Ah! couldst thou fly!

    _Warwick._ Why, then I would not fly.
         _Third part, Henry VI. act 5. sc. 3._

Such a sentiment from a man expiring of his wounds, is truly heroic, and
must elevate the mind to the greatest height that can be done by a
single expression. It will not suffer in a comparison with the famous
sentiment _Qu’il mourut_ in Corneille’s Horace. The latter is a
sentiment of indignation merely, the former of invincible fortitude.

In opposition to these examples, to cite many a sublime passage,
enriched with the finest images, and dressed in the most nervous
expressions, would scarce be fair. I shall produce but one instance from
Shakespear, which sets a few objects before the eye, without much pomp
of language. It works its effect, by representing these objects in a
climax, raising the mind higher and higher till it feel the emotion of
grandeur in perfection.

    The cloud-capt tow’rs, the gorgeous palaces,
    The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
    Yea all which it inherit, shall dissolve, _&c_.

_The cloud-capt tow’rs_ produce an elevating emotion, heightened by the
_gorgeous palaces_. And the mind is carried still higher and higher by
the images that follow. Successive images, making thus stronger and
stronger impressions, must elevate more than any single image can do.

I proceed to another observation. In the chapter of beauty it is
remarked, that regularity is required in small figures, and order in
small groups; but that in advancing gradually from small to great,
regularity and order are less and less required. This remark serves to
explain the extreme delight we have in viewing the face of nature, when
sufficiently enriched and diversified by objects. The bulk of the
objects seen in a natural landscape are beautiful, and some of them
grand. A flowing river, a spreading oak, a round hill, an extended
plain, are delightful; and even a rugged rock or barren heath, though in
themselves disagreeable, contribute by contrast to the beauty of the
whole. Joining to these, the verdure of the fields, the mixture of light
and shade, and the sublime canopy spread over all; it will not appear
wonderful, that so extensive a group of glorious objects should swell
the heart to its utmost bounds, and raise the strongest emotion of
grandeur. The spectator is conscious of an enthusiasm, which cannot bear
confinement nor the strictness of regularity and order. He loves to
range at large; and is so inchanted with shining objects, as to neglect
slight beauties or defects. Thus it is, that the delightful emotion of
grandeur, depends little on order and regularity. And when the emotion
is at its height by a survey of the greatest objects, order and
regularity are almost totally disregarded.

The same observation is applicable in some measure to works of art. In a
small building the slightest irregularity is disagreeable. In a
magnificent palace or a large Gothic church, irregularities are less
regarded. In an epic poem we pardon many negligences, which would be
intolerable in a sonnet or epigram. Notwithstanding such exceptions, it
may be justly laid down for a rule, That in all works of art, order and
regularity ought to be governing principles. And hence the observation
of Longinus[66], “In works of art we have regard to exact proportion; in
those of nature, to grandeur and magnificence.”

I shall add but one other observation, That no means can be more
successfully employed to sink and depress the mind than grandeur or
sublimity. By the artful introduction of an humbling object, the fall is
great in proportion to the former elevation. Of this doctrine Shakespear
affords us a beautiful illustration, in a passage part of which is cited
above for another purpose:

    The cloud-capt tow’rs, the gorgeous palaces,
    The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
    Yea all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
    And like the baseless fabric of a vision
    Leave not a rack behind----
         _Tempest, act 4. sc. 4._

The elevation of the mind in the former part of this beautiful passage,
makes the fall great in proportion when the most humbling of all images
is introduced, that of an utter dissolution of the earth and its
inhabitants. A sentiment makes not the same impression in a cool state,
that it does when the mind is warmed; and a depressing or melancholy
sentiment makes the strongest impression, when it brings down the mind
from its highest state of elevation or chearfulness.

This indirect effect of elevation to sink the mind, is sometimes
produced without the intervention of any humbling image. There was
occasion above to remark, that in describing superior beings, the
reader’s imagination, unable to support itself in a strained elevation,
falls often as from a height, and sinks even below its ordinary tone.
The following instance comes luckily in view; for a better illustration
cannot be given: “God said, Let there be light, and there was light.”
Longinus cites this passage from Moses as a shining example of the
sublime; and it is scarce possible in fewer words, to convey so clear an
image of the infinite power of the Deity. But then it belongs to the
present subject to remark, that the emotion of sublimity raised by this
image is but momentary; and that the mind, unable to support itself in
an elevation so much above nature, immediately sinks down into humility
and veneration for a being so far exalted above us groveling mortals.
Every one is acquainted with a dispute about this passage betwixt two
French critics[67], the one positively affirming, the other as
positively denying, it to be sublime. What I have opened, shows that
both of them have reached the truth, but neither of them the whole
truth. Every one of taste must be sensible, that the primary effect of
this passage is an emotion of grandeur. This so far justifies Boileau.
But then every one of taste must be equally sensible, that the emotion
is merely a flash, which vanisheth instantly, and gives way to the
deepest humility and veneration. This indirect effect of sublimity,
justifies Huet on the other hand, who being a man of true piety, and
perhaps of inferior imagination, felt the humbling passions more
sensibly than his antagonist. And even laying aside any peculiarity of
character, Huet’s opinion may I think be defended as the more solid;
upon the following account, that in such images, the depressing emotions
are the more sensibly felt, and have the longer endurance.

The straining an elevated subject beyond due bounds and beyond the
reach of an ordinary conception, is not a vice so frequent as to require
the correction of criticism. But false sublime is a rock which writers
of more fire than judgement generally split on. And therefore a
collection of examples may be of use as a beacon to future adventurers.
One species of false sublime, known by the name of _bon bast_, is common
among writers of a mean genius. It is a serious endeavour, by strained
description, to raise a low or familiar subject above its rank; which
instead of being sublime, never fails to be ridiculous. I am extremely
sensible how prone the mind is, in some animating passions, to magnify
its objects beyond natural bounds. But such hyperbolical description has
its limits. If carried beyond the impulse of the propensity, the
colouring no longer pleases: it degenerates into the burlesque. Take the
following examples.

    _Sejanus._---- Great and high
    The world knows only two, that’s Rome and I.
    My roof receives me not; ’tis air I tread,
    And at each step I feel my advanc’d head
    Knock out a star in heav’n.
         _Sejanus, Ben Johnson, act 5._

A writer who has no natural elevation of genius, is extremely apt to
deviate into bombast. He strains above his genius; and the violent
effort he makes carries him generally beyond the bounds of propriety.
Boileau expresses this happily:

    L’autre à peur de ramper, il se perd dans la nue[68].

The same author Ben Johnson abounds in the bombast:

    ---- The mother,
    Th’expulsed Apicata, finds them there;
    Whom when she saw lie spread on the degrees,
    After a world of fury on herself,
    Tearing her hair, defacing of her face,
    Beating her breasts and womb, kneeling amaz’d.
    Crying to heav’n, then to them; at last
    Her drowned voice got up above her woes:
    And with such black and bitter execrations,
    (As might affright the gods, and force the sun
    Run backward to the east; nay, make the old
    Deformed Chaos rise again t’ o’erwhelm
    Them, us, and all the world) she fills the air,
    Upbraids the heavens with their partial dooms,
    Defies their tyrannous powers, and demands
    What she and those poor innocents have transgress’d,
    That they must suffer such a share in vengeance.
         _Sejanus, act 5. sc. last._

    ---- Lentulus, the man,
    If all our fire were out, would fetch down new,
    Out of the hand of Jove; and rivet him
    To Caucasus, should he but frown; and let
    His own gaunt eagle fly at him to tire.
         _Catiline, act 3._

    Can these, or such, be any aids to us?
    Look they as they were built to shake the world,
    Or be a moment to our enterprise?
    A thousand, such as they are, could not make
    One atom of our souls. They should be men
    Worth heaven’s fear, that looking up, but thus,
    Would make Jove stand upon his guard, and draw
    Himself within his thunder; which, amaz’d,
    He should discharge in vain, and they unhurt.
    Or, if they were, like Capaneus at Thebes,
    They should hang dead upon the highest spires,
    And ask the second bolt to be thrown down.
    Why Lentulus talk you so long? This time
    Had been enough t’ have scatter’d all the stars,
    T’ have quench’d the sun and moon, and made the world
    Despair of day, or any light but ours.
         _Catiline, act 4._

This is the language of a madman:

    _Guilford._ Give way, and let the gushing torrent come,
    Behold the tears we bring to swell the deluge,
    Till the flood rise upon the guilty world
    And make the ruin common.
         _Lady Jane Gray, act 4. near the end._

Another species of false sublime, is still more faulty than bombast; and
that is, to force an elevation by introducing imaginary beings without
preserving any propriety in their actions; as if it were lawful to
ascribe every extravagance and inconsistence to beings of the poet’s
creation. No writers are more licentious in this article than Johnson
and Dryden.

    Methinks I see Death and the furies waiting
    What we will do, and all the heaven at leisure
    For the great spectacle. Draw then your swords:
    And if our destiny envy our virtue
    The honour of the day, yet let us care
    To sell ourselves at such a price, as may
    Undo the world to buy us, and make Fate,
    While she tempts ours, to fear her own estate.
         _Catiline, act 5._

    ---- The furies stood on hills
    Circling the place, and trembled to see men
    Do more than they: whilst Piety left the field,
    Griev’d for that side, that in so bad a cause
    They knew not what a crime their valour was.
    The Sun stood still, and was, behind the cloud
    The battle made, seen sweating to drive up
    His frighted horse, whom still the noise drove backward.
         _Ibid. act. 5._

    _Osmyn._ While we indulge our common happiness,
    He is forgot by whom we all possess,
    The brave Almanzor, to whose arms we owe
    All that we did, and all that we shall do;
    Who like a tempest that outrides the wind,
    Made a just battle ere the bodies join’d.

    _Abdalla._ His victories we scarce could keep in view,
    Or polish ’em so fast as he rough drew.

    _Abdemelech._ Fate after him below with pain did move,
    And Victory could scarce keep pace above.
    Death did at length so many slain forget,
    And lost the tale, and took ’em by the great.
         _Conquest of Granada, act. 2. at beginning._

    The gods of Rome fight for ye; loud Fame calls ye,
    Pitch’d on the topless Apenine, and blows
    To all the under world, all nations,
    The seas and unfrequented deserts, where the snow dwells,
    Wakens the ruin’d monuments, and there
    Where nothing but eternal death and sleep is,
    Informs again the dead bones.
         _Beaumont and Fletcher, Bonduca, act. 3. sc. 3._

I close with the following observation, That an actor upon the stage may
be guilty of bombast as well as an author in his closet. A certain
manner of acting, which is grand when supported by dignity in the
sentiment and force in the expression, is ridiculous where the sentiment
is mean, and the expression flat.




CHAP. V.

Motion and Force.


That motion is agreeable to the eye without relation to purpose or
design, may appear from the amusement it gives to infants. Juvenile
exercises are relished chiefly upon that account.

If to see a body in motion be agreeable, one will be apt to conclude,
that to see it at rest is disagreeable. But we learn from experience,
that this would be a rash conclusion. Rest is one of those circumstances
that are neither agreeable nor disagreeable. It is viewed with perfect
indifferency. And happy it is for mankind that the matter is so ordered.
If rest were agreeable, it would disincline us to motion, by which all
things are performed. If it were disagreeable, it would be a source of
perpetual uneasiness; for the bulk of the things we see appear to be at
rest. A similar instance of designing wisdom I have had occasion to
explain, in opposing grandeur to littleness, and elevation to lowness of
place[69]. Even in the simplest matters, the finger of God is
conspicuous. The happy adjustment of the internal nature of man to his
external circumstances, displayed in the instances here given, is indeed
admirable.

Motion is certainly agreeable in all its varieties of quickness and
slowness. But motion long continued admits some exceptions. That degree
of continued motion which corresponds to the natural course of our
perceptions, is the most agreeable[70]. The quickest motion is for an
instant delightful. But it soon appears to be too rapid. It becomes
painful, by forcibly accelerating the course of our perceptions. Slow
continued motion becomes disagreeable for an opposite reason, that it
retards the natural course of our perceptions.

There are other varieties in motion, beside quickness and slowness,
that make it more or less agreeable. Regular motion is preferred before
what is irregular, witness the motion of the planets in orbits nearly
circular. The motion of the comets in orbits less regular, is less
agreeable.

Motion uniformly accelerated, resembling an ascending series of numbers,
is more agreeable than when uniformly retarded. Motion upward is
agreeable by the elevation of the moving body. What then shall we say of
downward motion regularly accelerated by the force of gravity, compared
with upward motion regularly retarded by the same force? Which of these
is the most agreeable? This question is not easily solved.

Motion in a straight line is no doubt agreeable. But we prefer
undulating motion, as of waves, of a flame, of a ship under sail. Such
motion is more free, and also more natural. Hence the beauty of a
serpentine river.

The easy and sliding motion of fluids, from the lubricity and
incoherence of their parts, is agreeable upon that account. But the
agreeableness chiefly depends upon the following circumstance, that the
motion is perceived, not as of one body, but as of an endless number
moving together with order and regularity. Poets struck with this
beauty, draw more images from fluids than from solids.

Force is of two kinds; one quiescent, and one exerted by motion. The
former, dead weight for example, must be laid aside; for a body at rest
is not by that circumstance either agreeable or disagreeable. Moving
force only belongs to the present subject; and though it is not
separable from motion, yet by the power of abstraction, either of them
may be considered independent of the other. Both of them are agreeable,
because both of them include activity. It is agreeable to see a thing
move: to see it moved, as when it is dragged or pushed along, is neither
agreeable nor disagreeable, more than when at rest. It is agreeable to
see a thing exert force; but it makes not the thing either agreeable or
disagreeable, to see force exerted upon it.

Though motion and force are each of them agreeable, the impressions
they make are different. This difference, clearly felt, is not easily
described. All we can say is, that the emotion raised by a moving body,
resembles its cause: it feels as if the mind were carried along. The
emotion raised by force exerted, resembles also its cause: it feels as
if force were exerted within the mind.

To illustrate this difference, I give the following examples. It has
been explained why smoke ascending in a calm day, suppose from a cottage
in a wood, is an agreeable object[71]. Landscape-painters are fond of
this object, and introduce it upon all occasions. As the ascent is
natural and without effort, it is delightful in a calm state of mind. It
makes an impression of the same sort with that of a gently-flowing
river, but more agreeable, because ascent is more to our taste than
descent. A fire-work or a _jet d’eau_ rouses the mind more; because the
beauty of force visibly exerted, is superadded to that of upward
motion. To a man reclining indolently upon a bank of flowers, ascending
smoke in a still morning is delightful. But a fire-work or a _jet d’eau_
rouses him from this supine posture, and puts him in motion.

A _jet d’eau_ makes an impression distinguishable from that of a
water-fall. Downward motion being natural and without effort, tends
rather to quiet the mind than to rouse it. Upward motion, on the
contrary, overcoming the resistance of gravity, makes an impression of a
great effort, and thereby rouses and enlivens the mind.

The public games of the Greeks and Romans, which gave so much
entertainment to the spectators, consisted chiefly in exerting force,
wrestling, leaping, throwing great stones, and such like trials of
strength. When great force is exerted, the effort felt within the mind
produces great life and vivacity. The effort may be such, as in some
measure to overpower the mind. Thus the explosion of gun-powder, the
violence of a torrent, the weight of a mountain, and the crush of an
earthquake, create astonishment rather than pleasure.

No quality nor circumstance contributes more to grandeur than force,
especially as exerted by sensible beings. I cannot make this more
evident than by the following citations.

    ---- Him the almighty power
    Hurl’d headlong flaming from th’ ethereal sky,
    With hideous ruin and combustion, down
    To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
    In adamantine chains and penal fire,
    Who durst defy th’ Omnipotent to arms.
         _Paradise Lost, book 1._

    ---- Now storming fury rose,
    And clamour such as heard in heaven till now
    Was never; arms on armour clashing bray’d
    Horrible discord, and the madding wheels
    Of brazen chariots rag’d; dire was the noise
    Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss
    Of fiery darts in flaming vollies flew,
    And flying vaulted either host with fire.
    So under fiery cope together rush’d
    Both battles main, with ruinous assault
    And inextinguishable rage: all heav’n
    Resounded; and had earth been then, all earth
    Had to her centre shook.
         _Ibid, book 6._

      They ended parle, and both address’d for fight
    Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue
    Of angels, can relate, or to what things
    Liken on earth conspicuous, that may lift
    Human imagination to such height
    Of godlike pow’r? for likest gods they seem’d,
    Stood they or mov’d, in stature, motion, arms,
    Fit to decide the empire of great Heav’n.
    Now wav’d their fiery swords, and in the air
    Made horrid circles: two broad suns their shields
    Blaz’d opposite, while Expectation stood
    In horror: from each hand with speed retir’d,
    Where erst was thickest fight, th’ angelic throng,
    And left large field, unsafe within the wind
    Of such commotion; such as, to set forth
    Great things by small, if Nature’s concord broke,
    Among the constellations war were sprung,
    Two planets, rushing from aspéct malign
    Of fiercest opposition, in mid sky,
    Should combat, and their jarring spheres confound.
         _Ibid, book 6._

We shall now consider the effect of motion and force in conjunction. In
contemplating the planetary system, what strikes us the most, is the
spherical figures of the planets and their regular motions. The
conception we have of their activity and enormous bulk is more obscure.
The beauty accordingly of this system, raises a more lively emotion than
its grandeur. But if we could imagine ourselves spectators comprehending
the whole system at one view, the activity and irresistible force of
these immense bodies would fill us with amazement. Nature cannot furnish
another scene so grand.

Motion and force, agreeable in themselves, are also agreeable by their
utility when employed as means to accomplish some beneficial end. Hence
the superior beauty of some machines, where force and motion concur to
perform the work of numberless hands. Hence the beautiful motions, firm
and regular, of a horse trained for war. Every single step is the
fittest that can be for obtaining the end proposed. But the grace of
motion is visible chiefly in man, not only for the reasons mentioned,
but also because every gesture is significant. The power however of
agreeable motion is not a common talent. Every limb of the human body
has a good and a bad, an agreeable and disagreeable action. Some
motions are extremely graceful, others are plain and vulgar: some
express dignity, others meanness. But the pleasure here, arising not
singly from the beauty of motion, but from indicating character and
sentiment, belongs to a different chapter[72].

I should conclude with the final cause of the relish we have for motion
and force, were it not so evident as to require no explanation. We are
placed here in such circumstances as to make industry essential to our
well-being; for without industry the plainest necessaries of life are
not to be obtained. When our situation therefore in this world requires
activity and a constant exertion of motion and force, Providence
indulgently provides for our welfare in making these agreeable to us. It
would be a blunder in our nature, to make things disagreeable that we
depend on for existence; and even to make them indifferent, would tend
to make us relax greatly from that degree of activity which is
indispensable.




CHAP. VI.

Novelty, and the unexpected appearance of objects.


Of all the particulars that contribute to raise emotions, not excepting
beauty, or even greatness, novelty hath the most powerful influence. A
new spectacle attracts multitudes. It produceth instantaneously an
emotion which totally occupies the mind, and for a time excludes all
other objects. The soul seems to meet the strange appearance with a
certain elongation of itself; and all is hushed in close contemplation.
In some instances, there is perceived a degree of agony, attended with
external symptoms extremely expressive. Conversation among the vulgar
never is more interesting, than when it runs upon strange objects and
extraordinary events. Men tear themselves from their native country in
search of things rare and new; and curiosity converts into a pleasure,
the fatigues, and even perils of travelling. To what cause shall we
ascribe these singular appearances? The plain account of the matter
follows. Curiosity is implanted in human nature, for a purpose extremely
beneficial, that of acquiring knowledge. New and strange objects, above
all others, excite our curiosity; and its gratification is the emotion
above described, known by the name of _wonder_. This emotion is
distinguished from _admiration_. Novelty where-ever found, whether in a
quality or action, is the cause of wonder: admiration is directed upon
the operator who performs any thing wonderful.

During infancy, every new object is probably the occasion of wonder, in
some degree; because, during infancy, every object at first is strange
as well as new. But as objects are rendered familiar by custom, we cease
by degrees to wonder at new appearances that have any resemblance to
what we are acquainted with. A thing must be singular as well as new, to
excite our curiosity and to raise our wonder. To save multiplying words,
I would be understood to comprehend both circumstances when I hereafter
talk of novelty.

In an ordinary train of perceptions where one thing introduces another,
not a single object makes its appearance unexpectedly[73]. The mind thus
prepared for the reception of its objects, admits them one after another
without perturbation. But when a thing breaks in unexpectedly and
without the preparation of any connection, it raises a singular emotion
known by the name of _surprise_. This emotion may be produced by the
most familiar object, as when one accidentally meets a friend who was
reported to be dead; or a man in high life, lately a beggar. On the
other hand, a new object, however strange, will not produce this emotion
if the spectator be prepared for the fight. An elephant in India will
not surprise a traveller who goes to see one; and yet its novelty will
raise his wonder. An Indian in Britain would be much surprised to
stumble upon an elephant feeding at large in the open fields; but the
creature itself, to which he was accustomed, would not raise his
wonder.

Surprise thus in several respects differs from wonder. Unexpedtedness is
the cause of the former emotion: novelty is the cause of the latter. Nor
differ they less in their nature and circumstances, as will be explained
by and by. With relation to one circumstance they perfectly agree, which
is the shortness of their duration. The instantaneous production of
these emotions in perfection, may contribute to this effect, in
conformity to a general law, That things soon decay which soon come to
perfection. The violence of the emotions may also contribute; for an
ardent emotion, which is not susceptible of increase, cannot have a long
course. But their short duration is occasioned chiefly by that of their
causes. We are soon reconciled to an object, however unexpected; and
novelty soon degenerates into familiarity.

Whether these emotions be pleasant or painful, is not a clear point. It
may appear strange, that our own feelings and their capital qualities
should afford any matter for a doubt. But when we are ingrossed by any
emotion, there is no place for speculation; and when sufficiently calm
for speculation, it is not easy to recal the emotion with sufficient
accuracy. New objects are sometimes terrible, sometimes delightful. The
terror which a tyger inspires is greatest at first, and wears off
gradually by familiarity. On the other hand, even women will
acknowledge, that it is novelty which pleases the most in a new fashion.
At this rate, it should be thought, that wonder is not in itself
pleasant or painful, but that it assumes either quality according to
circumstances. This doctrine, however plausible, must not pass without
examination. And when we reflect upon the principle of curiosity and its
operations, a glimpse of light gives some faint view of a different
theory. Our curiosity is never more thoroughly gratified, than by new
and singular objects. That very gratification is the emotion of wonder,
which therefore, according to the analogy of nature, ought always to be
pleasant[74]. And indeed it would be a great defect in human nature,
were the gratification of so useful a principle unpleasant. But upon a
more strict scrutiny, we shall not have occasion to mark curiosity as an
exception from the general rule. A new object, it is true, that hath a
threatening appearance, adds to our terror by its novelty. But from this
experiment it doth not follow, that novelty is in itself disagreeable.
It is perfectly consistent, that we should be delighted with an object
in one view, and terrified with it in another. A river in flood swelling
over its banks, is a grand and delightful object; and yet it may produce
no small degree of fear when we attempt to cross it. Courage and
magnanimity are agreeable; and yet when we view these qualities in an
enemy, they serve to increase our terror[75]. In the same manner,
novelty has two effects clearly distinguishable from each other. A new
object, by gratifying curiosity, must always be agreeable. It may, at
the same time, have an opposite effect indirectly, which is, to inspire
terror. For when a new object appears in any degree dangerous, our
ignorance of its powers and qualities affords ample scope for the
imagination to dress it in the most frightful colours[76]. Thus the
first sight of a lion at some distance, may at the same instant produce
two opposite feelings, the pleasant emotion of wonder, and the painful
passion of terror. The novelty of the object, produces the former
directly, and contributes to the latter indirectly. Thus, when the
subject is analized, we find, that the power which novelty hath
indirectly to inflame terror, is perfectly consistent with its being in
every case agreeable. The matter may be put in a still clearer light by
varying the scene. If a lion be first seen from a place of safety, the
spectacle is altogether agreeable without the least mixture of terror.
If again the first sight put us within reach of this dangerous animal,
our terror may be so great as quite to exclude any sense of novelty. But
this fact proves not that wonder is painful: it proves only that wonder
may be excluded by a more powerful passion. And yet it is this fact,
which, in superficial thinking, has thrown the subject into obscurity. I
presume we may now boldly affirm, that wonder is in every case a
pleasant emotion. This is acknowledged as to all new objects that appear
inoffensive. And even as to objects that appear offensive, I urge that
the same must hold so long as the spectator can attend to the novelty.

Whether surprise be in itself pleasant or painful, is a question not
less intricate than the former. It is certain, that surprise inflames
our joy when unexpectedly we meet with an old friend: and not less our
terror, when we stumble upon any thing noxious. To clear this point, we
must trace it step by step. And the first thing to be remarked is, that
in some instances an unexpected object overpowers the mind so as to
produce a momentary stupefaction. An unexpected object, not less than
one that is new, is apt to sound an alarm and to raise terror. Man,
naturally a defenceless being, is happily so constituted as to apprehend
danger in all doubtful cases. Accordingly, where the object is
dangerous, or appears so, the sudden alarm it gives, without
preparation, is apt totally to unhinge the mind, and for a moment to
suspend all the faculties, even thought itself[77]. In this state a man
is quite helpless; and if he move at all, is as likely to run upon the
danger as from it. Surprise carried to this height, cannot be either
pleasant or painful; because the mind, during such momentary
stupefaction, is in a good measure, if not totally, insensible.

If we then inquire for the character of this emotion, it must be where
the unexpected object or event produceth less violent effects. And while
the mind remains sensible of pleasure and pain, is it not natural to
suppose, that surprise, like wonder, should have an invariable
character? I am inclined however to think, that surprise has no
invariable character, but assumes that of the object which raises it.
Wonder is the gratification of a natural principle, and upon that
account must be pleasant. There, novelty is the capital circumstance,
which, for a time, is intitled to possess the mind entirely in one
unvaried tone. The unexpected appearance of an object, seems not equally
intitled to produce an emotion distinguishable from the emotion,
pleasant or painful, that is produced by the object in its ordinary
appearance. It ought not naturally to have any effect, other than to
swell that emotion, by making it more pleasant or more painful than it
commonly is. And this conjecture is confirmed by experience, as well as
by language, which is built upon experience. When a man meets a friend
unexpectedly, he is said to be agreeably surprised; and when he meets an
enemy unexpectedly, he is said to be disagreeably surprised. It appears
then, that the sole effect of surprise is to swell the emotion raised by
the object. And this effect can be clearly explained. A tide of
connected perceptions, glides gently into the mind, and produceth no
perturbation. An object on the other hand breaking in unexpectedly,
sounds an alarm, rouses the mind out of its calm state, and directs its
whole attention upon the object, which, if agreeable, becomes doubly so.
Several circumstances concur to produce this effect. On the one hand,
the agitation of the mind and its keen attention, prepare it in the most
effectual manner for receiving a deep impression. On the other hand, the
object by its sudden and unforeseen appearance, makes an impression, not
gradually as expected objects do, but as at one stroke with its whole
force. The circumstances are precisely similar, where the object is in
itself disagreeable.

The pleasure of novelty is easily distinguished from that of variety. To
produce the latter, a plurality of objects is necessary. The former
arises from a circumstance found in a single object. Again, where
objects, whether coexistent or in succession, are sufficiently
diversified, the pleasure of variety is complete, though every single
object of the train be familiar. But the pleasure of novelty, directly
opposite to familiarity, requires no diversification.

There are different degrees of novelty, and its effects are in
proportion. The lowest degree is found in objects that are surveyed a
second time after a long interval. That in this case an object takes on
some appearance of novelty, is certain from experience. A large building
of many parts variously adorned, or an extensive field embellished with
trees, lakes, temples, statues, and other ornaments, will appear new
oftener than once. The memory of an object so complex is soon lost; of
its parts at least, or of their arrangement. But experience teaches,
that even without any decay of remembrance, absence alone will give an
air of novelty to a once familiar object; which is not surprising,
because familiarity wears off gradually by absence. Thus a person with
whom we have been intimate, returning after a long interval, appears
like a new acquaintance. Distance of place contributes to this
appearance, not less than distance of time. A friend after a short
absence in a remote country, has the same air of novelty as if he had
returned after a longer interval from a place nearer home. The mind
forms a connection betwixt him and the remote country, and bestows upon
him the singularity of the objects he has seen. When two things equally
new and singular are presented, the spectator balances betwixt them. But
when told that one of them is the product of a distant quarter of the
world, he no longer hesitates, but clings to this as the more singular.
Hence the preference given to foreign luxuries and to foreign
curiosities, which appear rare in proportion to their original distance.

The next degree of novelty, mounting upward, is found in objects of
which we have some information at second hand. For description, though
it contribute to familiarity, cannot altogether remove the appearance of
novelty when the object itself is presented. The first sight of a lion
occasions some wonder, after a thorough acquaintance with the corrected
pictures or statues of that animal.

A new object that bears some distant resemblance to a known species, is
an instance of a third degree of novelty. A strong resemblance among
individuals of the same species, prevents almost entirely the effect of
novelty; unless distance of place or some other circumstance concur.
But where the resemblance is faint, some degree of wonder is felt; and
the emotion rises in proportion to the faintness of the resemblance.

The highest degree of wonder ariseth from unknown objects that have no
analogy to any species we are acquainted with. Shakespear in a simile
introduces this species of novelty.

    As glorious to the sight
    As is a winged messenger from heaven
    Unto the white upturned wondring eye
    Of mortals, that fall back to gaze on him
    When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds,
    And sails upon the bosom of the air.
         _Romeo and Juliet._

One example of this species of novelty deserves peculiar attention; and
that is, when an object altogether new is seen by one person only, and
but once. These circumstances heighten remarkably the emotion. The
singularity of the condition of the spectator concurs with the
singularity of the object, to inflame wonder to its highest pitch.

In explaining the effects of novelty, the place a being occupies in the
scale of existence, is a circumstance that must not be omitted. Novelty
in the individuals of a low class, is perceived with indifference, or
with a very slight emotion. Thus a pebble, however singular in its
appearance, scarce moves our wonder. The emotion rises with the rank of
the object; and, other circumstances being equal, is strongest in the
highest order of existence. A strange animal affects us more than a
strange vegetable; and were we admitted to view superior beings, our
wonder would rise proportionably; and accompanying Nature in her amazing
works, be completed in the contemplation of the Deity.

However natural the love of novelty may be, it is a matter of
experience, that those who relish novelty the most, are careful to
conceal its influence. This relish, it is true, prevails in children, in
idle people, and in men of a weak mind. And yet, after all, why should
one be ashamed for indulging a natural propensity? A distinction will
explain this difficulty. No man is ashamed to own, that he loves to
contemplate new or strange objects. He neither condemns himself nor is
censured by others, for this appetite. But every man studies to conceal,
that he loves a thing or performs an action, merely for its novelty. The
reason of the difference will set the matter in a clear light. Curiosity
is a natural principle directed upon new and singular objects, in the
contemplation of which its gratification consists, without leading to
any end other than knowledge. The man therefore who prefers any thing
merely because it is new, hath not this principle for his justification;
nor indeed any good principle. Vanity is at the bottom, which easily
prevails upon those who have no taste, to prefer things odd, rare, or
singular, in order to distinguish themselves from others. And in fact,
the appetite for novelty, as above mentioned, reigns chiefly among
persons of a mean taste, who are ignorant of refined and elegant
pleasures.

The gratification of curiosity, as mentioned above, is distinguished by
a proper name, _viz. wonder_; an honour denied to the gratification of
any other principle, emotion, or passion, so far as I can recollect.
This singularity indicates some important final cause, which I endeavour
to unfold. An acquaintance with the various things that may affect us,
and with their properties, is essential to our well-being. Nor will a
slight or superficial acquaintance be sufficient. It ought to be so
deeply ingraved on the mind, as to be ready for use upon every occasion.
Now, in order to a deep impression, it is wisely contrived, that things
should be introduced to our acquaintance, with a certain pomp and
solemnity productive of a vivid emotion. When the impression is once
fairly made, the emotion of novelty, being no longer necessary,
vanisheth almost instantaneously; never to return, unless where the
impression happens to be obliterated by length of time or other means;
in which case the second introduction is nearly as solemn as the first.

Designing wisdom is no where more legible than in this part of the human
frame. If new objects did not affect us in a very peculiar manner,
their impressions would be so slight as scarce to be of any use in life.
On the other hand, did objects continue to affect us as deeply as at
first, the mind would be totally ingrossed with them, and have no room
left either for action or reflection.

The final cause of surprise is still more evident than of novelty.
Self-love makes us vigilantly attentive to self-preservation. But
self-love, which operates by means of reason and reflection, and impells
not the mind to any particular object or from it, is a principle too
cool for a sudden emergency. An object breaking in unexpectedly, affords
no time for deliberation; and, in this case, the agitation of surprise
is artfully contrived to rouse self-love into action. Surprise gives the
alarm, and if there be any appearance of danger, our whole force is
instantly summoned up to shun or to prevent it.




CHAP. VII.

Risible Objects.


Such is the nature of man, that his powers and faculties are soon
blunted by exercise. The returns of sleep, suspending all activity, are
not alone sufficient to preserve him in vigor. During his waking hours,
amusement by intervals is requisite to unbend his mind from serious
occupation. The imagination, of all our faculties the most active, and
not always at rest even in sleep, contributes more than any other cause
to recruit the mind and restore its vigor, by amusing us with gay and
ludicrous images; and when relaxation is necessary, such amusement is
much relished. But there are other sources of amusement beside the
imagination. Many objects, natural as well as artificial, may be
distinguished by the epithet of _risible_, because they raise in us a
peculiar emotion expressed externally by _laughter_. This is a pleasant
emotion; and being also mirthful, it most successfully unbends the mind
and recruits the spirits.

_Ludicrous_ is a general term, signifying, as we may conjecture from its
derivation, what is playsome, sportive, or jocular. _Ludicrous_
therefore seems the genus, of which _risible_ is a species, limited as
above to what makes us laugh.

However easy it may be, concerning any particular object, to say whether
it be risible or not; it seems difficult, if at all practicable, to
establish beforehand any general character by which objects of this kind
may be distinguished from others. Nor is this a singular case. Upon a
review, we find the same difficulty in most of the articles already
handled. There is nothing more easy, viewing a particular object, than
to pronounce that it is beautiful or ugly, grand or little: but were we
to attempt general rules for ranging objects under different classes,
according to these qualities, we should find ourselves utterly at a
loss. There is a separate cause which increases the difficulty of
distinguishing risible objects by a general character. All men are not
equally affected by risible objects; and even the same person is more
disposed to laugh at one time than another. In high spirits a thing will
make us laugh outright, that will scarce provoke a smile when we are in
a grave mood. We must therefore abandon the thought of attempting
general rules for distinguishing risible objects from others. Risible
objects however are circumscribed within certain limits, which I shall
suggest, without pretending to any degree of accuracy. And, in the first
place, I observe, that no object is risible but what appears slight,
little, or trifling. For man is so constituted as to be seriously
affected with every thing that is of importance to his own interest or
to that of others. Secondly, with respect to the works both of nature
and of art, nothing is risible but what deviates from the common nature
of the subject: it must be some particular out of rule, some remarkable
defect or excess, a very long visage, for example, or a very short one.
Hence nothing just, proper, decent, beautiful, proportioned, or grand,
is risible. A real distress raises pity, and therefore cannot be
risible. But a slight or imaginary distress, which moves not pity, is
risible. The adventure of the fulling-mills in Don Quixote is extremely
risible; so is the scene where Sancho, in a dark night, tumbles into a
pit, and attaches himself to the side by hand and foot, there hanging in
terrible dismay till the morning, when he discovers himself to be within
a foot of the bottom. A nose remarkably long or short is risible; but to
want the nose altogether, far from provoking laughter, raises horror in
the spectator.

From what is said, it will readily be conjectured, that the emotion
raised by a risible object is of a nature so singular as scarce to find
place while the mind is occupied with any other passion or emotion. And
this conjecture is verified by experience. We scarce ever find this
emotion blended with any other. One emotion I must except, and that is
contempt raised by some sort of improprieties. Every improper act
inspires us with some degree of contempt for the author. And if an
improper act be at the same time risible and provoke laughter, of which
blunders and absurdities are noted instances, the two emotions of
contempt and of laughter unite intimately in the mind, and produce
externally what is termed _a laugh of derision_ or _of scorn_. Hence
objects that cause laughter, may be distinguished into two kinds. They
are either _risible_ or _ridiculous_. A risible object is mirthful only;
a ridiculous object is both mirthful and contemptible. The first raises
an emotion of laughter that is altogether pleasant: the emotion of
laughter raised by the other, is qualified with that of contempt; and
the mixed emotion, partly pleasant partly painful, is termed _the
emotion of ridicule_. I avenge myself of the pain a ridiculous object
gives me by a laugh of derision. A risible object, on the other hand,
gives me no pain: it is altogether pleasant by a certain sort of
titillation, which is expressed externally by mirthful laughter.
Ridicule will be more fully explained afterward: the present chapter is
appropriated to the other emotion.

Risible objects are so common and so well understood, that it is
unnecessary to consume paper or time upon them. Take the few following
examples.

    _Falstaff._ I do remember him at Clement’s inn,
    like a man made after supper of a cheese-paring.
    When he was naked, he was for all the world like a
    forked radish, with a head fantastically carved upon
    it with a knife.
         _Second part, Henry IV. act 3. sc. 5._

The foregoing is of disproportion. The following examples are of slight
or imaginary misfortunes.

    _Falstaff._ Go fetch me a quart of sack, put a
    toast in’t. Have I liv’d to be carried in a basket,
    like a barrow of butcher’s offal, and to be thrown
    into the Thames? Well, if I be serv’d such another
    trick, I’ll have my brains ta’en out and butter’d,
    and give them to a dog for a new-year’s
    gift. The rogues slighted me into the river with
    as little remorse as they would have drown’d a
    bitch’s blind puppies, fifteen i’ th’ litter; and you
    may know by my size, that I have a kind of alacrity
    in sinking: if the bottom were as deep as hell,
    I should down. I had been drown’d, but that the
    shore was shelvy and shallow; a death that I abhor;
    for the water swells a man: and what a thing
    should I have been, when I had been swell’d? I
    should have been a mountain of mummy.
         _Merry wives of Windsor, act 3. sc. 15._

    _Falstaff._ Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook,
    what I have suffer’d to bring this woman to evil
    for your good. Being thus cramm’d in the basket,
    a couple of Ford’s knaves, his hinds, were
    call’d forth by their mistress, to carry me in the
    name of foul cloaths to Datchet-lane. They took
    me on their shoulders, met the jealous knave their
    master in the door, who ask’d them once or twice
    what they had in their basket. I quak’d for fear,
    left the lunatic knave would have search’d it; but
    Fate, ordaining he should be a cuckold, held his
    hand. Well, on went he for a search, and away
    went I for foul cloaths. But mark the sequel, Master
    Brook. I suffer’d the pangs of three egregious
    deaths: first, an intolerable fright, to be detected
    by a jealous rotten bell weather; next, to be compass’d
    like a good bilbo, in the circumference of a
    peck, hilt to point, heel to head; and then to be
    stopt in, like a strong distillation, with stinking cloaths
    that fretted in their own grease. Think of that, a
    man of my kidney; think of that, that am as subject
    to heat as butter; a man of continual dissolution
    and thaw; it was a miracle to ’scape suffocation.
    And in the height of this bath, when I was
    more than half-stew’d in grease, like a Dutch dish,
    to be thrown into the Thames, and cool’d glowing
    hot, in that surge, like a horse-shoe; think of
    that; hissing hot; think of that, Master Brook.
         _Merry wives of Windsor, act 3. sc. 17._




CHAP. VIII.

Resemblance and Contrast.


Having discussed those qualities and circumstances of single objects
that seem peculiarly connected with criticism, we proceed, according to
the method proposed in the chapter of beauty, to the relations of
objects, beginning with the relations of resemblance and contrast.

Man being unavoidably connected with the beings around him, some
acquaintance with their nature, their powers, and their qualities, is
requisite for regulating his conduct. As an incentive to acquire a
branch of knowledge so essential to our well-being, motives alone of
reason and interest are not sufficient. Nature hath providently
superadded curiosity, a vigorous propensity which never is at rest. It
is this propensity which attaches us to every new object[78]; and in
particular incites us to consider objects in the way of comparison, in
order to discover their differences and resemblances.

Resemblance among objects of the same kind, and dissimilitude among
objects of different kinds, are too obvious and familiar to gratify our
curiosity in any degree. The gratification lies in discovering
differences among things where resemblance prevails, and in discovering
resemblances where difference prevails. Thus a difference in individuals
of the same kind of plants or animals is deemed a discovery, while the
many particulars in which they agree are neglected: and in different
kinds, any resemblance is greedily remarked, without attending to the
many particulars in which they differ.

A comparison however may be too far stretched. When differences or
resemblances are carried beyond certain bounds, they appear slight and
trivial; and for that reason will not be relished by one of taste. Yet
such propensity is there to gratify passion, curiosity in particular,
that even among good writers, we find many comparisons too slight to
afford satisfaction. Hence the frequent instances among logicians, of
distinctions without any solid difference: and hence the frequent
instances among poets and orators, of similes without any just
resemblance. With regard to the latter, I shall confine myself to one
instance, which will probably amuse the reader, being a citation not
from a poet nor orator, but from a grave author writing an institute of
law. “Our student shall observe, that the knowledge of the law is like a
deep well, out of which each man draweth according to the strength of
his understanding. He that reacheth deepest, seeth the amiable and
admirable secrets of the law, wherein I assure you the sages of the law
in former times have had the deepest reach. And as the bucket in the
depth is easily drawn to the uppermost part of the water, (for _nullum
elementum in suo proprio loco est grave_), but take it from the water it
cannot be drawn up but with a great difficulty; so, albeit beginnings of
this study seem difficult, yet when the professor of the law can dive
into the depth, it is delightful, easy, and without any heavy burden,
so long as he keep himself in his own proper element[79].” Shakespear
with much wit ridicules this disposition to simile-making, by putting in
the mouth of a weak man a resemblance much of a piece with that now
mentioned.

     _Fluellen._ I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn: I
     tell you, Captain, if you look in the maps of the orld, I warrant
     that you sall find, in the comparisons between Macedon and
     Monmouth, that the situations, look you, is both alike. There is a
     river in Macedon, there is also moreover a river in Monmouth: it is
     call’d _Wye_ at Monmouth, but it is out of my prains what is the
     name of the other river; but it is all one, ’tis as like as my
     fingers to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. If you mark
     Alexander’s life well, Harry of Monmouth’s life is come after it
     indifferent well; for there is figures in all things. Alexander,
     God knows, and you know, in his rages, and his furies, and his
     wraths, and his cholers, and his moods, and his displeasures, and
     his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his
     prains, did, in his ales and his angers, look you, kill his pest
     friend Clytus.

     _Gower._ Our King is not like him in that, he never kill’d any of
     his friends.

     _Fluellen._ It is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales
     out of my mouth, ere it is made and finished. I speak but in
     figures, and comparisons of it: As Alexander kill’d his friend
     Clytus, being in his ales and his cups; so also Harry Monmouth,
     being in his right wits and his good judgments, turn’d away the fat
     knight with the great belly-doublet; he was full of jests, and
     gypes, and knaveries, and mocks: I have forgot his name.

     _Gower._ Sir John Falstaff.

     _Fluellen._ That is he: I tell you, there is good men porn at
     Monmouth. _K. Henry_ V. _act 4. sc. 13._

Instruction, no doubt, is the chief end of comparison, but not the only
end. In works addressed to the imagination, comparison may be employed
with great success to put a subject in a strong point of view. A lively
idea is formed of a man’s courage, by likening it to that of a lion; and
eloquence is exalted in our imagination, by comparing it to a river
overflowing its banks, and involving all in its impetuous course. The
same effect is produced by contrast. A man in prosperity, becomes more
sensible of his happiness, by opposing his condition to that of a
person in want of bread. Thus comparison is subservient to poetry as
well as to philosophy; and with respect to both, the foregoing
observation holds equally, that resemblance among objects of the same
kind, and contrast among objects of different kinds, have no effect.
Such a comparison neither tends to gratify our curiosity, nor to set the
objects compared in a stronger light. Two apartments in a palace,
similar in shape, size, and furniture, make separately as good a figure
as when compared; and the same observation applies to two similar
copartments in a garden. On the other hand, oppose a regular building to
a fall of water, or a good picture to a towering hill, or even a little
dog to a large horse, and the contrast will produce no effect. But
resemblance, where the objects compared are of different kinds, and
contrast where the objects compared are of the same kind, have each of
them remarkably an enlivening effect. The poets, such of them as have a
just taste, draw all their similes from things that in the main differ
widely from the principal subject; and they never attempt a contrast but
where the things have a common genus and a resemblance in the capital
circumstances. Place together a large and a small sized animal of the
same species, the one will appear greater the other less, than when
viewed separately. When we oppose beauty to deformity, each makes a
greater figure by the comparison.

Upon a subject not only in itself curious, but of great importance in
all the fine arts, I must be more particular. That resemblance and
contrast have an enlivening effect upon objects of sight, is made
sufficiently evident; and that they have the same effect upon objects of
the other senses, will appear from induction. Nor is this law confined
to the external senses. Characters contrasted, make a greater figure by
the opposition. Iago, in the tragedy of _Othello_, says

    He hath a daily beauty in his life,
    That makes me ugly.

The character of a fop, and of a rough warrior, are no where more
successfully contrasted than by Shakespear.

    _Hotspur._ My liege, I did deny no prisoners;
    But I remember, when the fight was done,
    When I was dry with rage, and extreme toil,
    Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword;
    Came there a certain Lord, neat, trimly dress’d,
    Fresh as a bridegroom; and his chin, new-reap’d,
    Shew’d like a stubble-land at harvest-home.
    He was perfumed like a milliner;
    And ’twixt his finger and his thumb he held
    A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
    He gave his nose;--and still he smil’d, and talk’d;
    And as the soldiers bare dead bodies by,
    He call’d them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
    To bring a slovenly, unhandsome corse
    Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
    With many holiday and lady terms
    He question’d me: amongst the rest, demanded
    My pris’ners, in your Majesty’s behalf.
    I then all smarting with my wounds; being gal’d
    To be so pester’d with a popinjay,
    Out of my grief, and my impatience,
    Answer’d, neglectingly, I know not what:
    He should, or should not; for he made me mad,
    To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet,
    And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman,
    Of guns, and drums, and wounds; (God save the mark!)
    And telling me, the sovereign’st thing on earth
    Was parmacity, for an inward bruise;
    And that it was great pity, so it was,
    This villanous saltpetre should be digg’d
    Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
    Which many a good, tall fellow had destroy’d
    So cowardly: and but for these vile guns,
    He would himself have been a soldier.--
         _First part, Henry IV. act 1. sc. 4._

Passions and emotions are also inflamed by comparison. A man of high
rank humbles the bystanders so far as almost to annihilate them in their
own opinion. Cæsar, beholding the statue of Alexander, felt a great
depression of spirits, when he reflected, that now at the age of
thirty-two, when Alexander died, he had not performed one memorable
action.

Our opinions also are much influenced by comparison. A man whose
opulence exceeds the ordinary standard, is reputed richer than he is in
reality; and the character of wisdom or weakness, if at all remarkable
is generally carried beyond the truth.

The opinion a man forms of his present condition as to happiness or
misery, depends in a great measure on the comparison he makes betwixt it
and his former condition:

    Could I forget
    What I have been, I might the better bear
    What I am destin’d to. I’m not the first
    That have been wretched: but to think how much
    I have been happier.
         _Southern’s Innocent adultery, act 2._

The distress of a long journey makes even an indifferent inn pass
current. And in travelling, when the road is good and the horseman well
covered, a bad day may be agreeable, by making him sensible how snug he
is.

The same effect is equally remarkable, when a man sets his condition in
opposition to that of others. A ship tossed about in a storm, makes the
spectator reflect upon his own security and ease, and puts these in the
strongest light:

    Suave, mari magno turbantibus æquora ventis,
    E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem,
    Non quia vexari quemquam est jocunda voluptas,
    Sed quibus ipse malis careas, quia cernere suave est.
         _Lucret. l. 2. principio._

A man in grief cannot bear mirth. It gives him a more lively notion of
his unhappiness, and of course makes him more unhappy. Satan
contemplating the beauties of the terrestrial paradise, breaks out in
the following exclamation.

    With what delight could I have walk’d thee round,
    If I could joy in ought, sweet interchange
    Of hill and valley, rivers, woods, and plains,
    Now land, now sea, and shores with forest crown’d,
    Rocks, dens, and caves! but I in none of these
    Find place or refuge; and the more I see
    Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
    Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
    Of contraries: all good to me becomes
    Bane, and in heav’n much worse would be my state.
         _Paradise Lost, book 9. l. 114._

    _Gaunt._ All places that the eye of heaven visits,
    Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
    Teach thy necessity to reason thus:
    There is no virtue like necessity.
    Think not the King did banish thee;
    But thou the King. Wo doth the heavier sit,
    Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
    Go say, I sent thee forth to purchase honour;
    And not, the King exil’d thee. Or suppose,
    Devouring pestilence hangs in our air,
    And thou art flying to a fresher clime,
    Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
    To lie that way thou go’st, not whence thou com’st.
    Suppose the singing birds, musicians;
    The grass whereon thou tread’st, the presence-floor;
    The flow’rs, fair ladies; and thy steps, no more
    Than a delightful measure, or a dance.
    For gnarling Sorrow hath less power to bite
    The man that mocks at it, and sets it light.

    _Bolingbroke._ Oh, who can hold a fire in his hand,
    By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
    Or cloy the hungry edge of Appetite,
    By bare imagination of a feast?
    Or wallow naked in December snow,
    By thinking on fantastic summer’s heat?
    Oh, no! the apprehension of the good
    Gives but the greater feeling to the worse.
         _King Richard II. act 1. sc. 6._

The appearance of danger gives sometimes pleasure, sometimes pain. A
timorous person upon the battlements of a high tower, is seized with
terror, which even the consciousness of security cannot dissipate. But
upon one of a firm head, this situation has a contrary effect. The
appearance of danger heightens by opposition the consciousness of
security, and of consequence the satisfaction that arises from security.
The feeling here resembles that above mentioned occasioned by a ship
labouring in a storm.

This effect of magnifying or lessening objects by means of comparison,
is so familiar, that no philosopher has thought of searching for a
cause[80]. The obscurity of the subject may possibly have contributed to
their silence. But luckily in treating other subjects, a principle is
unfolded which will clearly account for this phenomenon. It depends
upon the power of passion to model our opinion of objects for its
gratification[81]. We have had occasion to see many illustrious examples
of this singular power of passion; and the present subject affords an
additional instance. That this is the cause, will evidently appear, by
reflecting in what manner a spectator is affected, when a very large
animal is for the first time placed beside a very small one of the same
species. The opposition is the first thing that strikes the mind: the
unusual appearance gives surprise; and the spectator, prone to gratify
this emotion, conceives the opposition to be the greatest that can be.
He sees, or seems to see, the one animal extremely little, and the other
extremely large. The emotion of surprise arising from any unusual
resemblance, serves equally to explain why at first view we are apt to
think such resemblance more entire than it is in reality. And it must be
observed, that the circumstances of more and less, which are the proper
subjects of comparison, raise a perception so indistinct and vague as
to facilitate the effect described. We have no mental standard of great
and little, nor of the several degrees of any attribute; and the mind
thus unrestrained, is naturally disposed to indulge its surprise to the
utmost extent.

In exploring the operations of the mind, some of which are extremely
nice and slippery, it is necessary to proceed with the utmost
circumspection. And after all, seldom it happens that speculations of
this kind afford any strong conviction. Luckily, in the present case, we
have at hand facts and experiments that support the foregoing theory in
a satisfactory manner. In the first place, the opposing a small object
of one species to a great object of another, produces not, in any
degree, that effect of contrast, which is so remarkable when both
objects are of the same species. There is no difference betwixt these
two cases that promiseth to have any influence, but only that the former
is common, the latter rare. May we not then fairly conclude, that
surprise from the rarity of appearance is the cause of contrast, when
we find no such effect where the appearance is common? In the next
place, if surprise be the sole cause of the effects that appear in
making a comparison, it follows necessarily that these effects will
vanish so soon as a comparison becomes familiar. This holds so
unerringly, as to leave no reasonable doubt that surprise is the prime
mover in this operation. Our surprise is great the first time a small
lapdog is seen with a large mastiff: but when two such animals are
constantly together, there is no surprise; and it makes no difference
whether they be viewed separately or in company. We put no bounds to the
riches of a man who has recently made his fortune. The opposition
betwixt his present and past situation, or betwixt his present situation
and that of others, is carried to an extreme. With regard to a family
that for many generations hath enjoyed great wealth, the same false
reckoning is not made. It is equally remarkable, that a simile loses its
effect by repetition. A lover compared to a moth scorching itself at the
flame of a candle, is a sprightly simile, which by frequent use has
lost all force. Love cannot now be compared to fire, without some degree
of disgust. It has been justly objected against Homer, that the lion is
too often introduced in his similes. All the variety he is able to throw
into them, is not sufficient to keep alive the reader’s surprise.

To explain the influence of comparison upon the mind, I have chosen the
simplest case, that of two animals of the same kind, differing in size
only, seen for the first time. To complete the theory, other
circumstances must be taken in. And the next supposition I shall make,
is where both animals, separately familiar to the spectator, are brought
together for the first time. In this case, the effect of magnifying and
diminishing, will be found remarkably greater than in that first
mentioned. And the reason will appear upon analyzing the operation. The
first thing we feel is surprise, occasioned by the uncommon difference
of two creatures of the same species. We are next sensible, that the one
appears less, the other larger, than they did formerly. This new
circumstance is a second cause of surprise, and augments it so as to
make us imagine a still greater opposition betwixt the animals, than if
we had formed no notion of them beforehand.

I shall confine myself to one other supposition, That the spectator was
acquainted beforehand with one of the animals only, the lapdog for
example. This new circumstance will vary the effect. Instead of widening
the natural difference by enlarging in appearance the one animal and
diminishing the other in proportion, the whole apparent alteration will
rest upon the lapdog. The surprise to find it less than judged to be
formerly, will draw the whole attention of the mind upon it; and this
surprise will be gratified, by conceiving it to be of the most
diminutive size possible. The mastiff in the mean time is quite
neglected. I am able to illustrate this effect by a very familiar
example. Take a piece of paper or linen reckoned to be a good white, and
compare it with something of the same kind that is a pure white. The
judgement we formed of the first object is instantly varied; and the
surprise occasioned by finding it not so white as was thought,
produceth a hasty conviction that it is much less white than it is in
reality. Withdrawing now the pure white, and putting in its place a deep
black, the surprise occasioned by this new circumstance carries our
thought to the other extreme, and we now conceive the original object to
be a pure white. Thus experience forces us to acknowledge, that our
emotions have an influence even upon our eye-sight. This experiment
leads to a general observation, That whatever is found more strange or
beautiful than was expected, is judged to be more strange or beautiful
than it is in reality. Hence it is a common artifice, to depreciate
beforehand what we wish to make a figure in the eyes of others.

The comparisons employed by poets and orators, coincide with the
last-mentioned supposition. It is always a known object that is to be
aggrandized or lessened. The former is effectuated by likening it to
some grand object, or by contrasting it with one that has the opposite
character. To effectuate the latter, the method must be reversed. The
object must be contrasted with something superior to itself, or likened
to something inferior. The whole effect is produced upon the principal
subject, which by this means is elevated above its rank or depressed
below it.

In accounting for the effect that any unusual resemblance or contrast
has upon the mind, I have hitherto assigned no other cause but surprise;
and to prevent confusion and obscurity, I thought it proper to discuss
that principle first. But surprise is not the only cause of the effect
described. Another cause concurs, which operates perhaps not less
powerfully than surprise. This cause is a principle in human nature that
lies still in obscurity, not having been evolved by any writer, though
its effects are extensive. As it is not distinguished by a proper name,
the reader must be satisfied with the following description. No man who
studies himself or others but must be sensible of a tendency or
propensity in the mind to complete every work that is begun, and to
carry things to their full perfection. This principle has little
opportunity to display itself upon natural operations, which are seldom
left imperfect. But in the operations of art it hath great scope; and
displays itself remarkably, by making us persevere in our own work, and
by making us wish for the completion of what is done by another. We feel
a sensible pleasure when the work is brought to perfection; and our pain
is not less sensible when we are disappointed. Hence our uneasiness,
when an interesting story is broke off in the middle, when a piece of
music ends without a close, or when a building or garden is left
imperfect. The same principle operates in making collections, such as
the whole works good and bad of any author. A certain person endeavoured
to collect prints of all the capital paintings, and succeeded except as
to a few. La Bruyere remarks, that an anxious search was made for these,
not on account of their value, but to complete the set[82].

The final cause of this principle is an additional proof of its
existence. Human works are of no significancy till they be completed.
Reason is not always a sufficient counterbalance to indolence: and some
principle over and above is necessary, to excite our industry, and to
prevent our stopping short in the middle of the course.

We need not lose time in describing the co-operation of the foregoing
principle with surprise in producing the effect that is felt upon the
appearance of any unusual resemblance or contrast. Surprise first
operates, and carries our opinion of the resemblance or contrast beyond
the truth. The principle we have been describing carries us still
farther; for being bent upon gratification, it forces upon the mind a
conviction that the resemblance or contrast is complete. We need no
better illustration than the resemblance that is fancied in some
pebbles to a tree or an insect. The resemblance, however faint in
reality, is conceived to be wonderfully perfect. This tendency to
complete a resemblance acting jointly with surprise, carries the mind
sometimes so far as even to presume upon future events. In the Greek
tragedy, intitled, _Phineides_, those unhappy women, seeing the place
where it was intended they should be slain, cried out with anguish,
“They now saw their cruel destiny had condemned them to die in that
place, being the same where they had been exposed in their infancy[83].”

This remarkable principle which inclines us to advance every thing to
its perfection, not only co-operates with surprise to deceive the mind,
but of itself is able to produce that effect. Of this we see many
instances where there is no place for surprise. The first instance I
shall give is of resemblance. _Unumquodque eodem modo dissolvitur quo
colligatum est_, is a maxim in the Roman law that has no foundation in
truth. For tying and loosing, building and demolishing, are acts
opposite to each other, and are performed by opposite means. But when
these acts are connected by their relation to the same subject, their
connection leads us to imagine a sort of resemblance betwixt them, which
the foregoing principle makes us conceive to be as complete as possible.
The next instance shall be of contrast. Addison observes[84], “That the
palest features look the most agreeable in white; that a face which is
overflushed appears to advantage in the deepest scarlet; and that a dark
complexion is not a little alleviated by a black hood.” The foregoing
principle serves to account for these appearances. To make this evident,
one of the cases shall suffice. A complexion, however dark, never
approaches to black. When these colours appear together, their
opposition strikes us; and the propensity we have to complete the
opposition, makes the darkness of complexion vanish out of sight.

The operation of this principle, even where there is no ground for
surprise, is not confined to opinion or conviction. So powerful is it,
as to make us sometimes proceed to action in order to complete a
resemblance or contrast. If this appear obscure, it will be made clear
by the following instances. Upon what principle is the _lex talionis_
founded other than to make the punishment resemble the mischief? Reason
dictates, that there ought to be a conformity or resemblance betwixt a
crime and its punishment; and the foregoing principle impells us to make
the resemblance as complete as possible. Titus Livius, influenced by
this principle, accounts for a certain punishment by a resemblance
betwixt it and the crime, far too subtile for common apprehension.
Speaking of Mettus Fuffetius, the Alban general, who, for treachery to
the Romans, his allies, was sentenced to be torn to pieces by horses, he
puts the following speech in the mouth of Tullus Hostilius, who decreed
the punishment. “Mette Fuffeti, inquit, si ipse discere posses fidem ac
fœdera servare, vivo tibi ea disciplina a me adhibita esset. Nunc,
quoniam tuum insanabile ingenium est, at tu tuo supplicio doce humanum
genus, ea sancta credere, quæ a te violata sunt. Ut igitur paulo ante
animum inter Fidenatem Romanamque rem ancipitem gessisti, ita jam corpus
passim distrahendum dabis[85].” By the same influence, the sentence is
often executed upon the very spot where the crime was committed. In the
_Electra_ of Sophocles, Egistheus is dragged from the theatre into an
inner room of the supposed palace, to suffer death where he murdered
Agamemnon. Shakespear, whose knowledge of nature is not less profound
than extensive, has not overlooked this propensity:

     _Othello._ Get me some poison, Iago, this night; I’ll not
     expostulate with her, lest her body and her beauty unprovide my
     mind again; this night, Iago.

     _Iago._ Do it not with poison; strangle her in her bed, even in the
     bed she hath contaminated.

     _Othello._ Good, good: The justice of it pleases; very good.
     _Othello, act 4. sc. 5._

    _Warwick._ From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
    Your father’s head which Clifford placed there.
    Instead whereof let his supply the room.
    Measure for measure must be answered.
         _Third Part of Henry VI. act 2. sc. 9._

Persons in their last moments are generally seized with an anxiety to be
buried with their relations. In the _Amynta_ of Tasso, the lover,
hearing that his mistress was torn to pieces by a wolf, expresses a
desire to die the same death[86].

Upon the subject in general, I have two remarks to add. The first
concerns resemblance, which when too entire hath no effect, however
different in kind the things compared may be. This remark is applicable
to works of art only; for natural objects of different kinds, have
scarce ever an entire resemblance. Marble is a sort of matter, very
different from what composes an animal; and marble cut into a human
figure, produces great pleasure by the resemblance. But let a marble
statue be coloured like a picture, the resemblance is so entire as to
produce no effect. At a distance, it appears a real person. We discover
the mistake when we approach; and no other emotion is raised but
surprise occasioned by the deception. The idea of resemblance is sunk
into that of identity. The figure still appears to our eyes rather to be
a real person than a resemblance of it; and we must make use of our
reflection to correct the mistake. This cannot happen in a picture; for
the resemblance can never be so entire as to disguise the imitation.

The other remark regards contrast. Emotions make the greatest figure
when contrasted in succession. But then the succession ought neither to
be precipitate nor immoderately slow. If too slow, the effect of
contrast becomes faint by the distance of the emotions; and if
precipitate, no single emotion has room to expand itself to its full
size; but is stifled as it were in the birth by a succeeding emotion.
The funeral oration of the Bishop of Meaux upon the Duchess of Orleans,
is a perfect hotchpotch of chearful and melancholy representations
following each other in the quickest succession. Opposite emotions are
best felt in succession: but each emotion separately should be raised to
its due pitch, before another be introduced.

What is above laid down, will enable us to determine a very important
question concerning emotions raised by the fine arts, _viz._ What ought
to be the rule of succession; whether ought resemblance to be studied or
contrast? The emotions raised by the fine arts, are generally too nearly
related to make a figure by resemblance; and for that reason, their
succession ought to be regulated as much as possible by contrast. This
holds confessedly in epic and dramatic compositions: and the best
writers, led perhaps by a good taste more than by reasoning, have
generally aimed at this beauty. In the same cantata, all the variety of
emotions that are within the power of music, may not only be indulged,
but, to make the greatest figure, ought to be contrasted. In gardening
there is an additional reason for the rule. The emotions raised by that
art, are at best so faint, that every artifice should be used to give
them their utmost strength. A field may be laid out in grand, sweet,
gay, neat, wild, melancholy scenes. When these are viewed in succession,
grandeur ought to be contrasted with neatness, regularity with wildness,
and gaiety with melancholy; so as that each emotion may succeed its
opposite. Nay it is an improvement to intermix in the succession, rude
uncultivated spots as well as unbounded views, which in themselves are
disagreeable, but in succession heighten the feeling of the agreeable
objects. And we have nature for our guide, who in her most beautiful
landscapes often intermixes rugged rocks, dirty marshes, and barren
stony heaths. The greatest matters of music, have the same view in their
compositions: the second part of an Italian song seldom conveys any
sentiment; and, by its harshness, seems purposely contrived to give a
greater relish for the interesting parts of the composition.

A small garden comprehended under a single view, affords little
opportunity for this embellishment. Dissimilar emotions require
different tones of mind; and therefore in conjunction can never make a
good figure[87]. Gaiety and sweetness may be combined, or wildness and
gloominess; but a composition of gaiety and gloominess is distasteful.
The rude uncultivated copartment of furze and broom in Richmond garden,
hath a good effect in the succession of objects; but a spot of this
nature would be insufferable in the midst of a polished parterre or
flower-plot. A garden therefore, if not of great extent, will not admit
of dissimilar emotions. And in ornamenting a small garden, the safest
course is to confine it to a single expression. For the same reason, a
landscape ought also to be confined to a single expression. It is
accordingly a rule in painting, That if the subject be gay, every figure
ought to contribute to that emotion.

It follows from the foregoing train of reasoning, that a garden near a
great city, ought to have an air of solitude. The solitariness again of
a waste country ought to be contrasted in forming a garden; no temples,
no obscure walks; but _jets d’eau_, cascades, objects active, gay, and
splendid. Nay such a garden should in some measure avoid imitating
nature, by taking on an extraordinary appearance of regularity and art,
to show the busy hand of man, which in a waste country has a fine effect
by contrast.

It may be gathered from what is said above[88], that wit and ridicule
make not an agreeable mixture with grandeur. Dissimilar emotions have a
fine effect in a slow succession; but in a rapid succession, which
approaches to co-existence, they will not be relished. In the midst of a
laboured and elevated description of a battle, Virgil introduces a
ludicrous image, which is certainly out of its place:

    Obvius ambustum torrem Chorinæus ab ara
    Corripit, et venienti Ebuso plagamque ferenti
    Occupat os flammis: illi ingens barba reluxit,
    Nidoremque ambusta dedit.
         _Æn._ xii. 298.

The following image is not less ludicrous, nor less improperly placed.

    Mentre fan questi i bellici stromenti
    Perche debbiano tosto in uso porse,
    Il gran nemico de l’humane genti,
    Contra i Christiani i lividi occhi torse:
    E lor veggendo a le bell’ opre intenti,
    Ambo le labra per furor si morse:
    E qual tauro ferito, il suo dolore
    Verso mugghiando e sospirando fuore.
         _Gierusal. cant. 4. st. 1._

It would however be too austere, to banish altogether ludicrous images
from an epic poem. This poem doth not always soar above the clouds. It
admits great variety; and upon occasions can descend even to the ground
without sinking. In its more familiar tones, a ludicrous scene may be
introduced without impropriety. This is done by Virgil[89] in describing
a foot-race; the circumstances of which, not excepting the ludicrous
part, are copied from Homer[90]. After a fit of merryment, we are, it
is true, the less disposed to the serious and sublime: but then, a
ludicrous scene, by unbending the mind from severe application to more
interesting subjects, may prevent fatigue, and preserve our relish
entire.




CHAP. IX.

Of Uniformity and Variety.


When I apply myself to explain uniformity and variety, and to show how
we are affected by these circumstances, it appears doubtful what method
ought to be followed. I foresee several difficulties in keeping close to
my text; and yet by indulging a range, such as may be necessary for a
clear view, I shall certainly incur the censure of wandering.--Be it so.
One ought not to abandon the right track for fear of censure. The
collateral matters, beside, that will be introduced, are curious, and
not of slight importance in the science of human nature.

The necessary succession of perceptions, is a subject formerly handled,
so far as it depends on the relations of objects and their mutual
connections[91]. But that subject is not exhausted; and I take the
liberty to introduce it a second time, in order to explain in what
manner we are affected by uniformity and variety. The world we inhabit
is replete with things not less remarkable for their variety than their
number. These, unfolded by the wonderful mechanism of external sense,
furnish the mind with many perceptions, which, joined with ideas of
memory, of imagination, and of reflection, form a complete train that
has not a gap or interval. This tide of objects, in a continual flux, is
in a good measure independent of will. The mind, as has been
observed[92], is so constituted, “That it can by no effort break off the
succession of its ideas, nor keep its attention long fixt upon the same
object.” We can arrest a perception in its course; we can shorten its
natural duration, to make room for another; we can vary the succession
by change of place or amusement; and we can in some measure prevent
variety, by frequently recalling the same object after short intervals:
but still there must be a succession, and a change from one thing to
another. By artificial means, the succession may be retarded or
accelerated, may be rendered more various or more uniform, but in one
shape or other is unavoidable.

The rate of succession, even when left to its ordinary course, is not
always the same. There are natural causes that accelerate or retard it
considerably. The first I shall mention depends on a peculiar
constitution of mind. One man is distinguished from another, by no
circumstance more remarkably than the movement of his train of
perceptions. A cold languid temper is accompanied with a slow course of
perceptions, which occasions dulness of apprehension and sluggishness in
action. To a warm temper, on the contrary, belongs a quick course of
perceptions, which occasions quickness of apprehension and activity in
business. The Asiatic nations, the Chinese especially, are observed to
be more cool and deliberate than the Europeans: may not the reason be,
that heat enervates by exhausting the spirits? A certain degree of cold,
such as is felt in the middle regions of Europe, by bracing the fibres,
rouses the mind, and produces a brisk circulation of thought,
accompanied with vigour in action. In youth there is observable a
quicker succession of perceptions, than in old age. Hence in youth a
remarkable avidity for variety of amusements, which in riper years give
place to more uniform and more sedate occupation. This qualifies men of
middle age for business, where activity is required, but with a greater
proportion of uniformity than variety. In old age, a slow and languid
succession makes variety unnecessary; and for that reason, the aged, in
all their motions, are generally governed by an habitual uniformity.
Whatever be the cause, we may venture to pronounce, that heat in the
imagination and temper, is always connected with a brisk flow of
perceptions.

The natural rate of succession, depends also in some degree upon the
particular perceptions that compose the train. An agreeable object,
taking a strong hold of the mind, occasions a slower succession than
when the objects are indifferent. Grandeur and novelty fix the attention
for a considerable time, excluding all other ideas; and the mind thus
occupied feels no vacuity. Some emotions, by hurrying the mind from
object to object, accelerate the succession. Where the train is composed
of connected objects, the succession is quick. For it is so ordered by
nature, that the mind goes easily and sweetly along connected
objects[93]. On the other hand, the succession must be slow where the
train is composed of unconnected objects. An unconnected object, finding
no ready access to the mind, requires time to make an impression. And
that it is not admitted without a struggle, appears from the unsettled
state of the mind for some moments after it is presented, wavering
betwixt it and the former train. During this short period, one or other
of the former objects will intrude, perhaps oftener than once, till the
attention be fixt entirely upon the new object. The same observations
are applicable to ideas suggested by language. The mind can bear a quick
succession of related ideas. But an unrelated idea, for which the mind
is not prepared, takes time to make a distinct impression; and therefore
a train composed of such ideas, ought to proceed with a slow pace. Hence
an epic poem, a play, or any story connected in all its parts, may be
perused in a shorter time, than a book of maxims or apothegms, of which
a quick succession creates both confusion and fatigue.

Such latitude hath nature indulged in the rate of succession. What
latitude it indulges with respect to uniformity we proceed to examine.
The uniformity or variety of a train, so far as composed of external
objects, depends on the particular objects that surround the percipient
at the time. The present occupation must also have an influence; one is
sometimes engaged in a multiplicity of affairs, sometimes altogether
vacant. A natural train of ideas of memory is more circumscribed, each
object being linked, by some connection, to what precedes and to what
follows it. These connections, which are many and of different kinds,
afford scope for a sufficient degree of variety; and at the same time
prevent any excess that is unpleasant. Temper and constitution also have
an influence here, as well as upon the rate of succession. A man of a
calm and sedate temper, admits not willingly any idea but what is
regularly introduced by a proper connection. One of a roving disposition
embraces with avidity every new idea, however slender its relation be to
those that go before it. Neither must we overlook the nature of the
perceptions that compose the train; for their influence is not less with
respect to uniformity and variety, than with respect to the rate of
succession. The mind ingrossed by any passion, love or hatred, hope or
fear, broods over its object, and can bear no interruption. In such a
state, the train of perceptions must not only be slow, but extremely
uniform. Anger newly inflamed eagerly grasps its object, and leaves not
a cranny in the mind for another thought than of revenge. In the
character of Hotspur, this state of mind is represented to the life; a
picture remarkable for high colouring as well as for strictness of
imitation:

    _Worcester._ Peace, cousin, say no more.
    And now I will unclasp a secret book,
    And to your quick-conceiving discontents
    I’ll read you matter, deep and dangerous;
    As full of peril and advent’rous spirit
    As to o’erwalk a current, roaring loud,
    On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.

    _Hotspur._ If he fall in, good-night. Or sink or swim,
    Send danger from the east into the west,
    So honour cross it from the north to south;
    And let them grapple. O! the blood more stirs
    To rouse a lion than to start a hare.

    _Worcester._ Those same Noble Scots,
    That are your prisoners----

    _Hotspur._ I’ll keep them all.
    By Heav’n, he shall not have a Scot of them:
    No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not;
    I’ll keep them, by this hand.

    _Worcester._ You start away,
    And lend no ear unto my purposes;
    Those pris’ners you shall keep.

    _Hotspur._ I will; that’s flat:
    He said, he would not ransom Mortimer:
    Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer:
    But I will find him when he lies asleep,
    And in his ear I’ll holla _Mortimer_!
    Nay, I will have a starling taught to speak
    Nothing but _Mortimer_, and give it him,
    To keep his anger still in motion.

    _Worcester._ Hear you, cousin, a word.

    _Hotspur._ All studies here I solemnly defy,
    Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:
    And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,
    (But that I think his father loves him not,
    And would be glad he met with some mischance),
    I’d have him poison’d with a pot of ale.

    _Worcester._ Farewel, my kinsman, I will talk to you,
    When you are better temper’d to attend.
         _First part, Henry_ IV. _act 1. sc. 4._

Having viewed a train of perceptions as directed by nature, and the
variations it is susceptible of from different necessary causes, we
proceed to examine how far it is subjected to will; for that will hath
some influence, more or less, is observed above. And first, the rate of
succession may be retarded by insisting upon one object, and propelled
by dismissing another before its time. But such voluntary mutations in
the natural course of succession, have limits that cannot be extended by
the most painful efforts. The mind circumscribed in its capacity,
cannot, at the same instant, admit many perceptions; and when replete,
it has no place for new perceptions till others be removed. For this
reason, a voluntary change of perceptions cannot be instantaneous; and
the time it requires sets bounds to the velocity of succession. On the
other hand, the power we have to arrest a flying perception, is equally
limited. The longer we detain any perception, the more difficulty we
find in the operation; till, the difficulty becoming unsurmountable, we
are forced to quit our hold, and to permit the train to take its usual
course.

The power we have over this train as to uniformity and variety, is in
some cases very great, in others very little. A train so far as composed
of external objects, depends entirely on the place we occupy, and admits
not more or less variety but by change of place. A train composed of
ideas of memmory, is still less under our power. Objects which are
connected, afford the mind an easy passage from one to another. They
suggest each other in idea by the same means; and we cannot at will call
up any idea that is not connected with the train[94]. But a train of
ideas suggested by reading, may be varied at will, provided we have
books in store.

This power which nature hath given us over our train of perceptions, may
be greatly strengthened by proper discipline, and by an early
application to business. Its improved strength is remarkable in those
who have a strong genius for the mathematics: nor less remarkable in
persons devoted to religious exercises, who pass whole days in
contemplation, and impose upon themselves long and severe penances. It
is not to be conceived, what length a habit of activity in affairs will
carry some men. Let a stranger, or let any person to whom the sight is
not familiar, attend the Chancellor of Great Britain through the labours
but of one day, during a session of parliament: how great will be his
astonishment! what multiplicity of law-business, what deep thinking, and
what elaborate application to matters of government! The train of
perceptions must in this great man be accelerated far beyond the common
course of nature. Yet no confusion nor hurry; but in every article the
greatest order and accuracy. Such is the force of habit! How happy is
man, to have the command of a principle of action, that can elevate him
so far above the ordinary condition of humanity[95]!

We are now ripe for considering a train of perceptions with respect to
pleasure and pain: and to this speculation we must give peculiar
attention, because it serves to explain the effects that uniformity and
variety have upon the mind. A man is always in a pleasant state of mind,
when his perceptions flow in their natural course. He feels himself
free, light, and easy, especially after any forcible acceleration or
retardation. On the other hand, the resistance felt in retarding or
accelerating the natural course, excites a pain, which, though scarcely
felt in small removes, becomes considerable toward the extremes. An
aversion to fix on any single object for a long time, or to take in a
multiplicity of objects in a short time, is remarkable in children; and
equally so in men unaccustomed to business. A man languishes when the
succession is very slow; and, if he grow not impatient, is apt to fall
asleep. During a rapid succession, he hath a feeling as if his head were
turning round. He is fatigued, and his pain resembles that of weariness
after bodily labour. External objects, when they occasion a very slow or
a very quick succession, produce a pain of the same sort with what it
felt in a voluntary retardation or acceleration: which shows that the
pain proceeds not from the violence of the action, but from the
retardation or acceleration itself, disturbing that free and easy course
of succession which is naturally pleasant.

But the mind is not satisfied with a moderate course alone: its
perceptions must also be sufficiently diversified. Number without
variety constitutes not an agreeable train. In comparing a few objects,
uniformity is agreeable: but the frequent reiteration of uniform
objects becomes unpleasant. One tires of a scene that is not
diversified; and soon feels a sort of unnatural restraint when confined
within a narrow range, whether occasioned by a retarded succession or by
too great uniformity. An excess in variety is, on the other hand,
fatiguing. This is even perceptible in a train composed of related
objects: much more where the objects are unrelated; for an object,
unconnected with the former train, gains not admittance without effort;
and this effort, though scarce perceptible in a single instance, becomes
by frequent reiteration exceeding painful. Whatever be the cause, the
fact is certain, that a man never finds himself more at ease, than when
his perceptions succeed each other with a certain degree, not only of
velocity, but also of variety. Hence it proceeds, that a train
consisting entirely of ideas of memory, is never painful by too great
variety; because such ideas are not introduced otherwise than according
to their natural connections[96]. The pleasure of a train of ideas, is
the most remarkable in a reverie; especially where the imagination
interposes, and is active in coining new ideas, which is done with
wonderful facility. One must be sensible, that the serenity and ease of
the mind in this state, makes a great part of the enjoyment. The case is
different where external objects enter into the train; for these, making
their appearance without any order, and without any connection save that
of contiguity, form a train of perceptions that may be extremely uniform
or extremely diversified; which, for opposite reasons, are both of them
painful.

Any acceleration or retardation of the natural run of perceptions, is
painful even where it is voluntary. And it is equally painful to alter
that degree of variety which nature requires. Contemplation, when the
mind is long attached to one thing, soon becomes painful by restraining
the free range of perception. Curiosity and the prospect of advantage
from useful discoveries, may engage a man to prosecute his studies,
notwithstanding the pain they give him; and a habit of close attention,
formed by frequent exercise, may soften the pain. But it is deeply felt
by the bulk of mankind, and produceth in them an aversion to all
abstract sciences. In any profession or calling, a train of operation
that is simple and reiterated without intermission, makes the operator
languish, and lose his vigor. He complains neither of too great labour
nor of too little action; but regrets the want of variety, and his being
obliged to do the same thing over and over. Where the operation is
sufficiently varied, the mind retains its vigor, and is pleased with its
condition. Actions again create an uneasiness when excessive in number
or variety, though in every other respect agreeable. This uneasiness is
extremely remarkable, where strict attention must be given, at the same
time, to a number of different things. Thus a throng of business in law,
in physic, or in traffick, distresseth and distracts the mind, unless
where a habit of application is acquired by long and constant exercise.
The excessive variety is the distressing circumstance; and the mind
suffers grievously by being kept constantly upon the stretch.

With relation to involuntary causes disturbing that degree of variety
which nature requires, a slight pain affecting one part of the body
without variation, becomes, by its constancy and long duration, almost
insupportable. The patient, sensible that the pain is not increased in
degree, complains of its constancy more than of its severity, that it
ingrosses his whole thoughts, and gives admission to no other object.
Pain, of all feelings, seizes the attention with the greatest force; and
the mind, after fruitless efforts to turn its view to objects more
agreeable, must abandon itself to its tormentor. A shifting pain gives
less uneasiness, because change of place contributes to variety. An
intermitting pain, suffering other objects to intervene, is not
increased by reiteration. Again, any single colour or sound often
returning, becomes disagreeable; as may be observed in viewing a train
of similar apartments painted with the same colour, and in hearing the
prolonged tollings of a bell. Colour and sound varied within certain
limits, though without any order, are agreeable; witness a field
variegated with many colours of plants and flowers, and the various
notes of birds in a thicket. Increase the number or variety, and the
feeling becomes unpleasant. Thus a great variety of colours, crowded
upon a small canvas or in quick succession, create an uneasy feeling,
which is prevented by putting the colours at a greater distance either
of place or time. A number of voices in a crowded assembly, a number of
animals collected in a market, produce an unpleasant emotion; though a
few of them together, or all of them in a moderate succession, would be
agreeable. And because of the same excess in variety, a number of pains
felt in different parts of the body, at the same instant or in a rapid
succession, make an exquisite torture.

The foregoing doctrine concerning the train of perceptions, and the
pleasure or pain resulting from that train in different circumstances,
will be confirmed by attending to the final cause of these effects. And
as I am sensible that the mind, inflamed with speculations of this kind
so highly interesting, is beyond measure disposed to conviction, I shall
be watchful to admit no argument nor remark but what appears solidly
founded. With this caution I proceed to the inquiry. It is occasionally
observed above, that persons of a phlegmatic temperament, having a
sluggish train of perceptions, are indisposed to action; and that
activity constantly accompanies a brisk motion of perceptions. To
ascertain this fact, a man need not go abroad for experiments.
Reflecting upon things passing in his own mind, he will find, that a
brisk circulation of thought constantly prompts him to action; and that
he is averse to action when his perceptions languish in their course.
But man by nature is formed for action, and he must be active in order
to be happy. Nature therefore hath kindly provided against indolence, by
annexing pleasure to a moderate course of perceptions, and by making
every remarkable retardation painful. A slow course of perceptions is
attended with another bad effect. Man in a few capital cases is governed
by propensity or instinct; but in matters that admit deliberation and
choice, reason is assigned him for a guide. Now, as reasoning requires
often a great compass of ideas, their succession ought to be so quick,
as readily to furnish every motive that may be necessary for mature
deliberation. In a languid succession, motives will often occur after
action is commenced, when it is too late to retreat.

Nature hath guarded man, her favourite, against a succession too rapid,
not less carefully than against one too slow. Both are equally painful,
though the pain is not the same in both. Many are the good effects of
this contrivance. In the first place, as the bodily faculties are by
certain painful sensations confined within proper limits, beyond which
it would be dangerous to strain the tender organs, Nature, in like
manner, is equally provident with respect to the nobler faculties of the
mind. Thus the pain of an accelerated course of perceptions, is Nature’s
admonition to relax our pace, and to admit a more gentle exertion of
thought. Another valuable purpose may be gathered, from considering in
what manner objects are imprinted upon the mind. To make such an
impression as to give the memory fast hold of the object, time is
required, even where attention is the greatest; and a moderate degree of
attention, which is the common case, must be continued still longer to
produce the same effect. A rapid succession then must prevent objects
from making impressions so deep as to be of real service in life; and
Nature accordingly for the sake of memory, has by a painful feeling
guarded against a rapid succession. But a still more valuable purpose is
answered by this contrivance. As, on the one hand, a sluggish course of
perceptions indisposeth to action; so, on the other, a course too rapid
impels to rash and precipitant action. Prudent conduct is the child of
deliberation and clear conception, for which there is no place in a
rapid course of thought. Nature therefore, taking measures for prudent
conduct, has guarded us effectually from precipitancy of thought, by
making it painful.

Nature not only provides against a succession too slow or too quick, but
makes the middle course extremely pleasant. Nor is this middle course
confined within narrow bounds. Every man can naturally without pain
accelerate or retard in some degree the rate of his perceptions; and he
can do this in a still greater degree by the force of habit. Thus a
habit of contemplation annihilates the pain of a retarded course of
perceptions; and a busy life, after long practice, makes acceleration
pleasant.

Concerning the final cause of our taste for variety, it will be
considered, that human affairs, complex by variety as well as number,
require the distributing our attention and activity, in measure and
proportion. Nature therefore, to secure a just distribution
corresponding to the variety of human affairs, has made too great
uniformity or too great variety in the course of our perceptions equally
unpleasant. And indeed, were we addicted to either extreme, our internal
constitution would be ill suited to our external circumstances. At the
same time, where a frequent reiteration of the same operation is
required, as in several manufactures, or a quick circulation, as in law
or physic, Nature, attentive to all our wants, hath also provided for
these cases. She hath implanted in the breast of every person, an
efficacious principle, which leads to habit. By an obstinate
perseverance in the same occupation, the pain of excessive uniformity
vanisheth; and by the like perseverance in a quick circulation of
different occupations, the pain of excessive variety vanisheth. And thus
we come to take delight in several occupations, that by nature, without
habit, are not a little disgustful.

A middle rate also in our train of perceptions betwixt uniformity and
variety, is not less pleasant, than betwixt quickness and slowness. The
mind of man thus constituted, is wonderfully adapted to the course of
human affairs, which are continually changing, but not without
connection. It is equally adapted to the acquisition of knowledge, which
results chiefly from discovering resemblances among differing objects,
and differences among resembling objects. Such occupation, even
abstracting from the knowledge we acquire, is in itself delightful, by
preserving a middle rate betwixt too great uniformity and too great
variety.

We are now arrived at the chief purpose of the present chapter; and that
is to examine how far uniformity or variety ought to be studied in the
fine arts. And the knowledge we have obtained, will even at first view
suggest a general observation, That in every work of art, it must be
agreeable to find that degree of variety which corresponds to the
natural course of our perceptions; and that an excess in variety or in
uniformity, must be disagreeable by varying that natural course. For
this reason, works of art admit more or less variety according to the
nature of the subject. In a picture that strongly attaches the spectator
to a single object, the mind relisheth not a multiplicity of figures or
of ornaments. A picture again representing a gay subject, admits great
variety of figures and ornaments; because these are agreeable to the
mind in a chearful tone. The same observation is applicable to poetry
and to music.

It must at the same time be remarked, that one can bear a greater
variety of natural objects than of objects in a picture; and a greater
variety in a picture than in a description. A real object presented to
the view, makes an impression more readily than when represented in
colours, and much more readily than when represented in words. Hence it
is, that the profuse variety of objects in some natural landscapes,
neither breed confusion nor fatigue. And for the same reason, there is
place for greater variety of ornament in a picture, than in a poem.

From these general observations I proceed to particulars. In works
exposed continually to public view, variety ought to be studied. It is a
rule accordingly in sculpture, to contrast the different limbs of a
statue, in order to give it all the variety possible. Though the cone in
a single view be more beautiful than the pyramid; yet a pyramidal
steeple, because of its variety, is justly preferred. For the same
reason, the oval in compositions is preferred before the circle; and
painters, in copying buildings or any regular work, endeavour to give an
air of variety by representing the subject in an angular view: we are
pleased with the variety without losing sight of the regularity. In a
landscape representing animals, those especially of the same kind,
contrast ought to prevail. To draw one sleeping another awake, one
sitting another in motion, one moving toward the spectator another from
him, is the life of such a performance.

In every sort of writing intended for amusement, variety is necessary in
proportion to the length of the work. Want of variety is sensibly felt
in Davila’s history of the civil wars of France. The events are indeed
important and various: but the reader languisheth by a tiresome
uniformity of character; every person engaged being figured a consummate
politician, governed by interest only. It is hard to say, whether Ovid
disgusts more by too great variety or too great uniformity. His stories
are all of the same kind, concluding invariably with the transformation
of one being into another. So far he is tiresome with excess in
uniformity. He also fatigues with excess in variety, by hurrying his
reader incessantly from story to story. Ariosto is still more fatiguing
than Ovid, by exceeding the just bounds of variety. Not satisfied, like
Ovid, with a succession in his stories, he distracts the reader by
jumbling together a multitude of unconnected events. Nor is the Orlando
Furioso less tiresome by its uniformity than the Metamorphoses, though
in a different manner. After a story is brought to a crisis, the reader,
intent upon the catastrophe, is suddenly snatched away to a new story,
which is little regarded so long as the mind is occupied with the
former. This tantalizing method, from which the author never once
swerves during the course of a long work, beside its uniformity, hath
another bad effect: it prevents that sympathy which is raised by an
interesting event when the reader meets with no interruption.

The emotions produced by our perceptions in a train, have been little
considered, and less understood. The subject therefore required an
elaborate discussion. It may surprise some readers, to find variety
treated as only contributing to make a train of perceptions pleasant,
when it is commonly held to be a necessary ingredient in beauty of
whatever kind; according to the definition, “That beauty consists in
uniformity amidst variety.” But after the subject is explained and
illustrated as above, I presume it will be evident, that this
definition, however applicable to one or other species, is far from
being just with respect to beauty in general. Variety contributes no
share to the beauty of a moral action, nor of a mathematical theorem;
and numberless are the beautiful objects of sight that have little or no
variety in them. A globe, the most uniform of all figures, is of all the
most beautiful; and a square, though more beautiful than a trapezium,
hath less variety in its constituent parts. The foregoing definition,
which at best is but obscurely expressed, is only applicable to a number
of objects in a group or in succession, among which indeed a due mixture
of uniformity and variety is always agreeable, provided the particular
objects, separately considered, be in any degree beautiful. Uniformity
amidst variety among ugly objects, affords no pleasure. This
circumstance is totally omitted in the definition; and indeed to have
mentioned it, would at first glance show the definition to be
imperfect. To define beauty as arising from beautiful objects blended
together in a due proportion of uniformity and variety, would be too
gross to pass current; as nothing can be more gross, than to employ in a
definition the very term that is proposed to be explained.




APPENDIX to Chap. IX.

_Concerning the works of nature._


In natural objects, whether we regard their internal or external
structure, beauty and design are equally conspicuous. We shall begin
with the outside of nature, as what first presents itself.

The figure of an organic body, is generally regular. The trunk of a
tree, its branches, and their ramifications, are nearly round, and form
a series regularly decreasing from the trunk to the smallest fibre.
Uniformity is no where more remarkable than in the leaves, which, in
the same species, have all the same colour, size, and shape. The seeds
and fruits are all regular figures, approaching for the most part to the
globular form. Hence a plant, especially of the larger kind, with its
trunk, branches, foliage, and fruit, is a delightful object.

In an animal, the trunk, which is much larger than the other parts,
occupies a chief place. Its shape, like that of the stem of plants, is
nearly round; a figure which of all is the most agreeable. Its two sides
are precisely similar. Several of the under parts go off in pairs; and
the two individuals of each pair are accurately uniform. The single
parts are placed in the middle. The limbs, bearing a certain proportion
to the trunk, serve to support it, and to give it a proper elevation.
Upon one extremity are disposed the neck and head, in the direction of
the trunk. The head being the chief part, possesses with great propriety
the chief place. Hence, the beauty of the whole figure, is the result of
many equal and proportional parts orderly disposed; and the smallest
variation in number, equality, proportion, or order, never fails to
produce a perception of ugliness and deformity.

Nature in no particular seems more profuse of ornament, than in the
beautiful colouring of her works. The flowers of plants, the furs of
beasts, and the feathers of birds, vie with each other in the beauty of
their colours, which in lustre as well as in harmony are beyond the
power of imitation. Of all natural appearances, the colouring of the
human face is the most exquisite. It is the strongest instance of the
ineffable art of nature, in adapting and proportioning its colours to
the magnitude, figure, and position, of the parts. In a word, colour
seems to live in nature only, and to languish under the finest touches
of art.

When we examine the internal structure of a plant or animal, a wonderful
subtility of mechanism is displayed. Man, in his mechanical operations,
is confined to the surface of bodies. But the operations of nature are
exerted through the whole substance, so as to reach even the elementary
parts. Thus the body of an animal, and of a plant, are composed of
certain great vessels; these of smaller; and these again of still
smaller, without end so far we can discover. This power of diffusing
mechanism through the most intimate parts, is peculiar to nature; and
distinguishes her operations, most remarkably, from every work of art.
Such texture, continued from the grosser parts to the most minute,
preserves all along the strictest regularity. The fibres of plants are a
bundle of cylindric canals, lying in the same direction, and parallel or
nearly parallel to each other. In some instances, a most accurate
arrangement of parts is discovered, as in onions, formed of concentric
coats one within another to the very centre. An animal body is still
more admirable, in the disposition of its internal parts, and in their
order and symmetry. There is not a bone, a muscle, a blood-vessel, a
nerve, that hath not one corresponding to it on the opposite side of the
animal; and the same order is carried through the most minute parts. The
lungs are composed of two parts, which are disposed upon the sides of
the thorax; and the kidneys, in a lower situation, have a position not
less orderly. As to the parts that are single, the heart is
advantageously situated nigh the middle. The liver, stomach, and spleen,
are disposed in the upper region of the abdomen, about the same height:
the bladder is placed in the middle of the body; as well as the
intestinal canal, which fills the whole cavity by its convolutions.

The mechanical power of nature, not confined to small bodies, reacheth
equally those of the greatest size; witness the bodies that compose the
solar system, which, however large, are weighed, measured, and subjected
to certain laws, with the utmost accuracy. Their places around the sun,
with their distances, are determined by a precise rule, corresponding to
their quantities of matter. The superior dignity of the central body, in
respect of its bulk and lucid appearance, is suited to the place it
occupies. The globular figure of these bodies, is not only in itself
beautiful, but is above all others fitted for regular motion. Each
planet revolves about its own axis in a given time; and each moves round
the sun, in an orbit nearly circular, and in a time proportioned to its
distance. Their velocities, directed by an established law, are
perpetually changing by regular accelerations and retardations. In fine,
the great variety of regular appearances, joined with the beauty of the
system itself, cannot fail to produce the highest delight in every
person who can taste design, power, or beauty.

Nature hath a wonderful power of connecting systems with each other, and
of propagating that connection through all her works. Thus the
constituent parts of a plant, the roots, the stem, the branches, the
leaves, the fruit, are really different systems, united by a mutual
dependence on each other. Thus in an animal, the lymphatic and lacteal
ducts, the blood-vessels and nerves, the muscles and glands, the bones
and cartilages, the membranes and viscera, with the other organs, form
distinct systems, which are united into one whole. There are, at the
same time, other connections less intimate. Thus every plant is joined
to the earth by its roots; it requires rain and dews to furnish it with
juices; and it requires heat to preserve these juices in fluidity and
motion. Thus every animal, by its gravity, is connected with the earth,
with the element in which it breathes, and with the sun, by deriving
from it cherishing and enlivening heat. The earth furnisheth aliment to
plants, these to animals, and these again to other animals, in a long
train of dependence. That the earth is part of a greater system,
comprehending many bodies mutually attracting each other, and
gravitating all toward one common centre, is now thoroughly explored.
Such a regular and uniform series of connections, propagated through so
great a number of beings and through such wide spaces, is wonderful: and
our wonder must increase, when we observe this connection propagated
from the minutest atoms to bodies of the most enormous size, and widely
diffused, so as that we can neither perceive its beginning nor its end.
That it doth not terminate within our own planetary system, is certain.
The connection is diffused over spaces still more remote, where new
bodies and systems rise to our view, without end. All space is filled
with the works of God, which, being the operation of one hand, are
formed by one plan, to answer one great end.

But the most wonderful connection of all, though not the most
conspicuous, is that of our internal frame with the works of nature. Man
is obviously fitted for contemplating these works, because in this
contemplation he has great delight. The works of nature are remarkable
in their uniformity not less than in their variety; and the mind of man
is fitted to receive pleasure equally from both. Uniformity and variety
are interwoven in the works of nature with surprising art. Variety,
however great, is never without some degree of uniformity; nor the
greatest uniformity, without some degree of variety. There is great
variety in the same plant, by the different appearances of its stem,
branches, leaves, blossoms, fruit, size, and colour; and yet when we
trace this variety through different plants, especially of the same
kind, there is discovered a surprising uniformity. Again, where nature
seems to have intended the most exact uniformity, as among individuals
of the same kind, there still appears a diversity, which serves readily
to distinguish one individual from another. It is indeed admirable, that
the human visage, in which uniformity is so prevalent, should yet be so
marked as to leave no room for mistaking one person for another. The
difference, though clearly perceived, is often so minute as to go beyond
the reach of description. A correspondence so perfect betwixt the human
mind and the works of nature, is extremely remarkable. The opposition
betwixt variety and uniformity is so great, that one would not readily
imagine they could both be relished by the same palate; at least not in
the same object, nor at the same time. It is however true, that the
pleasures they afford, being happily adjusted to each other, and readily
mixing in intimate union, are frequently produced in perfection by the
same individual object. Nay further, in the objects that touch us the
most, uniformity and variety are constantly combined; witness natural
objects, where this combination is always found in perfection. It is
for that reason, that natural objects readily form themselves into
groups, and are agreeable in whatever manner combined: a wood with its
trees, shrubs, and herbs, is agreeable: the music of birds, the lowing
of cattle, and the murmuring of a brook, are in conjunction delightful;
though they strike the ear without modulation or harmony. In short,
nothing can be more happily accommodated to the inward constitution of
man, than that mixture of uniformity with variety which the eye
discovers in natural objects. And accordingly, the mind is never more
highly gratified than in contemplating a natural landscape.


End of the FIRST VOLUME.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] See the Appendix, § 13.

[2] Du Bos judiciously observes, that silence doth not tend to calm an
agitated mind; but that soft and slow music hath a fine effect.

[3] A taste for natural objects is born with us in perfection. To
relish a fine countenance, a rich landscape, or a vivid colour, culture
is unnecessary. The observation holds equally in natural sounds, such
as the singing of birds, or the murmuring of a brook. Nature here, the
artificer of the object as well as of the percipient, hath suited them
to each other with great accuracy. But of a poem, a cantata, a picture,
and other artificial productions, a true relish is not commonly
attained without study and practice.

[4] “Though logic may subsist without rhetoric or poetry, yet so
necessary to these last is a sound and correct logic, that without it
they are no better than warbling trifles.” Hermes, p. 6.

[5] Genius is allied to a warm and inflammable constitution, delicacy
of taste to calmness and sedateness. Hence it is common to find genius
in one who is a prey to every passion; which can scarce happen with
respect to delicacy of taste. Upon a man possessed of this blessing,
the moral duties, as well as the fine arts, make a deep impression,
so as to counterbalance every irregular desire. And even supposing a
strong temptation, it can take no fast hold of a calm and sedate temper.

[6] For how should this be done? What object is it that we are to call
up? If this question can be answered, the object is already in the
mind, and there is no occasion to exert the power. If the question
cannot be answered, I next demand, how it is possible that a voluntary
power can be exerted without any view of an object to exert it upon?
We cannot form a conception of such a thing. This argument appears to
me satisfactory: if it need confirmation, I urge experience. Whoever
makes a trial will find, that objects are linked together in the mind,
forming a connected chain; and that we have not the command of any
object independent of the chain.

[7] A train of perceptions or ideas, with respect to its uniformity and
variety, is handled afterward, chap. 9.

[8] Lib. 2. ode 13.

[9] Lin. 231.

[10] Lin. 136.

[11] Lin. 475.

[12] Lib. 4. lin. 173.

[13] Part 1. sect. 4.

[14] Introduction.

[15] Introduction.

[16] In tracing our emotions and passions to their origin, it once
was my opinion, that qualities and actions are the primary causes of
emotions; and that these emotions are afterward expanded upon the being
to which these qualities and actions belong. But I have discovered that
opinion to be erroneous. An attribute is not, even in imagination,
separable from the being to which it belongs; and for that reason,
cannot of itself be the cause of any emotion. We have, it is true, no
knowledge of any being or substance but by means of its attributes;
and therefore no being can be agreeable to us otherwise than by their
means. But still, when an emotion is raised, it is the being itself,
as we apprehend the matter, which raises the emotion; and it raises it
by means of one or other of its attributes. If it be urged, That we
can in idea abstract a quality from the thing to which it belongs; it
might be answered, That an abstract idea, which serves excellently the
purposes of reasoning, is too faint and too much strained to produce
any sort of emotion. But it is sufficient for the present purpose to
answer, That the eye never abstracts. By this organ we perceive things
as they really exist, and never perceive a quality as separated from
the subject. Hence it must be evident, that emotions are raised, not by
qualities abstractly considered, but by the substance or body so and
so qualified. Thus a spreading oak raises a pleasant emotion, by means
of its colour, figure, umbrage, _&c._ It is not the colour strictly
speaking that produces the emotion, but the tree as coloured: it is
not the figure abstractly considered that produces the emotion, but
the tree considered as of a certain figure. And hence by the way it
appears, that the beauty of such an object is complex, resolvable into
several beauties more simple.

[17] When this analysis of human nature is considered, not one article
of which can with any shadow of truth be controverted, I cannot help
being surprised at the blindness of some philosophers, who, by dark
and confused notions, are led to deny all motives to action but what
arise from self-love. Man, for ought appears, might possibly have been
so framed, as to be susceptible of no passions but what have self for
their object. But man thus framed, would be ill fitted for society.
Much better is the matter ordered, by enduing him with passions
directed entirely to the good of others, as well as with passions
directed entirely to his own good.

[18] See Essays upon morality and natural religion, part 1. essay 2.
ch. 4.

[19] Such proneness has the mind to this communication of properties,
that we often find properties ascribed to a related object, of which
naturally it is not susceptible. Sir Richard Greenville in a single
ship being surprised by the Spanish fleet, was advised to retire.
He utterly refused to turn from the enemy; declaring, “he would
rather die, than dishonour himself, his country, and her Majesty’s
ship.” _Hakluyt, vol. 2. part 2. p. 169._ To aid the communication
of properties in such instances, there always must be a momentary
personification. A ship must be imagined a sensible being, to make
it susceptible of honour or dishonour. In the battle of Mantinea,
Epaminondas being mortally wounded, was carried to his tent in a manner
dead. Recovering his senses, the first thing he inquired about was
his shield; which being brought, he kissed it as the companion of his
valour and glory. It must be remarked, that among the Greeks and Romans
it was deemed infamous for a soldier to return from battle without his
shield.

[20] See chap. 1.

[21] See Essays on morality and natural religion, part 1. ess. 2. ch. 5.

[22] Lib. 7. cap. 36.

[23] Aulus Gellius, lib. 5. cap. 14.

[24] Brasidas being surprised by the bite of a mouse he had catched,
let it slip out of his fingers. “No creature (says he) is so
contemptible, but what may provide for its own safety, if it have
courage to defend itself.”

_Plutarch. Apothegmata._

[25] Spectator, Nº 439.

[26] Part 1. sect. 1. of the present chapter.

[27] At quæ Polycleto defuerunt, Phidiæ atque Alcameni dantur. Phidias
tamen diis quam hominibus efficiendis melior artifex traditur: in
ebore vero longe citra æmulum, vel si nihil nisi Minervam Athenis, aut
Olympium in Elide Jovem fecisset, cujus pulchritudo adjecisse aliquid
etiam receptæ religioni videtur; adeo majestas operis Deum æquavit.

_Quintilian, lib. 12. cap. 10. § 1._

[28] See part 7. of this chapter.

[29] See the place above cited.

[30] Essays on the principles of morality and natural religion, part 1.
ess. 2. chap. 1.

[31] See the introduction.

[32] See this point explained afterwards, chap. 9.

[33] See the appendix, containing definitions and explanation of terms,
sect. 33.

[34] Chap. 6.

[35] See chap. 14.

[36] It is easier to conceive the manner of coexistence of similar
emotions, than to describe it. They cannot be said to mix or
incorporate like concordant sounds. Their union is rather of agreement
or concord; and therefore I have chosen the words in the text, not as
sufficient to express clearly the manner of their coexistence, but only
as less liable to exception than any other I can find.

[37] Chap. 18. sect. 3.

[38] Chap. of epic and dramatic compositions.

[39] See part 2. of the present chapter, toward the close.

[40] Canto 20. st. 97.

[41] Chap. 1.

[42] See part 1. sect. 1. of the present chapter.

[43] Herodotus, book 7.

[44] Act 2. sc. 6.

[45] Act 3. sc. 8.

[46] Part 1. of this chapter, sect. 3.

[47] Aristotle, poet. cap. 18. § 3. says, that anger raiseth in the
spectator a similar emotion of anger.

[48] See Historical law-tracts, tract 1.

[49] Part 5. of the present chapter.

[50] Chap. 2. part. 1. sect. 1. first note.

[51] Chap. 2. part 1. sect. 4.

[52] See the appendix, containing definitions and explanation of terms.

[53] See chap. 2. part 1. sect. 1.

[54] Longinus observes, that nature inclines us to admire, not a small
rivulet, however clear and transparent, but the Nile, the Ister, the
Rhine, or still more the ocean. The sight of a small fire produceth no
emotion; but we are struck with the boiling furnaces of Ætna, pouring
out whole rivers of liquid flame. _Treatise of the Sublime, chap. 29._

[55] Kempfer’s history of Japan, b. 5. ch. 2.

[56] Longinus gives a pretty good description of the sublime, though
not entirely just in every one of the circumstances, “That the mind
is elevated by it, and so sensibly affected as to swell in transport
and inward pride, as if what is only heard or read, were its own
invention.” But he adheres not to this description. In his 6th chapter
he justly observes, that many passions have nothing of the grand, such
as grief, fear, pity, which depress the mind instead of raising it.
And yet in chapter 8th, he mentions Sappho’s ode upon love as sublime.
Beautiful it is undoubtedly, but it cannot be sublime, because it
really depresses the mind instead of raising it. His translator Boileau
is not more successful in his instances. In his 10th reflection he
cites a passage from Demosthenes and another from Herodotus as sublime,
which are not so.

[57] Kempfer’s history of Japan.

[58] _Spectator_, Nº 42

[59] It is justly observed by Addison, that perhaps a man would have
been more astonished with the majestic air that appeared in one of
Lysippus’s statues of Alexander, though no bigger than the life, than
he might have been with Mount Athos, had it been cut into the figure
of the hero, according to the proposal of Phidias, with a river in one
hand and a city in the other. _Spectator_, Nº 415.

[60] Honestum per se esse expetendum indicant pueri, in quibus, ut in
speculis, natura cernitur. Quanta studia decertantium sunt! Quanta ipsa
certamina! Ut illi efferuntur lætitia, cum vicerunt! Ut pudet victos!
Ut se accusari nolunt! Ut cupiunt laudari! Quos illi labores non
perferunt, ut æqualium principes sint! _Cicero de finibus._

[61] Spectator, Nº 415.

[62] Chap. 8. of the Sublime.

[63] Lib. 3. beginning at line 567.

[64] _High_, in the old Scotch language, is pronounced _hee_.

[65] Herodotus, book 7.

[66] Chap. 30.

[67] Boileau and Huet.

[68] L’art poet. chant 1. l. 68.

[69] See chap. 4.

[70] See chap. 9.

[71] Chap. 1.

[72] Chap. 15.

[73] See chap. 1.

[74] See chap. 2. part 1. sect. 2.

[75] See chap. 4.

[76] Essays on the principles of morality and natural religion part 2.
ess. 6.

[77] Hence the Latin names for surprise, _torpor_, _animo stupor_.

[78] See chap. 6.

[79] Coke upon Littleton, p. 71.

[80] Practical writers upon the fine arts will attempt any thing, being
blind both to the difficulty and danger. De Piles, accounting why
contrast is agreeable, says, “That it is a sort of war which puts the
opposite parties in motion.” Thus, to account for an effect of which
there is no doubt, any cause, however foolish, is made welcome.

[81] Chap. 2. part 5.

[82] The examples above given are of subjects that can be brought to an
end or conclusion. But the same uneasiness is perceptible with respect
to subjects that admit not any conclusion; witness a series that has no
end, commonly called _an infinite series_. The mind running along such
a series, begins soon to feel an uneasiness, which becomes more and
more sensible in continuing its progress.

An unbounded prospect doth not long continue agreeable. We soon feel
a slight uneasiness, which increases with the time we bestow upon the
object. In order to find the cause of this uneasiness, we first take
under consideration an avenue without a terminating object. Can a
prospect without any termination be compared to an infinite series?
There is one striking difference, that with respect to the eye no
prospect can be unbounded. The quickest eye commands but a certain
length of space; and there it is bounded, however obscurely. But the
mind perceives things as they exist; and the line is carried on in
idea without end. In that respect an unbounded prospect is similar to
an infinite series. In fact, the uneasiness of an unbounded prospect
differs very little in its feeling from that of an infinite series; and
therefore we may reasonably conclude that both proceed from the same
cause.

We next consider a prospect unbounded every way, as for example, a
great plain, or the ocean, viewed from an eminence. We feel here an
uneasiness occasioned by the want of an end or termination, precisely
as in the other cases. A prospect unbounded every way is indeed so
far singular, as at first to be more pleasant than a prospect that is
unbounded in one direction only, and afterward to be more painful.
But these circumstances are easily explained without breaking in upon
the general theory. The pleasure we feel at first is a strong emotion
of grandeur, arising from the immense extension of the object. And to
increase the pain we feel afterward for the want of a termination,
there concurs a pain of a different kind, occasioned by stretching the
eye to comprehend so great a prospect; a pain that gradually increases
with the repeated efforts we make to grasp the whole.

It is the same principle, if I mistake not, which operates
imperceptibly with respect to quantity and number. Another’s property
indented into my field gives me uneasiness; and I am eager to make the
purchase, not for profit, but in order to square my field. Xerxes and
his army in their passage to Greece were sumptuously entertained by
Pythius the Lydian. Xerxes getting a particular account of his riches,
recompensed him with 7000 Darics, which he wanted to complete the sum
of four millions.

[83] Aristotle, poet. cap. 17.

[84] Spectator, Nº 265.

[85] Lib. 1. § 28.

[86] Act 4. sc. 2.

[87] See chap. 2. part 4.

[88] Chap. 2. part 4.

[89] Æn. lib. 5.

[90] Iliad, book 23. l. 879.

[91] Chap. 1.

[92] Locke, book 2. chap. 14.

[93] See chap. 1.

[94] See chap. 1.

[95] This chapter was composed in the year 1753.

[96] Chap. 1.








End of Project Gutenberg's Elements of Criticism, Volume I., by Henry Home

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELEMENTS OF CRITICISM, VOLUME I. ***

***** This file should be named 57678-0.txt or 57678-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/6/7/57678/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

