The Project Gutenberg eBook of Fundamentals of Prosperity: What They Are and Whence They Come
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Fundamentals of Prosperity: What They Are and Whence They Come

Author: Roger Ward Babson


        
Release date: May 16, 2007 [eBook #21502]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/21502

Credits: Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





                       Fundamentals of Prosperity

                           What They Are and
                            Whence They Come

                                   By

                            ROGER W. BABSON

              _President Babson Statistical Organization_



                        NEW YORK         CHICAGO

                       Fleming H. Revell Company

                        LONDON   AND   EDINBURGH




                          Copyright, 1920, by
                       FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY

                      New York:  158 Fifth Avenue
                      Chicago:    17 North Wabash Ave.
                      London:     21 Paternoster Square
                      Edinburgh:  75 Princes Street




Contents

          FOREWORD
       I. HONESTY OR STEEL DOORS?
      II. FAITH THE SEARCHLIGHT OF BUSINESS
     III. INDUSTRY VS. OPPORTUNITY
      IV. COOePERATION--SUCCESS BY HELPING THE OTHER FELLOW
       V. OUR REAL RESOURCES
      VI. STUDY THE HUMAN SOUL
     VII. BOOST THE OTHER FELLOW
    VIII. WHAT TRULY COUNTS
      IX. WHAT FIGURES SHOW
       X. WHERE THE CHURCH FALLS DOWN
      XI. THE FUTURE CHURCH



Foreword


Some two thousand years ago the greatest teacher who ever walked the
earth advised the people of Judea not to build their houses on the sand.
What he had in mind was that they were looking too much to the structure
above ground, and too little to the spiritual forces which must be the
foundation of any structure which is to stand. Following the war we
enjoyed the greatest prosperity this country has ever witnessed;--the
greatest activity, the greatest bank clearings, the greatest foreign
trade, the greatest railroad gross earnings, the highest commodity
prices.

We then constructed a ten-story building on a foundation meant for only
a two or three story building. Hence the problem confronting us business
men is to strengthen the foundation or else see the structure fall. I am
especially glad of the opportunity to write for business men. There are
two reasons:--first, because I feel that the business men are largely
responsible for having this ten-story structure on a foundation made for
one of only two or three stories; secondly, because I believe such men
alone have the vision, the imagination and the ability to strengthen the
foundation and prevent the structure from falling.

The fact is, we have become crazy over material things. We are looking
only at the structure above ground. We are trying to get more smoke from
the chimney. We are looking at space instead of service, at profits
instead of volume. With our eyes focused on the structure above ground,
we have lost sight of those human resources, thrift, imagination,
integrity, vision and faith which make the structure possible. I feel
that only by the business men can this foundation be strengthened before
the inevitable fall comes.

When steel rails were selling at $55 a ton, compared with only $25 a ton
a few years previous, our steel plants increased their capacity
twenty-five per cent. Increased demand, you say? No, the figures don't
show it. Only thirty-one million tons were produced in 1919, compared
with thirty-nine million tons in 1916. People have forgotten the gospel
of service. The producing power per man has fallen off from fifteen to
twenty per cent. We have all been keen on developing consumption. We
have devoted nine-tenths of our thought, energy and effort to developing
consumption. This message is to beg of every reader to give more thought
to developing production, to the reviving of a desire to produce and the
realization of joy in production.

We are spending millions and millions in every city to develop the
good-will of customers, to develop in customers a desire to buy. This is
all well and good, but we can't continue to go in one direction
indefinitely. We cannot always get steam out of the boiler without
feeding the furnace. The time has come when in our own interests, in the
interests of our communities, our industry, and of the nation itself,
for a while we must stop adding more stories to this structure. Instead,
we must strengthen the foundations upon which the entire structure
rests.

                                                          R. W. B.




I

HONESTY OR STEEL DOORS?

    While fifty-one per cent of the people have their eyes on
    the goal of integrity, our investments are secure; but
    with fifty-one per cent of them headed in the wrong
    direction, our investments are valueless. The first
    fundamental of prosperity is Integrity.


While on a recent visit to Chicago, I was taken by the president of one
of the largest banks to see his new safety deposit vaults. He described
these--as bank presidents will--as the largest and most marvellous
vaults in the city. He expatiated on the heavy steel doors and the
various electrical and mechanical contrivances which protect the stocks
and bonds deposited in the institution.

While at the bank a person came in to rent a box. He made the
arrangements for the box, and a box was handed to him. In it he
deposited some stocks and bonds which he took from his pocket. Then the
clerk who had charge of the vaults went to a rack on the wall and took
out a key and gave it to the man who had rented the box. The man then
put the box into one of the little steel compartments, shut the door and
turned the key. He then went away feeling perfectly secure on account of
those steel doors and various mechanical and electrical contrivances
existing to protect his wealth.

I did not wish to give him a sleepless night so I said nothing; but I
couldn't help thinking how easy it would have been for that poorly-paid,
humpbacked clerk to make a duplicate of that key before he delivered it
to the renter of that box. With such a duplicate, the clerk could have
made that man penniless within a few minutes after he had left the
building. The great steel door and the electrical and mechanical
contrivances would have been absolutely valueless.

Of course the point I am making is that the real security which that
great bank in Chicago had to offer its clientele lay not in the massive
stone columns in front of its structure; nor in the heavy steel doors;
nor the electrical and mechanical contrivances. The real strength of
that institution rested in the honesty,--the absolute integrity--of its
clerks.

       *       *       *       *       *

That afternoon I was talking about the matter with a business man. We
were discussing securities, earnings and capitalization. He seemed
greatly troubled by the mass of figures before him. I said to him:
"Instead of pawing over these earnings and striving to select yourself
the safest bond, you will do better to go to a reliable banker or
bond-house and leave the decision with him."

"Why," he said, "I couldn't do that."

"Mr. Jones," I went on, "tell me the truth! After you buy a bond or a
stock certificate, do you ever take the trouble to see if it is signed
and countersigned properly? Moreover, if you find it signed, is there
any way by which you may know whether the signature is genuine or
forged?"

"No," he said, "there isn't. I am absolutely dependent on the integrity
of the bankers from whom I buy the securities."

And when you think of it, there is really no value at all in the pieces
of paper which one so carefully locks up in these safety deposit boxes.
There is no value at all in the bank-book which we so carefully cherish.
There is no value at all in those deeds and mortgages upon which we
depend so completely. The value rests _first_, in the integrity of the
lawyers, clerks and stenographers who draw up the papers; _secondly_, in
the integrity of the officers who sign the documents; _thirdly_, in the
integrity of the courts and judges which would enable us to enforce our
claims; and _finally_, in the integrity of the community which would
determine whether or not the orders of the court will be executed.

These things which we look upon as of great value:--the stocks, bonds,
bank-books, deeds, mortgages, insurance policies, etc., are merely
nothing. While fifty-one per cent. of the people have their eyes on the
goal of Integrity, our investments are secure; but with fifty-one per
cent. of them headed in the wrong direction, our investments are
valueless. So the first fundamental of prosperity is integrity. Without
it there is no civilization, there is no peace, there is no security,
there is no safety. Mind you also that this applies just as much to the
man who is working for wages as to the capitalist and every owner of
property.

Integrity, however, is very much broader than the above illustration
would indicate. Integrity applies to many more things than to money.
Integrity requires the seeking after, as well as the dispensing of,
truth. It was this desire for truth which founded our educational
institutions, our sciences and our arts. All the great professions, from
medicine to engineering, rest upon this spirit of integrity. Only as
they so rest, can they prosper or even survive.

Integrity is the mother of knowledge. The desire for truth is the basis
of all learning, the value of all experience and the reason for all
study and investigation. Without integrity as a basis, our entire
educational system would fall to the ground; all newspapers and
magazines would become sources of great danger and the publication of
books would have to be suppressed. Our whole civilization rests upon the
assumption that people are honest. With this confidence shaken, the
structure falls. And it should fall, for, unless the truth be taught,
the nation would be much better off without its schools, newspapers,
books and professions. Better have no gun at all, than one aimed at
yourself. The corner-stone of prosperity is the stone of Integrity.




