III

INDUSTRY VS. OPPORTUNITY

    Industry is the mother of invention. Struggle, sacrifice
    and burning midnight oil have produced the cotton gin, the
    sewing machine, the printing press, the steam engine, the
    electric motor, the telephone, the incandescent lamp and
    the other great inventions of civilization. Some religious
    enthusiasts think only of the "lilies of the fields" and
    forget the parable of the talents.


A few years ago I was employed by one of the largest publishing houses
in the country to make a study of America's captains of industry. The
real purpose of the study was to discover some industry or some man that
could be helped greatly through national advertising. In connection with
that study of those captains of industry, I tabulated their ancestry.
These were the seventy greatest manufacturers, merchants and railroad
builders, the leading men who have made America by developing the
fields, the forests, the mines and the industries. What did I find? I
found that only five per cent. of these captains of industry are the
sons of bankers; only ten per cent. of them are the sons of
manufacturers; fifteen per cent. of them are the sons of merchants,
while over thirty per cent. of them are the sons of poor preachers and
farmers.

Why is it that ministers' sons hold a much more important place in the
industrial development of America than the sons of bankers? The
ministers' sons inherit no wealth, they have no more than their share of
college education; they are not especially religious as the world
measures religion. In fact, there is an old saying about "ministers'
sons and deacons' daughters." I would be false to my reputation as a
statistician to hold up these captains of industry as saintly examples
for young men to follow. But the fact remains nevertheless that these
men are creating America to-day. Now, what's the reason?

The reason is that these men have a combination of the two traits
already mentioned and a third added thereto;--namely, the habit of work.
They have inherited a certain rugged integrity from their mothers and a
gift of vision from their fathers which, when combined with the habit of
work--forced upon them by their family's meager income--means _power_.
Integrity is a dry seed until put in the ground of faith and allowed to
grow. But faith with works is prosperity.

A man may be honest and wonder why he does not get ahead; a man may have
vision and still remain only a dreamer; but when integrity and vision
are combined with hard work, the man prospers. It is the same with
classes and nations.

It has been said that genius is the author of invention. Statistics do
not support this statement. The facts show that industry is the mother
of invention. Struggle, sacrifice and burning midnight oil have produced
the cotton gin, the sewing machine, the printing press, the steam
engine, the electric motor, the telephone, the incandescent lamp and the
other great inventions of civilization.

Why is it that most of the able men in our great industries came from
the country districts? The reason is that the country boy is trained to
work. Statistics indicate that very seldom does a child, brought up in a
city apartment house, amount to much; while the children of well-to-do
city people are seriously handicapped. The great educator of the
previous generation was not the public school, but rather the _wood
box_. Those of us parents who have not a wood box for our children to
keep filled, or chores for them to do, are unfortunate.

Run through the list of the greatest captains of industry, as they come
to your mind. How many of the men who are really directing the country's
business gained their position through inherited wealth? You will find
them astonishingly few. There is no "divine right of kings" in business.
In fact, statistics show us that the very things which most people think
of as advantages, namely, wealth and "not having to work" are really
obstacles which are rarely surmounted.

Industry and thrift are closely allied. Economic studies show clearly
that ninety-five per cent. of the employers are employers because they
systematically saved money. Any man who systematically saves money from
early youth automatically becomes an employer. He may employ thousands
or he may have only two or three clerks in a country store, but he
nevertheless is an employer. These same studies show that ninety-five
per cent. of the wage workers are wage workers because they have
systematically spent their money as fast as they have earned it. They of
necessity remain wage workers. These are facts which no labour leader
can disprove and which are exceedingly significant. This is especially
striking when one considers that the employer often started out at the
same wages and in the same community as his wage workers. The employer
was naturally industrious and thrifty; while those who remained wage
workers were not.

The development of this nation through the construction of the
transcontinental railways, the financing of the western farms, and the
building of our cities is largely due to the old New England doctrine
that laziness and extravagance are sins. In some western communities it
is popular to laugh at these New England traits; but had it not been for
them, these western communities would never have existed. The industry
and thrift developed by the old New England religion were the basis of
our national growth.

I especially desire to emphasize this point because of the position of
certain religious enthusiasts who think only of "the lilies of the
field" and forget the parable of the talents. It is a fact that the
third fundamental of prosperity is Industry.




IV

COOePERATION--SUCCESS BY HELPING THE OTHER FELLOW

    Our industrial system has resulted in making many men
    economic eunuchs. The salvation of our cities, the
    salvation of our industries and the salvation of our
    nation depend on discovering something which will revive
    in man that desire to produce and joy in production which
    he had instinctively when he was a small boy.


A few days ago I was present at a dinner of business men in Boston who
were called together in order to secure some preferential freight rates
for Massachusetts. The principal theme of that gathering was to boom
Massachusetts at the expense of the rest of the country. At the close of
the dinner I was asked to give my opinion and said: "Let us see how many
things there are in this room that we could have were we dependent
solely on Massachusetts. The chairs and furniture are from Michigan; the
cotton is from Georgia; the linen from Ireland; the silver from Mexico;
the glassware from Pennsylvania; the paper from Maine; the paint from
Missouri; the clock from Connecticut--and so on." Finally I got the
courage to ask if there was a single thing in the room that did not
originate from some state other than Massachusetts. Those men were
absolutely helpless in finding a single thing.

The same fact applies in a general way to every state and every home.
Look about, where you are sitting now. How many things are there in the
room just where you are,--there is a table, a chair, a shoe, a coat, a
necktie, a cigar, a lampshade, a piano, a basket--for all of these you
are dependent upon others.

The same fact is true when we analyze one staple like shoes which,
primarily, are made of leather. Where does the leather come from? Just
follow that leather from the back of the steer until you buy it in the
form of shoes. Think where that steer was raised, and where the leather
was tanned. Think of all the men engaged in the industry from the
cow-punchers to the salesmen in the stores. But there is more than
leather involved in shoes. There is cotton in the shoe lacing and
lining. There is metal in the nails and eyelets. Not only must different
localities cooeperate to produce a shoe; but various industries must give
and take likewise.

Civilization is ultimately dependent on the ability of men to cooeperate.
The best barometer of civilization is the desire and ability of men to
cooeperate. The willingness to share with others,--the desire to work
with others is the great contribution which Christianity has given to
the world. The effect of this new spirit is most thrilling when one
considers the clothes which he has on his back, the food which he has on
the table, the things which he has in the house, and thinks of the
thousands of people whose labour has directly contributed toward these
things. Now this clearly shows that the fourth great fundamental of
prosperity is cooeperation, the willingness and ability of men to
cooeperate, to serve one another, to help one another, to give and to
take.

But the teachings of Jesus along these lines have a very much broader
application than when applied merely to raw materials, or even
manufactured products. As we can begin to prosper only when we develop
into finished products the raw materials of the fields, mines and
forests, so we can become truly prosperous only as we develop the
greatest of all resources,--the human resources. Not only does
Christianity demand that we seek to help and build up others; but our
own prosperity depends thereon as well.

       *       *       *       *       *

When in Washington, during the war, I had a wonderful opportunity of
meeting the representatives of both labour and capital. I had some
preconceived ideas on the labour question when I went to Washington; but
now they are all gone. I am perfectly willing, now, to agree with the
wage worker, to agree with the employer, to agree with both or to agree
with neither. But this one thing I am sure of, and that is that the
present system doesn't work. The present system is failing in getting
men to produce.

By nature man likes to produce. Our boy, as soon as he can toddle
out-of-doors, starts instinctively to make a mud pie. When he gets a
little older he gets some boards, shingles and nails and builds a hut.
Just as soon as he gets a knife, do you have to show him how to use it?
He instinctively begins to make a boat or an arrow or perhaps something
he has never seen. Why? Because in his soul is a natural desire to
produce and an inborn joy in production. But what happens to most of
these boys after they grow up?

Our industrial system has resulted in almost stultifying men
economically and making most of them economically non-productive. Why? I
don't know. I simply say it happens and the salvation of our industries
depends on discovering something which will revive in man that desire to
produce and that joy in production which he had instinctively when he
was a small boy.

Increased wages will not do it. Shorter hours will not do it. The wage
worker must feel right and the employer must feel right. It is all a
question of feeling. Feelings rule this world,--not things. The reason
that some people are not successful with collective bargaining and
profit sharing and all these other plans is because they think that men
act according to what they say, or according to what they learn, or
according to that in which they agree. Men act according to their
_feelings_, and "good feeling" is synonymous with the spirit of
cooeperation. One cannot exist without the other and prosperity cannot
continue without both. Hence the fourth fundamental of prosperity is
Cooeperation.




