VI

STUDY THE HUMAN SOUL

    The first step is to give more thought and attention to
    people, to establish more points of contact. Let us do
    humanly, individually, man to man, what we are trying to
    do in a great big way.


I was visiting the home of a famous manufacturer recently and he took me
out to his farm. He showed me his cattle. Above the head of each heifer
and each cow was the pedigree. The most careful record was kept of every
animal. He had a blue-print in his library at home of every one of those
animals. Yet when we began later to talk about the labour problem in his
own plant and I asked him how many of his people he knew personally, he
told me,--I quote his words:

"Why, they are all alike to me, Mr. Babson. I don't know one from the
other."

Later in the evening--it was during the Christmas vacation--a young
fellow drove up to the house in a fancy automobile, came in and asked
for this manufacturer's only daughter in order to take her to a party. I
didn't like the looks of the fellow very well. After they had gone out,
I said to the father:

"Who is that chap?"

The father replied: "I don't know; some friend of Mary's."

The father had every one of his cows blue-printed, but he didn't know
the name of the man who came to get his daughter and who didn't deliver
her until two o'clock the next morning! That man was neglecting the
human soul, both in his factory and in his home.

       *       *       *       *       *

I repeat that we have gone crazy over structures above ground. We are
absolutely forgetting the greatest of our resources,--the great
spiritual resource, upon which everything depends. How shall we develop
these resources?

Certainly we are not developing this great spiritual resource in the
public schools. The educational system was originally founded by the
Church to train the children in the fundamentals of righteousness.
Gradually, but constantly, we have drifted away from this goal and
to-day the purpose for which our schools were started has been almost
entirely lost. In some states it is now a criminal offence for a school
superintendent to ask a prospective school teacher what she believes or
whether she has any religion whatever! Under these conditions, is it
surprising that the spiritual resources of our children are lying
dormant?

Much of the prosperity of this nation is due to the family prayers which
were once daily held in the homes of our fathers. To a very large extent
this custom has gone by. Whatever the arguments pro and con may be, the
fact nevertheless remains that such family prayers nurtured and
developed these spiritual resources to which the prosperity of the
nation is due. The custom of family prayers should be revived along with
many other good New England customs which some modern radicals may
ridicule, but to which they owe all that they possess.

The masses to-day are getting their real education from the daily
newspapers. Many of these newspapers have much good material, but the
great effort of the daily press is not to make _producers_, but rather
to make _consumers_. The policy of the daily press is not to get people
to serve, but rather to get them to buy. Not only is the larger portion
of the newspapers given up to advertising, but most of this advertising
is of non-essentials, if not of luxuries. With this advertising
constantly before the people of the country, it is but natural that the
material things should seem of greatest importance. To remedy this
situation is a great problem to-day facing the Christian business men of
this country. What shall we do about it?

The first step is to give more thought and attention to people, and to
establish more points of contact. Let us do humanly, individually, man
to man, what we are trying to do in a great big way. Another method to
develop this human resource is to give people responsibility. Moreover,
we must do so if the nation is to be truly prosperous.




VII

BOOST THE OTHER FELLOW

    Just as our property is safe only as the other fellow's
    property is safe, just as our daughter is safe only as the
    other fellow's daughter is safe, so it also is true that
    in order to develop the human soul in other men, we have
    to give those men something.


My little girl has a black cat; about once in four months this cat has
kittens. Opposite our place is a man who has an Airedale dog. When that
dog comes across the street and that cat has no kittens, the cat
immediately "beats it" as fast as she can, with the dog after her. But
when that dog comes across the street and that cat has the
responsibility of some kittens, she immediately turns on the dog and the
_dog_ "beats it" with the cat after him. It is the same dog, the same
cat, and the same backyard; but in one instance the cat has no
responsibilities and in the other case she has. Responsibilities develop
faith, vision, courage, initiative, and other things that make the world
go round.

Just as our property is safe, only as the other fellow's property is
safe; just as our daughter is safe, only as the other fellow's daughter
is safe; so is it also true that, in order to develop the human soul in
other men, we have to give those men something. We must give them a
chance. We must give them opportunity. We must give them a boost. All of
us are simply storage batteries. We get out of life what we put into
life. We care for others, not in accordance with what they do for us,
but rather in accordance with what we have done for them.

I am quite often asked about investments. Well, there are times, about
once in three or four years--during panics, when every one is scared to
death--that I invest in stocks. There are other times when I advise the
purchase of bonds. The fact is, however, that I have not made my money
investing either in stocks or bonds. What money I have made has come
from investing in boys and girls, young men and young women.

There is a common belief current to-day that only people with experience
are worth while. But I say: Quit looking for the experienced salesmen
and trying to make a man out of him; get a _man_, and then make a
salesman of him. I have a young man in my business who was delivering
trunks for an express company twelve years ago. To-day he is my sales
manager and has built our gross from $100,000 to $1,000,000. One of my
best experts, a man who is sought for by the leading Chambers of
Commerce all over the land, was a carpenter on my garage nine years ago.
Another one of my experts, a man the demand for whose services I cannot
supply, never acquired recognition until he was over forty-five years of
age. I found him keeping hens at Wellesley Farms! A young lady in my
office to whom I pay $200 a week and who is worth, to me, $1,000 a week,
I picked up at $4 a week twelve years ago.

Such cases exist everywhere. You men yourselves know them. You look over
your own organizations. Who are the men who are really doing things? Are
they the men you acquired ready-made from other concerns? No! They are
the men that have been taken up and developed. These are the men that
have made money for you and have created the business enterprise of
which you are the head. Yet when we have reached a point of prestige,
and have a big business, we are tempted to say: "I haven't time to
develop any more people, I have got to get them already made." This is a
big mistake.

       *       *       *       *       *

I beg my readers--those who have them--to get your foremen together. Say
to the partners or the officials of your concern: "Haven't we given too
much thought to developing the structure? Aren't we piling too many
stories one upon another with too little thought to the foundation?"
Then go out and look over your plant and select a few people in each
department to whom you will give a real opportunity. Start in to develop
them and thereby strengthen the foundation of the business and the
prosperity of the nation.




