II

FAITH THE SEARCHLIGHT OF BUSINESS

    This religion which we talk about for an hour a week, on
    Sunday, is not only the vital force which protects our
    community, but it is the vital force which makes our
    communities. The power of our spiritual forces has not yet
    been tapped.


About three years ago I was travelling in South America. When going from
Sao Paulo up across the tablelands to Rio Janeiro, I passed through a
little poverty-stricken Indian village. It was some 3,000 feet above sea
level; but it was located at the foot of a great water-power. This
water-power, I was told, could easily develop from 10,000 to 15,000
horse-power for twelve months of the year. At the base of this waterfall
lived these poverty-stricken Indians, plowing their ground with broken
sticks, bringing their corn two hundred miles on their backs from the
seacoast, and grinding it by hand between two stones. Yet,--with a
little faith and vision, they could have developed that water-power,
even though in a most primitive manner, and with irrigation, could have
made that poverty-stricken valley a veritable Garden of Eden. They
simply lacked _faith_. They lacked vision. They were unwilling, or
unable, to look ahead to do something for the next generation and trust
to the Lord for the results.

I met the head man of the village and said to him: "Why is it that you
don't do something to develop this power?"

"Why, if we started to develop this thing," he answered, "by the time we
got it done, we would be dead."

Indians had lived there for the last two hundred years lacking the
vision. No one in that community had the foresight or vision to think or
see beyond the end of his day. It was lack of faith which stood between
them and prosperity. Hence, the second great fundamental of prosperity
is that intangible "something,"--known as faith, vision, hope, whatever
you may call it.

The writer of the Book of Proverbs says: "Where there is no vision, the
people perish." Statistics teach that where there is no vision,
civilization never gets started! The tangible things which we prize so
highly,--buildings, railroads, steamships, factories, power plants,
telephones, aeroplanes, etc., are but the result of faith and vision.
These things are only symptoms of conditions, mere barometers which
register the faith and vision of mankind.

This religion which we talk about for an hour a week, on Sunday, is not
only the vital force which protects our community, but it is the vital
force which _makes_ our communities. _The power of our spiritual forces
has not yet been tapped!_ Our grandchildren will look back upon us and
wonder why we neglected our trust and our opportunity, just as we look
back on those poor Indians in Brazil who plowed with crooked sticks,
grinding their corn between stones and hauling it on their backs two
hundred miles from the seaboard.

       *       *       *       *       *

These statements are not the result of any special interest as a
churchman. I am not a preacher. I am simply a business man, and my work
is almost wholly for bankers, brokers, manufacturers, merchants and
investors. The concern with which I am associated has one hundred and
eighty people in a suburb of Boston who are collecting, compiling and
distributing statistics on business conditions. We have only one source
of income, and that is from the clients who pay us for an analysis of
the situation. Therefore you may rest assured that it is impossible for
us to do any propaganda work in the interests of any one nation, sect,
religion or church. The only thing we can give clients is a conclusion
based on a diagnosis of a given situation. As probably few of you
readers are clients of ours, may I quote from a Bulletin which we
recently sent to these bankers and manufacturers?

"The need of the hour is not more legislation. The need of the hour is
more religion. More religion is needed everywhere, from the halls of
Congress at Washington, to the factories, the mines, the fields and the
forests. It is one thing to talk about plans or policies, but a plan or
policy without a religious motive is like a watch without a spring or a
body without the breath of life. The trouble, to-day, is that we are
trying to hatch chickens from sterile eggs. We may have the finest
incubator in the world and operate it according to the most improved
regulations--moreover, the eggs may appear perfect specimens--but unless
they have the germ of life in them all our efforts are of no avail."

I have referred to the fact that the security of our investments is
absolutely dependent upon the faith, the righteousness and the religion
of other people. I have stated that the real strength of our investments
is due, not to the distinguished bankers of America, but rather to the
poor preachers. I now go farther than that and say that the development
of the country as a whole is due to this _something_, this indescribable
_something_, this combination of faith, thrift, industry, initiative,
integrity and vision, which these preachers have developed in their
communities.

Faith and vision do not come from the wealth of a nation. It's the faith
and vision which produce the wealth. The wealth of a country does not
depend on its raw materials. Raw materials are to a certain extent
essential and to a great extent valuable; but the nations which to-day
are richest in raw materials are the poorest in wealth. Even when
considering one country--the United States--the principle holds true.
The coal and iron and copper have been here in this country for
thousands of years, but only within the last fifty years have they been
used. Water-powers exist even to-day absolutely unharnessed. Look the
whole world over and there has been no increase in raw materials. There
existed one thousand years ago more raw materials than we have to-day,
but we then lacked men with a vision and the faith to take that coal out
of the ground, to harness the water-powers, to build the railroads and
to do other things worth while. So I say, the second great fundamental
of prosperity is Faith.




