III
ADVOCATE AND AUTHOR
EDINBURGH—PARIS—FONTAINEBLEAU
JULY 1875-JULY 1879


TO MRS. THOMAS STEVENSON


              [_Chez Siron_, _Barbizon_, _Seine et Marne_, _August_ 1875.]

MY DEAR MOTHER,—I have been three days at a place called Grez, a pretty
and very melancholy village on the plain.  A low bridge of many arches
choked with sedge; great fields of white and yellow water-lilies; poplars
and willows innumerable; and about it all such an atmosphere of sadness
and slackness, one could do nothing but get into the boat and out of it
again, and yawn for bedtime.

Yesterday Bob and I walked home; it came on a very creditable
thunderstorm; we were soon wet through; sometimes the rain was so heavy
that one could only see by holding the hand over the eyes; and to crown
all, we lost our way and wandered all over the place, and into the
artillery range, among broken trees, with big shot lying about among the
rocks.  It was near dinner-time when we got to Barbizon; and it is
supposed that we walked from twenty-three to twenty-five miles, which is
not bad for the Advocate, who is not tired this morning.  I was very glad
to be back again in this dear place, and smell the wet forest in the
morning.

Simpson and the rest drove back in a carriage, and got about as wet as we
did.

Why don’t you write?  I have no more to say.—Ever your affectionate son,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MRS. SITWELL


                                _Château Renard_, _Loiret_, _August_ 1875.

. . . I HAVE been walking these last days from place to place; and it
does make it hot for walking with a sack in this weather.  I am burned in
horrid patches of red; my nose, I fear, is going to take the lead in
colour; Simpson is all flushed, as if he were seen by a sunset.  I send
you here two rondeaux; I don’t suppose they will amuse anybody but me;
but this measure, short and yet intricate, is just what I desire; and I
have had some good times walking along the glaring roads, or down the
poplar alley of the great canal, pitting my own humour to this old verse.

   Far have you come, my lady, from the town,
   And far from all your sorrows, if you please,
   To smell the good sea-winds and hear the seas,
   And in green meadows lay your body down.

   To find your pale face grow from pale to brown,
   Your sad eyes growing brighter by degrees;
   Far have you come, my lady, from the town,
   And far from all your sorrows, if you please.

   Here in this seaboard land of old renown,
   In meadow grass go wading to the knees;
   Bathe your whole soul a while in simple ease;
   There is no sorrow but the sea can drown;
   Far have you come, my lady, from the town.

                       _Nous n’irons plus au bois_.

   We’ll walk the woods no more,
   But stay beside the fire,
   To weep for old desire
   And things that are no more.
         The woods are spoiled and hoar,
   The ways are full of mire;
   We’ll walk the woods no more,
   But stay beside the fire.
         We loved, in days of yore,
   Love, laughter, and the lyre.
   Ah God, but death is dire,
   And death is at the door—
   We’ll walk the woods no more.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                             _Edinburgh_, [_Autumn_] 1875.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—Thanks for your letter and news.  No—my _Burns_ is not
done yet, it has led me so far afield that I cannot finish it; every time
I think I see my way to an end, some new game (or perhaps wild goose)
starts up, and away I go.  And then, again, to be plain, I shirk the work
of the critical part, shirk it as a man shirks a long jump.  It is awful
to have to express and differentiate _Burns_ in a column or two.  O
golly, I say, you know, it _can’t_ be done at the money.  All the more as
I’m going to write a book about it.  _Ramsay_, _Fergusson_, _and Burns_:
_an Essay_ (or _a critical essay_? but then I’m going to give lives of
the three gentlemen, only the gist of the book is the criticism) _by
Robert Louis Stevenson_, _Advocate_.  How’s that for cut and dry?  And I
_could_ write this book.  Unless I deceive myself, I could even write it
pretty adequately.  I feel as if I was really in it, and knew the game
thoroughly.  You see what comes of trying to write an essay on _Burns_ in
ten columns.

Meantime, when I have done Burns, I shall finish Charles of Orleans (who
is in a good way, about the fifth month, I should think, and promises to
be a fine healthy child, better than any of his elder brothers for a
while); and then perhaps a Villon, for Villon is a very essential part of
my _Ramsay-Fergusson-Burns_; I mean, is a note in it, and will recur
again and again for comparison and illustration; then, perhaps, I may try
Fontainebleau, by the way.  But so soon as Charles of Orleans is polished
off, and immortalised for ever, he and his pipings, in a solid
imperishable shrine of R. L. S., my true aim and end will be this little
book.  Suppose I could jerk you out 100 Cornhill pages; that would easy
make 200 pages of decent form; and then thickish paper—eh? would that do?
I dare say it could be made bigger; but I know what 100 pages of copy,
bright consummate copy, imply behind the scenes of weary manuscribing; I
think if I put another nothing to it, I should not be outside the mark;
and 100 Cornhill pages of 500 words means, I fancy (but I never was good
at figures), means 500,00 words.  There’s a prospect for an idle young
gentleman who lives at home at ease!  The future is thick with inky
fingers.  And then perhaps nobody would publish.  _Ah nom de dieu_!  What
do you think of all this? will it paddle, think you?

I hope this pen will write; it is the third I have tried.

About coming up, no, that’s impossible; for I am worse than a bankrupt.
I have at the present six shillings and a penny; I have a sounding lot of
bills for Christmas; new dress suit, for instance, the old one having
gone for Parliament House; and new white shirts to live up to my new
profession; I’m as gay and swell and gummy as can be; only all my boots
leak; one pair water, and the other two simple black mud; so that my rig
is more for the eye, than a very solid comfort to myself.  That is my
budget.  Dismal enough, and no prospect of any coin coming in; at least
for months.  So that here I am, I almost fear, for the winter; certainly
till after Christmas, and then it depends on how my bills ‘turn out’
whether it shall not be till spring.  So, meantime, I must whistle in my
cage.  My cage is better by one thing; I am an Advocate now.  If you ask
me why that makes it better, I would remind you that in the most
distressing circumstances a little consequence goes a long way, and even
bereaved relatives stand on precedence round the coffin.  I idle finely.
I read Boswell’s _Life of Johnson_, Martin’s _History of France_, _Allan
Ramsay_, _Olivier Bosselin_, all sorts of rubbish, _àpropos_ of _Burns_,
_Commines_, _Juvénal des Ursins_, etc.  I walk about the Parliament House
five forenoons a week, in wig and gown; I have either a five or six mile
walk, or an hour or two hard skating on the rink, every afternoon,
without fail.

I have not written much; but, like the seaman’s parrot in the tale, I
have thought a deal.  You have never, by the way, returned me either
_Spring_ or _Béranger_, which is certainly a d-d shame.  I always
comforted myself with that when my conscience pricked me about a letter
to you.  ‘Thus conscience’—O no, that’s not appropriate in this
connection.—Ever yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

I say, is there any chance of your coming north this year?  Mind you that
promise is now more respectable for age than is becoming.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                            [_Edinburgh_, _October_ 1875.]

   NOO lyart leaves blaw ower the green,
   Red are the bonny woods o’ Dean,
   An’ here we’re back in Embro, freen’,
         To pass the winter.
   Whilk noo, wi’ frosts afore, draws in,
         An’ snaws ahint her.

   I’ve seen’s hae days to fricht us a’,
   The Pentlands poothered weel wi’ snaw,
   The ways half-smoored wi’ liquid thaw,
         An’ half-congealin’,
   The snell an’ scowtherin’ norther blaw
         Frae blae Brunteelan’.

   I’ve seen’s been unco sweir to sally,
   And at the door-cheeks daff an’ dally,
   Seen’s daidle thus an’ shilly-shally
         For near a minute—
   Sae cauld the wind blew up the valley,
         The deil was in it!—

   Syne spread the silk an’ tak the gate,
   In blast an’ blaudin’ rain, deil hae’t!
   The hale toon glintin’, stane an’ slate,
         Wi’ cauld an’ weet,
   An’ to the Court, gin we’se be late,
         Bicker oor feet.

   And at the Court, tae, aft I saw
   Whaur Advocates by twa an’ twa
   Gang gesterin’ end to end the ha’
         In weeg an’ goon,
   To crack o’ what ye wull but Law
         The hale forenoon.

   That muckle ha,’ maist like a kirk,
   I’ve kent at braid mid-day sae mirk
   Ye’d seen white weegs an’ faces lurk
         Like ghaists frae Hell,
   But whether Christian ghaist or Turk
         Deil ane could tell.

   The three fires lunted in the gloom,
   The wind blew like the blast o’ doom,
   The rain upo’ the roof abune
         Played Peter Dick—
   Ye wad nae’d licht enough i’ the room
         Your teeth to pick!

   But, freend, ye ken how me an’ you,
   The ling-lang lanely winter through,
   Keep’d a guid speerit up, an’ true
         To lore Horatian,
   We aye the ither bottle drew
         To inclination.

   Sae let us in the comin’ days
   Stand sicker on our auncient ways—
   The strauchtest road in a’ the maze
         Since Eve ate apples;
   An’ let the winter weet our cla’es—
         We’ll weet oor thrapples.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                             [_Edinburgh_, _Autumn_ 1875.]

MY DEAR COLVIN,—_Fous ne me gombrennez pas_.  Angry with you?  No.  Is
the thing lost?  Well, so be it.  There is one masterpiece fewer in the
world.  The world can ill spare it, but I, sir, I (and here I strike my
hollow bosom so that it resounds) I am full of this sort of bauble; I am
made of it; it comes to me, sir, as the desire to sneeze comes upon poor
ordinary devils on cold days, when they should be getting out of bed and
into their horrid cold tubs by the light of a seven o’clock candle, with
the dismal seven o’clock frost-flowers all over the window.

Show Stephen what you please; if you could show him how to give me money,
you would oblige, sincerely yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.

I have a scroll of _Springtime_ somewhere, but I know that it is not in
very good order, and do not feel myself up to very much grind over it.  I
am damped about _Springtime_, that’s the truth of it.  It might have been
four or five quid!

Sir, I shall shave my head, if this goes on.  All men take a pleasure to
gird at me.  The laws of nature are in open war with me.  The wheel of a
dog-cart took the toes off my new boots.  Gout has set in with extreme
rigour, and cut me out of the cheap refreshment of beer.  I leant my back
against an oak, I thought it was a trusty tree, but first it bent, and
syne—it lost the Spirit of Springtime, and so did Professor Sidney
Colvin, Trinity College, to me.—Ever yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Along with this, I send you some P.P.P’s; if you lose them, you need not
seek to look upon my face again.  Do, for God’s sake, answer me about
them also; it is a horrid thing for a fond architect to find his
monuments received in silence.—Yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. SITWELL


                                       [_Edinburgh_, _November_ 12, 1875.]

MY DEAR FRIEND,—Since I got your letter I have been able to do a little
more work, and I have been much better contented with myself; but I can’t
get away, that is absolutely prevented by the state of my purse and my
debts, which, I may say, are red like crimson.  I don’t know how I am to
clear my hands of them, nor when, not before Christmas anyway.  Yesterday
I was twenty-five; so please wish me many happy returns—directly.  This
one was not _un_happy anyway.  I have got back a good deal into my old
random, little-thought way of life, and do not care whether I read,
write, speak, or walk, so long as I do something.  I have a great delight
in this wheel-skating; I have made great advance in it of late, can do a
good many amusing things (I mean amusing in _my_ sense—amusing to do).
You know, I lose all my forenoons at Court!  So it is, but the time
passes; it is a great pleasure to sit and hear cases argued or advised.
This is quite autobiographical, but I feel as if it was some time since
we met, and I can tell you, I am glad to meet you again.  In every way,
you see, but that of work the world goes well with me.  My health is
better than ever it was before; I get on without any jar, nay, as if
there never had been a jar, with my parents.  If it weren’t about that
work, I’d be happy.  But the fact is, I don’t think—the fact is, I’m
going to trust in Providence about work.  If I could get one or two
pieces I hate out of my way all would be well, I think; but these
obstacles disgust me, and as I know I ought to do them first, I don’t do
anything.  I must finish this off, or I’ll just lose another day.  I’ll
try to write again soon.—Ever your faithful friend,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. DE MATTOS


                                              _Edinburgh_, _January_ 1876.

MY DEAR KATHARINE,—The prisoner reserved his defence.  He has been seedy,
however; principally sick of the family evil, despondency; the sun is
gone out utterly; and the breath of the people of this city lies about as
a sort of damp, unwholesome fog, in which we go walking with bowed
hearts.  If I understand what is a contrite spirit, I have one; it is to
feel that you are a small jar, or rather, as I feel myself, a very large
jar, of pottery work rather _mal réussi_, and to make every allowance for
the potter (I beg pardon; Potter with a capital P.) on his ill-success,
and rather wish he would reduce you as soon as possible to potsherds.
However, there are many things to do yet before we go

   _Grossir la pâte universelle_
   _Faite des formes que Dieu fond_.

For instance, I have never been in a revolution yet.  I pray God I may be
in one at the end, if I am to make a mucker.  The best way to make a
mucker is to have your back set against a wall and a few lead pellets
whiffed into you in a moment, while yet you are all in a heat and a fury
of combat, with drums sounding on all sides, and people crying, and a
general smash like the infernal orchestration at the end of the
_Huguenots_. . . .

Please pardon me for having been so long of writing, and show your pardon
by writing soon to me; it will be a kindness, for I am sometimes very
dull.  Edinburgh is much changed for the worse by the absence of Bob; and
this damned weather weighs on me like a curse.  Yesterday, or the day
before, there came so black a rain squall that I was frightened—what a
child would call frightened, you know, for want of a better word—although
in reality it has nothing to do with fright.  I lit the gas and sat
cowering in my chair until it went away again.—Ever yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.

O I am trying my hand at a novel just now; it may interest you to know, I
am bound to say I do not think it will be a success.  However, it’s an
amusement for the moment, and work, work is your only ally against the
‘bearded people’ that squat upon their hams in the dark places of life
and embrace people horribly as they go by.  God save us from the bearded
people! to think that the sun is still shining in some happy places!

                                                                   R. L S.



TO MRS. SITWELL


                                            [_Edinburgh_, _January_ 1876.]

. . . OUR weather continues as it was, bitterly cold, and raining often.
There is not much pleasure in life certainly as it stands at present.
_Nous n’irons plus au boss_, _hélas_!

I meant to write some more last night, but my father was ill and it put
it out of my way.  He is better this morning.

If I had written last night, I should have written a lot.  But this
morning I am so dreadfully tired and stupid that I can say nothing.  I
was down at Leith in the afternoon.  God bless me, what horrid women I
saw; I never knew what a plain-looking race it was before.  I was sick at
heart with the looks of them.  And the children, filthy and ragged!  And
the smells!  And the fat black mud!

My soul was full of disgust ere I got back.  And yet the ships were
beautiful to see, as they are always; and on the pier there was a clean
cold wind that smelt a little of the sea, though it came down the Firth,
and the sunset had a certain _éclat_ and warmth.  Perhaps if I could get
more work done, I should be in a better trim to enjoy filthy streets and
people and cold grim weather; but I don’t much feel as if it was what I
would have chosen.  I am tempted every day of my life to go off on
another walking tour.  I like that better than anything else that I
know.—Ever your faithful friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                           [_Edinburgh_, _February_ 1876.]

MY DEAR COLVIN,—1_st_.  I have sent ‘Fontainebleau’ long ago, long ago.
And Leslie Stephen is worse than tepid about it—liked ‘some parts’ of it
‘very well,’ the son of Belial.  Moreover, he proposes to shorten it; and
I, who want _money_, and money soon, and not glory and the illustration
of the English language, I feel as if my poverty were going to consent.

2_nd_.  I’m as fit as a fiddle after my walk.  I am four inches bigger
about the waist than last July!  There, that’s your prophecy did that.  I
am on ‘Charles of Orleans’ now, but I don’t know where to send him.
Stephen obviously spews me out of his mouth, and I spew him out of mine,
so help me!  A man who doesn’t like my ‘Fontainebleau’!  His head must be
turned.

3_rd_.  If ever you do come across my ‘Spring’ (I beg your pardon for
referring to it again, but I don’t want you to forget) send it off at
once.

4_th_.  I went to Ayr, Maybole, Girvan, Ballantrae, Stranraer, Glenluce,
and Wigton.  I shall make an article of it some day soon, ‘A Winter’s
Walk in Carrick and Galloway.’  I had a good time.—Yours,

                                                                   R. L S.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                         [_Swanston Cottage_, _Lothianburn_, _July_ 1876.]

HERE I am, here, and very well too.  I am glad you liked ‘Walking Tours’;
I like it, too; I think it’s prose; and I own with contrition that I have
not always written prose.  However, I am ‘endeavouring after new
obedience’ (Scot. Shorter Catechism).  You don’t say aught of ‘Forest
Notes,’ which is kind.  There is one, if you will, that was too sweet to
be wholesome.

I am at ‘Charles d’Orléans.’  About fifteen _Cornhill_ pages have already
coulé’d from under my facile plume—no, I mean eleven, fifteen of MS.—and
we are not much more than half-way through, ‘Charles’ and I; but he’s a
pleasant companion.  My health is very well; I am in a fine exercisy
state.  Baynes is gone to London; if you see him, inquire about my
‘Burns.’  They have sent me £5, 5s, for it, which has mollified me
horrid.  £5, 5s. is a good deal to pay for a read of it in MS.; I can’t
complain.—Yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. SITWELL


                         [_Swanston Cottage_, _Lothianburn_, _July_ 1876.]

. . . I HAVE the strangest repugnance for writing; indeed, I have nearly
got myself persuaded into the notion that letters don’t arrive, in order
to salve my conscience for never sending them off.  I’m reading a great
deal of fifteenth century: _Trial of Joan of Arc_, _Paston Letters_,
_Basin_, etc., also _Boswell_ daily by way of a Bible; I mean to read
_Boswell_ now until the day I die.  And now and again a bit of _Pilgrim’s
Progress_.  Is that all?  Yes, I think that’s all.  I have a thing in
proof for the _Cornhill_ called _Virginibus Puerisque_.  ‘Charles of
Orleans’ is again laid aside, but in a good state of furtherance this
time.  A paper called ‘A Defence of Idlers’ (which is really a defence of
R. L. S.) is in a good way.  So, you see, I am busy in a tumultuous,
knotless sort of fashion; and as I say, I take lots of exercise, and I’m
as brown a berry.

This is the first letter I’ve written for—O I don’t know how long.

                                * * * * *

_July_ 30_th_.—This is, I suppose, three weeks after I began.  Do,
please, forgive me.

To the Highlands, first, to the Jenkins’, then to Antwerp; thence, by
canoe with Simpson, to Paris and Grez (on the Loing, and an old
acquaintance of mine on the skirts of Fontainebleau) to complete our
cruise next spring (if we’re all alive and jolly) by Loing and Loire,
Saone and Rhone to the Mediterranean.  It should make a jolly book of
gossip, I imagine.

God bless you.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—_Virginibus Puerisque_ is in August _Cornhill_.  ‘Charles of
Orleans’ is finished, and sent to Stephen; ‘Idlers’ ditto, and sent to
Grove; but I’ve no word of either.  So I’ve not been idle.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO W. E. HENLEY


                                     _Chauny_, _Aisne_ [_September_ 1876].

MY DEAR HENLEY,—Here I am, you see; and if you will take to a map, you
will observe I am already more than two doors from Antwerp, whence I
started.  I have fought it through under the worst weather I ever saw in
France; I have been wet through nearly every day of travel since the
second (inclusive); besides this, I have had to fight against pretty
mouldy health; so that, on the whole, the essayist and reviewer has
shown, I think, some pluck.  Four days ago I was not a hundred miles from
being miserably drowned, to the immense regret of a large circle of
friends and the permanent impoverishment of British Essayism and
Reviewery.  My boat culbutted me under a fallen tree in a very rapid
current; and I was a good while before I got on to the outside of that
fallen tree; rather a better while than I cared about.  When I got up, I
lay some time on my belly, panting, and exuded fluid.  All my symptoms
_jusqu’ ici_ are trifling.  But I’ve a damned sore throat.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. SITWELL


                                 17 _Heriot Row_, _Edinburgh_, _May_ 1877.

. . . A PERFECT chorus of repudiation is sounding in my ears; and
although you say nothing, I know you must be repudiating me, all the
same.  Write I cannot—there’s no good mincing matters, a letter frightens
me worse than the devil; and I am just as unfit for correspondence as if
I had never learned the three R.’s.

Let me give my news quickly before I relapse into my usual idleness.  I
have a terror lest I should relapse before I get this finished.  Courage,
R. L. S.!  On Leslie Stephen’s advice, I gave up the idea of a book of
essays.  He said he didn’t imagine I was rich enough for such an
amusement; and moreover, whatever was worth publication was worth
republication.  So the best of those I had ready: ‘An Apology for Idlers’
is in proof for the _Cornhill_.  I have ‘Villon’ to do for the same
magazine, but God knows when I’ll get it done, for drums, trumpets—I’m
engaged upon—trumpets, drums—a novel!  ‘THE HAIR TRUNK; OR, THE IDEAL
COMMONWEALTH.’  It is a most absurd story of a lot of young Cambridge
fellows who are going to found a new society, with no ideas on the
subject, and nothing but Bohemian tastes in the place of ideas; and who
are—well, I can’t explain about the trunk—it would take too long—but the
trunk is the fun of it—everybody steals it; burglary, marine fight, life
on desert island on west coast of Scotland, sloops, etc.  The first scene
where they make their grand schemes and get drunk is supposed to be very
funny, by Henley.  I really saw him laugh over it until he cried.

Please write to me, although I deserve it so little, and show a Christian
spirit.—Ever your faithful friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                             [_Edinburgh_, _August_ 1877.]

MY DEAR COLVIN,—I’m to be whipped away to-morrow to Penzance, where at
the post-office a letter will find me glad and grateful.  I am well, but
somewhat tired out with overwork.  I have only been home a fortnight this
morning, and I have already written to the tune of forty-five _Cornhill_
pages and upwards.  The most of it was only very laborious re-casting and
re-modelling, it is true; but it took it out of me famously, all the
same.

_Temple Bar_ appears to like my ‘Villon,’ so I may count on another
market there in the future, I hope.  At least, I am going to put it to
the proof at once, and send another story, ‘The Sire de Malétroit’s
Mousetrap’: a true novel, in the old sense; all unities preserved
moreover, if that’s anything, and I believe with some little merits; not
so _clever_ perhaps as the last, but sounder and more natural.

My ‘Villon’ is out this month; I should so much like to know what you
think of it.  Stephen has written to me apropos of ‘Idlers,’ that
something more in that vein would be agreeable to his views.  From
Stephen I count that a devil of a lot.

I am honestly so tired this morning that I hope you will take this for
what it’s worth and give me an answer in peace.—Ever yours,

                                                          LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MRS. SITWELL


                                              [_Penzance_, _August_ 1877.]

. . . YOU will do well to stick to your burn, that is a delightful life
you sketch, and a very fountain of health.  I wish I could live like that
but, alas! it is just as well I got my ‘Idlers’ written and done with,
for I have quite lost all power of resting.  I have a goad in my flesh
continually, pushing me to work, work, work.  I have an essay pretty well
through for Stephen; a story, ‘The Sire de Malétroit’s Mousetrap,’ with
which I shall try _Temple Bar_; another story, in the clouds, ‘The
Stepfather’s Story,’ most pathetic work of a high morality or immorality,
according to point of view; and lastly, also in the clouds, or perhaps a
little farther away, an essay on the ‘Two St. Michael’s Mounts,’
historical and picturesque; perhaps if it didn’t come too long, I might
throw in the ‘Bass Rock,’ and call it ‘Three Sea Fortalices,’ or
something of that kind.  You see how work keeps bubbling in my mind.
Then I shall do another fifteenth century paper this autumn—La Sale and
_Petit Jehan de Saintré_, which is a kind of fifteenth century _Sandford
and Merton_, ending in horrid immoral cynicism, as if the author had got
tired of being didactic, and just had a good wallow in the mire to wind
up with and indemnify himself for so much restraint.

Cornwall is not much to my taste, being as bleak as the bleakest parts of
Scotland, and nothing like so pointed and characteristic.  It has a
flavour of its own, though, which I may try and catch, if I find the
space, in the proposed article.  ‘Will o’ the Mill’ I sent, red hot, to
Stephen in a fit of haste, and have not yet had an answer.  I am quite
prepared for a refusal.  But I begin to have more hope in the story line,
and that should improve my income anyway.  I am glad you liked ‘Villon’;
some of it was not as good as it ought to be, but on the whole it seems
pretty vivid, and the features strongly marked.  Vividness and not style
is now my line; style is all very well, but vividness is the real line of
country; if a thing is meant to be read, it seems just as well to try and
make it readable.  I am such a dull person I cannot keep off my own
immortal works.  Indeed, they are scarcely ever out of my head.  And yet
I value them less and less every day.  But occupation is the great thing;
so that a man should have his life in his own pocket, and never be thrown
out of work by anything.  I am glad to hear you are better.  I must
stop—going to Land’s End.—Always your faithful friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO A. PATCHETT MARTIN


                                                                   [1877.]

DEAR SIR,—It would not be very easy for me to give you any idea of the
pleasure I found in your present.  People who write for the magazines
(probably from a guilty conscience) are apt to suppose their works
practically unpublished.  It seems unlikely that any one would take the
trouble to read a little paper buried among so many others; and reading
it, read it with any attention or pleasure.  And so, I can assure you,
your little book, coming from so far, gave me all the pleasure and
encouragement in the world.

I suppose you know and remember Charles Lamb’s essay on distant
correspondents?  Well, I was somewhat of his way of thinking about my
mild productions.  I did not indeed imagine they were read, and (I
suppose I may say) enjoyed right round upon the other side of the big
Football we have the honour to inhabit.  And as your present was the
first sign to the contrary, I feel I have been very ungrateful in not
writing earlier to acknowledge the receipt.  I dare say, however, you
hate writing letters as much as I can do myself (for if you like my
article, I may presume other points of sympathy between us); and on this
hypothesis you will be ready to forgive me the delay.

I may mention with regard to the piece of verses called ‘Such is Life,’
that I am not the only one on this side of the Football aforesaid to
think it a good and bright piece of work, and recognised a link of
sympathy with the poets who ‘play in hostelries at euchre.’—Believe me,
dear sir, yours truly,

                                                                   R. L S.



TO A. PATCHETT MARTIN


                           17 _Heriot Row_, _Edinburgh_ [_December_ 1877].

MY DEAR SIR,—I am afraid you must already have condemned me for a very
idle fellow truly.  Here it is more than two months since I received your
letter; I had no fewer than three journals to acknowledge; and never a
sign upon my part.  If you have seen a _Cornhill_ paper of mine upon
idling, you will be inclined to set it all down to that.  But you will
not be doing me justice.  Indeed, I have had a summer so troubled that I
have had little leisure and still less inclination to write letters.  I
was keeping the devil at bay with all my disposable activities; and more
than once I thought he had me by the throat.  The odd conditions of our
acquaintance enable me to say more to you than I would to a person who
lived at my elbow.  And besides, I am too much pleased and flattered at
our correspondence not to go as far as I can to set myself right in your
eyes.

In this damnable confusion (I beg pardon) I have lost all my possessions,
or near about, and quite lost all my wits.  I wish I could lay my hands
on the numbers of the _Review_, for I know I wished to say something on
that head more particularly than I can from memory; but where they have
escaped to, only time or chance can show.  However, I can tell you so
far, that I was very much pleased with the article on Bret Harte; it
seemed to me just, clear, and to the point.  I agreed pretty well with
all you said about George Eliot: a high, but, may we not add?—a rather
dry lady.  Did you—I forget—did you have a kick at the stern works of
that melancholy puppy and humbug Daniel Deronda himself?—the Prince of
prigs; the literary abomination of desolation in the way of manhood; a
type which is enough to make a man forswear the love of women, if that is
how it must be gained. . . . Hats off all the same, you understand: a
woman of genius.

Of your poems I have myself a kindness for ‘Noll and Nell,’ although I
don’t think you have made it as good as you ought: verse five is surely
not _quite melodious_.  I confess I like the Sonnet in the last number of
the _Review_—the Sonnet to England.

Please, if you have not, and I don’t suppose you have, already read it,
institute a search in all Melbourne for one of the rarest and certainly
one of the best of books—_Clarissa Harlowe_.  For any man who takes an
interest in the problems of the two sexes, that book is a perfect mine of
documents.  And it is written, sir, with the pen of an angel.  Miss Howe
and Lovelace, words cannot tell how good they are!  And the scene where
Clarissa beards her family, with her fan going all the while; and some of
the quarrel scenes between her and Lovelace; and the scene where Colonel
Marden goes to Mr. Hall, with Lord M. trying to compose matters, and the
Colonel with his eternal ‘finest woman in the world,’ and the inimitable
affirmation of Mowbray—nothing, nothing could be better!  You will bless
me when you read it for this recommendation; but, indeed, I can do
nothing but recommend Clarissa.  I am like that Frenchman of the
eighteenth century who discovered Habakkuk, and would give no one peace
about that respectable Hebrew.  For my part, I never was able to get over
his eminently respectable name; Isaiah is the boy, if you must have a
prophet, no less.  About Clarissa, I meditate a choice work: _A Dialogue
on Man_, _Woman_, _and_ ‘_Clarissa Harlowe_.’  It is to be so clever that
no array of terms can give you any idea; and very likely that particular
array in which I shall finally embody it, less than any other.

Do you know, my dear sir, what I like best in your letter?  The egotism
for which you thought necessary to apologise.  I am a rogue at egotism
myself; and to be plain, I have rarely or never liked any man who was
not.  The first step to discovering the beauties of God’s universe is
usually a (perhaps partial) apprehension of such of them as adorn our own
characters.  When I see a man who does not think pretty well of himself,
I always suspect him of being in the right.  And besides, if he does not
like himself, whom he has seen, how is he ever to like one whom he never
can see but in dim and artificial presentments?

I cordially reciprocate your offer of a welcome; it shall be at least a
warm one.  Are you not my first, my only, admirer—a dear tie?  Besides,
you are a man of sense, and you treat me as one by writing to me as you
do, and that gives me pleasure also.  Please continue to let me see your
work.  I have one or two things coming out in the _Cornhill_: a story
called ‘The Sire de Malétroit’s Door’ in _Temple Bar_; and a series of
articles on Edinburgh in the _Portfolio_; but I don’t know if these last
fly all the way to Melbourne.—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                       _Hôtel des Etrangers_, _Dieppe_, _January_ 1, 1878.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—I am at the _Inland Voyage_ again: have finished another
section, and have only two more to execute.  But one at least of these
will be very long—the longest in the book—being a great digression on
French artistic tramps.  I only hope Paul may take the thing; I want coin
so badly, and besides it would be something done—something put outside of
me and off my conscience; and I should not feel such a muff as I do, if
once I saw the thing in boards with a ticket on its back.  I think I
shall frequent circulating libraries a good deal.  The Preface shall
stand over, as you suggest, until the last, and then, sir, we shall see.
This to be read with a big voice.

This is New Year’s Day: let me, my dear Colvin, wish you a very good
year, free of all misunderstanding and bereavement, and full of good
weather and good work.  You know best what you have done for me, and so
you will know best how heartily I mean this.—Ever yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                    [_Paris_, _January or February_ 1878.]

MY DEAR COLVIN,—Many thanks for your letter.  I was much interested by
all the Edinburgh gossip.  Most likely I shall arrive in London next
week.  I think you know all about the Crane sketch; but it should be a
river, not a canal, you know, and the look should be ‘cruel, lewd, and
kindly,’ all at once.  There is more sense in that Greek myth of Pan than
in any other that I recollect except the luminous Hebrew one of the Fall:
one of the biggest things done.  If people would remember that all
religions are no more than representations of life, they would find them,
as they are, the best representations, licking Shakespeare.

What an inconceivable cheese is Alfred de Musset!  His comedies are, to
my view, the best work of France this century: a large order.  Did you
ever read them?  They are real, clear, living work.—Ever yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MR. AND MRS. THOMAS STEVENSON


               _Paris_, 44 _Bd. Haussmann_, _Friday_, _February_ 21, 1878.

MY DEAR PEOPLE,—Do you know who is my favourite author just now?  How are
the mighty fallen!  Anthony Trollope.  I batten on him; he is so nearly
wearying you, and yet he never does; or rather, he never does, until he
gets near the end, when he begins to wean you from him, so that you’re as
pleased to be done with him as you thought you would be sorry.  I wonder
if it’s old age?  It is a little, I am sure.  A young person would get
sickened by the dead level of meanness and cowardliness; you require to
be a little spoiled and cynical before you can enjoy it.  I have just
finished the _Way of the World_; there is only one person in it—no, there
are three—who are nice: the wild American woman, and two of the
dissipated young men, Dolly and Lord Nidderdale.  All the heroes and
heroines are just ghastly.  But what a triumph is Lady Carbury!  That is
real, sound, strong, genuine work: the man who could do that, if he had
had courage, might have written a fine book; he has preferred to write
many readable ones.  I meant to write such a long, nice letter, but I
cannot hold the pen.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. THOMAS STEVENSON


                               _Hotel du Val de Grâce_, _Rue St. Jacques_,
                                          _Paris_, _Sunday_ [_June_ 1878].

MY DEAR MOTHER,—About criticisms, I was more surprised at the tone of the
critics than I suppose any one else.  And the effect it has produced in
me is one of shame.  If they liked that so much, I ought to have given
them something better, that’s all.  And I shall try to do so.  Still, it
strikes me as odd; and I don’t understand the vogue.  It should sell the
thing.—Ever your affectionate son,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MRS. THOMAS STEVENSON


                                            _Monastier_, _September_ 1878.

MY DEAR MOTHER,—You must not expect to hear much from me for the next two
weeks; for I am near starting.  Donkey purchased—a love—price, 65 francs
and a glass of brandy.  My route is all pretty well laid out; I shall go
near no town till I get to Alais.  Remember, Poste Restante, Alais, Gard.
Greyfriars will be in October.  You did not say whether you liked
September; you might tell me that at Alais.  The other No.’s of Edinburgh
are: Parliament Close, Villa Quarters (which perhaps may not appear),
Calton Hill, Winter and New Year, and to the Pentland Hills.  ’Tis a kind
of book nobody would ever care to read; but none of the young men could
have done it better than I have, which is always a consolation.  I read
_Inland Voyage_ the other day: what rubbish these reviewers did talk!  It
is not badly written, thin, mildly cheery, and strained.  _Selon moi_.  I
mean to visit Hamerton on my return journey; otherwise, I should come by
sea from Marseilles.  I am very well known here now; indeed, quite a
feature of the place.—Your affectionate son,

                                                                  R. L. S.

The Engineer is the Conductor of Roads and Bridges; then I have the
Receiver of Registrations, the First Clerk of Excise, and the Perceiver
of the Impost.  That is our dinner party.  I am a sort of hovering
government official, as you see.  But away—away from these great
companions!



TO W. E. HENLEY


                                          [_Monastier_, _September_ 1878.]

DEAR HENLEY,—I hope to leave Monastier this day (Saturday) week;
thenceforward Poste Restante, Alais, Gard, is my address.  ‘Travels with
a Donkey in the French Highlands.’  I am no good to-day.  I cannot work,
nor even write letters.  A colossal breakfast yesterday at Puy has, I
think, done for me for ever; I certainly ate more than ever I ate before
in my life—a big slice of melon, some ham and jelly, _a filet_, a helping
of gudgeons, the breast and leg of a partridge, some green peas, eight
crayfish, some Mont d’Or cheese, a peach, and a handful of biscuits,
macaroons, and things.  It sounds Gargantuan; it cost three francs a
head.  So that it was inexpensive to the pocket, although I fear it may
prove extravagant to the fleshly tabernacle.  I can’t think how I did it
or why.  It is a new form of excess for me; but I think it pays less than
any of them.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                             _Monastier_, _at Morel’s_ [_September_ 1878].
                                    Lud knows about date, _vide_ postmark.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—Yours (with enclosures) of the 16th to hand.  All work
done.  I go to Le Puy to-morrow to dispatch baggage, get cash, stand
lunch to engineer, who has been very jolly and useful to me, and hope by
five o’clock on Saturday morning to be driving Modestine towards the
Gévaudan.  Modestine is my ânesse; a darling, mouse-colour, about the
size of a Newfoundland dog (bigger, between you and me), the colour of a
mouse, costing 65 francs and a glass of brandy.  Glad you sent on all the
coin; was half afraid I might come to a stick in the mountains, donkey
and all, which would have been the devil.  Have finished _Arabian Nights_
and Edinburgh book, and am a free man.  Next address, Poste Restante,
Alais, Gard.  Give my servilities to the family.  Health bad; spirits, I
think, looking up.—Ever yours,

                                                                   R. L S.



TO MRS. THOMAS STEVENSON


                                                           _October_ 1878.

MY DEAR MOTHER,—I have seen Hamerton; he was very kind, all his family
seemed pleased to see an _Inland Voyage_, and the book seemed to be quite
a household word with them.  P. G. himself promised to help me in my
bargains with publishers, which, said he, and I doubt not very
truthfully, he could manage to much greater advantage than I.  He is also
to read an _Inland Voyage_ over again, and send me his cuts and cuffs in
private, after having liberally administered his kisses _coram publico_.
I liked him very much.  Of all the pleasant parts of my profession, I
think the spirit of other men of letters makes the pleasantest.

Do you know, your sunset was very good?  The ‘attack’ (to speak
learnedly) was so plucky and odd.  I have thought of it repeatedly since.
I have just made a delightful dinner by myself in the Café Félix, where I
am an old established beggar, and am just smoking a cigar over my coffee.
I came last night from Autun, and I am muddled about my plans.  The world
is such a dance!—Ever your affectionate son,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO W. E. HENLEY


                          [_Trinity College_, _Cambridge_, _Autumn_ 1878.]

MY DEAR HENLEY,—Here I am living like a fighting-cock, and have not
spoken to a real person for about sixty hours.  Those who wait on me are
not real.  The man I know to be a myth, because I have seen him acting so
often in the Palais Royal.  He plays the Duke in _Tricoche et Cacolet_; I
knew his nose at once.  The part he plays here is very dull for him, but
conscientious.  As for the bedmaker, she’s a dream, a kind of cheerful,
innocent nightmare; I never saw so poor an imitation of humanity.  I
cannot work—_cannot_.  Even the _Guitar_ is still undone; I can only
write ditch-water.  ’Tis ghastly; but I am quite cheerful, and that is
more important.  Do you think you could prepare the printers for a
possible breakdown this week?  I shall try all I know on Monday; but if I
can get nothing better than I got this morning, I prefer to drop a week.
Telegraph to me if you think it necessary.  I shall not leave till
Wednesday at soonest.  Shall write again.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO EDMUND GOSSE


                         [17 _Heriot Row_, _Edinburgh_, _April_ 16, 1879].
                                         _Pool of Siloam_, _by El Dorado_,
                                         _Delectable Mountains_, _Arcadia_

MY DEAR GOSSE,—Herewith of the dibbs—a homely fiver.  How, and why, do
you continue to exist?  I do so ill, but for a variety of reasons.
First, I wait an angel to come down and trouble the waters; second, more
angels; third—well, more angels.  The waters are sluggish; the
angels—well, the angels won’t come, that’s about all.  But I sit waiting
and waiting, and people bring me meals, which help to pass time (I’m sure
it’s very kind of them), and sometimes I whistle to myself; and as
there’s a very pretty echo at my pool of Siloam, the thing’s agreeable to
hear.  The sun continues to rise every day, to my growing wonder.  ‘The
moon by night thee shall not smite.’  And the stars are all doing as well
as can be expected.  The air of Arcady is very brisk and pure, and we
command many enchanting prospects in space and time.  I do not yet know
much about my situation; for, to tell the truth, I only came here by the
run since I began to write this letter; I had to go back to date it; and
I am grateful to you for having been the occasion of this little outing.
What good travellers we are, if we had only faith; no man need stay in
Edinburgh but by unbelief; my religious organ has been ailing for a while
past, and I have lain a great deal in Edinburgh, a sheer hulk in
consequence.  But I got out my wings, and have taken a change of air.

I read your book with great interest, and ought long ago to have told you
so.  An ordinary man would say that he had been waiting till he could pay
his debts. . . . The book is good reading.  Your personal notes of those
you saw struck me as perhaps most sharp and ‘best held.’  See as many
people as you can, and make a book of them before you die.  That will be
a living book, upon my word.  You have the touch required.  I ask you to
put hands to it in private already.  Think of what Carlyle’s caricature
of old Coleridge is to us who never saw S. T. C.  With that and Kubla
Khan, we have the man in the fact.  Carlyle’s picture, of course, is not
of the author of _Kubla_, but of the author of that surprising _Friend_
which has knocked the breath out of two generations of hopeful youth.
Your portraits would be milder, sweeter, more true perhaps, and perhaps
not so truth-_telling_—if you will take my meaning.

I have to thank you for an introduction to that beautiful—no, that’s not
the word—that jolly, with an Arcadian jollity—thing of Vogelweide’s.
Also for your preface.  Some day I want to read a whole book in the same
picked dialect as that preface.  I think it must be one E. W. Gosse who
must write it.  He has got himself into a fix with me by writing the
preface; I look for a great deal, and will not be easily pleased.

I never thought of it, but my new book, which should soon be out,
contains a visit to a murder scene, but not done as we should like to see
them, for, of course, I was running another hare.

If you do not answer this in four pages, I shall stop the enclosed fiver
at the bank, a step which will lead to your incarceration for life.  As
my visits to Arcady are somewhat uncertain, you had better address 17
Heriot Row, Edinburgh, as usual.  I shall walk over for the note if I am
not yet home.—Believe me, very really yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

I charge extra for a flourish when it is successful; this isn’t, so you
have it gratis.  Is there any news in Babylon the Great?  My
fellow-creatures are electing school boards here in the midst of the
ages.  It is very composed of them.  I can’t think why they do it.  Nor
why I have written a real letter.  If you write a real letter back,
damme, I’ll try to _correspond_ with you.  A thing unknown in this age.
It is a consequence of the decay of faith; we cannot believe that the
fellow will be at the pains to read us.



TO W. E. HENLEY


                              17 _Heriot Row_, _Edinburgh_ [_April_ 1879].

MY DEAR HENLEY,—Heavens! have I done the like?  ‘Clarify and strain,’
indeed?  ‘Make it like Marvell,’ no less.  I’ll tell you what—you may go
to the devil; that’s what I think.  ‘Be eloquent’ is another of your
pregnant suggestions.  I cannot sufficiently thank you for that one.
Portrait of a person about to be eloquent at the request of a literary
friend.  You seem to forget sir, that rhyme is rhyme, sir, and—go to the
devil.

I’ll try to improve it, but I shan’t be able to—O go to the devil.

Seriously, you’re a cool hand.  And then you have the brass to ask me
_why_ ‘my steps went one by one’?   Why?  Powers of man! to rhyme with
sun, to be sure.  Why else could it be?  And you yourself have been a
poet!  G-r-r-r-r-r!  I’ll never be a poet any more.  Men are so d–d
ungrateful and captious, I declare I could weep.

   O Henley, in my hours of ease
   You may say anything you please,
   But when I join the Muse’s revel,
   Begad, I wish you at the devil!
   In vain my verse I plane and bevel,
   Like Banville’s rhyming devotees;
   In vain by many an artful swivel
   Lug in my meaning by degrees;
   I’m sure to hear my Henley cavil;
   And grovelling prostrate on my knees,
   Devote his body to the seas,
   His correspondence to the devil!

Impromptu poem.

I’m going to Shandon Hydropathic _cum parentibus_.  Write here.  I heard
from Lang.  Ferrier prayeth to be remembered; he means to write, likes
his Tourgenieff greatly.  Also likes my ‘What was on the Slate,’ which,
under a new title, yet unfound, and with a new and, on the whole, kindly
_dénouement_, is going to shoot up and become a star. . . .

I see I must write some more to you about my Monastery.  I am a weak
brother in verse.  You ask me to re-write things that I have already
managed just to write with the skin of my teeth.  If I don’t re-write
them, it’s because I don’t see how to write them better, not because I
don’t think they should be.  But, curiously enough, you condemn two of my
favourite passages, one of which is J. W. Ferrier’s favourite of the
whole.  Here I shall think it’s you who are wrong.  You see, I did not
try to make good verse, but to say what I wanted as well as verse would
let me.  I don’t like the rhyme ‘ear’ and ‘hear.’  But the couplet, ‘My
undissuaded heart I hear Whisper courage in my ear,’ is exactly what I
want for the thought, and to me seems very energetic as speech, if not as
verse.  Would ‘daring’ be better than ‘courage’?  _Je me le demande_.
No, it would be ambiguous, as though I had used it licentiously for
‘daringly,’ and that would cloak the sense.

In short, your suggestions have broken the heart of the scald.  He
doesn’t agree with them all; and those he does agree with, the spirit
indeed is willing, but the d-d flesh cannot, cannot, cannot, see its way
to profit by.  I think I’ll lay it by for nine years, like Horace.  I
think the well of Castaly’s run out.  No more the Muses round my pillow
haunt.  I am fallen once more to the mere proser.  God bless you.

                                                                   R. L S.



TO EDMUND GOSSE


                  _Swanston_, _Lothianburn_, _Edinburgh_, _July_ 24, 1879.

MY DEAR GOSSE,—I have greatly enjoyed your articles which seems to me
handsome in tone, and written like a fine old English gentleman.  But is
there not a hitch in the sentence at foot of page 153?  I get lost in it.

Chapters VIII. and IX. of Meredith’s story are very good, I think.  But
who wrote the review of my book? whoever he was, he cannot write; he is
humane, but a duffer; I could weep when I think of him; for surely to be
virtuous and incompetent is a hard lot.  I should prefer to be a bold
pirate, the gay sailor-boy of immorality, and a publisher at once.  My
mind is extinct; my appetite is expiring; I have fallen altogether into a
hollow-eyed, yawning way of life, like the parties in Burne Jones’s
pictures. . . . Talking of Burns.  (Is this not sad, Weg?  I use the term
of reproach not because I am angry with you this time, but because I am
angry with myself and desire to give pain.)  Talking, I say, of Robert
Burns, the inspired poet is a very gay subject for study.  I made a kind
of chronological table of his various loves and lusts, and have been
comparatively speechless ever since.  I am sorry to say it, but there was
something in him of the vulgar, bagmanlike, professional seducer.—Oblige
me by taking down and reading, for the hundredth time I hope, his ‘Twa
Dogs’ and his ‘Address to the Unco Guid.’  I am only a Scotchman, after
all, you see; and when I have beaten Burns, I am driven at once, by my
parental feelings, to console him with a sugar-plum.  But hang me if I
know anything I like so well as the ‘Twa Dogs.’  Even a common Englishman
may have a glimpse, as it were from Pisgah, of its extraordinary merits.

‘_English_, _The_:—a dull people, incapable of comprehending the Scottish
tongue.  Their history is so intimately connected with that of Scotland,
that we must refer our readers to that heading.  Their literature is
principally the work of venal Scots.’—Stevenson’s _Handy Cyclopædia_.
Glescow: Blaikie & Bannock.

Remember me in suitable fashion to Mrs. Gosse, the offspring, and the
cat.—And believe me ever yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                           17 _Heriot Row_, _Edinburgh_ [_July_ 28, 1879].

MY DEAR COLVIN,—I am just in the middle of your Rembrandt.  The taste for
Bummkopf and his works is agreeably dissembled so far as I have gone; and
the reins have never for an instant been thrown upon the neck of that
wooden Pegasus; he only perks up a learned snout from a footnote in the
cellarage of a paragraph; just, in short, where he ought to be, to
inspire confidence in a wicked and adulterous generation.  But, mind you,
Bummkopf is not human; he is Dagon the fish god, and down he will come,
sprawling on his belly or his behind, with his hands broken from his
helpless carcase, and his head rolling off into a corner.  Up will rise
on the other side, sane, pleasurable, human knowledge: a thing of beauty
and a joy, etc.

I’m three parts through Burns; long, dry, unsympathetic, but sound and, I
think, in its dry way, interesting.  Next I shall finish the story, and
then perhaps Thoreau.  Meredith has been staying with Morley, who is
about, it is believed, to write to me on a literary scheme.  Is it Keats,
hope you?  My heart leaps at the thought.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO EDMUND GOSSE


                           17 _Heriot Row_, _Edinburgh_ [_July_ 29, 1879].

MY DEAR GOSSE,—Yours was delicious; you are a young person of wit; one of
the last of them; wit being quite out of date, and humour confined to the
Scotch Church and the _Spectator_ in unconscious survival.  You will
probably be glad to hear that I am up again in the world; I have breathed
again, and had a frolic on the strength of it.  The frolic was yesterday,
Sawbath; the scene, the Royal Hotel, Bathgate; I went there with a
humorous friend to lunch.  The maid soon showed herself a lass of
character.  She was looking out of window.  On being asked what she was
after, ‘I’m lookin’ for my lad,’ says she.  ‘Is that him?’  ‘Weel, I’ve
been lookin’ for him a’ my life, and I’ve never seen him yet,’ was the
response.  I wrote her some verses in the vernacular; she read them.
‘They’re no bad for a beginner,’ said she.  The landlord’s daughter, Miss
Stewart, was present in oil colour; so I wrote her a declaration in
verse, and sent it by the handmaid.  She (Miss S.) was present on the
stair to witness our departure, in a warm, suffused condition.  Damn it,
Gosse, you needn’t suppose that you’re the only poet in the world.

Your statement about your initials, it will be seen, I pass over in
contempt and silence.  When once I have made up my mind, let me tell you,
sir, there lives no pock-pudding who can change it.  Your anger I defy.
Your unmanly reference to a well-known statesman I puff from me, sir,
like so much vapour.  Weg is your name; Weg.  W E G.

My enthusiasm has kind of dropped from me.  I envy you your wife, your
home, your child—I was going to say your cat.  There would be cats in my
home too if I could but get it.  I may seem to you ‘the impersonation of
life,’ but my life is the impersonation of waiting, and that’s a poor
creature.  God help us all, and the deil be kind to the hindmost!  Upon
my word, we are a brave, cheery crew, we human beings, and my admiration
increases daily—primarily for myself, but by a roundabout process for the
whole crowd; for I dare say they have all their poor little secrets and
anxieties.  And here am I, for instance, writing to you as if you were in
the seventh heaven, and yet I know you are in a sad anxiety yourself.  I
hope earnestly it will soon be over, and a fine pink Gosse sprawling in a
tub, and a mother in the best of health and spirits, glad and tired, and
with another interest in life.  Man, you are out of the trouble when this
is through.  A first child is a rival, but a second is only a rival to
the first; and the husband stands his ground and may keep married all his
life—a consummation heartily to be desired.  Good-bye, Gosse.  Write me a
witty letter with good news of the mistress.

                                                                  R. L. S.




