letter I don’t know what yesterday but she read it in bed and when I
went in with her breakfast I found her dead and if the doctor had not
been two doors off nobody else could have brought her to life again and
she sits and looks dreadful and won’t speak a word her eyes frighten me
so I shake from head to foot oh please do come I keep things as tidy as
I can and I do like her so and she used to be so kind to me and the
landlord says he’s afraid she’ll destroy herself I wish I could write
straight but I do shake so your dutiful wife matilda wragge excuse
faults and beg you on my knees come and help us the Doctor good man
will put some of his own writing into this for fear you can’t make out
mine and remain once more your dutiful wife matilda wragge.”

_Added by the Doctor._


“SIR,—I beg to inform you that I was yesterday called into a neighbor’s
in Vauxhall Walk to attend a young lady who had been suddenly taken
ill. I recovered her with great difficulty from one of the most
obstinate fainting-fits I ever remember to have met with. Since that
time she has had no relapse, but there is apparently some heavy
distress weighing on her mind which it has hitherto been found
impossible to remove. She sits, as I am informed, perfectly silent, and
perfectly unconscious of what goes on about her, for hours together,
with a letter in her hand which she will allow nobody to take from her.
If this state of depression continues, very distressing mental
consequences may follow; and I only do my duty in suggesting that some
relative or friend should interfere who has influence enough to rouse
her.

“Your obedient servant,
“RICHARD JARVIS, M.R.C.S.”


VIII.
From Norah to Magdalen.

“July 5th.


“For God’s sake, write me one line to say if you are still at
Birmingham, and where I can find you there! I have just heard from old
Mr. Clare. Oh, Magdalen, if you have no pity on yourself, have some
pity on me! The thought of you alone among strangers, the thought of
you heart-broken under this dreadful blow, never leaves me for an
instant. No words can tell how I feel for you! My own love, remember
the better days at home before that cowardly villain stole his way into
your heart; remember the happy time at Combe-Raven when we were always
together. Oh, don’t, don’t treat me like a stranger! We are alone in
the world now—let me come and comfort you, let me be more than a sister
to you, if I can. One line—only one line to tell me where I can find
you!”

IX.
From Magdalen to Norah.

“July 7th.


“MY DEAREST NORAH,

“All that your love for me can wish your letter has done. You, and you
alone, have found your way to my heart. I could think again, I could
feel again, after reading what you have written to me. Let this
assurance quiet your anxieties. My mind lives and breathes once more—it
was dead until I got your letter.

“The shock I have suffered has left a strange quietness in me. I feel
as if I had parted from my former self—as if the hopes once so dear to
me had all gone back to some past time from which I am now far removed.
I can look at the wreck of my life more calmly, Norah, than you could
look at it if we were both together again. I can trust myself already
to write to Frank.

“My darling, I think no woman ever knows how utterly she has given
herself up to the man she loves—until that man has ill-treated her. Can
you pity my weakness if I confess to having felt a pang at my heart
when I read that part of your letter which calls Frank a coward and a
villain? Nobody can despise me for this as I despise myself. I am like
a dog who crawls back and licks the master’s hand that has beaten him.
But it is so—I would confess it to nobody but you—indeed, indeed it is
so. He has deceived and deserted me; he has written me a cruel farewell
—but don’t call him a villain! If he repented and came back to me, I
would die rather than marry him now—but it grates on me to see that
word coward written against him in your hand! If he is weak of purpose,
who tried his weakness beyond what it could bear? Do you think this
would have happened if Michael Vanstone had not robbed us of our own,
and forced Frank away from me to China? In a week from to-day the year
of waiting would have come to an end, and I should have been Frank’s
wife, if my marriage portion had not been taken from me.

“You will say, after what has happened, it is well that I have escaped.
My love! there is something perverse in my heart which answers, No!
Better have been Frank’s wretched wife than the free woman I am now.

“I have not written to him. He sends me no address at which I could
write, even if I would. But I have not the wish. I will wait before I
send him _my_ farewell. If a day ever comes when I have the fortune
which my father once promised I should bring to him, do you know what I
would do with it? I would send it all to Frank, as my revenge on him
for his letter; as the last farewell word on my side to the man who has
deserted me. Let me live for that day! Let me live, Norah, in the hope
of better times for _you_, which is all the hope I have left. When I
think of your hard life, I can almost feel the tears once more in my
weary eyes. I can almost think I have come back again to my former
self.

“You will not think me hard-hearted and ungrateful if I say that we
must wait a little yet before we meet. I want to be more fit to see you
than I am now. I want to put Frank further away from me, and to bring
you nearer still. Are these good reasons? I don’t know—don’t ask me for
reasons. Take the kiss I have put for you here, where the little circle
is drawn on the paper; and let that bring us together for the present
till I write again. Good-by, my love. My heart is true to you, Norah,
but I dare not see you yet.

“MAGDALEN.”


X. From Magdalen to Miss Garth.

“MY DEAR MISS GARTH,

“I have been long in answering your letter; but you know what has
happened, and you will forgive me.

“All that I have to say may be said in a few words. You may depend on
my never making the general Sense of Propriety my enemy again: I am
getting knowledge enough of the world to make it my accomplice next
time. Norah will never leave another situation on my account—my life as
a public performer is at an end. It was harmless enough, God knows—I
may live, and so may you, to mourn the day when I parted from it—but I
shall never return to it again. It has left me, as Frank has left me,
as all my better thoughts have left me except my thoughts of Norah.

“Enough of myself! Shall I tell you some news to brighten this dull
letter? Mr. Michael Vanstone is dead, and Mr. Noel Vanstone has
succeeded to the possession of my fortune and Norah’s. He is quite
worthy of his inheritance. In his father’s place, he would have ruined
us as his father did.

“I have no more to say that you would care to know. Don’t be distressed
about me. I am trying to recover my spirits—I am trying to forget the
poor deluded girl who was foolish enough to be fond of Frank in the old
days at Combe-Raven. Sometimes a pang comes which tells me the girl
won’t be forgotten—but not often.

“It was very kind of you, when you wrote to such a lost creature as I
am, to sign yourself—_always my friend._ ‘Always’ is a bold word, my
dear old governess! I wonder whether you will ever want to recall it?
It will make no difference if you do, in the gratitude I shall always
feel for the trouble you took with me when I was a little girl. I have
ill repaid that trouble—ill repaid your kindness to me in after life. I
ask your pardon and your pity. The best thing you can do for both of us
is to forget me. Affectionately yours,

“MAGDALEN.”


“P.S.—I open the envelope to add one line. For God’s sake, don’t show
this letter to Norah!”

XI.
From Magdalen to Captain Wragge.

“Vauxhall Walk, July 17th.


“If I am not mistaken, it was arranged that I should write to you at
Birmingham as soon as I felt myself composed enough to think of the
future. My mind is settled at last, and I am now able to accept the
services which you have so unreservedly offered to me.

“I beg you will forgive the manner in which I received you on your
arrival in this house, after hearing the news of my sudden illness. I
was quite incapable of controlling myself—I was suffering an agony of
mind which for the time deprived me of my senses. It is only your due
that I should now thank you for treating me with great forbearance at a
time when forbearance was mercy.

“I will mention what I wish you to do as plainly and briefly as I can.

“In the first place, I request you to dispose (as privately as
possible) of every article of costume used in the dramatic
Entertainment. I have done with our performances forever; and I wish to
be set free from everything which might accidentally connect me with
them in the future. The key of my box is inclosed in this letter.

“The other box, which contains my own dresses, you will be kind enough
to forward to this house. I do not ask you to bring it yourself,
because I have a far more important commission to intrust to you.

“Referring to the note which you left for me at your departure, I
conclude that you have by this time traced Mr. Noel Vanstone from
Vauxhall Walk to the residence which he is now occupying. If you have
made the discovery—and if you are quite sure of not having drawn the
attention either of Mrs. Lecount or her master to yourself—I wish you
to arrange immediately for my residing (with you and Mrs. Wragge) in
the same town or village in which Mr. Noel Vanstone has taken up his
abode. I write this, it is hardly necessary to say, under the
impression that, wherever he may now be living, he is settled in the
place for some little time.

“If you can find a small furnished house for me on these conditions
which is to be let by the month, take it for a month certain to begin
with. Say that it is for your wife, your niece, and yourself, and use
any assumed name you please, as long as it is a name that can be
trusted to defeat the most suspicious inquiries. I leave this to your
experience in such matters. The secret of who we really are must be
kept as strictly as if it was a secret on which our lives depend.

“Any expenses to which you may be put in carrying out my wishes I will
immediately repay. If you easily find the sort of house I want, there
is no need for your returning to London to fetch us. We can join you as
soon as we know where to go. The house must be perfectly respectable,
and must be reasonably near to Mr. Noel Vanstone’s present residence,
wherever that is.

“You must allow me to be silent in this letter as to the object which I
have now in view. I am unwilling to risk an explanation in writing.
When all our preparations are made, you shall hear what I propose to do
from my own lips; and I shall expect you to tell me plainly, in return,
whether you will or will not give me the help I want on the best terms
which I am able to offer you.

“One word more before I seal up this letter.

“If any opportunity falls in your way after you have taken the house,
and before we join you, of exchanging a few civil words either with Mr.
Noel Vanstone or Mrs. Lecount, take advantage of it. It is very
important to my present object that we should become acquainted with
each other—as the purely accidental result of our being near neighbors.
I want you to smooth the way toward this end if you can, before Mrs.
Wragge and I come to you. Pray throw away no chance of observing Mrs.
Lecount, in particular, very carefully. Whatever help you can give me
at the outset in blindfolding that woman’s sharp eyes will be the most
precious help I have ever received at your hands.

“There is no need to answer this letter immediately—unless I have
written it under a mistaken impression of what you have accomplished
since leaving London. I have taken our lodgings on for another week;
and I can wait to hear from you until you are able to send me such news
as I wish to receive. You may be quite sure of my patience for the
future, under all possible circumstances. My caprices are at an end,
and my violent temper has tried your forbearance for the last time.

“MAGDALEN.”


XII.
From Captain Wragge to Magdalen.

“North Shingles Villa, Aldborough, Suffolk,
“July 22d.


“MY DEAR GIRL,

“Your letter has charmed and touched me. Your excuses have gone
straight to my heart; and your confidence in my humble abilities has
followed in the same direction. The pulse of the old militia-man throbs
with pride as he thinks of the trust you have placed in him, and vows
to deserve it. Don’t be surprised at this genial outburst. All
enthusiastic natures must explode occasionally; and _my_ form of
explosion is—Words.

“Everything you wanted me to do is done. The house is taken; the name
is found; and I am personally acquainted with Mrs. Lecount. After
reading this general statement, you will naturally be interested in
possessing your mind next of the accompanying details. Here they are,
at your service:

“The day after leaving you in London, I traced Mr. Noel Vanstone to
this curious little seaside snuggery. One of his father’s innumerable
bargains was a house at Aldborough—a rising watering-place, or Mr.
Michael Vanstone would not have invested a farthing in it. In this
house the despicable little miser, who lived rent free in London, now
lives, rent free again, on the coast of Suffolk. He is settled in his
present abode for the summer and autumn; and you and Mrs. Wragge have
only to join me here, to be established five doors away from him in
this elegant villa. I have got the whole house for three guineas a
week, with the option of remaining through the autumn at the same
price. In a fashionable watering-place, such a residence would have
been cheap at double the money.

“Our new name has been chosen with a wary eye to your suggestions. My
books—I hope you have not forgotten my Books?—contain, under the
heading of _Skins To Jump Into,_ a list of individuals retired from
this mortal scene, with whose names, families, and circumstances I am
well acquainted. Into some of those Skins I have been compelled to
Jump, in the exercise of my profession, at former periods of my career.
Others are still in the condition of new dresses and remain to be tried
on. The Skin which will exactly fit us originally clothed the bodies of
a family named Bygrave. I am in Mr. Bygrave’s skin at this moment-and
it fits without a wrinkle. If you will oblige me by slipping into Miss
Bygrave (Christian name, Susan); and if you will afterward push Mrs.
Wragge—anyhow; head foremost if you like—into Mrs. Bygrave (Christian
name, Julia), the transformation will be complete. Permit me to inform
you that I am your paternal uncle. My worthy brother was established
twenty years ago in the mahogany and logwood trade at Belize, Honduras.
He died in that place; and is buried on the south-west side of the
local cemetery, with a neat monument of native wood carved by a
self-taught negro artist. Nineteen months afterward his widow died of
apoplexy at a boarding-house in Cheltenham. She was supposed to be the
most corpulent woman in England, and was accommodated on the
ground-floor of the house in consequence of the difficulty of getting
her up and down stairs. You are her only child; you have been under my
care since the sad event at Cheltenham; you are twenty-one years old on
the second of August next; and, corpulence excepted, you are the living
image of your mother. I trouble you with these specimens of my intimate
knowledge of our new family Skin, to quiet your mind on the subject of
future inquiries. Trust to me and my books to satisfy any amount of
inquiry. In the meantime write down our new name and address, and see
how they strike you: ‘Mr. Bygrave, Mrs. Bygrave, Miss Bygrave; North
Shingles Villa, Aldborough.’ Upon my life, it reads remarkably well!

“The last detail I have to communicate refers to my acquaintance with
Mrs. Lecount.

“We met yesterday, in the grocer’s shop here. Keeping my ears open, I
found that Mrs. Lecount wanted a particular kind of tea which the man
had not got, and which he believed could not be procured any nearer
than Ipswich. I instantly saw my way to beginning an acquaintance, at
the trifling expense of a journey to that flourishing city. ‘I have
business to-day in Ipswich,’ I said, ‘and I propose returning to
Aldborough (if I can get back in time) this evening. Pray allow me to
take your order for the tea, and to bring it back with my own parcels.’
Mrs. Lecount politely declined giving me the trouble—I politely
insisted on taking it. We fell into conversation. There is no need to
trouble you with our talk. The result of it on my mind is—that Mrs.
Lecount’s one weak point, if she has such a thing at all, is a taste
for science, implanted by her deceased husband, the professor. I think
I see a chance here of working my way into her good graces, and casting
a little needful dust into those handsome black eyes of hers. Acting on
this idea when I purchased the lady’s tea at Ipswich, I also bought on
my own account that far-famed pocket-manual of knowledge, ‘Joyce’s
Scientific Dialogues.’ Possessing, as I do, a quick memory and
boundless confidence in myself, I propose privately inflating my new
skin with as much ready-made science as it will hold, and presenting
Mr. Bygrave to Mrs. Lecount’s notice in the character of the most
highly informed man she has met with since the professor’s death. The
necessity of blindfolding that woman (to use your own admirable
expression) is as clear to me as to you. If it is to be done in the way
I propose, make your mind easy—Wragge, inflated by Joyce, is the man to
do it.

“You now have my whole budget of news. Am I, or am I not, worthy of
your confidence in me? I say nothing of my devouring anxiety to know
what your objects really are—that anxiety will be satisfied when we
meet. Never yet, my dear girl, did I long to administer a productive
pecuniary Squeeze to any human creature, as I long to administer it to
Mr. Noel Vanstone. I say no more. _Verbum sap._ Pardon the pedantry of
a Latin quotation, and believe me,

“Entirely yours,
“HORATIO WRAGGE.


“P.S.—I await my instructions, as you requested. You have only to say
whether I shall return to London for the purpose of escorting you to
this place, or whether I shall wait here to receive you. The house is
in perfect order, the weather is charming, and the sea is as smooth as
Mrs. Lecount’s apron. She has just passed the window, and we have
exchanged bows. A sharp woman, my dear Magdalen; but Joyce and I
together may prove a trifle too much for her.”

XIII.

_Extract from the East Suffolk Argus._


“ALDBOROUGH.—We notice with pleasure the arrival of visitors to this
healthful and far-famed watering-place earlier in the season than usual
during the present year. _Esto Perpetua_ is all we have to say.

“VISITORS’ LIST.—Arrivals since our last. North Shingles Villa—Mrs.
Bygrave; Miss Bygrave.”



THE FOURTH SCENE.
ALDBOROUGH, SUFFOLK.



