letter is to implore you to assist me in quieting Norah’s anguish of
mind. The shock she has received at hearing this news of her sister is
not the worst result of what has happened. She has persuaded herself
that the answers she innocently gave, in her distress, to Mrs.
Lecount’s questions on the subject of her letter—the answers wrung from
her under the sudden pressure of confusion and alarm—may be used to
Magdalen’s prejudice by the woman who purposely startled her into
giving the information. I can only prevent her from taking some
desperate step on her side—some step by which she may forfeit the
friendship and protection of the excellent people with whom she is now
living—by reminding her that if Mrs. Lecount traces her master by means
of the postmark on the letter, we may trace Magdalen at the same time,
and by the same means. Whatever objection you may personally feel to
renewing the efforts for the rescue of this miserable girl which failed
so lamentably at York, I entreat you, for Norah’s sake, to take the
same steps now which we took then. Send me the only assurance which
will quiet her—the assurance, under your own hand, that the search on
our side has begun. If you will do this, you may trust me, when the
time comes, to stand between these two sisters, and to defend Norah’s
peace, character, and future prosperity at any price.

“Most sincerely yours,
“HARRIET GARTH.”


XI.
From Mrs. Lecount to Mr. de Bleriot.

“October 28th.


“DEAR SIR,

“I have found the trace you wanted. Mrs. Noel Vanstone has written to
her sister. The letter contains no address, but the postmark is
Allonby, in Cumberland. From Allonby, therefore, the inquiries must
begin. You have already in your possession the personal description of
both husband and wife. I urgently recommend you not to lose one
unnecessary moment. If it is possible to send to Cumberland immediately
on receipt of this letter, I beg you will do so.

“I have another word to say before I close my note—a word about the
discovery in Mr. Loscombe’s office.

“It is no surprise to me to hear that Mr. Noel Vanstone has made his
will since his marriage, and I am at no loss to guess in whose favor
the will is made. If I succeed in finding my master, let that person
get the money if that person can. A course to follow in this matter has
presented itself to my mind since I received your letter, but my
ignorance of details of business and intricacies of law leaves me still
uncertain whether my idea is capable of ready and certain execution. I
know no professional person whom I can trust in this delicate and
dangerous business. Is your large experience in other matters large
enough to help me in this? I will call at your office to-morrow at two
o’clock, for the purpose of consulting you on the subject. It is of the
greatest importance, when I next see Mr. Noel Vanstone, that he should
find me thoroughly prepared beforehand in this matter of the will.

“Your much obliged servant,
“VIRGINIE LECOUNT.”


XII.
From Mr. Pendril to Miss Garth.

“Serle Street, October 29th.


“DEAR MISS GARTH,

“I have only a moment to assure you of the sorrow with which I have
read your letter. The circumstances under which you urge your request,
and the reasons you give for making it, are sufficient to silence any
objection I might otherwise feel to the course you propose. A
trustworthy person, whom I have myself instructed, will start for
Allonby to-day, and as soon as I receive any news from him, you shall
hear of it by special messenger. Tell Miss Vanstone this, and pray add
the sincere expression of my sympathy and regard.

“Faithfully yours,
“WILLIAM PENDRIL.”


XIII.
From Mr. de Bleriot to Mrs. Lecount.

“Dark’s Buildings. November 1st.


“DEAR MADAM,

“I have the pleasure of informing you that the discovery has been made
with far less trouble than I had anticipated.

“Mr. and Mrs. Noel Vanstone have been traced across the Solway Firth to
Dumfries, and thence to a cottage a few miles from the town, on the
banks of the Nith. The exact address is Baliol Cottage, near Dumfries.

“This information, though easily hunted up, has nevertheless been
obtained under rather singular circumstances.

“Before leaving Allonby, the persons in my employ discovered, to their
surprise, that a stranger was in the place pursuing the same inquiry as
themselves. In the absence of any instructions preparing them for such
an occurrence as this, they took their own view of the circumstance.
Considering the man as an intruder on their business, whose success
might deprive them of the credit and reward of making the discovery,
they took advantage of their superiority in numbers, and of their being
first in the field, and carefully misled the stranger before they
ventured any further with their own investigations. I am in possession
of the details of their proceedings, with which I need not trouble you.
The end is, that this person, whoever he may be, was cleverly turned
back southward on a false scent before the men in my employment crossed
the Firth.

“I mention the circumstance, as you may be better able than I am to
find a clue to it, and as it may possibly be of a nature to induce you
to hasten your journey.

“Your faithful servant,
“ALFRED DE BLERIOT.”


XIV.
From Mrs. Lecount to Mr. de Bleriot.

“November 1st.


“DEAR SIR,

“One line to say that your letter has just reached me at my lodging in
London. I think I know who sent the strange man to inquire at Allonby.
It matters little. Before he finds out his mistake, I shall be at
Dumfries. My luggage is packed, and I start for the North by the next
train.

“Your deeply obliged,
“VIRGINIE LECOUNT.”



THE FIFTH SCENE.
BALIOL COTTAGE, DUMFRIES.



