letter came from China in the terrible past time at Vauxhall Walk.

“I was sorry to hear that you were ill to-day, from Mrs. Wragge,” said
the captain, unconsciously dropping his voice almost to a whisper as he
spoke.

“It doesn’t matter,” she answered quietly, out of the darkness. “I am
strong enough to suffer, and live. Other girls in my place would have
been happier—they would have suffered, and died. It doesn’t matter; it
will be all the same a hundred years hence. Is he coming again tomorrow
morning at seven o’clock?”

“He is coming, if you feel no objection to it.”

“I have no objection to make; I have done with objecting. But I should
like to have the time altered. I don’t look my best in the early
morning—-I have bad nights, and I rise haggard and worn. Write him a
note this evening, and tell him to come at twelve o’clock.”

“Twelve is rather late, under the circumstances, for you to be seen out
walking.”

“I have no intention of walking. Let him be shown into the parlor—”

Her voice died away in silence before she ended the sentence.

“Yes?” said Captain Wragge.

“And leave me alone in the parlor to receive him.”

“I understand,” said the captain. “An admirable idea. I’ll be out of
the way in the dining-room while he is here, and you can come and tell
me about it when he has gone.”

There was another moment of silence.

“Is there no way but telling you?” she asked, suddenly. “I can control
myself while he is with me, but I can’t answer for what I may say or do
afterward. Is there no other way?”

“Plenty of ways,” said the captain. “Here is the first that occurs to
me. Leave the blind down over the window of your room upstairs before
he comes. I will go out on the beach, and wait there within sight of
the house. When I see him come out again, I will look at the window. If
he has said nothing, leave the blind down. If he has made you an offer,
draw the blind up. The signal is simplicity itself; we can’t
misunderstand each other. Look your best to-morrow! Make sure of him,
my dear girl—make sure of him, if you possibly can.”

He had spoken loud enough to feel certain that she had heard him, but
no answering word came from her. The dead silence was only disturbed by
the rustling of her dress, which told him she had risen from her chair.
Her shadowy presence crossed the room again; the door shut softly; she
was gone. He rang the bell hurriedly for the lights. The servant found
him standing close at the window, looking less self-possessed than
usual. He told her he felt a little poorly, and sent her to the
cupboard for the brandy.

At a few minutes before twelve the next day Captain Wragge withdrew to
his post of observation, concealing himself behind a fishing-boat drawn
up on the beach. Punctually as the hour struck, he saw Noel Vanstone
approach North Shingles and open the garden gate. When the house door
had closed on the visitor, Captain Wragge settled himself comfortably
against the side of the boat and lit his cigar.

He smoked for half an hour—for ten minutes over the half-hour, by his
watch. He finished the cigar down to the last morsel of it that he
could hold in his lips. Just as he had thrown away the end, the door
opened again and Noel Vanstone came out.

The captain looked up instantly at Magdalen’s window. In the absorbing
excitement of the moment, he counted the seconds. She might get from
the parlor to her own room in less than a minute. He counted to thirty,
and nothing happened. He counted to fifty, and nothing happened. He
gave up counting, and left the boat impatiently, to return to the
house.

As he took his first step forward he saw the signal.

The blind was drawn up.

Cautiously ascending the eminence of the beach, Captain Wragge looked
toward Sea-view Cottage before he showed himself on the Parade. Noel
Vanstone had reached home again; he was just entering his own door.

“If all your money was offered me to stand in your shoes,” said the
captain, looking after him—“rich as you are, I wouldn’t take it!”



CHAPTER VIII.

On returning to the house, Captain Wragge received a significant
message from the servant. “Mr. Noel Vanstone would call again at two
o’clock that afternoon, when he hoped to have the pleasure of finding
Mr. Bygrave at home.”

The captain’s first inquiry after hearing this message referred to
Magdalen. “Where was Miss Bygrave?” “In her own room.” “Where was Mrs.
Bygrave?” “In the back parlor.” Captain Wragge turned his steps at once
in the latter direction, and found his wife, for the second time, in
tears. She had been sent out of Magdalen’s room for the whole day, and
she was at her wits’ end to know what she had done to deserve it.
Shortening her lamentations without ceremony, her husband sent her
upstairs on the spot, with instructions to knock at the door, and to
inquire whether Magdalen could give five minutes’ attention to a
question of importance which must be settled before two o’clock.

The answer returned was in the negative. Magdalen requested that the
subject on which she was asked to decide might be mentioned to her in
writing. She engaged to reply in the same way, on the understanding
that Mrs. Wragge, and not the servant, should be employed to deliver
the note and to take back the answer.

Captain Wragge forthwith opened his paper-case and wrote these lines:
“Accept my warmest congratulations on the result of your interview with
Mr. N. V. He is coming again at two o’clock—no doubt to make his
proposals in due form. The question to decide is, whether I shall press
him or not on the subject of settlements. The considerations for your
own mind are two in number. First, whether the said pressure (without
at all underrating your influence over him) may not squeeze for a long
time before it squeezes money out of Mr. N. V. Secondly, whether we are
altogether justified—considering our present position toward a certain
sharp practitioner in petticoats—in running the risk of delay. Consider
these points, and let me have your decision as soon as convenient.”

The answer returned to this note was written in crooked, blotted
characters, strangely unlike Magdalen’s usually firm and clear
handwriting. It only contained these words: “Give yourself no trouble
about settlements. Leave the use to which he is to put his money for
the future in my hands.”

“Did you see her?” asked the captain, when his wife had delivered the
answer.

“I tried,” said Mrs. Wragge, with a fresh burst of tears—“but she only
opened the door far enough to put out her hand. I took and gave it a
little squeeze—and, oh poor soul, it felt so cold in mine!”

When Mrs. Lecount’s master made his appearance at two o’clock, he stood
alarmingly in need of an anodyne application from Mrs. Lecount’s green
fan. The agitation of making his avowal to Magdalen; the terror of
finding himself discovered by the housekeeper; the tormenting suspicion
of the hard pecuniary conditions which Magdalen’s relative and guardian
might impose on him—all these emotions, stirring in conflict together,
had overpowered his feebly-working heart with a trial that strained it
sorely. He gasped for breath as he sat down in the parlor at North
Shingles, and that ominous bluish pallor which always overspread his
face in moments of agitation now made its warning appearance again.
Captain Wragge seized the brandy bottle in genuine alarm, and forced
his visitor to drink a wine-glassful of the spirit before a word was
said between them on either side.

Restored by the stimulant, and encouraged by the readiness with which
the captain anticipated everything that he had to say, Noel Vanstone
contrived to state the serious object of his visit in tolerably plain
terms. All the conventional preliminaries proper to the occasion were
easily disposed of. The suitor’s family was respectable; his position
in life was undeniably satisfactory; his attachment, though hasty, was
evidently disinterested and sincere. All that Captain Wragge had to do
was to refer to these various considerations with a happy choice of
language in a voice that trembled with manly emotion, and this he did
to perfection. For the first half-hour of the interview, no allusion
whatever was made to the delicate and dangerous part of the subject.
The captain waited until he had composed his visitor, and when that
result was achieved came smoothly to the point in these terms:

“There is one little difficulty, Mr. Vanstone, which I think we have
both overlooked. Your housekeeper’s recent conduct inclines me to fear
that she will view the approaching change in your life with anything
but a friendly eye. Probably you have not thought it necessary yet to
inform her of the new tie which you propose to form?”

Noel Vanstone turned pale at the bare idea of explaining himself to
Mrs. Lecount.

“I can’t tell what I’m to do,” he said, glancing aside nervously at the
window, as if he expected to see the housekeeper peeping in. “I hate
all awkward positions, and this is the most unpleasant position I ever
was placed in. You don’t know what a terrible woman Lecount is. I’m not
afraid of her; pray don’t suppose I’m afraid of her—”

At those words his fears rose in his throat, and gave him the lie
direct by stopping his utterance.

“Pray don’t trouble yourself to explain,” said Captain Wragge, coming
to the rescue. “This is the common story, Mr. Vanstone. Here is a woman
who has grown old in your service, and in your father’s service before
you; a woman who has contrived, in all sorts of small, underhand ways,
to presume systematically on her position for years and years past; a
woman, in short, whom your inconsiderate but perfectly natural kindness
has allowed to claim a right of property in you—”

“Property!” cried Noel Vanstone, mistaking the captain, and letting the
truth escape him through sheer inability to conceal his fears any
longer. “I don’t know what amount of property she won’t claim. She’ll
make me pay for my father as well as for myself. Thousands, Mr.
Bygrave—thousands of pounds sterling out of my pocket!!!” He clasped
his hands in despair at the picture of pecuniary compulsion which his
fancy had conjured up—his own golden life-blood spouting from him in
great jets of prodigality, under the lancet of Mrs. Lecount.

“Gently, Mr. Vanstone—gently! The woman knows nothing so far, and the
money is not gone yet.”

“No, no; the money is not gone, as you say. I’m only nervous about it;
I can’t help being nervous. You were saying something just now; you
were going to give me advice. I value your advice; you don’t know how
highly I value your advice.” He said those words with a conciliatory
smile which was more than helpless; it was absolutely servile in its
dependence on his judicious friend.

“I was only assuring you, my dear sir, that I understood your
position,” said the captain. “I see your difficulty as plainly as you
can see it yourself. Tell a woman like Mrs. Lecount that she must come
off her domestic throne, to make way for a young and beautiful
successor, armed with the authority of a wife, and an unpleasant scene
must be the inevitable result. An unpleasant scene, Mr. Vanstone, if
your opinion of your housekeeper’s sanity is well founded. Something
far more serious, if my opinion that her intellect is unsettled happens
to turn out the right one.”

“I don’t say it isn’t my opinion, too,” rejoined Noel Vanstone.
“Especially after what has happened to-day.”

Captain Wragge immediately begged to know what the event alluded to
might be.

Noel Vanstone thereupon explained—with an infinite number of
parentheses all referring to himself—that Mrs. Lecount had put the
dreaded question relating to the little note in her master’s pocket
barely an hour since. He had answered her inquiry as Mr. Bygrave had
advised him. On hearing that the accuracy of the personal description
had been fairly put to the test, and had failed in the one important
particular of the moles on the neck, Mrs. Lecount had considered a
little, and had then asked him whether he had shown her note to Mr.
Bygrave before the experiment was tried. He had answered in the
negative, as the only safe form of reply that he could think of on the
spur of the moment, and the housekeeper had then addressed him in these
strange and startling words: “You are keeping the truth from me, Mr.
Noel. You are trusting strangers, and doubting your old servant and
your old friend. Every time you go to Mr. Bygrave’s house, every time
you see Miss Bygrave, you are drawing nearer and nearer to your
destruction. They have got the bandage over your eyes in spite of me;
but I tell them, and tell you, before many days are over I will take it
off!” To this extraordinary outbreak—accompanied as it was by an
expression in Mrs. Lecount’s face which he had never seen there
before—Noel Vanstone had made no reply. Mr. Bygrave’s conviction that
there was a lurking taint of insanity in the housekeeper’s blood had
recurred to his memory, and he had left the room at the first
opportunity.

Captain Wragge listened with the closest attention to the narrative
thus presented to him. But one conclusion could be drawn from it—it was
a plain warning to him to hasten the end.

“I am not surprised,” he said, gravely, “to hear that you are inclining
more favorably to my opinion. After what you have just told me, Mr.
Vanstone, no sensible man could do otherwise. This is becoming serious.
I hardly know what results may not be expected to follow the
communication of your approaching change in life to Mrs. Lecount. My
niece may be involved in those results. She is nervous; she is
sensitive in the highest degree; she is the innocent object of this
woman’s unreasoning hatred and distrust. You alarm me, sir! I am not
easily thrown off my balance, but I acknowledge you alarm me for the
future.” He frowned, shook his head, and looked at his visitor
despondently.

Noel Vanstone began to feel uneasy. The change in Mr. Bygrave’s manner
seemed ominous of a reconsideration of his proposals from a new and
unfavorable point of view. He took counsel of his inborn cowardice and
his inborn cunning, and proposed a solution of the difficulty
discovered by himself.

“Why should we tell Lecount at all?” he asked. “What right has Lecount
to know? Can’t we be married without letting her into the secret? And
can’t somebody tell her afterward when we are both out of her reach?”

Captain Wragge received this proposal with an expression of surprise
which did infinite credit to his power of control over his own
countenance. His foremost object throughout the interview had been to
conduct it to this point, or, in other words, to make the first idea of
keeping the marriage a secret from Mrs. Lecount emanate from Noel
Vanstone instead of from himself. No one knew better than the captain
that the only responsibilities which a weak man ever accepts are
responsibilities which can be perpetually pointed out to him as resting
exclusively on his own shoulders.

“I am accustomed to set my face against clandestine proceedings of all
kinds,” said Captain Wragge. “But there are exceptions to the strictest
rules; and I am bound to admit, Mr. Vanstone, that your position in
this matter is an exceptional position, if ever there was one yet. The
course you have just proposed—however unbecoming I may think it,
however distasteful it may be to myself—would not only spare you a very
serious embarrassment (to say the least of it), but would also protect
you from the personal assertion of those pecuniary claims on the part
of your housekeeper to which you have already adverted. These are both
desirable results to achieve—to say nothing of the removal, on my side,
of all apprehension of annoyance to my niece. On the other hand,
however, a marriage solemnized with such privacy as you propose must be
a hasty marriage; for, as we are situated, the longer the delay the
greater will be the risk that our secret may escape our keeping. I am
not against hasty marriages where a mutual flame is fanned by an
adequate income. My own was a love-match contracted in a hurry. There
are plenty of instances in the experience of every one, of short
courtships and speedy marriages, which have turned up trumps—I beg your
pardon—which have turned out well after all. But if you and my niece,
Mr. Vanstone, are to add one to the number of these eases, the usual
preliminaries of marriage among the higher classes must be hastened by
some means. You doubtless understand me as now referring to the subject
of settlements.”

“I’ll take another teaspoonful of brandy,” said Noel Vanstone, holding
out his glass with a trembling hand as the word “settlements” passed
Captain Wragge’s lips.

“I’ll take a teaspoonful with you,” said the captain, nimbly
dismounting from the pedestal of his respectability, and sipping his
brandy with the highest relish. Noel Vanstone, after nervously
following his host’s example, composed himself to meet the coming
ordeal, with reclining head and grasping hands, in the position
familiarly associated to all civilized humanity with a seat in a
dentist’s chair.

The captain put down his empty glass and got up again on his pedestal.

“We were talking of settlements,” he resumed. “I have already
mentioned, Mr. Vanstone, at an early period of our conversation, that
my niece presents the man of her choice with no other dowry than the
most inestimable of all gifts—the gift of herself. This circumstance,
however (as you are no doubt aware), does not disentitle me to make the
customary stipulations with her future husband. According to the usual
course in this matter, my lawyer would see yours—consultations would
take place—delays would occur—strangers would be in possession of your
intentions—and Mrs. Lecount would, sooner or later, arrive at that
knowledge of the truth which you are anxious to keep from her. Do you
agree with me so far?”

Unutterable apprehension closed Noel Vanstone’s lips. He could only
reply by an inclination of the head.

“Very good,” said the captain. “Now, sir, you may possibly have
observed that I am a man of a very original turn of mind. If I have not
hitherto struck you in that light, it may then be necessary to mention
that there are some subjects on which I persist in thinking for myself.
The subject of marriage settlements is one of them. What, let me ask
you, does a parent or guardian in my present condition usually do?
After having trusted the man whom he has chosen for his son-in-law with
the sacred deposit of a woman’s happiness, he turns round on that man,
and declines to trust him with the infinitely inferior responsibility
of providing for her pecuniary future. He fetters his son-in-law with
the most binding document the law can produce, and employs with the
husband of his own child the same precautions which he would use if he
were dealing with a stranger and a rogue. I call such conduct as this
inconsistent and unbecoming in the last degree. You will not find it my
course of conduct, Mr. Vanstone—you will not find me preaching what I
don’t practice. If I trust you with my niece, I trust you with every
inferior responsibility toward her and toward me. Give me your hand,
sir; tell me, on your word of honor, that you will provide for your
wife as becomes her position and your means, and the question of
settlements is decided between us from this moment at once and
forever!” Having carried out Magdalen’s instructions in this lofty
tone, he threw open his respectable frockcoat, and sat with head erect
and hand extended, the model of parental feeling and the picture of
human integrity.

For one moment Noel Vanstone remained literally petrified by
astonishment. The next, he started from his chair and wrung the hand of
his magnanimous friend in a perfect transport of admiration. Never yet,
throughout his long and varied career, had Captain Wragge felt such
difficulty in keeping his countenance as he felt now. Contempt for the
outburst of miserly gratitude of which he was the object; triumph in
the sense of successful conspiracy against a man who had rated the
offer of his protection at five pounds; regret at the lost opportunity
of effecting a fine stroke of moral agriculture, which his dread of
involving himself in coming consequences had forced him to let slip—all
these varied emotions agitated the captain’s mind; all strove together
to find their way to the surface through the outlets of his face or his
tongue. He allowed Noel Vanstone to keep possession of his hand, and to
heap one series of shrill protestations and promises on another, until
he had regained his usual mastery over himself. That result achieved,
he put the little man back in his chair, and returned forthwith to the
subject of Mrs. Lecount.

“Suppose we now revert to the difficulty which we have not conquered
yet,” said the captain. “Let us say that I do violence to my own habits
and feelings; that I allow the considerations I have already mentioned
to weigh with me; and that I sanction your wish to be united to my
niece without the knowledge of Mrs. Lecount. Allow me to inquire in
that case what means you can suggest for the accomplishment of your
end?”

“I can’t suggest anything,” replied Noel Vanstone, helplessly. “Would
you object to suggest for me?”

“You are making a bolder request than you think, Mr. Vanstone. I never
do things by halves. When I am acting with my customary candor, I am
frank (as you know already) to the utmost verge of imprudence. When
exceptional circumstances compel me to take an opposite course, there
isn’t a slyer fox alive than I am. If, at your express request, I take
off my honest English coat here and put on a Jesuit’s gown—if, purely
out of sympathy for your awkward position, I consent to keep your
secret for you from Mrs. Lecount—I must have no unseasonable scruples
to contend with on your part. If it is neck or nothing on my side, sir,
it must be neck or nothing on yours also.”

“Neck or nothing, by all means,” said Noel Vanstone, briskly—“on the
understanding that you go first. I have no scruples about keeping
Lecount in the dark. But she is devilish cunning, Mr. Bygrave. How is
it to be done?”

“You shall hear directly,” replied the captain. “Before I develop my
views, I should like to have your opinion on an abstract question of
morality. What do you think, my dear sir, of pious frauds in general?”

Noel Vanstone looked a little embarrassed by the question.

“Shall I put it more plainly?” continued Captain Wragge. “What do you
say to the universally-accepted maxim that ‘all stratagems are fair in
love and war’?—Yes or No?”

“Yes!” answered Noel Vanstone, with the utmost readiness.

“One more question and I have done,” said the captain. “Do you see any
particular objection to practicing a pious fraud on Mrs. Lecount?”

Noel Vanstone’s resolution began to falter a little.

“Is Lecount likely to find it out?” he asked cautiously.

“She can’t possibly discover it until you are married and out of her
reach.”

“You are sure of that?”

“Quite sure.”

“Play any trick you like on Lecount,” said Noel Vanstone, with an air
of unutterable relief. “I have had my suspicions lately that she is
trying to domineer over me; I am beginning to feel that I have borne
with Lecount long enough. I wish I was well rid of her.”

“You shall have your wish,” said Captain Wragge. “You shall be rid of
her in a week or ten days.”

Noel Vanstone rose eagerly and approached the captain’s chair.

“You don’t say so!” he exclaimed. “How do you mean to send her away?”

“I mean to send her on a journey,” replied Captain Wragge.

“Where?”

“From your house at Aldborough to her brother’s bedside at Zurich.”

Noel Vanstone started back at the answer, and returned suddenly to his
chair.

“How can you do that?” he inquired, in the greatest perplexity. “Her
brother (hang him!) is much better. She had another letter from Zurich
to say so, this morning.”

“Did you see the letter?”

“Yes. She always worries about her brother—she _would_ show it to me.”

“Who was it from? and what did it say?”

“It was from the doctor—he always writes to her. I don’t care two
straws about her brother, and I don’t remember much of the letter,
except that it was a short one. The fellow was much better; and if the
doctor didn’t write again, she might take it for granted that he was
getting well. That was the substance of it.”

“Did you notice where she put the letter when you gave it her back
again?”

“Yes. She put it in the drawer where she keeps her account-books.”

“Can you get at that drawer?”

“Of course I can. I have got a duplicate key—I always insist on a
duplicate key of the place where she keeps her account books. I never
allow the account-books to be locked up from my inspection: it’s a rule
of the house.”

“Be so good as to get that letter to-day, Mr. Vanstone, without your
housekeeper’s knowledge, and add to the favor by letting me have it
here privately for an hour or two.”

“What do you want it for?”

“I have some more questions to ask before I tell you. Have you any
intimate friend at Zurich whom you could trust to help you in playing a
trick on Mrs. Lecount?”

“What sort of help do you mean?” asked Noel Vanstone.

“Suppose,” said the captain, “you were to send a letter addressed to
Mrs. Lecount at Aldborough, inclosed in another letter addressed to one
of your friends abroad? And suppose you were to instruct that friend to
help a harmless practical joke by posting Mrs. Lecount’s letter at
Zurich? Do you know any one who could be trusted to do that?”

“I know two people who could be trusted!” cried Noel Vanstone. “Both
ladies—both spinsters—both bitter enemies of Lecount’s. But what is
your drift, Mr. Bygrave? Though I am not usually wanting in
penetration, I don’t altogether see your drift.”

“You shall see it directly, Mr. Vanstone.”

With those words he rose, withdrew to his desk in the corner of the
room, and wrote a few lines on a sheet of note-paper. After first
reading them carefully to himself, he beckoned to Noel Vanstone to come
and read them too.

“A few minutes since,” said the captain, pointing complacently to his
own composition with the feather end of his pen, “I had the honor of
suggesting a pious fraud on Mrs. Lecount. There it is!”

He resigned his chair at the writing-table to his visitor. Noel
Vanstone sat down, and read these lines:

“MY DEAR MADAM—Since I last wrote, I deeply regret to inform you that
your brother has suffered a relapse. The symptoms are so serious, that
it is my painful duty to summon you instantly to his bedside. I am
making every effort to resist the renewed progress of the malady, and I
have not yet lost all hope of success. But I cannot reconcile it to my
conscience to leave you in ignorance of a serious change in my patient
for the worse, which _may_ be attended by fatal results. With much
sympathy, I remain, etc. etc.”

Captain Wragge waited with some anxiety for the effect which this
