CHAPTER III.

Toward six o’clock the next morning, the light pouring in on her face
awoke Magdalen in the bedroom in Rosemary Lane.

She started from her deep, dreamless repose of the past night with that
painful sense of bewilderment, on first waking, which is familiar to
all sleepers in strange beds. “Norah!” she called out mechanically,
when she opened her eyes. The next instant her mind roused itself, and
her senses told her the truth. She looked round the miserable room with
a loathing recognition of it. The sordid contrast which the place
presented to all that she had been accustomed to see in her own
bed-chamber—the practical abandonment, implied in its scanty furniture,
of those elegant purities of personal habit to which she had been
accustomed from her childhood—shocked that sense of bodily self-respect
in Magdalen which is a refined woman’s second nature. Contemptible as
the influence seemed, when compared with her situation at that moment,
the bare sight of the jug and basin in a corner of the room decided her
first resolution when she woke. She determined, then and there, to
leave Rosemary Lane.

How was she to leave it? With Captain Wragge, or without him?

She dressed herself, with a dainty shrinking from everything in the
room which her hands or her clothes touched in the process, and then
opened the window. The autumn air felt keen and sweet; and the little
patch of sky that she could see was warmly bright already with the new
sunlight. Distant voices of bargemen on the river, and the chirping of
birds among the weeds which topped the old city wall, were the only
sounds that broke the morning silence. She sat down by the window; and
searched her mind for the thoughts which she had lost, when weariness
overcame her on the night before.

The first subject to which she returned was the vagabond subject of
Captain Wragge.

The “moral agriculturist” had failed to remove her personal distrust of
him, cunningly as he had tried to plead against it by openly confessing
the impostures that he had practiced on others. He had raised her
opinion of his abilities; he had amused her by his humor; he had
astonished her by his assurance; but he had left her original
conviction that he was a Rogue exactly where it was when he first met
with her. If the one design then in her mind had been the design of
going on the stage, she would, at all hazards, have rejected the more
than doubtful assistance of Captain Wragge on the spot.

But the perilous journey on which she had now adventured herself had
another end in view—an end, dark and distant—an end, with pitfalls
hidden on the way to it, far other than the shallow pitfalls on the way
to the stage. In the mysterious stillness of the morning, her mind
looked on to its second and its deeper design, and the despicable
figure of the swindler rose before her in a new view.

She tried to shut him out—to feel above him and beyond him again, as
she had felt up to this time.

After a little trifling with her dress, she took from her bosom the
white silk bag which her own hands had made on the farewell night at
Combe-Raven. It drew together at the mouth with delicate silken
strings. The first thing she took out, on opening it, was a lock of
Frank’s hair, tied with a morsel of silver thread; the next was a sheet
of paper containing the extracts which she had copied from her father’s
will and her father’s letter; the last was a closely-folded packet of
bank-notes, to the value of nearly two hundred pounds—the produce (as
Miss Garth had rightly conjectured) of the sale of her jewelry and her
dresses, in which the servant at the boarding-school had privately
assisted her. She put back the notes at once, without a second glance
at them, and then sat looking thoughtfully at the lock of hair as it
lay on her lap. “You are better than nothing,” she said, speaking to it
with a girl’s fanciful tenderness. “I can sit and look at you
sometimes, till I almost think I am looking at Frank. Oh, my darling!
my darling!” Her voice faltered softly, and she put the lock of hair,
with a languid gentleness, to her lips. It fell from her fingers into
her bosom. A lovely tinge of color rose on her cheeks, and spread
downward to her neck, as if it followed the falling hair. She closed
her eyes, and let her fair head droop softly. The world passed from
her; and, for one enchanted moment, Love opened the gates of Paradise
to the daughter of Eve.

The trivial noises in the neighboring street, gathering in number as
the morning advanced, forced her back to the hard realities of the
passing time. She raised her head with a heavy sigh, and opened her
eyes once more on the mean and miserable little room.

The extracts from the will and the letter—those last memorials of her
father, now so closely associated with the purpose which had possession
of her mind—still lay before her. The transient color faded from her
face, as she spread the little manuscript open on her lap. The extracts
from the will stood highest on the page; they were limited to those few
touching words in which the dead father begged his children’s
forgiveness for the stain on their birth, and implored them to remember
the untiring love and care by which he had striven to atone for it. The
extract from the letter to Mr. Pendril came next. She read the last
melancholy sentences aloud to herself: “For God’s sake come on the day
when you receive this—come and relieve me from the dreadful thought
that my two darling girls are at this moment unprovided for. If
anything happened to me, and if my desire to do their mother justice
ended (through my miserable ignorance of the law) in leaving Norah and
Magdalen disinherited, I should not rest in my grave!” Under these
lines again, and close at the bottom of the page, was written the
terrible commentary on that letter which had fallen from Mr. Pendril’s
lips: “Mr. Vanstone’s daughters are Nobody’s Children, and the law
leaves them helpless at their uncle’s mercy.”

Helpless when those words were spoken—helpless still, after all that
she had resolved, after all that she had sacrificed. The assertion of
her natural rights and her sister’s, sanctioned by the direct
expression of her father’s last wishes; the recall of Frank from China;
the justification of her desertion of Norah—all hung on her desperate
purpose of recovering the lost inheritance, at any risk, from the man
who had beggared and insulted his brother’s children. And that man was
still a shadow to her! So little did she know of him that she was even
ignorant at that moment of his place of abode.

She rose and paced the room with the noiseless, negligent grace of a
wild creature of the forest in its cage. “How can I reach him in the
dark?” she said to herself. “How can I find out—?” She stopped
suddenly. Before the question had shaped itself to an end in her
thoughts, Captain Wragge was back in her mind again.

A man well used to working in the dark; a man with endless resources of
audacity and cunning; a man who would hesitate at no mean employment
that could be offered to him, if it was employment that filled his
pockets—was this the instrument for which, in its present need, her
hand was waiting? Two of the necessities to be met, before she could
take a single step in advance, were plainly present to her—the
necessity of knowing more of her father’s brother than she knew now;
and the necessity of throwing him off his guard by concealing herself
personally during the process of inquiry. Resolutely self-dependent as
she was, the inevitable spy’s work at the outset must be work delegated
to another. In her position, was there any ready human creature within
reach but the vagabond downstairs? Not one. She thought of it
anxiously, she thought of it long. Not one! There the choice was,
steadily confronting her: the choice of taking the Rogue, or of turning
her back on the Purpose.

She paused in the middle of the room. “What can he do at his worst?”
she said to herself. “Cheat me. Well! if my money governs him for me,
what then? Let him have my money!” She returned mechanically to her
place by the window. A moment more decided her. A moment more, and she
took the first fatal step downward-she determined to face the risk, and
try Captain Wragge.

At nine o’clock the landlady knocked at Magdalen’s door, and informed
her (with the captain’s kind compliments) that breakfast was ready.

She found Mrs. Wragge alone, attired in a voluminous brown holland
wrapper, with a limp cape and a trimming of dingy pink ribbon. The
ex-waitress at Darch’s Dining-rooms was absorbed in the contemplation
of a large dish, containing a leathery-looking substance of a mottled
yellow color, profusely sprinkled with little black spots.

“There it is!” said Mrs. Wragge. “Omelette with herbs. The landlady
helped me. And that’s what we’ve made of it. Don’t you ask the captain
for any when he comes in—don’t, there’s a good soul. It isn’t nice. We
had some accidents with it. It’s been under the grate. It’s been
spilled on the stairs. It’s scalded the landlady’s youngest boy—he went
and sat on it. Bless you, it isn’t half as nice as it looks! Don’t you
ask for any. Perhaps he won’t notice if you say nothing about it. What
do you think of my wrapper? I should so like to have a white one. Have
you got a white one? How is it trimmed? Do tell me!”

The formidable entrance of the captain suspended the next question on
her lips. Fortunately for Mrs. Wragge, her husband was far too anxious
for the promised expression of Magdalen’s decision to pay his customary
attention to questions of cookery. When breakfast was over, he
dismissed Mrs. Wragge, and merely referred to the omelette by telling
her that she had his full permission to “give it to the dogs.”

“How does my little proposal look by daylight?” he asked, placing
chairs for Magdalen and himself. “Which is it to be: ‘Captain Wragge,
take charge of me?’ or, ‘Captain Wragge, good-morning?’”

“You shall hear directly,” replied Magdalen. “I have something to say
first. I told you, last night, that I had another object in view
besides the object of earning my living on the stage—”

“I beg your pardon,” interposed Captain Wragge. “Did you say, earning
your living?”

“Certainly. Both my sister and myself must depend on our own exertions
to gain our daily bread.”

“What!!!” cried the captain, starting to his feet. “The daughters of my
wealthy and lamented relative by marriage reduced to earn their own
living? Impossible—wildly, extravagantly impossible!” He sat down
again, and looked at Magdalen as if she had inflicted a personal injury
on him.

“You are not acquainted with the full extent of our misfortune,” she
said, quietly. “I will tell you what has happened before I go any
further.” She told him at once, in the plainest terms she could find,
and with as few details as possible.

Captain Wragge’s profound bewilderment left him conscious of but one
distinct result produced by the narrative on his own mind. The lawyer’s
offer of Fifty Pounds Reward for the missing young lady ascended
instantly to a place in his estimation which it had never occupied
until that moment.

“Do I understand,” he inquired, “that you are entirely deprived of
present resources?”

“I have sold my jewelry and my dresses,” said Magdalen, impatient of
his mean harping on the pecuniary string. “If my want of experience
keeps me back in a theater, I can afford to wait till the stage can
afford to pay me.”

Captain Wragge mentally appraised the rings, bracelets, and necklaces,
the silks, satins, and laces of the daughter of a gentleman of fortune,
at—say, a third of their real value. In a moment more, the Fifty Pounds
Reward suddenly sank again to the lowest depths in the deep estimation
of this judicious man.

“Just so,” he said, in his most business-like manner. “There is not the
least fear, my dear girl, of your being kept back in a theater, if you
possess present resources, and if you profit by my assistance.”

“I must accept more assistance than you have already offered—or none,”
said Magdalen. “I have more serious difficulties before me than the
difficulty of leaving York, and the difficulty of finding my way to the
stage.”

“You don’t say so! I am all attention; pray explain yourself!”

She considered her next words carefully before they passed her lips.

“There are certain inquiries,” she said, “which I am interested in
making. If I undertook them myself, I should excite the suspicion of
the person inquired after, and should learn little or nothing of what I
wish to know. If the inquiries could be made by a stranger, without my
being seen in the matter, a service would be rendered me of much
greater importance than the service you offered last night.”

Captain Wragge’s vagabond face became gravely and deeply attentive.

“May I ask,” he said, “what the nature of the inquiries is likely to
be?”

Magdalen hesitated. She had necessarily mentioned Michael Vanstone’s
name in informing the captain of the loss of her inheritance. She must
inevitably mention it to him again if she employed his services. He
would doubtless discover it for himself, by a plain process of
inference, before she said many words more, frame them as carefully as
she might. Under these circumstances, was there any intelligible reason
for shrinking from direct reference to Michael Vanstone? No
intelligible reason—and yet she shrank.

“For instance,” pursued Captain Wragge, “are they inquiries about a man
or a woman; inquiries about an enemy or a friend—?”

“An enemy,” she answered, quickly.

Her reply might still have kept the captain in the dark—but her eyes
enlightened him. “Michael Vanstone!” thought the wary Wragge. “She
looks dangerous; I’ll feel my way a little further.”

“With regard, now, to the person who is the object of these inquiries,”
he resumed. “Are you thoroughly clear in your own mind about what you
want to know?”

“Perfectly clear,” replied Magdalen. “I want to know where he lives, to
begin with.”

“Yes. And after that?”

“I want to know about his habits; about who the people are whom he
associates with; about what he does with his money—” She considered a
little. “And one thing more,” she said; “I want to know whether there
is any woman about his house—a relation, or a housekeeper—who has an
influence over him.”

“Harmless enough, so far,” said the captain. “What next?”

“Nothing. The rest is my secret.”

The clouds on Captain Wragge’s countenance began to clear away again.
He reverted, with his customary precision, to his customary choice of
alternatives. “These inquiries of hers,” he thought, “mean one of two
things—Mischief, or Money! If it’s Mischief, I’ll slip through her
fingers. If it’s Money, I’ll make myself useful, with a view to the
future.”

Magdalen’s vigilant eyes watched the progress of his reflections
suspiciously. “Captain Wragge,” she said, “if you want time to
consider, say so plainly.”

“I don’t want a moment,” replied the captain. “Place your departure
from York, your dramatic career, and your private inquiries under my
care. Here I am, unreservedly at your disposal. Say the word—do you
take me?”

Her heart beat fast; her lips turned dry—but she said the word.

“I do.”

There was a pause. Magdalen sat silent, struggling with the vague dread
of the future which had been roused in her mind by her own reply.
Captain Wragge, on his side, was apparently absorbed in the
consideration of a new set of alternatives. His hands descended into
his empty pockets, and prophetically tested their capacity as
receptacles for gold and silver. The brightness of the precious metals
was in his face, the smoothness of the precious metals was in his
voice, as he provided himself with a new supply of words, and resumed
the conversation.

“The next question,” he said, “is the question of time. Do these
confidential investigations of ours require immediate attention—or can
they wait?”

“For the present, they can wait,” replied Magdalen. “I wish to secure
my freedom from all interference on the part of my friends before the
inquiries are made.”

“Very good. The first step toward accomplishing that object is to beat
our retreat—excuse a professional metaphor from a military man—to beat
our retreat from York to-morrow. I see my way plainly so far; but I am
all abroad, as we used to say in the militia, about my marching orders
afterward. The next direction we take ought to be chosen with an eye to
advancing your dramatic views. I am all ready, when I know what your
views are. How came you to think of the theater at all? I see the
sacred fire burning in you; tell me, who lit it?”

Magdalen could only answer him in one way. She could only look back at
the days that were gone forever, and tell him the story of her first
step toward the stage at Evergreen Lodge. Captain Wragge listened with
his usual politeness; but he evidently derived no satisfactory
impression from what he heard. Audiences of friends were audiences whom
he privately declined to trust; and the opinion of the stage-manager
was the opinion of a man who spoke with his fee in his pocket and his
eye on a future engagement.

“Interesting, deeply interesting,” he said, when Magdalen had done.
“But not conclusive to a practical man. A specimen of your abilities is
necessary to enlighten me. I have been on the stage myself; the comedy
of the Rivals is familiar to me from beginning to end. A sample is all
I want, if you have not forgotten the words—a sample of ‘Lucy,’ and a
sample of ‘Julia.’”

“I have not forgotten the words,” said Magdalen, sorrowfully; “and I
have the little books with me in which my dialogue was written out. I
have never parted with them; they remind me of a time—” Her lip
trembled, and a pang of the heart-ache silenced her.

“Nervous,” remarked the captain, indulgently. “Not at all a bad sign.
The greatest actresses on the stage are nervous. Follow their example,
and get over it. Where are the parts? Oh, here they are! Very nicely
written, and remarkably clean. I’ll give you the cues—it will all be
over (as the dentists say) in no time. Take the back drawing-room for
the stage, and take me for the audience. Tingle goes the bell; up runs
the curtain; order in the gallery, silence in the pit—enter Lucy!”

She tried hard to control herself; she forced back the sorrow—the
innocent, natural, human sorrow for the absent and the dead—pleading
hard with her for the tears that she refused. Resolutely, with cold,
clinched hands, she tried to begin. As the first familiar words passed
her lips, Frank came back to her from the sea, and the face of her dead
father looked at her with the smile of happy old times. The voices of
her mother and her sister talked gently in the fragrant country
stillness, and the garden-walks at Combe-Raven opened once more on her
view. With a faint, wailing cry, she dropped into a chair; her head
fell forward on the table, and she burst passionately into tears.

Captain Wragge was on his feet in a moment. She shuddered as he came
near her, and waved him back vehemently with her hand. “Leave me!” she
said; “leave me a minute by myself!” The compliant Wragge retired to
the front room; looked out of the window; and whistled under his
breath. “The family spirit again!” he said. “Complicated by hysterics.”

After waiting a minute or two he returned to make inquiries.

“Is there anything I can offer you?” he asked. “Cold water? burned
feathers? smelling salts? medical assistance? Shall I summon Mrs.
Wragge? Shall we put it off till to-morrow?”

She started up, wild and flushed, with a desperate self-command in her
face, with an angry resolution in her manner.

“No!” she said. “I must harden myself—and I will! Sit down again and
see me act.”

“Bravo!” cried the captain. “Dash at it, my beauty—and it’s done!”

She dashed at it, with a mad defiance of herself—with a raised voice,
and a glow like fever in her cheeks. All the artless, girlish charm of
the performance in happier and better days was gone. The native
dramatic capacity that was in her came, hard and bold, to the surface,
stripped of every softening allurement which had once adorned it. She
would have saddened and disappointed a man with any delicacy of
feeling. She absolutely electrified Captain Wragge. He forgot his
politeness, he forgot his long words. The essential spirit of the man’s
whole vagabond life burst out of him irresistibly in his first
exclamation. “Who the devil would have thought it? She _can_ act, after
all!” The instant the words escaped his lips he recovered himself, and
glided off into his ordinary colloquial channels. Magdalen stopped him
in the middle of his first compliment. “No,” she said; “I have forced
the truth out of you for once. I want no more.”

“Pardon me,” replied the incorrigible Wragge. “You want a little
instruction; and I am the man to give it you.”

With that answer, he placed a chair for her, and proceeded to explain
himself.

She sat down in silence. A sullen indifference began to show itself in
her manner; her cheeks turned pale again; and her eyes looked wearily
vacant at the wall before her. Captain Wragge noticed these signs of
heart-sickness and discontent with herself, after the effort she had
made, and saw the importance of rousing her by speaking, for once,
plainly and directly to the point. She had set a new value on herself
in his mercenary eyes. She had suggested to him a speculation in her
youth, her beauty, and her marked ability for the stage, which had
never entered his mind until he saw her act. The old militia-man was
quick at his shifts. He and his plans had both turned right about
together when Magdalen sat down to hear what he had to say.

“Mr. Huxtable’s opinion is my opinion,” he began. “You are a born
actress. But you must be trained before you can do anything on the
stage. I am disengaged—I am competent—I have trained others—I can train
you. Don’t trust my word: trust my eye to my own interests. I’ll make
it my interest to take pains with you, and to be quick about it. You
shall pay me for my instructions from your profits on the stage. Half
your salary for the first year; a third of your salary for the second
year; and half the sum you clear by your first benefit in a London
theater. What do you say to that? Have I made it my interest to push
you, or have I not?”

So far as appearances went, and so far as the stage went, it was plain
that he had linked his interests and Magdalen’s together. She briefly
told him so, and waited to hear more.

“A month or six weeks’ study,” continued the captain, “will give me a
reasonable idea of what you can do best. All ability runs in grooves;
and your groove remains to be found. We can’t find it here—for we can’t
keep you a close prisoner for weeks together in Rosemary Lane. A quiet
country place, secure from all interference and interruption, is the
place we want for a month certain. Trust my knowledge of Yorkshire, and
consider the place found. I see no difficulties anywhere, except the
difficulty of beating our retreat to-morrow.”

“I thought your arrangements were made last night?” said Magdalen.

“Quite right,” rejoined the captain. “They were made last night; and
here they are. We can’t leave by railway, because the lawyer’s clerk is
sure to be on the lookout for you at the York terminus. Very good; we
take to the road instead, and leave in our own carriage. Where the
deuce do we get it? We get it from the landlady’s brother, who has a
horse and chaise which he lets out for hire. That chaise comes to the
end of Rosemary Lane at an early hour to-morrow morning. I take my wife
and my niece out to show them the beauties of the neighborhood. We have
a picnic hamper with us, which marks our purpose in the public eye. You
disfigure yourself in a shawl, bonnet, and veil of Mrs. Wragge’s; we
turn our backs on York; and away we drive on a pleasure trip for the
day—you and I on the front seat, Mrs. Wragge and the hamper behind.
Good again. Once on the highroad, what do we do? Drive to the first
station beyond York, northward, southward, or eastward, as may be
hereafter determined. No lawyer’s clerk is waiting for you there. You
and Mrs. Wragge get out—first opening the hamper at a convenient
opportunity. Instead of containing chickens and Champagne, it contains
a carpet-bag, with the things you want for the night. You take your
tickets for a place previously determined on, and I take the chaise
back to York. Arrived once more in this house, I collect the luggage
left behind, and send for the woman downstairs. ‘Ladies so charmed with
such and such a place (wrong place of course), that they have
determined to stop there. Pray accept the customary week’s rent, in
place of a week’s warning. Good day.’ Is the clerk looking for me at
the York terminus? Not he. I take my ticket under his very nose; I
follow you with the luggage along your line of railway—and where is the
trace left of your departure? Nowhere. The fairy has vanished; and the
legal authorities are left in the lurch.”

“Why do you talk of difficulties?” asked Magdalen. “The difficulties
seem to be provided for.”

“All but ONE,” said Captain Wragge, with an ominous emphasis on the
last word. “The Grand Difficulty of humanity from the cradle to the
grave—Money.” He slowly winked his green eye; sighed with deep feeling;
and buried his insolvent hands in his unproductive pockets.

“What is the money wanted for?” inquired Magdalen.

“To pay my bills,” replied the captain, with a touching simplicity.
“Pray understand! I never was—and never shall be—personally desirous of
paying a single farthing to any human creature on the habitable globe.
I am speaking in your interest, not in mine.”

“My interest?”

“Certainly. You can’t get safely away from York to-morrow without the
chaise. And I can’t get the chaise without money. The landlady’s
brother will lend it if he sees his sister’s bill receipted, and if he
gets his day’s hire beforehand—not otherwise. Allow me to put the
transaction in a business light. We have agreed that I am to be
remunerated for my course of dramatic instruction out of your future
earnings on the stage. Very good. I merely draw on my future prospects;
and you, on whom those prospects depend, are naturally my banker. For
mere argument’s sake, estimate my share in your first year’s salary at
the totally inadequate value of a hundred pounds. Halve that sum;
quarter that sum—”

“How much do you want?” said Magdalen, impatiently.

Captain Wragge was sorely tempted to take the Reward at the top of the
handbills as his basis of calculation. But he felt the vast future
importance of present moderation; and actually wanting some twelve or
thirteen pounds, he merely doubled the amount, and said,
“Five-and-twenty.”

Magdalen took the little bag from her bosom, and gave him the money,
with a contemptuous wonder at the number of words which he had wasted
on her for the purpose of cheating on so small a scale. In the old days
at Combe-Raven, five-and-twenty pounds flowed from a stroke of her
father’s pen into the hands of any one in the house who chose to ask
for it.

Captain Wragge’s eyes dwelt on the little bag as the eyes of lovers
dwell on their mistresses. “Happy bag!” he murmured, as she put it back
in her bosom. He rose; dived into a corner of the room; produced his
neat dispatch-box; and solemnly unlocked it on the table between
Magdalen and himself.

“The nature of the man, my dear girl—the nature of the man,” he said,
opening one of his plump little books bound in calf and vellum. “A
transaction has taken place between us. I must have it down in black
and white.” He opened the book at a blank page, and wrote at the top,
in a fine mercantile hand: “_Miss Vanstone, the Younger: In account
with Horatio Wragge, late of the Royal Militia. D_r.—_C_r. _Sept._
24_th_, 1846. _D_r_.: To estimated value of H. Wragge’s interest in
Miss V.‘s first year’s salary—say_ £ 200. _C_r. _By paid on account_, £
25.” Having completed the entry—and having also shown, by doubling his
original estimate on the Debtor side, that Magdalen’s easy compliance
with his demand on her had not been thrown away on him—the captain
pressed his blotting-paper over the wet ink, and put away the book with
the air of a man who had done a virtuous action, and who was above
boasting about it.

“Excuse me for leaving you abruptly,” he said. “Time is of importance;
I must make sure of the chaise. If Mrs. Wragge comes in, tell her
nothing—she is not sharp enough to be trusted. If she presumes to ask
questions, extinguish her immediately. You have only to be loud. Pray
take my authority into your own hands, and be as loud with Mrs. Wragge
as I am!” He snatched up his tall hat, bowed, smiled, and tripped out
of the room.

Sensible of little else but of the relief of being alone; feeling no
more distinct impression than the vague sense of some serious change
having taken place in herself and her position, Magdalen let the events
of the morning come and go like shadows on her mind, and waited wearily
for what the day might bring forth. After the lapse of some time, the
door opened softly. The giant figure of Mrs. Wragge stalked into the
room, and stopped opposite Magdalen in solemn astonishment.

“Where are your Things?” asked Mrs. Wragge, with a burst of
incontrollable anxiety. “I’ve been upstairs looking in your drawers.
Where are your night-gowns and night-caps? and your petticoats and
stockings? and your hair-pins and bear’s grease, and all the rest of
it?”

“My luggage is left at the railway station,” said Magdalen.

Mrs. Wragge’s moon-face brightened dimly. The ineradicable female
instinct of Curiosity tried to sparkle in her faded blue eyes—flickered
piteously—and died out.

“How much luggage?” she asked, confidentially. “The captain’s gone out.
Let’s go and get it!”

“Mrs. Wragge!” cried a terrible voice at the door.

For the first time in Magdalen’s experience, Mrs. Wragge was deaf to
the customary stimulant. She actually ventured on a feeble remonstrance
in the presence of her husband.

“Oh, do let her have her Things!” pleaded Mrs. Wragge. “Oh, poor soul,
do let her have her Things!”

The captain’s inexorable forefinger pointed to a corner of the
room—dropped slowly as his wife retired before it—and suddenly stopped
at the region of her shoes.

“Do I hear a clapping on the floor!” exclaimed Captain Wragge, with an
expression of horror. “Yes; I do. Down at heel again! The left shoe
this time. Pull it up, Mrs. Wragge! pull it up!—The chaise will be here
to-morrow morning at nine o’clock,” he continued, addressing Magdalen.
“We can’t possibly venture on claiming your box. There is note-paper.
Write down a list of the necessaries you want. I will take it myself to
the shop, pay the bill for you, and bring back the parcel. We must
sacrifice the box—we must, indeed.”

While her husband was addressing Magdalen, Mrs. Wragge had stolen out
again from her corner, and had ventured near enough to the captain to
hear the words “shop” and “parcel.” She clapped her great hands
together in ungovernable excitement, and lost all control over herself
immediately.

“Oh, if it’s shopping, let me do it!” cried Mrs. Wragge. “She’s going
out to buy her Things! Oh, let me go with her—please let me go with
her!”

“Sit down!” shouted the captain. “Straight! more to the right—more
still. Stop where you are!”

Mrs. Wragge crossed her helpless hands on her lap, and melted meekly
into tears.

“I do so like shopping,” pleaded the poor creature; “and I get so
little of it now!”

Magdalen completed her list; and Captain Wragge at once left the room
with it. “Don’t let my wife bore you,” he said, pleasantly, as he went
out. “Cut her short, poor soul—cut her short!”

“Don’t cry,” said Magdalen, trying to comfort Mrs. Wragge by patting
her on the shoulder. “When the parcel comes back you shall open it.”

“Thank you, my dear,” said Mrs. Wragge, meekly, drying her eyes; “thank
you kindly. Don’t notice my handkerchief, please. It’s such a very
little one! I had a nice lot of them once, with lace borders. They’re
all gone now. Never mind! It will comfort me to unpack your Things.
You’re very good to me. I like you. I say—you won’t be angry, will you?
Give us a kiss.”

Magdalen stooped over her with the frank grace and gentleness of past
days, and touched her faded cheek. “Let me do something harmless!” she
thought, with a pang at her heart—“oh let me do something innocent and
kind for the sake of old times!”

She felt her eyes moistening, and silently turned away.

That night no rest came to her. That night the roused forces of Good
and Evil fought their terrible fight for her soul—and left the strife
between them still in suspense when morning came. As the clock of York
Minster struck nine, she followed Mrs. Wragge to the chaise, and took
her seat by the captain’s side. In a quarter of an hour more York was
in the distance, and the highroad lay bright and open before them in
the morning sunlight.



BETWEEN THE SCENES.
CHRONICLE OF EVENTS: PRESERVED IN CAPTAIN WRAGGE’S DESPATCH BOX.

I.
Chronicle for October, 1846.

I have retired into the bosom of my family. We are residing in the
secluded village of Ruswarp, on the banks of the Esk, about two miles
inland from Whitby. Our lodgings are comfortable, and we possess the
additional blessing of a tidy landlady. Mrs. Wragge and Miss Vanstone
preceded me here, in accordance with the plan I laid down for effecting
our retreat from York. On the next day I followed them alone, with the
luggage. On leaving the terminus, I had the satisfaction of seeing the
lawyer’s clerk in close confabulation with the detective officer whose
advent I had prophesied. I left him in peaceable possession of the city
of York, and the whole surrounding neighborhood. He has returned the
compliment, and has left us in peaceable possession of the valley of
the Esk, thirty miles away from him.

Remarkable results have followed my first efforts at the cultivation of
Miss Vanstone’s dramatic abilities.

I have discovered that she possesses extraordinary talent as a mimic.
She has the flexible face, the manageable voice, and the dramatic knack
which fit a woman for character-parts and disguises on the stage. All
she now wants is teaching and practice, to make her sure of her own
resources. The experience of her, thus gained, has revived an idea in
my mind which originally occurred to me at one of the “At Homes” of the
late inimitable Charles Mathews, comedian. I was in the Wine Trade at
the time, I remember. We imitated the Vintage-processes of Nature in a
back-kitchen at Brompton, and produced a dinner-sherry, pale and
curious, tonic in character, round in the mouth, a favorite with the
Court of Spain, at nineteen-and-sixpence a dozen, bottles
included—_Vide_ Prospectus of the period. The profits of myself and
partners were small; we were in advance of the tastes of the age, and
in debt to the bottle merchant. Being at my wits’ end for want of
money, and seeing what audiences Mathews drew, the idea occurred to me
of starting an imitation of the great Imitator himself, in the shape of
an “At Home,” given by a woman. The one trifling obstacle in the way
was the difficulty of finding the woman. From that time to this, I have
hitherto failed to overcome it. I have conquered it at last; I have
found the woman now. Miss Vanstone possesses youth and beauty as well
as talent. Train her in the art of dramatic disguise; provide her with
appropriate dresses for different characters; develop her
accomplishments in singing and playing; give her plenty of smart talk
addressed to the audience; advertise her as a Young Lady at Home;
astonish the public by a dramatic entertainment which depends from
first to last on that young lady’s own sole exertions; commit the
entire management of the thing to my care—and what follows as a
necessary con sequence? Fame for my fair relative, and a fortune for
myself.

I put these considerations, as frankly as usual, to Miss Vanstone;
offering to write the Entertainment, to manage all the business, and to
share the profits. I did not forget to strengthen my case by informing
her of the jealousies she would encounter, and the obstacles she would
meet, if she went on the stage. And I wound up by a neat reference to
the private inquiries which she is interested in making, and to the
personal independence which she is desirous of securing before she acts
on her information. “If you go on the stage,” I said, “your services
will be bought by a manager, and he may insist on his claims just at
the time when you want to get free from him. If, on the contrary, you
adopt my views, you will be your own mistress and your own manager, and
you can settle your course just as you like.” This last consideration
appeared to strike her. She took a day to consider it; and, when the
day was over, gave her consent.

I had the whole transaction down in black and white immediately. Our
arrangement is eminently satisfactory, except in one particular. She
shows a morbid distrust of writing her name at the bottom of any
document which I present to her, and roundly declares she will sign
nothing. As long as it is her interest to provide herself with
pecuniary resources for the future, she verbally engages to go on. When
it ceases to be her interest, she plainly threatens to leave off at a
week’s notice. A difficult girl to deal with; she has found out her own
value to me already. One comfort is, I have the cooking of the
accounts; and my fair relative shall not fill her pockets too suddenly
if I can help it.

My exertions in training Miss Vanstone for the coming experiment have
been varied by the writing of two anonymous letters in that young
lady’s interests. Finding her too fidgety about arranging matters with
her friends to pay proper attention to my instructions, I wrote
anonymously to the lawyer who is conducting the inquiry after her,
recommending him, in a friendly way, to give it up. The letter was
inclosed to a friend of mine in London, with instructions to post it at
Charing Cross. A week later I sent a second letter, through the same
channel, requesting the lawyer to inform me, in writing, whether he and
his clients had or had not decided on taking my advice. I directed him,
with jocose reference to the collision of interests between us, to
address his letter: “Tit for Tat, Post-office, West Strand.”

In a few days the answer arrived—privately forwarded, of course, to
Post-office, Whitby, by arrangement with my friend in London.

The lawyer’s reply was short and surly: “SIR—If my advice had been
followed, you and your anonymous letter would both be treated with the
contempt which they deserve. But the wishes of Miss Magdalen Vanstone’s
eldest sister have claims on my consideration which I cannot dispute;
and at her entreaty I inform you that all further proceedings on my
part are withdrawn—on the express understanding that this concession is
to open facilities for written communication, at least, between the two
sisters. A letter from the elder Miss Vanstone is inclosed in this. If
I don’t hear in a week’s time that it has been received, I shall place
the matter once more in the hands of the police.—WILLIAM PENDRIL.” A
sour man, this William Pendril. I can only say of him what an eminent
nobleman once said of his sulky servant—“I wouldn’t have such a temper
as that fellow has got for any earthly consideration that could be
offered me!”

As a matter of course, I looked into the letter which the lawyer
inclosed, before delivering it. Miss Vanstone, the elder, described
herself as distracted at not hearing from her sister; as suited with a
governess’s situation in a private family; as going into the situation
in a week’s time; and as longing for a letter to comfort her, before
she faced the trial of undertaking her new duties. After closing the
envelope again, I accompanied the delivery of the letter to Miss
Vanstone, the younger, by a word of caution. “Are you more sure of your
own courage now,” I said, “than you were when I met you?” She was ready
with her answer. “Captain Wragge, when you met me on the Walls of York
I had not gone too far to go back. I have gone too far now.”

If she really feels this—and I think she does—her corresponding with
her sister can do no harm. She wrote at great length the same day;
cried profusely over her own epistolary composition; and was remarkably
ill-tempered and snappish toward me, when we met in the evening. She
wants experience, poor girl—she sadly wants experience of the world.
How consoling to know that I am just the man to give it her!

II.
Chronicle for November.

We are established at Derby. The Entertainment is written; and the
rehearsals are in steady progress. All difficulties are provided for,
but the one eternal difficulty of money. Miss Vanstone’s resources
stretch easily enough to the limits of our personal wants; including
piano-forte hire for practice, and the purchase and making of the
necessary dresses. But the expenses of starting the Entertainment are
beyond the reach of any means we possess. A theatrical friend of mine
here, whom I had hoped to interest in our undertaking, proves,
unhappily, to be at a crisis in his career. The field of human
sympathy, out of which I might have raised the needful pecuniary crop,
is closed to me from want of time to cultivate it. I see no other
resource left—if we are to be ready by Christmas—than to try one of the
local music-sellers in this town, who is said to be a speculating man.
A private rehearsal at these lodgings, and a bargain which will fill
the pockets of a grasping stranger—such are the sacrifices which dire
necessity imposes on me at starting. Well! there is only one
consolation: I’ll cheat the music-seller.

III.
Chronicle for December. First Fortnight.

The music-seller extorts my unwilling respect. He is one of the very
few human beings I have met with in the course of my life who is not to
be cheated. He has taken a masterly advantage of our helplessness; and
has imposed terms on us, for performances at Derby and Nottingham, with
such a business-like disregard of all interests but his own that—fond
as I am of putting things down in black and white—I really cannot
prevail upon myself to record the bargain. It is needless to say, I
have yielded with my best grace; sharing with my fair relative the
wretched pecuniary prospects offered to us. Our turn will come. In the
meantime, I cordially regret not having known the local music-seller in
early life.

Personally speaking, I have no cause to complain of Miss Vanstone. We
have arranged that she shall regularly forward her address (at the
post-office) to her friends, as we move about from place to place.
Besides communicating in this way with her sister, she also reports
herself to a certain Mr. Clare, residing in Somersetshire, who is to
forward all letters exchanged between herself and his son. Careful
inquiry has informed me that this latter individual is now in China.
Having suspected from the first that there was a gentleman in the
background, it is highly satisfactory to know that he recedes into the
remote perspective of Asia. Long may he remain there!

The trifling responsibility of finding a name for our talented Magdalen
to perform under has been cast on my shoulders. She feels no interest
whatever in this part of the subject. “Give me any name you like,” she
said; “I have as much right to one as to another. Make it yourself.” I
have readily consented to gratify her wishes. The resources of my
commercial library include a list of useful names to assume; and we can
choose one at five minutes’ notice, when the admirable man of business
who now oppresses us is ready to issue his advertisements. On this
point my mind is easy enough: all my anxieties center in the fair
performer. I have not the least doubt she will do wonders if she is
only left to herself on the first night. But if the day’s post is
mischievous enough to upset her by a letter from her sister, I tremble
for the consequences.

IV.
Chronicle for December. Second Fortnight.

My gifted relative has made her first appearance in public, and has
laid the foundation of our future fortunes.

On the first night the attendance was larger than I had ventured to
hope. The novelty of an evening’s entertainment, conducted from
beginning to end by the unaided exertions of a young lady (see
advertisement), roused the public curiosity, and the seats were
moderately well filled. As good luck would have it, no letter addressed
to Miss Vanstone came that day. She was in full possession of herself
until she got the first dress on and heard the bell ring for the music.
At that critical moment she suddenly broke down. I found her alone in
the waiting-room, sobbing, and talking like a child. “Oh, poor papa!
poor papa! Oh, my God, if he saw me now!” My experience in such matters
at once informed me that it was a case of sal-volatile, accompanied by
sound advice. We strung her up in no time to concert pitch; set her
eyes in a blaze; and made her out-blush her own rouge. The curtain rose
when we had got her at a red heat. She dashed at it exactly as she
dashed at it in the back drawing-room at Rosemary Lane. Her personal
appearance settled the question of her reception before she opened her
lips. She rushed full gallop through her changes of character, her
songs, and her dialogue; making mistakes by the dozen, and never
stopping to set them right; carrying the people along with her in a
perfect whirlwind, and never waiting for the applause. The whole thing
was over twenty minutes sooner than the time we had calculated on. She
carried it through to the end, and fainted on the waiting-room sofa a
minute after the curtain was down. The music-seller having taken leave
of his senses from sheer astonishment, and I having no evening costume
to appear in, we sent the doctor to make the necessary apology to the
public, who were calling for her till the place rang again. I prompted
our medical orator with a neat speech from behind the curtain; and I
never heard such applause, from such a comparatively small audience,
before in my life. I felt the tribute—I felt it deeply. Fourteen years
ago I scraped together the wretched means of existence in this very
town by reading the newspaper (with explanatory comments) to the
company at a public-house. And now here I am at the top of the tree.

It is needless to say that my first proceeding was to bowl out the
music-seller on the spot. He called the next morning, no doubt with a
liberal proposal for extending the engagement beyond Derby and
Nottingham. My niece was described as not well enough to see him; and,
when he asked for me, he was told I was not up. I happened to be at
that moment engaged in putting the case pathetically to our gifted
Magdalen. Her answer was in the highest degree satisfactory. She would
permanently engage herself to nobody—least of all to a man who had
taken sordid advantage of her position and mine. She would be her own
mistress, and share the profits with me, while she wanted money, and
while it suited her to go on. So far so good. But the reason she added
next, for her flattering preference of myself, was less to my taste.
“The music-seller is not the man whom I employ to make my inquiries,”
she said. “You are the man.” I don’t like her steadily remembering
those inquiries, in the first bewilderment of her success. It looks ill
for the future; it looks infernally ill for the future.

V.
Chronicle for January, 1847.

She has shown the cloven foot already. I begin to be a little afraid of
her.

On the conclusion of the Nottingham engagement (the results of which
more than equaled the results at Derby), I proposed taking the
entertainment next—now we had got it into our own hands—to Newark. Miss
Vanstone raised no objection until we came to the question of time,
when she amazed me by stipulating for a week’s delay before we appeared
in public again.

“For what possible purpose?” I asked.

“For the purpose of making the inquiries which I mentioned to you at
York,” she answered.

I instantly enlarged on the danger of delay, putting all the
considerations before her in every imaginable form. She remained
perfectly immovable. I tried to shake her on the question of expenses.
She answered by handing me over her share of the proceeds at Derby and
Nottingham—and there were my expenses paid, at the rate of nearly two
guineas a day. I wonder who first picked out a mule as the type of
obstinacy? How little knowledge that man must have had of women!

There was no help for it. I took down my instructions in black and
white, as usual. My first exertions were to be directed to the
discovery of Mr. Michael Vanstone’s address: I was also expected to
find out how long he was likely to live there, and whether he had sold
Combe-Raven or not. My next inquiries were to inform me of his ordinary
habits of life; of what he did with his money; of who his intimate
friends were; and of the sort of terms on which his son, Mr. Noel
Vanstone, was now living with him. Lastly, the investigations were to
end in discovering whether there was any female relative, or any woman
exercising domestic authority in the house, who was known to have an
influence over either father or son.

If my long practice in cultivating the field of human sympathy had not
accustomed me to private investigations into the affairs of other
people, I might have found some of these queries rather difficult to
deal with in the course of a week. As it was, I gave myself all the
benefit of my own experience, and brought the answers back to
Nottingham in a day less than the given time. Here they are, in regular
order, for convenience of future reference:

(1.) Mr. Michael Vanstone is now residing at German Place, Brighton,
and likely to remain there, as he finds the air suits him. He reached
London from Switzerland in September last; and sold the Combe-Raven
property immediately on his arrival.

(2.) His ordinary habits of life are secret and retired; he seldom
visits, or receives company. Part of his money is supposed to be in the
Funds, and part laid out in railway investments, which have survived
the panic of eighteen hundred and forty-six, and are rapidly rising in
value. He is said to be a bold speculator. Since his arrival in England
he has invested, with great judgment, in house property. He has some
houses in remote parts of London, and some houses in certain
watering-places on the east coast, which are shown to be advancing in
public repute. In all these cases he is reported to have made
remarkably good bargains.

(3.) It is not easy to discover who his intimate friends are. Two names
only have been ascertained. The first is Admiral Bartram; supposed to
have been under friendly obligations, in past years, to Mr. Michael
Vanstone. The second is Mr. George Bartram, nephew of the Admiral, and
now staying on a short visit in the house at German Place. Mr. George
Bartram is the son of the late Mr. Andrew Vanstone’s sister, also
deceased. He is therefore a cousin of Mr. Noel Vanstone’s. This
last—viz., Mr. Noel Vanstone—is in delicate health, and is living on
excellent terms with his father in German Place.

(4.) There is no female relative in Mr. Michael Vanstone’s family
circle. But there is a housekeeper who has lived in his service ever
since his wife’s death, and who has acquired a strong influence over
both father and son. She is a native of Switzerland, elderly, and a
widow. Her name is Mrs. Lecount.

On placing these particulars in Miss Vanstone’s hands, she made no
remark, except to thank me. I endeavored to invite her confidence. No
results; nothing but a renewal of civility, and a sudden shifting to
the subject of the Entertainment. Very good. If she won’t give me the
information I want, the conclusion is obvious—I must help myself.

Business considerations claim the remainder of this page. Let me return
to business.

    ———————————————————————————
    Financial Statement.   |    Third Week in January.
    ———————————————————————————
    Place Visited.         |    Performances.
    Newark.                |      Two.
    ———————————————————————————
    Net Receipts.          |      Net Receipts.
    In black and white.    |      Actually Realized.
    £ 25                   |     £ 32 10s.
    ————————————————————————————
    Apparent Division      |   Actual Division
    of Profits.            |   of Profits.
     Miss V.......£ 12 10  |   Miss V.......£ 12 10
     Self.........£ 12 10  |   Self.........£ 20 00
    ———————————————————————————
               Private Surplus on the Week,
                         Or say,
               Self-presented Testimonial.
                        £ 7 10s.
    ———————————————————————————
    Audited,               |     Passed correct,
        H. WRAGGE.         |        H. WRAGGE
    ———————————————————————————

The next stronghold of British sympathy which we take by storm is
Sheffield. We open the first week in February.

VI.
Chronicle for February.

Practice has now given my fair relative the confidence which I
predicted would come with time. Her knack of disguising her own
identity in the impersonation of different characters so completely
staggers her audiences that the same people come twice over to find out
how she does it. It is the amiable defect of the English public never
to know when they have had enough of a good thing. They actually try to
encore one of her characters—an old north-country lady; modeled on that
honored preceptress in the late Mr. Vanstone’s family to whom I
presented myself at Combe-Raven. This particular performance fairly
amazes the people. I don’t wonder at it. Such an extraordinary
assumption of age by a girl of nineteen has never been seen in public
before, in the whole course of my theatrical experience.

I find myself writing in a lower tone than usual; I miss my own dash of
humor. The fact is, I am depressed about the future. In the very height
of our prosperity my perverse pupil sticks to her trumpery family
quarrel. I feel myself at the mercy of the first whim in the Vanstone
direction which may come into her head—I, the architect of her
fortunes. Too bad; upon my soul, too bad.

She has acted already on the inquiries which she forced me to make for
her. She has written two letters to Mr. Michael Vanstone.

To the first letter no answer came. To the second a reply was received.
Her infernal cleverness put an obstacle I had not expected in the way
of my intercepting it. Later in the day, after she had herself opened
and read the answer, I laid another trap for her. It just succeeded,
and no more. I had half a minute to look into the envelope in her
absence. It contained nothing but her own letter returned. She is not
the girl to put up quietly with such an insult as this. Mischief will
come of it—Mischief to Michael Vanstone—which is of no earthly
consequence: mischief to Me—which is a truly serious matter.

VII.
Chronicle for March.

After performing at Sheffield and Manchester, we have moved to
Liverpool, Preston, and Lancaster. Another change in this weathercock
of a girl. She has written no more letters to Michael Vanstone; and she
has become as anxious to make money as I am myself. We are realizing
large profits, and we are worked to death. I don’t like this change in
her: she has a purpose to answer, or she would not show such
extraordinary eagerness to fill her purse. Nothing I can do—no cooking
of accounts; no self-presented testimonials—can keep that purse empty.
The success of the Entertainment, and her own sharpness in looking
after her interests, literally force me into a course of comparative
honesty. She puts into her pocket more than a third of the profits, in
defiance of my most arduous exertions to prevent her. And this at my
age! this after my long and successful career as a moral agriculturist!
Marks of admiration are very little things; but they express my
feelings, and I put them in freely.

VIII.
Chronicle for April and May.

We have visited seven more large towns, and are now at Birmingham.
Consulting my books, I find that Miss Vanstone has realized by the
Entertainment, up to this time, the enormous sum of nearly four hundred
pounds. It is quite possible that my own profits may reach one or two
miserable hundred more. But I was the architect of her fortunes—the
publisher, so to speak, of her book—and, if anything, I am underpaid.

I made the above discovery on the twenty-ninth of the month—anniversary
of the Restoration of my royal predecessor in the field of human
sympathies, Charles the Second. I had barely finished locking up my
dispatch-box, when the ungrateful girl, whose reputation I have made,
came into the room and told me in so many words that the business
connection between us was for the present at an end.

I attempt no description of my own sensations: I merely record facts.
She informed me, with an appearance of perfect composure, that she
needed rest, and that she had “new objects in view.” She might possibly
want me to assist those objects; and she might possibly return to the
Entertainment. In either case it would be enough if we exchanged
addresses, at which we could write to each other in case of need.
Having no desire to leave me too abruptly, she would remain the next
day (which was Sunday); and would take her departure on Monday morning.
Such was her explanation, in so many words.

Remonstrance, as I knew by experience, would be thrown away. Authority
I had none to exert. My one sensible course to take in this emergency
was to find out which way my own interests pointed, and to go that way
without a moment’s unnecessary hesitation.

A very little reflection has since convinced me that she has a
deep-laid scheme against Michael Vanstone in view. She is young,
handsome, clever, and unscrupulous; she has made money to live on, and
has time at her disposal to find out the weak side of an old man; and
she is going to attack Mr. Michael Vanstone unawares with the
legitimate weapons of her sex. Is she likely to want me for such a
purpose as this? Doubtful. Is she merely anxious to get rid of me on
easy terms? Probable. Am I the sort of man to be treated in this way by
my own pupil? Decidedly not: I am the man to see my way through a neat
succession of alternatives; and here they are:

First alternative: To announce my compliance with her proposal; to
exchange addresses with her; and then to keep my eye privately on all
her future movements. Second alternative: to express fond anxiety in a
paternal capacity; and to threaten giving the alarm to her sister and
the lawyer, if she persists in her design. Third alternative: to turn
the information I already possess to the best account, by making it a
marketable commodity between Mr. Michael Vanstone and myself. At
present I incline toward the last of these three courses. But my
decision is far too important to be hurried. To-day is only the
twenty-ninth. I will suspend my Chronicle of Events until Monday.

May 31st.—My alternatives and her plans are both overthrown together.

The newspaper came in, as usual, after breakfast. I looked it over, and
discovered this memorable entry among the obituary announcements of the
day:

“On the 29th inst., at Brighton, Michael Vanstone, Esq., formerly of
Zurich, aged 77.”

Miss Vanstone was present in the room when I read those two startling
lines. Her bonnet was on; her boxes were packed; she was waiting
impatiently until it was time to go to the train. I handed the paper to
her, without a word on my side. Without a word on hers, she looked
where I pointed, and read the news of Michael Vanstone’s death.

The paper dropped out of her hand, and she suddenly pulled down her
veil. I caught one glance at her face before she hid it from me. The
effect on my mind was startling in the extreme. To put it with my
customary dash of humor—her face informed me that the most sensible
action which Michael Vanstone, Esq., formerly of Zurich, had ever
achieved in his life was the action he performed at Brighton on the
29th instant.

Finding the dead silence in the room singularly unpleasant under
existing circumstances, I thought I would make a remark. My regard for
my own interests supplied me with a subject. I mentioned the
Entertainment.

“After what has happened,” I said, “I presume we go on with our
performances as usual?”

“No,” she answered, behind the veil. “We go on with my inquiries.”

“Inquiries after a dead man?”

“Inquiries after the dead man’s son.”

“Mr. Noel Vanstone?”

“Yes; Mr. Noel Vanstone.”

Not having a veil to put down over my own face, I stooped and picked up
the newspaper. Her devilish determination quite upset me for the
moment. I actually had to steady myself before I could speak to her
again.

“Are the new inquiries as harmless as the old ones?” I asked.

“Quite as harmless.”

“What am I expected to find out?”

“I wish to know whether Mr. Noel Vanstone remains at Brighton after the
funeral.”

“And if not?”

“If not, I shall want to know his new address wherever it may be.”

“Yes. And what next?”

“I wish you to find out next if all the father’s money goes to the
son.”

I began to see her drift. The word money relieved me; I felt quite on
my own ground again.

“Anything more?” I asked.

“Only one thing more,” she answered. “Make sure, if you please, whether
Mrs. Lecount, the housekeeper, remains or not in Mr. Noel Vanstone’s
service.”

Her voice altered a little as she mentioned Mrs. Lecount’s name; she is
evidently sharp enough to distrust the housekeeper already.

“My expenses are to be paid as usual?” I said.

“As usual.”

“When am I expected to leave for Brighton?”

“As soon as you can.”

She rose, and left the room. After a momentary doubt, I decided on
executing the new commission. The more private inquiries I conduct for
my fair relative the harder she will find it to get rid of hers truly,
Horatio Wragge.

There is nothing to prevent my starting for Brighton to-morrow. So
to-morrow I go. If Mr. Noel Vanstone succeeds to his father’s property,
he is the only human being possessed of pecuniary blessings who fails
to inspire me with a feeling of unmitigated envy.

IX.
Chronicle for June.

9th.—I returned yesterday with my information. Here it is, privately
noted down for convenience of future reference:

Mr. Noel Vanstone has left Brighton, and has removed, for the purpose
of transacting business in London, to one of his late father’s empty
houses in Vauxhall Walk, Lambeth. This singularly mean selection of a
place of residence on the part of a gentleman of fortune looks as if
Mr. N. V. and his money were not easily parted.

Mr. Noel Vanstone has stepped into his father’s shoes under the
following circumstances: Mr. Michael Vanstone appears to have died,
curiously enough, as Mr. Andrew Vanstone died—intestate. With this
difference, however, in the two cases, that the younger brother left an
informal will, and the elder brother left no will at all. The hardest
men have their weaknesses; and Mr. Michael Vanstone’s weakness seems to
have been an insurmountable horror of contemplating the event of his
own death. His son, his housekeeper, and his lawyer, had all three
tried over and over again to get him to make a will; and had never
shaken his obstinate resolution to put off performing the only business
duty he was ever known to neglect. Two doctors attended him in his last
illness; warned him that he was too old a man to hope to get over it;
and warned him in vain. He announced his own positive determination not
to die. His last words in this world (as I succeeded in discovering
from the nurse who assisted Mrs. Lecount) were: “I’m getting better
every minute; send for the fly directly and take me out for a drive.”
The same night Death proved to be the more obstinate of the two; and
left his son (and only child) to take the property in due course of
law. Nobody doubts that the result would have been the same if a will
had been made. The father and son had every confidence in each other,
and were known to have always lived together on the most friendly
terms.

Mrs. Lecount remains with Mr. Noel Vanstone, in the same housekeeping
capacity which she filled with his father, and has accompanied him to
the new residence in Vauxhall Walk. She is acknowledged on all hands to
have been a sufferer by the turn events have taken. If Mr. Michael
Vanstone had made his will, there is no doubt she would have received a
handsome legacy. She is now left dependent on Mr. Noel Vanstone’s sense
of gratitude; and she is not at all likely, I should imagine, to let
that sense fall asleep for want of a little timely jogging. Whether my
fair relative’s future intentions in this quarter point toward Mischief
or Money, is more than I can yet say. In either case, I venture to
predict that she will find an awkward obstacle in Mrs. Lecount.

So much for my information to the present date. The manner in which it
was received by Miss Vanstone showed the most ungrateful distrust of
me. She confided nothing to my private ear but the expression of her
best thanks. A sharp girl—a devilish sharp girl. But there is such a
thing as bowling a man out once too often; especially when the name of
that man happens to be Wragge.

Not a word more about the Entertainment; not a word more about moving
from our present quarters. Very good. My right hand lays my left hand a
wager. Ten to one, on her opening communications with the son as she
opened them with the father. Ten to one, on her writing to Noel
Vanstone before the month is out.

21st.—She has written by to-day’s post. A long letter, apparently—for
she put two stamps on the envelope. (Private memorandum, addressed to
myself. Wait for the answer.)

22d, 23d, 24th.—(Private memorandum continued. Wait for the answer.)

25th.—The answer has come. As an ex-military man, I have naturally
employed stratagem to get at it. The success which rewards all genuine
perseverance has rewarded me—and I have got at it accordingly.

The letter is written, not by Mr. Noel Vanstone, but by Mrs. Lecount.
She takes the highest moral ground, in a tone of spiteful politeness.
Mr. Noel Vanstone’s delicate health and recent bereavement prevent him
from writing himself. Any more letters from Miss Vanstone will be
returned unopened. Any personal application will produce an immediate
appeal to the protection of the law. Mr. Noel Vanstone, having been
expressly cautioned against Miss Magdalen Vanstone by his late lamented
father, has not yet forgotten his father’s advice. Considers it a
reflection cast on the memory of the best of men, to suppose that his
course of action toward the Misses Vanstone can be other than the
course of action which his father pursued. This is what he has himself
instructed Mrs. Lecount to say. She has endeavored to express herself
in the most conciliatory language she could select; she had tried to
avoid giving unnecessary pain, by addressing Miss Vanstone (as a matter
of courtesy) by the family name; and she trusts these concessions,
which speak for themselves, will not be thrown away.—Such is the
substance of the letter, and so it ends.

I draw two conclusions from this little document. First—that it will
lead to serious results. Secondly—that Mrs. Lecount, with all her
politeness, is a dangerous woman to deal with. I wish I saw my way safe
before me. I don’t see it yet.

29th.—Miss Vanstone has abandoned my protection; and the whole
lucrative future of the dramatic entertainment has abandoned me with
her. I am swindled—I, the last man under heaven who could possibly have
expected to write in those disgraceful terms of myself—I AM SWINDLED!

Let me chronicle the events. They exhibit me, for the time being, in a
sadly helpless point of view. But the nature of the man prevails: I
must have the events down in black and white.

The announcement of her approaching departure was intimated to me
yesterday. After another civil speech about the information I had
procured at Brighton, she hinted that there was a necessity for pushing
our inquiries a little further. I immediately offered to undertake
them, as before. “No,” she said; “they are not in your way this time.
They are inquiries relating to a woman; and I mean to make them
myself!” Feeling privately convinced that this new resolution pointed
straight at Mrs. Lecount, I tried a few innocent questions on the
subject. She quietly declined to answer them. I asked next when she
proposed to leave. She would leave on the twenty-eighth. For what
destination? London. For long? Probably not. By herself? No. With me?
No. With whom then? With Mrs. Wragge, if I had no objection. Good
heavens! for what possible purpose? For the purpose of getting a
respectable lodging, which she could hardly expect to accomplish unless
she was accompanied by an elderly female friend. And was I, in the
capacity of elderly male friend, to be left out of the business
altogether? Impossible to say at present. Was I not even to forward any
letters which might come for her at our present address? No: she would
make the arrangement herself at the post-office; and she would ask me,
at the same time, for an address, at which I could receive a letter
from her, in case of necessity for future communication. Further
inquiries, after this last answer, could lead to nothing but waste of
time. I saved time by putting no more questions.

It was clear to me that our present position toward each other was what
our position had been previously to the event of Michael Vanstone’s
death. I returned, as before, to my choice of alternatives. Which way
did my private interests point? Toward trusting the chance of her
wanting me again? Toward threatening her with the interference of her
relatives and friends? Or toward making the information which I
possessed a marketable commodity between the wealthy branch of the
family and myself? The last of the three was the alternative I had
chosen in the case of the father. I chose it once more in the case of
the son.

The train started for London nearly four hours since, and took her away
in it, accompanied by Mrs. Wragge.

My wife is too great a fool, poor soul, to be actively valuable in the
present emergency; but she will be passively useful in keeping up Miss
Vanstone’s connection with me—and, in consideration of that
circumstance, I consent to brush my own trousers, shave my own chin,
and submit to the other inconveniences of waiting on myself for a
limited period. Any faint glimmerings of sense which Mrs. Wragge may
have formerly possessed appear to have now finally taken their leave of
her. On receiving permission to go to London, she favored us
immediately with two inquiries. Might she do some shopping? and might
she leave the cookery-book behind her? Miss Vanstone said Yes to one
question, and I said Yes to the other—and from that moment, Mrs. Wragge
has existed in a state of perpetual laughter. I am still hoarse with
vainly repeated applications of vocal stimulant; and I left her in the
railway carriage, to my inexpressible disgust, with _both_ shoes down
at heel.

Under ordinary circumstances these absurd particulars would not have
dwelt on my memory. But, as matters actually stand, my unfortunate
wife’s imbecility may, in her present position, lead to consequences
which we none of us foresee. She is nothing more or less than a
grown-up child; and I can plainly detect that Miss Vanstone trusts her,
as she would not have trusted a sharper woman, on that very account. I
know children, little and big, rather better than my fair relative
does; and I say—beware of all forms of human innocence, when it happens
to be your interest to keep a secret to yourself.

Let me return to business. Here I am, at two o’clock on a fine summer’s
afternoon, left entirely alone, to consider the safest means of
approaching Mr. Noel Vanstone on my own account. My private suspicions
of his miserly character produce no discouraging effect on me. I have
extracted cheering pecuniary results in my time from people quite as
fond of their money as he can be. The real difficulty to contend with
is the obstacle of Mrs. Lecount. If I am not mistaken, this lady merits
a little serious consideration on my part. I will close my chronicle
for to-day, and give Mrs. Lecount her due.

Three o’clock.—I open these pages again to record a discovery which has
taken me entirely by surprise.

After completing the last entry, a circumstance revived in my memory
which I had noticed on escorting the ladies this morning to the
railway. I then remarked that Miss Vanstone had only taken one of her
three boxes with her—and it now occurred to me that a private
investigation of the luggage she had left behind might possibly be
attended with beneficial results. Having, at certain periods of my life
been in the habit of cultivating friendly terms with strange locks, I
found no difficulty in establishing myself on a familiar footing with
Miss Vanstone’s boxes. One of the two presented nothing to interest me.
The other—devoted to the preservation of the costumes, articles of
toilet, and other properties used in the dramatic Entertainment—proved
to be better worth examining: for it led me straight to the discovery
of one of its owner’s secrets.

I found all the dresses in the box complete—with one remarkable
exception. That exception was the dress of the old north-country lady;
the character which I have already mentioned as the best of all my
pupil’s disguises, and as modeled in voice and manner on her old
governess, Miss Garth. The wig; the eyebrows; the bonnet and veil; the
cloak, padded inside to disfigure her back and shoulders; the paints
and cosmetics used to age her face and alter her complexion—were all
gone. Nothing but the gown remained; a gaudily-flowered silk, useful
enough for dramatic purposes, but too extravagant in color and pattern
to bear inspection by daylight. The other parts of the dress are
sufficiently quiet to pass muster; the bonnet and veil are only
old-fashioned, and the cloak is of a sober gray color. But one plain
inference can be drawn from such a discovery as this. As certainly as I
sit here, she is going to open the campaign against Noel Vanstone and
Mrs. Lecount in a character which neither of those two persons can have
any possible reason for suspecting at the outset—the character of Miss
Garth.

What course am I to take under these circumstances? Having got her
secret, what am I to do with it? These are awkward considerations; I am
rather puzzled how to deal with them.

It is something more than the mere fact of her choosing to disguise
herself to forward her own private ends that causes my present
perplexity. Hundreds of girls take fancies for disguising themselves;
and hundreds of instances of it are related year after year in the
public journals. But my ex-pupil is not to be confounded for one moment
with the average adventuress of the newspapers. She is capable of going
a long way beyond the limit of dressing herself like a man, and
imitating a man’s voice and manner. She has a natural gift for assuming
characters which I have never seen equaled by a woman; and she has
performed in public until she has felt her own power, and trained her
talent for disguising herself to the highest pitch. A girl who takes
the sharpest people unawares by using such a capacity as this to help
her own objects in private life, and who sharpens that capacity by a
determination to fight her way to her own purpose, which has beaten
down everything before it, up to this time—is a girl who tries an
experiment in deception, new enough and dangerous enough to lead, one
way or the other, to very serious results. This is my conviction,
founded on a large experience in the art of imposing on my
fellow-creatures. I say of my fair relative’s enterprise what I never
said or thought of it till I introduced myself to the inside of her
box. The chances for and against her winning the fight for her lost
fortune are now so evenly balanced that I cannot for the life of me see
on which side the scale inclines. All I can discern is, that it will,
to a dead certainty, turn one way or the other on the day when she
passes Noel Vanstone’s doors in disguise.

Which way do my interests point now? Upon my honor, I don’t know.

Five o’clock.—I have effected a masterly compromise; I have decided on
turning myself into a Jack-on-both-sides.

By to-day’s post I have dispatched to London an anonymous letter for
Mr. Noel Vanstone. It will be forwarded to its destination by the same
means which I successfully adopted to mystify Mr. Pendril; and it will
reach Vauxhall Walk, Lambeth, by the afternoon of to-morrow at the
latest.

The letter is short, and to the purpose. It warns Mr. Noel Vanstone, in
the most alarming language, that he is destined to become the victim of
a conspiracy; and that the prime mover of it is a young lady who has
already held written communication with his father and himself. It
offers him the information necessary to secure his own safety, on
condition that he makes it worth the writer’s while to run the serious
personal risk which such a disclosure will entail on him. And it ends
by stipulating that the answer shall be advertised in the _Times_;
shall be addressed to “An Unknown Friend”; and shall state plainly what
remuneration Mr. Noel Vanstone offers for the priceless service which
it is proposed to render him.

Unless some unexpected complication occurs, this letter places me
exactly in the position which it is my present interest to occupy. If
the advertisement appears, and if the remuneration offered is large
enough to justify me in going over to the camp of the enemy, over I go.
If no advertisement appears, or if Mr. Noel Vanstone rates my
invaluable assistance at too low a figure, here I remain, biding my
time till my fair relative wants me, or till I make her want me, which
comes to the same thing. If the anonymous letter falls by any accident
into her hands, she will find disparaging allusions in it to myself,
purposely introduced to suggest that the writer must be one of the
persons whom I addressed while conducting her inquiries. If Mrs.
Lecount takes the business in hand and lays a trap for me—I decline her
tempting invitation by becoming totally ignorant of the whole affair
the instant any second person appears in it. Let the end come as it
may, here I am ready to profit by it: here I am, facing both ways, with
perfect ease and security—a moral agriculturist, with his eye on two
crops at once, and his swindler’s sickle ready for any emergency.

For the next week to come, the newspaper will be more interesting to me
than ever. I wonder which side I shall eventually belong to?



THE THIRD SCENE.
VAUXHALL WALK, LAMBETH.



