CHAPTER XV.

On the next morning but one, news was received from Mr. Pendril. The
place of Michael Vanstone’s residence on the Continent had been
discovered. He was living at Zurich; and a letter had been dispatched
to him, at that place, on the day when the information was obtained. In
the course of the coming week an answer might be expected, and the
purport of it should be communicated forthwith to the ladies at
Combe-Raven.

Short as it was, the interval of delay passed wearily. Ten days elapsed
before the expected answer was received; and when it came at last, it
proved to be, strictly speaking, no answer at all. Mr. Pendril had been
merely referred to an agent in London who was in possession of Michael
Vanstone’s instructions. Certain difficulties had been discovered in
connection with those instructions, which had produced the necessity of
once more writing to Zurich. And there “the negotiations” rested again
for the present.

A second paragraph in Mr. Pendril’s letter contained another piece of
intelligence entirely new. Mr. Michael Vanstone’s son (and only child),
Mr. Noel Vanstone, had recently arrived in London, and was then staying
in lodgings occupied by his cousin, Mr. George Bartram. Professional
considerations had induced Mr. Pendril to pay a visit to the lodgings.
He had been very kindly received by Mr. Bartram; but had been informed
by that gentleman that his cousin was not then in a condition to
receive visitors. Mr. Noel Vanstone had been suffering, for some years
past, from a wearing and obstinate malady; he had come to England
expressly to obtain the best medical advice, and he still felt the
fatigue of the journey so severely as to be confined to his bed. Under
these circumstances, Mr. Pendril had no alternative but to take his
leave. An interview with Mr. Noel Vanstone might have cleared up some
of the difficulties in connection with his father’s instructions. As
events had turned out, there was no help for it but to wait for a few
days more.

The days passed, the empty days of solitude and suspense. At last, a
third letter from the lawyer announced the long delayed conclusion of
the correspondence. The final answer had been received from Zurich, and
Mr. Pendril would personally communicate it at Combe-Raven on the
afternoon of the next day.

That next day was Wednesday, the twelfth of August. The weather had
changed in the night; and the sun rose watery through mist and cloud.
By noon the sky was overcast at all points; the temperature was
sensibly colder; and the rain poured down, straight and soft and
steady, on the thirsty earth. Toward three o’clock, Miss Garth and
Norah entered the morning-room, to await Mr. Pendril’s arrival. They
were joined shortly afterward by Magdalen. In half an hour more the
familiar fall of the iron latch in the socket reached their ears from
the fence beyond the shrubbery. Mr. Pendril and Mr. Clare advanced into
view along the garden-path, walking arm-in-arm through the rain,
sheltered by the same umbrella. The lawyer bowed as they passed the
windows; Mr. Clare walked straight on, deep in his own
thoughts—noticing nothing.

After a delay which seemed interminable; after a weary scraping of wet
feet on the hall mat; after a mysterious, muttered interchange of
question and answer outside the door, the two came in—Mr. Clare leading
the way. The old man walked straight up to the table, without any
preliminary greeting, and looked across it at the three women, with a
stern pity for them in his ragged, wrinkled face.

“Bad news,” he said. “I am an enemy to all unnecessary suspense.
Plainness is kindness in such a case as this. I mean to be kind—and I
tell you plainly—bad news.”

Mr. Pendril followed him. He shook hands, in silence, with Miss Garth
and the two sisters, and took a seat near them. Mr. Clare placed
himself apart on a chair by the window. The gray rainy light fell soft
and sad on the faces of Norah and Magdalen, who sat together opposite
to him. Miss Garth had placed herself a little behind them, in partial
shadow; and the lawyer’s quiet face was seen in profile, close beside
her. So the four occupants of the room appeared to Mr. Clare, as he sat
apart in his corner; his long claw-like fingers interlaced on his knee;
his dark vigilant eyes fixed searchingly now on one face, now on
another. The dripping rustle of the rain among the leaves, and the
clear, ceaseless tick of the clock on the mantel-piece, made the minute
of silence which followed the settling of the persons present in their
places indescribably oppressive. It was a relief to every one when Mr.
Pendril spoke.

“Mr. Clare has told you already,” he began, “that I am the bearer of
bad news. I am grieved to say, Miss Garth, that your doubts, when I
last saw you, were better founded than my hopes. What that heartless
elder brother was in his youth, he is still in his old age. In all my
unhappy experience of the worst side of human nature, I have never met
with a man so utterly dead to every consideration of mercy as Michael
Vanstone.”

“Do you mean that he takes the whole of his brother’s fortune, and
makes no provision whatever for his brother’s children?” asked Miss
Garth.

“He offers a sum of money for present emergencies,” replied Mr.
Pendril, “so meanly and disgracefully insufficient that I am ashamed to
mention it.”

“And nothing for the future?”

“Absolutely nothing.”

As that answer was given, the same thought passed, at the same moment,
through Miss Garth’s mind and through Norah’s. The decision, which
deprived both the sisters alike of the resources of fortune, did not
end there for the younger of the two. Michael Vanstone’s merciless
resolution had virtually pronounced the sentence which dismissed Frank
to China, and which destroyed all present hope of Magdalen’s marriage.
As the words passed the lawyer’s lips, Miss Garth and Norah looked at
Magdalen anxiously. Her face turned a shade paler—but not a feature of
it moved; not a word escaped her. Norah, who held her sister’s hand in
her own, felt it tremble for a moment, and then turn cold—and that was
all.

“Let me mention plainly what I have done,” resumed Mr. Pendril; “I am
very desirous you should not think that I have left any effort untried.
When I wrote to Michael Vanstone, in the first instance, I did not
confine myself to the usual formal statement. I put before him, plainly
and earnestly, every one of the circumstances under which he has become
possessed of his brother’s fortune. When I received the answer,
referring me to his written instructions to his lawyer in London—and
when a copy of those instructions was placed in my hands—I positively
declined, on becoming acquainted with them, to receive the writer’s
decision as final. I induced the solicitor, on the other side, to
accord us a further term of delay; I attempted to see Mr. Noel Vanstone
in London for the purpose of obtaining his intercession; and, failing
in that, I myself wrote to his father for the second time. The answer
referred me, in insolently curt terms, to the instructions already
communicated; declared those instructions to be final; and declined any
further correspondence with me. There is the beginning and the end of
the negotiation. If I have overlooked any means of touching this
heartless man—tell me, and those means shall be tried.”

He looked at Norah. She pressed her sister’s hand encouragingly, and
answered for both of them.

“I speak for my sister, as well as for myself,” she said, with her
color a little heightened, with her natural gentleness of manner just
touched by a quiet, uncomplaining sadness. “You have done all that
could be done, Mr. Pendril. We have tried to restrain ourselves from
hoping too confidently; and we are deeply grateful for your kindness,
at a time when kindness is sorely needed by both of us.”

Magdalen’s hand returned the pressure of her sister’s—withdrew
itself—trifled for a moment impatiently with the arrangement of her
dress—then suddenly moved the chair closer to the table. Leaning one
arm on it (with the hand fast clinched), she looked across at Mr.
Pendril. Her face, always remarkable for its want of color, was now
startling to contemplate, in its blank, bloodless pallor. But the light
in her large gray eyes was bright and steady as ever; and her voice,
though low in tone, was clear and resolute in accent as she addressed
the lawyer in these terms:

“I understood you to say, Mr. Pendril, that my father’s brother had
sent his written orders to London, and that you had a copy. Have you
preserved it?”

“Certainly.”

“Have you got it about you?”

“I have.”

“May I see it?”

Mr. Pendril hesitated, and looked uneasily from Magdalen to Miss Garth,
and from Miss Garth back again to Magdalen.

“Pray oblige me by not pressing your request,” he said. “It is surely
enough that you know the result of the instructions. Why should you
agitate yourself to no purpose by reading them? They are expressed so
cruelly; they show such abominable want of feeling, that I really
cannot prevail upon myself to let you see them.”

“I am sensible of your kindness, Mr. Pendril, in wishing to spare me
pain. But I can bear pain; I promise to distress nobody. Will you
excuse me if I repeat my request?”

She held out her hand—the soft, white, virgin hand that had touched
nothing to soil it or harden it yet.

“Oh, Magdalen, think again!” said Norah.

“You distress Mr. Pendril,” added Miss Garth; “you distress us all.”

“There can be no end gained,” pleaded the lawyer—“forgive me for saying
so—there can really be no useful end gained by my showing you the
instructions.”

(“Fools!” said Mr. Clare to himself. “Have they no eyes to see that she
means to have her own way?”)

“Something tells me there is an end to be gained,” persisted Magdalen.
“This decision is a very serious one. It is more serious to me—” She
looked round at Mr. Clare, who sat closely watching her, and instantly
looked back again, with the first outward betrayal of emotion which had
escaped her yet. “It is even more serious to me,” she resumed, “for
private reasons—than it is to my sister. I know nothing yet but that
our father’s brother has taken our fortunes from us. He must have some
motives of his own for such conduct as that. It is not fair to him, or
fair to us, to keep those motives concealed. He has deliberately robbed
Norah, and robbed me; and I think we have a right, if we wish it, to
know why?”

“I don’t wish it,” said Norah.

“I do,” said Magdalen; and once more she held out her hand.

At this point Mr. Clare roused himself and interfered for the first
time.

“You have relieved your conscience,” he said, addressing the lawyer.
“Give her the right she claims. It _is_ her right—if she will have it.”

Mr. Pendril quietly took the written instructions from his pocket. “I
have warned you,” he said—and handed the papers across the table
without another word. One of the pages of writing—was folded down at
the corner; and at that folded page the manuscript opened, when
Magdalen first turned the leaves. “Is this the place which refers to my
sister and myself?” she inquired. Mr. Pendril bowed; and Magdalen
smoothed out the manuscript before her on the table.

“Will you decide, Norah?” she asked, turning to her sister. “Shall I
read this aloud, or shall I read it to myself?”

“To yourself,” said Miss Garth; answering for Norah, who looked at her
in mute perplexity and distress.

“It shall be as you wish,” said Magdalen. With that reply, she turned
again to the manuscript and read these lines:

“. . . . You are now in possession of my wishes in relation to the
property in money, and to the sale of the furniture, carriages, horses,
and so forth. The last point left on which it is necessary for me to
instruct you refers to the persons inhabiting the house, and to certain
preposterous claims on their behalf set up by a solicitor named
Pendril; who has, no doubt, interested reasons of his own for making
application to me.

“I understand that my late brother has left two illegitimate children;
both of them young women, who are of an age to earn their own
livelihood. Various considerations, all equally irregular, have been
urged in respect to these persons by the solicitor representing them.
Be so good as to tell him that neither you nor I have anything to do
with questions of mere sentiment; and then state plainly, for his
better information, what the motives are which regulate my conduct, and
what the provision is which I feel myself justified in making for the
two young women. Your instructions on both these points you will find
detailed in the next paragraph.

“I wish the persons concerned to know, once for all, how I regard the
circumstances which have placed my late brother’s property at my
disposal. Let them understand that I consider those circumstances to be
a Providential interposition which has restored to me the inheritance
that ought always to have been mine. I receive the money, not only as
my right, but also as a proper compensation for the injustice which I
suffered from my father, and a proper penalty paid by my younger
brother for the vile intrigue by which he succeeded in disinheriting
me. His conduct, when a young man, was uniformly discreditable in all
the relations of life; and what it then was it continued to be (on the
showing of his own legal representative) after the time when I ceased
to hold any communication with him. He appears to have systematically
imposed a woman on Society as his wife who was not his wife, and to
have completed the outrage on morality by afterward marrying her. Such
conduct as this has called down a Judgment on himself and his children.
I will not invite retribution on my own head by assisting those
children to continue the imposition which their parents practiced, and
by helping them to take a place in the world to which they are not
entitled. Let them, as becomes their birth, gain their bread in
situations. If they show themselves disposed to accept their proper
position I will assist them to start virtuously in life by a present of
one hundred pounds each. This sum I authorize you to pay them, on their
personal application, with the necessary acknowledgment of receipt; and
on the express understanding that the transaction, so completed, is to
be the beginning and the end of my connection with them. The
arrangements under which they quit the house I leave to your
discretion; and I have only to add that my decision on this matter, as
on all other matters, is positive and final.”

Line by line—without once looking up from the pages before her
—Magdalen read those atrocious sentences through, from beginning to
end. The other persons assembled in the room, all eagerly looking at
her together, saw the dress rising and falling faster and faster over
her bosom—saw the hand in which she lightly held the manuscript at the
outset close unconsciously on the paper and crush it, as she advanced
nearer and nearer to the end—but detected no other outward signs of
what was passing within her. As soon as she had done, she silently
pushed the manuscript away, and put her hands on a sudden over her
face. When she withdrew them, all the four persons in the room noticed
a change in her. Something in her expression had altered, subtly and
silently; something which made the familiar features suddenly look
strange, even to her sister and Miss Garth; something, through all
after years, never to be forgotten in connection with that day—and
never to be described.

The first words she spoke were addressed to Mr. Pendril.

“May I ask one more favor,” she said, “before you enter on your
business arrangements?”

Mr. Pendril replied ceremoniously by a gesture of assent. Magdalen’s
resolution to possess herself of the Instructions did not appear to
have produced a favorable impression on the lawyer’s mind.

“You mentioned what you were so kind as to do, in our interests, when
you first wrote to Mr. Michael Vanstone,” she continued. “You said you
had told him all the circumstances. I want—if you will allow me—to be
made quite sure of what he really knew about us—when he sent these
orders to his lawyer. Did he know that my father had made a will, and
that he had left our fortunes to my sister and myself?”

“He did know it,” said Mr. Pendril.

“Did you tell him how it happened that we are left in this helpless
position?”

“I told him that your father was entirely unaware, when he married, of
the necessity for making another will.”

“And that another will would have been made, after he saw Mr. Clare,
but for the dreadful misfortune of his death?”

“He knew that also.”

“Did he know that my father’s untiring goodness and kindness to both of
us—”

Her voice faltered for the first time: she sighed, and put her hand to
her head wearily. Norah spoke entreatingly to her; Miss Garth spoke
entreatingly to her; Mr. Clare sat silent, watching her more and more
earnestly. She answered her sister’s remonstrance with a faint smile.
“I will keep my promise,” she said; “I will distress nobody.” With that
reply, she turned again to Mr. Pendril; and steadily reiterated the
question—but in another form of words.

“Did Mr. Michael Vanstone know that my father’s great anxiety was to
make sure of providing for my sister and myself?”

“He knew it in your father’s own words. I sent him an extract from your
father’s last letter to me.”

“The letter which asked you to come for God’s sake, and relieve him
from the dreadful thought that his daughters were unprovided for? The
letter which said he should not rest in his grave if he left us
disinherited?”

“That letter and those words.”

She paused, still keeping her eyes steadily fixed on the lawyer’s face.

“I want to fasten it all in my mind,” she said “before I go on. Mr.
Michael Vanstone knew of the first will; he knew what prevented the
making of the second will; he knew of the letter and he read the words.
What did he know of besides? Did you tell him of my mother’s last
illness? Did you say that her share in the money would have been left
to us, if she could have lifted her dying hand in your presence? Did
you try to make him ashamed of the cruel law which calls girls in our
situation Nobody’s Children, and which allows him to use us as he is
using us now?”

“I put all those considerations to him. I left none of them doubtful; I
left none of them out.”

She slowly reached her hand to the copy of the Instructions, and slowly
folded it up again, in the shape in which it had been presented to her.
“I am much obliged to you, Mr. Pendril.” With those words, she bowed,
and gently pushed the manuscript back across the table; then turned to
her sister.

“Norah,” she said, “if we both of us live to grow old, and if you ever
forget all that we owe to Michael Vanstone—come to me, and I will
remind you.”

She rose and walked across the room by herself to the window. As she
passed Mr. Clare, the old man stretched out his claw-like fingers and
caught her fast by the arm before she was aware of him.

“What is this mask of yours hiding?” he asked, forcing her to bend to
him, and looking close into her face. “Which of the extremes of human
temperature does your courage start from—the dead cold or the white
hot?”

She shrank back from him and turned away her head in silence. She would
have resented that unscrupulous intrusion on her own thoughts from any
man alive but Frank’s father. He dropped her arm as suddenly as he had
taken it, and let her go on to the window. “No,” he said to himself,
“not the cold extreme, whatever else it may be. So much the worse for
her, and for all belonging to her.”

There was a momentary pause. Once more the dripping rustle of the rain
and the steady ticking of the clock filled up the gap of silence. Mr.
Pendril put the Instructions back in his pocket, considered a little,
and, turning toward Norah and Miss Garth, recalled their attention to
the present and pressing necessities of the time.

“Our consultation has been needlessly prolonged,” he said, “by painful
references to the past. We shall be better employed in settling our
arrangements for the future. I am obliged to return to town this
evening. Pray let me hear how I can best assist you; pray tell me what
trouble and what responsibility I can take off your hands.”

For the moment, neither Norah nor Miss Garth seemed to be capable of
answering him. Magdalen’s reception of the news which annihilated the
marriage prospect that her father’s own lips had placed before her not
a month since, had bewildered and dismayed them alike. They had
summoned their courage to meet the shock of her passionate grief, or to
face the harder trial of witnessing her speechless despair. But they
were not prepared for her invincible resolution to read the
Instructions; for the terrible questions which she had put to the
lawyer; for her immovable determination to fix all the circumstances in
her mind, under which Michael Vanstone’s decision had been pronounced.
There she stood at the window, an unfathomable mystery to the sister
who had never been parted from her, to the governess who had trained
her from a child. Miss Garth remembered the dark doubts which had
crossed her mind on the day when she and Magdalen had met in the
garden. Norah looked forward to the coming time, with the first serious
dread of it on her sister’s account which she had felt yet. Both had
hitherto remained passive, in despair of knowing what to do. Both were
now silent, in despair of knowing what to say.

Mr. Pendril patiently and kindly helped them, by returning to the
subject of their future plans for the second time.

“I am sorry to press any business matters on your attention,” he said,
“when you are necessarily unfitted to deal with them. But I must take
my instructions back to London with me to-night. With reference, in the
first place, to the disgraceful pecuniary offer, to which I have
already alluded. The younger Miss Vanstone having read the
Instructions, needs no further information from my lips. The elder
will, I hope, excuse me if I tell her (what I should be ashamed to tell
her, but that it is a matter of necessity), that Mr. Michael Vanstone’s
provision for his brother’s children begins and ends with an offer to
each of them of one hundred pounds.”

Norah’s face crimsoned with indignation. She started to her feet, as if
Michael Vanstone had been present in the room, and had personally
insulted her.

“I see,” said the lawyer, wishing to spare her; “I may tell Mr. Michael
Vanstone you refuse the money.”

“Tell him,” she broke out passionately, “if I was starving by the
roadside, I wouldn’t touch a farthing of it!”

“Shall I notify your refusal also?” asked Mr. Pendril, speaking to
Magdalen next.

She turned round from the window—but kept her face in shadow, by
standing close against it with her back to the light.

“Tell him, on my part,” she said, “to think again before he starts me
in life with a hundred pounds. I will give him time to think.” She
spoke those strange words with a marked emphasis; and turning back
quickly to the window, hid her face from the observation of every one
in the room.

“You both refuse the offer,” said Mr. Pendril, taking out his pencil,
and making his professional note of the decision. As he shut up his
pocketbook, he glanced toward Magdalen doubtfully. She had roused in
him the latent distrust which is a lawyer’s second nature: he had his
suspicions of her looks; he had his suspicions of her language. Her
sister seemed to have mere influence over her than Miss Garth. He
resolved to speak privately to her sister before he went away.

While the idea was passing through his mind, his attention was claimed
by another question from Magdalen.

“Is he an old man?” she asked, suddenly, without turning round from the
window.

“If you mean Mr. Michael Vanstone, he is seventy-five or seventy-six
years of age.”

“You spoke of his son a little while since. Has he any other sons—or
daughters?”

“None.”

“Do you know anything of his wife?”

“She has been dead for many years.”

There was a pause. “Why do you ask these questions?” said Norah.

“I beg your pardon,” replied Magdalen, quietly; “I won’t ask any more.”

For the third time, Mr. Pendril returned to the business of the
interview.

“The servants must not be forgotten,” he said. “They must be settled
with and discharged: I will give them the necessary explanation before
I leave. As for the house, no questions connected with it need trouble
you. The carriages and horses, the furniture and plate, and so on, must
simply be left on the premises to await Mr. Michael Vanstone’s further
orders. But any possessions, Miss Vanstone, personally belonging to you
or to your sister—jewelry and dresses, and any little presents which
may have been made to you—are entirely at your disposal. With regard to
the time of your departure, I understand that a month or more will
elapse before Mr. Michael Vanstone can leave Zurich; and I am sure I
only do his solicitor justice in saying—”

“Excuse me, Mr. Pendril,” interposed Norah; “I think I understand, from
what you have just said, that our house and everything in it belongs
to—?” She stopped, as if the mere utterance of the man’s name was
abhorrent to her.

“To Michael Vanstone,” said Mr. Pendril. “The house goes to him with
the rest of the property.”

“Then I, for one, am ready to leave it tomorrow!”

Magdalen started at the window, as her sister spoke, and looked at Mr.
Clare, with the first open signs of anxiety and alarm which she had
shown yet.

“Don’t be angry with me,” she whispered, stooping over the old man with
a sudden humility of look, and a sudden nervousness of manner. “I can’t
go without seeing Frank first!”

“You shall see him,” replied Mr. Clare. “I am here to speak to you
about it, when the business is done.”

“It is quite unnecessary to hurry your departure, as you propose,”
continued Mr. Pendril, addressing Norah. “I can safely assure you that
a week hence will be time enough.”

“If this is Mr. Michael Vanstone’s house,” repeated Norah; “I am ready
to leave it tomorrow.”

She impatiently quitted her chair and seated herself further away on
the sofa. As she laid her hand on the back of it, her face changed.
There, at the head of the sofa, were the cushions which had supported
her mother when she lay down for the last time to repose. There, at the
foot of the sofa, was the clumsy, old-fashioned arm-chair, which had
been her father’s favorite seat on rainy days, when she and her sister
used to amuse him at the piano opposite, by playing his favorite tunes.
A heavy sigh, which she tried vainly to repress, burst from her lips.
“Oh,” she thought, “I had forgotten these old friends! How shall we
part from them when the time comes!”

“May I inquire, Miss Vanstone, whether you and your sister have formed
any definite plans for the future?” asked Mr. Pendril. “Have you
thought of any place of residence?”

“I may take it on myself, sir,” said Miss Garth, “to answer your
question for them. When they leave this house, they leave it with me.
My home is their home, and my bread is their bread. Their parents
honored me, trusted me, and loved me. For twelve happy years they never
let me remember that I was their governess; they only let me know
myself as their companion and their friend. My memory of them is the
memory of unvarying gentleness and generosity; and my life shall pay
the debt of my gratitude to their orphan children.”

Norah rose hastily from the sofa; Magdalen impetuously left the window.
For once, there was no contrast in the conduct of the sisters. For
once, the same impulse moved their hearts, the same earnest feeling
inspired their words. Miss Garth waited until the first outburst of
emotion had passed away; then rose, and, taking Norah and Magdalen each
by the hand, addressed herself to Mr. Pendril and Mr. Clare. She spoke
with perfect self-possession; strong in her artless unconsciousness of
her own good action.

“Even such a trifle as my own story,” she said, “is of some importance
at such a moment as this. I wish you both, gentlemen, to understand
that I am not promising more to the daughters of your old friend than I
can perform. When I first came to this house, I entered it under such
independent circumstances as are not common in the lives of
governesses. In my younger days, I was associated in teaching with my
elder sister: we established a school in London, which grew to be a
large and prosperous one. I only left it, and became a private
governess, because the heavy responsibility of the school was more than
my strength could bear. I left my share in the profits untouched, and I
possess a pecuniary interest in our establishment to this day. That is
my story, in few words. When we leave this house, I propose that we
shall go back to the school in London, which is still prosperously
directed by my elder sister. We can live there as quietly as we please,
until time has helped us to bear our affliction better than we can bear
it now. If Norah’s and Magdalen’s altered prospects oblige them to earn
their own independence, I can help them to earn it, as a gentleman’s
daughters should. The best families in this land are glad to ask my
sister’s advice where the interests of their children’s home-training
are concerned; and I answer, beforehand, for her hearty desire to serve
Mr. Vanstone’s daughters, as I answer for my own. That is the future
which my gratitude to their father and mother, and my love for
themselves, now offers to them. If you think my proposal, gentlemen, a
fit and fair proposal—and I see in your faces that you do—let us not
make the hard necessities of our position harder still, by any useless
delay in meeting them at once. Let us do what we must do; let us act on
Norah’s decision, and leave this house to-morrow. You mentioned the
servants just now, Mr. Pendril: I am ready to call them together in the
next room, and to assist you in the settlement of their claims,
whenever you please.”

Without waiting for the lawyer’s answer, without leaving the sisters
time to realize their own terrible situation, she moved at once toward
the door. It was her wise resolution to meet the coming trial by doing
much and saying little. Before she could leave the room, Mr. Clare
followed, and stopped her on the threshold.

“I never envied a woman’s feelings before,” said the old man. “It may
surprise you to hear it; but I envy yours. Wait! I have something more
to say. There is an obstacle still left—the everlasting obstacle of
Frank. Help me to sweep him off. Take the elder sister along with you
and the lawyer, and leave me here to have it out with the younger. I
want to see what metal she’s really made of.”

While Mr. Clare was addressing these words to Miss Garth, Mr. Pendril
had taken the opportunity of speaking to Norah. “Before I go back to
town,” he said, “I should like to have a word with you in private. From
what has passed today, Miss Vanstone, I have formed a very high opinion
of your discretion; and, as an old friend of your father’s, I want to
take the freedom of speaking to you about your sister.”

Before Norah could answer, she was summoned, in compliance with Mr.
Clare’s request, to the conference with the servants. Mr. Pendril
followed Miss Garth, as a matter of course. When the three were out in
the hall, Mr. Clare re-entered the room, closed the door, and signed
peremptorily to Magdalen to take a chair.

She obeyed him in silence. He took a turn up and down the room, with
his hands in the side-pockets of the long, loose, shapeless coat which
he habitually wore.

“How old are you?” he said, stopping suddenly, and speaking to her with
the whole breadth of the room between them.

“I was eighteen last birthday,” she answered, humbly, without looking
up at him.

“You have shown extraordinary courage for a girl of eighteen. Have you
got any of that courage left?”

She clasped her hands together, and wrung them hard. A few tears
gathered in her eyes, and rolled slowly over her cheeks.

“I can’t give Frank up,” she said, faintly. “You don’t care for me, I
know; but you used to care for my father. Will you try to be kind to me
for my father’s sake?”

The last words died away in a whisper; she could say no more. Never had
she felt the illimitable power which a woman’s love possesses of
absorbing into itself every other event, every other joy or sorrow of
her life, as she felt it then. Never had she so tenderly associated
Frank with the memory of her lost parents, as at that moment. Never had
the impenetrable atmosphere of illusion through which women behold the
man of their choice—the atmosphere which had blinded her to all that
was weak, selfish, and mean in Frank’s nature—surrounded him with a
brighter halo than now, when she was pleading with the father for the
possession of the son. “Oh, don’t ask me to give him up!” she said,
trying to take courage, and shuddering from head to foot. In the next
instant, she flew to the opposite extreme, with the suddenness of a
flash of lightning. “I won’t give him up!” she burst out violently.
“No! not if a thousand fathers ask me!”

“I am one father,” said Mr. Clare. “And I don’t ask you.”

In the first astonishment and delight of hearing those unexpected
words, she started to her feet, crossed the room, and tried to throw
her arms round his neck. She might as well have attempted to move the
house from its foundations. He took her by the shoulders and put her
back in her chair. His inexorable eyes looked her into submission; and
his lean forefinger shook at her warningly, as if he was quieting a
fractious child.

“Hug Frank,” he said; “don’t hug me. I haven’t done with you yet; when
I have, you may shake hands with me, if you like. Wait, and compose
yourself.”

He left her. His hands went back into his pockets, and his monotonous
march up and down the room began again.

“Ready?” he asked, stopping short after a while. She tried to answer.
“Take two minutes more,” he said, and resumed his walk with the
regularity of clock-work. “These are the creatures,” he thought to
himself, “into whose keeping men otherwise sensible give the happiness
of their lives. Is there any other object in creation, I wonder, which
answers its end as badly as a woman does?”

He stopped before her once more. Her breathing was easier; the dark
flush on her face was dying out again.

“Ready?” he repeated. “Yes; ready at last. Listen to me; and let’s get
it over. I don’t ask you to give Frank up. I ask you to wait.”

“I will wait,” she said. “Patiently, willingly.”

“Will you make Frank wait?”

“Yes.”

“Will you send him to China?”

Her head drooped upon her bosom, and she clasped her hands again, in
silence. Mr. Clare saw where the difficulty lay, and marched straight
up to it on the spot.

“I don’t pretend to enter into your feelings for Frank, or Frank’s for
you,” he said. “The subject doesn’t interest me. But I _do_ pretend to
state two plain truths. It is one plain truth that you can’t be married
till you have money enough to pay for the roof that shelters you, the
clothes that cover you, and the victuals you eat. It is another plain
truth that you can’t find the money; that I can’t find the money; and
that Frank’s only chance of finding it, is going to China. If I tell
him to go, he’ll sit in a corner and cry. If I insist, he’ll say Yes,
and deceive me. If I go a step further, and see him on board ship with
my own eyes, he’ll slip off in the pilot’s boat, and sneak back
secretly to you. That’s his disposition.”

“No!” said Magdalen. “It’s not his disposition; it’s his love for Me.”

“Call it what you like,” retorted Mr. Clare. “Sneak or Sweetheart —he’s
too slippery, in either capacity, for my fingers to hold him. My
shutting the door won’t keep him from coming back. Your shutting the
door will. Have you the courage to shut it? Are you fond enough of him
not to stand in his light?”

“Fond! I would die for him!”

“Will you send him to China?”

She sighed bitterly.

“Have a little pity for me,” she said. “I have lost my father; I have
lost my mother; I have lost my fortune—and now I am to lose Frank. You
don’t like women, I know; but try to help me with a little pity. I
don’t say it’s not for his own interests to send him to China; I only
say it’s hard—very, very hard on _me_.”

Mr. Clare had been deaf to her violence, insensible to her caresses,
blind to her tears; but under the tough integument of his philosophy he
had a heart—and it answered that hopeless appeal; it felt those
touching words.

“I don’t deny that your case is a hard one,” he said. “I don’t want to
make it harder. I only ask you to do in Frank’s interests what Frank is
too weak to do for himself. It’s no fault of yours; it’s no fault of
mine—but it’s not the less true that the fortune you were to have
brought him has changed owners.”

She suddenly looked up, with a furtive light in her eyes, with a
threatening smile on her lips.

“It may change owners again,” she said.

Mr. Clare saw the alteration in her expression, and heard the tones of
her voice. But the words were spoken low; spoken as if to herself—they
failed to reach him across the breadth of the room. He stopped
instantly in his walk and asked what she had said.

“Nothing,” she answered, turning her head away toward the window, and
looking out mechanically at the falling rain. “Only my own thoughts.”

Mr. Clare resumed his walk, and returned to his subject.

“It’s your interest,” he went on, “as well as Frank’s interest, that he
should go. He may make money enough to marry you in China; he can’t
make it here. If he stops at home, he’ll be the ruin of both of you.
He’ll shut his eyes to every consideration of prudence, and pester you
to marry him; and when he has carried his point, he will be the first
to turn round afterward and complain that you’re a burden on him. Hear
me out! You’re in love with Frank—I’m not, and I know him. Put you two
together often enough; give him time enough to hug, cry, pester, and
plead; and I’ll tell you what the end will be—you’ll marry him.”

He had touched the right string at last. It rung back in answer before
he could add another word.

“You don’t know me,” she said, firmly. “You don’t know what I can
suffer for Frank’s sake. He shall never marry me till I can be what my
father said I should be—the making of his fortune. He shall take no
burden, when he takes me; I promise you that! I’ll be the good angel of
Frank’s life; I’ll not go a penniless girl to him, and drag him down.”
She abruptly left her seat, advanced a few steps toward Mr. Clare, and
stopped in the middle of the room. Her arms fell helpless on either
side of her, and she burst into tears. “He shall go,” she said. “If my
heart breaks in doing it, I’ll tell him to-morrow that we must say
Good-by!”

Mr. Clare at once advanced to meet her, and held out his hand.

“I’ll help you,” he said. “Frank shall hear every word that has passed
between us. When he comes to-morrow he shall know, beforehand, that he
comes to say Good-by.”

She took his hand in both her own—hesitated—looked at him—and pressed
it to her bosom. “May I ask a favor of you, before you go?” she said,
timidly. He tried to take his hand from her; but she knew her
advantage, and held it fast. “Suppose there should be some change for
the better?” she went on. “Suppose I could come to Frank, as my fat her
said I should come to him—?”

Before she could complete the question, Mr. Clare made a second effort
and withdrew his hand. “As your father said you should come to him?” he
repeated, looking at her attentively.

“Yes,” she replied. “Strange things happen sometimes. If strange things
happen to me will you let Frank come back before the five years are
out?”

What did she mean? Was she clinging desperately to the hope of melting
Michael Vanstone’s heart? Mr. Clare could draw no other conclusion from
what she had just said to him. At the beginning of the interview he
would have roughly dispelled her delusion. At the end of the interview
he left her compassionately in possession of it.

“You are hoping against all hope,” he said; “but if it gives you
courage, hope on. If this impossible good fortune of yours ever
happens, tell me, and Frank shall come back. In the meantime—”

“In the meantime,” she interposed sadly, “you have my promise.”

Once more Mr. Clare’s sharp eyes searched her face attentively.

“I will trust your promise,” he said. “You shall see Frank to-morrow.”

She went back thoughtfully to her chair, and sat down again in silence.
Mr. Clare made for the door before any formal leave-taking could pass
between them. “Deep!” he thought to himself, as he looked back at her
before he went out; “only eighteen; and too deep for my sounding!”

In the hall he found Norah, waiting anxiously to hear what had
happened.

“Is it all over?” she asked. “Does Frank go to China?”

“Be careful how you manage that sister of yours,” said Mr. Clare,
without noticing the question. “She has one great misfortune to contend
with: she’s not made for the ordinary jog-trot of a woman’s life. I
don’t say I can see straight to the end of the good or evil in her—I
only warn you, her future will be no common one.”

An hour later, Mr. Pendril left the house; and, by that night’s post,
Miss Garth dispatched a letter to her sister in London.

THE END OF THE FIRST SCENE.



BETWEEN THE SCENES.
PROGRESS OF THE STORY THROUGH THE POST.

I.
From Norah Vanstone to Mr. Pendril.

“Westmoreland House, Kensington,
“August 14th, 1846.


“DEAR MR. PENDRIL,—

“The date of this letter will show you that the last of many hard
partings is over. We have left Combe-Raven; we have said farewell to
home.

“I have been thinking seriously of what you said to me on Wednesday,
before you went back to town. I entirely agree with you that Miss Garth
is more shaken by all she has gone through for our sakes than she is
herself willing to admit; and that it is my duty, for the future, to
spare her all the anxiety that I can on the subject of my sister and
myself. This is very little to do for our dearest friend, for our
second mother. Such as it is, I will do it with all my heart.

“But, forgive me for saying that I am as far as ever from agreeing with
you about Magdalen. I am so sensible, in our helpless position, of the
importance of your assistance; so anxious to be worthy of the interest
of my father’s trusted adviser and oldest friend, that I feel really
and truly disappointed with myself for differing with you—and yet I do
differ. Magdalen is very strange, very unaccountable, to those who
don’t know her intimately. I can understand that she has innocently
misled you; and that she has presented herself, perhaps, under her
least favorable aspect. But that the clue to her language and her
conduct on Wednesday last is to be found in such a feeling toward the
man who has ruined us, as the feeling at which you hinted, is what I
cannot and will not believe of my sister. If you knew, as I do, what a
noble nature she has, you would not be surprised at this obstinate
resistance of mine to your opinion. Will you try to alter it? I don’t
mind what Mr. Clare says; he believes in nothing. But I attach a very
serious importance to what _you_ say; and, kind as I know your motives
to be, it distresses me to think you are doing Magdalen an injustice.

“Having relieved my mind of this confession, I may now come to the
proper object of my letter. I promised, if you could not find leisure
time to visit us to-day, to write and tell you all that happened after
you left us. The day has passed without our seeing you. So I open my
writing-case and perform my promise.

“I am sorry to say that three of the women-servants—the house-maid, the
kitchen-maid, and even our own maid (to whom I am sure we have always
been kind)—took advantage of your having paid them their wages to pack
up and go as soon as your back was turned. They came to say good-by
with as much ceremony and as little feeling as if they were leaving the
house under ordinary circumstances. The cook, for all her violent
temper, behaved very differently: she sent up a message to say that she
would stop and help us to the last. And Thomas (who has never yet been
in any other place than ours) spoke so gratefully of my dear father’s
unvarying kindness to him, and asked so anxiously to be allowed to go
on serving us while his little savings lasted, that Magdalen and I
forgot all formal considerations and both shook hands with him. The
poor lad went out of the room crying. I wish him well; I hope he will
find a kind master and a good place.

“The long, quiet, rainy evening out-of-doors—our last evening at
Combe-Raven—was a sad trial to us. I think winter-time would have
weighed less on our spirits; the drawn curtains and the bright lamps,
and the companionable fires would have helped us. We were only five in
the house altogether—after having once been so many! I can’t tell you
how dreary the gray daylight looked, toward seven o’clock, in the
lonely rooms, and on the noiseless staircase. Surely, the prejudice in
favor of long summer evenings is the prejudice of happy people? We did
our best. We kept ourselves employed, and Miss Garth helped us. The
prospect of preparing for our departure, which had seemed so dreadful
earlier in the day, altered into the prospect of a refuge from
ourselves as the evening came on. We each tried at first to pack up in
our own rooms—but the loneliness was more than we could bear. We
carried all our possessions downstairs, and heaped them on the large
dining-table, and so made our preparations together in the same room. I
am sure we have taken nothing away which does not properly belong to
us.

“Having already mentioned to you my own conviction that Magdalen was
not herself when you saw her on Wednesday, I feel tempted to stop here
and give you an instance in proof of what I say. The little
circumstance happened on Wednesday night, just before we went up to our
rooms.

“After we had packed our dresses and our birthday presents, our books
and our music, we began to sort our letters, which had got confused
from being placed on the table together. Some of my letters were mixed
with Magdalen’s, and some of hers with mine. Among these last I found a
card, which had been given to my sister early in the year by an actor
who managed an amateur theatrical performance in which she took a part.
The man had given her the card, containing his name and address, in the
belief that she would be invited to many more amusements of the same
kind, and in the hope that she would recommend him as a superintendent
on future occasions. I only relate these trifling particulars to show
you how little worth keeping such a card could be, in such
circumstances as ours. Naturally enough, I threw it away from me across
the table, meaning to throw it on the floor. It fell short, close to
the place in which Magdalen was sitting. She took it up, looked at it,
and immediately declared that she would not have had this perfectly
worthless thing destroyed for the world. She was almost angry with me
for having thrown it away; almost angry with Miss Garth for asking what
she could possibly want with it! Could there be any plainer proof than
this that our misfortunes—falling so much more heavily on her than on
me—have quite unhinged her, and worn her out? Surely her words and
looks are not to be interpreted against her, when she is not
sufficiently mistress of herself to exert her natural judgment—when she
shows the unreasonable petulance of a child on a question which is not
of the slightest importance.

“A little after eleven we went upstairs to try if we could get some
rest.

“I drew aside the curtain of my window and looked out. Oh, what a cruel
last night it was: no moon, no stars; such deep darkness that not one
of the dear familiar objects in the garden was visible when I looked
for them; such deep stillness that even my own movements about the room
almost frightened me! I tried to lie down and sleep, but the sense of
loneliness came again and quite overpowered me. You will say I am old
enough, at six-and-twenty, to have exerted more control over myself. I
hardly know how it happened, but I stole into Magdalen’s room, just as
I used to steal into it years and years ago, when we were children. She
was not in bed; she was sitting with her writing materials before her,
thinking. I said I wanted to be with her the last night; and she kissed
me, and told me to lie down, and promised soon to follow me. My mind
was a little quieted and I fell asleep. It was daylight when I woke—and
the first sight I saw was Magdalen, still sitting in the chair, and
still thinking. She had never been to bed; she had not slept all
through the night.

“‘I shall sleep when we have left Combe-Raven,’ she said. ‘I shall be
better when it is all over, and I have bid Frank good-by.’ She had in
her hand our father’s will, and the letter he wrote to you; and when
she had done speaking, she gave them into my possession. I was the
eldest (she said), and those last precious relics ought to be in my
keeping. I tried to propose to her that we should divide them; but she
shook her head. ‘I have copied for myself,’ was her answer, ‘all that
he says of us in the will, and all that he says in the letter.’ She
told me this, and took from her bosom a tiny white silk bag, which she
had made in the night, and in which she had put the extracts, so as to
keep them always about her. ‘This tells me in his own words what his
last wishes were for both of us,’ she said; ‘and this is all I want for
the future.’

“These are trifles to dwell on; and I am almost surprised at myself for
not feeling ashamed to trouble you with them. But, since I have known
what your early connection was with my father and mother, I have
learned to think of you (and, I suppose, to write to you) as an old
friend. And, besides, I have it so much at heart to change your opinion
of Magdalen, that I can’t help telling you the smallest things about
her which may, in my judgment, end in making you think of her as I do.

“When breakfast-time came (on Thursday morning), we were surprised to
find a strange letter on the table. Perhaps I ought to mention it to
you, in case of any future necessity for your interference. It was
addressed to Miss Garth, on paper with the deepest mourning-border
round it; and the writer was the same man who followed us on our way
home from a walk one day last spring—Captain Wragge. His object appears
to be to assert once more his audacious claim to a family connection
with my poor mother, under cover of a letter of condolence; which it is
an insolence in such a person to have written at all. He expresses as
much sympathy—on his discovery of our affliction in the newspaper—as if
he had been really intimate with us; and he begs to know, in a
postscript (being evidently in total ignorance of all that has really
happened), whether it is thought desirable that he should be present,
among the other relatives, at the reading of the will! The address he
gives, at which letters will reach him for the next fortnight, is,
‘Post-office, Birmingham.’ This is all I have to tell you on the
subject. Both the letter and the writer seem to me to be equally
unworthy of the slightest notice, on our part or on yours.

“After breakfast Magdalen left us, and went by herself into the
morning-room. The weather being still showery, we had arranged that
Francis Clare should see her in that room, when he presented himself to
take his leave. I was upstairs when he came; and I remained upstairs
for more than half an hour afterward, sadly anxious, as you may well
believe, on Magdalen’s account.

“At the end of the half-hour or more, I came downstairs. As I reached
the landing I suddenly heard her voice, raised entreatingly, and
calling on him by his name—then loud sobs—then a frightful laughing and
screaming, both together, that rang through the house. I instantly ran
into the room, and found Magdalen on the sofa in violent hysterics, and
Frank standing staring at her, with a lowering, angry face, biting his
nails.

“I felt so indignant—without knowing plainly why, for I was ignorant,
of course, of what had passed at the interview—that I took Mr. Francis
Clare by the shoulders and pushed him out of the room. I am careful to
tell you how I acted toward him, and what led to it; because I
understand that he is excessively offended with me, and that he is
likely to mention elsewhere what he calls my unladylike violence toward
him. If he should mention it to you, I am anxious to acknowledge, of my
own accord, that I forgot myself—not, I hope you will think, without
some provocation.

“I pushed him into the hall, leaving Magdalen, for the moment, to Miss
Garth’s care. Instead of going away, he sat down sulkily on one of the
hall chairs. ‘May I ask the reason of this extraordinary violence?’ he
inquired, with an injured look. ‘No,’ I said. ‘You will be good enough
to imagine the reason for yourself, and to leave us immediately, if you
please.’ He sat doggedly in the chair, biting his nails and
considering. ‘What have I done to be treated in this unfeeling manner?’
he asked, after a while. ‘I can enter into no discussion with you,’ I
answered; ‘I can only request you to leave us. If you persist in
waiting to see my sister again, I will go to the cottage myself and
appeal to your father.’ He got up in a great hurry at those words. ‘I
have been infamously used in this business,’ he said. ‘All the
hardships and the sacrifices have fallen to my share. I’m the only one
among you who has any heart: all the rest are as hard as
stones—Magdalen included. In one breath she says she loves me, and in
another she tells me to go to China. What have I done to be treated
with this heartless inconsistency? I am consistent myself—I only want
to stop at home—and (what’s the consequence?) you’re all against me!’
In that manner he grumbled his way down the steps, and so I saw the
last of him. This was all that passed between us. If he gives you any
other account of it, what he says will be false. He made no attempt to
return. An hour afterward his father came alone to say good-by. He saw
Miss Garth and me, but not Magdalen; and he told us he would take the
necessary measures, with your assistance, for having his son properly
looked after in London, and seen safely on board the vessel when the
time came. It was a short visit, and a sad leave-taking. Even Mr. Clare
was sorry, though he tried hard to hide it.

“We had barely two hours, after Mr. Clare had left us, before it would
be time to go. I went back to Magdalen, and found her quieter and
better, though terribly pale and exhausted, and oppressed, as I
fancied, by thoughts which she could not prevail on herself to
communicate. She would tell me nothing then—she has told me nothing
since—of what passed between herself and Francis Clare. When I spoke of
him angrily (feeling as I did that he had distressed and tortured her,
when she ought to have had all the encouragement and comfort from him
that man could give), she refused to hear me: she made the kindest
allowances and the sweetest excuses for him, and laid all the blame of
the dreadful state in which I had found her entirely on herself. Was I
wrong in telling you that she had a noble nature? And won’t you alter
your opinion when you read these lines?

“We had no friends to come and bid us good-by; and our few
acquaintances were too far from us—perhaps too indifferent about us—to
call. We employed the little leisure left in going over the house
together for the last time. We took leave of our old schoolroom, our
bedrooms, the room where our mother died, the little study where our
father used to settle his accounts and write his letters—feeling toward
them, in our forlorn condition, as other girls might have felt at
parting with old friends. From the house, in a gleam of fine weather,
we went into the garden, and gathered our last nosegay; with the
purpose of drying the flowers when they begin to wither, and keeping
them in remembrance of the happy days that are gone. When we had said
good-by to the garden, there was only half an hour left. We went
together to the grave; we knelt down, side by side, in silence, and
kissed the sacred ground. I thought my heart would have broken. August
was the month of my mother’s birthday; and, this time last year, my
father and Magdalen and I were all consulting in secret what present we
could make to surprise her with on the birthday morning.

“If you had seen how Magdalen suffered, you would never doubt her
again. I had to take her from the last resting-place of our father and
mother almost by force. Before we were out of the churchyard she broke
from me and ran back. She dropped on her knees at the grave; tore up
from it passionately a handful of grass; and said something to herself,
at the same moment, which, though I followed her instantly, I did not
get near enough to hear. She turned on me in such a frenzied manner,
when I tried to raise her from the ground—she looked at me with such a
fearful wildness in her eyes—that I felt absolutely terrified at the
sight of her. To my relief, the paroxysm left her as suddenly as it had
come. She thrust away the tuft of grass into the bosom of her dress,
and took my arm and hurried with me out of the churchyard. I asked her
why she had gone back—I asked what those words were which she had
spoken at the grave. ‘A promise to our dead father,’ she answered, with
a momentary return of the wild look and the frenzied manner which had
startled me already. I was afraid to agitate her by saying more; I left
all other questions to be asked at a fitter and a quieter time. You
will understand from this how terribly she suffers, how wildly and
strangely she acts under violent agitation; and you will not interpret
against her what she said or did when you saw her on Wednesday last.

“We only returned to the house in time to hasten away from it to the
train. Perhaps it was better for us so—better that we had only a moment
left to look back before the turn in the road hid the last of
Combe-Raven from our view. There was not a soul we knew at the station;
nobody to stare at us, nobody to wish us good-by. The rain came on
again as we took our seats in the train. What we felt at the sight of
the railway—what horrible remembrances it forced on our minds of the
calamity which has made us fatherless—I cannot, and dare not, tell you.
I have tried anxiously not to write this letter in a gloomy tone; not
to return all your kindness to us by distressing you with our grief.
Perhaps I have dwelt too long already on the little story of our
parting from home? I can only say, in excuse, that my heart is full of
it; and what is not in my heart my pen won’t write.

“We have been so short a time in our new abode that I have nothing more
to tell you—except that Miss Garth’s sister has received us with the
heartiest kindness. She considerately leaves us to ourselves, until we
are fitter than we are now to think of our future plans, and to arrange
as we best can for earning our own living. The house is so large, and
the position of our rooms has been so thoughtfully chosen, that I
should hardly know—except when I hear the laughing of the younger girls
in the garden—that we were living in a school.

“With kindest and best wishes from Miss Garth and my sister, believe
me, dear Mr. Pendril, gratefully yours,

“NORAH VANSTONE.”


II.
From Miss Garth to Mr. Pendril.

“Westmoreland House, Kensington,
“September 23d, 1846.


“MY DEAR SIR,—

“I write these lines in such misery of mind as no words can describe.
Magdalen has deserted us. At an early hour this morning she secretly
left the house, and she has not been heard of since.

“I would come and speak to you personally; but I dare not leave Norah.
I must try to control myself; I must try to write.

“Nothing happened yesterday to prepare me or to prepare Norah for this
last—I had almost said, this worst—of all our afflictions. The only
alteration we either of us noticed in the unhappy girl was an
alteration for the better when we parted for the night. She kissed me,
which she has not done latterly; and she burst out crying when she
embraced her sister next. We had so little suspicion of the truth that
we thought these signs of renewed tenderness and affection a promise of
better things for the future.

“This morning, when her sister went into her room, it was empty, and a
note in her handwriting, addressed to Norah, was lying on the
dressing-table. I cannot prevail on Norah to part with the note; I can
only send you the inclosed copy of it. You will see that it affords no
clue to the direction she has taken.

“Knowing the value of time, in this dreadful emergency, I examined her
room, and (with my sister’s help) questioned the servants immediately
on the news of her absence reaching me. Her wardrobe was empty; and all
her boxes but one, which she has evidently taken away with her, are
empty, too. We are of opinion that she has privately turned her dresses
and jewelry into money; that she had the one trunk she took with her
removed from the house yesterday; and that she left us this morning on
foot. The answers given by one of the servants are so unsatisfactory
that we believe the woman has been bribed to assist her; and has
managed all those arrangements for her flight which she could not have
safely undertaken by herself.

“Of the immediate object with which she has left us, I entertain no
doubt.

“I have reasons (which I can tell you at a fitter time) for feeling
assured that she has gone away with the intention of trying her fortune
on the stage. She has in her possession the card of an actor by
profession, who superintended an amateur theatrical performance at
Clifton, in which she took part; and to him she has gone to help her. I
saw the card at the time, and I know the actor’s name to be Huxtable.
The address I cannot call to mind quite so correctly; but I am almost
sure it was at some theatrical place in Bow Street, Covent Garden. Let
me entreat you not to lose a moment in sending to make the necessary
inquiries; the first trace of her will, I firmly believe, be found at
that address.

“If we had nothing worse to dread than her attempting to go on the
stage, I should not feel the distress and dismay which now overpower
me. Hundreds of other girls have acted as recklessly as she has acted,
and have not ended ill after all. But my fears for Magdalen do not
begin and end with the risk she is running at present.

“There has been something weighing on her mind ever since we left
Combe-Raven—weighing far more heavily for the last six weeks than at
first. Until the period when Francis Clare left England, I am persuaded
she was secretly sustained by the hope that he would contrive to see
her again. From the day when she knew that the measures you had taken
for preventing this had succeeded; from the day when she was assured
that the ship had really taken him away, nothing has roused, nothing
has interested her. She has given herself up, more and more hopelessly,
to her own brooding thoughts; thoughts which I believe first entered
her mind on the day when the utter ruin of the prospects on which her
marriage depended was made known to her. She has formed some desperate
project of contesting the possession of her father’s fortune with
Michael Vanstone; and the stage career which she has gone away to try
is nothing more than a means of freeing herself from all home
dependence, and of enabling her to run what mad risks she pleases, in
perfect security from all home control. What it costs me to write of
her in these terms, I must leave you to imagine. The time has gone by
when any consideration of distress to my own feelings can weigh with
me. Whatever I can say which will open your eyes to the real danger,
and strengthen your conviction of the instant necessity of averting it,
I say in despite of myself, without hesitation and without reserve.

“One word more, and I have done.

“The last time you were so good as to come to this house, do you
remember how Magdalen embarrassed and distressed us by questioning you
about her right to bear her father’s name? Do you remember her
persisting in her inquiries, until she had forced you to acknowledge
that, legally speaking, she and her sister had No Name? I venture to
remind you of this, because you have the affairs of hundreds of clients
to think of, and you might well have forgotten the circumstance.
Whatever natural reluctance she might otherwise have had to deceiving
us, and degrading herself, by the use of an assumed name, that
conversation with you is certain to have removed. We must discover her
by personal description—we can trace her in no other way.

“I can think of nothing more to guide your decision in our deplorable
emergency. For God’s sake, let no expense and no efforts be spared. My
letter ought to reach you by ten o’clock this morning, at the latest.
Let me have one line in answer, to say you will act instantly for the
best. My only hope of quieting Norah is to show her a word of
encouragement from your pen. Believe me, dear sir, yours sincerely and
obliged,

“HARRIET GARTH.”


III.
From Magdalen to Norah (inclosed in the preceding Letter).

“MY DARLING,—

“Try to forgive me. I have struggled against myself till I am worn out
in the effort. I am the wretchedest of living creatures. Our quiet life
here maddens me; I can bear it no longer; I must go. If you knew what
my thoughts are; if you knew how hard I have fought against them, and
how horribly they have gone on haunting me in the lonely quiet of this
house, you would pity and forgive me. Oh, my love, don’t feel hurt at
my not opening my heart to you as I ought! I dare not open it. I dare
not show myself to you as I really am.

“Pray don’t send and seek after me; I will write and relieve all your
anxieties. You know, Norah, we must get our living for ourselves; I
have only gone to get mine in the manner which is fittest for me.
Whether I succeed, or whether I fail, I can do myself no harm either
way. I have no position to lose, and no name to degrade. Don’t doubt I
love you—don’t let Miss Garth doubt my gratitude. I go away miserable
at leaving you; but I must go. If I had loved you less dearly, I might
have had the courage to say this in your presence—but how could I trust
myself to resist your persuasions, and to bear the sight of your
distress? Farewell, my darling! Take a thousand kisses from me, my own
best, dearest love, till we meet again.

“MAGDALEN.”


IV.
From Sergeant Bulmer (of the Detective Police) to Mr. Pendril.

“Scotland Yard,
“September 29th, 1846.


“SIR,—

“Your clerk informs me that the parties interested in our inquiry after
the missing young lady are anxious for news of the same. I went to your
office to speak to you about the matter to-day. Not having found you,
and not being able to return and try again to-morrow, I write these
lines to save delay, and to tell you how we stand thus far.

“I am sorry to say, no advance has been made since my former report.
The trace of the young lady which we found nearly a week since, still
remains the last trace discovered of her. This case seems a mighty
simple one looked at from a distance. Looked at close, it alters very
considerably for the worse, and becomes, to speak the plain truth—a
Poser.

“This is how we now stand:

“We have traced the young lady to the theatrical agent’s in Bow Street.
We know that at an early hour on the morning of the twenty-third the
agent was called downstairs, while he was dressing, to speak to a young
lady in a cab at the door. We know that, on her production of Mr.
Huxtable’s card, he wrote on it Mr. Huxtable’s address in the country,
and heard her order the cabman to drive to the Great Northern terminus.
We believe she left by the nine o’clock train. We followed her by the
twelve o’clock train. We have ascertained that she called at half-past
two at Mr. Huxtable’s lodgings; that she found he was away, and not
expected back till eight in the evening; that she left word she would
call again at eight; and that she never returned. Mr. Huxtable’s
statement is—he and the young lady have never set eyes on each other.
The first consideration which follows, is this: Are we to believe Mr.
Huxtable? I have carefully inquired into his character; I know as much,
or more, about him than he knows about himself; and my opinion is, that
we _are_ to believe him. To the best of my knowledge, he is a perfectly
honest man.

“Here, then, is the hitch in the case. The young lady sets out with a
certain object before her. Instead of going on to the accomplishment of
that object, she stops short of it. Why has she stopped? and where?
Those are, unfortunately, just the questions which we can’t answer yet.

“My own opinion of the matter is, briefly, as follows: I don’t think
she has met with any serious accident. Serious accidents, in nine cases
out of ten, discover themselves. My own notion is, that she has fallen
into the hands of some person or persons interested in hiding her away,
and sharp enough to know how to set about it. Whether she is in their
charge, with or without her own consent, is more than I can undertake
to say at present. I don’t wish to raise false hopes or false fears; I
wish to stop short at the opinion I have given already.

“In regard to the future, I may tell you that I have left one of my men
in daily communication with the authorities. I have also taken care to
have the handbills offering a reward for the discovery of her widely
circulated. Lastly, I have completed the necessary arrangements for
seeing the play-bills of all country theaters, and for having the
dramatic companies well looked after. Some years since, this would have
cost a serious expenditure of time and money. Luckily for our purpose,
the country theaters are in a bad way. Excepting the large cities,
hardly one of them is open, and we can keep our eye on them, with
little expense and less difficulty.

“These are the steps which I think it needful to take at present. If
you are of another opinion, you have only to give me your directions,
and I will carefully attend to the same. I don’t by any means despair
of our finding the young lady and bringing her back to her friends safe
and well. Please to tell them so; and allow me to subscribe myself,
yours respectfully,

“ABRAHAM BULMER.”


V.
Anonymous Letter addressed to Mr. Pendril.

“SIR,—

“A word to the wise. The friends of a certain young lady are wasting
time and money to no purpose. Your confidential clerk and your
detective policeman are looking for a needle in a bottle of hay. This
is the ninth of October, and they have not found her yet: they will as
soon find the Northwest Passage. Call your dogs off; and you may hear
of the young lady’s safety under her own hand. The longer you look for
her, the longer she will remain, what she is now—lost.”


[The preceding letter is thus indorsed, in Mr. Pendril’s handwriting:
“No apparent means of tracing the inclosed to its source. Post-mark,
‘Charing Cross.’ Stationer’s stamp cut off the inside of the envelope.
Handwriting, probably a man’s, in disguise. Writer, whoever he is,
correctly informed. No further trace of the younger Miss Vanstone
discovered yet.”]



THE SECOND SCENE.
SKELDERGATE, YORK.



