letter might produce. Mean, selfish, and cowardly as he was, even Noel
Vanstone might feel some compunction at practicing such a deception as
was here suggested on a woman who stood toward him in the position of
Mrs. Lecount. She had served him faithfully, however interested her
motives might be—she had lived since he was a lad in the full
possession of his father’s confidence—she was living now under the
protection of his own roof. Could he fail to remember this; and,
remembering it, could he lend his aid without hesitation to the scheme
which was now proposed to him? Captain Wragge unconsciously retained
belief enough in human nature to doubt it. To his surprise, and, it
must be added, to his relief, also, his apprehensions proved to be
groundless. The only emotions aroused in Noel Vanstone’s mind by a
perusal of the letter were a hearty admiration of his friend’s idea,
and a vainglorious anxiety to claim the credit to himself of being the
person who carried it out. Examples may be found every day of a fool
who is no coward; examples may be found occasionally of a fool who is
not cunning; but it may reasonably be doubted whether there is a
producible instance anywhere of a fool who is not cruel.

“Perfect!” cried Noel Vanstone, clapping his hands. “Mr. Bygrave, you
are as good as Figaro in the French comedy. Talking of French, there is
one serious mistake in this clever letter of yours—it is written in the
wrong language. When the doctor writes to Lecount, he writes in French.
Perhaps you meant me to translate it? You can’t manage without my help,
can you? I write French as fluently as I write English. Just look at
me! I’ll translate it, while I sit here, in two strokes of the pen.”

He completed the translation almost as rapidly as Captain Wragge had
produced the original. “Wait a minute!” he cried, in high critical
triumph at discovering another defect in the composition of his
ingenious friend. “The doctor always dates his letters. Here is no date
to yours.”

“I leave the date to you,” said the captain, with a sardonic smile.
“You have discovered the fault, my dear sir—pray correct it!”

Noel Vanstone mentally looked into the great gulf which separates the
faculty that can discover a defect, from the faculty that can apply a
remedy, and, following the example of many a wiser man, declined to
cross over it.

“I couldn’t think of taking the liberty,” he said, politely. “Perhaps
you had a motive for leaving the date out?”

“Perhaps I had,” replied Captain Wragge, with his easiest good-humor.
“The date must depend on the time a letter takes to get to Zurich. _I_
have had no experience on that point—_you_ must have had plenty of
experience in your father’s time. Give me the benefit of your
information, and we will add the date before you leave the
writing-table.”

Noel Vanstone’s experience was, as Captain Wragge had anticipated,
perfectly competent to settle the question of time. The railway
resources of the Continent (in the year eighteen hundred and
forty-seven) were but scanty; and a letter sent at that period from
England to Zurich, and from Zurich back again to England, occupied ten
days in making the double journey by post.

“Date the letter in French five days on from to-morrow,” said the
captain, when he had got his information. “Very good. The next thing is
to let me have the doctor’s note as soon as you can. I may be obliged
to practice some hours before I can copy your translation in an exact
imitation of the doctor’s handwriting. Have you got any foreign
note-paper? Let me have a few sheets, and send, at the same time, an
envelope addressed to one of those lady-friends of yours at Zurich,
accompanied by the necessary request to post the inclosure. This is all
I need trouble you to do, Mr. Vanstone. Don’t let me seem inhospitable;
but the sooner you can supply me with my materials, the better I shall
be pleased. We entirely understand each other, I suppose? Having
accepted your proposal for my niece’s hand, I sanction a private
marriage in consideration of the circumstances on your side. A little
harmless stratagem is necessary to forward your views. I invent the
stratagem at your request, and you make use of it without the least
hesitation. The result is, that in ten days from to-morrow Mrs. Lecount
will be on her way to Switzerland; in fifteen days from to-morrow Mrs.
Lecount will reach Zurich, and discover the trick we have played her;
in twenty days from to-morrow Mrs. Lecount will be back at Aldborough,
and will find her master’s wedding-cards on the table, and her master
himself away on his honey-moon trip. I put it arithmetically, for the
sake of putting it plain. God bless you. Good-morning!”

“I suppose I may have the happiness of seeing Miss Bygrave to-morrow?”
said Noel Vanstone, turning round at the door.

“We must be careful,” replied Captain Wragge. “I don’t forbid
to-morrow, but I make no promise beyond that. Permit me to remind you
that we have got Mrs. Lecount to manage for the next ten days.”

“I wish Lecount was at the bottom of the German Ocean!” exclaimed Noel
Vanstone, fervently. “It’s all very well for you to manage her—you
don’t live in the house. What am I to do?”

“I’ll tell you to-morrow,” said the captain. “Go out for your walk
alone, and drop in here, as you dropped in to-day, at two o’clock. In
the meantime, don’t forget those things I want you to send me. Seal
them up together in a large envelope. When you have done that, ask Mrs.
Lecount to walk out with you as usual; and while she is upstairs
putting her bonnet on, send the servant across to me. You understand?
Good-morning.”

An hour afterward, the sealed envelope, with its inclosures, reached
Captain Wragge in perfect safety. The double task of exactly imitating
a strange handwriting, and accurately copying words written in a
language with which he was but slightly acquainted, presented more
difficulties to be overcome than the captain had anticipated. It was
eleven o’clock before the employment which he had undertaken was
successfully completed, and the letter to Zurich ready for the post.

Before going to bed, he walked out on the deserted Parade to breathe
the cool night air. All the lights were extinguished in Sea-view
Cottage, when he looked that way, except the light in the housekeeper’s
window. Captain Wragge shook his head suspiciously. He had gained
experience enough by this time to distrust the wakefulness of Mrs.
Lecount.



