letter came to St. Crux, and that he inclosed it to you, under cover to
Mr. Bygrave, at your own request. Did Mr. Bygrave ever give you that
letter? Don’t agitate yourself, sir! One word of reply will do—Yes or
No.”

He read the paper, and looked up at her with growing bewilderment and
fear. She obstinately waited until he spoke. “No,” he said, faintly; “I
never got the letter.”

“First proof!” said Mrs. Lecount, taking the paper from him, and
putting it back in the bag. “One more, with your kind permission,
before we come to things more serious still. I gave you a written
description, sir, at Aldborough, of a person not named, and I asked you
to compare it with Miss Bygrave the next time you were in her company.
After having first shown the description to Mr. Bygrave—it is useless
to deny it now, Mr. Noel; your friend at North Shingles is not here to
help you!—after having first shown my note to Mr. Bygrave, you made the
comparison, and you found it fail in the most important particular.
There were two little moles placed close together on the left side of
the neck, in my description of the unknown lady, and there were no
little moles at all when you looked at Miss Bygrave’s neck. I am old
enough to be your mother, Mr. Noel. If the question is not indelicate,
may I ask what the present state of your knowledge is on the subject of
your wife’s neck?”

She looked at him with a merciless steadiness. He drew back a few
steps, cowering under her eye. “I can’t say,” he stammered. “I don’t
know. What do you mean by these questions? I never thought about the
moles afterward; I never looked. She wears her hair low—”

“She has excellent reasons to wear it low, sir,” remarked Mrs. Lecount.
“We will try and lift that hair before we have done with the subject.
When I came out here to find you in the garden, I saw a neat young
person through the kitchen window, with her work in her hand, who
looked to my eyes like a lady’s maid. Is this young person your wife’s
maid? I beg your pardon, sir, did you say yes? In that case, another
question, if you please. Did you engage her, or did your wife?”

“I engaged her—”

“While I was away? While I was in total ignorance that you meant to
have a wife, or a wife’s maid?”

“Yes.”

“Under those circumstances, Mr. Noel, you cannot possibly suspect me of
conspiring to deceive you, with the maid for my instrument. Go into the
house, sir, while I wait here. Ask the woman who dresses Mrs. Noel
Vanstone’s hair morning and night whether her mistress has a mark on
the left side of her neck, and (if so) what that mark is?”

He walked a few steps toward the house without uttering a word, then
stopped, and looked back at Mrs. Lecount. His blinking eyes were
steady, and his wizen face had become suddenly composed. Mrs. Lecount
advanced a little and joined him. She saw the change; but, with all her
experience of him, she failed to interpret the true meaning of it.

“Are you in want of a pretense, sir?” she asked. “Are you at a loss to
account to your wife’s maid for such a question as I wish you to put to
her? Pretenses are easily found which will do for persons in her
station of life. Say I have come here with news of a legacy for Mrs.
Noel Vanstone, and that there is a question of her identity to settle
before she can receive the money.”

She pointed to the house. He paid no attention to the sign. His face
grew paler and paler. Without moving or speaking he stood and looked at
her.

“Are you afraid?” asked Mrs. Lecount.

Those words roused him; those words lit a spark of the fire of manhood
in him at last. He turned on her like a sheep on a dog.

“I won’t be questioned and ordered!” he broke out, trembling violently
under the new sensation of his own courage. “I won’t be threatened and
mystified any longer! How did you find me out at this place? What do
you mean by coming here with your hints and your mysteries? What have
you got to say against my wife?”

Mrs. Lecount composedly opened the traveling-bag and took out her
smelling bottle, in case of emergency.

“You have spoken to me in plain words,” she said. “In plain words, sir,
you shall have your answer. Are you too angry to listen?”

Her looks and tones alarmed him, in spite of himself. His courage began
to sink again; and, desperately as he tried to steady it, his voice
trembled when he answered her.

“Give me my answer,” he said, “and give it at once.”

“Your commands shall be obeyed, sir, to the letter,” replied Mrs.
Lecount. “I have come here with two objects. To open your eyes to your
own situation, and to save your fortune—perhaps your life. Your
situation is this. Miss Bygrave has married you under a false character
and a false name. Can you rouse your memory? Can you call to mind the
disguised woman who threatened you in Vauxhall Walk? That woman—as
certainly as I stand here—is now your wife.”

He looked at her in breathless silence, his lips falling apart, his
eyes fixed in vacant inquiry. The suddenness of the disclosure had
overreached its own end. It had stupefied him.

“My wife?” he repeated, and burst into an imbecile laugh.

“Your wife,” reiterated Mrs. Lecount.

At the repetition of those two words the strain on his faculties
relaxed. A thought dawned on him for the first time. His eyes fixed on
her with a furtive alarm, and he drew back hastily. “Mad!” he said to
himself, with a sudden remembrance of what his friend Mr. Bygrave had
told him at Aldborough, sharpened by his own sense of the haggard
change that he saw in her face.

He spoke in a whisper, but Mrs. Lecount heard him. She was close at his
side again in an instant. For the first time, her self-possession
failed her, and she caught him angrily by the arm.

“Will you put my madness to the proof, sir?” she asked.

He shook off her hold; he began to gather courage again, in the intense
sincerity of his disbelief, courage to face the assertion which she
persisted in forcing on him.

“Yes,” he answered. “What must I do?”

“Do what I told you,” said Mrs. Lecount. “Ask the maid that question
about her mistress on the spot. And if she tells you the mark is there,
do one thing more. Take me up into your wife’s room, and open her
wardrobe in my presence with your own hands.”

“What do you want with her wardrobe?” he asked.

“You shall know when you open it.”

“Very strange!” he said to himself, vacantly. “It’s like a scene in a
novel—it’s like nothing in real life.” He went slowly into the house,
and Mrs. Lecount waited for him in the garden.

After an absence of a few minutes only he appeared again, on the top of
the flight of steps which led into the garden from the house. He held
by the iron rail with one hand, while with the other he beckoned to
Mrs. Lecount to join him on the steps.

“What does the maid say?” she asked, as she approached him. “Is the
mark there?”

He answered in a whisper, “Yes.” What he had heard from the maid had
produced a marked change in him. The horror of the coming discovery had
laid its paralyzing hold on his mind. He moved mechanically; he looked
and spoke like a man in a dream.

“Will you take my arm, sir?”

He shook his head, and, preceding her along the passage and up the
stairs, led the way into his wife’s room. When she joined him and
locked the door, he stood passively waiting for his directions, without
making any remark, without showing any external appearance of surprise.
He had not removed either his hat or coat. Mrs. Lecount took them off
for him. “Thank you,” he said, with the docility of a well-trained
child. “It’s like a scene in a novel—it’s like nothing in real life.”

The bed-chamber was not very large, and the furniture was heavy and
old-fashioned. But evidences of Magdalen’s natural taste and refinement
were visible everywhere, in the little embellishments that graced and
enlivened the aspect of the room. The perfume of dried rose-leaves hung
fragrant on the cool air. Mrs. Lecount sniffed the perfume with a
disparaging frown and threw the window up to its full height. “Pah!”
she said, with a shudder of virtuous disgust, “the atmosphere of
deceit!”

She seated herself near the window. The wardrobe stood against the wall
opposite, and the bed was at the side of the room on her right hand.
“Open the wardrobe, Mr. Noel,” she said. “I don’t go near it. I touch
nothing in it myself. Take out the dresses with your own hand and put
them on the bed. Take them out one by one until I tell you to stop.”

He obeyed her. “I’ll do it as well as I can,” he said. “My hands are
cold, and my head feels half asleep.”

The dresses to be removed were not many, for Magdalen had taken some of
them away with her. After he had put two dresses on the bed, he was
obliged to search in the inner recesses of the wardrobe before he could
find a third. When he produced it, Mrs. Lecount made a sign to him to
stop. The end was reached already; he had found the brown Alpaca dress.

“Lay it out on the bed, sir,” said Mrs. Lecount. “You will see a double
flounce running round the bottom of it. Lift up the outer flounce, and
pass the inner one through your fingers, inch by inch. If you come to a
place where there is a morsel of the stuff missing, stop and look up at
me.”

He passed the flounce slowly through his fingers for a minute or more,
then stopped and looked up. Mrs. Lecount produced her pocket-book and
opened it.

“Every word I now speak, sir, is of serious consequence to you and to
me,” she said. “Listen with your closest attention. When the woman
calling herself Miss Garth came to see us in Vauxhall Walk, I knelt
down behind the chair in which she was sitting and I cut a morsel of
stuff from the dress she wore, which might help me to know that dress
if I ever saw it again. I did this while the woman’s whole attention
was absorbed in talking to you. The morsel of stuff has been kept in my
pocketbook from that time to this. See for yourself, Mr. Noel, if it
fits the gap in that dress which your own hands have just taken from
your wife’s wardrobe.”

She rose and handed him the fragment of stuff across the bed. He put it
into the vacant space in the flounce as well as his trembling fingers
would let him.

“Does it fit, sir?” asked Mrs. Lecount.

The dress dropped from his hands, and the deadly bluish pallor—which
every doctor who attended him had warned his housekeeper to
dread—overspread his face slowly. Mrs. Lecount had not reckoned on such
an answer to her question as she now saw in his cheeks. She hurried
round to him, with the smelling-bottle in her hand. He dropped to his
knees and caught at her dress with the grasp of a drowning man. “Save
me!” he gasped, in a hoarse, breathless whisper. “Oh, Lecount, save
me!”

“I promise to save you,” said Mrs. Lecount; “I am here with the means
and the resolution to save you. Come away from this place—come nearer
to the air.” She raised him as she spoke, and led him across the room
to the window. “Do you feel the chill pain again on your left side?”
she asked, with the first signs of alarm that she had shown yet. “Has
your wife got any eau-de-cologne, any sal-volatile in her room? Don’t
exhaust yourself by speaking—point to the place!”

He pointed to a little triangular cupboard of old worm-eaten
walnut-wood fixed high in a corner of the room. Mrs. Lecount tried the
door: it was locked.

As she made that discovery, she saw his head sink back gradually on the
easy-chair in which she had placed him. The warning of the doctors in
past years—“If you ever let him faint, you let him die”—recurred to her
memory as if it had been spoken the day before. She looked at the
cupboard again. In a recess under it lay some ends of cord, placed
there apparently for purposes of packing. Without an instant’s
hesitation, she snatched up a morsel of cord, tied one end fast round
the knob of the cupboard door, and seizing the other end in both hands,
pulled it suddenly with the exertion of her whole strength. The rotten
wood gave way, the cupboard doors flew open, and a heap of little
trifles poured out noisily on the floor. Without stopping to notice the
broken china and glass at her feet, she looked into the dark recesses
of the cupboard and saw the gleam of two glass bottles. One was put
away at the extreme back of the shelf, the other was a little in
advance, almost hiding it. She snatched them both out at once, and took
them, one in each hand, to the window, where she could read their
labels in the clearer light.

The bottle in her right hand was the first bottle she looked at. It was
marked—_Sal-volatile_.

She instantly laid the other bottle aside on the table without looking
at it. The other bottle lay there, waiting its turn. It held a dark
liquid, and it was labeled—POISON.



