CHAPTER III.

There was a pause of a few minutes while Mrs. Lecount opened the second
of the two papers which lay before her on the table, and refreshed her
memory by looking it rapidly through. This done, she once more
addressed herself to Noel Vanstone, carefully lowering her voice, so as
to render it inaudible to any one who might be listening in the passage
outside.

“I must beg your permission, sir,” she began, “to return to the subject
of your wife. I do so most unwillingly; and I promise you that what I
have now to say about her shall be said, for your sake and for mine, in
the fewest words. What do we know of this woman, Mr. Noel—judging her
by her own confession when she came to us in the character of Miss
Garth, and by her own acts afterward at Aldborough? We know that, if
death had not snatched your father out of her reach, she was ready with
her plot to rob him of the Combe-Raven money. We know that, when you
inherited the money in your turn, she was ready with her plot to rob
_you_. We know how she carried that plot through to the end; and we
know that nothing but your death is wanted, at this moment, to crown
her rapacity and her deception with success. We are sure of these
things. We are sure that she is young, bold, and clever—that she has
neither doubts, scruples, nor pity—and that she possesses the personal
qualities which men in general (quite incomprehensibly to _me!_) are
weak enough to admire. These are not fancies, Mr. Noel, but facts; you
know them as well as I do.”

He made a sign in the affirmative, and Mrs. Lecount went on:

“Keep in your mind what I have said of the past, sir, and now look with
me to the future. I hope and trust you have a long life still before
you; but let us, for the moment only, suppose the case of your
death—your death leaving this will behind you, which gives your fortune
to your cousin George. I am told there is an office in London in which
copies of all wills must be kept. Any curious stranger who chooses to
pay a shilling for the privilege may enter that office, and may read
any will in the place at his or her discretion. Do you see what I am
coming to, Mr. Noel? Your disinherited widow pays her shilling, and
reads your will. Your disinherited widow sees that the Combe-Raven
money, which has gone from your father to you, goes next from you to
Mr. George Bartram. What is the certain end of that discovery? The end
is, that you leave to your cousin and your friend the legacy of this
woman’s vengeance and this woman’s deceit-vengeance made more resolute,
deceit made more devilish than ever, by her exasperation at her own
failure. What is your cousin George? He is a generous, unsuspicious
man; incapable of deceit himself, and fearing no deception in others.
Leave him at the mercy of your wife’s unscrupulous fascinations and
your wife’s unfathomable deceit, and I see the end as certainly as I
see you sitting there! She will blind his eyes, as she blinded yours;
and, in spite of _you_, in spite of _me_, she will have the money!”

She stopped, and left her last words time to gain their hold on his
mind. The circumstances had been stated so clearly, the conclusion from
them had been so plainly drawn, that he seized her meaning without an
effort, and seized it at once.

“I see!” he said, vindictively clinching his hands. “I understand,
Lecount! She shan’t have a farthing. What shall I do? Shall I leave the
money to the admiral?” He paused, and considered a little. “No,” he
resumed; “there’s the same danger in leaving it to the admiral that
there is in leaving it to George.”

“There is no danger, Mr. Noel, if you take my advice.”

“What is your advice?”

“Follow your own idea, sir. Take the pen in hand again, and leave the
money to Admiral Bartram.”

He mechanically dipped the pen in the ink, and then hesitated.

“You shall know where I am leading you, sir,” said Mrs. Lecount,
“before you sign your will. In the meantime, let us gain every inch of
ground we can, as we go on. I want the will to be all written out
before we advance a single step beyond it. Begin your third paragraph,
Mr. Noel, under the lines which leave me my legacy of five thousand
pounds.”

She dictated the last momentous sentence of the will (from the rough
draft in her own possession) in these words:

“The whole residue of my estate, after payment of my burial expenses
and my lawful debts, I give and bequeath to Rear-Admiral Arthur Everard
Bartram, my Executor aforesaid; to be by him applied to such uses as he
may think fit.

“Signed, sealed, and delivered, this third day of November, eighteen
hundred and forty-seven, by Noel Vanstone, the within-named testator,
as and for his last Will and Testament, in the presence of us—”

“Is that all?” asked Noel Vanstone, in astonishment.

“That is enough, sir, to bequeath your fortune to the admiral; and
therefore that is all. Now let us go back to the case which we have
supposed already. Your widow pays her shilling, and sees this will.
There is the Combe-Raven money left to Admiral Bartram, with a
declaration in plain words that it is his, to use as he likes. When she
sees this, what does she do? She sets her trap for the admiral. He is a
bachelor, and he is an old man. Who is to protect him against the arts
of this desperate woman? Protect him yourself, sir, with a few more
strokes of that pen which has done such wonders already. You have left
him this legacy in your will—which your wife sees. Take the legacy away
again, in a letter—which is a dead secret between the admiral and you.
Put the will and the letter under one cover, and place them in the
admiral’s possession, with your written directions to him to break the
seal on the day of your death. Let the will say what it says now; and
let the letter (which is your secret and his) tell him the truth. Say
that, in leaving him your fortune, you leave it with the request that
he will take his legacy with one hand from you, and give it with the
other to his nephew George. Tell him that your trust in this matter
rests solely on your confidence in his honor, and on your belief in his
affectionate remembrance of your father and yourself. You have known
the admiral since you were a boy. He has his little whims and oddities;
but he is a gentleman from the crown of his head to the sole of his
foot; and he is utterly incapable of proving false to a trust in his
honor, reposed by his dead friend. Meet the difficulty boldly, by such
a stratagem as this; and you save these two helpless men from your
wife’s snare, one by means of the other. Here, on one side, is your
will, which gives the fortune to the admiral, and sets her plotting
accordingly. And there, on the other side, is your letter, which
privately puts the money into the nephew’s hands!”

The malicious dexterity of this combination was exactly the dexterity
which Noel Vanstone was most fit to appreciate. He tried to express his
approval and admiration in words. Mrs. Lecount held up her hand
warningly and closed his lips.

“Wait, sir, before you express your opinion,” she went on. “Half the
difficulty is all that we have conquered yet. Let us say, the admiral
has made the use of your legacy which you have privately requested him
to make of it. Sooner or later, however well the secret may be kept,
your wife will discover the truth. What follows that discovery! She
lays siege to Mr. George. All you have done is to leave him the money
by a roundabout way. There he is, after an interval of time, as much at
her mercy as if you had openly mentioned him in your will. What is the
remedy for this? The remedy is to mislead her, if we can, for the
second time—to set up an obstacle between her and the money, for the
protection of your cousin George. Can you guess for yourself, Mr. Noel,
what is the most promising obstacle we can put in her way?”

He shook his head. Mrs. Lecount smiled, and startled him into close
attention by laying her hand on his arm.

“Put a Woman in her way, sir!” she whispered in her wiliest tones.
“_We_ don’t believe in that fascinating beauty of hers—whatever _you_
may do. _Our_ lips don’t burn to kiss those smooth cheeks. _Our_ arms
don’t long to be round that supple waist. _We_ see through her smiles
and her graces, and her stays and her padding—she can’t fascinate _us!_
Put a woman in her way, Mr. Noel! Not a woman in my helpless situation,
who is only a servant, but a woman with the authority and the jealousy
of a Wife. Make it a condition, in your letter to the admiral, that if
Mr. George is a bachelor at the time of your death, he shall marry
within a certain time afterward, or he shall not have the legacy.
Suppose he remains single in spite of your condition, who is to have
the money then? Put a woman in your wife’s way, sir, once more—and
leave the fortune, in that case, to the married sister of your cousin
George.”

She paused. Noel Vanstone again attempted to express his opinion, and
again Mrs. Lecount’s hand extinguished him in silence.

“If you approve, Mr. Noel,” she said, “I will take your approval for
granted. If you object, I will meet your objection before it is out of
your mouth. You may say: Suppose this condition is sufficient to answer
the purpose, why hide it in a private letter to the admiral? Why not
openly write it down, with my cousin’s name, in the will? Only for one
reason, sir. Only because the secret way is the sure way, with such a
woman as your wife. The more secret you can keep your intentions, the
more time you force her to waste in finding them out for herself. That
time which she loses is time gained from her treachery by the
admiral—time gained by Mr. George (if he is still a bachelor) for his
undisturbed choice of a lady—time gained, for her own security, by the
object of his choice, who might otherwise be the first object of your
wife’s suspicion and your wife’s hostility. Remember the bottle we have
discovered upstairs; and keep this desperate woman ignorant, and
therefore harmless, as long as you can. There is my advice, Mr. Noel,
in the fewest and plainest words. What do you say, sir? Am I almost as
clever in my way as your friend Mr. Bygrave? Can I, too, conspire a
little, when the object of my conspiracy is to assist your wishes and
to protect your friends?”

Permitted the use of his tongue at last, Noel Vanstone’s admiration of
Mrs. Lecount expressed itself in terms precisely similar to those which
he had used on a former occasion, in paying his compliments to Captain
Wragge. “What a head you have got!” were the grateful words which he
had once spoken to Mrs. Lecount’s bitterest enemy. “What a head you
have got!” were the grateful words which he now spoke again to Mrs.
Lecount herself. So do extremes meet; and such is sometimes the
all-embracing capacity of the approval of a fool!

“Allow my head, sir, to deserve the compliment which you have paid to
it,” said Mrs. Lecount. “The letter to the admiral is not written yet.
Your will there is a body without a soul—an Adam without an Eve—until
the letter is completed and laid by its side. A little more dictation
on my part, a little more writing on yours, and our work is done.
Pardon me. The letter will be longer than the will; we must have larger
paper than the note-paper this time.”

The writing-case was searched, and some letter paper was found in it of
the size required. Mrs. Lecount resumed her dictation; and Noel
Vanstone resumed his pen.

“Baliol Cottage, Dumfries,
“November 3d, 1847.


“Private.

“DEAR ADMIRAL BARTRAM,

“When you open my Will (in which you are named my sole executor), you
will find that I have bequeathed the whole residue of my estate—after
payment of one legacy of five thousand pounds—to yourself. It is the
purpose of my letter to tell you privately what the object is for which
I have left you the fortune which is now placed in your hands.

“I beg you to consider this large legacy as intended, under certain
conditions, to be given by you to your nephew George. If your nephew is
married at the time of my death, and if his wife is living, I request
you to put him at once in possession of your legacy; accompanying it by
the expression of my desire (which I am sure he will consider a sacred
and binding obligation on him) that he will settle the money on his
wife—and on his children, if he has any. If, on the other hand, he is
unmarried at the time of my death, or if he is a widower—in either of
those cases, I make it a condition of his receiving the legacy, that he
shall be married within the period of—”

Mrs. Lecount laid down the Draft letter from which she had been
dictating thus far, and informed Noel Vanstone by a sign that his pen
might rest.

“We have come to the question of time, sir,” she observed. “How long
will you give your cousin to marry, if he is single, or a widower, at
the time of your death?”

“Shall I give him a year?” inquired Noel Vanstone.

“If we had nothing to consider but the interests of Propriety,” said
Mrs. Lecount, “I should say a year too, sir—especially if Mr. George
should happen to be a widower. But we have your wife to consider, as
well as the interests of Propriety. A year of delay, between your death
and your cousin’s marriage, is a dangerously long time to leave the
disposal of your fortune in suspense. Give a determined woman a year to
plot and contrive in, and there is no saying what she may not do.”

“Six months?” suggested Noel Vanstone.

“Six months, sir,” rejoined Mrs. Lecount, “is the preferable time of
the two. A six months’ interval from the day of your death is enough
for Mr. George. You look discomposed, sir; what is the matter?”

“I wish you wouldn’t talk so much about my death,” he broke out,
petulantly. “I don’t like it! I hate the very sound of the word!”

Mrs. Lecount smiled resignedly, and referred to her Draft.

“I see the word ‘decease’ written here,” she remarked. “Perhaps, Mr.
Noel, you would prefer it?”

“Yes,” he said; “I prefer ‘Decease.’ It doesn’t sound so dreadful as
‘Death.’”

“Let us go on with the letter, sir.”

She resumed her dictation, as follows:

“...in either of those cases, I make it a condition of his receiving
the legacy that he shall be married within the period of Six calendar
months from the day of my decease; that the woman he marries shall not
be a widow; and that his marriage shall be a marriage by Banns,
publicly celebrated in the parish church of Ossory—where he has been
known from his childhood, and where the family and circumstances of his
future wife are likely to be the subject of public interest and
inquiry.”

“This,” said Mrs. Lecount, quietly looking up from the Draft, “is to
protect Mr. George, sir, in case the same trap is set for him which was
successfully set for you. She will not find her false character and her
false name fit quite so easily next time—no, not even with Mr. Bygrave
to help her! Another dip of ink, Mr. Noel; let us write the next
paragraph. Are you ready?”

“Yes.”

Mrs. Lecount went on.

“If your nephew fails to comply with these conditions—that is to say,
if being either a bachelor or a widower at the time of my decease, he
fails to marry in all respects as I have here instructed him to marry,
within Six calendar months from that time—it is my desire that he shall
not receive the legacy, or any part of it. I request you, in the case
here supposed, to pass him over altogether; and to give the fortune
left you in my will to his married sister, Mrs. Girdlestone.

“Having now put you in possession of my motives and intentions, I come
to the next question which it is necessary to consider. If, when you
open this letter, your nephew is an unmarried man, it is clearly
indispensable that he should know of the conditions here imposed on
him, as soon, if possible, as you know of them yourself. Are you, under
these circumstances, freely to communicate to him what I have here
written to you? Or are you to leave him under the impression that no
such private expression of my wishes as this is in existence; and are
you to state all the conditions relating to his marriage, as if they
emanated entirely from yourself?

“If you will adopt this latter alternative, you will add one more to
the many obligations under which your friendship has placed me.

“I have serious reason to believe that the possession of my money, and
the discovery of any peculiar arrangements relating to the disposal of
it, will be objects (after my decease) of the fraud and conspiracy of
an unscrupulous person. I am therefore anxious—for your sake, in the
first place—that no suspicion of the existence of this letter should be
conveyed to the mind of the person to whom I allude. And I am equally
desirous—for Mrs. Girdlestone’s sake, in the second place—that this
same person should be entirely ignorant that the legacy will pass into
Mrs. Girdlestone’s possession, if your nephew is not married in the
given time. I know George’s easy, pliable disposition; I dread the
attempts that will be made to practice on it; and I feel sure that the
prudent course will be, to abstain from trusting him with secrets, the
rash revelation of which might be followed by serious, and even
dangerous results.

“State the conditions, therefore, to your nephew, as if they were your
own. Let him think they have been suggested to your mind by the new
responsibilities imposed on you as a man of property, by your position
in my will, and by your consequent anxiety to provide for the
perpetuation of the family name. If these reasons are not sufficient to
satisfy him, there can be no objection to your referring him, for any
further explanations which he may desire, to his wedding-day.

“I have done. My last wishes are now confided to you, in implicit
reliance on your honor, and on your tender regard for the memory of
your friend. Of the miserable circumstances which compel me to write as
I have written here, I say nothing. You will hear of them, if my life
is spared, from my own lips—for you will be the first friend whom I
shall consult in my difficulty and distress. Keep this letter strictly
secret, and strictly in your own possession, until my requests are
complied with. Let no human being but yourself know where it is, on any
pretense whatever.

“Believe me, dear Admiral Bartram,
“Affectionately yours,
“NOEL VANSTONE.”


“Have you signed, sir?” asked Mrs. Lecount. “Let me look the letter
over, if you please, before we seal it up.”

She read the letter carefully. In Noel Vanstone’s close, cramped
handwriting, it filled two pages of letter-paper, and ended at the top
of the third page. Instead of using an envelope, Mrs. Lecount folded
it, neatly and securely, in the old-fashioned way. She lit the taper in
the ink-stand, and returned the letter to the writer.

“Seal it, Mr. Noel,” she said, “with your own hand, and your own seal.”
She extinguished the taper, and handed him the pen again. “Address the
letter, sir,” she proceeded, “to _Admiral Bartram, St.
Crux-in-the-Marsh, Essex._ Now, add these words, and sign them, above
the address: _To be kept in your own possession, and to be opened by
yourself only, on the day of my death_—or ‘Decease,’ if you prefer
it—_Noel Vanstone._ Have you done? Let me look at it again. Quite right
in every particular. Accept my congratulations, sir. If your wife has
not plotted her last plot for the Combe-Raven money, it is not your
fault, Mr. Noel—and not mine!”

Finding his attention released by the completion of the letter, Noel
Vanstone reverted at once to purely personal considerations. “There is
my packing-up to be thought of now,” he said. “I can’t go away without
my warm things.”

“Excuse me, sir,” rejoined Mrs. Lecount, “there is the Will to be
signed first; and there must be two persons found to witness your
signature.” She looked out of the front window, and saw the carriage
waiting at the door. “The coachman will do for one of the witnesses,”
she said. “He is in respectable service at Dumfries, and he can be
found if he happens to be wanted. We must have one of your own
servants, I suppose, for the other witness. They are all detestable
women; but the cook is the least ill-looking of the three. Send for the
cook, sir; while I go out and call the coachman. When we have got our
witnesses here, you have only to speak to them in these words: ‘I have
a document here to sign, and I wish you to write your names on it, as
witnesses of my signature.’ Nothing more, Mr. Noel! Say those few words
in your usual manner—and, when the signing is over, I will see myself
to your packing-up, and your warm things.”

She went to the front door, and summoned the coachman to the parlor. On
her return, she found the cook already in the room. The cook looked
mysteriously offended, and stared without intermission at Mrs. Lecount.
In a minute more the coachman—an elderly man—came in. He was preceded
by a relishing odor of whisky; but his head was Scotch; and nothing but
his odor betrayed him.

“I have a document here to sign,” said Noel Vanstone, repeating his
lesson; “and I wish you to write your names on it, as witnesses of my
signature.”

The coachman looked at the will. The cook never removed her eyes from
Mrs. Lecount.

“Ye’ll no object, sir,” said the coachman, with the national caution
showing itself in every wrinkle on his face—“ye’ll no object, sir, to
tell me, first, what the Doecument may be?”

Mrs. Lecount interposed before Noel Vanstone’s indignation could
express itself in words.

“You must tell the man, sir, that this is your Will,” she said. “When
he witnesses your signature, he can see as much for himself if he looks
at the top of the page.”

“Ay, ay,” said the coachman, looking at the top of the page
immediately. “His last Will and Testament. Hech, sirs! there’s a sair
confronting of Death in a Doecument like yon! A’ flesh is grass,”
continued the coachman, exhaling an additional puff of whisky, and
looking up devoutly at the ceiling. “Tak’ those words in connection
with that other Screepture: Many are ca’ad, but few are chosen. Tak’
that again, in connection with Rev’lations, Chapter the First, verses
One to Fefteen. Lay the whole to heart; and what’s your Walth, then?
Dross, sirs! And your body? (Screepture again.) Clay for the potter!
And your life? (Screepture once more.) The Breeth o’ your Nostrils!”

The cook listened as if the cook was at church: but she never removed
her eyes from Mrs. Lecount.

“You had better sign, sir. This is apparently some custom prevalent in
Dumfries during the transaction of business,” said Mrs. Lecount,
resignedly. “The man means well, I dare say.”

She added those last words in a soothing tone, for she saw that Noel
Vanstone’s indignation was fast merging into alarm. The coachman’s
outburst of exhortation seemed to have inspired him with fear, as well
as disgust.

He dipped the pen in the ink, and signed the Will without uttering a
word. The coachman (descending instantly from Theology to Business)
watched the signature with the most scrupulous attention; and signed
his own name as witness, with an implied commentary on the proceeding,
in the form of another puff of whisky, exhaled through the medium of a
heavy sigh. The cook looked away from Mrs. Lecount with an
effort—signed her name in a violent hurry—and looked back again with a
start, as if she expected to see a loaded pistol (produced in the
interval) in the housekeeper’s hands. “Thank you,” said Mrs. Lecount,
in her friendliest manner. The cook shut up her lips aggressively and
looked at her master. “You may go!” said her master. The cook coughed
contemptuously, and went.

“We shan’t keep you long,” said Mrs. Lecount, dismissing the coachman.
“In half an hour, or less, we shall be ready for the journey back.”

The coachman’s austere countenance relaxed for the first time. He
smiled mysteriously, and approached Mrs. Lecount on tiptoe.

“Ye’ll no forget one thing, my leddy,” he said, with the most
ingratiating politeness. “Ye’ll no forget the witnessing as weel as the
driving, when ye pay me for my day’s wark!” He laughed with guttural
gravity; and, leaving his atmosphere behind him, stalked out of the
room.

“Lecount,” said Noel Vanstone, as soon as the coachman closed the door,
“did I hear you tell that man we should be ready in half an hour?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Are you blind?”

He asked the question with an angry stamp of his foot. Mrs. Lecount
looked at him in astonishment.

“Can’t you see the brute is drunk?” he went on, more and more
irritably. “Is my life nothing? Am I to be left at the mercy of a
drunken coachman? I won’t trust that man to drive me, for any
consideration under heaven! I’m surprised you could think of it,
Lecount.”

“The man has been drinking, sir,” said Mrs. Lecount. “It is easy to see
and to smell that. But he is evidently used to drinking. If he is sober
enough to walk quite straight—which he certainly does—and to sign his
name in an excellent handwriting—which you may see for yourself on the
Will—I venture to think he is sober enough to drive us to Dumfries.”

“Nothing of the sort! You’re a foreigner, Lecount; you don’t understand
these people. They drink whisky from morning to-night. Whisky is the
strongest spirit that’s made; whisky is notorious for its effect on the
brain. I tell you, I won’t run the risk. I never was driven, and I
never will be driven, by anybody but a sober man.”

“Must I go back to Dumfries by myself, sir?”

“And leave me here? Leave me alone in this house after what has
happened? How do I know my wife may not come back to-night? How do I
know her journey is not a blind to mislead me? Have you no feeling,
Lecount? Can you leave me in my miserable situation—?” He sank into a
chair and burst out crying over his own idea, before he had completed
the expression of it in words. “Too bad!” he said, with his
handkerchief over his face—“too bad!”

It was impossible not to pity him. If ever mortal was pitiable, he was
the man. He had broken down at last, under the conflict of violent
emotions which had been roused in him since the morning. The effort to
follow Mrs. Lecount along the mazes of intricate combination through
which she had steadily led the way, had upheld him while that effort
lasted: the moment it was at an end, he dropped. The coachman had
hastened a result—of which the coachman was far from being the cause.

“You surprise me—you distress me, sir,” said Mrs. Lecount. “I entreat
you to compose yourself. I will stay here, if you wish it, with
pleasure—I will stay here to-night, for your sake. You want rest and
quiet after this dreadful day. The coachman shall be instantly sent
away, Mr. Noel. I will give him a note to the landlord of the hotel,
and the carriage shall come back for us to-morrow morning, with another
man to drive it.”

The prospect which those words presented cheered him. He wiped his
eyes, and kissed Mrs. Lecount’s hand. “Yes!” he said, faintly; “send
the coachman away—and you stop here. You good creature! You excellent
Lecount! Send the drunken brute away, and come back directly. We will
be comfortable by the fire, Lecount—and have a nice little dinner—and
try to make it like old times.” His weak voice faltered; he returned to
the fire side, and melted into tears again under the pathetic influence
of his own idea.

Mrs. Lecount left him for a minute to dismiss the coachman. When she
returned to the parlor she found him with his hand on the bell.

“What do you want, sir?” she asked.

“I want to tell the servants to get your room ready,” he answered. “I
wish to show you every attention, Lecount.”

“You are all kindness, Mr. Noel; but wait one moment. It may be well to
have these papers put out of the way before the servant comes in again.
If you will place the Will and the Sealed Letter together in one
envelope—and if you will direct it to the admiral—I will take care that
the inclosure so addressed is safely placed in his own hands. Will you
come to the table, Mr. Noel, only for one minute more?”

No! He was obstinate; he refused to move from the fire; he was sick and
tired of writing: he wished he had never been born, and he loathed the
sight of pen and ink. All Mrs. Lecount’s patience and all Mrs.
Lecount’s persuasion were required to induce him to write the admiral’s
address for the second time. She only succeeded by bringing the blank
envelope to him upon the paper-case, and putting it coaxingly on his
lap. He grumbled, he even swore, but he directed the envelope at last,
in these terms: “To Admiral Bartram, St. Crux-in-the-Marsh. Favored by
Mrs. Lecount.” With that final act of compliance his docility came to
an end. He refused, in the fiercest terms, to seal the envelope. There
was no need to press this proceeding on him. His seal lay ready on the
table, and it mattered nothing whether he used it, or whether a person
in his confidence used it for him. Mrs. Lecount sealed the envelope,
with its two important inclosures placed safely inside.

She opened her traveling-bag for the last time, and pausing for a
moment before she put the sealed packet away, looked at it with a
triumph too deep for words. She smiled as she dropped it into the bag.
Not the shadow of a suspicion that the Will might contain superfluous
phrases and expressions which no practical lawyer would have used; not
the vestige of a doubt whether the Letter was quite as complete a
document as a practical lawyer might have made it, troubled her mind.
In blind reliance—born of her hatred for Magdalen and her hunger for
revenge—in blind reliance on her own abilities and on her friend’s law,
she trusted the future implicitly to the promise of the morning’s work.

As she locked her traveling-bag Noel Vanstone rang the bell. On this
occasion, the summons was answered by Louisa.

“Get the spare room ready,” said her master; “this lady will sleep here
to-night. And air my warm things; this lady and I are going away
to-morrow morning.”

The civil and submissive Louisa received her orders in sullen
silence—darted an angry look at her master’s impenetrable guest—and
left the room. The servants were evidently all attached to their
mistress’s interests, and were all of one opinion on the subject of
Mrs. Lecount.

“That’s done!” said Noel Vanstone, with a sigh of infinite relief.
“Come and sit down, Lecount. Let’s be comfortable—let’s gossip over the
fire.”

Mrs. Lecount accepted the invitation and drew an easy-chair to his
side. He took her hand with a confidential tenderness, and held it in
his while the talk went on. A stranger, looking in through the window,
would have taken them for mother and son, and would have thought to
himself: “What a happy home!”

The gossip, led by Noel Vanstone, consisted as usual of an endless
string of questions, and was devoted entirely to the subject of himself
and his future prospects. Where would Lecount take him to when they
went away the next morning? Why to London? Why should he be left in
London, while Lecount went on to St. Crux to give the admiral the
Letter and the Will? Because his wife might follow him, if he went to
the admiral’s? Well, there was something in that. And because he ought
to be safely concealed from her, in some comfortable lodging, near Mr.
Loscombe? Why near Mr. Loscombe? Ah, yes, to be sure—to know what the
law would do to help him. Would the law set him free from the Wretch
who had deceived him? How tiresome of Lecount not to know! Would the
law say he had gone and married himself a second time, because he had
been living with the Wretch, like husband and wife, in Scotland?
Anything that publicly assumed to be a marriage was a marriage (he had
heard) in Scotland. How excessively tiresome of Lecount to sit there
and say she knew nothing about it! Was he to stay long in London by
himself, with nobody but Mr. Loscombe to speak to? Would Lecount come
back to him as soon as she had put those important papers in the
admiral’s own hands? Would Lecount consider herself still in his
service? The good Lecount! the excellent Lecount! And after all the
law-business was over—what then? Why not leave this horrid England and
go abroad again? Why not go to France, to some cheap place near Paris?
Say Versailles? say St. Germain? In a nice little French house—cheap?
With a nice French _bonne_ to cook—who wouldn’t waste his substance in
the grease-pot? With a nice little garden—where he could work himself,
and get health, and save the expense of keeping a gardener? It wasn’t a
bad idea. And it seemed to promise well for the future—didn’t it,
Lecount?

So he ran on—the poor weak creature! the abject, miserable little man!

As the darkness gathered at the close of the short November day he
began to grow drowsy—his ceaseless questions came to an end at last—he
fell asleep. The wind outside sang its mournful winter-song; the tramp
of passing footsteps, the roll of passing wheels on the road ceased in
dreary silence. He slept on quietly. The firelight rose and fell on his
wizen little face and his nervous, drooping hands. Mrs. Lecount had not
pitied him yet. She began to pity him now. Her point was gained; her
interest in his will was secured; he had put his future life, of his
own accord, under her fostering care—the fire was comfortable; the
circumstances were favorable to the growth of Christian feeling. “Poor
wretch!” said Mrs. Lecount, looking at him with a grave
compassion—“poor wretch!”

The dinner-hour roused him. He was cheerful at dinner; he reverted to
the idea of the cheap little house in France; he smirked and simpered;
and talked French to Mrs. Lecount, while the house-maid and Louisa
waited, turn and turn about, under protest. When dinner was over, he
returned to his comfortable chair before the fire, and Mrs. Lecount
followed him. He resumed the conversation—which meant, in his case,
repeating his questions. But he was not so quick and ready with them as
he had been earlier in the day. They began to flag—they continued, at
longer and longer intervals—they ceased altogether. Toward nine o’clock
he fell asleep again.

It was not a quiet sleep this time. He muttered, and ground his teeth,
and rolled his head from side to side of the chair. Mrs. Lecount
purposely made noise enough to rouse him. He woke, with a vacant eye
and a flushed cheek. He walked about the room restlessly, with a new
idea in his mind—the idea of writing a terrible letter; a letter of
eternal farewell to his wife. How was it to be written? In what
language should he express his feelings? The powers of Shakespeare
himself would be unequal to the emergency! He had been the victim of an
outrage entirely without parallel. A wretch had crept into his bosom! A
viper had hidden herself at his fireside! Where could words be found to
brand her with the infamy she deserved? He stopped, with a suffocating
sense in him of his own impotent rage—he stopped, and shook his fist
tremulously in the empty air.

Mrs. Lecount interfered with an energy and a resolution inspired by
serious alarm. After the heavy strain that had been laid on his
weakness already, such an outbreak of passionate agitation as was now
bursting from him might be the destruction of his rest that night and
of his strength to travel the next day. With infinite difficulty, with
endless promises to return to the subject, and to advise him about it
in the morning, she prevailed on him, at last, to go upstairs and
compose himself for the night. She gave him her arm to assist him. On
the way upstairs his attention, to her great relief, became suddenly
absorbed by a new fancy. He remembered a certain warm and comfortable
mixture of wine, eggs, sugar, and spices, which she had often been
accustomed to make for him in former times, and which he thought he
should relish exceedingly before he went to bed. Mrs. Lecount helped
him on with his dressing-gown—then went down-stairs again to make his
warm drink for him at the parlor fire.

She rang the bell and ordered the necessary ingredients for the
mixture, in Noel Vanstone’s name. The servants, with the small
ingenious malice of their race, brought up the materials one by one,
and kept her waiting for each of them as long as possible. She had got
the saucepan, and the spoon, and the tumbler, and the nutmeg-grater,
and the wine—but not the egg, the sugar, or the spices—when she heard
him above, walking backward and forward noisily in his room; exciting
himself on the old subject again, beyond all doubt.

She went upstairs once more; but he was too quick for her—he heard her
outside the door; and when she opened it, she found him in his chair,
with his back cunningly turned toward her. Knowing him too well to
attempt any remonstrance, she merely announced the speedy arrival of
the warm drink and turned to leave the room. On her way out, she
noticed a table in a corner, with an inkstand and a paper-case on it,
and tried, without attracting his attention, to take the writing
materials away. He was too quick for her again. He asked, angrily, if
she doubted his promise. She put the writing materials back on the
table, for fear of offending him, and left the room.

In half an hour more the mixture was ready. She carried it up to him,
foaming and fragrant, in a large tumbler. “He will sleep after this,”
she thought to herself, as she opened the door; “I have made it
stronger than usual on purpose.”

He had changed his place. He was sitting at the table in the
corner—still with his back to her, writing. This time his quick ears
had not served him; this time she caught him in the fact.

“Oh, Mr. Noel! Mr. Noel!” she said, reproachfully, “what is your
promise worth?”

He made no answer. He was sitting with his left elbow on the table, and
with his head resting on his left hand. His right hand lay back on the
paper, with the pen lying loose in it. “Your drink, Mr. Noel,” she
said, in a kinder tone, feeling unwilling to offend him. He took no
notice of her. She went to the table to rouse him. Was he deep in
thought?

He was dead!

THE END OF THE FIFTH SCENE.



BETWEEN THE SCENES.
PROGRESS OF THE STORY THROUGH THE POST.

I.
From Mrs. Noel Vanstone to Mr. Loscombe.

“Park Terrace, St. John’s Wood, November 5th.


“Dear Sir,

“I came to London yesterday for the purpose of seeing a relative,
leaving Mr. Vanstone at Baliol Cottage, and proposing to return to him
in the course of the week. I reached London late last night, and drove
to these lodgings, having written to secure accommodation beforehand.

“This morning’s post has brought me a letter from my own maid, whom I
left at Baliol Cottage, with instructions to write to me if anything
extraordinary took place in my absence. You will find the girl’s letter
inclosed in this. I have had some experience of her; and I believe she
is to be strictly depended on to tell the truth.

“I purposely abstain from troubling you by any useless allusions to
myself. When you have read my maid’s letter, you will understand the
shock which the news contained in it has caused me. I can only repeat
that I place implicit belief in her statement. I am firmly persuaded
that my husband’s former housekeeper has found him out, has practiced
on his weakness in my absence, and has prevailed on him to make another
Will. From what I know of this woman, I feel no doubt that she has used
her influence over Mr. Vanstone to deprive me, if possible, of all
future interests in my husband’s fortune.

“Under such circumstances as these, it is in the last degree
important—for more reasons than I need mention here—that I should see
Mr. Vanstone, and come to an explanation with him, at the earliest
possible opportunity. You will find that my maid thoughtfully kept her
letter open until the last moment before post-time—without, however,
having any later news to give me than that Mrs. Lecount was to sleep at
the cottage last night and that she and Mr. Vanstone were to leave
together this morning. But for that last piece of intelligence, I
should have been on my way back to Scotland before now. As it is, I
cannot decide for myself what I ought to do next. My going back to
Dumfries, after Mr. Vanstone has left it, seems like taking a journey
for nothing —and my staying in London appears to be almost equally
useless.

“Will you kindly advise me in this difficulty? I will come to you at
Lincoln’s Inn at any time this afternoon or to-morrow which you may
appoint. My next few hours are engaged. As soon as this letter is
dispatched, I am going to Kensington, with the object of ascertaining
whether certain doubts I feel about the means by which Mrs. Lecount may
have accomplished her discovery are well founded or not. If you will
let me have your answer by return of post, I will not fail to get back
to St. John’s Wood in time to receive it.

“Believe me, dear sir, yours sincerely,
“MAGDALEN VANSTONE.”


II.
From Mr. Loscombe to Mrs. Noel Vanstone.

“Lincoln’s Inn, November 5th.


“DEAR MADAM,

“Your letter and its inclosure have caused me great concern and
surprise. Pressure of business allows me no hope of being able to see
you either to-day or to-morrow morning. But if three o’clock to-morrow
afternoon will suit you, at that hour you will find me at your service.

“I cannot pretend to offer a positive opinion until I know more of the
particulars connected with this extraordinary business than I find
communicated either in your letter or in your maid’s. But with this
reserve, I venture to suggest that your remaining in London until
to-morrow may possibly lead to other results besides your consultation
at my chambers. There is at least a chance that you or I may hear
something further in this strange matter by the morning’s post.

“I remain, dear Madam, faithfully yours,
“JOHN LOSCOMBE.”


III.
From Mrs. Noel Vanstone to Miss Garth.

“November 5th, Two o’clock.


“I have just returned from Westmoreland House—after purposely leaving
it in secret, and purposely avoiding you under your own roof. You shall
know why I came, and why I went away. It is due to my remembrance of
old times not to treat you like a stranger, although I can never again
treat you like a friend.

“I set forth on the third from the North to London. My only object in
taking this long journey was to see Norah. I had been suffering for
many weary weeks past such remorse as only miserable women like me can
feel. Perhaps the suffering weakened me; perhaps it roused some old
forgotten tenderness—God knows!—I can’t explain it; I can only tell you
that I began to think of Norah by day, and to dream of Norah by night,
till I was almost heartbroken. I have no better reason than this to
give for running all the risks which I ran, and coming to London to see
her. I don’t wish to claim more for myself than I deserve; I don’t wish
to tell you I was the reformed and repenting creature whom _you_ might
have approved. I had only one feeling in me that I know of. I wanted to
put my arms round Norah’s neck, and cry my heart out on Norah’s bosom.
Childish enough, I dare say. Something might have come of it; nothing
might have come of it—who knows?

“I had no means of finding Norah without your assistance. However you
might disapprove of what I had done, I thought you would not refuse to
help me to find my sister. When I lay down last night in my strange
bed, I said to myself, ‘I will ask Miss Garth, for my father’s sake and
my mother’s sake, to tell me.’ You don’t know what a comfort I felt in
that thought. How should you? What do good women like you know of
miserable sinners like me? All you know is that you pray for us at
church.

“Well, I fell asleep happily that night—for the first time since my
marriage. When the morning came, I paid the penalty of daring to be
happy only for one night. When the morning came, a letter came with it,
which told me that my bitterest enemy on earth (you have meddled
sufficiently with my affairs to know what enemy I mean) had revenged
herself on me in my absence. In following the impulse which led me to
my sister, I had gone to my ruin.

“The mischief was beyond all present remedy, when I received the news
of it. Whatever had happened, whatever might happen, I made up my mind
to persist in my resolution of seeing Norah before I did anything else.
I suspected _you_ of being concerned in the disaster which had
overtaken me—because I felt positively certain at Aldborough that you
and Mrs. Lecount had written to each other. But I never suspected
Norah. If I lay on my death-bed at this moment I could say with a safe
conscience I never suspected Norah.

“So I went this morning to Westmoreland House to ask you for my
sister’s address, and to acknowledge plainly that I suspected you of
being again in correspondence with Mrs. Lecount.

“When I inquired for you at the door, they told me you had gone out,
but that you were expected back before long. They asked me if I would
see your sister, who was then in the school-room. I desired that your
sister should on no account be disturbed: my business was not with her,
but with you. I begged to be allowed to wait in a room by myself until
you returned.

“They showed me into the double room on the ground-floor, divided by
curtains—as it was when I last remember it. There was a fire in the
outer division of the room, but none in the inner; and for that reason,
I suppose, the curtains were drawn. The servant was very civil and
attentive to me. I have learned to be thankful for civility and
attention, and I spoke to her as cheerfully as I could. I said to her,
‘I shall see Miss Garth here, as she comes up to the door, and I can
beckon her in through the long window.’ The servant said I could do so,
if you came that way, but that you let yourself in sometimes with your
own key by the back-garden gate; and if you did this, she would take
care to let you know of my visit. I mention these trifles, to show you
that there was no pre-meditated deceit in my mind when I came to the
house.

“I waited a weary time, and you never came: I don’t know whether my
impatience made me think so, or whether the large fire burning made the
room really as hot as I felt it to be—I only know that, after a while,
I passed through the curtains into the inner room, to try the cooler
atmosphere.

“I walked to the long window which leads into the back garden, to look
out, and almost at the same time I heard the door opened—the door of
the room I had just left, and your voice and the voice of some other
woman, a stranger to me, talking. The stranger was one of the
parlor-boarders, I dare say. I gathered from the first words you
exchanged together, that you had met in the passage—she on her way
downstairs, and you on your way in from the back garden. Her next
question and your next answer informed me that this person was a friend
of my sister’s, who felt a strong interest in her, and who knew that
you had just returned from a visit to Norah. So far, I only hesitated
to show myself, because I shrank, in my painful situation, from facing
a stranger. But when I heard my own name immediately afterward on your
lips and on hers, then I purposely came nearer to the curtain between
us, and purposely listened.

“A mean action, you will say? Call it mean, if you like. What better
can you expect from such a woman as I am?

“You were always famous for your memory. There is no necessity for my
repeating the words you spoke to your friend, and the words your friend
spoke to you, hardly an hour since. When you read these lines, you will
know, as well as I know, what those words told me. I ask for no
particulars; I will take all your reasons and all your excuses for
granted. It is enough for me to know that you and Mr. Pendril have been
searching for me again, and that Norah is in the conspiracy this time,
to reclaim me in spite of myself. It is enough for me to know that my
letter to my sister has been turned into a trap to catch me, and that
Mrs. Lecount’s revenge has accomplished its object by means of
information received from Norah’s lips.

“Shall I tell you what I suffered when I heard these things? No; it
would only be a waste of time to tell you. Whatever I suffer, I deserve
it—don’t I?

“I waited in that inner room—knowing my own violent temper, and not
trusting myself to see you, after what I had heard—I waited in that
inner room, trembling lest the servant should tell you of my visit
before I could find an opportunity of leaving the house. No such
misfortune happened. The servant, no doubt, heard the voices upstairs,
and supposed that we had met each other in the passage. I don’t know
how long or how short a time it was before you left the room to go and
take off your bonnet—you went, and your friend went with you. I raised
the long window softly, and stepped into the back garden. The way by
which you returned to the house was the way by which I left it. No
blame attaches to the servant. As usual, where I am concerned, nobody
is to blame but me.

“Time enough has passed now to quiet my mind a little. You know how
strong I am? You remember how I used to fight against all my illnesses
when I was a child? Now I am a woman, I fight against my miseries in
the same way. Don’t pity me, Miss Garth! Don’t pity me!

“I have no harsh feeling against Norah. The hope I had of seeing her is
a hope taken from me; the consolation I had in writing to her is a
consolation denied me for the future. I am cut to the heart; but I have
no angry feeling toward my sister. She means well, poor soul—I dare say
she means well. It would distress her, if she knew what has happened.
Don’t tell her. Conceal my visit, and burn my letter.

“A last word to yourself and I have done:

“If I rightly understand my present situation, your spies are still
searching for me to just as little purpose as they searched at York.
Dismiss them—you are wasting your money to no purpose. If you
discovered me to-morrow, what could you do? My position has altered. I
am no longer the poor outcast girl, the vagabond public performer, whom
you once hunted after. I have done what I told you I would do—I have
made the general sense of propriety my accomplice this time. Do you
know who I am? I am a respectable married woman, accountable for my
actions to nobody under heaven but my husband. I have got a place in
the world, and a name in the world, at last. Even the law, which is the
friend of all you respectable people, has recognized my existence, and
has become _my_ friend too! The Archbishop of Canterbury gave me his
license to be married, and the vicar of Aldborough performed the
service. If I found your spies following me in the street, and if I
chose to claim protection from them, the law would acknowledge my
claim. You forget what wonders my wickedness has done for me. It has
made Nobody’s Child Somebody’s Wife.

“If you will give these considerations their due weight; if you will
exert your excellent common sense, I have no fear of being obliged to
appeal to my newly-found friend and protector—the law. You will feel,
by this time, that you have meddled with me at last to some purpose. I
am estranged from Norah—I am discovered by my husband—I am defeated by
Mrs. Lecount. You have driven me to the last extremity; you have
strengthened me to fight the battle of my life with the resolution
which only a lost and friendless woman can feel. Badly as your schemes
have prospered, they have not proved totally useless after all!

“I have no more to say. If you ever speak about me to Norah, tell her
that a day may come when she will see me again—the day when we two
sisters have recovered our natural rights; the day when I put Norah’s
fortune into Norah’s hand.

“Those are my last words. Remember them the next time you feel tempted
to meddle with me again.

“MAGDALEN VANSTONE.”


IV.
From Mr. Loscombe to Mrs. Noel Vanstone.

“Lincoln’s Inn, November 6th.


“DEAR MADAM,

“This morning’s post has doubtless brought you the same shocking news
which it has brought to me. You must know by this time that a terrible
affliction has befallen you—the affliction of your husband’s sudden
death.

“I am on the point of starting for the North, to make all needful
inquiries, and to perform whatever duties I may with propriety
undertake, as solicitor to the deceased gentleman. Let me earnestly
recommend you not to follow me to Baliol Cottage, until I have had time
to write to you first, and to give you such advice as I cannot, through
ignorance of all the circumstances, pretend to offer now. You may rely
on my writing, after my arrival in Scotland, by the first post.

“I remain, dear Madam, faithfully yours,
“JOHN LOSCOMBE.”


V.
From Mr. Pendril to Miss Garth.

“Serle Street, November 6th.


“DEAR MISS GARTH,

“I return you Mrs. Noel Vanstone’s letter. I can understand your
mortification at the tone in which it is written, and your distress at
the manner in which this unhappy woman has interpreted the conversation
that she overheard at your house. I cannot honestly add that I lament
what has happened. My opinion has never altered since the Combe-Raven
time. I believe Mrs. Noel Vanstone to be one of the most reckless,
desperate, and perverted women living; and any circumstances that
estrange her from her sister are circumstances which I welcome, for her
sister’s sake.

“There cannot be a moment’s doubt on the course you ought to follow in
this matter. Even Mrs. Noel Vanstone herself acknowledges the propriety
of sparing her sister additional and unnecessary distress. By all
means, keep Miss Vanstone in ignorance of the visit to Kensington, and
of the letter which has followed it. It would be not only unwise, but
absolutely cruel, to enlighten her. If we had any remedy to apply, or
even any hope to offer, we might feel some hesitation in keeping our
secret. But there is no remedy, and no hope. Mrs. Noel Vanstone is
perfectly justified in the view she takes of her own position. Neither
you nor I can assert the smallest right to control her.

“I have already taken the necessary measures for putting an end to our
useless inquiries. In a few days I will write to Miss Vanstone, and
will do my best to tranquilize her mind on the subject of her sister.
If I can find no sufficient excuse to satisfy her, it will be better
she should think we have discovered nothing than that she should know
the truth.

“Believe me most truly yours,
“WILLIAM PENDRIL.”


VI.
From Mr. Loscombe to Mrs. Noel Vanstone.

“Lincoln’s Inn, November 15th.


“Private.

“DEAR MADAM,

“In compliance with your request, I now proceed to communicate to you
in writing what (but for the calamity which has so recently befallen
you) I should have preferred communicating by word of mouth. Be pleased
to consider this letter as strictly confidential between yourself and
me.

“I enclose, as you desire, a copy of the Will executed by your late
husband on the third of this month. There can be no question of the
genuineness of the original document. I protested, as a matter of form,
against Admiral Bartram’s solicitor assuming a position of authority at
Baliol Cottage. But he took the position, nevertheless; acting as legal
representative of the sole Executor under the second Will. I am bound
to say I should have done the same myself in his place.

“The serious question follows, What can we do for the best in your
interests? The Will executed under my professional superintendence, on
the thirtieth of September last, is at present superseded and revoked
by the second and later Will, executed on the third of November. Can we
dispute this document?

“I doubt the possibility of disputing the new Will on the face of it.
It is no doubt irregularly expressed; but it is dated, signed, and
witnessed as the law directs; and the perfectly simple and
straightforward provisions that it contains are in no respect, that I
can see, technically open to attack.

“This being the case, can we dispute the Will on the ground that it has
been executed when the Testator was not in a fit state to dispose of
his own property? or when the Testator was subjected to undue and
improper influence?

“In the first of these cases, the medical evidence would put an
obstacle in our way. We cannot assert that previous illness had
weakened the Testator’s mind. It is clear that he died suddenly, as the
doctors had all along declared he would die, of disease of the heart.
He was out walking in his garden, as usual, on the day of his death; he
ate a hearty dinner; none of the persons in his service noticed any
change in him; he was a little more irritable with them than usual, but
that was all. It is impossible to attack the state of his faculties:
there is no case to go into court with, so far.

“Can we declare that he acted under undue influence; or, in plainer
terms, under the influence of Mrs. Lecount?

“There are serious difficulties, again, in the way of taking this
course. We cannot assert, for example, that Mrs. Lecount has assumed a
place in the will which she has no fair claim to occupy. She has
cunningly limited her own legacy, not only to what is fairly due her,
but to what the late Mr. Michael Vanstone himself had the intention of
leaving her. If I were examined on the subject, I should be compelled
to acknowledge that I had heard him express this intention myself. It
is only the truth to say that I have heard him express it more than
once. There is no point of attack in Mrs. Lecount’s legacy, and there
is no point of attack in your late husband’s choice of an executor. He
has made the wise choice, and the natural choice, of the oldest and
trustiest friend he had in the world.

“One more consideration remains—the most important which I have yet
approached, and therefore the consideration which I have reserved to
the last. On the thirtieth of September, the Testator executes a will,
leaving his widow sole executrix, with a legacy of eighty thousand
pounds. On the third of November following, he expressly revokes this
will, and leaves another in its stead, in which his widow is never once
mentioned, and in which the whole residue of his estate, after payment
of one comparatively trifling legacy, is left to a friend.

“It rests entirely with you to say whether any valid reason can or
cannot be produced to explain such an extraordinary proceeding as this.
If no reason can be assigned—and I know of none myself—I think we have
a point here which deserves our careful consideration; for it may be a
point which is open to attack. Pray understand that I am now appealing
to you solely as a lawyer, who is obliged to look all possible
eventualities in the face. I have no wish to intrude on your private
affairs; I have no wish to write a word which could be construed into
any indirect reflection on yourself.

“If you tell me that, so far as you know, your husband capriciously
struck you out of his will, without assignable reason or motive for
doing so, and without other obvious explanation of his conduct than
that he acted in this matter entirely under the influence of Mrs.
Lecount, I will immediately take Counsel’s opinion touching the
propriety of disputing the will on this ground. If, on the other hand,
you tell me that there are reasons (known to yourself, though unknown
to me) for not taking the course I propose, I will accept that
intimation without troubling you, unless you wish it, to explain
yourself further. In this latter event, I will write to you again; for
I shall then have something more to say, which may greatly surprise
you, on the subject of the Will.

“Faithfully yours,
“JOHN LOSCOMBE.”


VII.
From Mrs. Noel Vanstone to Mr. Loscombe.

“November 16th.


“DEAR SIR,

“Accept my best thanks for the kindness and consideration with which
you have treated me; and let the anxieties under which I am now
suffering plead my excuse, if I reply to your letter without ceremony,
in the fewest possible words.

“I have my own reasons for not hesitating to answer your question in
the negative. It is impossible for us to go to law, as you propose, on
the subject of the Will.

“Believe me, dear sir, yours gratefully,
“MAGDALEN VANSTONE.”


VIII.
From Mr. Loscombe to Mrs. Noel Vanstone.

“Lincoln’s Inn. November 17th.


“DEAR MADAM,

“I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, answering my proposal
in the negative, for reasons of your own. Under these circumstances—on
which I offer no comment—I beg to perform my promise of again
communicating with you on the subject of your late husband’s Will.

“Be so kind as to look at your copy of the document. You will find that
the clause which devises the whole residue of your husband’s estate to
Admiral Bartram ends in these terms: _to be by him applied to such uses
as he may think fit._

“Simple as they may seem to you, these are very remarkable words. In
the first place, no practical lawyer would have used them in drawing
your husband’s will. In the second place, they are utterly useless to
serve any plain straightforward purpose. The legacy is left
unconditionally to the admiral; and in the same breath he is told that
he may do what he likes with it! The phrase points clearly to one of
two conclusions. It has either dropped from the writer’s pen in pure
ignorance, or it has been carefully set where it appears to serve the
purpose of a snare. I am firmly persuaded that the latter explanation
is the right one. The words are expressly intended to mislead some
person—yourself in all probability—and the cunning which has put them
to that use is a cunning which (as constantly happens when uninstructed
persons meddle with law) has overreached itself. My thirty years’
experience reads those words in a sense exactly opposite to the sense
which they are intended to convey. I say that Admiral Bartram is _not_
free to apply his legacy to such purposes as he may think fit; I
believe he is privately controlled by a supplementary document in the
shape of a Secret Trust.

“I can easily explain to you what I mean by a Secret Trust. It is
usually contained in the form of a letter from a Testator to his
Executors, privately informing them of testamentary intentions on his
part which he has not thought proper openly to acknowledge in his will.
I leave you a hundred pounds; and I write a private letter enjoining
you, on taking the legacy, not to devote it to your own purposes, but
to give it to some third person, whose name I have my own reasons for
not mentioning in my will. That is a Secret Trust.

“If I am right in my own persuasion that such a document as I here
describe is at this moment in Admiral Bartram’s possession—a persuasion
based, in the first instance, on the extraordinary words that I have
quoted to you; and, in the second instance, on purely legal
considerations with which it is needless to incumber my letter—if I am
right in this opinion, the discovery of the Secret Trust would be, in
all probability, a most important discovery to your interests. I will
not trouble you with technical reasons, or with references to my
experience in these matters, which only a professional man could
understand. I will merely say that I don’t give up your cause as
utterly lost, until the conviction now impressed on my own mind is
proved to be wrong.

“I can add no more, while this important question still remains
involved in doubt; neither can I suggest any means of solving that
doubt. If the existence of the Trust was proved, and if the nature of
the stipulations contained in it was made known to me, I could then say
positively what the legal chances were of your being able to set up a
Case on the strength of it: and I could also tell you whether I should
or should not feel justified in personally undertaking that Case under
a private arrangement with yourself.

“As things are, I can make no arrangement, and offer no advice. I can
only put you confidentially in possession of my private opinion,
leaving you entirely free to draw your own inferences from it, and
regretting that I cannot write more confidently and more definitely
than I have written here. All that I could conscientiously say on this
very difficult and delicate subject, I have said.

“Believe me, dear madam, faithfully yours,
“JOHN LOSCOMBE.


“P.S.—I omitted one consideration in my last letter, which I may
mention here, in order to show you that no point in connection with the
case has escaped me. If it had been possible to show that Mr. Vanstone
was _domiciled_ in Scotland at the time of his death, we might have
asserted your interests by means of the Scotch law, which does not
allow a husband the power of absolutely disinheriting his wife. But it
is impossible to assert that Mr. Vanstone was legally domiciled in
Scotland. He came there as a visitor only; he occupied a furnished
house for the season; and he never expressed, either by word or deed,
the slightest intention of settling permanently in the North.”

IX.
From Mrs. Noel Vanstone to Mr. Loscombe.

“DEAR SIR,

“I have read your letter more than once, with the deepest interest and
attention; and the oftener I read it, the more firmly I believe that
there is really such a Letter as you mention in Admiral Bartram’s
hands.

“It is my interest that the discovery should be made, and I at once
acknowledge to you that I am determined to find the means of secretly
and certainly making it. My resolution rests on other motives than the
motives which you might naturally suppose would influence me. I only
tell you this, in case you feel inclined to remonstrate. There is good
reason for what I say, when I assure you that remonstrance will be
useless.

“I ask for no assistance in this matter; I will trouble nobody for
advice. You shall not be involved in any rash proceedings on my part.
Whatever danger there may be, I will risk it. Whatever delays may
happen, I will bear them patiently. I am lonely and friendless, and
surely troubled in mind, but I am strong enough to win my way through
worse trials than these. My spirits will rise again, and my time will
come. If that Secret Trust is in Admiral Bartram’s possession—when you
next see me, you shall see me with it in my own hands.

“Yours gratefully,
“MAGDALEN VANSTONE.”



THE SIXTH SCENE.
ST. JOHN’S WOOD.



