CHAPTER XIV.

The morning of her husband’s return to North Shingles was a morning
memorable forever in the domestic calendar of Mrs. Wragge. She dated
from that occasion the first announcement which reached her of
Magdalen’s marriage.

It had been Mrs. Wragge’s earthly lot to pass her life in a state of
perpetual surprise. Never yet, however, had she wandered in such a maze
of astonishment as the maze in which she lost herself when the captain
coolly told her the truth. She had been sharp enough to suspect Mr.
Noel Vanstone of coming to the house in the character of a sweetheart
on approval; and she had dimly interpreted certain expressions of
impatience which had fallen from Magdalen’s lips as boding ill for the
success of his suit, but her utmost penetration had never reached as
far as a suspicion of the impending marriage. She rose from one climax
of amazement to another, as her husband proceeded with his disclosure.
A wedding in the family at a day’s notice! and that wedding Magdalen’s!
and not a single new dress ordered for anybody, the bride included! and
the Oriental Cashmere Robe totally unavailable on the occasion when she
might have worn it to the greatest advantage! Mrs. Wragge dropped
crookedly into a chair, and beat her disorderly hands on her
unsymmetrical knees, in utter forgetfulness of the captain’s presence
and the captain’s terrible eye. It would not have surprised her to hear
that the world had come to an end, and that the only mortal whom
Destiny had overlooked, in winding up the affairs of this earthly
planet, was herself!

Leaving his wife to recover her composure by her own unaided efforts,
Captain Wragge withdrew to wait for Magdalen’s appearance in the lower
regions of the house. It was close on one o’clock before the sound of
footsteps in the room above warned him that she was awake and stirring.
He called at once for the maid (whose name he had ascertained to be
Louisa), and sent her upstairs to her mistress for the second time.

Magdalen was standing by her dressing-table when a faint tap at the
door suddenly roused her. The tap was followed by the sound of a meek
voice, which announced itself as the voice of “her maid,” and inquired
if Miss Bygrave needed any assistance that morning.

“Not at present,” said Magdalen, as soon as she had recovered the
surprise of finding herself unexpectedly provided with an attendant. “I
will ring when I want you.”

After dismissing the woman with that answer, she accidentally looked
from the door to the window. Any speculations on the subject of the new
servant in which she might otherwise have engaged were instantly
suspended by the sight of the bottle of laudanum, still standing on the
ledge of the window, where she had left it at sunrise. She took it once
more in her hand, with a strange confusion of feeling—with a vague
doubt even yet, whether the sight of it reminded her of a terrible
reality or a terrible dream. Her first impulse was to rid herself of it
on the spot. She raised the bottle to throw the contents out of the
window, and paused, in sudden distrust of the impulse that had come to
her. “I have accepted my new life,” she thought. “How do I know what
that life may have in store for me?” She turned from the window and
went back to the table. “I may be forced to drink it yet,” she said,
and put the laudanum into her dressing-case.

Her mind was not at ease when she had done this: there seemed to be
some indefinable ingratitude in the act. Still she made no attempt to
remove the bottle from its hiding-place. She hurried on her toilet; she
hastened the time when she could ring for the maid, and forget herself
and her waking thoughts in a new subject. After touching the bell, she
took from the table her letter to Norah and her letter to the captain,
put them both into her dressing-case with the laudanum, and locked it
securely with the key which she kept attached to her watch-chain.

Magdalen’s first impression of her attendant was not an agreeable one.
She could not investigate the girl with the experienced eye of the
landlady at the London hotel, who had characterized the stranger as a
young person overtaken by misfortune, and who had showed plainly, by
her look and manner, of what nature she suspected that misfortune to
be. But with this drawback, Magdalen was perfectly competent to detect
the tokens of sickness and sorrow lurking under the surface of the new
maid’s activity and politeness. She suspected the girl was
ill-tempered; she disliked her name; and she was indisposed to welcome
any servant who had been engaged by Noel Vanstone. But after the first
few minutes, “Louisa” grew on her liking. She answered all the
questions put to her with perfect directness; she appeared to
understand her duties thoroughly; and she never spoke until she was
spoken to first. After making all the inquiries that occurred to her at
the time, and after determining to give the maid a fair trial, Magdalen
rose to leave the room. The very air in it was still heavy to her with
the oppression of the past night.

“Have you anything more to say to me?” she asked, turning to the
servant, with her hand on the door.

“I beg your pardon, miss,” said Louisa, very respectfully and very
quietly. “I think my master told me that the marriage was to be
to-morrow?”

Magdalen repressed the shudder that stole over her at that reference to
the marriage on the lips of a stranger, and answered in the
affirmative.

“It’s a very short time, miss, to prepare in. If you would be so kind
as to give me my orders about the packing before you go downstairs—?”

“There are no such preparations to make as you suppose,” said Magdalen,
hastily. “The few things I have here can be all packed at once, if you
like. I shall wear the same dress to-morrow which I have on to-day.
Leave out the straw bonnet and the light shawl, and put everything else
into my boxes. I have no new dresses to pack; I have nothing ordered
for the occasion of any sort.” She tried to add some commonplace
phrases of explanation, accounting as probably as might be for the
absence of the usual wedding outfit and wedding-dress. But no further
reference to the marriage would pass her lips, and without another word
she abruptly left the room.

The meek and melancholy Louisa stood lost in astonishment. “Something
wrong here,” she thought. “I’m half afraid of my new place already.”
She sighed resignedly, shook her head, and went to the wardrobe. She
first examined the drawers underneath, took out the various articles of
linen laid inside, and placed them on chairs. Opening the upper part of
the wardrobe next, she ranged the dresses in it side by side on the
bed. Her last proceeding was to push the empty boxes into the middle of
the room, and to compare the space at her disposal with the articles of
dress which she had to pack. She completed her preliminary calculations
with the ready self-reliance of a woman who thoroughly understood her
business, and began the packing forthwith. Just as she had placed the
first article of linen in the smaller box, the door of the room opened,
and the house-servant, eager for gossip, came in.

“What do you want?” asked Louisa, quietly.

“Did you ever hear of anything like this!” said the house-servant,
entering on her subject immediately.

“Like what?”

“Like this marriage, to be sure. You’re London bred, they tell me. Did
you ever hear of a young lady being married without a single new thing
to her back? No wedding veil, and no wedding breakfast, and no wedding
favors for the servants. It’s flying in the face of Providence—that’s
what I say. I’m only a poor servant, I know. But it’s wicked, downright
wicked—and I don’t care who hears me!”

Louisa went on with the packing.

“Look at her dresses!” persisted the house-servant, waving her hand
indignantly at the bed. “I’m only a poor girl, but I wouldn’t marry the
best man alive without a new gown to my back. Look here! look at this
dowdy brown thing here. Alpaca! You’re not going to pack this Alpaca
thing, are you? Why, it’s hardly fit for a servant! I don’t know that
I’d take a gift of it if it was offered me. It would do for me if I
took it up in the skirt, and let it out in the waist—and it wouldn’t
look so bad with a bit of bright trimming, would it?”

“Let that dress alone, if you please,” said Louisa, as quietly as ever.

“What did you say?” inquired the other, doubting whether her ears had
not deceived her.

“I said, let that dress alone. It belongs to my mistress, and I have my
mistress’s orders to pack up everything in the room. You are not
helping me by coming here—you are very much in my way.”

“Well!” said the house-servant, “you may be London bred, as they say.
But if these are your London manners, give me Suffolk!” She opened the
door with an angry snatch at the handle, shut it violently, opened it
again, and looked in. “Give me Suffolk!” said the house-servant, with a
parting nod of her head to point the edge of her sarcasm.

Louisa proceeded impenetrably with her packing up.

Having neatly disposed of the linen in the smaller box, she turned her
attention to the dresses next. After passing them carefully in review,
to ascertain which was the least valuable of the collection, and to
place that one at the bottom of the trunk for the rest to lie on, she
made her choice with very little difficulty. The first gown which she
put into the box was—the brown Alpaca dress.

Meanwhile, Magdalen had joined the captain downstairs. Although he
could not fail to notice the languor in her face and the listlessness
of all her movements, he was relieved to find that she met him with
perfect composure. She was even self-possessed enough to ask him for
news of his journey, with no other signs of agitation than a passing
change of color and a little trembling of the lips.

“So much for the past,” said Captain Wragge, when his narrative of the
expedition to London by way of St. Crux had come to an end. “Now for
the present. The bridegroom—”

“If it makes no difference,” she interposed, “call him Mr. Noel
Vanstone.”

“With all my heart. Mr. Noel Vanstone is coming here this afternoon to
dine and spend the evening. He will be tiresome in the last degree;
but, like all tiresome people, he is not to be got rid of on any terms.
Before he comes, I have a last word or two of caution for your private
ear. By this time to-morrow we shall have parted—without any certain
knowledge, on either side, of our ever meeting again. I am anxious to
serve your interests faithfully to the last; I am anxious you should
feel that I have done all I could for your future security when we say
good-by.”

Magdalen looked at him in surprise. He spoke in altered tones. He was
agitated; he was strangely in earnest. Something in his look and manner
took her memory back to the first night at Aldborough, when she had
opened her mind to him in the darkening solitude—when they two had sat
together alone on the slope of the martello tower. “I have no reason to
think otherwise than kindly of you,” she said.

Captain Wragge suddenly left his chair, and took a turn backward and
forward in the room. Magdalen’s last words seemed to have produced some
extraordinary disturbance in him.

“Damn it!” he broke out; “I can’t let you say that. You have reason to
think ill of me. I have cheated you. You never got your fair share of
profit from the Entertainment, from first to last. There! now the
murder’s out!”

Magdalen smiled, and signed to him to come back to his chair.

“I know you cheated me,” she said, quietly. “You were in the exercise
of your profession, Captain Wragge. I expected it when I joined you. I
made no complaint at the time, and I make none now. If the money you
took is any recompense for all the trouble I have given you, you are
heartily welcome to it.”

“Will you shake hands on that?” asked the captain, with an awkwardness
and hesitation strongly at variance with his customary ease of manner.

Magdalen gave him her hand. He wrung it hard. “You are a strange girl,”
he said, trying to speak lightly. “You have laid a hold on me that I
don’t quite understand. I’m half uncomfortable at taking the money from
you now; and yet you don’t want it, do you?” He hesitated. “I almost
wish,” he said, “I had never met you on the Walls of York.”

“It is too late to wish that, Captain Wragge. Say no more. You only
distress me—say no more. We have other subjects to talk about. What
were those words of caution which you had for my private ear?”

The captain took another turn in the room, and struggled back again
into his every-day character. He produced from his pocketbook Mrs.
Lecount’s letter to her master, and handed it to Magdalen.

“There is the letter that might have ruined us if it had ever reached
its address,” he said. “Read it carefully. I have a question to ask you
when you have done.”

Magdalen read the letter. “What is this proof,” she inquired, “which
Mrs. Lecount relies on so confidently!”

“The very question I was going to ask you,” said Captain Wragge.
“Consult your memory of what happened when you tried that experiment in
Vauxhall Walk. Did Mrs. Lecount get no other chance against you than
the chances you have told me of already?”

“She discovered that my face was disguised, and she heard me speak in
my own voice.”

“And nothing more?”

“Nothing more.”

“Very good. Then my interpretation of the letter is clearly the right
one. The proof Mrs. Lecount relies on is my wife’s infernal ghost
story—which is, in plain English, the story of Miss Bygrave having been
seen in Miss Vanstone’s disguise; the witness being the very person who
is afterward presented at Aldborough in the character of Miss Bygrave’s
aunt. An excellent chance for Mrs. Lecount, if she can only lay her
hand at the right time on Mrs. Wragge, and no chance at all, if she
can’t. Make your mind easy on that point. Mrs. Lecount and my wife have
seen the last of each other. In the meantime, don’t neglect the warning
I give you, in giving you this letter. Tear it up, for fear of
accidents, but don’t forget it.”

“Trust me to remember it,” replied Magdalen, destroying the letter
while she spoke. “Have you anything more to tell me?”

“I have some information to give you,” said Captain Wragge, “which may
be useful, because it relates to your future security. Mind, I want to
know nothing about your proceedings when to-morrow is over; we settled
that when we first discussed this matter. I ask no questions, and I
make no guesses. All I want to do now is to warn you of your legal
position after your marriage, and to leave you to make what use you
please of your knowledge, at your own sole discretion. I took a
lawyer’s opinion on the point when I was in London, thinking it might
be useful to you.”

“It is sure to be useful. What did the lawyer say?”

“To put it plainly, this is what he said. If Mr. Noel Vanstone ever
discovers that you have knowingly married him under a false name, he
can apply to the Ecclesiastical Court to have his marriage declared
null and void. The issue of the application would rest with the judges.
But if he could prove that he had been intentionally deceived, the
legal opinion is that his case would be a strong one.”

“Suppose I chose to apply on my side?” said Magdalen, eagerly. “What
then?”

“You might make the application,” replied the captain. “But remember
one thing—you would come into Court with the acknowledgment of your own
deception. I leave you to imagine what the judges would think of that.”

“Did the lawyer tell you anything else?”

“One thing besides,” said Captain Wragge. “Whatever the law might do
with the marriage in the lifetime of both the parties to it—on the
death of either one of them, no application made by the survivor would
avail; and, as to the case of that survivor, the marriage would remain
valid. You understand? If he dies, or if you die—and if no application
has been made to the Court—he the survivor, or you the survivor, would
have no power of disputing the marriage. But in the lifetime of both of
you, if he claimed to have the marriage dissolved, the chances are all
in favor of his carrying his point.”

He looked at Magdalen with a furtive curiosity as he said those words.
She turned her head aside, absently tying her watch-chain into a loop
and untying it again, evidently thinking with the closest attention
over what he had last said to her. Captain Wragge walked uneasily to
the window and looked out. The first object that caught his eye was Mr.
Noel Vanstone approaching from Sea View. He returned instantly to his
former place in the room, and addressed himself to Magdalen once more.

“Here is Mr. Noel Vanstone,” he said. “One last caution before he comes
in. Be on your guard with him about your age. He put the question to me
before he got the License. I took the shortest way out of the
difficulty, and told him you were twenty-one, and he made the
declaration accordingly. Never mind about _me_; after to-morrow I am
invisible. But, in your own interests, don’t forget, if the subject
turns up, that you were of age when you were married. There is nothing
more. You are provided with every necessary warning that I can give
you. Whatever happens in the future, remember I have done my best.”

He hurried to the door without waiting for an answer, and went out into
the garden to receive his guest.

Noel Vanstone made his appearance at the gate, solemnly carrying his
bridal offering to North Shingles with both hands. The object in
question was an ancient casket (one of his father’s bargains); inside
the casket reposed an old-fashioned carbuncle brooch, set in silver
(another of his father’s bargains)—bridal presents both, possessing the
inestimable merit of leaving his money undisturbed in his pocket. He
shook his head portentously when the captain inquired after his health
and spirits. He had passed a wakeful night; ungovernable apprehensions
of Lecount’s sudden re-appearance had beset him as soon as he found
himself alone at Sea View. Sea View was redolent of Lecount: Sea View
(though built on piles, and the strongest house in England) was
henceforth odious to him. He had felt this all night; he had also felt
his responsibilities. There was the lady’s maid, to begin with. Now he
had hired her, he began to think she wouldn’t do. She might fall sick
on his hands; she might have deceived him by a false character; she and
the landlady of the hotel might have been in league together. Horrible!
Really horrible to think of. Then there was the other
responsibility—perhaps the heavier of the two—the responsibility of
deciding where he was to go and spend his honeymoon to-morrow. He would
have preferred one of his father’s empty houses: But except at Vauxhall
Walk (which he supposed would be objected to), and at Aldborough (which
was of course out of the question) all the houses were let. He would
put himself in Mr. Bygrave’s hands. Where had Mr. Bygrave spent his own
honeymoon? Given the British Islands to choose from, where would Mr.
Bygrave pitch his tent, on a careful review of all the circumstances?

At this point the bridegroom’s questions suddenly came to an end, and
the bridegroom’s face exhibited an expression of ungovernable
astonishment. His judicious friend, whose advice had been at his
disposal in every other emergency, suddenly turned round on him, in the
emergency of the honeymoon, and flatly declined discussing the subject.

“No!” said the captain, as Noel Vanstone opened his lips to plead for a
hearing, “you must really excuse me. My point of view in this matter
is, as usual, a peculiar one. For some time past I have been living in
an atmosphere of deception, to suit your convenience. That atmosphere,
my good sir, is getting close; my Moral Being requires ventilation.
Settle the choice of a locality with my niece, and leave me, at my
particular request, in total ignorance of the subject. Mrs. Lecount is
certain to come here on her return from Zurich, and is certain to ask
me where you are gone. You may think it strange, Mr. Vanstone; but when
I tell her I don’t know, I wish to enjoy the unaccustomed luxury of
feeling, for once in a way, that I am speaking the truth!”

With those words, he opened the sitting-room door, introduced Noel
Vanstone to Magdalen’s presence, bowed himself out of the room again,
and set forth alone to while away the rest of the afternoon by taking a
walk. His face showed plain tokens of anxiety, and his party-colored
eyes looked hither and thither distrustfully, as he sauntered along the
shore. “The time hangs heavy on our hands,” thought the captain. “I
wish to-morrow was come and gone.”

The day passed and nothing happened; the evening and the night
followed, placidly and uneventfully. Monday came, a cloudless, lovely
day; Monday confirmed the captain’s assertion that the marriage was a
certainty. Toward ten o’clock, the clerk, ascending the church steps
quoted the old proverb to the pew-opener, meeting him under the porch:
“Happy the bride on whom the sun shines!”

In a quarter of an hour more the wedding-party was in the vestry, and
the clergyman led the way to the altar. Carefully as the secret of the
marriage had been kept, the opening of the church in the morning had
been enough to betray it. A small congregation, almost entirely
composed of women, were scattered here and there among the pews.
Kirke’s sister and her children were staying with a friend at
Aldborough, and Kirke’s sister was one of the congregation.

As the wedding-party entered the church, the haunting terror of Mrs.
Lecount spread from Noel Vanstone to the captain. For the first few
minutes, the eyes of both of them looked among the women in the pews
with the same searching scrutiny, and looked away again with the same
sense of relief. The clergyman noticed that look, and investigated the
License more closely than usual. The clerk began to doubt privately
whether the old proverb about the bride was a proverb to be always
depended on. The female members of the congregation murmured among
themselves at the inexcusable disregard of appearances implied in the
bride’s dress. Kirke’s sister whispered venomously in her friend’s ear,
“Thank God for to-day for Robert’s sake.” Mrs. Wragge cried silently,
with the dread of some threatening calamity she knew not what. The one
person present who remained outwardly undisturbed was Magdalen herself.
She stood, with tearless resignation, in her place before the
altar—stood, as if all the sources of human emotion were frozen up
within her.

The clergyman opened the Book.


It was done. The awful words which speak from earth to Heaven were
pronounced. The children of the two dead brothers—inheritors of the
implacable enmity which had parted their parents—were Man and Wife.

From that moment events hurried with a headlong rapidity to the parting
scene. They were back at the house while the words of the Marriage
Service seemed still ringing in their ears. Before they had been five
minutes indoors the carriage drew up at the garden gate. In a minute
more the opportunity came for which Magdalen and the captain had been
on the watch—the opportunity of speaking together in private for the
last time. She still preserved her icy resignation; she seemed beyond
all reach now of the fear that had once mastered her, of the remorse
that had once tortured her soul. With a firm hand she gave him the
promised money. With a firm face she looked her last at him. “I’m not
to blame,” he whispered, eagerly; “I have only done what you asked me.”
She bowed her head; she bent it toward him kindly and let him touch her
fore-head with his lips. “Take care!” he said. “My last words are—for
God’s sake take care when I’m gone!” She turned from him with a smile,
and spoke her farewell words to his wife. Mrs. Wragge tried hard to
face her loss bravely—the loss of the friend whose presence had fallen
like light from Heaven over the dim pathway of her life. “You have been
very good to me, my dear; I thank you kindly; I thank you with all my
heart.” She could say no more; she clung to Magdalen in a passion of
tears, as her mother might have clung to her, if her mother had lived
to see that horrible day. “I’m frightened for you!” cried the poor
creature, in a wild, wailing voice. “Oh, my darling, I’m frightened for
you!” Magdalen desperately drew herself free—kissed her—and hurried out
to the door. The expression of that artless gratitude, the cry of that
guileless love, shook her as nothing else had shaken her that day. It
was a refuge to get to the carriage—a refuge, though the man she had
married stood there waiting for her at the door.

Mrs. Wragge tried to follow her into the garden. But the captain had
seen Magdalen’s face as she ran out, and he steadily held his wife back
in the passage. From that distance the last farewells were exchanged.
As long as the carriage was in sight, Magdalen looked back at them; she
waved her handkerchief as she turned the corner. In a moment more the
last thread which bound her to them was broken; the familiar
companionship of many months was a thing of the past already!

Captain Wragge closed the house door on the idlers who were looking in
from the Parade. He led his wife back into the sitting-room, and spoke
to her with a forbearance which she had never yet experienced from him.

“She has gone her way,” he said, “and in another hour we shall have
gone ours. Cry your cry out—I don’t deny she’s worth crying for.”

Even then—even when the dread of Magdalen’s future was at its darkest
in his mind—the ruling habit of the man’s life clung to him.
Mechanically he unlocked his dispatch-box. Mechanically he opened his
Book of Accounts, and made the closing entry—the entry of his last
transaction with Magdalen—in black and white. “By Rec’d from Miss
Vanstone,” wrote the captain, with a gloomy brow, “Two hundred pounds.”

“You won’t be angry with me?” said Mrs. Wragge, looking timidly at her
husband through her tears. “I want a word of comfort, captain. Oh, do
tell me, when shall I see her again?”

The captain closed the book, and answered in one inexorable word:
“Never!”

Between eleven and twelve o’clock that night Mrs. Lecount drove into
Zurich.

Her brother’s house, when she stopped before it, was shut up. With some
difficulty and delay the servant was aroused. She held up her hands in
speechless amazement when she opened the door and saw who the visitor
was.

“Is my brother alive?” asked Mrs. Lecount, entering the house.

“Alive!” echoed the servant. “He has gone holiday-making into the
country, to finish his recovery in the fine fresh air.”

The housekeeper staggered back against the wall of the passage. The
coachman and the servant put her into a chair. Her face was livid, and
her teeth chattered in her head.

“Send for my brother’s doctor,” she said, as soon as she could speak.

The doctor came. She handed him a letter before he could say a word.

“Did you write that letter?”

He looked it over rapidly, and answered her without hesitation,

“Certainly not!”

“It is your handwriting.”

“It is a forgery of my handwriting.”

She rose from the chair with a new strength in her.

“When does the return mail start for Paris?” she asked.

“In half an hour.”

“Send instantly and take me a place in it!”

The servant hesitated, the doctor protested. She turned a deaf ear to
them both.

“Send!” she reiterated, “or I will go myself.”

They obeyed. The servant went to take the place: the doctor remained
and held a conversation with Mrs. Lecount. When the half-hour had
passed, he helped her into her place in the mail, and charged the
conductor privately to take care of his passenger.

“She has traveled from England without stopping,” said the doctor; “and
she is traveling back again without rest. Be careful of her, or she
will break down under the double journey.”

The mail started. Before the first hour of the new day was at an end
Mrs. Lecount was on her way back to England.

THE END OF THE FOURTH SCENE.



BETWEEN THE SCENES.
PROGRESS OF THE STORY THROUGH THE POST.

I.
From George Bartram to Noel Vanstone.

“St. Crux, September 4th, 1847.


“My dear Noel,

“Here are two plain questions at starting. In the name of all that is
mysterious, what are you hiding for? And why is everything relating to
your marriage kept an impenetrable secret from your oldest friends?

“I have been to Aldborough to try if I could trace you from that place,
and have come back as wise as I went. I have applied to your lawyer in
London, and have been told, in reply, that you have forbidden him to
disclose the place of your retreat to any one without first receiving
your permission to do so. All I could prevail on him to say was, that
he would forward any letter which might be sent to his care. I write
accordingly, and mind this, I expect an answer.

“You may ask, in your ill-tempered way, what business I have to meddle
with affairs of yours which it is your pleasure to keep private. My
dear Noel, there is a serious reason for our opening communications
with you from this house. You don’t know what events have taken place
at St. Crux since you ran away to get married; and though I detest
writing letters, I must lose an hour’s shooting to-day in trying to
enlighten you.

“On the twenty-third of last month, the admiral and I were disturbed
over our wine after dinner by the announcement that a visitor had
unexpectedly arrived at St. Crux. Who do you think the visitor was?
Mrs. Lecount!

“My uncle, with that old-fashioned bachelor gallantry of his which pays
equal respect to all wearers of petticoats, left the table directly to
welcome Mrs. Lecount. While I was debating whether I should follow him
or not, my meditations were suddenly brought to an end by a loud call
from the admiral. I ran into the morning-room, and there was your
unfortunate housekeeper on the sofa, with all the women servants about
her, more dead than alive. She had traveled from England to Zurich, and
from Zurich back again to England, without stopping; and she looked,
seriously and literally, at death’s door. I immediately agreed with my
uncle that the first thing to be done was to send for medical help. We
dispatched a groom on the spot, and, at Mrs. Lecount’s own request,
sent all the servants in a body out of the room.

“As soon as we were alone, Mrs. Lecount surprised us by a singular
question. She asked if you had received a letter which she had
addressed to you before leaving England at this house. When we told her
that the letter had been forwarded, under cover to your friend Mr.
Bygrave, by your own particular request, she turned as pale as ashes;
and when we added that you had left us in company with this same Mr.
Bygrave, she clasped her hands and stared at us as if she had taken
leave of her senses. Her next question was, ‘Where is Mr. Noel now?’ We
could only give her one reply—Mr. Noel had not informed us. She looked
perfectly thunderstruck at that answer. ‘He has gone to his ruin!’ she
said. ‘He has gone away in company with the greatest villain in
England. I must find him! I tell you I must find Mr. Noel! If I don’t
find him at once, it will be too late. He will be married!’ she burst
out quite frantically. ‘On my honor and my oath, he will be married!’
The admiral, incautiously perhaps, but with the best intentions, told
her you were married already. She gave a scream that made the windows
ring again and dropped back on the sofa in a fainting-fit. The doctor
came in the nick of time, and soon brought her to. But she was taken
ill the same night; she has grown worse and worse ever since; and the
last medical report is, that the fever from which she has been
suffering is in a fair way to settle on her brain.

“Now, my dear Noel, neither my uncle nor I have any wish to intrude
ourselves on your confidence. We are naturally astonished at the
extraordinary mystery which hangs over you and your marriage, and we
cannot be blind to the fact that your housekeeper has, apparently, some
strong reason of her own for viewing Mrs. Noel Vanstone with an enmity
and distrust which we are quite ready to believe that lady has done
nothing to deserve. Whatever strange misunderstanding there may have
been in your household, is your business (if you choose to keep it to
yourself), and not ours. All we have any right to do is to tell you
what the doctor says. His patient has been delirious; he declines to
answer for her life if she goes on as she is going on now; and he
thinks—finding that she is perpetually talking of her master—that your
presence would be useful in quieting her, if you could come here at
once, and exert your influence before it is too late.

“What do you say? Will you emerge from the darkness that surrounds you
and come to St. Crux? If this was the case of an ordinary servant, I
could understand your hesitating to leave the delights of your
honeymoon for any such object as is here proposed to you. But, my dear
fellow, Mrs. Lecount is not an ordinary servant. You are under
obligations to her fidelity and attachment in your father’s time, as
well as in your own; and if you _can_ quiet the anxieties which seem to
be driving this unfortunate woman mad, I really think you ought to come
here and do so. Your leaving Mrs. Noel Vanstone is of course out of the
question. There is no necessity for any such hard-hearted proceeding.
The admiral desires me to remind you that he is your oldest friend
living, and that his house is at your wife’s disposal, as it has always
been at yours. In this great rambling-place she need dread no near
association with the sick-room; and, with all my uncle’s oddities, I am
sure she will not think the offer of his friendship an offer to be
despised.

“Have I told you already that I went to Aldborough to try and find a
clue to your whereabouts? I can’t be at the trouble of looking back to
see; so, if I have told you, I tell you again. The truth is, I made an
acquaintance at Aldborough of whom you know something—at least by
report.

“After applying vainly at Sea View, I went to the hotel to inquire
about you. The landlady could give me no information; but the moment I
mentioned your name, she asked if I was related to you; and when I told
her I was your cousin, she said there was a young lady then at the
hotel whose name was Vanstone also, who was in great distress about a
missing relative, and who might prove of some use to me—or I to her—if
we knew of each other’s errand at Aldborough. I had not the least idea
who she was, but I sent in my card at a venture; and in five minutes
afterward I found myself in the presence of one of the most charming
women these eyes ever looked on.

“Our first words of explanation informed me that my family name was
known to her by repute. Who do you think she was? The eldest daughter
of my uncle and yours—Andrew Vanstone. I had often heard my poor mother
in past years speak of her brother Andrew, and I knew of that sad story
at Combe-Raven. But our families, as you are aware, had always been
estranged, and I had never seen my charming cousin before. She has the
dark eyes and hair, and the gentle, retiring manners that I always
admire in a woman. I don’t want to renew our old disagreement about
your father’s conduct to those two sisters, or to deny that his brother
Andrew may have behaved badly to him; I am willing to admit that the
high moral position he took in the matter is quite unassailable by such
a miserable sinner as I am; and I will not dispute that my own
spendthrift habits incapacitate me from offering any opinion on the
conduct of other people’s pecuniary affairs. But, with all these
allowances and drawbacks, I can tell you one thing, Noel. If you ever
see the elder Miss Vanstone, I venture to prophesy that, for the first
time in your life, you will doubt the propriety of following your
father’s example.

“She told me her little story, poor thing, most simply and
unaffectedly. She is now occupying her second situation as a
governess—and, as usual, I, who know everybody, know the family. They
are friends of my uncle’s, whom he has lost sight of latterly—the
Tyrrels of Portland Place—and they treat Miss Vanstone with as much
kindness and consideration as if she was a member of the family. One of
their old servants accompanied her to Aldborough, her object in
traveling to that place being what the landlady of the hotel had stated
it to be. The family reverses have, it seems, had a serious effect on
Miss Vanstone’s younger sister, who has left her friends and who has
been missing from home for some time. She had been last heard of at
Aldborough; and her elder sister, on her return from the Continent with
the Tyrrels, had instantly set out to make inquiries at that place.

“This was all Miss Vanstone told me. She asked whether you had seen
anything of her sister, or whether Mrs. Lecount knew anything of her
sister—I suppose because she was aware you had been at Aldborough. Of
course I could tell her nothing. She entered into no details on the
subject, and I could not presume to ask her for any. All I did was to
set to work with might and main to assist her inquiries. The attempt
was an utter failure; nobody could give us any information. We tried
personal description of course; and strange to say, the only young lady
formerly staying at Aldborough who answered the description was, of all
the people in the world, the lady you have married! If she had not had
an uncle and aunt (both of whom have left the place), I should have
begun to suspect that you had married your cousin without knowing it!
Is this the clue to the mystery? Don’t be angry; I must have my little
joke, and I can’t help writing as carelessly as I talk. The end of it
was, our inquiries were all baffled, and I traveled back with Miss
Vanstone and her attendant as far as our station here. I think I shall
call on the Tyrrels when I am next in London. I have certainly treated
that family with the most inexcusable neglect.

“Here I am at the end of my third sheet of note-paper! I don’t often
take the pen in hand; but when I do, you will agree with me that I am
in no hurry to lay it aside again. Treat the rest of my letter as you
like, but consider what I have told you about Mrs. Lecount, and
remember that time is of consequence.

“Ever yours,
“GEORGE BARTRAM.”


II.
From Norah Vanstone to Miss Garth.

“Portland Place.


“MY DEAR MISS GARTH,

“More sorrow, more disappointment! I have just returned from
Aldborough, without making any discovery. Magdalen is still lost to us.

“I cannot attribute this new overthrow of my hopes to any want of
perseverance or penetration in making the necessary inquiries. My
inexperience in such matters was most kindly and unexpectedly assisted
by Mr. George Bartram. By a strange coincidence, he happened to be at
Aldborough, inquiring after Mr. Noel Vanstone, at the very time when I
was there inquiring after Magdalen. He sent in his card, and knowing,
when I looked at the name, that he was my cousin—if I may call him so—I
thought there would be no impropriety in my seeing him and asking his
advice. I abstained from entering into particulars for Magdalen’s sake,
and I made no allusion to that letter of Mrs. Lecount’s which you
answered for me. I only told him Magdalen was missing, and had been
last heard of at Aldborough. The kindness which he showed in devoting
himself to my assistance exceeds all description. He treated me, in my
forlorn situation, with a delicacy and respect which I shall remember
gratefully long after he has himself perhaps forgotten our meeting
altogether. He is quite young—not more than thirty, I should think. In
face and figure, he reminded me a little of the portrait of my father
at Combe-Raven—I mean the portrait in the dining-room, of my father
when he was a young man.

“Useless as our inquiries were, there is one result of them which has
left a very strange and shocking impression on my mind.

“It appears that Mr. Noel Vanstone has lately married, under mysterious
circumstances, a young lady whom he met with at Aldborough, named
Bygrave. He has gone away with his wife, telling nobody but his lawyer
where he has gone to. This I heard from Mr. George Bartram, who was
endeavoring to trace him, for the purpose of communicating the news of
his housekeeper’s serious illness—the housekeeper being the same Mrs.
Lecount whose letter you answered. So far, you may say, there is
nothing which need particularly interest either of us. But I think you
will be as much surprised as I was when I tell you that the description
given by the people at Aldborough of Miss Bygrave’s appearance is most
startlingly and unaccountably like the description of Magdalen’s
appearance. This discovery, taken in connection with all the
circumstances we know of, has had an effect on my mind which I cannot
describe to you—which I dare not realize to myself. Pray come and see
me! I have never felt so wretched about Magdalen as I feel now.
Suspense must have weakened my nerves in some strange way. I feel
superstitious about the slightest things. This accidental resemblance
of a total stranger to Magdalen fills me every now and then with the
most horrible misgivings—merely because Mr. Noel Vanstone’s name
happens to be mixed up with it. Once more, pray come to me; I have so
much to say to you that I cannot, and dare not, say in writing.

“Gratefully and affectionately yours,
“NORAH.”


III.
From Mr. John Loscombe (Solicitor) to George Bartram, Esq.

“Lincoln’s Inn, London,
“September 6th, 1847.


“SIR,

“I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note, inclosing a letter
addressed to my client, Mr. Noel Vanstone, and requesting that I will
forward the same to Mr. Vanstone’s present address.

“Since I last had the pleasure of communicating with you on this
subject, my position toward my client is entirely altered. Three days
ago I received a letter from him, which stated his intention of
changing his place of residence on the next day then ensuing, but which
left me entirely in ignorance on the subject of the locality to which
it was his intention to remove. I have not heard from him since; and,
as he had previously drawn on me for a larger sum of money than usual,
there would be no present necessity for his writing to me
again—assuming that it is his wish to keep his place of residence
concealed from every one, myself included.

“Under these circumstances, I think it right to return you your letter,
with the assurance that I will let you know, if I happen to be again
placed in a position to forward it to its destination.

“Your obedient servant,
“JOHN LOSCOMBE.”


IV.
From Norah Vanstone to Miss Garth.

“Portland Place.


“MY DEAR MISS GARTH,

“Forget the letter I wrote to you yesterday, and all the gloomy
forebodings that it contains. This morning’s post has brought new life
to me. I have just received a letter, addressed to me at your house,
and forwarded here, in your absence from home yesterday, by your
sister. Can you guess who the writer is?—Magdalen!

“The letter is very short; it seems to have been written in a hurry.
She says she has been dreaming of me for some nights past, and the
dreams have made her fear that her long silence has caused me more
distress on her account than she is worth. She writes, therefore, to
assure me that she is safe and well—that she hopes to see me before
long—and that she has something to tell me, when we meet, which will
try my sisterly love for her as nothing has tried it yet. The letter is
not dated; but the postmark is ‘Allonby,’ which I have found, on
referring to the Gazetteer, to be a little sea-side place in
Cumberland. There is no hope of my being able to write back, for
Magdalen expressly says that she is on the eve of departure from her
present residence, and that she is not at liberty to say where she is
going to next, or to leave instructions for forwarding any letters
after her.

“In happier times I should have thought this letter very far from being
a satisfactory one, and I should have been seriously alarmed by that
allusion to a future confidence on her part which will try my love for
her as nothing has tried it yet. But after all the suspense I have
suffered, the happiness of seeing her handwriting again seems to fill
my heart and to keep all other feelings out of it. I don’t send you her
letter, because I know you are coming to me soon, and I want to have
the pleasure of seeing you read it.

“Ever affectionately yours,
“NORAH.


“P.S.—Mr. George Bartram called on Mrs. Tyrrel to-day. He insisted on
being introduced to the children. When he was gone, Mrs. Tyrrel laughed
in her good-humored way, and said that his anxiety to see the children
looked, to her mind, very much like an anxiety to see _me_. You may
imagine how my spirits are improved when I can occupy my pen in writing
such nonsense as this!”

V.
From Mrs. Lecount to Mr. de Bleriot, General Agent, London.

“St. Crux, October 23d, 1847.


“DEAR SIR,

“I have been long in thanking you for the kind letter which promises me
your assistance, in friendly remembrance of the commercial relations
formerly existing between my brother and yourself. The truth is, I have
over-taxed my strength on my recovery from a long and dangerous
illness; and for the last ten days I have been suffering under a
relapse. I am now better again, and able to enter on the business which
you so kindly offer to undertake for me.

“The person whose present place of abode it is of the utmost importance
to me to discover is Mr. Noel Vanstone. I have lived, for many years
past, in this gentleman’s service as house-keeper; and not having
received my formal dismissal, I consider myself in his service still.
During my absence on the Continent he was privately married at
Aldborough, in Suffolk, on the eighteenth of August last. He left
Aldborough the same day, taking his wife with him to some place of
retreat which was kept a secret from everybody except his lawyer, Mr.
Loscombe, of Lincoln’s Inn. After a short time he again removed, on the
4th of September, without informing Mr. Loscombe, on this occasion, of
his new place of abode. From that date to this the lawyer has remained
(or has pretended to remain) in total ignorance of where he now is.
Application has been made to Mr. Loscombe, under the circumstances, to
mention what that former place of residence was, of which Mr. Vanstone
is known to have informed him. Mr. Loscombe has declined acceding to
this request, for want of formal permission to disclose his client’s
proceedings after leaving Aldborough. I have all these latter
particulars from Mr. Loscombe’s correspondent—the nephew of the
gentleman who owns this house, and whose charity has given me an
asylum, during the heavy affliction of my sickness, under his own roof.

“I believe the reasons which have induced Mr. Noel Vanstone to keep
himself and his wife in hiding are reasons which relate entirely to
myself. In the first place, he is aware that the circumstances under
which he has married are such as to give me the right of regarding him
with a just indignation. In the second place, he knows that my faithful
services, rendered through a period of twenty years, to his father and
to himself, forbid him, in common decency, to cast me out helpless on
the world without a provision for the end of my life. He is the meanest
of living men, and his wife is the vilest of living women. As long as
he can avoid fulfilling his obligations to me, he will; and his wife’s
encouragement may be trusted to fortify him in his ingratitude.

“My object in determining to find him out is briefly this. His marriage
has exposed him to consequences which a man of ten times his courage
could not face without shrinking. Of those consequences he knows
nothing. His wife knows, and keeps him in ignorance. I know, and can
enlighten him. His security from the danger that threatens him is in my
hands alone; and he shall pay the price of his rescue to the last
farthing of the debt that justice claims for me as my due—no more, and
no less.

“I have now laid my mind before you, as you told me, without reserve.
You know why I want to find this man, and what I mean to do when I find
him. I leave it to your sympathy for me to answer the serious question
that remains: How is the discovery to be made? If a first trace of them
can be found, after their departure from Aldborough, I believe careful
inquiry will suffice for the rest. The personal appearance of the wife,
and the extraordinary contrast between her husband and herself, are
certain to be remarked, and remembered, by every stranger who sees
them.

“When you favor me with your answer, please address it to ‘Care of
Admiral Bartram, St. Crux-in the-Marsh, near Ossory, Essex’.

“Your much obliged,
“VIRGINIE LECOUNT.”


VI.
From Mr. de Bleriot to Mrs. Lecount.

“Dark’s Buildings, Kingsland,
“October 25th, 1847.


“Private and Confidential.

“DEAR MADAM,

“I hasten to reply to your favor of Saturday’s date. Circumstances have
enabled me to forward your interests, by consulting a friend of mine
possessing great experience in the management of private inquiries of
all sorts. I have placed your case before him (without mentioning
names); and I am happy to inform you that my views and his views of the
proper course to take agree in every particular.

“Both myself and friend, then, are of opinion that little or nothing
can be done toward tracing the parties you mention, until the place of
their temporary residence after they left Aldborough has been
discovered first. If this can be done, the sooner it is done the
better. Judging from your letter, some weeks must have passed since the
lawyer received his information that they had shifted their quarters.
As they are both remarkable-looking people, the strangers who may have
assisted them on their travels have probably not forgotten them yet.
Nevertheless, expedition is desirable.

“The question for you to consider is, whether they may not possibly
have communicated the address of which we stand in need to some other
person besides the lawyer. The husband may have written to members of
his family, or the wife may have written to members of her family. Both
myself and friend are of opinion that the latter chance is the likelier
of the two. If you have any means of access in the direction of the
wife’s family, we strongly recommend you to make use of them. If not,
please supply us with the names of any of her near relations or
intimate female friends whom you know, and we will endeavor to get
access for you.

“In any case, we request you will at once favor us with the most exact
personal description that can be written of both the parties. We may
require your assistance, in this important particular, at five minutes’
notice. Favor us, therefore, with the description by return of post. In
the meantime, we will endeavor to ascertain on our side whether any
information is to be privately obtained at Mr. Loscombe’s office. The
lawyer himself is probably altogether beyond our reach. But if any one
of his clerks can be advantageously treated with on such terms as may
not overtax your pecuniary resources, accept my assurance that the
opportunity shall be made the most of by,

“Dear madam,
“Your faithful servant,
“ALFRED DE BLERIOT.”


VII.
From Mr. Pendril to Norah Vanstone.

“Serle Street, October 27th. 1847.


“MY DEAR MISS VANSTONE,

“A lady named Lecount (formerly attached to Mr. Noel Vanstone’s service
in the capacity of housekeeper) has called at my office this morning,
and has asked me to furnish her with your address. I have begged her to
excuse my immediate compliance with her request, and to favor me with a
call to-morrow morning, when I shall be prepared to meet her with a
definite answer.

“My hesitation in this matter does not proceed from any distrust of
Mrs. Lecount personally, for I know nothing whatever to her prejudice.
But in making her request to me, she stated that the object of the
desired interview was to speak to you privately on the subject of your
sister. Forgive me for acknowledging that I determined to withhold the
address as soon as I heard this. You will make allowances for your old
friend, and your sincere well-wisher? You will not take it amiss if I
express my strong disapproval of your allowing yourself, on any
pretense whatever, to be mixed up for the future with your sister’s
proceedings.

“I will not distress you by saying more than this. But I feel too deep
an interest in your welfare, and too sincere an admiration of the
patience with which you have borne all your trials, to say less.

“If I cannot prevail on you to follow my advice, you have only to say
so, and Mrs. Lecount shall have your address to-morrow. In this case
(which I cannot contemplate without the greatest unwillingness), let me
at least recommend you to stipulate that Miss Garth shall be present at
the interview. In any matter with which your sister is concerned, you
may want an old friend’s advice, and an old friend’s protection against
your own generous impulses. If I could have helped you in this way, I
would; but Mrs. Lecount gave me indirectly to understand that the
subject to be discussed was of too delicate a nature to permit of my
presence. Whatever this objection may be really worth, it cannot apply
to Miss Garth, who has brought you both up from childhood. I say,
again, therefore, if you see Mrs. Lecount, see her in Miss Garth’s
company.

“Always most truly yours,
“WILLIAM PENDRIL.”


VIII.
From Norah Vanstone to Mr. Pendril.

“Portland Place, Wednesday.


“DEAR MR. PENDRIL,

“Pray don’t think I am ungrateful for your kindness. Indeed, indeed I
am not! But I must see Mrs. Lecount. You were not aware when you wrote
to me that I had received a few lines from Magdalen—not telling me
where she is, but holding out the hope of our meeting before long.
Perhaps Mrs. Lecount may have something to say to me on this very
subject. Even if it should not be so, my sister—do what she may—is
still my sister. I can’t desert her; I can’t turn my back on any one
who comes to me in her name. You know, dear Mr. Pendril, I have always
been obstinate on this subject, and you have always borne with me. Let
me owe another obligation to you which I can never return, and bear
with me still!

“Need I say that I willingly accept that part of your advice which
refers to Miss Garth? I have already written to beg that she will come
here at four to-morrow afternoon. When you see Mrs. Lecount, please
inform her that Miss Garth will be with me, and that she will find us
both ready to receive her here to-morrow at four o’clock.

“Gratefully yours,
“NORAH VANSTONE.”


IX.
From Mr. de Bleriot to Mrs. Lecount.

“Dark’s Buildings, October 28th.


“Private.

“DEAR MADAM,

“One of Mr. Loscombe’s clerks has proved amenable to a small pecuniary
consideration, and has mentioned a circumstance which it may be of some
importance to you to know.

“Nearly a month since, accident gave the clerk in question an
opportunity of looking into one of the documents on his master’s table,
which had attracted his attention from a slight peculiarity in the form
and color of the paper. He had only time, during Mr. Loscombe’s
momentary absence, to satisfy his curiosity by looking at the beginning
of the document and at the end. At the beginning he saw the customary
form used in making a will; at the end he discovered the signature of
Mr. Noel Vanstone, with the names of two attesting witnesses, and the
date (of which he is quite certain)—_the thirtieth of September last._

“Before the clerk had time to make any further investigations, his
master returned, sorted the papers on the table, and carefully locked
up the will in the strong box devoted to the custody of Mr. Noel
Vanstone’s documents. It has been ascertained that, at the close of
September, Mr. Loscombe was absent from the office. If he was then
employed in superintending the execution of his client’s will—which is
quite possible—it follows clearly that he was in the secret of Mr.
Vanstone’s address after the removal of the 4th of September; and if
you can do nothing on your side, it may be desirable to have the lawyer
watched on ours. In any case, it is certainly ascertained that Mr. Noel
Vanstone has made his will since his marriage. I leave you to draw your
own conclusions from that fact, and remain, in the hope of hearing from
you shortly,

“Your faithful servant,
“ALFRED DE BLERIOT.”


X.
From Miss Garth to Mr. Pendril.

“Portland Place, October 28th.


“MY DEAR SIR,

“Mrs. Lecount has just left us. If it was not too late to wish, I
should wish, from the bottom of my heart, that Norah had taken your
advice, and had refused to see her.

“I write in such distress of mind that I cannot hope to give you a
clear and complete account of the interview. I can only tell you
briefly what Mrs. Lecount has done, and what our situation now is. The
rest must be left until I am more composed, and until I can speak to
you personally.

“You will remember my informing you of the letter which Mrs. Lecount
addressed to Norah from Aldborough, and which I answered for her in her
absence. When Mrs. Lecount made her appearance to-day, her first words
announced to us that she had come to renew the subject. As well as I
can remember it, this is what she said, addressing herself to Norah:

“‘I wrote to you on the subject of your sister, Miss Vanstone, some
little time since, and Miss Garth was so good as to answer the letter.
What I feared at that time has come true. Your sister has defied all my
efforts to check her; she has disappeared in company with my master,
Mr. Noel Vanstone; and she is now in a position of danger which may
lead to her disgrace and ruin at a moment’s notice. It is my interest
to recover my master, it is your interest to save your sister. Tell
me—for time is precious—have you any news of her?’

“Norah answered, as well as her terror and distress would allow her, ‘I
have had a letter, but there was no address on it.’

“Mrs. Lecount asked, ‘Was there no postmark on the envelope?’

“Norah said, ‘Yes; Allonby.’

“‘Allonby is better than nothing,’ said Mrs. Lecount. ‘Allonby may help
you to trace her. Where is Allonby?’

“Norah told her. It all passed in a minute. I had been too much
confused and startled to interfere before, but I composed myself
sufficiently to interfere now.

“‘You have entered into no particulars,’ I said. ‘You have only
frightened us—you have told us nothing.’

“‘You shall hear the particulars, ma’am,’ said Mrs. Lecount; ‘and you
and Miss Vanstone shall judge for yourselves if I have frightened you
without a cause.’

“Upon this, she entered at once upon a long narrative, which I cannot—I
might almost say, which I dare not—repeat. You will understand the
horror we both felt when I tell you the end. If Mrs. Lecount’s
statement is to be relied on, Magdalen has carried her mad resolution
of recovering her father’s fortune to the last and most desperate
extremity—she has married Michael Vanstone’s son under a false name.
Her husband is at this moment still persuaded that her maiden name was
Bygrave, and that she is really the niece of a scoundrel who assisted
her imposture, and whom I recognize, by the description of him, to have
been Captain Wragge.

“I spare you Mrs. Lecount’s cool avowal, when she rose to leave us, of
her own mercenary motives in wishing to discover her master and to
enlighten him. I spare you the hints she dropped of Magdalen’s purpose
in contracting this infamous marriage. The one aim and object of my
