
THE TRUTH ABOUT JESUS IS HE A MYTH?

Illustrated

By M. M. Mangasarian

1909


[Illustration: 005 Woman Crucified. In the Church of St. Etienne,
France. For a Long Time This Bearded Woman Was Supposed to be the
Christ]

_If it is not historically true that such and such things happened in
Palestine eighteen centuries ago, what becomes of Christianity?_
--THOMAS HUXLEY.


_By education most have been misled, So they believe because they were
so bred; The priest continues what the nurse began, And thus the child
imposes on the man_.--DRYDEN.




PREFACE

The following work offers in book form the series of studies on the
question of the historicity of Jesus, presented from time to time
before the Independent Religious Society in Orchestra Hall. No effort
has been made to change the manner of the spoken, into the more
regular form of the written, word.


M. M. MANGASARIAN.


[Illustration: 010 Picture in Herculaneum, of the Days of Pompeii,
Showing Cupid Crowned with a Cross.]




PART I.




A PARABLE

I am today twenty-five hundred years old. I have been dead for nearly
as many years. My place of birth was Athens; my grave was not far from
those of Xenophon and Plato, within view of the white glory of Athens
and the shimmering waters of the Aegean sea.

After sleeping in my grave for many centuries I awoke suddenly--I
cannot tell how nor why--and was transported by a force beyond my
control to this new day and this new city. I arrived here at daybreak,
when the sky was still dull and drowsy. As I approached the city I
heard bells ringing, and a little later I found the streets astir
with throngs of well dressed people in family groups wending their way
hither and thither. Evidently they were not going to work, for they
were accompanied by their children in their best clothes, and a
pleasant expression was upon their faces.

"This must be a day of festival and worship, devoted to one of their
gods," I murmured to myself.

Looking about me I saw a gentleman in a neat black dress, smiling, and
his hand extended to me with great cordiality. He must have realized I
was a stranger and wished to tender his hospitality to me. I accepted
it gratefully. I clasped his hand. He pressed mine. We gazed for a
moment silently into each other's eyes. He understood my bewilderment
amid my novel surroundings, and offered to enlighten me. He explained
to me the ringing of the bells and the meaning of the holiday crowds
moving in the streets. It was Sunday--Sunday before Christmas, and the
people were going to "the House of God."

"Of course you are going there, too," I said to my friendly guide.

"Yes," he answered, "I conduct the worship. I am a priest."

"A priest of Apollo?" I interrogated.

"No, no," he replied, raising his hand to command silence, "Apollo is
not a god; he was only an idol."

"An idol?" I whispered, taken by surprise.

"I perceive you are a Greek," he said to me, "and the Greeks," he
continued, "notwithstanding their distinguished accomplishments, were
an idolatrous people. They worshipped gods that did not exist. They
built temples to divinities which were merely empty names--empty
names," he repeated. "Apollo and Athene--and the entire Olympian lot
were no more than inventions of the fancy."

"But the Greeks loved their gods," I protested, my heart clamoring in
my breast.

"They were not gods, they were idols, and the difference between a god
and an idol is this: an idol is a thing; God is a living being. When
you cannot prove the existence of your god, when you have never seen
him, nor heard his voice, nor touched him--when you have nothing
provable about him, he is an idol. Have you seen Apollo? Have you
heard him? Have you touched him?"

"No," I said, in a low voice.

"Do you know of any one who has?"

I had to admit that I did not.

"He was an idol, then, and not a god."

"But many of us Greeks," I said, "have felt Apollo in our hearts and
have been inspired by him."

"You imagine you have," returned my guide. "If he were really divine
he would be living to this day."

"Is he, then, dead?" I asked.

"He never lived; and for the last two thousand years or more his
temple has been a heap of ruins."

I wept to hear that Apollo, the god of light and music, was no
more--that his fair temple had fallen into ruins and the fire upon his
altar had been extinguished; then, wiping a tear from my eyes, I said,
"Oh, but our gods were fair and beautiful; our religion was rich and
picturesque. It made the Greeks a nation of poets, orators, artists,
warriors, thinkers. It made Athens a city of light; it created the
beautiful, the true, the good--yes, our religion was divine."

"It had only one fault," interrupted my guide.

"What was that?" I inquired, without knowing what his answer would be.

"It was not true."

"But I still believe in Apollo," I exclaimed; "he is not dead, I know
he is alive."

"Prove it," he said to me; then, pausing for a moment, "if you produce
him," he said, "we shall all fall down and worship him. Produce Apollo
and he shall be our god."

"Produce him!" I whispered to myself. "What blasphemy!" Then, taking
heart, I told my guide how more than once I had felt Apollo's radiant
presence in my heart, and told him of the immortal lines of Homer
concerning the divine Apollo. "Do you doubt Homer?" I said to him;
"Homer, the inspired bard? Homer, whose inkwell was as big as the sea;
whose imperishable page was Time? Homer, whose every word was a drop
of light?" Then I proceeded to quote from Homer's _Iliad_, the Greek
Bible, worshipped by all the Hellenes as the rarest Manuscript between
heaven and earth. I quoted his description of Apollo, than whose lyre
nothing is more musical, than whose speech even honey is not sweeter.
I recited how his mother went from town to town to select a worthy
place to give birth to the young god, son of Zeus, the Supreme Being,
and how he was born and cradled amid the ministrations of all the
goddesses, who bathed him in the running stream and fed him with
nectar and ambrosia from Olympus. Then I recited the lines which
picture Apollo bursting his bands, leaping forth from his cradle, and
spreading his wings like a swan, soaring sunward, declaring that he
had come to announce to mortals the will of God. "Is it possible," I
asked, "that all this is pure fabrication, a fantasy of the brain, as
unsubstantial as the air? No, no, Apollo is not an idol. He is a god,
and the son of a god. The whole Greek world will bear me witness
that I am telling the truth." Then I looked at my guide to see what
impression this outburst of sincere enthusiasm had produced upon him,
and I saw a cold smile upon his lips that cut me to the heart. It
seemed as if he wished to say to me, "You poor deluded pagan! You are
not intelligent enough to know that Homer was only a mortal after all,
and that he was writing a play in which he manufactured the gods of
whom he sang--that these gods existed only in his imagination, and
that today they are as dead as is their inventor--the poet."

By this time we stood at the entrance of a large edifice which my
guide said was "the House of God." As we walked in I saw innumerable
little lights blinking and winking all over the spacious interior.
There were, besides, pictures, altars and images all around me. The
air was heavy with incense; a number of men in gorgeous vestments were
passing to and fro, bowing and kneeling before the various lights
and images. The audience was upon its knees enveloped in silence--a
silence so solemn that it awed me. Observing my anxiety to understand
the meaning of all this, my guide took me aside and in a whisper told
me that the people were celebrating the anniversary of the birthday of
their beautiful Savior--Jesus, the Son of God.

"So was Apollo the son of God," I replied, thinking perhaps that after
all we might find ourselves in agreement with one another.

"Forget Apollo," he said, with a suggestion of severity in his voice.
"There is no such person. He was only an idol. If you were to search
for Apollo in all the universe you would never find any one answering
to his name or description. Jesus," he resumed, "is the Son of God. He
came to our earth and was born of a virgin."

Again I was tempted to tell my guide that that was how Apollo became
incarnate; but I restrained myself.

"Then Jesus grew up to be a man," continued my guide, "performing
unheard-of wonders, such as treading the seas, giving sight, hearing
and speech to the blind, the deaf and the dumb, converting water into
wine, feeding the multitudes miraculously, predicting coming events
and resurrecting the dead."

"Of course, of your gods, too," he added, "it is claimed that they
performed miracles, and of your oracles that they foretold the future,
but there is this difference--the things related of your gods are
a fiction, the things told of Jesus are a fact, and the difference
between Paganism and Christianity is the difference between fiction
and fact."

Just then I heard a wave of murmur, like the rustling of leaves in
a forest, sweep over the bowed audience. I turned about and
unconsciously, my Greek curiosity impelling me, I pushed forward
toward where the greater candle lights were blazing. I felt that
perhaps the commotion in the house was the announcement that the God
Jesus was about to make his appearance, and I wanted to see him. I
wanted to touch him, or, if the crowd were too large to allow me that
privilege, I wanted, at least, to hear his voice. I, who had never
seen a god, never touched one, never heard one speak, I who had
believed in Apollo without ever having known anything provable about
him, I wanted to see the real God, Jesus.

But my guide placed his hand quickly upon my shoulder, and held me
back.

"I want to see Jesus," I hastened, turning toward him. I said this
reverently and in good faith. "Will he not be here this morning? Will
he not speak to his worshippers?" I asked again. "Will he not permit
them to touch him, to caress his hand, to clasp his divine feet, to
inhale the ambrosial fragrance of his breath, to bask in the golden
light of his eyes, to hear the music of his immaculate accents? Let
me, too, see Jesus," I pleaded.

"You cannot see him," answered my guide, with a trace of embarrassment
in his voice. "He does not show himself any more."

I was too much surprised at this to make any immediate reply.

"For the last two thousand years," my guide continued, "it has not
pleased Jesus to show himself to any one; neither has he been heard
from for the same number of years."

"For two thousand years no one has either seen or heard Jesus?"
I asked, my eyes filled with wonder and my voice quivering with
excitement.

"No," he answered.

"Would not that, then," I ventured to ask, impatiently, "make Jesus
as much of an idol as Apollo? And are not these people on their knees
before a god of whose existence they are as much in the dark as were
the Greeks of fair Apollo, and of whose past they have only rumors
such as Homer reports of our Olympian gods--as idolatrous as the
Athenians? What would you say," I asked my guide, "if I were to demand
that you should produce Jesus and prove him to my eyes and ears as
you have asked me to produce and prove Apollo? What is the difference
between a ceremony performed in honor of Apollo and one performed
in honor of Jesus, since it is as impossible to give oracular
demonstration of the existence of the one as of the other? If Jesus is
alive and a god, and Apollo is an idol and dead, what is the evidence,
since the one is as invisible, as inaccessible, and as unproducible
as the other? And, if faith that Jesus is a god proves him a god, why
will not faith in Apollo make him a god? But if worshipping Jesus,
whom for the best part of the last two thousand years no man has seen,
heard or touched; if building temples to him, burning incense upon his
altars, bowing at his shrine and calling him 'God,' is not idolatry,
neither is it idolatry to kindle fire upon the luminous altars of the
Greek Apollo,--God of the dawn, master of the enchanted lyre--he with
the bow and arrow tipped with fire! I am not denying," I said, "that
Jesus ever lived. He may have been alive two thousand years ago, but
if he has not been heard from since, if the same thing that happened
to the people living at the time he lived has happened to him,
namely--if he is dead, then you are worshipping the dead, which fact
stamps your religion as idolatrous."

And, then, remembering what he had said to me about the Greek
mythology being beautiful but not true, I said to him: "Your temples
are indeed gorgeous and costly; your music is grand; your altars
are superb; your litany is exquisite; your chants are melting; your
incense, and bells and flowers, your gold and silver vessels are
all in rare taste, and I dare say your dogmas are subtle and your
preachers eloquent, but your religion has one fault--_it is not
true_."

[Illustration: 022 Swastika. Earlier Form of the Cross. ]

[Illustration: 023 The Lamb in the Holy Sepulchre, Mosaic of the IV
Century, Sarcophagus of Luc de Bearn. Showing the Lamb on the Cross.]




IN CONFIDENCE

I shall speak in a straightforward way, and shall say today what
perhaps I should say tomorrow, or ten years from now,--but shall say
it today, because I cannot keep it back, because I have nothing better
to say than the truth, or what I hold to be the truth. But why seek
truths that are not pleasant? We cannot help it. No man can suppress
the truth. Truth finds a crack or crevice to crop out of; it bobs up
to the surface and all the volume and weight of waters can not keep it
down. Truth prevails! Life, death, truth--behold, these three no
power can keep back. And since we are doomed to know the truth, let us
cultivate a love for it. It is of no avail to cry over lost illusions,
to long for vanished dreams, or to call to the departing gods to come
back. It may be pleasant to play with toys and dolls all our life, but
evidently we are not meant to remain children always. The time comes
when we must put away childish things and obey the summons of truth,
stern and high. A people who fear the truth can never be a free
people. If what I will say is the truth, do you know of any good
reason why I should not say it? And if for prudential reasons I should
sometimes hold back the truth, how would you know _when_ I am telling
what I believe to be the truth, and when I am holding it back for
reasons of policy?

The truth, however unwelcome, is not injurious; it is error which
raises false hopes, which destroys, degrades and pollutes, and which,
sooner or later, must be abandoned. Was it not Spencer, whom Darwin
called "our great philosopher," who said, "Repulsive as is its aspect,
the hard fact which dissipates a cherished illusion is presently found
to contain the germ of a more salutary belief?" Spain is decaying
today because her teachers, for policy's sake, are withholding the
disagreeable truth from the people. Holy water and sainted bones can
give a nation illusions and dreams, but never,--strength.

A difficult subject is in the nature of a challenge to the mind.
One difficult task attempted is worth a thousand commonplace efforts
completed. The majority of people avoid the difficult and fear danger.
But he who would progress must even court danger. Political and
religious liberty were discovered through peril and struggle. The
world owes its emancipation to human daring. Had Columbus feared
danger, America might have slept for another thousand years.

I have a difficult subject in hand. It is also a delicate one. But
I am determined not only to know, if it is possible, the whole truth
about Jesus, but also to communicate that truth to others. Some people
can keep their minds shut. I cannot; I must share my intellectual
life with the world. If I lived a thousand years ago, I might have
collapsed at the sight of the burning stake, but I feel sure I would
have deserved the stake.

People say to me, sometimes, "Why do you not confine yourself to
moral and religious exhortation, such as, 'Be kind, do good, love one
another, etc.'?" But there is more of a moral tonic in the open
and candid discussion of a subject like the one in hand, than in a
multitude of platitudes. We feel our moral fiber stiffen into force
and purpose under the inspiration of a peril dared for the advancement
of truth.

"Tell us what you believe," is one of the requests frequently
addressed to me. I never deliver a lecture in which I do not, either
directly or indirectly, give full and free expression to my faith in
everything that is worthy of faith. If I do not believe in dogma, it
is because I believe in freedom. If I do not believe in one inspired
book, it is because I believe that all truth and only truth is
inspired. If I do not ask the gods to help us, it is because I believe
in human help, so much more real than supernatural help. If I do not
believe in standing still, it is because I believe in progress. If I
am not attracted by the vision of a distant heaven, it is because
I believe in human happiness, now and here. If I do not say "Lord,
Lord!" to Jesus, it is because I bow my head to a greater Power than
Jesus, to a more efficient Savior than he has ever been--Science!

"Oh, he tears down, but does not build up," is another criticism about
my work. It is not true. No preacher or priest is more constructive.
To build up their churches and maintain their creeds the priests
pulled down and destroyed the magnificent civilization of Greece and
Rome, plunging Europe into the dark and sterile ages which lasted
over a thousand years. When Galileo waved his hands for joy because
he believed he had enriched humanity with a new truth and extended the
sphere of knowledge, what did the church do to him? It conspired to
destroy him. It shut him up in a dungeon! Clapping truth into jail;
gagging the mouth of the student--is that building up or tearing down?
When Bruno lighted a new torch to increase the light of the world,
what was his reward? The stake! During all the ages that the church
had the power to police the world, every time a thinker raised his
head he was clubbed to death. Do you think it is kind of us--does it
square with our sense of justice to call the priest constructive,
and the scientists and philosophers who have helped people to their
feet--helped them to self-government in politics, and to self-help in
life,--destructive? Count your rights--political, religious, social,
intellectual--and tell me which of them was conquered for you by the
priest.

"He is irreverent," is still another hasty criticism I have heard
advanced against the rationalist. I wish to tell you something. But
first let us be impersonal. The epithets "irreverent," "blasphemer,"
"atheist," and "infidel," are flung at a man, not from pity, but from
envy. Not having the courage or the industry of our neighbor who works
like a busy bee in the world of men and books, searching with the
sweat of his brow for the real bread of life, wetting the open page
before him with his tears, pushing into the "wee" hours of the
night his quest, animated by the fairest of all loves, "the love of
truth",--we ease our own indolent conscience by calling him names. We
pretend that it is not because we are too lazy or too selfish to work
as hard or think as freely as he does, but because we do not want to
be as irreverent as he is that we keep the windows of our minds shut.
To excuse our own mediocrity we call the man who tries to get out
of the rut a "blasphemer." And so we ask the world to praise our
indifference as a great virtue, and to denounce the conscientious toil
and thought of another, as "blasphemy."

[Illustration: 029 The Lamb Standing Upon the Gospels. VIII Century.]




IS JESUS A MYTH?

What is a myth? A myth is a fanciful explanation of a given
phenomenon. Observing the sun, the moon, and the stars overhead, the
primitive man wished to account for them. This was natural. The mind
craves for knowledge. The child asks questions because of an inborn
desire to know. Man feels ill at ease with a sense of a mental vacuum,
until his questions are answered. Before the days of science, a
fanciful answer was all that could be given to man's questions about
the physical world. The primitive man guessed where knowledge failed
him--what else could he do? A myth, then, is a guess, a story, a
speculation, or a fanciful explanation of a phenomenon, in the absence
of accurate information.

Many are the myths about the heavenly bodies, which, while we call
them myths, because we know better, were to the ancients truths. The
Sun and Moon were once brother and sister, thought the child-man; but
there arose a dispute between them; the woman ran away, and the man
ran after her, until they came to the end of the earth where land and
sky met. The woman jumped into the sky, and the man after her, where
they kept chasing each other forever, as Sun and Moon. Now and
then they came close enough to snap at each other. That was their
explanation of an eclipse. (Childhood of the World.--Edward Clodd.)
With this mythus, the primitive man was satisfied, until his
developing intelligence realized its inadequacy. Science was born of
that realization.

During the middle ages it was believed by Europeans that in certain
parts of the world, in India, for instance, there were people who
had only one eye in the middle of their foreheads, and were more like
monsters than humans. This was imaginary knowledge, which travel and
research have corrected. The myth of a one-eyed people living in India
has been replaced by accurate information concerning the
Hindoos. Likewise, before the science of ancient languages was
perfected--before archaeology had dug up buried cities and deciphered
the hieroglyphics on the monuments of antiquity, most of our knowledge
concerning the earlier ages was mythical, that is to say, it was
knowledge not based on investigation, but made to order. Just as
the theologians still speculate about the other world, primitive
man speculated about this world. Even we moderns, not very long ago,
believed, for instance, that the land of Egypt was visited by ten
fantastic plagues; that in one bloody night every first born in the
land was slain; that the angel of a tribal-god dipped his hand in
blood and printed a red mark upon the doors of the houses of the Jews
to protect them from harm; that Pharaoh and his armies were drowned
in the Red Sea; that the children of Israel wandered for forty years
around Mount Sinai; and so forth, and so forth. But now that we can
read the inscriptions on the stone pages dug out of ancient ruins; now
that we can compel a buried world to reveal its secret and to tell us
its story, we do not have to go on making myths about the ancients.
Myths die when history is born.

It will be seen from these examples that there is no harm in
myth-making if the myth is called a myth. It is when we use our
fanciful knowledge to deny or to shut out real and scientific
knowledge that the myth becomes a stumbling block. And this is
precisely the use to which myths have been put. The king with his
sword and the priest with his curses, have supported the myth against
science. When a man _pretends_ to believe that the _Santa Claus_ of
his childhood is real, and tries to compel also others to play a part,
he becomes positively immoral. There is no harm in believing in _Santa
Claus_ as a myth, but there is in pretending that he is real, because
such an attitude of mind makes a mere trifle of truth.

Is Jesus a myth? There is in man a faculty for fiction. Before history
was born, there was myth; before men could think, they dreamed. It
was with the human race in its infancy as it is with the child. The
child's imagination is more active than its reason. It is easier for
it to fancy even than to see. It thinks less than it guesses. This
wild flight of fancy is checked only by experience. It is reflection
which introduces a bit into the mouth of imagination, curbing its pace
and subduing its restless spirit. It is, then, as we grow older, and,
if I may use the word, riper, that we learn to distinguish between
fact and fiction, between history and myth.

In childhood we need playthings, and the more fantastic and _bizarre_
they are, the better we are pleased with them. We dream, for instance,
of castles in the air--gorgeous and clothed with the azure hue of
the skies. We fill the space about and over us with spirits, fairies,
gods, and other invisible and airy beings. We covet the rainbow. We
reach out for the moon. Our feet do not really begin to touch the firm
ground until we have reached the years of discretion.

I know there are those who wish they could always remain
children,--living in dreamland. But even if this were desirable, it
is not possible. Evolution is our destiny; of what use is it, then, to
take up arms against destiny?

Let it be borne in mind that all the religions of the world were born
in the childhood of the race.

Science was not born until man had matured. There is in this thought a
world of meaning.

Children make religions.

Grown up people create science.

The cradle is the womb of all the fairies and faiths of mankind.

The school is the birthplace of science.

Religion is the science of the child.

Science is the religion of the matured man.

In the discussion of this subject, I appeal to the mature, not to
the child mind. I appeal to those who have cultivated a taste for
truth--who are not easily scared, but who can "screw their courage
to the sticking point" and follow to the end truth's leading. The
multitude is ever joined to its idols; let them alone. I speak to the
discerning few.

There is an important difference between a lecturer and an ordained
preacher. The latter can command a hearing in the name of God, or in
the name of the Bible. He does not have to satisfy his hearers about
the reasonableness of what he preaches. He is God's mouthpiece, and
no one may disagree with him. He can also invoke the authority of
the church and of the Christian world to enforce acceptance of his
teaching. The only way I may command your respect is to be reasonable.
You will not listen to me for God's sake, nor for the Bible's
sake, nor yet for the love of heaven, or the fear of hell. My only
protection is to be rational--to be truthful. In other words, the
preacher can afford to ignore common sense in the name of Revelation.
But if I depart from it in the least, or am caught once playing fast
and loose with the facts, I will irretrievably lose my standing.

[Illustration: 035 In Use Upon Heathen Altars Centuries Before
Christianity.]


Our answer to the question, Is Jesus a Myth? must depend more or
less upon original research, as there is very little written on the
subject. The majority of writers assume that a person answering to the
description of Jesus lived some two thousand years ago. Even the few
who entertain doubts on the subject, seem to hold that while there is
a large mythical element in the Jesus story, nevertheless there is a
historical nucleus round which has clustered the elaborate legend of
the Christ. In all probability, they argue, there was a man called
Jesus, who said many helpful things, and led an exemplary life, and
all the miracles and wonders represent the accretions of fond and
pious ages.

Let us place ourselves entirely in the hands of the evidence. As far
as possible, let us be passive, showing no predisposition one way or
another. We can afford to be independent. If the evidence proves the
historicity of Jesus, well and good; if the evidence is not sufficient
to prove it, there is no reason why we should fear to say so; besides,
it is our duty to inform ourselves on this question. As intelligent
beings we desire to know whether this Jesus, whose worship is not only
costing the world millions of the people's money, but which is also
drawing to his service the time, the energies, the affection, the
devotion, and the labor of humanity,--is a myth, or a reality. We
believe that all religious persecutions, all sectarian wars, hatreds
and intolerance, which still cramp and embitter our humanity, would
be replaced by love and brotherhood, if the sects could be made to
see that the God-Jesus they are quarreling over is a myth, a shadow
to which credulity alone gives substance. Like people who have been
fighting in the dark, fearing some danger, the sects, once relieved
of the thraldom of a tradition which has been handed down to them by a
childish age and country, will turn around and embrace one another. In
every sense, the subject is an all-absorbing one. It goes to the root
of things; it touches the vital parts, and it means life or death to
the Christian religion.

[Illustration: 037 Ascension of Jesus, Ninth Century.]

[Illustration: 038 Juno Nursing Her Divine Child, Mars.]




THE PROBLEM STATED

Let me now give an idea of the method I propose to follow in the study
of this subject. Let us suppose that a student living in the year 3000
desired to make sure that such a man as Abraham Lincoln really lived
and did the things attributed to him. How would he go about it?

A man must have a birthplace and a birthday. All the records agree as
to where and when Lincoln was born. This is not enough to prove his
historicity, but it is an important link in the chain.

Neither the place nor the time of Jesus' birth is known. There
has never been any unanimity about this matter. There has been
considerable confusion and contradiction about it. It cannot be proved
that the twenty-fifth of December is his birthday. A number of other
dates were observed by the Christian church at various times as the
birthday of Jesus. The Gospels give no date, and appear to be quite
uncertain--really ignorant about it. When it is remembered that the
Gospels purport to have been written by Jesus' intimate companions,
and during the lifetime of his brothers and mother, their silence on
this matter becomes significant. The selection of the twenty-fifth of
December as his birthday is not only an arbitrary one, but that date,
having been from time immemorial dedicated to the Sun, the inference
is that the Son of God and the Sun of heaven enjoying the same
birthday, were at one time identical beings. The fact that Jesus'
death was accompanied with the darkening of the Sun, and that the date
of his resurrection is also associated with the position of the Sun at
the time of the vernal equinox, is a further intimation that we
have in the story of the birth, death, and resurrection of Jesus,
an ancient and nearly universal Sun-myth, instead of verifiable
historical events. The story of Jesus for three days in the heart of
the earth; of Jonah, three days in the belly of a fish; of Hercules,
three days in the belly of a whale, and of Little Red Riding Hood,
sleeping in the belly of a great black wolf, represent the attempt of
primitive man to explain the phenomenon of Day and Night. The Sun is
swallowed by a dragon, a wolf, or a whale, which plunges the world
into darkness; but the dragon is killed, and the Sun rises triumphant
to make another Day. This ancient Sun myth is the starting point
of nearly all miraculous religions, from the days of Egypt to the
twentieth century.

[Illustration: 041 The Persian God, Mithra. All the Gods Have the
Solar Disc Around Their Heads, Showing That Sun-Worship Was One of the
Earliest Forms of Religion.]

The story which Mathew relates about a remarkable star, which sailing
in the air pointed out to some unnamed magicians the cradle or cave in
which the wonder-child was born, helps further to identify Jesus with
the Sun. What became of this "performing" star, or of the magicians,
and their costly gifts, the records do not say. It is more likely that
it was the astrological predilections of the gospel writer which led
him to assign to his God-child a star in the heavens. The belief
that the stars determine human destinies is a very ancient one.
Such expressions in our language as "ill-starred," "a lucky star,"
"disaster," "lunacy," and so on, indicate the hold which astrology
once enjoyed upon the human mind. We still call a melancholy
man, _Saturnine_; a cheerful man, _Jovial_; a quick-tempered man,
_Mercurial_; showing how closely our ancestors associated the
movements of celestial bodies with human affairs. * The prominence,
therefore, of the sun and stars in the Gospel story tends to show that
Jesus is an astrological rather than a historical character.

     *Childhood of the World.--Edward Clodd.

That the time of his birth, his death, and supposed resurrection is
_not_ verifiable is generally admitted.

This uncertainty robs the story of Jesus, to an extent at least, of
the atmosphere of reality.

The twenty-fifth of December is celebrated as his birthday. Yet there
is no evidence that he was born on that day. Although the Gospels are
silent as to the date on which Jesus was born, there is circumstantial
evidence in the accounts given of the event to show that the
twenty-fifth of December could not have been his birthday. It snows in
Palestine, though a warmer country, and we know that in December
there are no shepherds tending their flocks in the night time in
that country. Often at this time of the year the fields and hills
are covered with snow. Hence, if the shepherds sleeping in the
fields really saw the heavens open and heard the angel-song, in all
probability it was in some other month of the year, and not late in
December. We know, also, that early in the history of Christianity
the months of May and June enjoyed the honor of containing the day of
Jesus' birth.

[Illustration: 043 Isis Nursing Her Divine Child, 3000 B. C.]

Of course, it is immaterial on which day Jesus was born, but why is
it not known? Yet not only is the date of his birth a matter of
conjecture, but also the year in which he was born. Matthew, one of
the Evangelists, suggests that Jesus was born in King Herod's time,
for it was this king who, hearing from the Magi that a King of the
Jews was born, decided to destroy him; but Luke, another Evangelist,
intimates that Jesus was born when Quirinus was ruler of Judea, which
makes the date of Jesus' birth about fourteen years later than the
date given by Matthew. Why this discrepancy in a historical document,
to say nothing about inspiration? The theologian might say that this
little difficulty was introduced purposely into the scriptures to
establish its infallibility, but it is only religious books that
are pronounced infallible on the strength of the contradictions they
contain.

Again, Matthew says that to escape the evil designs of Herod, Mary
and Joseph, with the infant Jesus, fled into Egypt, Luke says nothing
about this hurried flight, nor of Herod's intention to kill the infant
Messiah. On the contrary he tells us that after the forty days of
purification were over Jesus was publicly presented at the temple,
where Herod, if he really, as Matthew relates, wished to seize him,
could have done so without difficulty. It is impossible to reconcile
the flight to Egypt with the presentation in the temple, and this
inconsistency is certainly insurmountable and makes it look as if the
narrative had no value whatever as history.

When we come to the more important chapters about Jesus, we meet with
greater difficulties. Have you ever noticed that the day on which
Jesus is supposed to have died falls invariably on a Friday? What is
the reason for this? It is evident that nobody knows, and nobody ever
knew the date on which the Crucifixion took place, if it ever took
place. It is so obscure and so mythical that an artificial day has
been fixed by the Ecclesiastical councils. While it is always on a
Friday that the Crucifixion is commemorated, the week in which the day
occurs varies from year to year. "Good Friday" falls not before the
spring equinox, but as soon after the spring equinox as the full moon
allows, thus making the calculation to depend upon the position of the
sun in the Zodiac and the phases of the moon. But that was precisely
the way the day for the festival of the pagan goddess Oestera was
determined. The Pagan Oestera has become the Christian Easter. Does
not this fact, as well as those already touched upon, make the story
of Jesus to read very much like the stories of the Pagan deities.

The early Christians, Origin, for instance, in his reply to the
rationalist Celsus who questioned the reality of Jesus, instead of
producing evidence of a historical nature, appealed to the mythology
of the pagans to prove that the story of Jesus was no more incredible
than those of the Greek and Roman gods. This is so important that
we refer our readers to Origin's own words on the subject. "Before
replying to Celsus, it is necessary to admit that in the matter of
history, however true it might be," writes this Christian Father, "it
is often very difficult and sometimes quite impossible to establish
its truth by evidence which shall be considered sufficient." * This is
a plain admission that as early as the second and third centuries
the claims put forth about Jesus did not admit of positive historical
demonstration. But in the absence of evidence Origin offers the
following metaphysical arguments against the sceptical Celsus:
1. Such stories as are told of Jesus are admitted to be true when told
of pagan divinities, why can they not also be true when told of
the Christian Messiah? 2. They must be true because they are the
fulfillment of Old Testament prophecies. In other words, the only
proofs Origin can bring forth against the rationalistic criticism of
Celsus is, that to deny Jesus would be equivalent to denying both the
Pagan and Jewish mythologies. If Jesus is not real, says Origin, then
Apollo was not real, and the Old Testament prophecies have not been
fulfilled. If we are to have any mythology at all, he seems to argue,
why object to adding to it the mythus of Jesus? There could not be
a more damaging admission than this from one of the most conspicuous
defenders of Jesus' story against early criticism.

   * Origin _Contre Celse._ 1. 58 et Suiv. Ibid.

Justin Martyr, another early Father, offers the following argument
against unbelievers in the Christian legend: "When we say also that
the Word, which is the first birth of God, was produced without sexual
union, and that he, Jesus Christ, our teacher, was crucified,
died, and rose again, and ascended into heaven, we propound nothing
different from what you believe regarding those whom you esteem sons
of Jupiter." * Which is another way of saying that the Christian
mythus is very similar to the pagan, and should therefore be equally
true. Pressing his argument further, this interesting Father discovers
many resemblances between what he himself is preaching and what the
pagans have always believed: "For you know how many sons your esteemed
writers ascribe to Jupiter. Mercury, the interpreting word (he spells
this word with a small _w_ while in the above quotation he uses a
capital _W_ to denote the Christian incarnation) and teacher of
all; Aesculapius...who ascended to heaven; one Hercules...and
Perseus;...and Bellerophon, who, though sprung from mortals, rose
to heaven on the horses of Pegasus." ** If Jupiter can have, Justin
Martyr seems to reason, half a dozen divine sons, why cannot Jehovah
have at least one?

     * First Apology, Chapter xxi (Anti-Nicene Library).

     ** Ibid.

[Illustration: 048 The Unsexed Christ, Naked In the Church of St.
Antoine, Tours, France.]

Instead of producing historical evidence or appealing to creditable
documents, as one would to prove the existence of a Caesar or an
Alexander, Justin Martyr draws upon pagan mythology in his reply to
the critics of Christianity. All he seems to ask for is that Jesus be
given a higher place among the divinities of the ancient world.

To help their cause the Christian apologists not infrequently also
changed the sense of certain Old Testament passages to make them
support the miraculous stories in the New Testament. For example,
having borrowed from Oriental books the story of the god in a manger,
surrounded by staring animals, the Christian fathers introduced a
prediction of this event into the following text from the book of
Habakkuk in the Bible: "Accomplish thy work in the midst of the
_years_, in the midst of the years make known, etc." * This Old
Testament text appeared in the Greek translation as follows: "Thou
shalt manifest thyself in the midst of _two animals_" which was
fulfilled of course when Jesus was born in a stable. How weak must be
one's case to resort to such tactics in order to command a following!
And when it is remembered that these follies were deemed necessary
to prove the reality of what has been claimed as the most stupendous
event in all history, one can readily see upon how fragile a
foundation is built the story of the Christian God-man.

     * Heb. iii. 2.

Let us continue: Abraham Lincoln's associates and contemporaries are
all known to history. The immediate companions of Jesus appear to be,
on the other hand, as mythical as he is himself. Who was Matthew? Who
was Mark? Who were John, Peter, Judas, and Mary? There is absolutely
no evidence that they ever existed. They are not mentioned except in
the New Testament books, which, as we shall see, are "supposed"
copies of "supposed" originals. If Peter ever went to Rome with a new
doctrine, how is it that no historian has taken note of him? If Paul
visited Athens and preached from Mars Hill, how is it that there is
no mention of him or of his strange Gospel in the Athenian chronicles?
For all we know, both Peter and Paul may have really existed, but it
is only a guess, as we have no means of ascertaining. The uncertainty
about the apostles of Jesus is quite in keeping with the uncertainty
about Jesus himself.

The report that Jesus had twelve apostles seems also mythical. The
number twelve, like the number seven, or three, or forty, plays an
important role in all Sun-myths, and points to the twelve signs of
the Zodiac. Jacob had twelve sons; there were twelve tribes of Israel;
twelve months in the year; twelve gates or pillars of heaven, etc. In
many of the religions of the world, the number twelve is sacred.
There have been few god-saviors who did not have twelve apostles or
messengers. In one or two places, in the New Testament, Jesus is made
to send out "the seventy" to evangelize the world. Here again we
see the presence of a myth. It was believed that there were seventy
different nations in the world--to each nation an apostle. Seventy
wise men are supposed to have translated the Old Testament, sitting in
seventy different cells. That is why their translation is called
"_the Septuagint_" But it is all a legend, as there is no evidence
of seventy scholars working in seventy individual cells on the Hebrew
Bible. One of the Church Fathers declares that he saw these seventy
cells with his own eyes. He was the only one who saw them.

That the "Twelve Apostles" are fanciful may be inferred from the
obscurity in which the greater number of them have remained. Peter,
Paul, John, James, Judas, occupy the stage almost exclusively. If
Paul was an apostle, we have fourteen, instead of twelve. Leaving out
Judas, and counting Matthias, who was elected in his place, we have
thirteen apostles.

The number forty figures also in many primitive myths. The Jews were
in the wilderness for forty years; Jesus fasted for forty days; from
the resurrection to the ascension were forty days; Moses was on the
mountain with God for forty days. An account in which such scrupulous
attention is shown to supposed sacred numbers is apt to be more
artificial than real. The biographers of Lincoln or of Socrates do not
seem to be interested in numbers. They write history, not stories.

Again, many of the contemporaries of Lincoln bear written witness
to his existence. The historians of the time, the statesmen, the
publicists, the chroniclers--all seem to be acquainted with him, or to
have heard of him. It is impossible to explain why the contemporaries
of Jesus, the authors and historians of his time, do not take notice
of him. If Abraham Lincoln was important enough to have attracted the
attention of his contemporaries, how much more Jesus. Is it reasonable
to suppose that these Pagan and Jewish writers knew of Jesus,--had
heard of his incomparably great works and sayings,--but omitted
to give him a page or a line? Could they have been in a conspiracy
against him? How else is this unanimous silence to be accounted for?
Is it not more likely that the wonder-working Jesus was unknown to
them? And he was unknown to them because no such Jesus existed in
their day.

Should the student, looking into Abraham Lincoln's history, discover
that no one of his biographers knew positively just when he lived or
where he was born, he would have reason to conclude that because
of this uncertainty on the part of the biographers, he must be more
exacting than he otherwise would have been. That is precisely
our position. Of course, there are in history great men of whose
birthplaces or birthdays we are equally uncertain. But we believe in
their existence, not because no one seems to know exactly when and
where they were born, but because there is overwhelming evidence
corroborating the other reports about them, and which is sufficient
to remove the suspicion suggested by the darkness hanging over their
nativity. Is there any evidence strong enough to prove the historicity
of Jesus, in spite of the fact that not even his supposed companions,
writing during the lifetime of Jesus' mother, have any definite
information to give.

But let us continue. The reports current about a man like Lincoln are
verifiable, while many of those about Jesus are of a nature that no
amount of evidence can confirm. That Lincoln was President of these
United States, that he signed the Emancipation Proclamation, and that
he was assassinated, can be readily authenticated.

But how can any amount of evidence satisfy one's self that Jesus was
born of a virgin, for instance? Such a report or rumor can never even
be examined; it does not lend itself to evidence; it is beyond the
sphere of history; it is not a legitimate question for investigation.
It belongs to mythology. Indeed, to put forth a report of that
nature is to forbid the use of evidence, and to command forcible
acquiescence, which, to say the least, is a very suspicious
circumstance, calculated to hurt rather than to help the Jesus story.

The report that Jesus was God is equally impossible of verification.
How are we to prove whether or not a certain person was God? Jesus may
have been a wonderful man, but is every wonderful man a God? Jesus may
have claimed to have been a God, but is every one who puts forth
such a claim a God? How, then, are we to decide which of the numerous
candidates for divine honors should be given our votes? And can we by
voting for Jesus make him a God? Observe to what confusion the mere
attempt to follow such a report leads us.

A human Jesus may or may not have existed, but we are as sure as we
can be of anything, that a virgin-born God, named Jesus, such as we
must believe in or be eternally lost, is an impossibility--except
to credulity. But credulity is no evidence at all, even when it
is dignified by the name of _faith_. Let us pause for a moment to
reflect: The final argument for the existence of the miraculous Jesus,
preached in church and Sunday-school, these two thousand years, as
the sole savior of the world, is an appeal to faith--the same to which
Mohammed resorts to establish his claims, and Brigham Young to
prove his revelation. There is no other possible way by which the
virgin-birth or the _godhood_ of a man can be established. And such a
faith is never free, it is always maintained by the sword now, and by
hell-fire hereafter.

Once more, if it had been reported of Abraham Lincoln that he
predicted his own assassination; that he promised some of his friends
they would not die until they saw him coming again upon the clouds of
heaven; that he would give them thrones to sit upon; that they could
safely drink deadly poisons in his name, or that he would grant them
any request which they might make, provided they asked it for his
sake, we would be justified in concluding that such a Lincoln never
existed. Yet the most impossible utterances are put in Jesus' mouth.
He is made to say: "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I
do." No man who makes such a promise can keep it. It is not sayings
like the above that can prove a man a God. Has Jesus kept his promise?
Does he give his people everything, or "whatsoever" they ask of him?
But, it is answered, "Jesus only meant to say that he would give
whatever he himself considered good for his friends to have." Indeed!
Is that the way to crawl out of a contract? If that is what he meant,
why did he say something else? Could he not have _said_ just what he
_meant_, in the first place? Would it not have been fairer not to
have given his friends any occasion for false expectations? Better
to promise a little and do more, than to promise everything and do
nothing. But to say that Jesus really entered into any such agreement
is to throw doubt upon his existence. Such a character is too wild
to be real. Only a mythical Jesus could virtually hand over the
government of the universe to courtiers who have petitions to press
upon his attention. Moreover, if Jesus could keep his promise, there
would be today no misery in the world, no orphans, no childless
mothers, no shipwrecks, no floods, no famines, no disease, no crippled
children, no insanity, no wars, no crime, no wrong! Have not a
thousand, thousand prayers been offered in Jesus' name against every
evil which has ploughed the face of our earth? Have these prayers been
answered? Then why is there discontent in the world? Can the followers
of Jesus move mountains, drink deadly poisons, touch serpents, or work
greater miracles than are ascribed to Jesus, as it was promised that
they would do? How many self-deluded prophets these extravagant claims
have produced! And who can number the bitter disappointments caused by
such impossible promises?

George Jacob Holyoake, of England, tells how in the days of utter
poverty, his believing mother asked the Lord, again and again--on her
knees, with tears streaming from her eyes, and with absolute faith
in Jesus' ability to keep His promise,--to give her starving children
their daily bread. But the more fervently she prayed the heavier grew
the burden of her life. A stone or wooden idol could not have been
more indifferent to a mother's tears. "My mind aches as I think of
those days," writes Mr. Holyoake. One day he went to see the Rev.
Mr. Cribbace, who had invited inquirers to his house. "Do you really
believe," asked young Holyoake to the clergyman, "that what we ask in
faith we shall receive?"

"It never struck me," continues Mr. Holyoake, "that the preacher's
threadbare dress, his half-famished look, and necessity of taking up
a collection the previous night to pay expenses showed that faith was
not a source of income to him. It never struck me that if help could
be obtained by prayer no church would be needy, no believer would
be poor." What answer did the preacher give to Holyoake's earnest
question? The same which the preachers of today give: "He parried his
answer with many words, and at length said that the promise was to be
taken with the provision that what we asked for would be given, _if
God thought it for our good."_ Why then, did not Jesus explain that
important _proviso_ when he made the promise? Was Jesus only making
a half statement, the other half of which he would reveal later to
protect himself against disappointed petitioners. But he said: "If
ye ask anything in my name, I will do it," and "If it were not so, I
would have told you." Did he not mean just what he said? The truth is
that no historical person in his senses ever made such extraordinary,
such impossible promises, and the report that Jesus made them only
goes to confirm that their author is only a legendary being.

When this truth dawned upon Mr. Holyoake he ceased to petition Heaven,
which was like "dropping a bucket into an empty well," and began to
look _elsewhere_ for help. * The world owes its advancement to the
fact that men no longer look to Heaven for help, but help themselves.
Self-effort, and not prayer, is the remedy against ignorance, slavery,
poverty, and moral degradation. Fortunately, by holding up before us
an impossible Jesus, with his impossible promises, the churches have
succeeded only in postponing, but not in preventing, the progress of
man. This is a compliment to human nature, and it is well earned. It
is also a promise that in time humanity will be completely emancipated
from every phantom which in the past has scared it into silence or
submission, and

         "A loftier race than e'er the world
     Hath known shall rise
     With flame of liberty in their souls,
     And light of science in their eyes."

     * Bygones Worth Remembering.--George Jacob Holyoake

[Illustration: 061 Portion of Manuscript Supposed to Be Copy of Lost
Originals.]



THE CHRISTIAN DOCUMENTS

The documents containing the story of Jesus are so unlike those about
Lincoln or any other historical character, that we must be doubly
vigilant in our investigation.

The Christians rely mainly on the four Gospels for the historicity
of Jesus. But the original documents of which the books in the New
Testament are claimed to be faithful copies are not in existence.
_There is absolutely no evidence that they ever were in existence_.
This is a statement which can not be controverted. Is it conceivable
that the early believers lost through carelessness or purposely
_every_ document written by an apostle, while guarding with all
protecting jealousy and zeal the writings of anonymous persons? Is
there any valid reason why the contributions to Christian literature
of an inspired apostle should perish while those of a nameless scribe
are preserved, why the original Gospel of Matthew should drop quietly
out of sight, no one knows how, while a supposed copy of it in an
alien language is preserved for many centuries? Jesus himself, it
is admitted, did not write a single line. He had come, according to
popular belief, to reveal the will of God--a most important mission
indeed, and yet he not only did not put this revelation in writing
during his lifetime, and with his own hand, which it is natural to
suppose that a divine teacher, expressly come from heaven, would have
done, but he left this all-important duty to anonymous chroniclers,
who, naturally, made enough mistakes to split up Christendom into
innumerable factions. It is worth a moment's pause to think of
the persecutions, the cruel wars, and the centuries of hatred and
bitterness which would have been spared our unfortunate humanity,
if Jesus himself had written down his message in the clearest and
plainest manner, instead of leaving it to his supposed disciples
to publish it to the world, when he could no longer correct their
mistakes.

Moreover, not only did Jesus not write himself, but he has not even
taken any pains to preserve the writings of his "apostles," It is well
known that the original manuscripts, if there were any, are nowhere
to be found. This is a grave matter. We have only supposed copies of
supposed original manuscripts. Who copied them? When were they copied?
How can we be sure that these copies are reliable? And why are there
thousands upon thousands of various readings in these, numerous
supposed copies? What means have we of deciding which version or
reading to accept? Is it possible that as the result of Jesus' advent
into our world, we have only a basketful of nameless and dateless
copies and documents? Is it conceivable, I ask, that a God would send
his Son to us, and then leave us to wander through a pile of dusty
manuscripts to find out why He sent His Son, and what He taught when
on earth?

The only answer the Christian church can give to this question is
that the original writings were purposely allowed to perish. When
a precious document containing the testament of Almighty God, and
inscribed for an eternal purpose by the Holy Ghost, disappears
altogether there is absolutely no other way of accounting for its
disappearance than by saying, as we have suggested, that its divine
author must have intentionally withdrawn it from circulation. "God
moves in a mysterious way" is the last resort of the believer. This
is the one argument which is left to theology to fight science with.
Unfortunately it is an argument which would prove every cult and "ism"
under the heavens true. The Mohammedan, the Mazdaian, and the Pagan
may also fall back upon faith. There is nothing which faith can not
cover up from the light. But if a faith which ignores evidence be not
a superstition, what then is superstition? I wonder if the Catholic
Church, which pretends to believe--and which derives quite an income
from the belief--that God has miraculously preserved the wood of the
cross, the Holy Sepulchre, in Jerusalem, the coat of Jesus, and quite
a number of other mementos, can explain why the original manuscripts
were lost. I have a suspicion that there were no "original"
manuscripts. I am not sure of this, of course, but if nails, bones and
holy places could be miraculously preserved, why not also manuscripts?
It is reasonable to suppose that the Deity would not have permitted
the most important documents containing His Revelation to drop into
some hole and disappear, or to be gnawed into dust by the insects,
after having had them written by special inspiration.

Again, when these documents, such as we find them, are examined, it
will be observed that, even in the most elementary intelligence which
they pretend to furnish, they are hopelessly at variance with one
another. It is, for example, utterly impossible to reconcile Matthew's
genealogy of Jesus with the one given by Luke. In copying the names of
the supposed ancestors of Jesus, they tamper with the list as given
in the book of Chronicles, in the Old Testament, and thereby justly
expose themselves to the charge of bad faith. One evangelist says
Jesus was descended from Solomon, born of "her that had been the wife
of Urias." It will be remembered that David ordered Urias killed in
a cowardly manner, that he may marry his widow, whom he coveted.
According to Matthew, Jesus is one of the offspring of this adulterous
relation. According to Luke, it is not through Solomon, but through
Nathan, that Jesus is connected with the house of David.

Again, Luke tells us that the name of the father of Joseph was _Heli;_
Matthew says it was _Jacob_. If the writers of the gospels were
contemporaries of Joseph they could have easily learned the exact name
of his father.

Again, why do these biographers of Jesus give us the genealogy of
Joseph if he was not the father of Jesus? It is the genealogy of Mary
which they should have given to prove the descent of Jesus from
the house of David, and not that of Joseph. These irreconcilable
differences between Luke, Matthew and the other evangelists, go to
prove that these authors possessed no reliable information concerning
the subjects they were writing about. For if Jesus is a historical
character, and these biographers were really his immediate associates,
and were inspired besides, how are we to explain their blunders and
contradictions about his genealogy?

A good illustration of the mythical or unhistorical character of the
New Testament is furnished by the story of John the Baptist. He is
first represented as confessing publicly that Jesus is the Christ;
that he himself is not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoes;
and that Jesus is the Lamb of God, "who taketh away the sins of the
world." John was also present, the gospels say, when the heavens
opened and a dove descended on Jesus' head, and he heard the voice
from the skies, crying: "He is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased."

Is it possible that, a few chapters later, this same John forgets his
public confession,--the dove and the voice from heaven,--and actually
sends two of his disciples to find out who this Jesus is, * The only
way we can account for such strange conduct is that the compiler or
editor in question had two different myths or stories before him, and
he wished to use them both.

   * Matthew xi.

A further proof of the loose and extravagant style of the Gospel
writers is furnished by the concluding verse of the Fourth Gospel:
"There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they
should be written, every one, I suppose that even the world itself
could not contain the books that should be written." This is more like
the language of a myth-maker than of a historian. How much reliance
can we put in a reporter who is given to such exaggeration? To say
that the world itself would be too small to contain the unreported
sayings and doings of a teacher whose public life possibly did not
last longer than a year, and whose reported words and deeds fill
only a few pages, is to prove one's statements unworthy of serious
consideration.

And it is worth our while to note also that the documents which have
come down to our time and which purport to be the biographies of
Jesus, are not only written in an alien language, that is to say, in
a language which was not that of Jesus and his disciples, but neither
are they dated or signed. Jesus and his twelve apostles were Jews;
why are all the four Gospels written in Greek? If they were originally
written in Hebrew, how can we tell that the Greek translation is
accurate, since we can not compare it with the originals? And why are
these Gospels anonymous? Why are they not dated? But as we shall
say something more on this subject in the present volume, we confine
ourselves at this point to reproducing a fragment of the manuscript
pages from which our Greek Translations have been made. * It is
admitted by scholars that owing to the difficulty of reading these
ancient and imperfect and also conflicting texts, an accurate
translation is impossible. But this is another way of saying that what
the churches call the Word of God is not only the word of man, but a
very imperfect word, at that.

    * See page 57.

The belief in Jesus, then, is founded on secondary documents, altered
and edited by various hands; on lost originals, and on anonymous
manuscripts of an age considerably later than the events therein
related--manuscripts which contradict each other as well as
themselves. Such is clearly and undeniably the basis for the belief
in a historical Jesus. It was this sense of the insufficiency of
the evidence which drove the missionaries of Christianity to commit
forgeries.

If there was ample evidence for the historicity of Jesus, why did his
biographers resort to forgery? The following admissions by Christian
writers themselves show the helplessness of the early preachers in
the presence of inquirers who asked for proofs. The church historian,
Mosheim, writes that, "The Christian Fathers deemed it a pious act to
employ deception and fraud." *

     * Ecclesiastical Hist., Vol. I, p. 247.

Again, he says: "The greatest and most pious teachers were nearly all
of them infected with this leprosy." Will not some believer tell
us why forgery and fraud were necessary to prove the historicity
of Jesus. Another historian, Milman, writes that, "Pious fraud was
admitted and avowed" by the early missionaries of Jesus. "It was an
age of literary frauds," writes Bishop Ellicott, speaking of the times
immediately following the alleged crucifixion of Jesus. Dr. Giles
declares that, "There can be no doubt that great numbers of books were
written with no other purpose than to deceive." And it is the opinion
of Dr. Robertson Smith that, "There was an enormous floating mass of
spurious literature created to suit party views." Books which are now
rejected as apochryphal were at one time received as inspired,
and books which are now believed to be infallible were at one time
regarded as of no authority in the Christian world. It certainly is
puzzling that there should be a whole literature of fraud and forgery
in the name of a historical person. But if Jesus was a myth, we can
easily explain the legends and traditions springing up in his name.

The early followers of Jesus, then, realizing the force of this
objection, did actually resort to interpolation and forgery in order
to prove that Jesus was a historical character.

One of the oldest critics of the Christian religion was a Pagan, known
to history under the name of Porphyry; yet, the early Fathers did not
hesitate to tamper even with the writings of an avowed opponent of
their religion. After issuing an edict to destroy, among others, the
writings of this philosopher, a work, called _Philosophy of Oracles,_
was produced, in which the author is made to write almost as a
Christian; and the name of Porphyry was signed to it as its author.
St. Augustine was one of the first to reject it as a forgery. * A
more astounding invention than this alleged work of a heathen bearing
witness to Christ is difficult to produce. Do these forgeries, these
apocryphal writings, these interpolations, freely admitted to have
been the prevailing practice of the early Christians, help to prove
the existence of Jesus? And when to this wholesale manufacture
of doubtful evidence is added the terrible vandalism which nearly
destroyed every great Pagan classic, we can form an idea of the
desperate means to which the early Christians resorted to prove that
Jesus was not a myth. It all goes to show how difficult it is to make
a man out of a myth.

     * Geo. W. Foote. Crimes of Christianity.

[Illustration: 072]

[Illustration: 073 The Goddess Mother in the Grecian Pantheon.]




VIRGIN BIRTHS

Stories of gods born of virgins are to be found in nearly every age
and country. There have been many virgin mothers, and Mary with her
child is but a recent version of a very old and universal myth. In
China and India, in Babylonia and Egypt, in Greece and Rome, "divine"
beings selected from among the daughters of men the purest and most
beautiful to serve them as a means of entrance into the world of
mortals. Wishing to take upon themselves the human form, while
retaining at the same time their "divinity," this compromise--of an
earthly mother with a "divine" father--was effected. In the form of
a swan Jupiter approached Leda, as in the guise of a dove, or a
_Paracletus,_ Jehovah "overshadowed" Mary.

A nymph bathing in a river in China is touched by a lotus plant, and
the divine Fohi is born.

In Siam, a wandering sunbeam caresses a girl in her teens, and the
great and wonderful deliverer, Codom, is born. In the life of Buddha
we read that he descended on his mother Maya, "in likeness as the
heavenly queen, and entered her womb," and was "born from her right
side, to save the world." * In Greece, the young god Apollo visits a
fair maid of Athens, and a Plato is ushered into the world.

     * Stories of Virgin Births. Reference: Lord Macartney.
     Voyage dans "interview de la Chine et en Tartarie." Vol. I,
     p. 48. See also Les Vierges Meres et les Naissance
     Miraculeuse. p. Saintyves. p. 19, etc.

In ancient Mexico, as well as in Babylonia, and in modern Corea, as in
modern Palestine, as in the legends of all lands, virgins gave birth
and became divine mothers. *

     * Stories of Virgin Births. Reference: Lord Macartney.
     Voyage dans "interview de la Chine et en Tartarie." Vol. I,
     p. 48. See also Les Vierges Meres et les Naissance
     Miraculeuse. p. Saintyves. p. 19, etc.

But the real home of virgin births is the land of the Nile. Eighteen
hundred years before Christ, we find carved on one of the walls of the
great temple of Luxor a picture of the _annunciation, conception
and birth_ of King Amunothph III, an almost exact copy of the
annunciation, conception and birth of the Christian God. Of course
no one will think of maintaining that the Egyptians borrowed the idea
from the Catholics nearly two thousand years before the Christian era.
"The story in the Gospel of Luke, the first and second chapters is,"
says Malvert, "a reproduction, 'point by point,' of the story in
stone of the miraculous birth of Amunothph." *

     * Science and Religion p. 96.

[Illustration: 076 The Annunciation, Birth, and Adoration of Amenophis
of Egypt, Nearly 2000 Years Before Christ.]

Sharpe in his Egyptian Mythology, page 19, gives the following
description of the Luxor picture, quoted by G. W. Foote in his _Bible
Romances,_ page 126: "In this picture we have the annunciation, the
conception, the birth and the adoration, as described in the first
and second chapters of Luke's Gospel." Massey gives a more minute
description of the Luxor picture. "The first scene on the left hand
shows the god Taht, the divine Word or Loges, in the act of hailing
the virgin queen, announcing to her that she is to give birth to a
son. In the second scene the god Kneph (assisted by Hathor) gives
life to her. This is the Holy Ghost, or Spirit that causes
conception....Next the mother is seated on the midwife's stool, and
the child is supported in the hands of one of the nurses. The fourth
scene is that of the adoration. Here the child is enthroned, receiving
homage from the gods and gifts from men." * The picture on the wall of
the Luxor temple, then, is one of the sources to which the anonymous
writers of the Gospels went for their miraculous story. It is no
wonder they suppressed their own identity as well as the source from
which they borrowed their material.

     * Natural Genesis. Massey, Vol.  II, p. 398

Not only the idea of a virgin mother, but all the other miraculous
events, such as the stable cradle, the guiding star, the massacre of
the children, the flight to Egypt, and the resurrection and bodily
ascension toward the clouds, have not only been borrowed, but are even
scarcely altered in the New Testament story of Jesus.

[Illustration: 078 The Nativity of the God Dionysius, Museum of
Naples. ]

That the early Christians borrowed the legend of Jesus from earthly
sources is too evident to be even questioned. Gerald Massey in his
great work on Egyptian origins demonstrates the identity of Mary, the
mother of Jesus, with Isis, the mother of Horus. He says: "The most
ancient, gold-bedizened, smoke-stained Byzantine pictures of the
virgin and child represent the mythical mother as Isis, and not as a
human mother of Nazareth." * Science and research have made this fact
so certain that, on the one hand ignorance, and on the other, interest
only, can continue to claim inspiration for the authors of the undated
and unsigned fragmentary documents which pass for the Word of God. If,
then, Jesus is stripped of all the borrowed legends and miracles of
which he is the subject; and if we also take away from him all the
teachings which collected from Jewish and Pagan sources have been
attributed to him--what will be left of him? That the ideas put in
his mouth have been culled and compiled from other sources is as
demonstrable as the Pagan origin of the legends related of him.

     * Natural Genesis. Massey, Vol. ii, p. 487.

Nearly every one of the dogmas and ceremonies in the Christian cult
were borrowed from other and older religions. The resurrection
myth, the ascension, the eucharisty, baptism, worship by kneeling or
prostration, the folding of the hands on the breast, the ringing of
bells and the burning of incense, the vestments and vessels used in
church, the candles, "holy" water,--even the word _Mass_ were all
adopted and adapted by the Christians from the religions of the
ancients. The Trinity is as much Pagan, as much Indian or Buddhist,
as it is Christian. The idea of a Son of God is as old as the oldest
cult. The sun is the son of heaven in all primitive faiths.
The physical sun becomes in the course of evolution, the Son of
Righteousness, or the Son of God, and heaven is personified as the
Father on High. The halo around the head of Jesus, the horns of the
older deities, the rays of light radiating from the heads of Hindu
and Pagan gods are incontrovertible evidence that all gods were at one
time--the sun in heaven.

[Illustration: 080 Prehistoric Crosses Discovered in Pagan Sepulchres
(Italy).]




THE ORIGIN OF THE CROSS

Only the uninformed, of whom, we regret to say, there are a great
many, and who are the main support of the old religions, still believe
that the cross originated with Christianity. Like the dogmas of the
Trinity, the virgin birth, and the resurrection, the sign of the
cross or the cross as an emblem or a symbol was borrowed from the more
ancient faiths of Asia. Perhaps one of the most important discoveries
which primitive man felt obliged never to be ungrateful enough to
forget, was the production of fire by the friction of two sticks
placed across each other in the form of a cross. As early as the stone
age we find the cross carved on monuments which have been dug out of
the earth and which can be seen in the museums of Europe. On the coins
of later generations as well as on the altars of prehistoric times we
find the "sacred" symbol of the cross. The dead in ancient cemeteries
slept under the cross as they do in our day in Catholic churchyards.

[Illustration: 081 House of Goodness, with Cross. Egyptian, 2000 B.
C.]

In ancient Egypt, as in modern China, India, Corea, the cross is
venerated by the masses as a charm of great power. In the Musee
Guimet, in Paris, we have seen specimens of pre-Christian crosses.
In the Louvre Museum one of the "heathen" gods carries a cross on his
head. During his second journey to New Zealand, Cook was surprised to
find the natives marking the graves of their dead with the cross. We
saw, in the Museum of St. Germain, an ancient divinity of Gaul, before
the conquest of the country by Julius Caesar, wearing a garment on
which was woven a cross. In the same museum an ancient altar of Gaul
under Paganism, had a cross carved upon it. That the cross was not
adopted by the followers of Jesus until a later date may be inferred
from the silence of the earlier gospels, Matthew, Mark and Luke, on
the details of the crucifixion, which is more fully developed in the
later gospel of John. The first three evangelists say nothing about
the nails or the blood, and give the impression that he was hanged.
Writing of the two thieves who were sentenced to receive the same
punishment, Luke says, "One of the malefactors that was _hanged_ with
him." The idea of a bleeding Christ, such as we see on crosses in
Catholic churches, is not present in these earlier descriptions of
the crucifixion; the Christians of the time of Origin were called "the
followers of the god who was hanged." In the fourth gospel we see the
beginnings of the legend of the cross, of Jesus carrying or falling
under the weight of the cross, of the nail prints in his hands and
feet, of the spear drawing the blood from his side and smearing his
body. Of all this, the first three evangelists are quite ignorant.

[Illustration: 082 Pagan Priest of Herculaneum Wearing the Cross.]

[Illustration: 083 Cross of the Chinese Emperor Fou-Hi,2953 Years
Before Christ; and An Ancient Pagan Cross Discovered in Newgrange,
Ireland.]

Let it be further noted that it was not until eight hundred years
after the supposed crucifixion that Jesus is seen in the form of a
human being on the cross. Not in any of the paintings on the ancient
catacombs is found a crucified Christ. The earliest cross bearing a
human being is of the eighth century. For a long time a lamb with a
cross, or on a cross, was the Christian symbol, and it is a lamb which
we see entombed in the "holy sepulchre." In more than one mosaic of
early Christian times, it is not Jesus, but a lamb, which is bleeding
for the salvation of the world. How a lamb came to play so important
a role in Christianity is variously explained. The similarity between
the name of the Hindu god, _Agni_ and the meaning of the same word in
Latin, which is a lamb, is one theory. Another is that a ram, one of
the signs of the zodiac, often confounded by the ancients with a lamb,
is the origin of the popular reverence for the lamb as a symbol--a
reverence which all religions based on sun-worship shared. The lamb
in Christianity takes away the sins of the people, just as the paschal
lamb did in the Old Testament, and earlier still, just as it did in
Babylonia.

[Illustration: 084 Used by a Priest of Bacchus, Showing the Cross.]

[Illustration: 085 Engraving of the XI Century; Lamb on Cross; A Lamb
Carrying the Cross; The Lamb and the Cross, IX Century. ]

To the same effect is the following letter of the bishop of Mende, in
France, bearing date of the year 800 A. D.: "Because the darkness
has disappeared, and because also Christ is a real man, Pope Adrian
commands us to paint him under the form of a man. The lamb of God must
not any longer be painted on a cross, but after a human form has
been placed on the cross, there is no objection to have a lamb
also represented with it, either at the foot of the cross or on the
opposite side." * We leave it to our readers to draw the necessary
conclusions from the above letter. How did a lamb hold its place on
the cross for eight hundred years? If Jesus was really crucified, and
that fact was a matter of history, why did it take eight hundred years
for a Christian bishop to write, "now that Christ is a real man,"
etc.? Today, it would be considered a blasphemy to place a lamb on a
cross.

     * Translated from the French of Didron. Quoted by Malvert.

On the tombstones of Christians of the fourth century are pictures
representing, not Jesus, but a lamb, working the miracles mentioned
in the gospels, such as multiplying the loaves and fishes, and raising
Lazarus from the dead.

[Illustration: 086 Mosaic of St. Praxedes, V Century, Showing the
Lamb Christ; The Lamb Slowly Becoming Human; The Lamb Multiplying the
Loaves and Fishes, IV Century Sarcophagus.]

The first representations of a human form on the cross differ
considerably from those which prevail at the present time.

[Illustration: 087 The Lamb Resurrecting Lazarus, IV Century
Sarcophagus.]

While the figure on the modern cross is almost naked, those on the
earlier ones are clothed and completely covered. Wearing a flowing
tunic, Jesus is standing straight against the cross with his
arms outstretched, as though in the act of delivering an address.
Frequently, at his feet, on the cross, there is still painted the
figure of a lamb, which by and by, he is going to replace altogether.
Gradually the robe disappears from the crucified one, until we see him
crucified, as in the adjoining picture, with hardly any clothes on,
and wearing an expression of great agony.

[Illustration: 088 Modern Christ.]

[Illustration: 089 Christ and the Twelve Apostles, Carrying Swastikas
and Solar Discs Instead of the Cross. Sarcophagus, Milan.]




THE SILENCE OF PROFANE WRITERS

In all historical matters, we cannot ask for more than a _reasonable_
assurance concerning any question. In fact, absolute certainty in any
branch of human knowledge, with the exception of mathematics, perhaps,
is impossible. We are finite beings, limited in all our powers, and,
hence, our conclusions are not only relative, but they should ever
be held subject to correction. When our law courts send a man to the
gallows, they can have no more than a reasonable assurance that he is
guilty; when they acquit him, they can have no more than a reasonable
assurance that he is innocent. Positive assurance is unattainable. The
dogmatist is the only one who claims to possess absolute certainty.
But his claim is no more than a groundless assumption. When,
therefore, we learn that Josephus, for instance, who lived in the
same country and about the same time as Jesus, and wrote an extensive
history of the men and events of his day and country, does not mention
Jesus, except by interpolation, which even a Christian clergyman,
Bishop Warburton, calls "a rank forgery, and a very stupid one, too,"
we can be reasonably sure that no such Jesus as is described in the
New Testament, lived about the same time and in the same country with
Josephus.

The failure of such a historian as Josephus to mention Jesus tends to
make the existence of Jesus at least reasonably doubtful.

Few Christians now place any reliance upon the evidence from Josephus.
The early Fathers made this Jew admit that Jesus was the Son of God.
Of course, the admission was a forgery. De Quincey says the passage is
known to be "a forgery by all men not lunatics." Of one other supposed
reference in Josephus, Canon Farrar says: "This passage was early
tampered with by the Christians." The same writer says this of a third
passage: "Respecting the third passage in Josephus, the only question
is whether it be partly or entirely spurious." Lardner, the great
English theologian, was the first man to prove that Josephus was a
poor witness for Christ.

In examining the evidence from profane writers we must remember that
the silence of one contemporary author is more important than the
supposed testimony of another. There was living in the same time
with Jesus a great Jewish scholar by the name of Philo. He was an
Alexandrian Jew, and he visited Jerusalem while Jesus was teaching and
working miracles in the holy city. Yet Philo in all his works never
once mentions Jesus. He does not seem to have heard of him. He could
not have helped mentioning him if he had really seen him or heard
of him. In one place in his works Philo is describing the difference
between two Jewish names, Hosea and Jesus. Jesus, he says, means
saviour of the people. What a fine opportunity for him to have added
that, at that very time, there was living in Jerusalem a saviour
by the name of Jesus, or one supposed to be, or claiming to be, a
saviour. He could not have helped mentioning Jesus if he had ever seen
or heard of him.

We have elsewhere referred to the significant silence of the Pagan
historians and miscellaneous writers on the wonderful events
narrated in the New Testament. But a few remarks may be added here in
explanation of the supposed testimony of Tacitus.

The quotation from Tacitus is an important one. That part of the
passage which concerns us is something like this:--"They have their
denomination from _Chrestus,_ put to death as a criminal by Pontius
Pilate during the reign of Tiberius." I wish to say in the first place
that this passage is not in the _History_ of Tacitus, known to the
ancients, but in his _Annals,_ which is not quoted by any ancient
writer. The _Annals_ of Tacitus were not known to be in existence
until the year 1468. An English writer, Mr. Ross, has undertaken, in
an interesting volume, to show that the _Annals_ were forged by an
Italian, Bracciolini. I am not competent to say whether or not Mr.
Ross proves his point. But is it conceivable that the early Christians
would have ignored so valuable a testimony had they known of its
existence, and would they not have known of it had it really existed?
The Christian Fathers, who not only collected assiduously all that
they could use to establish the reality of Jesus--but who did not
hesitate even to forge passages, to invent documents, and also to
destroy the testimony of witnesses unfavorable to their cause--would
have certainly used the Tacitus passage had it been in existence in
their day. _Not one of the Christian Fathers_ in his controversy with
the unbelievers has quoted the passage from Tacitus, which passage is
the church's strongest proof of the historicity of Jesus, outside the
gospels.

But, to begin with, this passage has the appearance, at least, of
being penned by a Christian. It speaks of such persecutions of
the Christians in Rome which contradict all that we know of Roman
civilization. The abuse of Christians in the same passage may have
been introduced purposely to cover up the identity of the writer. The
terrible outrages against the Christians mentioned in the text
from Tacitus are supposed to have taken place in the year 64 A. D.
According to the New Testament, Paul was in Rome from the year 63
to the year 65, and must, therefore, have been an eye-witness of the
persecution under Nero. Let me quote from the Bible to show that there
could have been no such persecution as the Tacitus passage describes.
The last verse in the book of Acts reads: "And he (Paul) abode two
whole years in his own hired dwelling, and received all that went in
unto him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching things concerning
the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, _none forbidding him_." How
is this picture of peace and tranquility to be reconciled with the
charge that the Romans rolled up the Christians in straw mats and
burned them to illuminate the streets at night, and also that the
lions were let loose upon the disciples of Jesus?

Moreover, it is generally known that the Romans were indifferent to
religious propaganda, and never persecuted any sect or party in the
name of religion. In Rome, the Jews were free to be Jews; why should
the Jewish Christians--and the early Christians were Jews--have been
thrown to the lions? In all probability the persecutions were much
milder than the Tacitus passage describes, and politics was the real
cause.

Until not very long ago, it was universally believed that William Tell
was a historical character. But it is now proven beyond any
reasonable doubt, that Tell and his apple are altogether mythical.
Notwithstanding that a great poet has made him the theme of a powerful
drama, and a great composer devoted one of his operas to his heroic
achievements; notwithstanding also that the Swiss show the crossbow
with which he is supposed to have shot at the apple on his son's
head--he is now admitted to be only a legendary hero. The principal
arguments which have led the educated world to revise its views
concerning William Tell are that, the Swiss historians, Faber and
Hamurbin, who lived shortly after the "hero," and who wrote the
history of their country, as Josephus did that of his, do not mention
Tell. Had such a man existed before their time, they could not have
failed to refer to him. Their complete silence is damaging beyond help
to the historicity of Tell. Neither does the historian, who was an eye
witness of the battle of Morgarten in 1315, mention the name of Tell.
The Zurich Chronicle of 1497, also omits to refer to his story. In the
accounts of the struggle of the Swiss against Austria, which drove the
former into rebellion and ultimate independence, Tell's name cannot be
found. Yet all these arguments are not half so damaging to the William
Tell story, as the silence of Josephus is to the Jesus story. Jesus
was supposed to have worked greater wonders and to have created a
wider sensation than Tell; therefore, it is more difficult to explain
the silence of historians like Josephus, Pliny and Quintilian; or of
philosophers like Philo, Seneca and Epictetus, concerning Jesus, than
to explain the silence of the Swiss chroniclers concerning Tell.




THE JESUS STORY A RELIGIOUS DRAMA

We have now progressed far enough in our investigation to pause a
moment for reflection before we proceed any further. I am conscious of
no intentional misrepresentation or suppression of the facts relating
to the question in hand. If I have erred through ignorance, I shall
correct any mistake I may have made, if some good reader will take the
trouble to enlighten me. I am also satisfied that I have not commanded
the evidence, but have allowed the evidence to command me. I am
not interested in either proving or disproving the existence of the
New-Testament Jesus. I am not an advocate, I am rather an umpire, who
hears the evidence and pronounces his decision accordingly. Let the
lawyers or the advocates argue _pro_ and _con_. I only weigh,--and I
am sure, impartially,--the evidence which the witnesses offer. We
have heard and examined quite a number of these, and, I, at least,
am compelled to say, that unless stronger evidence be forthcoming, a
historical Jesus has not been proven by the evidence thus far taken
in. This does not mean that there is no evidence whatever that Jesus
was a real existence, but that the evidence is not enough to prove it.

To condemn or to acquit a man in a court of law, there must not only
be evidence, but enough of it to justify a decision. There is some
evidence for almost any imaginable proposition; but that is
not enough. Not only does the evidence offered to prove Jesus'
historicity, already examined, fail to give this assurance, but,
on the contrary, it lends much support to the opposite supposition,
namely, that in all probability, Jesus was a myth--even as Mithra,
Osiris, Isis, Hercules, Sampson, Adonis, Moses, Attis, Hermes,
Heracles, Apollo of Tyanna, Chrishna, and Indra, were myths.

The story of Jesus, we are constrained to say, possesses all the
characteristics of the religious drama, full of startling episodes,
thrilling situations, dramatic action and _denouement_. It reads more
like a play than plain history. From such evidence as the gospels
themselves furnish, the conclusion that he was no more than the
principal character in a religious play receives much support. Mystery
and morality plays are of a very ancient origin. In earlier times,
almost all popular instruction was by means of _Tableaux vivant_.

As a great scenic or dramatic performance, with Jesus as the hero,
Judas as the villain--with conspiracy as its plot, and the trial, the
resurrection and ascension as its _finale_, the story is intelligent
enough. For instance, as the curtain rises, it discloses upon the
stage shepherds tending their flocks in the green fields under the
moonlit sky; again, as the scene shifts, the clouds break, the heavens
open, and voices are heard from above, with a white-winged chorus
chanting an anthem. The next scene suggests a stable with the cattle
in their stalls, munching hay. In a corner of the stable, close to
a manger, imagine a young woman, stooping to kiss a newly born babe.
Anon appear three bearded and richly costumed men, with presents in
their hands, bowing their heads in ecstatic adoration. Surely enough
this is not history: It does not read like history. The element of
fiction runs through the entire Gospels, and is its warp and woof. A
careful analysis of the various incidents in this _ensemble_ will not
fail to convince the unprejudiced reader that while they possess all
the essentials for dramatic presentation, they lack the requirements
of real history.

The "opened-heavens," "angel-choirs," "grazing flocks," "watchful
shepherds," "worshiping magicians," "the stable crib," "the mother and
child," "the wonderful star," "the presents," "the anthem"--all these,
while they fit admirably as stage setting, are questionable material
for history. No historical person was ever born in so spectacular a
manner. The Gospel account of Jesus is an embellished, ornamental,
even sensationally dramatic creation to serve as an introduction for
a legendary hero. Similar theatrical furniture has been used thousands
of times to introduce other legendary characters. All the Savior Gods
were born supernaturally. They were all half god, half man. They were
all of royal descent. Miracles and wonders attended their birth. Jesus
was not an exception. We reject as mythical the birth-stories about
Mithra, and Apollo. Why accept as history those about Jesus? It rests
with the preachers of Christianity to show that while the god-man
of Persia, or of Greece, for example, was a myth, the god-man of
Palestine is historical.

The dramatic element is again plainly seen in the account of the
betrayal of Jesus. Jesus, who preaches daily in the temples, and in
the public places; who talks to the multitude on the mountain and
at the seaside; who feeds thousands by miracle; the report of whose
wonderful cures has reached the ends of the earth, and who is often
followed by such a crush that to reach him an opening has to be made
in the ceiling of the house where he is stopping; who goes in and
out before the people and is constantly disputing with the elders
and leaders of the nation--is, nevertheless, represented as being so
unknown that his enemies have to resort to the device of bribing with
thirty silver coins one of his disciples to point him out to them, and
which is to be done by a kiss. This might make a great scene upon the
stage, but it is not the way things happen in life.

Then read how Jesus is carried before Pilate the Roman governor, and
how while he is being tried a courier rushes in with a letter from
Pilate's wife which is dramatically torn open and read aloud in the
presence of the crowded court. The letter, it is said, was about a
dream of Pilate's wife, in which some ghost tells her that Jesus is
innocent, and that her husband should not proceed against him. Is this
history? Roman jurisprudence had not degenerated to that extent as to
permit the dreams of a woman or of a man to influence the course of
justice. But this letter episode was invented by the playwright--if
I may use the phrase--to prolong the dramatic suspense, to complicate
the situation, to twist the plot, and thereby render the impression
produced by his "piece" more lasting. The letter and the dream did
not save Jesus. Pilate was not influenced by his dreaming wife. She
dreamed in vain.

In the next place we hear Pilate pronouncing Jesus guiltless; but,
forthwith, he hands him over to the Jews to be killed. Does this
read like history? Did ever a Roman court witness such a trial? To
pronounce a man innocent and then to say to his prosecutors: "If you
wish to kill him, you may do so," is extraordinary conduct. Then,
proceeding, Pilate takes water and ostentatiously washes his hands, a
proceeding introduced by a Greek or Latin scribe, who wished, in all
probability, to throw the blame of the crucifixion entirely upon the
Jews. Pilate, representing the Gentile world, washes his hands of the
responsibility for the death of Jesus, while the Jews are made to say,
"His blood be upon us and our children."

Imagine the clamoring, howling Jews, trampling on one another,
gesticulating furiously, gnashing their teeth, foaming at the mouth,
and spitting in one another's face as they shout, "Crucify him!
Crucify him!" A very powerful stage setting, to be sure--but it
is impossible to imagine that such disorder, such anarchy could
be permitted in any court of justice. But think once more of those
terrible words placed in the mouths of the Jews, "His blood be upon
us and our children." Think of a people openly cursing themselves and
asking the whole Christian world to persecute them forever--"His blood
be upon _us and our children_."

Next, the composers of the gospels conduct us to the Garden of
Gethsemane, that we may see there the hero of the play in his agony,
fighting the great battle of his life alone, with neither help nor
sympathy from his distracted followers. He is shown to us there,
on his knees, crying tears of blood--sobbing and groaning under the
shadow of an almost crushing fear. Tremblingly he prays, "Let this
cup pass from me--if it be possible;" and then, yielding to the terror
crowding in upon him, he sighs in the hearing of all the ages, "The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak," precisely the excuse given
by everybody for not doing what they would do if they could. Now, we
ask in all seriousness, is it likely that a God who had come down
from heaven purposely to drink that cup and to be the martyr-Savior of
humanity--would seek to be spared the fate for which he was ordained
from all eternity?

The objection that Jesus' hesitation on the eve of the crucifixion,
as well as his cry of despair on the cross, were meant to show that he
was as human as he was divine, does not solve the difficulty. In that
event Jesus, then, was merely acting--feigning a fear which he did
not feel, and pretending to dread a death which he knew could not hurt
him. If, however, Jesus really felt alarmed at the approach of death,
how much braver, then, were many of his followers who afterwards faced
dangers and tortures far more cruel than his own! We honestly think
that to have put in Jesus' mouth the words above quoted, and also to
have represented him as closing his public career with a shriek on the
cross: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" was tantamount
to an admission by the writers that they were dealing with a symbolic
Christ, an ideal figure, the hero of a play, and not a historical
character.

It is highly dramatic, to be sure, to see the sun darkened, to feel
the whole earth quaking, to behold the graves ripped open and the dead
reappear in their shrouds--to hear the hero himself tearing his own
heart with that cry of shuddering anguish, "My God! my God!"--but
it is not history. If such a man as Jesus really lived, then his
biographers have only given us a caricature of him. However beautiful
some of the sayings attributed to Jesus, and whatever the source
they may have been borrowed from, they are not enough to prove his
historicity. But even as the Ten Commandments do not prove Moses to
have been a historical personage or the author of the books and deeds
attributed to him, neither do the parables and miracles of Jesus prove
him to have once visited this earth as a god, or to have even existed
as a man.

Socrates and Jesus! Compare the quite natural behavior of Socrates in
prison with that of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane. The Greek sage
is serene. Jesus is alarmed. The night agony of his soul, his tears
of _blood_, his pitiful collapse when he prays, "if it be possible
let this cup pass from me,"--all this would be very impressive on the
boards, but they seem incredible of a real man engaged in saving a
world. Once more we say that the defense that it was the man in Jesus
and not the god in him that broke down, would be unjust to the memory
of thousands of martyrs who died by a more terrible death than that of
Jesus. As elsewhere stated, but which cannot be too often emphasized,
what man would not have embraced death with enthusiasm,--without a
moment's misgiving, did he think that by his death, death and sin
would be no more! Who would shrink from a cross which is going to
save millions to millions added from eternal burnings. He must be
a phantom, indeed, who trembles and cries like a frightened child
because he cannot have the crown without the cross! What a spectacle
for the real heroes crowding the galleries of history! It is difficult
to see the shrinking and shuddering Savior of the world, his face
bathed in perspiration, blood oozing out of his forehead, his lips
pale, his voice breaking into a shriek, "My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me!"--it is difficult to witness all this and not to pity
him. Poor Jesus! he is going to save the world, but who is going to
save _him?_

If we compare the trial of Jesus with that of Socrates, the fictitious
nature of the former cannot possibly escape detection. Socrates was
so well known in Athens, that it was not necessary for his accusers to
bribe one of his disciples to betray him. Jesus should have been even
better known in Jerusalem than Socrates was in Athens. He was daily
preaching in the synagogues, and his miracles had given him an _eclat_
which Socrates did not enjoy.

Socrates is not taken to court at night, bound hand and feet. Jesus
is arrested in the glare of torchlights, after he is betrayed by
Judas with a kiss; then he is bound and forced into the high priest's
presence. All this is admirable setting for a stage, but they are no
more than that.

The disciples of Socrates behave like real men, those of Jesus are
actors. They run away; they hide and follow at a distance. One of them
curses him. The cock crows, the apostate repents. This reads like a
play.

In the presence of his judges, Socrates makes his own defense. One
by one he meets the charges. Jesus refused, according to two of the
evangelists, to open his mouth at his trial. This is dramatic, but it
is not history. It is not conceivable that a real person accused as
Jesus was, would have refused a great opportunity to disprove the
charges against him. Socrates' defense of himself is one of the
classics. Jesus' silence is a conundrum. "But he answered nothing,"
"But Jesus as yet answered nothing," "And he answered him never a
word," is the report of two of his biographers. The other two
evangelists, as is usual, contradict the former and produce the
following dialogues between Jesus and his judges, which from beginning
to end possess all the marks of unreality:

_Pilate_.--"Art thou the King of the Jews?"

_Jesus_.--"Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it
thee of me?"

_Pilate_--"Art thou a King?"

_Jesus_.--"Thou sayest that I am a King."

Is it possible that a real man, not to say the Savior of the world,
would give such unmeaning and evasive replies to straightforward
questions? Does it not read like a page from fiction?

In the presence of the priests of his own race Jesus is as indefinite
and sophistical as he is before the Roman Pilate.

_The Priests_--"Art thou the Christ--tell us?"

_Jesus._--"If I tell you ye will not believe me."

_The Priests_.--"Art thou the Son of God?"

_Jesus_.--"Ye say that I am."

In the first answer he refuses to reveal himself because he does not
think he can command belief in himself; in his second answer he either
blames them for saying he was the Son of God, or quotes their own
testimony to prove that he is the Son of God. But if they believed
he was God, would they try to kill him? Is it not unthinkable? He
intimates that the priests believe he is the Son of God--"Ye say that
I am." Surely, it is more probable that these dialogues were invented
by his anonymous biographers than that they really represent an actual
conversation between Jesus and his judges.

Compare in the next place the manner in which the public trials of
Socrates and Jesus are conducted. There is order in the Athenian
court; there is anarchy in the Jerusalem court. Witnesses and accusers
walk up to Jesus and slap him on the face, and the judge does
not reprove them for it. The court is in the hands of rowdies and
hoodlums, who shout "Crucify him," and again, "Crucify him." A Roman
judge, while admitting that he finds no guilt in Jesus deserving of
death, is nevertheless represented as handing him over to the mob to
be killed, after he has himself scourged him. No Roman judge could
have behaved as this Pilate is reported to have behaved toward an
accused person on trial for his life. All that we know of civilized
government, all that we know of the jurisprudence of Rome, contradicts
this "inspired" account of a pretended historical event. If Jesus was
ever tried and condemned to death in a Roman court, an account of it
that can command belief has yet to be written.

Again, when we come to consider the random, disconnected and
fragmentary form in which the teachings of Jesus are presented, we
cannot avoid the conclusion that he is a _dramatis persona_ brought
upon the stage to give expression not to a consistent, connected
and carefully worked-out thought, but to voice with many breaks and
interruptions, the ideas of his changing managers. He is made to play
a number of contradictory roles, and appears in the same story in
totally different characters.

One editor or compiler of the Gospel describes Jesus as an ascetic and
a mendicant, wandering from place to place, without a roof over his
head, and crawling at eventide into his cave in the Mount of Olives.
He introduces him as the "Man of Sorrows," fasting in the wilderness,
counseling people to part with their riches, and promising the Kingdom
of Heaven to Lazarus, the beggar.

Another redactor announces him as "eating and drinking" at the
banquets of "publicans and sinners,"--a "wine-bibbing" Son of Man.
"John the Baptist came neither eating nor drinking, but the Son of
Man came both eating and drinking," which, if it means anything, means
that Jesus was the very opposite of the ascetic John.

A partisan of the doctrine of non-resistance puts in Jesus' mouth the
words: "Resist not evil;" "The meek shall inherit the earth,"
etc., and counsels that he who smites us on the one cheek should be
permitted to strike us also on the other, and that to him who robs us
of an undergarment, we should also hand over our outer garments.

Another draws the picture of a militant Jesus who could never endorse
such precepts of indolence and resignation. "The kingdom of heaven is
taken by _violence_," cries this new Jesus, and intimates that no such
beggar like Lazarus, sitting all day long with the dogs and his sores,
can ever earn so great a prize. With a scourge in his hands this Jesus
rushes upon the traders in the temple-court, upturns their tables and
whips their owners into the streets. Surely this was resistance of the
most pronounced type. The right to use physical force could not have
been given a better endorsement than by this example of Jesus.

It will not help matters to say that these money-changers were
violating a divine law, and needed chastisement with a whip. Is not
the man who smites us upon the cheek, or robs us of our clothing,
equally guilty? Moreover, these traders in the outer courts of the
synagogue were rendering the worshipers a useful service. Just as
candles, rosaries, images and literature are sold in church vestibules
for the accommodation of Catholics, so were doves, pigeons and Hebrew
coins, necessary to the Jewish sacrifices, sold in the temple-courts
for the Jewish worshiper. The money changer who supplied the pious Jew
with the only sacred coin which the priests would accept was not very
much less important to the Jewish religion than the rabbi. To have
fallen upon these traders with a weapon, and to have caused them the
loss of their property, was certainly the most inconsistent thing that
a "meek" and "lowly" Jesus preaching non-resistance could have done.

Again; one writer makes Jesus the teacher _par excellence_ of peace.
He counsels forgiveness of injuries not seven times, but seventy times
that number--meaning unlimited love and charity. "Love your enemies,"
"Bless them that curse you," is his unusual advice. But another hand
retouches this picture, and we have a Jesus who breaks his own golden
rule. This other Jesus heaps abuse upon the people who displease him;
calls his enemies "vipers," "serpents," "devils," and predicts for
them eternal burnings in sulphur and brimstone. How could he who said,
"Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden," say also, "Depart from me
ye _cursed_?" Who curses them? How can there be an everlasting hell in
a universe whose author advises us to love our enemies, to bless them
that curse us, and to forgive seventy times seven? How could the same
Jesus who said, "Blessed are the peacemakers," say also, "I came not
to bring peace, but a sword?" Is it possible that the same Jesus who
commands us to love our _enemies_, commands us also to "hate" father,
mother, wife and child, for "his name's sake?" Yes! the same Jesus who
said, "Put up thy sword in its sheath," also commands us to sell our
effects and "buy a sword."

Once more: A believer in the divinity of Jesus--I am going to
say--invents the following text: "The Father and I are _one_." An
opponent to this Trinitarian dogma introduces a correction which robs
the above text of its authority: "The Father is greater than I,"
and makes Jesus admit openly that there are some things known to
the father only. It is difficult not to see in these passages the
beginnings of the terrible controversies which, starting with Peter
and Paul, have come down to our day, _and which will not end_ until
Jesus shall take his place among the mythical saviors of the world.

To harmonize these many and different Jesuses into something like
unity or consistency a thousand books have been written by the clergy.
They have not succeeded. How can a Jesus represented at one time as
the image of divine perfection, and at another as protesting against
being called "good," for "none is good, save one, God,"--how can these
two conceptions be reconciled except by a resort to artificial and
arbitrary interpretations? If such insurmountable contradictions in
the teachings and character of another would weaken our faith in
his historicity, then we are justified in inferring that in all
probability Jesus was only a name--the name of an imaginary stage
hero, uttering the conflicting thoughts of his prompters.

Again, such phrases as, "and he was caught up in a cloud,"--describing
the ascension and consequent disappearance of Jesus, betray the
anxiety of the authors of the Gospels to bring their marvelous story
to a close. Not knowing how to terminate the career of an imaginary
Messiah, his creators invented the above method of dispatching him.
"He was caught up in a cloud,"--but for that, the narrators would have
been obliged to continue their story indefinitely.

In tragedy the play ends with the death of the hero, but if the
biographers of Jesus had given a similar excuse for bringing their
narrative to a _finale_, there would have been the danger of their
being asked to point out his grave. "He was caught up in a cloud,"
relieved them of all responsibility to produce his remains if called
upon to do so, and, at the same time, furnished them with an excuse to
bring their story to a close.

It would hardly be necessary, were we all unbiased, to look for any
further proofs of the mythical and fanciful nature of the Gospel
narratives than this expedient to which the writers resorted. To
questions, "Where is Jesus?"

"What became of his body?" etc., they could answer, "He was caught up
in a cloud." But a career that ends in the clouds was never begun on
the earth.

[Illustration: 117 Coin of the XII Century, Showing Halo Around Lamb's
Head.]

Let us imagine ourselves in Jerusalem in the year One, of the
Christian era, when the apostles, as it is claimed, were proclaiming
Jesus as the Messiah, crucified and risen. Desiring to be convinced
before believing in the strange story, let us suppose the following
conversation between the apostles and ourselves. We ask:

How long have you known Jesus?

I have known him for one year.

And I for two.

And I for three.

Has any of you known him for more than three years?

No.

Was he with his apostles for one year or for three?

For one.

No, for three.

You are not certain, then, how long Jesus was with his apostles.

No.

How old was Jesus when crucified?

About thirty-one.

No, about thirty-three.

No, he was much older, about fifty.

You cannot tell with any certainty, then, his age at the time of his
death.

No.

You say he was tried and crucified in Jerusalem before your own eyes,
can you remember the date of this great event?

We cannot.

Were you present when Jesus was taken down from the cross?

We were not.

You cannot tell, then, whether he was dead when taken down.

We have no personal knowledge.

Were you present when he was buried?

We were not, because we were in hiding for our lives.

You do not know, therefore, whether he was actually buried, or where
he was buried.

We do not.

Were any of you present when Jesus came forth from the grave?

Not one of us was present,

Then, you were not with him when he was taken down from the cross; you
were not with him when he was interred, and you were not present when
he rose from the grave.

We were not.

When, therefore, you say, he was dead, buried and rose again, you are
relying upon the testimony of others?

We are.

Will you mention the names of some of the witnesses who saw Jesus come
forth from the tomb?

Mary Magdalene, and she is here and may be questioned.

Were you present, Mary, when the angels rolled away the stone, and
when Jesus came forth from the dead?

No, when I reached the burying place early in the morning, the grave
had already been vacated, and there was no one sleeping in it.

You saw him, then, as the apostles did, _after_ he had risen?

Yes.

But you did not see anybody rise out of the grave.

I did not.

Are there any witnesses who saw the resurrection?

There are many who saw him after the resurrection.

But if neither they nor you saw him dead, and buried, and did not
see him rise, either, how can you tell that a most astounding and
supposedly impossible miracle had taken place between the time you saw
him last and when you saw him again two or three days after? Is it
not more natural to suppose that, being in a hurry on account of the
approaching Sabbath, Jesus, if ever crucified, was taken down from the
cross before he had really died, and that he was not buried, as rumor
states, but remained in hiding; and his showing himself to you under
cover of darkness and in secluded spots and in the dead of night only,
would seem to confirm this explanation.

You admit also that the risen Jesus did not present himself at the
synagogues of the people, in the public streets, or at the palace of
the High Priest to convince them of his Messiahship. Do you not think
that if he had done this, it would then have been impossible to deny
his resurrection? Why, then, did Jesus hide himself after he came out
of the grave? Why did he not show himself also to his enemies? Was he
still afraid of them, or did he not care whether they believed or not?
If so, why are _you_ trying to convert them? The question waits for
a reasonable answer; Why did not Jesus challenge the whole world with
the evidence of his resurrection? You say you saw him occasionally, a
few moments at a time, now here, and now there, and finally on the
top of a mountain whence he was caught up in a cloud and disappeared
altogether. But that "cloud" has melted away, the sky is clear, and
there is no Jesus visible there. The cloud, then, had nothing to hide.
It was unnecessary to call in a cloud to close the career of your
Christ. The grave is empty, the cloud has vanished. Where is Christ?
In heaven! Ah, you have at last removed him to a world unknown, to
the undiscovered country. Leave him there! Criticism, doubt,
investigation, the light of day, cannot cross its shores. Leave him
there!

[Illustration: 122 St. Margaret of the Catholic Church, Westminster,
England; The Goddess Astarte Carrying a Cross, British Museum.]




THE JESUS OF PAUL

The central figure of the New Testament is Jesus, and the question we
are trying to answer is, whether we have sufficient evidence to
prove to the unbiased mind that he is historical. An idea of the
intellectual caliber of the average churchman may be had by the nature
of the evidence he offers to justify his faith in the historical
Jesus. "The whole world celebrates annually the nativity of Jesus; how
could there be a Christmas celebration if there never was a Christ?"
asks a Chicago clergyman. The simplicity of this plea would
be touching were it not that it calls attention to the painful
inefficiency of the pulpit as an educator. The church goer is trained
to believe, not to think. The truth is withheld from him under the
pious pretense that faith, and not knowledge, is the essential thing.
A habit of untruthfulness is cultivated by systematically sacrificing
everything to orthodoxy. This habit in the end destroys one's
conscience for any truths which are prejudicial to one's interest. But
is it true that the Christmas celebration proves a historical Jesus?

We can only offer a few additional remarks to what we have already
said elsewhere in these pages on the Pagan origin of Christmas. It
will make us grateful to remember that just as we have to go to the
Pagans for the origins of our civilized institutions--our courts
of justice, our art and literature, and our political and religious
liberties--we must thank them also for our merry festivals, such as
Christmas and Easter. The ignorant, of course, do not know anything
about the value and wealth of the legacy bequeathed to us by our
glorious ancestors of Greek and Roman times, but the educated can have
no excuse for any failure to own their everlasting indebtedness to
the Pagans. It will be impossible today to write the history of
civilization without giving to the classical world the leading role.
But while accepting the gifts of the Pagan peoples we have abused
the givers. A beneficiary who will defame a bounteous benefactor
is unworthy of his good fortune. I regret to say that the Christian
church, notwithstanding that it owes many of its most precious
privileges to the Pagans, has returned for service rendered insolence
and vituperation. No generous or just institution would treat a rival
as Christianity has treated Paganism.

Both Christmas and Easter are Pagan festivals. We do not know, no
one knows, when Jesus was born; but we know the time of the winter
solstice when the sun begins to retrace his steps, turning his
radiant face toward our earth once more. It was this event, a natural,
demonstrable, universal, event, that our European ancestors celebrated
with song and dance--with green branches, through which twinkled a
thousand lighted candles, and with the exchange of good wishes
and gifts. Has the church had the courage to tell its people that
Christmas is a Pagan festival which was adopted and adapted by the
Christian world, reluctantly at first, and in the end as a measure of
compromise only? The Protestants, especially, conveniently forget
the severe Puritanic legislation against the observance of this Pagan
festival, both in England and America. It is the return to Paganism
which has given to Christmas and Easter their great popularity, as
it is the revival of Paganism which is everywhere replacing the Bible
ideas of monarchic government with republicanism. And yet, repeatedly,
and without any scruples of conscience, preacher and people claim
these festivals as the gifts of their creed to humanity, and quote
them further to prove the historical existence of their god-man,
Jesus. It was this open and persistent perversion of history by the
church, the manufacture of evidence on the one hand, the suppression
of witnesses prejudiced to her interests on the other, and the
deliberate forging of documents, which provoked Carlyle into referring
to one of its branches as _the great lying Church_.

We have said enough to show that, in all probability--for let us not
be dogmatic--the story of Jesus,--his birth and betrayal by one of
his own disciples, his trial in a Roman court, his crucifixion,
resurrection and ascension,--belongs to the order of imaginative
literature. Conceived at first as a religious drama, it received many
new accretions as it traveled from country to country and from age to
age. The "piece" shows signs of having been touched and retouched to
make it acceptable to the different countries in which it was
played. The hand of the adapter, the interpolator and the reviser is
unmistakably present. As an allegory, or as a dramatic composition,
meant for the religious stage, it proved one of the strongest
productions of Pagan or Christian times. But as real history, it lacks
the fundamental requisite--probability. As a play, it is stirring
and strong; as history, it lacks naturalness and consistency. The
miraculous is ever outside the province of history. Jesus was
a miracle, and as such, at least, we are safe in declaring him
un-historical.

We pass on now to the presentation of evidence which we venture to
think demonstrates with an almost mathematic precision, that the Jesus
of the four gospels is a legendary hero, as unhistorical as William
Tell of Switzerland. This evidence is furnished by the epistles
bearing the signature of Paul. He has been accepted as not only the
greatest apostle of Christianity, but in a sense also the author of
its theology. It is generally admitted that the epistles bearing the
name of Paul are among the oldest apostolical writings. They are older
than the gospels. This is very important information. When Paul
was preaching, the four gospels had not yet been written. From
the epistles of Paul, of which there are about thirteen in the
Bible--making the New Testament largely the work of this one
apostle--we learn that there were in different parts of Asia, a number
of Christian churches already established. Not only Paul, then, but
also the Christian church was in existence before the gospels were
composed. It would be natural to infer that it was not the gospels
which created the church, but the church which produced the gospels.
Do not lose sight of the fact that when Paul was preaching to the
Christians there was no written biography of Jesus in existence. There
was a church without a book.

In comparing the Jesus of Paul with the Jesus whose portrait is drawn
for us in the gospels, we find that they are not the same persons at
all. This is decisive. Paul knows nothing about a miraculously
born savior. He does not mention a single time, in all his thirteen
epistles, that Jesus was born of a virgin, or that his birth was
accompanied with heavenly signs and wonders. He knew nothing of
a Jesus born after the manner of the gospel writers. It is not
imaginable that he knew the facts, but suppressed them, or that he
considered them unimportant, or that he forgot to refer to them in
any of his public utterances. Today, a preacher is expelled from his
denomination if he suppresses or ignores the miraculous conception of
the Son of God; but Paul was guilty of that very heresy. How explain
it? It is quite simple: The virgin-born Jesus was not yet _invented_
when Paul was preaching Christianity. Neither he, nor the churches he
had organized, had ever heard of such a person. The virgin-born Jesus
was of later origin than the Apostle Paul.

Let the meaning of this discrepancy between the Jesus of Paul, that
is to say, the earliest portrait of Jesus, and the Jesus of the four
evangelists, be fully grasped by the student, and it should prove
beyond a doubt that in Paul's time the story of Jesus' birth from the
virgin-mother and the Holy Ghost, which has since become a cardinal
dogma of the Christian church, was not yet in circulation. Jesus had
not yet been Hellenized; he was still a Jewish Messiah whose coming
was foretold in the Old Testament, and who was to be a prophet like
unto Moses, without the remotest suggestion of a supernatural origin.

No proposition in Euclid is safer from contradiction than that, if
Paul knew what the gospels tell about Jesus, he would have, at
least once or twice during his long ministry, given evidence of his
knowledge of it. The conclusion is inevitable that the gospel Jesus
is later than Paul and his churches. Paul stood nearest to the time of
Jesus. Of those whose writings are supposed to have come down to
us, he is the most representative, and his epistles are the _first_
literature of the new religion. And yet there is absolutely not a
single hint or suggestion in them of such a Jesus as is depicted in
the gospels. The gospel Jesus was not yet put together or compiled,
when Paul was preaching.

Once more; if we peruse carefully and critically the writings of Paul,
the earliest and greatest Christian apostle and missionary, we find
that he is not only ignorant of the gospel stories about the birth and
miracles of Jesus, but he is equally and just as innocently ignorant
of the _teachings_ of Jesus. In the gospels Jesus is the author of the
Sermon on the Mount, the Lord's Prayer, the Parable of the Prodigal
Son, the Story of Dives, the Good Samaritan, etc. Is it conceivable
that a preacher of Jesus could go throughout the world to convert
people to the teachings of Jesus, as Paul did, without ever quoting
a single one of his sayings? Had Paul known that Jesus had preached a
sermon, or formulated a prayer, or said many inspired things about
the here and the hereafter, he could not have helped quoting, now and
then, from the words of his master. If Christianity could have been
established without a knowledge of the teachings of Jesus, why, then,
did Jesus come to teach, and why were his teachings preserved by
divine inspiration? But if a knowledge of these teachings of Jesus is
indispensable to making converts, Paul gives not the least evidence
that he possessed such knowledge.

But the Apostle Paul, judging from his many epistles to the earliest
converts to Christianity, which are really his testimony, supposed to
have been sealed by his blood, appears to be quite as ignorant of a
Jesus who went about working miracles,--opening the eyes of the
blind, giving health to the sick, hearing to the deaf, and life to the
dead,--as he is of a Jesus born of a virgin woman and the Holy Ghost.
Is not this remarkable? Does it not lend strong confirmation to the
idea that the miracle-working Jesus of the gospels was not known in
Paul's time, that is to say, the earliest Jesus known to the churches
was a person altogether different from his namesake in the four
evangelists. If Paul knew of a miracle-working Jesus, one who could
feed the multitude with a few loaves and fishes--who could command the
grave to open, who could cast out devils, and cleanse the land of the
foulest disease of leprosy, who could, and did, perform many other
wonderful works to convince the unbelieving generation of
his divinity,--is it conceivable that either intentionally or
inadvertently he would have never once referred to them in all his
preaching? Is it not almost certain that, if the earliest Christians
knew of the miracles of Jesus, they would have been greatly surprised
at the failure of Paul to refer to them a single time? And would not
Paul have told them of the promise of Jesus to give them power to work
even greater miracles than his own, had he known of such a promise.
Could Paul really have left out of his ministry so essential a chapter
from the life of Jesus, had he been acquainted with it? The miraculous
fills up the greater portion of the four gospels, and if these
documents were dictated by the Holy Ghost, it means that they were too
important to be left out. Why, then, does not Paul speak of them at
all? There is only one reasonable answer: A miracle-working Jesus was
unknown to Paul.

What would we say of a disciple of Tolstoi, for example, who came
to America to make converts to Count Tolstoi and never once quoted
anything that Tolstoi had said? Or what would we think of the
Christian missionaries who go to India, China, Japan and Africa to
preach the gospel, if they never mentioned to the people of these
countries the Sermon on the Mount, the Parable of the Prodigal Son,
the Lord's Prayer--nor quoted a single text from the gospels?
Yet Paul, the first missionary, did the very thing which would be
inexplicable in a modern missionary. There is only one rational
explanation for this: The Jesus of Paul was not born of a virgin; he
did not work miracles; and he was not a teacher. It was after his day
that such a Jesus was--I have to use again a strong word--_invented_.

It has been hinted by certain professional defenders of Christianity
that Paul's specific mission was to introduce Christianity among the
Gentiles, and not to call attention to the miraculous element in
the life of his Master. But this is a very lame defense. What is
Christianity, but the life and teachings of Jesus? And how can it be
introduced among the Gentiles without a knowledge of the doctrines
and works of its founder? Paul gives no evidence of possessing
any knowledge of the teachings of Jesus, how could he, then, be a
missionary of Christianity to the heathen? There is no other answer
which can be given than that the Christianity of Paul was something
radically different from the Christianity of the later gospel writers,
who in all probability were Greeks and not Jews. Moreover, it is
known that Paul was reprimanded by his fellow-apostles for carrying
Christianity to the Gentiles. What better defense could Paul have
given for his conduct than to have quoted the commandment of Jesus--

"Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature."
And he would have quoted the "divine" text had he been familiar with
it. Nay, the other apostles would not have taken him to task for
obeying the commandment of Jesus had they been familiar with such a
commandment. It all goes to support the proposition that the gospel
Jesus was of a date later than the apostolic times.

That the authorities of the church realize how damaging to the reality
of the gospel Jesus is the inexplicable silence of Paul concerning
him, may be seen in their vain effort to find in a passage put in
Paul's mouth by the unknown author of the book of _Acts_, evidence
that Paul does quote the sayings of Jesus. The passage referred to is
the following: "It is more blessed to give than to receive." Paul is
made to state that this was a saying of Jesus. In the first place,
this quotation is not in the epistles of Paul, but in the _Acts_, of
which Paul was not the author; in the second place, there is no such
quotation in the gospels. The position, then, that there is not a
single saying of Jesus in the gospels which is quoted by Paul in his
many epistles is unassailable, and certainly fatal to the historicity
of the gospel Jesus.

Again, from Paul himself we learn that he was a zealous Hebrew, a
Pharisee of Pharisees, studying with Gamaliel in Jerusalem, presumably
to become a rabbi. Is it possible that such a man could remain totally
ignorant of a miracle worker and teacher like Jesus, living in the
same city with him? If Jesus really raised Lazarus from the grave,
and entered Jerusalem at the head of a procession, waving branches
and shouting, "hosanna"--if he was really crucified in Jerusalem, and
ascended from one of its environs--is it possible that Paul neither
saw Jesus nor heard anything about these miracles? But if he knew all
these things about Jesus, is it possible that he could go through the
world preaching Christ without ever once referring to them? It is
more likely that when Paul was studying in Jerusalem there was no
miraculous Jesus living or teaching in any part of Judea.

If men make their gods they also make their Christs. * It is
frequently urged that it was impossible for a band of illiterate
fishermen to have created out of their own fancy so glorious a
character as that of Jesus, and that it would be more miraculous to
suppose that the unique sayings of Jesus and his incomparably perfect
life were invented by a few plain people than to believe in his actual
existence. But it is not honest to throw the question into that
form. We do not know who were the authors of the gospels. It is pure
assumption that they were written by plain fishermen. The authors of
the gospels do not disclose their identity. The words, _according_
to Matthew, Mark, etc., represent only the guesses or opinions of
translators and copyists.

     * Christianity and Mythology. J. M. Robertson, to whom the
     author acknowledges his indebtedness, for the difference
     between Paul's Jesus and that of the Gospels.

Both in the gospels and in Christian history the apostles are
represented as illiterate men. But if they spoke Greek, and could also
write in Greek, they could not have been just plain fishermen. That
they were Greeks, not Jews, and more or less educated, may be safely
inferred from the fact that they all write in Greek, and one of
them at least seems to be acquainted with the Alexandrian school
of philosophy. Jesus was supposedly a Jew, his twelve apostles all
Jews--how is it, then, that the only biographies of him extant are all
in Greek? If his fishermen disciples were capable of composition in
Greek, they could not have been illiterate men, if they could not have
written in Greek--which was a rare accomplishment for a Jew, according
to what Josephus says--then the gospels were not written by the
apostles of Jesus. But the fact that though these documents are in a
language alien both to Jesus and his disciples, they are unsigned and
undated, goes to prove, we think, that their editors or authors wished
to conceal their identity that they may be taken for the apostles
themselves.

In the next place it is equally an assumption that the portrait of
Jesus is incomparable. It is now proven beyond a doubt that there is
not a single saying of Jesus, I say this deliberately, which had not
already been known both among the Jews and Pagans. Sometimes it is
urged by pettifogging clergymen that, while it is true that Confucius
gave the Golden Rule six hundred years before Jesus, it was in a
negative form. Confucius said, "Do not unto another what you would not
another to do unto you." Jesus said, "Do unto others," etc. But every
negative has its corresponding affirmation. Moreover, are not the Ten
Commandments in the negative? But the Greek sages gave the Golden Rule
in as positive a form as we find it in the Gospels. "And may I do to
others as I would that others should do to me," said Plato. *

     * Jowett Trans., V. p. 483.

Besides, if the only difference between Jesus and Confucius, the one a
God, the other a mere man, was that they both said the same thing, the
one in the negative, the other in the positive, it is not enough
to prove Jesus infinitely superior to Confucius. Many of Jesus' own
commandments are in the negative: "Resist not evil," for instance.]
And as to his life; it is in no sense superior or even as large and as
many sided as that of Socrates. I know some consider it blasphemy to
compare Jesus with Socrates, but that must be attributed to prejudice
rather than to reason.

And to the question that if Jesus be mythical, we cannot account for
the rise and progress of the Christian church, we answer that the
Pagan gods who occupied Mount Olympus were all mythical beings--mere
shadows, and yet Paganism was the religion of the most advanced
and cultured nations of antiquity. How could an imaginary Zeus, or
Jupiter, draw to his temple the elite of Greece and Rome? And if there
is nothing strange in the rise and spread of the Pagan church; in the
rapid progress of the worship of Osiris, who never existed; in the
wonderful success of the religion of Mithra, who is but a name; if
the worship of Adonis, of Attis, of Isis, and the legends of Heracles,
Prometheus, Hercules, and the Hindoo trinity,--Brahma, Shiva,
Chrishna,--with their rock-hewn temples, can be explained without
believing in the actual existence of these gods--why not Christianity?
Religions, like everything else, are born, they grow old and die. They
show the handiwork of whole races, and of different epochs, rather
than of one man or of one age. Time gives them birth, and changing
environments determine their career. Just as the portrait of Jesus we
see in shops and churches is an invention, so is his character. The
artist gave him his features, the theologian his attributes.

What are the elements out of which the Jesus story was evolved? The
Jewish people were in constant expectation of a Messiah. The belief
prevailed that his name would be Joshua, which in English is Jesus.
The meaning of the word is _savior_. In ancient Syrian mythology,
Joshua was a Sun God. The Old-Testament Joshua, who "stopped the
Sun," was in all probability this same Syrian divinity. According to
tradition this Joshua, or Jesus, was the son of Mary, a name which
with slight variations is found in nearly all the old mythologies.
Greek and Hindoo divinities were mothered by either a Mary, Meriam,
Myrrah, or Merri. Maria or Mares is the oldest word for sea--the
earliest source of life. The ancients looked upon the sea-water as the
mother of every living thing. "Joshua (or Jesus), son of Mary," was
already a part of the religious outfit of the Asiatic world when Paul
began his missionary tours. His Jesus, or anointed one, crucified or
slain, did in no sense represent a new or original message. It is
no more strange that Paul's mythological "savior" should loom into
prominence and cast a spell over all the world, than that a mythical
Apollo or Jupiter should rule for thousands of years over the fairest
portions of the earth.

It is also well known that there is in the Talmud the story of a
Jesus, Ben, or son, of Pandira, who lived about a hundred years before
the Gospel Jesus, and who was hanged from a tree. I believe this Jesus
is quite as legendary as the Syrian Hesous, or Joshua. But may it not
be that such a legend accepted as true--to the ancients all legends
were true--contributed its share toward marking the outlines of the
later Jesus, hanged on a cross? My idea has been to show that the
materials for a Jesus myth were at hand, and that, therefore, to
account for the rise and progress of the Christian cult is no more
difficult than to explain the widely spread religion of the Indian
Chrishna, or of the Persian Mithra. *

     * For a fuller discussion of the various "Christs" in
     mythology read Robertson's Christianity and Mythology and
     his Pagan Christs.

Now, why have I given these conclusions to the world? Would I not
have made more friends--provoked a warmer response from the public at
large--had I repeated in pleasant accents the familiar phrases about
the glory and beauty and sweetness of the Savior God, the Virgin-born
Christ? Instead of that, I have run the risk of alienating the
sympathies of my fellows by intimating that this Jesus whom
Christendom worships today as a god, this Jesus at whose altar the
Christian world bends its knees and bows its head, is as much of an
idol as was Apollo of the Greeks; and that we--we Americans of the
twentieth century--are an idolatrous people, inasmuch as we worship a
name, or at most, a man of whom we know nothing provable.

[Illustration: 142 Italian Sculpture of the X Century.]




IS CHRISTIANITY REAL?

It is assumed, without foundation, as I hope to show, that the
religion of Jesus alone can save the world. We are not surprised at
the claim, because there has never been a religion which has been too
modest to make a similar claim. No religion has ever been satisfied to
be _one_ of the saviors of man. Each religion wants to be the _only_
savior of man. There is no monopoly like religious monopoly. The
industrial corporations with all their greed are less exacting than
the Catholic church, for instance, which keeps heaven itself under
lock and key.

But what is meant by salvation? Let us consider its religious meaning
first. An unbiased investigation of the dogmas and their supposed
historical foundations will prove that the salvation which
Christianity offers, and the means by which it proposes to effect the
world's salvation, are extremely fanciful in nature. If this point
could be made clear, there will be less reluctance on the part of the
public to listen to the evidence on the un-historicity of the founder
of Christianity.

We are told that God, who is perfect, created this world about half
a hundred centuries ago. Of course, being perfect himself the world
which he created was perfect, too. But the world did not stay perfect
very long. Nay, from the heights it fell, not slowly, but suddenly,
into the lowest depths of degradation. How a world which God had
created perfect, could in the twinkling of an eye become so vile as
to be cursed by the same being who a moment before had pronounced it
"good," and besides be handed over to the devil as fuel for eternal
burnings, only credulity can explain. I am giving the story of what is
called the "plan of salvation," in order to show its mythical nature.
In the preceding pages we have discussed the question, Is Jesus a
Myth, but I believe that when we have reflected upon the story of
man's fall and his supposed subsequent salvation by the blood of
Jesus, we shall conclude that the function, or the office, which Jesus
is said to perform, is as mythical as his person.

The story of Eden possesses all the marks of an allegory. Adam and
Eve, and a perfect world _suddenly_ plunged from a snowy whiteness
into the blackness of hell, are the thoughts of a child who
exaggerates because of an as yet undisciplined fancy. Yet, if Adam and
Eve are unreal, theologically speaking, Jesus is unreal. If they are
allegory and myth, so is Jesus. It is claimed that it was the fall of
Adam which necessitated the death of Jesus, but if Adam's fall be a
fiction, as we know it is, Jesus' death as an atonement must also be a
fiction.

In the fall of Adam, we are told, humanity itself fell. Could anything
be more fanciful than that? And what was Adam's sin? He coveted
knowledge. He wished to improve his mind. He experimented with
forbidden things. He dared to take the initiative. And for that
imaginary crime, even the generations not yet born are to be forever
blighted. Even the animals, the flowers and vegetables were cursed for
it. Can you conceive of anything more mythical than that? One of
the English divines of the age of Calvin declared that original
sin,--Adam's sin imputed to us,--was so awful, that "if a man had
never been born he would yet have been damned for it." It is from this
mythical sin that a mythical Savior saves us. And how does he do it?
In a very mythical way, as we shall see.

When the world fell, it fell into the devil's hands. To redeem a part
of it, at least, the deity concludes to give up his only son for
a ransom. This is interesting. God is represented as being greatly
offended, because the world which he had created perfect was all in
a heap before him. To placate himself he sacrificed his son--not
himself.

But, as intimated above, he does not intend to restore the whole world
to its pristine purity, but only a part of it. This is alarming. He
creates the whole world perfect, but now he is satisfied to have only
a portion of it redeemed from the devil. If he can save at all,
pray, why not save all? This is not an irrelevant question when it
is remembered that the whole world was created perfect in the first
place.

The refusal of the deity to save all of his world from the devil would
lead one to believe that even when God created the world perfect he
did not mean to keep all of it to himself, but meant that some of it,
the greater part of it, as some theologians contend, should go to the
devil! Surely this is nothing but myth. Let us hope for the sake
of our ideals that all this is no more than the childish prattle of
primitive man.

But let us return to the story of the fall of man; God decides to save
a part of his ruined perfect world by the sacrifice of his son. The
latter is supposed to have said to his father: "Punish me, kill
me, accept my blood, and let it pay for the sins of man." He thus
interceded for the _elect_, and the deity was mollified. As Jesus is
also God, it follows that one God tried to pacify another, which is
pure myth. Some theologians have another theory--there is room here
for many theories. According to these, God gave up his son as a
ransom, not to himself, but to the devil, who now claimed the world
as his own. I heard a distinguished minister explain this in the
following manner: A poor man whose house is mortgaged hears that some
philanthropist has redeemed the property by paying off the mortgage.
The soul of man was by the fall of Adam mortgaged to the devil. God
has raised the mortgage by abandoning his son to be killed to satisfy
the devil who held the mortgage. The debt which we owed has been paid
by Jesus. By this arrangement the devil loses his legal right to our
souls and we are saved. All we need to do is to believe in this story
and we'll be sure to go to heaven. And to think that intelligent
Americans not only accept all this as inspired, but denounce the
man who ventures to intimate modestly that it might be a myth, as
a blasphemer! "O, judgment!" cries Shakespeare, "thou hast fled to
brutish beasts, and men have lost their reason."

The morality which the Christian church teaches is of as mythical a
nature as the story of the fall, and the blood-atonement. It is not
natural morality, but something quite unintelligible and fictitious.
For instance, we are told that we cannot of ourselves be righteous. We
must first have the grace of God. Then we are told that we cannot have
the grace of God unless he gives it to us. And he will not give it to
us unless we ask for it. But we cannot ask for it, unless he moves us
to ask for it. And there we are. We shall be damned if we do not come
to God, and we cannot come to God unless he calls us. Besides, could
anything be more mythical than a righteousness which can only be
imputed to us,--any righteousness of our own being but "filthy rags?"

The Christian religion has the appearance of being one great
myth, constructed out of many minor myths. It is the same with
Mohammedanism, or Judaism, which latter is the mischievous parent of
both the Mohammedan and the Christian faiths. It is the same with
all supernatural creeds. Myth is the dominating element in them all.
Compared with these Asiatic religions how glorious is science! How
wholesome, helpful, and luminous, are her commandments!

If I were to command you to believe that Mount Olympus was once
tenanted by blue-eyed gods and their consorts,--sipping nectar and
ambrosia the live-long day,--you will answer, "Oh, that is only
mythology." If I were to tell you that you cannot be saved unless you
believe that Minerva was born full-fledged from the brain of Jupiter,
you will laugh at me. If I were to tell you that you must punish your
innocent sons for the guilt of their brothers and sisters, you will
answer that I insult your moral sense. And yet, every Sunday, the
preacher repeats the myth of Adam and Eve, and how God killed his
innocent son to please himself, or to satisfy the devil, and with
bated breath, and on your knees, you whisper, _Amen._

How is it that when you read the literature of the Greeks, the
literature of the Persians, the literature of Hindoostan, or of the
Mohammedan world, you discriminate between fact and fiction, between
history and myth, but when it comes to the literature of the Jews, you
stammer, you stutter, you bite your lips, you turn pale, and fall
upon your face before it as the savage before his fetish? You would
consider it unreasonable to believe that everything a Greek, or a
Roman, or an Arab ever said was inspired. And yet, men have been
hounded to death for not believing that everything that a Jew ever
said in olden times was inspired.

I do not have to use arguments, I hope, to prove to an intelligent
public that an infallible book is as much a myth as the Garden of
Eden, or the Star of Bethlehem.

A mythical Savior, a mythical Bible, a mythical plan of salvation!

When we subject what are called religious truths to the same tests by
which we determine scientific or historical truths, we discover that
they are not truths at all; they are only opinions. Any statement
which snaps under the strain of reason is unworthy of credence. But it
is claimed that religious truth is discovered by intuition and not by
investigation. The believer, it is claimed, feels in his own soul--he
has the witness of the spirit, that the Bible is infallible, and that
Jesus is the Savior of man. The Christian does not have to look into
the arguments for or against his religion, it is said, before he makes
up his mind; he knows by an inward assurance; he has proved it to
his own deepermost being that Jesus is real and that he is the only
Savior. But what is that but another kind of argument? The argument is
quite inadequate to inspire assurance, as you will presently see, but
it is an argument nevertheless. To say that we must believe and
not reason is a kind of reasoning, This device of reasoning against
reasoning is resorted to by people who have been compelled by modern
thought to give up, one after another, the strongholds of their
position. They run under shelter of what they call faith, or the
"inward witness of the spirit," or the intuitive argument, hoping
thereby to escape the enemy's fire, if I may use so objectionable a
phrase.

What is called faith, then, or an intuitive spiritual assurance, is a
species of reasoning; let its worth be tested honestly.

In the first place, faith or the intuitive argument would prove too
much. If Jesus is real, notwithstanding that there is no reliable
historical data to warrant the belief, because the believer feels in
his own soul that He is real and divine, I answer that, the same
mode of reasoning--and let us not forget, it is a kind of
_reasoning_--would prove Mohammed a divine savior, and the wooden idol
of the savage a god. The African Bushman trembles before an image,
because he feels in his own soul that the thing is real. Does that
make it real? The Moslem cries unto Mohammed, because he believes in
his innermost heart that Mohammed is near and can hear him. He will
risk his life on that assurance. To quote to him history and science
to prove that Mohammed is dead and unable to save, would be of no
avail, for he has the witness of the spirit in him, an intuitive
assurance, that the great prophet sits on the right hand of Allah. An
argument which proves too much, proves nothing.

In the second place, an intuition is not communicable. I may have an
intuition that I see spirits all about me this morning. They come,
they go, they nod, they brush my forehead with their wings. But do
_you_ see them, too, because I see them? There is the difference
between a scientific demonstration and a purely metaphysical
assumption. I could go to the blackboard and assure you, as I am
myself assured, that two parallel lines running in the same direction
will not and cannot meet. That is demonstration. A fever patient
when in a state of delirium, and a frightened child in the dark, see
things. We do not deny that they do, but their testimony does not
prove that the things they see are real.

"What is this I see before me?" cries Macbeth, the murderer, and he
shrieks and shakes from head to foot--he draws his sword and rushes
upon Banquo's ghost, which he sees coldly staring at him. But is that
any proof that what he saw we could see also? Yes, we could, if we
were in the same frenzy! And it is the revivalist's aim, by creating
a general excitement, to make everybody _see things_. "Doctor, Doctor,
help! they are coming to kill me; there they are--the assassins,--one,
two, three--oh, help," and the patient jumps out of bed to escape
the banditti crowding in upon him. But is that any reason why the
attending physician, his pulse normal and his brow cool, should
believe that the room is filling up with assassins? I observe people
jump up and down, as they do in holiness meetings; I hear them say
they see angels, they see Jesus, they feel his presence. But is that
any evidence for you or me? An intuitive argument is not communicable,
and, therefore, it is no argument at all.

Our orthodox friends are finally driven by modern thought, which is
growing bolder every day, to the only refuge left for them. It is the
one already mentioned. Granted that Jesus was an imaginary character,
even then, as an ideal, they argue, he is an inspiration, and the most
effective moral force the world has ever known. We do not care, they
say, whether the story of his birth, trial, death, and resurrection
is myth or actual history; such a man as Jesus may never have existed,
the things he is reported as saying may have been put in his mouth by
others, but what of that--is not the picture of his character
perfect? Are not the Beatitudes beautiful--no matter who said them?
To strengthen this position they call our attention to Shakespeare's
creations, the majority of whom--Hamlet, Othello, Lear, Portia,
Imogen, Desdemona, are fictitious. Yet where are there grander men, or
finer women? These children of Shakespeare may never have lived, but,
surely, they will never die. In the same sense, Jesus may be just as
ideal a character as those of Shakespeare, they say, and still be "the
light of the world." A New York preacher is reported as saying that if
Christianity is a lie, it is a "glorious lie."

My answer to the above is that such an argument evades instead of
facing the question. It is receding from a position under cover of a
rhetorical manoeuvre. It is a retreat in disguise. If Christianity is
a "glorious lie," then call it such. The question under discussion is,
Is Jesus Historical? To answer that it is immaterial whether or not
he is historical, is to admit that there is no evidence that he
is historical. To urge that, unhistorical though he be, he is,
nevertheless, the only savior of the world, is, I regret to say,
not only evasive,--not only does it beg the question, but it is
also clearly dishonest. How long will the tremendous ecclesiastical
machinery last, if it were candidly avowed that it is doubtful whether
there ever was such a historical character as Jesus, or that in all
probability he is no more real than one of Shakespeare's creations?
What! all these prayers, these churches, these denominations,
these sectarian wars which have shed oceans of human blood--these
unfortunate persecutions which have blackened the face of man--the
fear of hell and the devil which has blasted millions of lives--all
these for a Christ who may, after all, be only a picture!

Neither is it true that this pictorial Jesus saved the world. He has
had two thousand years to do it in, but as missionaries are still
being sent out, it follows that the world is yet to be saved. The
argument presented elsewhere in these pages may here be recapitulated.

There was war before Christianity; has Jesus abolished war?

There was poverty and misery in the world before Christianity; has
Jesus removed these evils?

There was ignorance in the world before Christianity; has Jesus
destroyed ignorance?

There were disease, crime, persecution, oppression, slavery,
massacres, and bloodshed in the world before Christianity; alas, are
they not still with us?

_When Jesus shall succeed in pacifying his own disciples; in healing
the sectarian world of its endless and bitter quarrels, then it will
be time to ask what else Jesus has done for humanity._

If the world is improving at all, and we believe it is, the progress
is due to the fact that man pays now more attention to _this_ life
than formerly. He is thinking less of the other world and more of
this. He no longer sings with the believer:

     The world is all a fleeting show
        For man's delusion given.
     Its smiles of joy, its tears of woe,
        Deceitful shine, deceitful flow,
     There's nothing true but heaven.

How could people with such feelings labor to improve a world they
hated? How could they be in the least interested in social or
political reforms when they were constantly repeating to themselves--

     I'm a pilgrim, and I'm a stranger--
     I can tarry, I can tarry, but a night.

That these same people should now claim not only a part of the credit
for the many improvements, but all of it--saying that, but for their
religion the "world would now have been a hell," * is really a little
too much for even the most serene temperament.

     * Rev. Frank Gunsaulus, of the Central Church, Chicago. See
     A New Catechism.--M. M. Mangasarian.

Which of the religions has persecuted as long and as relentlessly as
Christianity?

Which of the many faiths of the world has opposed Science as
stubbornly and as bitterly as Christianity?

In the name of what other prophets have more people been burned at the
stake than in the names of Jesus and Moses?

What other revelation has given rise to so many sects, hostile and
irreconcilable, as the Christian?

Which religion has furnished as many effective texts for political
oppression, polygamy, slavery, and the subjection of woman as the
religion of Jesus and Paul?

Is there,--has there ever been another creed which makes salvation
dependent on belief,--thereby encouraging hypocrisy, and making honest
inquiry a crime?

To send a thief to heaven from the gallows because he believes, and
an honest man to hell because he doubts, is that the virtue which is
going to save the world?

The claim that Jesus has saved the world is another myth.

A _pictorial_ Christ, then, has not done anything for humanity
to deserve the tremendous expenditure of time, energy, love, and
devotion, which has for two thousand years taxed the resources of
civilization.

The passing away of this imaginary savior will relieve the world of an
unproductive investment.

We conclude: Honesty, like charity, must begin at home. Unless we can
tell the truth in our churches we will never tell the truth in our
shops. Unless our teachers, the ministers of God, are honest, our
insurance companies and corporations will have to be watched. Permit
sham in your religious life, and the disease will spread to every
member of the social body. If you may keep religion in the dark, and
cry "hush," "hush," when people ask that it be brought out into the
light, why may not politics or business cultivate a similar partiality
for darkness? If the king cries, "rebel," when a citizen asks for
justice, it is because he has heard the priest cry, "infidel," when a
member of his church asked for evidence. Religious hypocrisy is the
mother of all hypocrisies. Cure a man of that, and the human world
will recover its health.

Not so long ago, nearly everybody believed in the existence of a
personal devil. People saw him, heard him, described him, danced with
him, and claimed, besides, to have whipped him. Luther hurled his
inkstand at him, and American women accused as witches were put to
death in the name of the devil. Yet all this "evidence" has not saved
the devil from passing out of existence. What has happened to the
devil will happen to the gods. Man is the only real savior. If he is
not a savior, there is no other.

[Illustration: 160 The Hindu Trinity.]




