CHAPTER I.

OF RELIGION.


1. Of religion towards the Gods, know that the chief element is to have
right opinions concerning them, as existing and governing the whole in
fair order and justice; and then to set thyself to obey them, and to
yield to them in each event, and submit to it willingly, as accomplished
under the highest counsels. For so shalt thou never blame the Gods, nor
accuse them, as being neglectful of thee.

2. But this may come to pass in no other way than by placing Good and
Evil in the things that are in our own power, and withdrawing them from
those that are not; for if thou take any of these things to be good or
evil, then when thou shalt miss thy desire, or fall into what thou
desirest not, it is altogether necessary that thou blame and hate those
who caused thee to do so.

3. For every living thing was so framed by Nature as to flee and turn
from things, and the causes of things, that appear hurtful, and to
follow and admire things, and the causes of things, that appear
serviceable. For it is impossible that one who thinketh himself harmed
should delight in that seemeth to harm him, even as he cannot delight in
the very harm itself.

4. And thus it comes that a father is reviled by his son when he will
not give him of the things that appear to be good. And this it was that
set Polyneices and Eteocles at war with each other—the opinion, namely,
that royalty is a good. And through this the Gods are railed on by the
husbandman and the sailor, by the merchant, and men who lose their wives
or children. For where advantage is, there also is religion. Thus he who
is careful to pursue and avoid as he ought, is careful, at the same
time, of religion.

5. But it is fitting also that every man should pour libations and offer
sacrifices and first-fruits after the customs of his fathers, purely,
and not languidly nor negligently, nor, indeed, scantily, nor yet beyond
his means.




CHAPTER II.

OF PROVIDENCE.


1. Concerning the Gods, there are some who say that a Divine Being does
not exist; and others, that it exists indeed, but is idle and uncaring,
and hath no forethought for anything; and a third class say that there
is such a Being, and he taketh forethought also, but only in respect of
great and heavenly things, but of nothing that is on the earth; and a
fourth class, that he taketh thought of things both in heaven and earth,
but only in general, and not of each thing severally. And there is a
fifth class, whereof are Odysseus and Socrates, who say, _Nor can I move
without thy knowledge_.[1]

2. Before all things, then, it is necessary to investigate each of these
opinions, whether it be justly affirmed or no. For if there be no Gods,
how can the following of the Gods be an end? And if there are Gods, but
such as take no care for anything, then also how can the following of
them be truly an end? And how, again, if the Gods both exist and take
care for things, yet if there be no communication from them to men, yea,
by Zeus, and even to mine own self? The wise and good man, having
investigated all these things, will submit his own mind to Him that
governeth the Whole, even as good citizens to the laws of their State.

3. But a certain man having inquired how one could be persuaded that
every one of his actions is observed by God, Doth it not appear to you,
said Epictetus, that all things are united in One?

——“It doth so appear.”

What then? Think you not that a sympathy exists between heavenly and
earthly things?

——“I do think it.”

For how else do plants, as if at the command of God, when He bids them,
flower in due season? and shoot forth when He bids them shoot, and bear
fruit when He bids them bear? and ripen when He bids them ripen? and
again they drop their fruit when He bids them drop it, and shed their
leaves when He bids them shed them? and how else at His bidding do they
fold themselves together, and remain motionless and at rest? And how
else at the waxing and waning of the moon, and the approach and
withdrawal of the sun, do we behold such a change and reversal in
earthly things? But are the plants and our bodies so bound up in the
whole, and have sympathy with it, and are our spirits not much more so?
And our souls being thus bound up and in touch with God, seeing, indeed,
that they are portions and fragments of Him, shall not every movement of
them, inasmuch as it is something inward and akin to God, be perceived
by Him? But you are able to meditate upon the divine government, and
upon all divine and all human affairs, and to be affected at the same
time in the senses and in the intellect by ten thousand things, and at
the same time to assent to some and dissent to others, or suspend your
judgment; and you preserve in your mind so many impressions of so many
and various things, and being affected by them, you strike upon ideas
similar to earlier impressions, and you retain many different arts, and
memories of ten thousand things; and shall not God have the power to
overlook all things, and be present with all, and have a certain
communication with all? But is the sun able to illuminate so great a
part of the All, and to leave so little without light,—that part,
namely, which is filled with the shadow of the earth—and shall He who
made the sun, and guideth it in its sphere—a small part of Him beside
the Whole—shall He not be capable of perceiving all things?

4. _But I_, saith the man, _cannot take heed of all these things at
once_. And who said you could do this? that you had equal powers with
God? But, nevertheless, He hath placed at every man’s side a Guardian,
the Genius of each man,[2] who is charged to watch over him, a Genius
that cannot sleep, nor be deceived. To what greater and more watchful
guardian could He have committed us? So, when ye have shut the doors,
and made darkness in the house, remember never to say that ye are alone;
for ye are not alone, but God is there, and your Genius is there; and
what need have these of light to mark what ye are doing? To this God it
were fitting also that ye should swear an oath, as soldiers do to Cæsar.
But those indeed who receive pay swear to prefer the safety of Cæsar
before all things; but ye, receiving so many and great things, will ye
not swear? or swearing, will ye not abide by it? And what shall ye
swear? Never to disobey, never to accuse, never to blame aught that He
hath given, never unwillingly to do or suffer any necessary thing. Is
this oath like unto that other? The soldiers swear to esteem no other
man before Cæsar; ye to esteem yourselves above all.




