CHAPTER XXIII.

CONSTANCY.


Abide in the precepts as in laws which it were impious to transgress.
And whatsoever any man may say of thee, regard it not; for neither is
this anything of thine own.




CHAPTER XXIV.

HOW LONG?


1. How long wilt thou delay to hold thyself worthy of the best things,
and to transgress in nothing the decrees of Reason? Thou hast received
the maxims by which it behooves thee to live; and dost thou live by
them? What teacher dost thou still look for to whom to hand over the
task of thy correction? Thou art no longer a boy, but already a man full
grown. If, then, thou art neglectful and sluggish, and ever making
resolve after resolve, and fixing one day after another on which thou
wilt begin to attend to thyself, thou wilt forget that thou art making
no advance, but wilt go on as one of the vulgar sort, both living and
dying.

2. Now, at last, therefore hold thyself worthy to live as a man of full
age and one who is pressing forward, and let everything that appeareth
the best be to thee as an inviolable law. And if any toil or pleasure or
reputation or the loss of it be laid upon thee, remember that now is the
contest, here already are the Olympian games, and there is no deferring
them any longer, and that in a single day and in a single trial ground
is to be lost or gained.

3. It was thus that Socrates made himself what he was, in all things
that befell him having regard to no other thing than Reason. But thou,
albeit thou be yet no Socrates, yet as one that would be Socrates, so it
behooveth thee to live.




CHAPTER XXV.

PARTS OF PHILOSOPHY.


1. The first and most necessary point in philosophy is the use of the
precepts, for example, not to lie. The second is the proof of these, as,
Whence it comes that it is wrong to lie? The third is that which giveth
confirmation and coherence to the others, such as, Whence it comes that
this is proof? for what is proof? what is consequence? what is
contradiction? what is truth? what is falsehood?

2. Thus the third point is necessary through the second, and the second
through the first. But the most necessary of all, and that when we
should rest, is the first, But we do the contrary. For we linger on the
third point, and spend all our zeal on that, while of the first we are
utterly neglectful, and thus we are liars; but the explanation of how it
is shown to be wrong to lie we have ever ready to hand.




CHAPTER XXVI.

MEMORABILIA.


Hold in readiness for every need, these—

   “Lead me, O Zeus, and thou, Destiny, whithersoever ye
   have appointed me to go, and may I follow fearlessly. But
   if in an evil mind I be unwilling, still must I follow.”

   “That man is wise among us, and hath understanding of
   things divine, who hath nobly agreed with Necessity.”

But the third also—

   “O Crito, if so it seem good to the Gods so let it be.
   Anytus and Meletus are able to kill me indeed, but to
   harm me, never.”[1]


THE END.




NOTES.


CLEANTHES’ HYMN TO ZEUS.

   [1] Professor Mahaffy, in his _Greek Life and Thought_, quotes
   the full text of this noble Hymn, which, he thinks, “would
   alone redeem the Hellenistic age, as it stands before us, from
   the charge of mere artificiality and pedantry.”

   [2] ἰῆς μίμημα λαχόντες μοῦνον. This is Zeller’s reading,
    but not Professor Mahaffy’s, who has ἑνὸς μίμημα.


NOTES.


