CHAPTER V.

1. The strong and growing yearning for some direct, personal revelation
of God, some supernatural manifestation of His existence and care for
men, is noted by Zeller as a special trait of Hellenistic times. Such a
revelation must have been longed for by many as the only satisfying
answer to the destructive logic of the Pyrrhonists, and men’s minds were
also of course led that way by the insistence of the Stoic thinkers upon
the communion of the individual with God, as the most important of all
possible relations. Hence the growth of many wild and orgiastic cults at
this epoch—all based on the state of ecstasy connected with their rites,
which was ascribed to supernatural influence. With the Stoics this
movement took the comparatively sober shape of attention to the
established system of oracular divination. Zeller, however, shows that
some Stoics were disposed to rationalize the revelations of the oracles
by supposing a certain sympathy between the mind of the seer and the
future events which led to the unconscious selection of means of
divination which would exhibit the proper signs.—(Z. 339, 340.)
Epictetus evidently thought more of God’s revelation in the conscience
than any other.

2. The story is told by Simplicius in his commentary on this chapter.
Two friends, journeying together to inquire of the oracle at Delphi,
were set upon by robbers; one of them resisted, and was murdered, the
other either fled or made no effort on his companion’s behalf. Arriving
at the temple of Apollo, he was greeted with the following deliverance
of the oracle:—

  “Thou saw’st thy friend all undefended die—
  Foul with that sin, from Phœbus’ temple fly.”


BOOK V.


CHAPTER I.

1. Simplicius explains that the oath was to be refused, because to call
God to witness in any merely personal and earthly interest implies a
want of reverence towards Him; but that if there were a question of
pledging one’s faith on behalf of friends, or parents, or country, it
was not improper to add the confirmation of an oath.

2. Upton quotes allusions to these recitations from Juvenal, Martial,
and Pliny. Authors would read their own works and invite crowds of
flatterers to attend. Epict. _Diss._ iii. 23. (Schweighäuser) is a
scornful diatribe against the pretentious people who held forth on these
occasions, and the people who assembled to hear and applaud them. He
contrasts with fashionable reciters and lecturers his own master, Rufus.
“Rufus was wont to say, _I speak to no purpose, if ye have time to
praise me_. And, verily, he spoke in such a way that every man who sat
there thought that some one had accused him to Rufus, he so handled all
that was going on, he so set before each man’s eyes his faults.”

3. Into vulgarity—ἐις ἰδιωτισμόν.


CHAPTER II.

1. The sophism, or puzzle, called the Liar, ran thus:—A liar says he
lies: if it is true, he is no liar; and if he lies, he is speaking
truth. The Quiescent (ὁ ἡσυχάζων) was an invention attributed by Cicero
to Chrysippus (Acad. ii. 29). When asked of a gradually-increasing
number of things to say when they ceased to be few and became many, he
was wont to cease replying, or be “quiescent,” shortly before the limit
was reached—a device which we have some difficulty in regarding as a
fair example of Chrysippus’s contributions to the science of logic. For
the master sophism see Bk. II. chap. i., _note_ 1.

2. Plato, _Laws_, ix.:—“When any of such opinions visit thee, go to the
purifying sacrifices, go and pray in the temples of the protecting Gods,
go to the society of men whom thou hast heard of as good; and now hear
from others, now say for thine own part, that it behooves every man to
hold in regard the things that are honorable and righteous. But from the
company of evil men, fly without a look behind. And if in doing these
things thy disease give ground, well; but if not, hold death the better
choice, and depart from life.”

3. _The true athlete._—Literally, ascetic, ἀσκητής; _i. e._, practicer.

4. The Dioscuri, or Twins, Castor and Pollux, were the patron deities
of sailors.


CHAPTER VI.

1. _If viewed disjunctively._—That is, if we say, It is day, or, It is
night. This is a difficult chapter, and full of corruptions. The feast
alluded to is, doubtless, the feast of life, where the Gods are the
hosts.


CHAPTER VII.

1. _Winter training._—Such as the Roman troops underwent when in
winter-quarters. They were accustomed to exercise themselves with arms
of double the normal weight, and prepare themselves by marching,
running, leaping, etc., for active service.


