CHAPTER VII.

1. The school of Plato was continued at Athens under the title of the
Academy. In its later days it produced little except logical puzzles.

2. “Friend, if indeed, escaping from this war, we were destined
thereafter to an ageless and deathless life, then neither would I fight
in the van nor set thee in the press of glorious battle. But now, since
death in a thousand kinds stands everywhere against us, which no man
shall fly from nor elude, we go; either we shall give glory to another,
or he to us.”—Sarpedon’s speech, _Iliad_, xii. 322-8.

3. General consent.—The well-known philosophic doctrine, that what all
men unite in believing must be true, which has so often been made the
basis of arguments against Skepticism in various forms.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. See chap. IV. i.

2. He drew water by night for his gardens, and studied philosophy in the
day.—_Diog. Laert._ [Upton.]

3. A most characteristic feature of the whole Stoic school was its
treatment of ancient mythology and legend. These things were closely and
earnestly studied, with a constant view to the deeper meanings that
underlay the vesture of fable, an attitude which contrasts very
favorably with Plato’s banishment of the poets from his Republic for
“teaching false notions about the Gods.”


CHAPTER IX.

1. Gyara, an island in the Ægean, used as a penal settlement.


CHAPTER X.

1. _The captain ... the driver_—literally, “to him who has knowledge”
(of the given art).

2. Liberator—καρπιστής. The person appointed by law to carry out the
ceremony of the manumission of slaves.


CHAPTER XI.

1. This chapter seems to me to contain a truth expressed so baldly and
crudely as to appear a falsehood. The reader’s mind will be fixed upon
the truth or falsehood according as he is or is not capable of reading
Epictetus with understanding.

2. This earthen lamp was sold, according to Lucian, at the death of
Epictetus for 3,000 drachmæ (about £120).—_Adv. Indoct._ 13.


CHAPTER XIII.

1. Parodying a verse of Euripides on the stream of Dirce in Bœotia.
The Marcian aqueduct brought water to Rome.

2. I adopt Upton’s conjecture for the inexplicable ἐν βοὸς κοιλίᾳ.


CHAPTER XVIII.

1. An eminent Cynic (also mentioned by Seneca and Tacitus).


CHAPTER XXV.

1. This is the reading of one of the Christian Paraphrases. The other
versions add the words πρὸς ἀλλήλους after ἐξ ὧν ὀυ διαφερόμεθα, giving
the sense “from things in which we do not differ from each other.” It is
no uncommon thing for all the versions of Epictetus to unite in a
manifestly corrupt reading, and though in this case the received text is
not an impossible one, I have thought myself justified in following the
variant of the Paraphrase.


CHAPTER XXVII.

1. There is an allusion to this curious feature of the Olympic contests
in the Fourth Idyll of Theocritus. Casaubon (_Lect. Theocr._ ad Idyll.
4) quoted by Schweighäuser, in his note on this passage (_Diss._ III.
xv. 4), shows from Festus Pompeius that there was a statue in the
Capitol of a youth bearing a spade after the manner of the Olympic
combatants.

2. Euphrates, a Stoic philosopher, and contemporary of Epictetus. He was
tutor of Pliny, the younger.

3. The pentathlos contended in five athletic exercises—viz., running,
leaping, throwing the quoit, throwing the javelin, wrestling.

4. Much of this must refer to the period of probation or discipleship,
for Epictetus is clear that the ordinary Stoic (who had not embraced the
special mission of Cynicism) was not required to forsake his family, or
his affairs, or his duties as a citizen, nor even justified in doing so.


