CHAPTER XIII.

WHY WE SHOULD BEAR WITH WRONG.


When some one may do you an injury, or speak ill of you, remember that
he either does it or speaks it believing that it is right and meet for
him to do so. It is not possible, then, that he can follow the thing
that appears to you, but the thing that appears to him. Wherefore, if it
appear evil to him, it is he that is injured, being deceived. For also
if any one should take a true consequence to be false, it is not the
consequence that is injured, but he which is deceived. Setting out,
then, from these opinions, you will bear a gentle mind towards any man
who may revile you. For, say on each occasion, _So it appeared to him_.




CHAPTER XIV.

THAT EVERYTHING HATH TWO HANDLES.


Every matter hath two handles—by the one it may be carried; by the
other, not. If thy brother do thee wrong, take not this thing by the
handle, _He wrongs me_; for that is the handle whereby it may not be
carried. But take it rather by the handle, _He is my brother, nourished
with me_; and thou wilt take it by a handle whereby it may be carried.




CHAPTER XV.

ON CERTAIN FALSE CONCLUSIONS.


There is no true conclusion in these reasonings: _I am richer than thou,
therefore I am better_: _I am more eloquent than thou, therefore I am
better_. But the conclusions are rather these: _I am richer than thou,
therefore my wealth is better_: _I am more eloquent than thou, therefore
my speech is better_. But thou art not wealth, and thou art not speech.




CHAPTER XVI.

PERCEPTION AND JUDGMENT.


1. Doth a man bathe himself quickly? Then, say not, _Wrongly_, but
_Quickly_. Doth he drink much wine? Then say not, _Wrongly_, but _Much_.
For whence do you know if it were ill done till you have understood his
opinion?

2. Thus it shall not befall you to assent to any other things than
those whereof you are truly and directly sensible.[1]

3. What is the cause of assenting to anything? The appearance that it is
so. But if it appear to be not so, it is impossible to assent to it.
Wherefore? For that this is the nature of the mind, to receive the true
with favor, the false with disfavor, and the uncertain with
indifference. The proof of this? Be sure, if you can, at this moment,
that it is night. You cannot. Cease to be sure that it is day. You
cannot. Be sure that the stars are odd in number, or that they are even.
You cannot. When, therefore, any man shall assent to what is false, know
that he had no will to consent to falsehood; for, as saith Plato, no
soul is willingly deprived of the truth, but the false appeared to it to
be true. Come, then, what have we in actions corresponding to this true
and false? The seemly and the unseemly, the profitable and the
unprofitable, that which concerns me and that which doth not concern me,
and such like. Can any man think that a certain thing is for his profit,
and not elect to do it? He cannot. How, then, is it with her who saith—

  “And will I know the evils I shall do,
   But wrath is lord of all my purposes?”
                              _Medea_, 1079.

For, did she hold this very thing, to gratify her wrath and avenge
herself on her husband more profitable than to spare her children? Even
so: but she was deceived. Show her clearly that she was deceived, and
she will not do it; but so long as you show it not, what else hath she
to follow than the thing as it appears to her? Nothing. Wherefore, then,
have you indignation with her, that the unhappy wretch has gone astray
concerning the greatest things, and has become a viper instead of a
human being? If anything, will you not rather pity, as we pity the blind
and the lame, those that are blinded and lamed in the chiefest of their
faculties?

4. ——“So that all these great and dreadful deeds have this same origin
in the appearance of the thing?”

The same, and no other. The _Iliad_ is nought but appearance, and the
use of appearances. The thing that appeared to Paris was the carrying
off of the wife of Menelaus; the thing that appeared to Helen was to
accompany him. Had it, then, appeared to Menelaus to be sensible that it
was a gain to be deprived of such a wife, what would have happened? Not
only had there been no _Iliad_, but no _Odyssey_ neither.

——“On such a little thing do such great ones hang?”

But what talk is this of great things? Wars and seditions and
destructions of many men, and overthrow of cities? And what is there of
great in these? Nothing. For what is there of greatness in the deaths
of many oxen and sheep, and the burning or overthrow of many nests of
swallows or storks?

——“But are these things like unto those?”

They are most like. The bodies of men are destroyed, and the bodies of
oxen and of sheep. The dwellings of men are burned, and the nests of
storks. What is there great, what is there awful in this? Or show me
wherein differeth the dwelling of a man, as a dwelling, from the nest of
a stork, save that the one buildeth his little houses of planks and
tiles and bricks, and the other of sticks and mud?

——“Are a stork and a man, then, alike?”

What say you? In body they are most like.

——“Doth a man, then, differ in no respect from a stork?”

God forbid; but in these matters there is no difference.

——“Wherein, then, doth he differ?”

Seek, and you shall find that in another thing there is a difference.
Look if it be not in the observing and studying of what he doth; look if
it be not in his social instinct, in his faith, his reverence, his
steadfastness, his understanding. Where, then, is the great Good or Evil
for man? There, where the difference is. If this be saved, and abide, as
it were, in a fortress, and reverence be not depraved, nor faith, nor
understanding, then is the man also saved. But if one of these things
perish, or be taken by storm, then doth the man also perish. And in this
it is that great actions are done. It was a mighty downfall, they say,
for Paris, when the Greeks came, and when they sacked Troy, and when his
brothers perished. Not so: for through another’s act can no man
fall—that was the sacking of the storks’ nests. But the downfall was
then when he lost reverence and faith, when he betrayed hospitality and
violated decorum. When was the fall of Achilles? When Patroclus died?
God forbid; but when he was wrathful, when he bewept the loss of his
girl, when he forgot that he was there not to win mistresses but to make
war. These, for men, are downfall and storming and overthrow, when right
opinions are demolished or depraved.




