The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Teaching of Epictetus, by Epictetus

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Teaching of Epictetus
       Being the 'Encheiridion of Epictetus,' with Selections
       from the 'Dissertations' and 'Fragments'

Author: Epictetus

Translator: T.W. Rolleston

Release Date: May 29, 2012 [EBook #39855]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEACHING OF EPICTETUS ***




Produced by Colin Bell, Turgut Dincer, Brett Fishburne and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





  THE TEACHING OF EPICTETUS:
  BEING THE ‘ENCHEIRIDION
  OF EPICTETUS,’ WITH SELECTIONS
  FROM THE ‘DISSERTATION’
  AND ‘FRAGMENTS.’


  The name Epictetus is pronounced _ep’’ik-ti’tus—e_ as in
  _get_, first _i_ as in _habit_, second _i_ as in
  _police_, _u_ as in _but_.


  TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK,
  WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES, BY
  T. W. ROLLESTON.

  NEW YORK
  HOME BOOK COMPANY,
  45 VESEY STREET.




INTRODUCTION.


But for the zeal and ability of one disciple we should not now possess
any trustworthy account of the teaching of Epictetus. For, like not a
few other sages, he wrote nothing—his teaching was purely oral,
delivered, in the form of lectures or discourses, to the students who
came to him to receive their education in philosophy. One of these
students was Flavius Arrianus, afterwards Senator and Consul of Rome,
named by Lucian “one among the first of Roman men,” and known to us
chiefly as author of the best history of Alexander the Great which was
produced in antiquity. That history is still extant, but posterity owes
Arrian still more abundant thanks for the copious notes of the teaching
of Epictetus which he took down from his master’s lips in Nicopolis.
This record he afterwards published in eight books (whereof only four
now remain), entitled the _Dissertations of Epictetus_; and out of these
he drew the materials for compiling the little work, the _Encheiridion_,
or Manual, of Epictetus, by which this philosopher has hitherto been
most generally known.[1]

It is clear that the _Dissertations_ were not regarded by Arrian as a
satisfactory representation of the teaching of his master; that he
published them, indeed, with much reluctance, and only when it appeared
that unless he did so, certain imperfect versions of his records would
be established as the sole sources of authoritative information about
Epictetus. These circumstances are explained in a dedicatory letter to
his friend Lucius Gellius, prefixed to the edition of the
_Dissertations_ which Arrian finally resolved to issue. I here translate
this document in full:—

   “Arrian to Lucius Gellius, hail.

   “I did not write [in literary form and composition,
   συγγράφειν] the words of Epictetus in the manner in which
   a man might write such things. Neither have I put them
   forth among men, since, as I say, I did not even write
   them. But whatever I heard him speak, those things I
   endeavored to set down in his very words, so to preserve
   to myself for future times a memorial of his thought and
   unstudied speech. Naturally, therefore, they are such
   things as one man might say to another on the occasion of
   the moment, not such as he would put together with the
   idea of finding readers long afterwards. Such they are,
   and I know not how without my will or knowledge they fell
   among men. But to me it is no great matter if I shall
   appear unequal to composing such a work, and to Epictetus
   none at all if any one shall despise his discourse; for
   when he spoke it, it was evident that he had but one
   aim—to stir the minds of his hearers towards the best
   things. And if, indeed, the words here written should do
   the same, then they will do, I think, that which the
   words of sages ought to do. But if not, yet let those who
   read them know this, that when he himself spoke them, it
   was impossible for the hearer to avoid feeling whatever
   Epictetus desired he should feel. But if his words, when
   they are merely words, have not this effect, perhaps it
   is that I am in fault, perhaps it could not have been
   otherwise. Farewell!”

The style of the _Dissertations_, as they have reached us, answers very
well to the above account of their origin and purpose. They contain much
that the world should be as little willing to neglect as anything that
Greek philosophy has left us; but they contain also many repetitions,
redundancies, incoherencies; and are absolutely devoid of any sort of
order or system in their arrangement. Each chapter has generally
something of a central theme, but beyond this all is chaos. The same
theme will be dwelt on again and again in almost the same phrases;
utterances of majestic wisdom are imbedded in pages of tedious argument,
and any grouping of the chapters according to a progressive sequence of
ideas will be looked for in vain.

Under these conditions it was evident that the teaching of Epictetus
could never win half the influence which its essential qualities fitted
it to exercise. And accordingly, as another and better vehicle for this
influence, Arrian compiled and condensed from the _Dissertations_ the
small handbook of the Stoic philosophy known as the _Encheiridion of
Epictetus_. This little work has made Epictetus known to very many whom
the _Dissertations_ would never have reached. It had the
distinction—unparalleled in the case of any other Pagan writing, if we
except the doubtful _Sententiæ_ of Xystus—of being adopted as a
religious work in the early Christian Church. Two paraphrases of
it—still extant—one of which was specially designed for the use of
monastic bodies, were produced about the sixth century A. D., in which
very few changes were made in the text, beyond the alteration of Pagan
names and allusions to Scriptural ones.

About the same time it was made the subject of an elaborate and lengthy
commentary by a Pagan writer, Simplicius, wherein chapter after chapter
is dissected, discussed, and explained. It was elegantly rendered into
Latin by the well-known scholar of the Renaissance, Angelo Politian, who
dedicated his translation to Lorenzo de’ Medici. Down to the present
day, as numerous translations testify, it has remained the most usual
means of access to the thought of Epictetus.

But inestimable as the _Encheiridion_ is, he who knows it alone has
gained nothing like all that Epictetus has to give. It is a compendium;
and although much more stirring and forcible than is usual with such
works, it cannot give us the wealth of interesting allusion, reflection,
humor, the bursts of eloquence, the abrupt and biting style, the vivid
revelations of personal feeling, which marked the teaching of Epictetus
in the form in which he delivered it. It seems, therefore, that to make
him as accessible as he can be to those for whom such things have any
value or interest, it were necessary to produce from the _Encheiridion_
and the _Dissertations_ a third work, which should have the advantages
of each. This is what I have endeavored to do in the present work. In it
the whole of the _Encheiridion_ is given, and the divisions of
subject-matter into which the _Encheiridion_ falls have been observed by
the division of my translation into five Books, corresponding with the
natural divisions of the _Encheiridion_—Book I., treating of the first
principles of the Stoic philosophy; Book II., dealing with the general
application of these principles to life; Book III., with man’s relations
to his fellow-man; Book IV., with his relations to God; Book V.,
containing, besides a couple of concluding chapters, chiefly practical
counsels of behavior on various particular occasions, and _obiter dicta_
on the use of the faculties. Such is the scheme of arrangement suggested
by the _Encheiridion_; and I have filled it in by setting among the
chapters of the _Encheiridion_ chapters or passages from the
_Dissertations_, selected for their relevancy to the matter in hand. In
fact, I have reversed the process by which the _Encheiridion_ came into
being. It was condensed out of the _Dissertations_: I have expanded it
again by drawing into it a large quantity of material from the original
work, and subjecting the new matter thus gained to the system and order
of sequence which I found to prevail in the _Encheiridion_. The passages
or chapters taken from the _Dissertations_ are those which seemed to me
most characteristic of the philosophy or the personality of Epictetus,
and I have made it my aim to omit nothing which is essential to a full
and clear understanding of the message he had to deliver to his
generation. Of course there is plenty of room for differences of opinion
as to the manner in which this conception has been here carried out; but
I hope that the present attempt may do something to win a larger
audience for his teaching than former editions could, in the nature of
the case, obtain. If this hope should prove to be well founded, I shall
expect, some day, to give the present English version a counterpart in a
Greek text arranged on the same lines.

I may add here that the reader will find an Index at the end of this
volume, in which every paragraph is referred to its original source in
the _Dissertations_, _Encheiridion_, or _Fragments_—the references
applying to Schweighäuser’s standard edition of Epictetus.[2]

As regards the style of my translation, I hope the tinge of archaism I
have given it will be felt to suit the matter. I could think of no idiom
so varied, so flexible even down to its use of various grammatical
forms, so well suited alike to colloquy, or argument, or satire, or
impassioned eloquence, as Elizabethan English.

So much to make the plan of the present work understood; and the reader
may perhaps wish that I would now leave him to the study of it. But
there is much in Epictetus the significance of which will not appear to
any one who is unacquainted with the general system of Stoic philosophy
which formed the basis of Epictetus’s ethical teaching. And I hope that
the reader will prefer to have such information as is necessary given
him in the form of a general introduction rather than in that of a
multitude of notes.

The founder of the Stoic philosophy was Zeno, a native of Cyprus, who
taught in Athens, about 300 B. C., in that frescoed arcade, or Stoa,
which gave its name to his school. His birthplace is worth noting, for
Zeno lived at the beginning of that epoch, himself one of the first
products of it, in which the influence of the East became strongly
apparent in Greek thought; the period called Hellenistic in
contradistinction to the purely Hellenic period which ended in the
conquests of the Macedonians. In many ways the conditions of life in the
Hellenistic period formed the most favorable _milieu_ possible for the
development of Greek thought upon the only lines which, after Aristotle,
it could fruitfully pursue; and this not in spite of, but even because
of, the great degradation of political and social life from which all
Hellendom then suffered. What the democratic polities were like, on
which was laid the problem of confronting Philip of Macedon, we may
conjecture from the history of the best known and assuredly not the
worst of them, Athens. And the best type of Athenian whose rise to power
was favored by the conditions of this time and place was Demosthenes:
Demosthenes, the grand historical warning to all peoples against
committing their destinies to professional orators; the statesman whose
doubtless real veneration for his country and her past served only to
make him a more mischievous counselor in her present difficulties; whose
splendid power as a wielder of words was scarcely more signal than his
incapacity and cowardice when he was called upon to match those words
with deeds. Athens, entangling the Thebans in an alliance against
Macedon, and then leaving them to face Alexander alone; deifying
Demetrius the Besieger for driving out a Macedonian garrison, and
allotting him the Parthenon itself to be his lodging and the scene of
his unspeakable profligacies; murdering Phocion, the one man who dared
to bring sincerity and virtue to her service—Athens was a type of the
Greek States of this epoch: too unprincipled for democratic government,
too contentious for despotism, too vain to submit to foreign rule, too
lacking in valor, purpose, union, to resist it with effect.

Whatever the causes of the change may have been, the conditions of
public life in this Hellenistic period were certainly very different
from those which prevailed, albeit with decadence, before that vast
breaking up of boundaries and destruction of political systems involved
in the Macedonian conquests. The successful and inspiring conflict with
Persia waged by the Hellenic States had for a time made all Greek hearts
to beat with one aspiration, and had brought to the front a race of
leaders who were capable of subduing the Greek democracies to their own
steadfast and statesmanlike purposes. Public life was then not only a
possible but even the most natural career for a man of talent and
probity. The small size of the Greek States gave almost every such man
an opportunity of action, and so keen and universal was the interest in
politics that it threatened to lead Greek philosophy into a region in
which philosophy is very apt to lose its vitalizing connection with
human consciousness and experience, and to stiffen into barren
speculation. In a word, man, as an individual, began to be too much lost
sight of in the consideration of man as a citizen; his uses, his duties,
the whole worth and significance of his life, came to be estimated too
exclusively by his relations to the visible society about him. It was
when the great Stoic Chrysippus found himself obliged to stand aloof
from all participation in politics—“For if I counsel honorably I shall
offend the citizens, and if basely, the Gods”—that such men as he were
led to ask themselves: Is there then any sphere of human endeavor out of
the reach of the tyranny of circumstance? If I cannot be a citizen, what
am I worth then simply as a man? If I can be nothing to my fellows, what
can I be to God? To a state of things, then, which, speaking broadly,
made public life impossible to honest men, we owe the noblest ethical
system of antiquity; to the enforced concentration of thought upon the
individual we owe a certain note of universality till then absent from
Hellenic thought.

But stoicism was not the only product of the speculation of this period.
Side by side with it there started into being two other systems of
philosophy, the necessity for combating which was doubtless of immense
service to its development. These were Epicureanism and Pyrrhonism; and
as the reader will find Epictetus much concerned with each of them, it
may be desirable that I should give some brief account of their cardinal
doctrines.

Epicurus was an Athenian. After some residence in Lesbos and Lampsacus,
he began to teach in his native city about the year 306 B.C. His ethical
views, which are all that concern us here, were of a distinctly
unelevating nature. Pleasure, ἡδονή, was pronounced to be for each man
the end and aim of his being, and the only rational motive of action.
This, however, was not the pleasure of the voluptuary—its highest forms,
according to Epicurus, were gained in ἀταραξία and ἀπονία—that is, a
cheerful and unanxious temperament, with leisure for contemplation, ends
not attainable by the criminal who lives in constant fear of detection,
or the luxurious liver in whom satiety produces disgust and weariness.

Certain bodily conditions were, however, regarded as objects in
themselves, and partaking of the nature of the absolutely good; and all
entanglement in human relationships was discountenanced for the
disturbance and distress which such relationships were liable to cause.
These doctrines were put in practice by their teacher in inuring himself
to a hermit-like simplicity and abstemiousness of life; and his life was
philosophically consistent with his doctrines, for it is clear that the
end of Pleasure will be most surely gained by him who has fewest wants
to gratify. But though the lives of Epicurus and his immediate followers
were exceptionally sober and strict, the total effect of his doctrine
could not but have been evil. They were purely egoistic in this
tendency—they centered each man’s activity and interest upon himself
alone, they bade him take no thought for any other earthly or heavenly
thing, and taught him that this ideal of indifference was realized in
its full perfection by the Gods, who dwelt apart in divine repose while
blind necessity had its way with human destiny.

Pyrrho of Elis, a rather earlier teacher than Zeno or Epicurus, who
is said to have studied philosophy under Indian Gymnosophists and
Chaldean Magi, was the originator in European thought of a great and
permanent philosophic movement. His school was inspired by the _Geist
der stets verneint_, and the term Skeptic was first devised to describe
its attitude. Its strength is in a discovery which inevitably takes
place when men begin to reflect upon their own mental operations—the
discovery, namely, that, given a perceiving mind and a perceived object,
it is always possible for the former, if it has the power of
introspection, to doubt whether it has received a really true and
faithful impression of the latter. How can we be assured that external
objects are as we perceive them? How can we even be assured that there
is any principle of constancy in their relations to our consciousness?
The senses often delude us; we are convinced, in dreams, of the reality
of appearances which, nevertheless, have no reality—why may not all
perception be a delusion? Why may not even our sense of the validity of
inference and of the truth of the axioms of geometry be a pure
hallucination? With these searching questions the Skeptic cut at the
root of all belief, and the problems which they raise have dominated
philosophy down to the present day. Nor in two thousand years has any
logical answer to them ever been found. Lotze, the last thinker of
really first-rate powers that the world has seen, practically abandons
all inquiry into theories of perception, and starts with the
_assumption_ that we are living in a kosmos, not a chaos; that the
order, coherence, reason in things to which consciousness testifies, are
realities. In antiquity, I may add, the profound problems raised by
Pyrrhonism do not seem to have been very profoundly apprehended either
by the Pyrrhonists or their opponents. The latter had nothing better to
appeal to than that notoriously feeble resource, the _argumentum ad
hominem_. If the Pyrrhonist distrusted the evidence of his senses, they
asked, why did he avoid walking over precipices or into the sea, or eat
bread instead of earth, or in any way make choice of means for ends? The
Pyrrhonist’s answer was equally superficial. It anticipated the famous
formula of Bishop Butler. Probability, argued they, was the guide of
life—having observed certain results to follow from certain
antecedents, the prudent man will shape his course in life accordingly,
although, as a matter of theory and speculation, he may refuse to
believe in the constancy of nature. This answer involves a clear
inconsistency. It involves even a greater assumption than that which the
Pyrrhonist refused to make as to the credibility of his perceptions—the
assumption of the credibility of his recollections. To the
thorough-going Skeptic there is no such thing as past experience—he is,
as it were, new-born at each instant of his life.

Such, in outline, were the systems against which the Stoic philosophy
had to make good its position in the ancient world. From the first there
seems to have been no doubt of its ability to do so, although,
unhappily, the records which have been preserved of the teaching of its
earliest days are few and obscure. The writings of Zeno, the founder of
Stoicism, and of Chrysippus, his immediate successor in the leadership
of the school, have utterly perished, while of Cleanthes, the third of
the early Stoic teachers, very little remains beyond the profound and
majestic Hymn to Zeus, of which I have given a translation in this work.
The complete loss of the hundreds of treatises produced by Chrysippus is
especially to be regretted, as he appears to have taken the main part in
giving shape and system to the Stoic philosophy. “Had Chrysippus not
been, the Stoa had not been,” was a proverbial saying which testifies to
his fame. However, from the accounts of ancient philosophers in Diogenes
Laertius, from Plutarch, Seneca, Cicero, and a few other authorities, we
can learn pretty clearly what the framework of the Stoic system had
grown to be long before Epictetus began to study it.

In antiquity, a philosophic system was expected to have something to
say for itself on three different branches of study—Logic, Physics
(which included cosmogony and theology), and Ethics. We think of the
Stoics chiefly in connection with the last-named of these subjects, but
they were no less eminent in the others, and Chrysippus, in particular,
was held to have done so much for the science of logic that a saying was
current—“If there were dialectic among the Gods, it must be the
dialectic of Chrysippus.” Of the Stoic contributions to this science,
scarcely any record remains.

Of their physical system, however, much is known, and the reader of
Epictetus needs to be acquainted with its general features. These were
borrowed from an earlier thinker, Heracleitus, whose central doctrine
was that the universe was an eternal flux and transition; everything was
in a state of becoming, _ein Werdendes_. At the beginning of things, so
far as they can be said to have any beginning, is the Deity in his
purest manifestation, which, be it observed, is a strictly material one,
a sublimated and ethereal fire, αἰθεῶδες πῦρ. In this fire dwelt the
divine creative thought and impulse. The first step in that process of
differentiation in which development consists is the production of
vapor, which condensed into water. Two elementary forces play their part
in these operations—a movement towards within, and a movement towards
without, the one a densifying, the other an expanding and straining
force (τόνος). The former gives us solidity in matter, the other the
qualities and energies of matter. Thus, by various degrees of density,
we get earth, water, atmospheric air, and from air, the common element
of earthly fire; and these elements in their various combinations, with
their various attributes and powers, gradually produce the successive
stages of organic life. Though all these proceed from the substance of
the Divine Being, the Stoics recognized, in the derived substance which
make up the universe as we have it now, various degrees of purity, of
affinity to their original source. Man’s body, for instance, with its
passions and affections, lies comparatively far from the divine; but his
soul is a veritable ray of the primitive fire, _Deus in corpore humano
hospitans_. The popular mythology of the day was entirely rejected by
the Stoics, although, as Professor Mahaffy points out, they never
attempted to “discredit orthodoxy,” but, on the contrary, used its myths
and ceremonies with the utmost reverence as vehicles of profound
religious truths. But they certainly believed in intelligences above
man, yet below the one Supreme Being; thus the stars and the lightning
(the reader will observe the allusions in the Hymn of Cleanthes) are in
some sense divinities, by virtue of the supposed purity of their fiery
essence.

Thus from the one primitive divine element the Kosmos, with all its
hierarchy of being, is evolved. But in the Stoic system πάντα ῥεῖ,[3]
there is no continuance in any one condition. As in the normal life of
all earthly creatures there comes a certain climax or turning point,
after which the forces of decay gain slowly but surely on those of
growth and resistance, so also runs the history of the universe which
includes them all. One by one the steps by which it was formed shall be
retraced, and the derived substances which compose it consumed and
re-absorbed by that from which they sprang. From matter in its grossest
form to its purest, from earth and stone and water to the highest
intelligence in men and dæmons and Gods, nothing shall escape this doom
of dissolution; everything shall yield up its separate existence, until
at last the indestructible element of that primeval fire is again the
sole being that remains, and Zeus is “alone in the conflagration,”
self-contemplating in the solitudes of thought. But this is not the end.
There is no end. The plastic impulse again resumes its sway, and soon
another cycle of world-development and world-destruction begins to run
its course. In the language of Seneca, “When that fatal day, that
necessity of the times, shall have arrived, and it seems good to God to
make an end of old things and ordain the better, then shall the ancient
order be revoked and every creature be generated anew, and a race
ignorant of guilt be given to the earth.”

This was the general physical system on which all Stoics were agreed,
although there were differences of opinion upon minor points; such as
how far these successive cycles resembled each other? some asserting
that they did so in the minutest detail, others only in their larger
features. It was a system, for all its superstitions, not without
grandeur and truth. At bottom it expressed a sense of that phenomenon of
ebb and flow, systole and diastole, the action and counteraction of
balanced forces, which is perhaps the profoundest law of life.

Two questions arise in connection with the Stoic cosmogony, which we
must briefly discuss before proceeding farther. Are we justified in
terming their view of the universe a materialistic one? and what was
their doctrine of the destinies of the human soul? Now it is certainly
the usual practice among writers on philosophy to reckon the Stoics as
materialists, and it is unquestionably true that they denied the
possibility of any existence which was not corporeal. Strong as they are
on the supremacy of the human soul over the human body, sharp as is the
line with which they divide these elements, yet the distinction is a
moral, not a metaphysical one—each is an actual material substance. But
we shall be seriously mistaken, nevertheless, if we place them in the
same class with the scientific materialists of the present day.
According to the latter, Thought is no necessary moment in the universe,
but merely a product of certain accidental combinations of matter, a
product which, when these are dissolved, must disappear from existence,
without leaving a trace of its presence behind. Again, according to most
modern opponents of the materialistic view, Thought has an independent
and immortal being—it existed before matter was, and would continue to
exist if all matter were annihilated. The Stoic view differed from each
of these modern theories. It held Thought and Matter to be eternal,
inseparable, and, indeed, strictly identical. Being in its primitive and
purest form was fire, a corporeal substance, but one exhibiting
consciousness, purpose, will.

As to the question of the Stoic view of the immortality of the human
soul, it does not seem to me to deserve so much discussion as it has
received from some commentators. It is obvious that the soul must, in
the end, share the lot of all other existences, and be resolved into the
Divine Being which was its source. The only question that can arise is
whether this resolution takes place at the moment of death, or whether
the sense of personal identity persists for a certain period beyond that
event; and this question, which Epictetus appears to have been wise
enough to leave an open one, is philosophically of very little
importance. The soul is immortal, the individual perishes; this is the
conclusion of Stoicism, and if we know this, there is little else it can
much concern us to know.

The reader who desires to gain a thorough knowledge of Hellenistic
philosophy, and of the social and political conditions in which it
throve, will find what he seeks in two works to which I have to express
my large indebtedness. One is Zeller’s _Philosophie der Griechen_
(_Epikureer_, _Stoiker u. Skeptiker_),[4] a monument of German research
and erudition, in which vast masses of original material for the study
of this most interesting, but neglected, epoch of the development of
European intellect have been brought together, and interpreted with more
than German lucidity and method. The other is Professor Mahaffy’s recent
volume, _Greek Life and Thought_, a study of the Hellenistic period in
various aspects, which the scholar will not read without profit, nor the
lay-reader without pleasure.

We turn now to that department of the Stoic philosophy with which the
reader of Epictetus is most concerned—its Ethics.

The ethical question resolves itself into a search for the supreme
object of human endeavor, the _Summum Bonum_, the absolute and essential
good. This, for the Stoic, embodied itself in the formula, “to live
according to Nature.” But what is Nature? The will of God, as revealed
in the heart and conscience of those who seek to know it, and
interpreted through the observation in a reverent and faithful spirit of
the facts of life.

Going into the subject more precisely we find certain criteria of moral
truth established, προλήψεις, as they were called, that is, primitive,
original conceptions, or, as I have rendered them in my translation,
“natural conceptions,” dogmas by which all moral questions can be tried.
If we inquire into the source of these προλήψεις, we shall find
ourselves mistaken in our disposition to think that the Stoics regarded
them as innate ideas. Innate they are not, for the Stoics held the soul
at birth to be a _tabula rasa_, or blank page, which only experience
could fill with character and meaning. But as Seneca says in his
inquiry, “Quomodo ad nos prima boni honestique notitia pervenerit,”[5]
although Nature alone could not teach us these things, could not equip
us with the knowledge of them before we entered upon life, yet the
“seeds” of this knowledge she does give us; the soul of every man has
implanted in it a certain aptness or, indeed, necessity to deduce
certain universal truths from such observation and experience as are
common to all mankind; and these truths, the προλήψεις, though not
strictly innate, have thus an inevitableness and dogmatic force not
possessed by those which one man may reach and another miss in the
exercise of the ordinary faculties, by argument, study, and so forth. By
these natural conceptions the existence and character of God, and the
general decrees of the moral law, are considered to be affirmed. If we
inquire further how the Stoic explained the fact that some of these
so-called inevitable and universal conclusions are denied in all
sincerity by men like Epicurus, who were neither bad nor mad, we strike
upon the difficulty which confronts all systems that aim at setting up
any absolute body of truth, expressible in human language, in place of
that partial, progressive, and infinitely varied revelation of God’s
mind and purpose to which the uncolored facts of the world’s religious
history seem to testify.

The natural conceptions, as I have said, contain the primary doctrines
of ethics. None of these are more important for the Stoic than that
which declares essential Good to lie in the active, not the passive side
of man; in the will, not in the flesh, nor in anything else which the
will is unable to control. But a certain relative and conditional
goodness may lie in matters which are yet of no moment to the spiritual
man, to that part of him which seeks the essential good. And we must
note that when Epictetus speaks of certain things as good or bad or
indifferent, he is generally speaking of them in their relation to the
spiritual man, and in the most absolute and unconditional sense. No evil
can happen to the essential part of man, to that side of him which is
related to the eternal and divine, without his own will. Hence the death
of a beloved friend, or child, or wife, is no evil; and if it be no
evil, we are forbidden to grieve for it, or, in the most usual phrase
with Epictetus, we are not to be troubled or confounded by it,
ταράσσεσθαι. But if this utterance should shock our natural feelings, it
will do something which assuredly Epictetus never meant it to do. It is
the soul of man which these events cannot injure, and it is the soul
which is forbidden to think itself injured by them. Such love of the
individual as may be embraced in the larger love of the All, of
God—such grief for bereavements and calamities as does not overwhelm
the inner man (ii. 19) in a “wave of mortal tumult,” and dull his vital
sense of the great moral ends which he was born to pursue, is repeatedly
and explicitly admitted by Epictetus. Thus, in iii. 2, we have him
arguing against Epicurus that there are certain natural sympathies
between man and his kind, and even convicting Epicurus himself of a
secret belief in these sympathies. Epicurus had dissuaded his followers
from marriage, and the bringing-up of children, on account of the grief
and anxiety which such relations necessarily entail. Not so the
Stoics—they pressed their disciples to enter into the ordinary earthly
relationships of husband, or wife, or citizen, and this without
pretending to have found any means of averting the natural consequences
which Epicurus dreaded, although they did profess to have discovered
something in man which made him equal to the endurance of them. Again,
although the condition of ἀπάθεια, of inward peace, of freedom from
passions, is again and again represented by Epictetus as the mark of the
perfect sage, we are told that this ἀπάθεια is something quite different
from “apathy”—a man is not to be emotionless “like a statue.” And a
third passage confirming this view is to be found in Book I., ch. xi.
(Schweighäuser), where the conduct of a man who was so afflicted by the
illness of his little daughter that he ran away from the house, and
would hear news of her only through messages, is condemned, not for the
affection and anxiety it proved, but for its utter unreasonableness.
“Would you,” asks Epictetus, “have her mother and her nurse and her
pedagogue, who all love her too, also run away from her, and leave her
to die in the hands of persons who neither love nor care for her at
all?” There is a grief which is really a self-indulgence, a barren,
absorbing, paralyzing grief, which, to the soul possessed by it, makes
every other thing in heaven and earth seem strange and cold and trivial.
From such grief alone Epictetus would deliver us, and I think he would
have accepted Mr. Aubrey de Vere’s noble sonnet on _Sorrow_ as a
thoroughly fit poetic statement of Stoic doctrine on this subject:—

  “Count each affliction, whether light or grave,
  God’s messenger sent down to thee; do thou
  With courtesy receive him; rise and bow;
  And, ere his shadow pass thy threshold, crave
  Permission first his heavenly feet to lave;
  Then lay before him all thou hast, allow
  No cloud of passion to usurp thy brow,
  Or mar thy hospitality; no wave
  Of mortal tumult to obliterate
  The soul’s marmoreal calmness: Grief should be
  Like joy, majestic, equable, sedate,
  Confirming, cleansing, raising, making free,
  Strong to consume small troubles; to commend
  Great thoughts, grave thoughts, thoughts lasting to the end.”

But the grief that shall do this is a grief that must be _felt_. And
Epictetus assuredly never meant to offer the Stoic philosophy as a mere
stupefying anodyne. Make the man a Stoic, and something yet remains to
do—to make the Stoic a man. One of these purposes was not more the
concern of Epictetus than the other. And he pursued both of them with a
strength, sincerity, and sanity of thought, with a power of nourishing
the heroic fiber in humanity, which, to my mind, make him the very chief
of Pagan moralists.

It is no purpose of mine to fill this preface with information which the
reader can gain without doubt or difficulty from the author whom it
introduces, and therefore I shall leave him to discover for himself what
the positive ethical teaching of Epictetus was like. Nor is it,
unhappily, possible to say much upon another subject on which Epictetus
gives us little or no information—his own life and circumstances.
Arrian wrote a biography of him, but it is now entirely lost, and the
biographical details which have been collected from Simplicius, Suidas,
Aulus Gellius, and others are very scanty. He was born at Hierapolis, in
Phrygia, and became, how is unknown, a slave of Epaphroditus, a freedman
and favorite of Nero, who is recorded to have treated him with great
cruelty. One day, it is said, Epaphroditus began twisting his leg for
amusement. Epictetus said, “If you go on you will break my leg.”
Epaphroditus persisted, the leg was broken, and Epictetus, with
unruffled serenity, only said, “Did I not tell you that you would break
my leg?” This circumstance is adduced by Celsus in his famous
controversy with Origen as an instance of Pagan fortitude equal to
anything which Christian martyrology had to show;[6] but it is probably
a mere myth which grew up to account for the fact mentioned by
Simplicius and Suidas that Epictetus was feeble in body and lame from an
early age.

Epaphroditus was probably a very bad master, and as a favorite and
intimate of Nero’s must have been a bad man; but we have to thank him
for the fact that Epictetus, while yet a slave, was sent to attend the
philosophic lectures of Musonius Rufus, an eminent Stoic of Rome, whom
both Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius mention with great respect. The
system of philosophic training had been at this time long organized.
There were masters of repute everywhere, who delivered their instruction
in regular courses, received a fixed payment for the same, and under
whom crowds of young men assembled from far and near to study science
and ethics—to receive, in short, what corresponded to a university
education in those days. The curious circumstance that a slave like
Epictetus could participate in advantages of this kind is generally
explained as the result of a fashionable whim which possessed Roman
nobles at this time for having philosophers and men of culture among
their slaves. Professor Mahaffy, in his _Greek Life and Thought_ (p.
132), commenting on the summons of the two philosophers, Anaxarchus and
Callisthenes, to console Alexander after his murder of Cleitus,
observes, that it was probably usual to call in philosophers to minister
professionally in cases of affliction. From this, to making a
philosopher a regular adjunct to a large household, even as the baron of
later times kept a fool, the step is not great. But Epaphroditus, one
thinks, must have had frequent reason to rue the choice he made in
Epictetus, if he expected his domestic philosopher to excuse his
misdeeds as Anaxarchus did those of Alexander on the occasion above
mentioned.

In the year 94 A. D. the emperor Domitian issued a decree expelling all
philosophers from Rome—an easily explainable proceeding on his part if
there were any large number of them who, in the words of Epictetus, were
able “to look tyrants steadily in the face.” Epictetus must have by this
time obtained his freedom and set up for himself as a professor of
philosophy, for we find him, in consequence of this decree, betaking
himself to Nicopolis, a city of Epirus. Here he lived and taught to a
venerable age, and here he delivered the discourses which Arrian has
reported for us. He lived with great simplicity, and is said to have had
no servant or other inmate of his house until he hired a nurse for an
infant which was about to be exposed, according to the practice of those
days when it was desired to check the inconvenient growth of a family,
and which Epictetus rescued and brought up. The date of his death is
unknown.

And now, reader, I will take my leave of you with Arrian’s farewell
salutation to Lucius Gellius, which, literally translated, is _Be
strong_. If you need it, I know no teacher better able to make or keep
you so than Epictetus. At any rate, to give him a fair chance of doing
what it is in him to do for English-speaking men and women is something
I have regarded as a sort of duty, a discharge of obligation for his
infinite service to myself; which done to the utmost of my powers, the
fewest forewords are the best.


  T. W. R.




FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 1: _The Encheiridion of Epictetus_, Translated into
    English by T. W. Rolleston. Kegan Paul, Trench, & Co., 1881.]

    [Footnote 2: Epicteti Dissertationum ab Arriano Digestarum Libri IV.
    et ex Deperditis Sermonibus Fragmenta. Post Io. Uptoni aliorumque
    curas, denuo ad Codicum M Storum fidem recensuit, Latina Versione,
    Adnotationibus, Indicibus illustravit Johannes Schweighäuser,
    Lipsiæ. MDCCXCIX.

    Epicteti Manuale et Cebetis Tabula Græce et Latine. Schw.
    MDCCXCVIII.

    There are two excellent English translations of the whole extant
    works of Epictetus—one by Mrs. Carter, published in the last
    century, the other by the late George Long, M. A. (Bohn Series), to
    both of which, but especially the latter, I desire to record my
    great obligations.]

    [Footnote 3: πάντα ῥεῖ, all flows—the cardinal doctrine of the
    Heracleitean philosophy.]

    [Footnote 4: An English translation of this work has lately
    appeared.]

    [Footnote 5: Ep. 120. 4. ff.]

    [Footnote 6: Gregory Nazianzen, commenting on this narrative,
    remarks that it only shows how manfully _unavoidable_ sufferings may
    be borne.]




CLEANTHES’ HYMN TO ZEUS.[1]


   Most glorious of the Immortals, many named, Almighty
     forever.

   Zeus, ruler of nature, that governest all things with
     law,

   Hail! for lawful it is that all mortals should address
     Thee.

   For we are Thy offspring, taking the image only of Thy
     voice,[2] as many mortal things as live and move upon the
     earth.

   Therefore will I hymn Thee, and sing Thy might forever.

   For Thee doth all this universe that circles round the
     earth obey, moving whithersoever Thou leadest, and is
     gladly swayed by Thee.

   Such a minister hast Thou in Thine invincible hands;—the
     two-edged, blazing, imperishable thunderbolt.

   For under its stroke all Nature shuddereth, and by it
     Thou guidest aright the Universal Reason, that roams
     through all things, mingling itself with the greater and
     the lesser lights, till it have grown so great, and
     become supreme king over all.

   Nor is aught done on the earth without Thee, O God, nor
     in the divine sphere of the heavens, nor in the sea,

   Save the works that evil men do in their folly—

   Yea, but Thou knowest even to find a place for
     superfluous things, and to order that which is
     disorderly, and things not dear to men are dear to Thee.

   Thus dost Thou harmonize into One all good and evil
     things, that there should be one everlasting Reason of
     them all.

   And this the evil among mortal men avoid and heed not;
     wretched, ever desiring to possess the good, yet they nor
     see nor hear the universal Law of God, which obeying with
     all their heart, their life would be well.

   But they rush graceless each to his own aim,

   Some cherishing lust for fame, the nurse of evil strife,

   Some bent on monstrous gain,

   Some turned to folly and the sweet works of the flesh,

   Hastening, indeed, to bring the very contrary of these
     things to pass.

   But Thou, O Zeus, the All-giver, Dweller in the darkness
     of cloud, Lord of thunder, save Thou men from their
     unhappy folly,

   Which do Thou, O Father, scatter from their souls; and
     give them to discover the wisdom, in whose assurance Thou
     governest all things with justice;

   So that being honored, they may pay Thee honor,

   Hymning Thy works continually, as it beseems a mortal
     man.

   Since there can be no greater glory for men or Gods than
     this,

   Duly to praise forever the Universal Law.


   NOTE:

   The bracketed numerals in the text refer throughout to the Notes at
   the end of the volume; each chapter having, where notes are necessary,
   its own chapter of Notes.


THE TEACHING OF EPICTETUS.




_BOOK I._


CHAPTER I.

THE BEGINNING OF PHILOSOPHY.


1. Wouldst thou be good, then first believe that thou art evil.

2. The beginning of philosophy, at least with those who lay hold of it
as they ought and enter by the door,[1] is the consciousness of their
own feebleness and incapacity in respect of necessary things.

3. For we come into the world having by nature no idea of a right-angled
triangle, or a quarter-tone, or a semi-tone, but by a certain tradition
of art we learn each of these things. And thus those who know them not,
do not suppose that they know them. But good and evil, and nobleness and
baseness, and the seemly and the unseemly, and happiness and
misfortune, and what is our concern and what is not, and what ought to
be done and what not—who hath come into the world without an implanted
notion of these things? Thus we all use these terms, and endeavor to fit
our natural conceptions to every several thing. _He did well, rightly,
not rightly, he failed, he succeeded, he is unrighteous, he is
righteous_—which of us spareth to use terms like these? Which of us
will defer the use of them till he hath learned them, even as ignorant
men do not use terms of geometry or music? But this is the reason of it:
we come into the world already, as it were, taught by Nature some things
in this kind, and setting out from these things we have added thereto
our own conceit.[2] _For how_, saith one, _do I not know what is noble
and what is base_? Have I not the notion of it? Truly. _And do I not
apply it to things severally?_ You do apply it. _Do I not, then, apply
it rightly?_ But here lies the whole question, and here conceit entereth
in. For setting out from things confessed by all, they go on by a false
application to that which is disputed. For if, in addition to those
things, they had gained also this power of application, what would then
hinder them to be perfect? But now since you think that you apply
rightly the natural conceptions to things severally, tell me, whence
have you this assurance?

——“Because it seems so to me.”

But to another it seems otherwise—and he, too, doth he think his
application right or not?

——“He doth think it.”

Can ye, then, both be rightly applying the conceptions in matters
wherein your opinions contradict each other?

——“We cannot.”

Have you, then, aught better to show for your application, or aught
above this, that it seemeth so to you? But what else doth a madman do
than those things that to him seem right? And doth this rule suffice for
him?

——“It doth not suffice.”

Come, then, to that which is above seeming. What is this?

4. Behold, the beginning of philosophy is the observation of how men
contradict each other, and the search whence cometh this contradiction,
and the censure and mistrust of bare opinion. And it is an inquiry into
that which seems, whether it rightly seems; and the discovery of a
certain rule, even as we have found a balance for weights, and a plumb
line for straight and crooked. This is the beginning of philosophy. Are
all things right to all to whom they seem so? But how can contradictory
things be right?

——“Nay, then, not all things, but those that seem to us right.”

And why to you more than the Syrians, or to the Egyptians? Why more
than to me or to any other man? Not at all more. Seeming, then, doth not
for every man answer to Being; for neither in weights or measures doth
the bare appearance content us, but for each case we have discovered
some rule. And here, then, is there no rule above seeming? And how could
it be that there were no evidence or discovery of things the most
necessary for men? There is, then, a rule. And wherefore do we not seek
it, and find it, and, having found it, henceforth use it without
transgression, and not so much as stretch forth a finger without it? For
this it is, I think, that when it is discovered cureth of their madness
those that mismeasure all things by seeming alone; so that henceforth,
setting out from things known and investigated, we may use an organized
body of natural conceptions in all our several dealings.

5. What is the subject about which we are inquiring? Pleasure? Submit it
to the rule, cast it into the scales. Now the Good must be a thing of
such sort that we ought to trust in it? _Truly._ And we ought to have
faith in it? _We ought._ And ought we to trust in anything which is
unstable? _Nay._ And hath pleasure any stability? _It hath not._ Take
it, then, and fling it out of the scales, and set it far away from the
place of the Good. But if you are dim of sight, and one balance doth not
suffice, then take another. Is it right to be elated in what is good?
_Yea._ And is it right to be elated then in the presence of a pleasure?
See to it that thou say not it is right; or I shall not hold thee worthy
even of the balance.[3] Thus are things judged and weighed, when the
rules are held in readiness. And the aim of philosophy is this, to
examine and establish the rules. And to use them when they are known is
the task of a wise and good man.




