CHAPTER II

ON HABIT.


1. Every skill and faculty is maintained and increased by the
corresponding acts; as, the faculty of walking by walking, of running by
running. If you will read aloud well, then do it constantly; if you will
write, then write. But when you have not read aloud for thirty days
together, but done something else, you shall see the result. Thus, if
you have lain down for ten days, then rise up and endeavor to walk a
good distance, and you shall see how your legs are enfeebled. In
general, then, if you would make yourself skilled in anything, then do
it; and if you would refrain from anything, then do it not, but use
yourself to do rather some other thing instead of it.

2. And thus it is in spiritual things also. When thou art wrathful, know
that not this single evil hath happened to thee, but that thou hast
increased the aptness to it, and, as it were, poured oil upon the fire.
When thou art overcome in passion, think not that this defeat is all;
but thou hast nourished thine incontinence, and increased it. For it is
impossible but that aptitudes and faculties should spring up where they
were not before, or spread and grow mightier, by the corresponding acts.
And thus, surely, do also, as the philosopher says, the infirmities of
the soul grow up. For when thou hast once been covetous of money, if
Reason, which leadeth to a sense of the vice, be called to aid, then
both the desire is set at rest, and our ruling faculty is
re-established, as it was in the beginning. But if thou bring no remedy
to aid, then shall the soul return no more to the first estate; but when
next excited by the corresponding appearance, shall be kindled to desire
even more quickly than before. And when this is continually happening,
the soul becomes callous in the end, and through its infirmity the love
of money is strengthened. For he that hath had a fever, when the illness
hath left him, is not what he was before his fever, unless he have been
entirely healed. And somewhat on this wise also it happens in the
affection of the soul: certain traces and scars are left in it, the
which if a man do not wholly eradicate, when he hath been again scoured
on the same place, it shall make no longer scars, but sores.

3. Wouldst thou, then, be no longer of a wrathful temper? Then do not
nourish the aptness to it, give it nothing that will increase it, be
tranquil from the outset, and number the days when thou hast not been
wrathful. _I have not been wrathful now for one, nor for two, nor for
three days_; but if thou have saved thirty days, then sacrifice to God.
For the aptness is at first enfeebled, and then destroyed. _To-day I was
not vexed, nor to-morrow, nor for two or three months together; but I
was heedful when anything happened to move me thus._ Know that thou art
in good case. To-day, when I saw a fair woman, I did not say to myself,
_Would that one could possess her_; nor, _Happy is her husband_, for he
who saith this saith also, _Happy is her paramour_; nor do I picture to
my mind what should follow. But I stroke my head, and say, _Well done,
Epictetus! you have solved a fine sophism, finer by far than the master
sophism_. But if she were also willing and consenting, and sent to me,
and if she also laid hold of me, and drew near to me, and I should yet
restrain myself and conquer, this were indeed then a sophism above the
Liar, above the Quiescent. Verily, for this a man’s spirit may rightly
swell, and not for propounding the master sophism.[1]

4. How, then, may this come to pass? Resolve at last to seek thine own
commendation, to appear fair in the eyes of God; desire to become pure
with thine own pure self, and with God. Then when thou shalt fall in
with any appearance such as we have spoken of, what saith Plato? _Go to
the purifying sacrifices, go and pray in the temples of the
protecting Gods_.[2] It shall even suffice if thou seek the company of
good and wise men, and try thyself by one of them, whether he be one of
the living or of the dead.

5. By opposing these remedies thou shalt conquer the appearance, nor be
led captive by it. But at the outset, be not swept away by the vehemence
of it; but say, _Await me a little, thou appearance; let me see what
thou art, and with what thou hast to do; let me approve thee_. And then
permit it not to lead thee forward, and to picture to thee what should
follow, else it shall take possession of thee, and carry thee
whithersoever it will. But rather bring in against it some other fair
and noble appearance, and therewithal cast out this vile one. And if
thou use to exercise thyself in this way, thou shalt see what shoulders
and nerves and sinews thou wilt have! But now we have only wordiness,
and nothing more.

6. This is the true athlete,[3] he who exerciseth himself against such
appearances. Hold, unhappy man! be not swept away. Great is the contest,
divine the task, for kingship, for freedom, for prosperity, for
tranquillity. Be mindful of God, call Him to be thy helper and defender,
as men at sea call upon the Dioscuri in a storm.[4] For what greater
tempest is there than that which proceedeth from appearances, that
mightily overcome and expel the Reason? Yea, a storm itself, what is it
but an appearance? For, take away only the dread of death, and bring as
many thunderings and lightnings as thou wilt, and thou shalt see what
fair weather and calm there will be in the ruling faculty. But if having
been once defeated, thou shalt say, _The next time I will conquer_; and
then the same thing over again, be sure that in the end thou wilt be
brought to such a sorry and feeble state that henceforth thou wilt not
so much as know that thou art sinning; but thou wilt begin to make
excuses for the thing, and then confirm that saying of Hesiod to be
true:—

  “With ills unending strives the putter off.”
                             —_Works and Days_, 411.

7. What then? can a man make this resolve, and so stand up faultless? He
cannot; but this much he can—to be ever straining towards
faultlessness. For happy it were if, by never relaxing this industrious
heed, we shall rid ourselves of at least a few of our faults. But now,
when thou sayest, _From to-morrow I shall be heedful_, know that this is
what thou art saying:—_To-day I shall be shameless, importunate,
abject; it shall be in others’ power to afflict me; to-day I shall be
wrathful, envious_. Lo, to how many vices dost thou give place! But if
aught be well to-morrow, how much better to-day? if to-morrow suit, how
much better to-day? Yea, and for this, too, that thou mayest have the
power to-morrow, and not again put it off till the third day.




