CHAPTER VII.

THAT EACH MAN PLAY HIS OWN PART.


1. If thou hast assumed a part beyond thy power to play, then thou hast
both come to shame in that, and missed one thou couldst have well
performed.

2. And some one having inquired, _How then, shall each of us perceive
what character he befits?_ Whence, said Epictetus, doth the bull alone,
when the lion approacheth, discover his own capacity, and advance to
defend the whole herd? It is clear that with the capacity is ever joined
the perception of the same, and thus, whoever of us may possess a like
capacity will not be ignorant of it. But a bull is not made in a moment,
nor is a man of generous spirit; but we must have preparation and
winter-training,[1] and not lightly rush upon things that do not concern
us.




CHAPTER VIII.

THAT WE SHOULD BE CAREFUL OF THE SOUL AS OF THE BODY.


In going about, you are careful not to step upon a nail or to twist your
foot. Care thus also lest you injure your ruling faculty. And if we
observe this in each thing we do, we shall the more safely undertake it.




CHAPTER IX.

THE MEASURE OF GAIN.


The measure of gain for each man is the body, as the foot is for the
shoe. Take your stand on this, and you shall preserve the measure. But
if you transgress it, you must thenceforth be borne, as it were, down a
steep. And so it is with the shoe, for if you will go beyond the measure
of the foot, the shoe will be first gilded, then dyed purple, then
embroidered. For that which hath once transgressed its measure hath no
longer any limit.




CHAPTER X.

THE WORTH OF WOMEN.


From the age of fourteen years women are flattered and worshiped by
men. Seeing thus that there is nothing else for them but to serve the
pleasure of men, they begin to beautify themselves, and to place all
their hopes in this. It were well, then, that they should perceive
themselves to be prized for nothing else than modesty and decorum.




CHAPTER XI.

A DULL NATURE.


It betokens a dull nature to be greatly occupied in matters that concern
the body, as to be much concerned about exercising one’s self, or
eating, or drinking, or other bodily acts. But these things should be
done by the way, and all attention be given to the mind.




CHAPTER XII.

OF ADORNMENT OF THE PERSON.


1. A certain young man, a rhetorician, having come to Epictetus with his
hair dressed in an unusually elaborate way, and his other attire much
adorned, Tell me, said Epictetus, think you not that some dogs are
beautiful, and some horses, and so of the other animals?

——“I do think it,” said he.

And men too—are not some beautiful and some ill-favored?

——“How otherwise?”

Whether, then, do we call each of these beautiful for the same reasons
and in the same kind, or each for something proper to itself? And you
shall see the matter thus: Inasmuch as we observe a dog to be formed by
nature for one end, and a horse for another, and, let us say, a
nightingale for another, we may in general say, not unreasonably, that
each of them is then beautiful when it is excellent according to its own
nature; but since the nature of each is different, different also, it
seems to me, is the manner of being beautiful in each. Is it not so?

He acknowledged that it was.

Therefore, that which maketh a dog beautiful maketh a horse ill-favored;
and that which maketh a horse beautiful, a dog ill-favored; if, indeed,
their natures are different?

——“So it seems.”

And that which maketh a beautiful Pancratiast,[1] the same maketh a
wrestler not good, and a runner utterly laughable? And he who is
beautiful for the Pentathlon is very bad for wrestling?

——“It is so,” he said.

What is it, then, that makes a man beautiful? Is it not that which, in
its kind, makes also a dog or a horse beautiful?

——“It is that,” he answered.

What, then, makes a dog beautiful? The presence of the virtue of a dog.
And a horse? The presence of the virtue of a horse. And what, then, a
man? Is it not also the presence of the virtue of a man? And, O youth,
if thou wouldst be beautiful, do thou labor to perfect this, the virtue
of a human being. But what is it? Look whom you praise when you praise
any without affection—is it the righteous or the unrighteous?

——“The righteous.”

Is it the temperate or the profligate?

——“The temperate.”

Is it the continent or the incontinent?

——“The continent.”

Then making yourself such a one as you praise, you will know that you
are making yourself beautiful; but so long as you neglect these things,
though you sought out every device to appear beautiful, you must of
necessity be ugly.

2. For thou art not flesh and hair, but a Will: if thou keep this
beautiful, then wilt thou be beautiful. But so far I dare not tell thee
that thou art ugly, for I think thou wilt more easily bear to hear
anything else than this. But see what Socrates saith to Alcibiades, the
most beautiful and blooming of men: _Endeavor, then, to be beautiful_;
and what saith he? _Curl thy locks, and pluck out the hairs of thy
legs?_ God forbid. But _Set thy Will in order, cast out evil doctrines_.

——“And how then shall we deal with the body?”

As nature made it. Another hath cared for this; commit it to Him.

——“But what? Shall the body then be uncleansed?”

God forbid. But that which thou art and wast made by Nature, cleanse
this; let a man be clean as a man, a woman as a woman, a child as a
child.

3. For we ought not even by the aspect of the body to scare away the
multitude from philosophy; but by his body, as in all other things, a
philosopher should show himself cheerful, and free from troubles.
_Behold, friends, how I have nothing and need nothing; behold how I am
homeless and landless, and an exile_, if so it chance, _and hearthless,
and yet I live more free from troubles than all the lordly and the rich.
But look on my body, too; ye see that it is not the worse for my hard
life._ But if one saith this to me, having the countenance and garb of a
condemned criminal, what God shall persuade me to approach to philosophy
which makes such men as this? God forbid! I would not, were it even to
become a sage.

4. I, indeed, by the Gods, had rather a young man in his first movement
towards philosophy came to me with his hair curled than disheveled and
foul. For a certain impression of the beautiful is to be seen in him,
and an aim at what is becoming; and to the thing wherein it seemeth to
him to lie, there he applies his art. Thenceforth it only needs to show
him its true place, and to say, _Young man, thou seekest the beautiful,
and thou dost well. Know, then, that it flourishes there where thy
Reason is; there seek it where are thy likes and dislikes, thy pursuits
and avoidances, for this is what thou hast in thyself of choice and
precious, but the body is by nature mud. Why dost thou spend thy labor
upon it in vain? for that the body is naught, Time shall certainly teach
thee, though it teach thee nothing else._ But if one come to me foul and
filthy, and a mustache down to the knees, what have I to say to him?
with what image or likeness can I draw him on? For with what that is
like unto Beauty hath he ever busied himself, so as I may set him on
another course, and say, _Not here is Beauty, but there_? Will you have
me tell him, _Beauty consists not in being befouled, but in the Reason_?
For doth he even seek Beauty? hath he any impression of it in his mind?
Go, and reason with a hog, that he shall not roll himself in the mud.

5. Behold a youth worthy of love—behold an old man worthy to love, and
to be loved in return; to whom one may commit his sons, his daughters,
to be taught; to whom young men may come, if it please you—that he may
deliver lectures to them on a dunghill! God forbid. Every extravagance
arises from something in human nature, but this is near to being one
that is not human.




