CHAPTER I.

ON GENUINE AND BORROWED BELIEFS.


1. The master-argument seems to start from propositions such as
these:[1] There being a mutual contradiction among these three
propositions—(1) “Every past event is necessarily true,” and (2) “An
impossibility cannot follow a possibility,” and (3) “Things are possible
which neither are nor will be true,” Diodorus, perceiving this
contradiction, made use of the force of the first two in order to prove
that nothing is possible which neither is nor will be true. And, again,
one will hold these two, (3) that a thing is possible which neither is
nor will be true, and (2) that an impossibility cannot follow from a
possibility; but by no means that every past thing is necessarily true,
and thus those of the school of Cleanthes appear to think, whom
Antipater strongly defended. But some hold the other two, (3) that a
thing is possible that neither is nor will be true, and (1) that every
past event is necessarily true; but maintain that an impossibility may
follow from a possibility. But all three it is impossible to hold at
once, because of their mutual contradiction.

2. Now, if any one inquire of me, _And which of these dost thou hold?_
I shall answer him that I do not know, but I have received this account,
that Diodorus holds certain of them, and I think the followers of
Panthoides and Cleanthes certain others, and those of Chrysippus yet
others. _And thyself?_ Nay, it is no affair of mine to try my own
thoughts, and to compare and estimate statements, and to form some
opinion of my own upon the matter.[2] And thus I differ no whit from the
grammarians. Who was Hector’s father? _Priam._ And his brothers?
_Alexander and Deiphobus._ And their mother, who was she? _Hecuba. That
is the account I have received._ From whom? _From Homer; and I think
Hellanicus has written of them, and maybe others too._ And I; what
better have I to say about the master-argument? But if I am a vain man,
and especially at a banquet, I shall amaze all the company by recounting
those who have written on it;—for Chrysippus wrote on it wonderfully in
his first book “On Possibilities;” and Cleanthes wrote a separate
treatise on it, and so did Archedemus. And Antipater wrote too, not only
in his book “On Possibilities,” but also separately in those on the
master-argument. Have you not read the work? No! Then read it. And what
good will it do him to read it? He will become yet more of a babbler and
a nuisance than he is now, for what else hath the reading of it done for
you? What opinion have you formed for yourself on the matter? Nay, but
you will tell us all about Helen, and Priam, and the island of Calypso,
that never existed, nor ever will.

3. And in Homer, indeed, it is no great matter if you have simply
mastered the account, and formed no opinion of your own. But in ethics
this is even much more often the case than in other matters. Tell me
concerning good and evil things! Listen to him, then, with his—

  “Me to Ciconia brought the wind from Troy.”
                                 —_Od._ ix, 39.

_Of things some are good, some evil, and some indifferent. Now the good
things are the virtues, and those that have the nature of virtue, and
the evil things the vices, and those that have the nature of vice; and
the indifferent things are between these, as wealth, health, life,
death, pleasure, affliction._ And how do you know this? Because
Hellanicus affirms it in his history of the Egyptians; for as well say
this as that Diogenes has it in his Ethics, or Chrysippus, or Cleanthes.
But have you tested any of their sayings, and formed an opinion for
yourself? Show me how you are wont to bear a storm at sea. Do you
remember the difference between good and evil when the sail clatters,
and some vexatious man comes to you as you are shrieking, and says—

——“Tell me, by the Gods, what you were lately saying, Is it any vice
to be shipwrecked? Hath it anything of the nature of vice?”

Would you not lay hold of a stick and shake it in his face: _Let us
alone, man; we are perishing, and you come to mock us!_ And do you
remember the difference if you are accused of something and Cæsar sends
for you? If one should come to you when you enter, pale and trembling,
and should say, “Why do you tremble, man? what is your business
concerned with? Doth Cæsar there within dispense virtue and vice to
those who go in to him? _Why_, you will say; _must you too mock me in my
calamities?_

——“Nevertheless, tell me, O Philosopher, why you tremble—is it not
merely death that you are in danger of, or imprisonment, or bodily
suffering, or exile, or disgrace? What else? Is it any vice? or anything
of the nature of vice?”

And you will reply somewhat to this effect: _Let me alone, man; my own
evils are enough for me._

And truly you say well, for your own evils are enough for you; which are
meanness, cowardice, and your false pretenses when you sat in the school
of philosophy. Why did you deck yourself in others’ glory? Why did you
call yourself a Stoic?

4. Watch yourselves thus in the things that ye do, and ye shall see of
what school ye are. And the most of you will be found Epicureans, but
some few Peripatetics,[4] and those but slack. For where is the proof
that ye hold virtue equal to all other things, or indeed superior? Show
me a Stoic, if ye have one. Where or how can ye? But persons that repeat
the phrases of Stoicism, of these ye can show us any number. And do they
repeat those of the Epicureans any worse? and are they not equally
accurate in the Peripatetic? Who is, then, a Stoic? As we say that a
statue is Pheidian which is wrought according to the art of Pheidias,
show me a man that is wrought according to the opinions he utters! Show
me one that is sick and yet prosperous, in peril and prosperous, dying
and prosperous, in exile and prosperous, in evil repute and prosperous.
Show him to me! by the Gods! fain would I see a Stoic! And have ye none
that is fully wrought out; then show me at least one that is in hand to
be wrought—one that even leaneth towards these things. Do me this
favor—grudge not an old man a sight that I have never seen yet. Think
ye that I would have you show me the Zeus of Pheidias or the Athene—a
work all ivory and gold? Nay; but let one show me a man’s soul that
longs to be like-minded with God, and to blame neither Gods nor men, and
not to fail in any effort or avoidance, and not to be wrathful nor
envious, nor jealous, but—for why should I make rounds to say it?—that
desires to become a God from a man, and in this body of ours, this
corpse, is mindful of his fellowship with Zeus. Show me that man. But ye
cannot! Why, then, will ye mock yourselves and cheat others? Why wrap
yourselves in others’ garb, and go about, like thieves that steal
clothes from the bath, with names and things that in nowise belong to
you?

5. And now I am your teacher and ye are being taught by me. And I have
this aim—to perfect you, that ye be unhindered, uncompelled,
unembarrassed, free, prosperous, happy, looking unto God alone in all
things great and small. And ye are here to learn these things, and to do
them. And wherefore do ye not finish the work, if ye have indeed such an
aim as behooves you, and if I, besides the aim, have such ability as
behooves me? What is here lacking? When I see a carpenter, and the wood
lying beside him, I look for some work. And now, here is the carpenter,
here is the wood—what is yet lacking? Is the thing such as cannot be
taught? It can. Is it, then, not in our power? Yea, this alone of all
things is. Wealth is not in our power, nor health, nor repute, nor any
other thing, save only the right use of appearances. This alone is by
nature unhindered; this alone is unembarrassed. Wherefore, then, will ye
not make an end? Tell me the reason. For either the fault lies in me, or
in you, or in the nature of the thing. But the thing itself is possible,
and indeed the only thing that is in our power. It remains that I am to
blame, or else ye are; or, to speak more truly, both of us. What will
ye, then? Let us at length begin to entertain such a purpose among us,
and let the past be past. Only let us make a beginning: trust in me, and
ye shall see.




