CHAPTER VII.

TO THE LEARNER.


1. Remember that pursuit declares the aim of attaining the thing
pursued, and avoidance that of not falling into the thing shunned; and
he who fails in his pursuit is unfortunate, and it is misfortune to fall
into what he would avoid. If now you shun only those things in your
power which are contrary to Nature, you shall never fall into what you
would avoid. But if you shun disease or death or poverty, you shall have
misfortune.

2. Turn away, then, your avoidance from things not in our power, and
set it upon things contrary to Nature which are in our power. And let
pursuit for the present be utterly effaced; for if you are pursuing
something that is not in our power, it must needs be that you miscarry,
and of things that are, as many as you may rightly aim at, none are yet
open to you. But use only desire and aversion, and that indeed lightly,
and with reserve, and indifferently.

3. No great thing cometh suddenly into being, for not even a bunch of
grapes can, or a fig. If you say to me now:_ I desire a fig_, I answer
that there is need of time: let it first of all flower, and then bring
forth the fruit, and then ripen. When the fruit of a fig-tree is not
perfected at once, and in a single hour, would you win the fruit of a
man’s mind thus quickly and easily? Even if I say to you, expect it not.

4. To fulfill the promise of a man’s nature is itself no common thing.
For what is a man? _A living creature_, say you; _mortal, and endowed
with Reason_. And from what are we set apart by Reason? _From the wild
beasts._ And what others? _From sheep and the like._ Look to it, then,
that thou do nothing like a wild beast, for if thou do, the man in thee
perisheth, thou hast not fulfilled his promise. Look to it, that thou do
nothing like a sheep, or thus too the man hath perished. _What, then,
can we do as sheep?_ When we are gluttonous, sensual, reckless, filthy,
thoughtless, to what are we then sunken? To sheep. What have we lost?
Our faculty of Reason. And when we are contentious, and hurtful, and
angry, and violent, to what are we sunken? To wild beasts. And for the
rest some of us are great wild beasts, and some of us little and evil
ones; whereby we may say, “Let me at least be eaten by a lion.”[1] But
through all these things the promise of the man’s nature has been
ruined.

5. For when is a complex proposition safe?[2] When it fulfills its
promise. So that the validity of a complex proposition is when it is a
complex of truths. And when is a disjunctive safe? When it fulfills its
promise. And when are flutes, or a lyre, or a horse, or a dog? What
marvel is it, then, if a man also is to be saved in the same way, and
perish in the same way?

6. But each thing is increased and saved by the corresponding works—the
carpenter by the practice of carpentry, the grammarian by the study of
grammar; but if he use to write ungrammatically, it must needs be that
his art shall be corrupted and destroyed. Thus, too, the works of
reverence save the reverent man, and those of shamelessness destroy him.
And works of faithfulness save the faithful man, and the contrary
destroy him. And men of the contrary character are strengthened therein
by contrary deeds; the irreverent by irreverence, the faithless by
faithlessness, the reviler by reviling, the angry by anger, the
avaricious by unfair giving and taking.

7. Know, that not easily shall a conviction arise in a man unless he
every day speak the same things and hear the same things, and at the
same time apply them unto life.

8. Every great power is perilous to beginners. Thou must bear such
things according to thy strength. _But I must live according to Nature?_
That is not for a sick man.[3] Lead thy life as a sick man for a while,
so that thou mayest hereafter live it as a whole man. Fast, drink water,
abstain for a while from pursuit of every kind, in order that thou
mayest pursue as Reason bids. And if as Reason bids, then when thou
shalt have aught of good in thee, thy pursuit shall be well. _Nay, but
we would live as sages and do good to men._ What good? What wilt thou
do? Hast thou done good to thyself? But thou wouldst exhort them? And
hast thou exhorted thyself?[4] Thou wouldst do them good—then do not
chatter to them, but show them in thyself what manner of men philosophy
can make. In thy eating do good to those that eat with thee, in thy
drinking to those that drink, by yielding and giving place to all, and
bearing with them. Thus do them good, and not by spitting thy bile upon
them.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE CYNIC.


1. One of his pupils, who seemed to be drawn towards the way of
Cynicism, inquired of Epictetus what manner of man the Cynic ought to
be, and what was the natural conception of the thing. And Epictetus
said: Let us look into it at leisure. But so much I have now to say to
you, that whosoever shall without God attempt so great a matter stirreth
up the wrath of God against him, and desireth only to behave himself
unseemly before the people. For in no well-ordered house doth one come
in and say to himself: _I should be the steward of the house_, else,
when the lord of the house shall have observed it, and seeth him
insolently giving orders, he will drag him forth and chastise him. So it
is also, in this great city of the universe, for here too there is a
master of the house who ordereth each and all: Thou art the Sun; thy
power is to travel round and to make the year and the seasons, and to
increase and nourish fruits, and to stir the winds and still them, and
temperately to warm the bodies of men. Go forth, run thy course, and
minister thus to the greatest things and to the least. Thou art a calf;
when a lion shall appear, do what befits thee, or it shall be worse for
thee. Thou art a bull; come forth and fight, for this is thy part and
pride, and this thou canst. Thou art able to lead the army against
Ilion; be Agamemnon. Thou canst fight in single combat with Hector; be
Achilles. But if Thersites came forth and pretended to the authority,
then either he would not gain it, or, gaining it, he would have been
shamed before many witnesses.

2. And about this affair, do thou take thought upon it earnestly, for it
is not such as it seemeth to thee. _I wear a rough cloak now, and I
shall wear it then;[2] I sleep hard now, and I shall sleep so then. I
will take to myself a wallet and staff, and I will begin to go about and
beg, and to reprove every one I meet with; and if I shall see one that
plucks out his hairs, I will censure him, or one that hath his hair
curled, or that goes in purple raiment._ If thou conceivest the matter
on this wise, far be it from thee—go not near it, it is not for thee.
But if thou conceivest of it as it is, and holdest thyself not unworthy
of it, then behold to how great an enterprise thou art putting forth
thine hand.

3. First, in things that concern thyself, thou must appear in nothing
like unto what thou now doest. Thou must not accuse God nor man; thou
must utterly give over pursuit, and avoid only those things that are in
the power of thy will; anger is not meet for thee, nor resentment, nor
envy, nor pity;[3] nor must a girl appear to thee fair, nor must
reputation, nor a flat cake.[4] For it must be understood that other men
shelter themselves by walls and houses and by darkness when they do such
things, and many means of concealment have they. One shutteth the door,
placeth some one before the chamber; _if any one should come, say, He is
out, he is busy_. But in place of all these things it behooves the Cynic
to shelter himself behind his own piety and reverence; but if he doth
not, he shall be put to shame, naked under the sky. This is his house,
this his door, this the guards of his chamber, this his darkness. For he
must not seek to hide aught that he doeth, else he is gone, the Cynic
hath perished, the man who lived under the open sky, the freeman. He
hath begun to fear something from without, he hath begun to need
concealment; nor can he find it when he would, for where shall he hide
himself, and how? And if by chance this tutor, this public teacher,
should be found in guilt, what things must he not suffer! And fearing
these things, can he yet take heart with his whole soul to guide the
rest of mankind? That can he never: it is impossible!

4. First, then, thou must purify thy ruling faculty and this vocation
of thine also, saying: Now it is my mind I must shape, as the carpenter
shapes wood and the shoemaker leather; and the thing to be formed is a
right use of appearances. But nothing to me is the body, and nothing to
me the parts of it. _Death?_ Let it come when it will, either death of
the whole or of a part. _Flee it!_ And whither? Can any man cast me out
of the universe? He cannot; but whithersoever I may go there will be the
sun, and the moon, and there the stars, and visions, and omens, and
communion with the Gods.[5]

5. And, furthermore, when he hath thus fashioned himself, he will not be
content with these things, who is a Cynic indeed. But know that he is an
herald from God to men, declaring to them the truth about good and evil
things; that they have erred, and are seeking the reality of good and
evil where it is not; and where it is, they do not consider; and he is a
spy, like Diogenes, when he was led captive to Philip after the battle
of Chæronea.[6] For the Cynic is, in truth, a spy of the things that are
friendly to men, and that are hostile; and having closely spied out all,
he must come back and declare the truth. And he must neither be stricken
with terror and report of enemies where none are; nor be in any
otherwise confounded or troubled by the appearances.

6. He must then be able, if so it chance, to go up impassioned, as on
the tragic stage, and speak that word of Socrates, “O men, whither are
ye borne away? What do ye? Miserable as ye are! like blind men ye wander
up and down. Ye have left the true road, and are going by a false; ye
are seeking peace and happiness where they are not, and if another shall
show you where they are, ye believe him not. Wherefore will ye seek it
in outward things? _In the body?_ It is not there—and if ye believe me
not, lo, Myro! lo, Ophellius.[7] _In possessions?_ It is not there, and
if ye believe me not, lo, Crœsus! lo, the wealthy of our own day, how
full of mourning is their life! _In authority?_ It is not there, else
should those be happy who have been twice or thrice consul; yet they are
not. Whom shall we believe in this matter? You, who look but on these
men from without, and are dazzled by the appearance, or the men
themselves? And what say they? Hearken to them when they lament, when
they groan, when by reason of those consulships, and their glory and
renown, they hold their state the more full of misery and danger! _In
royalty?_ It is not there; else were Nero happy and Sardanapalus; but
not Agamemnon himself was happy, more splendid though he was than Nero
or Sardanapalus; but while the rest are snoring what is he doing?

  “He tore his rooted hair by handfuls out.”—_Il._ x.

And what saith himself? “I am distraught,” he saith, “and I am in
anguish; my heart leaps forth from my bosom.”—[_Il._ x.] Miserable man!
which of thy concerns hath gone wrong with thee? Thy wealth? Nay. Thy
body? Nay; but thou art rich in gold and bronze. What ails thee then?
That part, whatever it be, with which we pursue, with which we avoid,
with which we desire and dislike, thou hast neglected and corrupted. How
hath it been neglected? He hath been ignorant of the true Good for which
it was born, and of the Evil; and of what is his own, and what is alien
to him. And when it goeth ill with something that is alien to him, he
saith, _Woe is me, for the Greeks are in peril._ O unhappy mind of thee!
of all things alone neglected and untended. _They will be slain by the
Trojans and die!_ And if the Trojans slay them not, will they not still
die? _Yea, but not all together._ What, then, doth it matter? for if it
be an evil to die, it is alike evil to die together or to die one by
one. Shall anything else happen to them than the parting of body and
soul? _Nothing._ And when the Greeks have perished, is the door closed
to thee? canst thou not also die? _I can._ Wherefore, then, dost thou
lament: _Woe is me, a king, and bearing the scepter of Zeus_? There is
no unfortunate king, as there is no unfortunate God. What, then, art
thou? In very truth a shepherd; for thou lamentest even as shepherds do
when a wolf hath snatched away one of the sheep; and sheep are they whom
thou dost rule. And why art thou come hither? Was thy faculty of pursuit
in any peril, or of avoidance, or thy desire or aversion? _Nay_, he
saith, _but my brother’s wife was carried away_. Was it not a great gain
to be rid of an adulterous wife? _Shall we be, then, despised of the
Trojans?_ Of the Trojan? Of what manner of men? of wise men or fools? If
of wise men, why do ye make war with them? if of fools, why do ye heed
them?[8]

7. _In what, then, is the good, seeing that in these things it is not?
Tell us, thou, my lord missionary and spy!_ It is there where ye deem it
not, and where ye have no desire to seek it. For did ye desire, ye would
have found it in yourselves, nor would ye wander to things without, nor
pursue things alien, as if they were your own concerns. Turn to your own
selves; understand the natural conceptions which ye possess. What kind
of thing do ye take the Good to be? Peace? happiness? freedom? Come,
then, do ye not naturally conceive it as great, as precious, and that
cannot be harmed? What kind of material, then, will ye take to shape
peace and freedom withal—that which is enslaved or in that which is
free? _That which is free._ Have ye the flesh enslaved or free? _We know
not._ Know ye not that it is the slave of fever, of gout, of ophthalmia,
of dysentery, of tyranny, and fire, and steel, and everything that is
mightier than itself? _Yea, it is enslaved._ How, then, can aught that
is of the body be free? and how can that be great or precious which by
nature is dead, mere earth or mud?

8. What then? have ye nothing that is free? _It may be nothing._ And who
can compel you to assent to an appearance that is false? _No man._ And
who can compel you not to assent to an appearance that is true? _No
man._ Here, then, ye see that there is in you something that is by
nature free. But which of you, except he lay hold of some appearance of
the profitable, or of the becoming, can either pursue or avoid, or
desire or dislike, or adapt or intend anything? _No man._ In these
things, too, then, ye have something that is unhindered and free. This,
miserable men, must ye perfect; this have a care to, in this seek for
the Good.

9. _And how is it possible that one can live prosperously who hath
nothing; a naked, homeless, hearthless, beggarly man, without servants,
without a country?_ Lo, God hath sent you a man to show you in very deed
that it is possible. Behold me, that I have neither country, nor house,
nor possessions, nor servants; I sleep on the ground; nor is a wife
mine, nor children, nor domicile, but only earth and heaven, and a
single cloak. And what is lacking to me? do ever I grieve? do I fear? am
I not free? When did any of you see me fail of my pursuit, or meet with
what I had avoided? When did I blame God or man? When did I accuse any
man? When did any of you see me of a sullen countenance? How do I meet
those whom ye fear and marvel at? Do I not treat them as my slaves? Who
that seeth me, but thinketh he beholdeth his king and his lord?

10. So these are the accents of the Cynic, this his character, this his
design. Not so—but it is his bag, and his staff, and his great jaws;
and to devour all that is given to him, or store it up, or to reprove
out of season every one that he may meet, or to show off his
shoulder.[9]

11. Dost thou see how thou art about to take in hand so great a matter?
Take first a mirror, look upon thy shoulders, mark well thy loins and
thighs. Thou art about to enter thy name for the Olympic games, O man;
no cold and paltry contest. Nor canst thou then be merely overcome and
then depart; but first thou must be shamed in the sight of all the
world; and not alone of the Athenians, or Lacedæmonians, or
Nicopolitans. And then if thou hast too rashly entered upon the contest
thou must be thrashed, and before being thrashed must suffer thirst and
scorching heat, and swallow much dust.

12. Consider more closely, know thyself, question thy genius,[10]
attempt nothing without God; who, if He counsel thee, be sure that He
wills thee either to be great or to be greatly plagued. For this very
agreeable circumstance is linked with the calling of a Cynic; he must be
flogged like an ass, and, being flogged, must love those who flog him,
as though he were the father or brother of all mankind. Not so, but if
one shall flog thee, stand in the midst and shriek out, _O Cæsar, what
things do I suffer in the Emperor’s peace! Let us take him before the
pro-consul._ But what is Cæsar to the Cynic? or what is a pro-consul? or
what is any other than He that hath sent him hither, and whom he
serveth, which is Zeus? Doth he call upon any other than God? Is he not
persuaded, whatsoever things he may suffer, that he is being trained and
exercised by God? Hercules, when he was exercised by Eurystheus, never
deemed himself wretched; but fulfilled courageously all that was laid
upon him. But he who shall cry out and bear it hard when he is being
trained and exercised by Zeus, is he worthy to bear the scepter of
Diogenes? Hear what Diogenes saith, when ill of a fever, to the
bystanders: _Base souls, will ye not remain? To see the overthrow and
combat of athletes, how great a way ye journey to Olympia; and have ye
no will to see a combat between a fever and a man?_ And will such an one
presently accuse God who hath sent him, as having used him ill—he who
was glorying in his lot, and held himself worthy to be a spectacle to
the bystanders? For of what shall he accuse Him: that his life is
seemly, that he manifests God’s will, that he showeth forth his virtue
more brightly? Come, then; and what saith he about death, about pain?
How did he compare his own happiness with that of the Great King? nay,
he thought rather that there was no comparison. For where there are
confusions, and griefs, and fears, and unattained pursuits, and
avoidance in vain, and envy and rivalry, can the way to happiness lie
there? But where rotten opinions are there must of necessity be all
these things.

13. And the young man having asked whether one that hath fallen ill
shall obey, if a friend desire that he will go home with him and be
tended: Where, he said, will you show me the friend of a Cynic? For he
himself must be even such another, so as to be worthy to be reckoned his
friend. A sharer in the scepter and the royalty must he be, and a worthy
servant, if he will be worthy of his friendship, as Diogenes was of
Antisthenes and Crates of Diogenes. Or seems it so to thee that
whosoever shall come to him and bid him hail is his friend? and that he
will think him worthy that a Cynic shall go to his house? Thus if it
please thee to be a Cynic, bethink thee rather of such a thing as this,
and cast about for a dainty dungheap whereon to have thy fever; and see
that it look away from the north, so that thou be not chilled. But thou
seemest to me to wish to retreat into somebody’s house and spend thy
time there, and be fed. What hast thou to do with undertaking so great a
matter?

14. _But marriage_, said he, _and the begetting of children,—are these
to be received by the Cynic among his chief purposes?_

Give me, said Epictetus, a city of wise men, and perhaps no one will
easily come to the Cynic way: for whose sake should he embrace it?
However, if we do suppose such a thing, there is nothing to hinder his
marrying and begetting children; for his wife will be even such another,
and his father-in-law such another, and thus will his children be
brought up. But things being as they now are, as it were in order of
battle, must not the Cynic be given wholly and undistracted to the
service of God, being able to go about among men, and not bound to
private duties, nor entangled in ties which, if he transgress, he can no
longer preserve the aspect of honesty and goodness; and if he obey them,
he hath lost that of the missionary, the spy, the herald of the Gods?
For see! he must needs observe a certain conduct towards his
father-in-law, and he hath somewhat to render also to the rest of his
wife’s kin and to his wife herself. And for the rest, he is shut off
from Cynicism by the care for sickness, or means of livelihood. For one
thing alone, he must have a vessel for warming water for his little
child, where he may wash it in the bath; and wool for his wife when she
has been delivered, and oil, and a couch, and a drinking cup—already a
number of utensils—and other affairs and distractions. Where shall I
thenceforth find that king, whose business is the common weal?

  “Warden of men, and with so many cares.”
                                _Il._ ii. 25.

on whom it lies to oversee all men, the married, and parents, and who
useth his wife well, and who ill, and who wrangles, and what household
is well-ordered, and what not; going about as a physician, and feeling
pulses—“thou hast a fever, thou a headache, thou the gout; do thou
fast, do thou eat, do thou avoid the bath, thou needest the knife, thou
the cautery?” Where is the place for leisure to one who is bound to
private duties? Must he not provide raiment for his children? yea, and
send them to the schoolmaster with their tablets and writing
instruments? and have a bed ready for them, since a man cannot be a
Cynic from the womb? Else were it better to cast them away at once than
kill them in this way. See, now, to what we have brought our Cynic—how
we have taken away his kingship from him! _True, but Crates married._
Thou speakest of a circumstance that arose from love, and adducest a
wife who was another Crates.[11] But our inquiry is concerning common
marriages, and how men may be undistracted; and thus inquiring, we do
not find it, in this condition of the world, a purpose of chief concern
for a Cynic.

15. _How, then_, said he, _shall he still be preserving the community?_
God help thee! Whether do they best serve mankind who fill their own
place by bringing into the world two or three screaming children, or
those who, as far they may, oversee all men, what they do, how they
live, wherewith they concern themselves, and what duties they neglect?
And were the Thebans more benefited by as many as left their little
children behind, or by Epaminondas, who died childless? And did Priam,
who begat fifty good-for-nothing sons, or Danaus, or Æolus,[12] better
serve the community than Homer? Shall, then, the command of an army or
the writing of poems withdraw a man from marriage and fatherhood, and he
shall not be thought to have gained nothing for his childlessness, but
the kingship of a Cynic shall be not worth what it costs? It may be we
do not perceive his greatness, nor do we worthily conceive of the
character of Diogenes; but we turn away our eyes to the present Cynics,
“watch-dogs of the dining-room,”[13] who in nothing resemble those
others, save perchance in breaking wind; but in no other thing. For
else these things would not have moved us, nor should we have marveled
if a Cynic will not marry nor beget children. Man! he hath begotten all
mankind, he hath all men for his sons, all women for his daughters; so
doth he visit all and care for all. Thinkest thou that he is a mere
meddler and busybody in rebuking those whom he meets? As a father he
doth it, as a brother, and as servant of the Universal Father, which is
God.

16. If it please thee, ask of me also whether he shall have to do with
affairs of public polity? Fool! dost thou seek a greater polity than
that in whose affairs he is already concerned? Will it be greater if he
come forward among the Athenians to say something about ways or
means—he, whose part it is to discourse with all men, Athenians,
Corinthians, Romans alike, not concerning means or ways, nor concerning
peace or war, but about happiness and unhappiness, about good-fortune
and ill-fortune, about slavery and freedom? And of a man that hath his
part in so great a polity will you ask me if he shall attend to public
affairs? Ask me also if he shall be a ruler; and again I shall say, Thou
fool, what rule can be greater than his?

17. And to such a man there is need also of a certain kind of body. For
if he shall appear consumptive, meager, and pale, his witness hath not
the same emphasis. Not only by showing forth the things of the spirit
must he convince foolish men that it is possible, without the things
that are admired of them, to be good and wise, but also in his body must
he show that plain and simple and open-air living are not mischievous
even to the body: “Behold, even of this I am a witness, I and my body.”
So Diogenes was wont to do, for he went about radiant with health, and
with his very body he turned many to good. But a Cynic that men pity
seems to be a beggar—all men turn away from him, all stumble at him.
For he must not appear squalid; so that neither in this respect shall he
scare men away; but his very austerity should be cleanly and pleasing.

18. Much grace of body, then, must belong to the Cynic, and also
quickness of mind, else he is a mere clot of slime and nothing else; for
he must be ready and apt to meet all that may befall him. Thus when one
said to Diogenes: _Thou art that Diogenes who thinkest there are no
Gods_, he replied, _And how may that be, seeing I hold thee hateful to
the Gods?_ And again, when Alexander stood beside him, as he was lying
asleep, and said:

  “Not all night must a man of counsel sleep,”

he answered, ere he was yet awake:

  “Warden of men, and with so many cares.”[14]

19. But before all things must his ruling faculty be purer than the sun,
else he must needs be a gambler and cheater, who, being himself
entangled in some iniquity, will reprove others. For, see how the matter
stands: to these kings and tyrants, their spearmen and their arms give
the office of reproving men, and the power to punish transgressors, yea,
though they themselves be evil; but to the Cynic, instead of arms and
spearmen, his conscience giveth this power. When he knows that he has
watched and labored for men, and lain down to sleep in purity, and sleep
hath left him yet purer; and that his thoughts have been the thoughts of
one dear to the Gods, of a servant, and a sharer in the rule of Zeus;
and he hath had ever at hand that

  “Lead me, O Zeus, and thou Destiny,[15]

and,

  “If thus it be pleasing to the Gods, so may it be”—

wherefore, then, shall he not take heart to speak boldly to his
brothers, to his children, in a word, to all his kin? For this reason,
he that is in this state is no meddler or busybody, for when he
overlooks human affairs he meddles not with foreign matters, but with
his own affairs. Else, name the general a busybody when he overlooks his
soldiers, and reviews them, and watches them, and punishes the
disorderly. But if you have a flat cake under your cloak while you
reprove others, I say, get hence rather into a corner, and eat what thou
hast stolen—what are other men’s concerns to thee? For what art
thou—the bull of the herd? or the queen bee? Show me the tokens of thy
supremacy, such as nature hath given her. But if thou art a drone
claiming sovereignty over the bees, thinkest thou not that thy
fellow-citizens will overthrow thee, as bees do the drones?

20. And truly the Cynic must be so long-suffering as that he shall seem
to the multitude insensate and a stone. Him doth none revile, nor smite,
nor insult; but his body hath he given to any man to use at will. For he
remembers that the worse must needs be vanquished by the better,
whereinsoever it is the worse; and the body is worse than the
multitude—the weaker than the stronger. Never, then, doth he go down to
any contest where it is possible for him to be vanquished, but he yields
up all that is not his own, and contends for nothing that is subject to
others. But where there is question of the will and the use of
appearances, then you shall see how many eyes he hath, so that you may
say that compared with him Argus was blind. Is his assent ever hasty; or
his desire idle; or his pursuit in vain; or his avoidance unsuccessful;
or his aim unfulfilled? doth he ever blame, or cringe, or envy? This is
his great study and his design; but as regards all other things, he lies
on his back and snores, for all is peace. There is no thief of his will,
nor tyrant; but of his body? yea; and of his chattels? yea, and also of
his authority and his honors. What, then, are these things to him? So
when one may seek to make him afraid on account of them—_Go hence_, he
saith to him, _and find out little children; it is to these that masks
are dreadful, but I know they are made of clay, and that inside them
there is nothing._

21. On such a matter art thou now meditating. Therefore, if it please
thee, in God’s name delay it yet awhile, and see first what ability thou
hast for it. For mark what Hector speaks to Andromache: _Go_, he saith,
_rather into the house and weave_—

                      “For war’s the care
  Of every man, and more than all of me.”
                                —_Il._ vi. 490.

Thus he knew where lay his own ability and her incapacity.


END OF BOOK I.




_BOOK II._




