CHAPTER IX.

ON SOLITUDE.


1. Solitude is the state of one who is helpless. For he who is alone is
not therefore solitary; even as he who is in a great company is not
therefore not solitary. When, therefore, we have lost a brother or a son
or a friend on whom we were wont to rest, we say that we are left
solitary, and oftentimes we say it in Rome, with such a crowd meeting us
and so many dwelling about us, and, it may be, having a multitude of
slaves. For the solitary man, in his conception, meaneth to be thought
helpless, and laid open to those who wish him harm. Therefore when we
are on a journey we then, above all, say that we are solitary when we
are fallen among thieves; for that which taketh away solitude is not the
sight of a man, but of a faithful and pious and serviceable man. For if
to be solitary it sufficeth to be alone, then say that Zeus is solitary
in the conflagration,[1] and bewails himself. _Woe is me! I have neither
Hera nor Athene nor Apollo_, nor, in short, either brother or son or
descendant or kinsman. And so some say he doth when alone in the
conflagration. For they comprehend not the life of a man who is alone,
setting out from a certain natural principle, that we are by nature
social, and inclined to love each other, and pleased to be in the
company of other men. But none the less is it needful that one find the
means to this also, to be able to suffice to himself, and to be his own
companion. For as Zeus is his own companion, and is content with
himself, and considereth his own government, what it is, and is occupied
in designs worthy of himself; thus should we be able to converse with
ourselves, and feel no need of others, nor want means to pass the time;
but to observe the divine government, and the relation of ourselves with
other things; to consider how we stood formerly towards the events that
befall us, and how we stand now; what things they are that still afflict
us; how these, too, may be healed, how removed; and if aught should need
perfecting, to perfect it according to the reason of the case.

2. Ye see now how that Cæsar seemeth to have given us a great peace;
how there are no longer wars nor battles nor bands of robbers nor of
pirates, but a man may travel at every season, and sail from east to
west. But can he give us peace from fever? or from shipwreck? or from
fire? or earthquake? or lightning? ay, or from love? _He cannot._ Or
from grief? _He cannot._ Or from envy? _He cannot._ Briefly, then, he
cannot secure us from any of such things. But the word of the
philosophers doth promise us peace even from these things. And what
saith it? _If ye will hearken unto me, O men, wheresoever ye be,
whatsoever ye do, ye shall not grieve, ye shall not be wroth, ye shall
not be compelled or hindered, but ye shall live untroubled and free from
every ill._ Whosoever hath this peace, which Cæsar never proclaimed (for
how could he proclaim it?), but which God proclaimed through His word,
shall he not suffice to himself when he may be alone? for he beholdeth
and considereth, _Now can no evil happen to me; for me there is no
robber, no earthquake; all things are full of peace, full of calm; for
me no way, no city, no assembly, no neighbor, no associate hath any
hurt_. He is supplied by one, whose part that is, with food, by another
with raiment, by another with senses, by another with natural
conceptions. And when it may be that the necessary things are no longer
supplied, that is the signal for retreat: the door is opened, and God
saith to thee, _Depart_.

——“Whither?”

To nothing dreadful, but to the place from whence thou camest—to things
friendly and akin to thee, to the elements of Being. Whatever in thee
was fire shall go to fire; of earth, to earth; of air, to air; of water,
to water;[2] no Hades, nor Acheron, nor Coeytus, nor Phlegethon, but all
things are full of Gods and Powers.[3] Whoso hath these things to think
on, and seeth the sun and the moon and the stars, and rejoiceth in the
earth and the sea, he is no more solitary than he is helpless.

——“What, then, if one come and find me alone and slay me?”

Fool! not thee, but thy wretched body.

3. Thou art a little soul bearing up a corpse.

4. What solitude, then, is there any longer, what lack? Why do we make
ourselves worse than children, which, when they are left alone, what do
they?—they take shells and sand and build up somewhat, and then throw
it down, and again build up something else, and so they never lack
pastime. And shall I, if ye sail away from me, sit down and weep for
that I am left alone and solitary? Shall I have no shells nor sand? But
children do these things through their folly, and we through our wisdom
are made unhappy.




CHAPTER X.

AGAINST THE CONTENTIOUS AND REVENGEFUL.


1. To suppose that we shall become contemptible in the eyes of others,
unless in some way we inflict an injury on those who first showed
hostility to us, is the character of most ignoble and thoughtless men.
For thus we say, that a man is to be despised according to his inability
to do hurt; but much rather is he to be despised according to his
inability to do good.

2. The wise and good man neither strives with any himself, nor in the
measure of his power will he allow another to strive. And in this, as in
all other things, the life of Socrates is set before us as an example;
who did not only himself fly all contention, but also forbade it to
others. See in Xenophon’s _Symposium_ how many quarrels he ended; and,
again, how he bore with Thrasymachus, and how with Polus and with
Callicles; and how he endured his wife, and how his son, which opposed
him with sophistical arguments. For he remembered very well that no man
can command the ruling faculty of another.

3. How, then, is there yet any place for contention in one so minded?
For what event can amaze him? what appear strange to him? Doth he not
look for even worse and more grievous things at the hands of evil men
than do befall him? Doth he not count everything for gain which is short
of the extreme of injury? Hath such a one reviled thee? Much thanks to
him that he did not strike thee. _But he did also strike me._ Much
thanks that he did not wound thee. _But he did also wound me._ Much
thanks that he did not slay thee. For when did he learn, or from whom,
that he was a tame animal, and affectionate to others, and that to the
wrongdoer the wrong-doing itself is a heavy injury? For since he hath not
learned these things, nor believes them, wherefore should he not follow
that which appears to be his advantage? Thy neighbor hath flung stones!
Hast thou, then, sinned in aught? But he has broken things in the house?
And art thou a household vessel? Nay—but a Will.

4. What, then, hath been given thee for this occasion? To a wolf it were
given to bite—to fling more stones. But if thou seek what is becoming
for a man, look into thy stores, see what faculties thou hast come here
furnished withal. Hast thou the nature of a wild beast? the temper of
revenge?

5. When is a horse in wretched case? When he is bereaved of his natural
faculties; not when he cannot crow, but when he cannot run. When is a
dog? Not when he cannot fly, but when he cannot track. Is not a man,
then, also thus wretched, not when he cannot strangle lions or embrace
statues[1]—for to this he came endowed with no faculties by Nature—but
when he hath lost his honesty, his faithfulness? Surely we should meet
together and lament over such a man; so great are the evils into which
he hath fallen. Not, indeed, that we should lament for his birth, or for
his death, but in that while yet living he hath suffered the loss of his
own true possessions. I speak not of his paternal inheritance, not of
his land, or his house, or his inn, or his slaves (for not one of these
things is the true possession of a man, but all are alien, servile,
subject, given now to some, now to others, by those that can command
them); but of his human qualities, the stamps of his spirit wherewith he
came into the world. Even such we seek for also on coins, and if we find
them we approve the coins, and if not, we cast them away. What is the
stamp of this sestertius? _The stamp of Trajan._ Then give it me. _The
stamp of Nero._[2] Fling it away—it will not pass, it is bad. And so
here too. What is the stamp of his mind? He is gentle, social,
forbearing, affectionate. Come, then, I receive him, I admit him to
citizenship, I receive him as a neighbor, a fellow-traveler. See to it
only that he have not Nero’s stamp. Is he wrathful, revengeful,
complaining? Doth he, when it may seem good to him, break the heads of
all who stand in his way? Why, then, didst thou say he was a man? Shall
everything be judged by the bare form? If so, then say that a wax apple
is a real apple, and that it has the smell and taste of an apple. But
the outward shape doth not suffice, nor are eyes and nose enough to make
a man, but he is a man only if he have a man’s mind. Here is one that
will not hear reason, that will not submit when he is confuted—he is an
ass. In another, reverence hath died—he is worthless, anything rather
than a man. This one seeketh whom he may meet and kick or bite—so that
he is not even a sheep or an ass, but some kind of savage beast.

6. But this is the nature of every creature, to pursue the Good and fly
the Evil; and to hold every man an enemy and a plotter for our woe, were
it even a brother, or son, or father, who takes away from us the one, or
brings us into the other. For nothing is nearer or dearer to us than the
Good. It remains, therefore, if outward things be good and evil, that a
father is no longer the friend of his sons, nor the brother of his
brother, but every place is full of enemies and plotters and slanderers.
But if the only Good is that the Will should be as it ought to be, and
the only Evil as it ought not, where is there then any place for strife,
for reviling? For about what things shall we strive? about those that
are nothing to us? and with whom? with the ignorant, the unhappy, with
men who are deceived concerning the greatest things?

7. Remembering these things, Socrates managed his own household,
enduring a most shrewish wife and an undutiful son. For these doctrines
make love in a household, and concord in a State, peace among nations,
and gratitude towards God, with boldness in every place, as of one who
hath to do with things alien to him, and of no estimation. And we are
the men to write and read these things, and to applaud them when they
are delivered to us, but to the belief of them we have not even come
near. And therefore that saying concerning the Lacedæmonians,

  “Lions at home, but in Ephesus foxes,”[3]

will fit us too—lions in the school and foxes without.


END OF BOOK III.




_BOOK IV._




