CHAPTER III.

ON DISPUTATION.


1. What things a man must have learned in order to be able to reason
well have been accurately defined by our philosophers; but in the
fitting use of them we are wholly unexercised. Give any one of us whom
ye please some ignorant man for a disputant, and he shall find no way to
deal with him; but if, when he hath moved him a little, the man answer
beside the purpose, he is no longer able to manage him, but either he
will revile him, or mock him, and say, _He is an ignorant fellow;
nothing can be done with him_.

2. But a guide, when he hath found one straying from the way, leads him
into the proper road, and does not mock him or revile him, and then go
away. And do thou show such a man the truth, and thou shalt see that he
will follow it. But so long as thou dost not show it, mock him not, but
be sensible rather of thine own incapacity.

3. But what? this business of instruction is not very safe at present,
and least of all in Rome; for he who pursues it will of course feel
constrained not to do it in a corner, but he must go to some man of
consular rank, it may be, or some rich man, and inquire of him: Sir, can
you tell me to whom you have committed the care of your horses?
_Surely._ Was it, then, to any chance-comer and one inexperienced about
horses? _By no means._ Well, then, to whom are your gold and silver
vessels and raiment entrusted? _Neither are these committed to any
chance person._ And your body, have you already sought out one to whom
to commit the care of it? _How not?_ And that also one who is
experienced in training and medicine? _Assuredly._ Whether, now, are
these the best things you have, or do you possess aught that is better
than all of them? _What thing do you mean?_ That, by Zeus, which useth
all these, and approveth each of them and taketh counsel? _Is it the
soul, then, that you mean?_ You have conceived me rightly; it is even
this. _Truly I hold that I possess in this something much better than
everything else._ Can you then declare to us in what manner you have
taken thought for your soul? for it is not likely that a wise man like
yourself, and one of repute in the State, would overlook the best think
you possess, and use no diligence or design about it, but leave it
neglected and perishing? _Surely not._ But do you provide for it
yourself? and have you learned the way from another, or discovered it
yourself?

4. And then at last there is danger lest he say first, _Good sir, what
is this to you? who are you?_ and then, if you persist in troubling him,
that he may lift up his hands and smite you. Once I too was an admirer
of this method until I fell into these difficulties.




CHAPTER IV.

THAT WE SHOULD BE SLOW IN ACCEPTING PLEASURE.


1. When thou hast received the appearance of some pleasure, then, as in
other things, guard thyself lest thou be carried away by it, but delay
with thyself a little, and let the thing await thee for a while. Then
bethink thyself of the two periods of time, one when thou shalt be
enjoying the pleasure, the other, when, having enjoyed it, thou shalt
afterwards repent of it and reproach thyself. And set on the other side
how thou shalt rejoice and commend thyself if thou abstain.

2. But if it seem reasonable to thee to do the thing, beware lest thou
have been conquered by the flattery and the sweetness and the allurement
of it. But set on the other side how much better were the consciousness
of having won that victory.




CHAPTER V.

THAT WE SHOULD BE OPEN IN OUR DEALINGS.


In doing aught which thou hast clearly discerned as right to do, seek
never to avoid being seen in the doing of it, even though the multitude
should be destined to form some wrong opinion concerning it. For if thou
dost not right, avoid the deed itself. But if rightly, why fear those
who will wrongly rebuke thee?




CHAPTER VI.

THAT HALF TRUE MAY BE ALL FALSE.


As the sayings, _It is day_, _It is night_, are wholly justifiable if
viewed disjunctively, but not if viewed together, even so at a feast, to
pick out the largest portion for one’s self may be justifiable, if we
look to the needs of the body alone, but is unjustifiable if viewed as
it concerns the preservation of the proper community in the feast.
Therefore, in eating with another person, remember not to look only at
the value for the body of the things that are set before thee, but to
preserve also the reverence due to the giver of the feast.




