CHAPTER XVII.

THAT THE PHILOSOPHER SHALL EXHIBIT TO THE VULGAR DEEDS, NOT WORDS.


1. Thou shalt never proclaim thyself a philosopher, nor speak much
among the vulgar of the philosophic maxims; but do the things that
follow from the maxims. For example, do not discourse at a feast upon
how one ought to eat, but eat as one ought. For remember that even so
Socrates everywhere banished ostentation, so that men used to come to
him desiring that he would recommend them to teachers of philosophy, and
he brought them away and did so, so well did he bear to be overlooked.

2. And if among the vulgar discourse should arise concerning some maxim
of thy philosophy, do thou, for the most part, keep silence, for there
is great risk that thou straightway vomit up what thou hast not
digested. And when some one shall say to thee, _Thou knowest naught_,
and it bites thee not, then know that thou hast begun the work.

3. And as sheep do not bring their food to the shepherds to show how
much they have eaten, but digesting inwardly their provender, bear
outwardly wool and milk, even so do not thou, for the most part, display
the maxims before the vulgar, but rather the works which follow from
them when they are digested.




CHAPTER XVIII.

ASCESIS.


When you have adapted the body to a frugal way of living, do not
flatter yourself on that, nor if you drink only water, say, on every
opportunity, _I drink only water_. And if you desire at any time to
inure yourself to labor and endurance, do it to yourself and not unto
the world. And do not embrace the statues; but some time when you are
exceedingly thirsty take a mouthful of cold water, and spit it out, and
say nothing about it.




CHAPTER XIX.

TOKENS.


1. The position and token of the vulgar: he looks never to himself for
benefit or hurt, but always to outward things. The position and
character of the philosopher: he looks for benefit or hurt only to
himself.

2. The tokens of one that is making advance: he blames none, he praises
none, he accuses none, he complains of none; he speaks never of himself,
as being somewhat, or as knowing aught. When he is thwarted or hindered
in aught, he accuseth himself. If one should praise him, he laughs at
him in his sleeve; if one should blame him, he makes no defense. He goes
about like the sick and feeble, fearing to move the parts that are
settling together before they have taken hold. He hath taken out of
himself all pursuit, and hath turned all avoidance to things in our
power which are contrary to nature. Toward all things he will keep his
inclination slack. If he is thought foolish or unlearned, he regardeth
it not. In a word, he watches himself as he would a treacherous enemy.




CHAPTER XX.

THAT THE LOGICAL ART IS NECESSARY.


1. Since Reason is that by which all other things are organized and
perfected,[1] it is meet that itself should not remain unorganized. But
by what shall it be organized? For it is clear that this must be either
by itself or by some other thing. But this must be Reason; or something
else which is greater than Reason, which is impossible.

2. “Yea,” one may say, “but it is more pressing to cure our vices, and
the like.”

You desire, then, to hear something of these things? Hear then; but if
you shall say to me, _I know not if you are reasoning truly or falsely?_
or if I utter something ambiguous, and you shall bid me distinguish,
shall I lose patience with you and tell you, _It is more pressing to
cure our vices than chop logic_?

3. For this reason I think the logical are set at the beginning of our
study, even as before the measuring of corn we set the examination of
the measure. For unless we shall first establish what is a modius[2] and
what is a balance, how shall we be able to measure or weigh anything?

4. In this case, then, if you have not understood and accurately
investigated the criterion of all other things, and that through which
they are understood, shall we be able to investigate and understand
anything else? and how could we? _Yea, but a modius is a wooden thing,
and barren._ But it measures corn. _And logic is also barren._ As
regards this, indeed, we shall see. But even if one should grant this,
it sufficeth that logic is that which distinguishes and investigates
other things, and, as one may say, measures and weighs them. Who saith
these things? is it Chrysippus alone and Zeno and Cleanthes? but doth
not Antisthenes[3] say it? And who wrote that the investigation of terms
is the beginning of education?—was it not Socrates? and of whom doth
Xenophon write that he began with the investigation of terms, what each
of them signified?




