CHAPTER V.

OF DIVINATION.


1. When thou goest to inquire of an oracle, remember that what the event
will be thou knowest not, for this is the thing thou art come to learn
from the seer; but of what nature it is (if haply thou art a
philosopher), thou knewest already in coming. For if it be any of those
things that are not in our own power, it follows of necessity that it
can be neither good nor evil.

2. Bring, therefore, to the seer neither pursuit nor avoidance, nor go
before him with trembling, but well knowing that all events are
indifferent and nothing to thee. For whatever it may be, it shall lie
with thee to use it nobly; and this no man can prevent. Go, then, with a
good courage to the Gods as to counselors; and for the rest, when
anything hath been counseled thee, remember of whom thou hast taken
counsel, and whom thou wilt be slighting if thou art not obedient.

3. Therefore, as Socrates would have it, go to the oracle for those
matters only where thy whole inquiry bendeth solely towards the event,
and where there are no means either from reason or any other art for
knowing beforehand what is to happen. Thus, when it may be needful to
share some peril with thy friend or thy country, inquire of no oracle
whether thou shouldst do the thing. For if the seer should declare that
the sacrifices are inauspicious, this signifies clearly either death, or
the loss of some limb, or banishment; yet doth Reason decree that even
so thou must stand by thy friend, and share thy country’s danger.

4. Mark, therefore, that greater seer, the Pythian, who cast out of his
temple one that, when his friend was being murdered, did not help
him.[2]


END OF BOOK IV




_BOOK V._




CHAPTER I.

THE BEHAVIOUR OF A PHILOSOPHER.


1. Ordain for thyself forthwith a certain form and type of conduct,
which thou shalt maintain both alone and, when it may chance, among men.

2. And for the most part keep silence, or speak only what is necessary,
and in few words. But when occasion may call thee to speak, then speak,
but sparingly, and not about any subject at hap-hazard, nor about
gladiators, nor horse races, nor athletes, nor things to eat and drink,
which are talked of everywhere; but, above all, not about men, as
blaming or praising or comparing them.

If, then, thou art able, let thy discourse draw that of the company
towards what is seemly and good. But if thou find thyself apart among
men of another sort, keep silence.

3. Laugh not much, nor at many things, nor unrestrainedly.

4. Refuse altogether, if thou canst, to take an oath; if thou canst not,
then as the circumstances allow.[1]

5. Shun banquets given by strangers and by the vulgar. But if any
occasion bring thee to them, give strictest heed, lest thou fall
unawares into the ways of the vulgar. For know that if thy companion be
corrupt, he who hath conversation with him must needs be corrupted also,
even if himself should chance to be pure.

6. Hath any of you the art of a lute-player when he takes the lute in
his hand, so as at once when he hath touched the strings to know which
are out of tune, and then to tune the instrument?—such a gift as
Socrates had, who in every company could lead those that were with him
to his own topic? Whence should you have it? but ye must needs be
carried about hither and thither by the vulgar. And wherefore, then, are
they stronger than ye? For that they speak their sorry stuff from
belief; but ye, your fine talk from the lips out. Wherefore it is flat
and dead; and sickening it is to hear your exhortations and this
wretched virtue of yours, which is prated of in every quarter. And thus
the vulgar conquer you. For everywhere belief is mighty, belief is
invincible. Until then the right opinions are hardened in you; and until
ye shall have gained a certain strength for your safety, I counsel you
to mingle cautiously with the vulgar, else every day, like wax in the
sun, shall whatever hath been written in you in the school be melted
away.

7. In things that concern the body accept only so far as the bare
need—as in food, drink, clothing, habitation, servants. But all that
makes for glory or luxury thou must utterly proscribe.

8. Concerning intercourse of the sexes, it is right to be pure before
marriage, to the best of thy power. But, using it, let a man have to do
only with what is lawful. Yet be not grievous to those who use such
pleasures, nor censorious; nor be often putting thyself forward as not
using them.

9. If one shall bear thee word that such a one hath spoken evil of thee,
then do not defend thyself against his accusations, but make answer: _He
little knew my other vices, or he had not mentioned only these_.

10. There is no necessity to go often to the arena, but if occasion
should take thee there, do not appear ardent on any man’s side but thine
own; that is to say, choose that only to happen which does happen, and
that the conqueror may be simply he who wins; for so shalt thou not be
thwarted. But from shouting and laughing at this or that, or violent
gesticulation, thou must utterly abstain. And when thou art gone away,
converse little on the things that have passed, so far as they make not
for thine own correction. For from that it would appear that admiration
of the spectacle had overcome thee.

11. Go not freely nor indiscriminately to recitations.[2] But if thou
go, then preserve (yet without being grievous to others) thy gravity and
calmness.

12. When thou art about to meet any one, especially one of those that
are thought high in rank, set before thy mind what Socrates or Zeno had
done in such a case. And so thou wilt not fail to deal as it behooves
thee with the occasion.

13. When thou goest to any of those that are great in power, set before
thy mind the case that thou wilt not find him at home, that thou wilt be
shut out, that the doors may be slammed in thy face, that he will take
no notice of thee. And if even with these things it behooves thee to go,
then go, and bear all that happens; and never say to thyself—_It was
not worth this_. For that is the part of the foolish, and of those that
are offended at outward things.

14. In company, be it far from thee to dwell much and over-measure on
thine own deeds and dangers. For to dwell on thine own dangers is
pleasant indeed to thee, but not equally pleasant for others is it to
hear of the things that have chanced to thee.

15. Be it far from thee to move laughter. For that habit is a slippery
descent into vulgarity;[3] and it is always enough to relax thy
neighbors’ respect for thee.

16. And it is dangerous to approach to vicious conversation. Therefore,
when anything of the kind may arise, rebuke, if there is opportunity,
him who approaches thereto. But if not, then at least by silence and
blushing and grave looks, let it be plain that his talk is disagreeable
to thee.




