CHAPTER II.

ON THE NATURAL CONCEPTIONS.


1. The natural conceptions are common to all men, and one cannot
contradict another. For which of us but affirms that the Good is
profitable, and that we should choose it, and in all circumstances
follow and pursue it? Which of us but affirms that uprightness is
honorable and becoming? Where, then, doth the contradiction arise?
Concerning the application of the natural conceptions to things
severally. When one saith, _He did well, he is a worthy man_, and
another, _Nay, but he did foolishly_, then there is a contradiction
among men, one with another. And there is the same contradiction among
the Jews and the Syrians and the Egyptians and the Romans; not whether
that which is righteous should be preferred to all things and in all
cases pursued, but whether this be righteous or unrighteous, to eat the
flesh of swine. And ye can discover the same contradiction in the matter
of Achilles and Agamemnon. For call them before us: What sayest thou,
Agamemnon, Should not that which is right and fair come to pass?

——“That should it.”

And what sayest thou, Achilles, Doth it not please thee that what is
fair and right should be done?

——“Of all things this doth most please me.”

Then make application of your natural conceptions. Whence arose this
dispute? The one saith: _I am not bound to deliver up Chryseis to her
father._ And the other saith: _Thou art bound._ Assuredly one of them
must ill apply the conception of duty. And again the one saith:
_Therefore if I should deliver up Chryseis, it is meet that I take his
prize from one of you._ And the other: _Wouldst thou, then, take from me
my beloved?_ He saith: _Yea, even thine._ And _shall I alone, and I
alone, have nothing_? And thus ariseth the contradiction.

2. What is it, then, to be educated? It is to learn to apply the natural
conceptions to each thing severally according to nature; and further, to
discern that of things that exist some are in our own power[1] and the
rest are not in our own power. And things that are in our own power are
the will, and all the works of the will. And things that are not in our
own power are the body, and the parts of the body, and possessions and
parents and brethren and children and country and, in a word, our
associates. Where now shall we place the Good? To what objects shall we
apply it? To those which are in our own power? Then is health not good,
and whole limbs and life? and are not children and parents and country?
And who will bear with you if you say this? Let us, then, transfer it to
these things. Now, can one be happy who is injured, and has missed
gaining what is good? He cannot. And can such a one bear himself towards
his fellows as he ought? How is it possible that he should? For I have
it of nature that I must seek my own profit. If it profits me to own a
piece of land, it profits me to take it from my neighbor. If it profits
me to have a garment, it profits me to steal it from the bath. And hence
wars, seditions, tyrannies, conspiracies. And how shall I be able to
maintain a right mind towards God? for if I suffer injury and
misfortune, it cannot be but He neglects me. And what have I to do with
Him if He cannot help me? And, again, what have I to do with Him if He
is willing to let me continue in the evils in which I am? Henceforth I
begin to hate Him. Why, then, do we build temples and set up statues to
Zeus as we do to powers of evil, such as Fever?[2] And how is He now
the Saviour and the Raingiver and the Fruitgiver? And verily, all this
follows, if we place anywhere in external things the nature and being of
the Good.




CHAPTER III.

THE MASTER-FACULTY.


1. Of all our faculties ye shall find but one that can contemplate
itself, or, therefore, approve or disapprove itself. How far hath
grammar the power of contemplation? Only so far as to judge concerning
letters. And music? Only so far as to judge concerning melodies. Doth
any of them, then, contemplate itself? Not one. But when you have need
to write to your friend, grammar will tell you how to write; but whether
to write or not, grammar will not tell. And so with the musical art in
the case of melodies; but whether it is now meet or not to sing or to
play, music will not tell. What, then, will tell it? That faculty which
both contemplates itself and all other things. And what is this? It is
the faculty of Reason; for we have received none other which can
consider itself—what it is, and what it can, and what it is worth—and
all the other faculties as well. For what else is it that tells us that
a golden thing is beautiful, since itself doth not? Clearly it is the
faculty which makes use of appearances. What else is it that judges of
music and grammar, and the other faculties, and proves their uses, and
shows the fit occasions? None else than this.

2. Thus the Gods, as it was fit they should, place that only in our
power which is the mightiest and master thing, the right use of
appearances; but other things are not in our power. Was it that they did
not wish it? I indeed think that had they been able they had made over
to us those things also; but this they could in no way do. For being on
the earth, and bound up with this flesh and with these associates, how
was it possible that as regards these we should not be hindered by
external things? But what saith Zeus? “Epictetus, if it were possible, I
would have made both this thy little body and thy little property free
and unhampered. But forget not now that this is but finely tempered
clay, and nothing of thine own. And since I could not do this, I have
given thee a part of ourselves, this power of desiring and disliking,
and pursuing, avoiding, and rejecting, and, in brief, the use of
appearances. Have a care, then, of this, hold this only for thine own,
and thou shalt never be hindered or hampered, thou shalt not lament,
thou shalt not blame, thou shalt never flatter any man.” What then? Do
these seem trifling matters? _God forbid._ Are you, then, not content
with them? _At least I pray the Gods I may be._[1]

3. But now having one thing in our power to care for, and to cleave to,
we rather choose to be careful of many things, and to bind ourselves to
many things, even to the flesh, and to possessions, and to brother and
friend, and child and slave. And being thus bound to many things, they
lie heavy on us and drag us down. So, if the weather be not fair for
sailing, we sit down distraught and are ever peering forth to see how
stands the wind. _It is north._ And what is that to us? _When will the
west wind blow?_ When it shall seem good to it, friend; or to Æolus. For
it was not thee, but Æolus whom God made “steward of the winds.”[2] What
then? It is right to devise how we may perfect the things that are our
own, and to use the others as their nature is. And what, then, is their
nature? As it may please God.




