CHAPTER XXII.

THAT A MAN IS SUFFICIENT TO HIMSELF.


1. If thou set thine heart upon philosophy, prepare straightway to be
laughed at and mocked by many who will say, _Behold, he has suddenly
come back to us a philosopher_; or, _How came you by that brow of
scorn?_ But do thou cherish no scorn, but hold to those things that seem
to thee the best, as one set by God in that place. Remember, too, that
if thou abide in that way, those that first mocked thee, the same shall
afterwards reverence thee; but if thou yield to them, thou shalt receive
double mockery.

2. If it shall ever happen to thee to be turned to outward things in the
desire to please some person, know that thou hast lost thy way of life.
Let it be enough for thee in all things to _be_ a philosopher. But if
thou desire also to seem one, then seem so to thyself, for this thou
canst.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THAT EVERY MAN FULFILL HIS OWN TASK.


1. Let such thoughts never afflict thee as, _I shall live unhonored,
and never be anybody anywhere_. For if lack of honor be an evil, thou
canst no more fall into evil through another’s doings than into vice. Is
it, then, of thy own doing to be made a governor, or invited to feasts?
By no means. How, then, is this to be unhonored? How shouldst thou
_never be anybody anywhere_, whom it behooves to be somebody only in the
things that are in thine own power, wherein it lies with thee to be of
the greatest worth?

2. _But I shall not be able to serve my friends._ How sayst thou? to
serve them? They shall not have money from thee, nor shalt thou make
them Roman citizens. Who, then, told thee that these were of the things
that are in our power, and not alien to us? And who can give that which
himself hath not?

3. _Acquire, then_, they say, _that we may possess_. If I can acquire,
and lose not piety, and faith, and magnanimity withal, show me the way,
and I will do it. But if ye will have me lose the good things I possess,
that ye may compass things that are not good at all, how unjust and
unthinking are ye? But which will ye rather have—money, or a faithful
and pious friend? Then, rather take part with me to this end; and ask me
not to do aught through which I must cast away those things.

4. _But_, he saith, _I shall not do my part in serving my country_.
Again, what is this service? Thy country shall not have porticos nor
baths from thee, and what then? Neither hath she shoes from the smith,
nor arms from the cobbler; but it is enough if every man fulfill his own
task. And if thou hast made one other pious and faithful citizen for
her, art thou, then, of no service? Wherefore, neither shalt thou be
useless to thy country.

5. _What place, then_, he saith, _can I hold in the State_? Whatever
place thou canst, guarding still thy faith and piety. But if in wishing
to serve her thou cast away these things, what wilt thou profit her
then, when perfected in shamelessness and faithlessness?




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE WORLD’S PRICE FOR THE WORLD’S WORTH.


1. Is some one preferred before thee at a feast, or in salutation, or in
being invited to give counsel? Then, if these things are good, it
behooves thee rejoice that he hath gained them; but if evil, be not
vexed that thou hast not gained them; but remember that if thou act not
as other men to gain the things that are not in our own power, neither
canst thou be held worthy of a like reward with them.

2. For how is it possible for him who will not hang about other men’s
doors to have a like reward with him who doth so? or him who will not
attend on them with him who doth attend? or him who will not flatter
them with the flatterer? Thou art unjust, then, and insatiable, if thou
desire to gain those things for nothing, without paying the price for
which they are sold.

3. But how much is a lettuce sold for? A penny, perchance. If any one,
then, will spend a penny, he shall have lettuce; but thou, not spending,
shalt not have. But think not thou art worse off than he; for as he has
the lettuce, so thou the penny which thou wouldst not give.

4. And likewise in this matter. Thou art not invited to some man’s
feast? That is, for thou gavest not to the host the price of the supper;
and it is sold for flattery, it is sold for attendance. Pay, then, the
price, if it will profit thee, for which the thing is sold. But if thou
wilt not give the price, and wilt have the thing, greedy art thou and
infatuated.

5. Shalt thou have nothing, then, instead of the supper? Thou shalt have
this—not to have praised one whom thou hadst no mind to praise, and not
to have endured the insolence of his door-keepers.




