BOOK III.


CHAPTER II.

1. The husk is, of course, the body. If it is maintained that Nature has
made the ease of this our only proper pursuit, of course the altruistic,
or social instincts have to be rejected and denied.

2. The text is here almost certainly corrupt. It runs πῶς οὖν
ὑπονοητικοί ἐσμεν, οἷς μὴ φυσική ἐστι πρὸς τὰ ἔκγονα φιλοστοργία. All
the MSS. agree in ὑπονοητικοί, for which Schweighäuser desires to read
προνοητικοί, and Wolf, ἔτι κοινωνικοί. Salmasius declares emphatically
for πῶς οὖν ἐπινοεῖς ὅτι κοινωνικοί ἐσμεν, and this, with a slight
alteration suggested to me by an eminent living scholar, is the reading
I have adopted: Let us suppose that Epictetus said πῶς οὖν ὑπονοεῖς ὅτι
κ.ε., and that this was written in the short lines common in Greek
MSS.:—

  ΠΩΣΟΥΝΥΠΟ
  ΝΟΕΙΣΟΤΙΚΟΙ
  ΝΩΝΙΚΟΙ

The second line, beginning with the same letter as the third, might
easily be dropped by a transcriber, and the next transcriber would
certainly change the resulting ὑπονωνικοί to ὑπονοητικοί. The existing
reading might give the sense, “How are we, then, suspicious of those (if
any there be) to whom Nature has given no affection for their
offspring?”

3. Outward things—such as making provision for one’s family, serving
the State, etc.,—actions which are not directly concerned with our
spiritual good.


CHAPTER III.

1. Phrygia, the birthplace of Epictetus, was one of the great centers
of the wild and fearful cult of Cybele, whose priests gashed and
mutilated themselves in the excitement of the orgie.

2. Philosophy is brought upon the scene, speaking first through the
mouth of a Stoic, afterwards through that of an Epicurean, and the
practical results of each system are exhibited.

3. The Athenians, rather than submit to Xerxes, abandoned their city to
be plundered, and took to their fleet, the victory at Salamis rewarding
their resolve.

Those who died at Thermopylæ were the three hundred Spartans under
Leonidas, who held the pass against the Persian host till all were
slain. Often as their heroism has been celebrated, perhaps nothing more
worthy of their valor has been written than the truly laconic epitaph
composed for them by Simonides:

  “Stranger, the Spartans bade us die:
   Go, tell them, thou, that here we lie.”


CHAPTER IV.

1. The sense of human dignity was strong in Epictetus, and he would
have it practically observed in men’s relations with each other. Compare
Ch. v. 7. Zeller must have overlooked these Fragments of Epictetus when
he asserted (p. 301) that no Stoic philosopher had ever condemned
slavery. So far as we know, however, this is the only condemnation of
that institution ever uttered by any Pagan thinker. The usual Stoic view
was laid down by Chrysippus, who defined the slave very much as Carlyle
does, as a “perpetuus mercenarius”—a man “hired for life, from whom
work was to be required, a just return for it being accorded (_operam
exegendam, justa prœbenda_).” This utterance of Epictetus, as of one
who knew slavery from within, and certainly was not inclined to
exaggerate its discomforts, is noteworthy enough.


CHAPTER V.

1. Administrator, διορθωτής; in Latin, _Corrector_—a State officer of
whom inscriptions, etc., make frequent mention, but of whose functions
not much appears to be known beyond what the present chapter of
Epictetus reveals.

2. Cassiope was a port of Epirus, not far from Nicopolis, where
Epictetus taught. Schw. conjectures that Maximus was sending his son to
study philosophy at Nicopolis under Epictetus.

3. “For a correct view of these matters will reduce every movement of
preference and avoidance to health of body and tranquillity of soul; for
this is the perfection of a happy life.”—Epicurus, _Diog. Laert._ x.
128. Epictetus’s analysis of the Epicurean theory amounts to this, that
the pleasure of the soul is the chief good, but that it is only felt
through the body and its conditions.

4. _The overseer of youth._—An officer in certain Greek cities. See
Mahaffy’s _Greek Life and Thought_, ch. xvii., on the organization of
the _ephebi_.

5. _Aid in works that are according to Nature._—The Greek is—ἐν τοῖς
κατὰ φύσιν ἔργοις παρακρατῆ. There is some difference of opinion among
commentators as to the meaning of παρακρατῆ. Wolf translates, “hold the
chief place” in natural works. Upton, Schw., and Long render it by “keep
us constant,” “sustain us,” in such works. I do not see why we should
not take the word in its plainest sense—that pleasure should _act
together with other forces_ in leading us to do well.


