CHAPTER XIX.

THAT WE LAMENT NOT FROM WITHIN.


When thou seest one lamenting in grief because his son is gone abroad,
or because he hath lost his goods, look to it that thou be not carried
away by the appearance to think that he hath truly fallen into
misfortune, in outward things. But be the thought at hand, _It is not
the thing itself that afflicts this man—since there are others whom it
afflicts not—but the opinion he has about it_. And so far as speech, be
not slow to fit thyself to his mood, and even if so it be to lament with
him. But have a care that thou lament not also from within.




CHAPTER XX.

THAT A MAN MAY ACT HIS PART BUT NOT CHOOSE IT.


1. Remember that thou art an actor in a play, of such a part as it may
please the director to assign thee; of a short part if he choose a short
part; of a long one if he choose a long. And if he will have thee take
the part of a poor man, or of a cripple, or a governor, or a private
person, mayest thou act that part with grace! For thine it is to act
well the allotted part, but to choose it is another’s.

2. Say no more then, _How will it be with me?_ for however it be thou
wilt settle it well, and the issue shall be fortunate. What would
Hercules have been had he said, _How shall I contrive that a great lion
may not appear to me, or a great boar, or a savage man?_ And what hast
thou to do with that? if a great boar appear, thou wilt fight the
greater fight; if evil men, thou wilt clear the earth of them. _But if I
die thus?_ Thou wilt die a good man, in the accomplishing of a noble
deed. For since we must by all means die, a man cannot be found but he
will be doing somewhat, either tilling or digging or trading or
governing, or having an indigestion or a diarrhœa. What wilt thou,
then, that Death shall find thee doing? I, for my part, will choose some
work, humane, beneficent, social, noble. But if I am not able to be
found doing things of this greatness, then, at least, I will be doing
that which none can hinder me to do, that which is given to me to
do—namely, correcting myself, bettering my faculty for making use of
appearances, working out my peace, giving what is due in every
obligation of life; and if I prosper so far, then entering upon the
third topic of philosophy, which concerneth the security of judgments.

3. If Death shall find me in the midst of these studies, it shall
suffice me if I can lift up my hands to God and say, _The means which
thou gavest me for the perceiving of thy government, and for the
following of the same, have I not neglected: so far as in me lies, I
have not dishonored thee. Behold how I have used my senses, and my
natural conceptions. Have I ever blamed thee? was I ever offended at
aught that happened, or did I desire it should happen otherwise? Did I
ever desire to transgress my obligations? That thou didst beget me I
thank thee for what thou gavest. I am content that I have used thy gifts
so long. Take them again, and set them in what place thou wilt, for
thine were all things, and thou gavest them me._

4. Is it not enough to depart in this condition? and what life is better
and fairer than one like this, and what end more happy?




CHAPTER XXI.

DISTINCTIONS.


1. When a raven croaks you a bad omen, be not carried away by the
appearance; but straightway distinguish with yourself and say, _None of
these things bodes aught to myself, but either to this poor body or this
wretched property of mine, or to my good repute, or to my children, or
to my wife. But to me all omens are fortunate if I choose to have it so.
For whatever of these things may come to pass, it lies with me to have
it serve me._

2. You may be always victorious if you will never enter into any contest
but where the victory depends upon yourself.

3. When you shall see a man honored above others, or mighty in power, or
otherwise esteemed, look to it that thou deem him not blessed, being
carried away by the appearance. For if the essence of the Good be in
those things that are in our own power, then neither envy nor jealousy
have any place, nor thou thyself shalt not desire to be commander or
prince or consul, but to be free. And to this there is one road—scorn
of the things that are not in our own power.

4. Remember, it is not he that strikes or he that reviles that doth any
man an injury, but the opinion about these things, that they are
injurious. When, then, some one may provoke thee to wrath, know that it
is thine own conception which hath provoked thee. Strive, therefore, at
the outset not to be carried away by the appearance; for if thou once
gain time and delay, thou wilt more easily master thyself.

5. Death and exile, and all things that appear dreadful, let these be
every day before thine eyes. But Death most of all; for so thou wilt
neither despise nor too greatly desire any condition of life.




