CHAPTER XIV.

FACULTIES.


Remember at anything that shall befall thee to turn to thyself and seek
what faculty thou hast for making use of it. If thou see a beautiful
person, thou wilt find a faculty for that—namely, Self-mastery. If toil
is laid upon thee, thou wilt find the faculty of Perseverance. If thou
art reviled, thou wilt find Patience. And making this thy wont, thou
shalt not be carried away by the appearances.




CHAPTER XV.

RETURNS.


Never in any case say, _I have lost_ such a thing, but _I have returned
it_. Is thy child dead? it is returned. Is thy wife dead? she is
returned. Art thou deprived of thy estate? is not this also returned?

——“But he is wicked who deprives me of it!”

But what is that to thee, through whom the Giver demands his own? As
long, therefore, as he grants it to thee, steward it like another’s
property, as travelers use an inn.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE PRICE OF TRANQUILLITY.


1. If you would advance in philosophy you must abandon such thoughts as,
_If I neglect my affairs I shall not have the means of living. If I do
not correct my servant he will be good for nothing._ For it is better to
die of hunger, having lived without grief and fear, than to live with a
troubled spirit amid abundance. And it is better to have a bad servant
than an afflicted mind.

2. Make a beginning then in small matters. Is a little of your oil
spilt, or a little wine stolen? Then say to yourself, _For so much peace
is bought, this is the price of tranquillity_. For nothing can be gained
without paying for it. And when you call your servant, bethink you that
he may not hear, or, hearing, may not obey. For him, indeed, that is not
well, but for you it is altogether well that he have not the power to
trouble your mind.




CHAPTER XVII.

A CHOICE.


If thou wouldst advance, be content to let people think thee senseless
and foolish as regards external things. Wish not ever to seem wise, and
if ever thou shalt find thyself accounted to be somebody, then mistrust
thyself. For know that it is not easy to make a choice that shall agree
both with outward things and with Nature, but it must needs be that he
who is careful of the one shall neglect the other.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THAT WHERE THE HEART IS THE BOND IS.


1. Thou art a fool if thou desire wife and children and friends to live
forever, for that is desiring things to be in thy power which are not in
thy power, and things pertaining to others to be thine own. So also thou
art a fool to desire that thy servant should never do anything amiss,
for that is desiring evil not to be evil, but something else. But if
thou desire never to fail in any pursuit, this thou canst do. This,
therefore, practice to attain—namely, the attainable.

2. The lord of each of us is he that hath power over the things that we
desire or dislike, to give or to take them away. Whosoever, then, will
be free, let him neither desire nor shun any of the things that are in
others’ power; otherwise he must needs be enslaved.

3. Wherefore Demetrius[1] said to Nero, _You threaten me with death,
but Nature threatens you_. If I am taken up with my poor body, or my
property, I have given myself over to slavery, for I immediately show of
my own self with what I may be captured. As when a snake draws in his
head, I say, _Strike at that part of him which he guards_. And know
thou, that at the part thou desirest to guard, there thy master will
fall upon thee. Remembering this, whom wilt thou still flatter or fear?

4. Think that thou shouldst conduct thyself in life as at a feast. Is
some dish brought to thee? Then put forth thyself in seemly fashion.
Doth it pass thee by? Then hold it not back. Hath it not yet come? Then
do not reach out for it at a distance, but wait till it is at thine
hand. And thus doing with regard to children and wife and governments
and wealth, thou wilt be a worthy guest at the table of the Gods. And if
thou even pass over things that are offered to thee, and refuse to take
of them, then thou wilt not only share the banquet, but also the
dominion of the Gods. For so doing Diogenes and Heracleitus, and the
like, both were, and were reported to be, rightly divine.




