CHAPTER XXI.

GRAMMARIAN OR SAGE.


When some one may exalt himself in that he is able to understand and
expound the works of Chrysippus, say then to thyself: If Chrysippus had
not written obscurely, this man would have had nothing whereon to exalt
himself. But I, what do I desire? Is it not to learn to understand
Nature and to follow her? I inquire, then, who can expound Nature to me,
and hearing that Chrysippus can, I betake myself to him. But I do not
understand his writings, therefore I seek an expounder for them. And so
far there is nothing exalted. But when I have found the expounder, it
remaineth for me to put in practice what he declares to me, and in this
alone is there anything exalted. But if I shall admire the bare
exposition, what else have I made of myself than a grammarian instead of
a philosopher, save, indeed, that the exposition is of Chrysippus and
not of Homer? When, therefore, one may ask me to lecture on the
philosophy of Chrysippus, I shall rather blush when I am not able to
show forth works of a like nature and in harmony with the words.




CHAPTER XXII.

ACCOMPLISHMENTS.


1. The clearer be the characters in which a book is writ, the more
pleasantly and conveniently shall any man read it. Thus also a man shall
listen more conveniently to any discourse if it be conveyed in
well-ordered and graceful words. Be it not said, then, that there is no
faculty of expression, for this is the thought of a man both impious and
cowardly[1]—impious, for he holds in disesteem the gracious gifts of
God, as if he would take away the serviceable faculty of seeing, or of
hearing, or indeed this of speaking. Did God give the eyes for nothing?
And was it for nothing that He mingled in them a spirit of such might
and cunning as to reach a long way off and receive the impression of
visible forms—a messenger so swift and faithful? Was it for nothing
that He gave the intervening air such efficacy, and made it elastic, so
that being, in a manner, strained,[2] our vision should traverse it? Was
it for nothing that He made Light, without which there were no benefit
of any other thing?

2. Man, be not unthankful for these things, nor yet unmindful of better
things. For seeing and hearing, and, by Zeus, for life itself, and the
things that work together to maintain it, for dried fruits, for wine,
for oil, do thou give thanks to God. But remember that He hath given
thee another thing which is better than all these—that, namely, which
uses them, which approves them, which taketh account of the worth of
each. For what is that which declareth concerning all these faculties
how much each of them is worth? Is it the faculty itself? Heard you
ever the faculty of vision tell aught concerning itself? or that of
hearing? or wheat, or barley, or a horse, or a dog? Nay, but as
ministers and slaves are they appointed, to serve the faculty which
makes use of appearances. And if you would learn how much any of them is
worth, of whom will you inquire? who shall give answer? How then shall
any other faculty be greater than this, which both useth the others as
its servants, and the same approveth each of them and declareth
concerning them? For which of them knoweth what itself is, and what it
is worth? Which of them knoweth when it behooves to make use of it, and
when not? What is that which openeth and closeth the eyes, turning them
away from things which they should not behold, and guiding them towards
other things? Is it the faculty of vision? Nay, but the faculty of the
Will. What is that which closeth and openeth the ears?—that in
obedience to which they become busy and curious, or again, unmoved by
what they hear? Is it the faculty of hearing? It is no other than that
of the Will.

3. Being then so great a faculty, and set over all the rest, let it come
to us and tell us that the best of existing things is the flesh! Not
even if the flesh itself affirmed that it was the best, would any man
have patience with it. Now what is it, Epicurus, which declares this
doctrine, that the flesh is best, which wrote concerning the _End of
Being_, and on _Laws of Nature_, and on the _Canon of Truth_?—which let
thy beard grow? which wrote, when dying, that it was spending its last
day and a happy one?[3] Is it the flesh or the Will? Wilt thou affirm,
then, that thou hast aught better than the Will? Nay, but art thou not
mad—so blind, in truth, and deaf as thou art?

4. What then? Shall any man contemn the other faculties? God forbid!
Doth any man say that there is no use or eminence in the faculty of
eloquence? God forbid—that were senseless, impious, thankless towards
God. But to each thing its true worth. For there is a certain use in an
ass, but not so much as in an ox; and in a dog, but not so much as in a
slave; and in a slave, but not so much as in a citizen; and in citizens,
but not so much as in governors. Yet not because other things are better
is the use which anything affords to be contemned. There is a certain
worth in the faculty of eloquence, but not so much as in the Will. When,
then, I speak thus, let no man deem that I would have you neglect the
power of eloquence, for I would not have you neglect your eyes, or ears,
or hands, or feet, or raiment, or shoes. But if one ask me which is,
then, the best of existing things, what shall I say? The faculty of
eloquence I cannot say, but that of the Will, when it is made right. For
this is that which useth the other, and all the other faculties, both
small and great. When this is set right, a man that was not good becomes
good; when it is not right, the man becomes evil. This is that whereby
we fail or prosper—whereby we blame others, or approve them; the
neglect of which is the misery, and the care of it the happiness, of
mankind.

5. But to take away the faculty of eloquence, and to say that there is
in truth no such faculty, is not only the part of a thankless man toward
Him who hath given it, but also of a cowardly. For such a one seemeth to
me to fear lest if there be any faculty of this kind we shall not be
able to despise it. Such are they also which say that there is no
difference between beauty and ugliness. Then were a man to be affected
in like manner on seeing Thersites and Achilles, or on seeing Helen and
any common woman?[4] Truly, a thought of fools and boors, and of men who
know not the nature of each thing, but fear lest, if one perceive the
difference, he shall be straightway swept away and overpowered by it.
But the great thing is this—to leave to each the faculty that it hath,
and so leaving it to scan the worth of the faculty, and to learn what is
the greatest of existing things; and everywhere to pursue this, and be
zealous about this, making all other things accessory to this, albeit,
according to our powers, not neglecting even these. For of the eyes also
must we take care, yet not as of the best thing; yet of these, too, by
the very exercise of the best thing; since that shall in no other wise
subsist according to Nature save by wise dealing in these matters, and
preferring certain things to others.

6. But what is done in the world? As if a man journeying to his own
country should pass by an excellent inn, and the inn being agreeable to
him, should stay, and abide in it. Man, thou hast forgotten thy purpose;
thy journeying was not to this, but through this. _But this is
pleasant._ And how many other inns are pleasant, and how many meadows?
yet merely for passing through. But thy business is this, to arrive in
thy native country, to remove the fears of thy kinsfolk, to do, thyself,
the duties of a citizen, to marry, to beget children, to fill the
customary offices. For thou art not come into this world to choose out
its pleasanter places, but to dwell in those where thou wast born, and
whereof thou wast appointed to be a citizen. And so in some wise it is
with this matter. Since, by the aid of speech and such like deliverance,
we must come to our aim, and purify the Will, and order aright the
faculty which makes use of appearances; and it is necessary that this
deliverance of the doctrines come to pass by a certain use of speech,
and with a certain art and trenchancy of expression, there are some
which are taken captive by these things themselves, and abide in
them—one in the gift of speech, one in syllogisms, one in sophisms, one
in some such another of these inns, and there they linger and molder
away, as though they were fallen among the Sirens.

7. Man, thy business was to make thyself fit to use the appearances that
encounter thee according to Nature, not missing what thou pursuest, nor
falling into what thou wouldst avoid, never failing of good fortune, nor
overtaken of ill fortune, free, unhindered, uncompelled, agreeing with
the governance of Zeus, obedient unto the same, and well-pleased
therein; blaming none, charging none, able of thy whole soul to utter
these lines:—

  “Lead me, O Zeus, and thou, Destiny!”

Then, having this for thy business, if some little matter of eloquence
please thee, or certain speculations, wilt thou stay and abide in them,
and elect to settle in them, forgetting all that is at home? and wilt
thou say, _These things are admirable_? Who saith they are not
admirable? but for passing through, like inns. What should hinder one
that spoke like Demosthenes to be unfortunate? or one that could resolve
syllogisms like Chrysippus to be miserable, to grieve, to envy; in a
word, to be troubled and unhappy? Nothing. Thou seest now that all these
things are but inns, and of no worth; but our business was another
thing. When I say these things to certain persons, they think I am
rejecting all care about language or speculation. But I do not reject
this; I reject the endless occupation with them, the putting our hopes
in them. If a man by this teaching injureth those who hear him, reckon
me also among those who do this injury. For I cannot, in order to please
you, see that one thing is best and chief of all, and say that another
is.[5]




