CHAPTER VIII.

TIME AND CHANGE.


1. Let not another’s vice be thy evil. For thou wast not born to be
abject with others, or unfortunate with others, but to prosper with
them. But if any one is unfortunate, remember that it is of his own
doing. For God hath made all men to be happy, and of good estate. For
this end hath He granted means and occasions, giving some things to each
man as his own concern, and some things as alien; and the things that
are hindered and subject to compulsion and lost are not his own concern,
and those that are unhindered are; and the substance of Good and of
Evil, as it were worthy of Him that careth for us and doth protect us as
a father, He hath placed among our own concerns.

2.——“But I have parted from such a one, and he is grieved.”

For why did he deem things alien to be his own concern? Why, when he
rejoiced to see thee, did he not reason that thou wert mortal, and apt
to travel to another land? Therefore doth he pay the penalty of his own
folly. But thou, for what cause or reason dost thou bewail thyself? Hast
thou also given no thought to these things; but like silly women
consorted with all that pleased thee as though thou shouldst consort
with them forever, places and persons and pastimes? and now thou sittest
weeping, because thou canst see the same persons and frequent the same
places no longer. This, truly, is what thou art fit for, to be more
wretched than crows and ravens that can fly whithersoever they please,
and change their nests, and pass across the seas, nor ever lament nor
yearn for what they have left.

——“Yea, but they are thus because they are creatures without reason.”

To us, then, was Reason given by the Gods for our misfortune and misery?
that we should be wretched and sorrowful forever? Let all men be
immortal, forsooth, and no man migrate to another land, nor let us
ourselves ever migrate, but remain rooted to one spot like plants; and
if one of our companions go, let us sit down and weep, and if he return,
dance and clap hands like children!

3. Shall we not now at last wean ourselves, and remember what we heard
from the philosophers? if, indeed, we did not listen to them as a
wizard’s incantation. For they said that the universe is one Polity, and
one is the substance out of which it is made, and there must, of
necessity, be a certain cycle, and some things must give place to
others, some dissolving away, and others coming into being, some abiding
in one place, and others being in motion. But all things are full of
love, first of the Gods, then of men, that are by nature made to have
affection towards each other; and it must needs be that some dwell with
each other, and some are separated, rejoicing in those who are with
them, and not distressed for those who go away. And man, they said, is
magnanimous by nature, and contemneth all things beyond the Will; and
hath also this quality, not to be rooted to one spot, nor grown into the
earth, but able to go from place to place, sometimes urged by divers
needs, sometimes for the sake of what he shall see.

4. And such was the case with Ulysses:—

   “The cities of many peoples and minds of men he
   knew.”—_Od._ i. 3.

And yet earlier with Hercules, who went about the whole earth—

   “All disorders of men and orderly rule to see,”
                                     —_Od._ xvii. 487,

casting out and purging the one, and bringing in the other in its place.
And how many friends, think you, had he in Thebes? how many in Argos?
how many in Athens? and how many did he gain in his journeyings? And he
took a wife, too, when it seemed to him due time, and begat children,
and left them behind him, not with lamentations or regrets, nor leaving
them as orphans; for he knew that no man is an orphan, but that there is
an Eternal Father who careth continually for all. For not of report
alone had he heard that Zeus is the Father of men, whom also he thought
to be his own father, and called Him so, and all that he did, he did
looking unto Him. And thus it was that he was able to live happily in
every place.

5. For never can happiness and the longing for what is not exist
together. For Happiness must have all its will. It is like unto one that
hath eaten and is filled; thirst will not sort with it, nor hunger. _But
Ulysses longed for his wife, and lamented as he sat on the rock._[1] And
do you, then, follow Homer and his stories in everything? Or if he did
in truth lament, what else was he than an unfortunate man? And what good
man is unfortunate? Verily, the Whole is ill-governed if Zeus taketh no
care of his own citizens, that they like himself may be happy; but these
things it is not lawful nor pious even to think of. But Ulysses, if
indeed he lamented and complained, was not a good man. For what good man
is there that knoweth not who he is? and who knoweth this who forgets
that things which come into existence also perish, and that no two human
beings dwell together forever? To aim, then, at things which are
impossible is a contemptible and foolish thing; it is the part of a
stranger and alien in God’s world who fights against God in the one way
he can—by his own opinions.

6. _But my mother laments if she sees me not._ And wherefore hath she
never learned these teachings? Yet, I say not that it is no concern of
ours to prevent her grieving; but that we should not absolutely, and
without exception, desire what is not our own. And the grief of another
is another’s, and my grief is mine own. I will, therefore, absolutely
end mine own grief, for this I can; and that of another according to my
means, but this I will not attempt absolutely. For otherwise I shall be
fighting with God. I shall be opposing and resisting Him in the
government of the Whole; and of this strife against God, this obstinacy,
not only my children’s children, but I myself, too, shall pay the
penalty by day and night; for I shall leap from my bed at visions of the
night, confounded, trembling at every news, having my peace at the mercy
of letters of other persons. _A messenger hath come from Rome; God grant
it be no evil_. But what evil can come upon thee there, where thou art
not? _There is a message from Greece; God grant it be no evil._ And thus
to thee every place may be a source of misfortune. Is it not enough for
thee to be unfortunate where thou art, and not also across the sea, and
by writings? Is this the security of thine affairs? _But what if my
friends which are abroad die there?_ What else than that creatures
destined to die have died? And how dost thou desire to live to old age,
and never to see the death of any whom thou lovest? Knowest thou not
that in a great length of time many and various things must chance; that
a fever shall overthrow one, and a robber another, and a tyrant another?
Such is our environment, such our companions; cold and heat, and
improper ways of living, and journeyings, and voyagings, and winds, and
various circumstances will destroy one man, and exile another, and cast
another into an embassy, and another into a campaign. Sit down, then,
terrified at all these things; grieve and fail, and be unfortunate;
depend on others, and that not on one or two, but myriads upon myriads.

7. Is this what you heard, is this what you learned from the
philosophers? Know you not that our business here is a warfare? and one
must watch, and one go out as a spy, and one must fight? All cannot be
the same thing, nor would it be better if they were. But you neglect to
do the bidding of the commander, and complain when he hath laid somewhat
rougher than common upon you; and you mark not what, so far as in you
lies, you are making the army to become, so that if all copy you, none
will dig a trench, none will cast up a rampart, none will watch, none
will run any risk, but each will appear worthless for warfare. Again, in
a ship, if you go for a sailor, take up one place, and never budge from
it; and if you are wanted to go aloft, refuse; or to run upon the prow,
refuse; and what captain will have patience with you? Will he not cast
you out like some useless thing, nothing else than a hindrance and bad
example to the other sailors?

8. And thus here also: the life of every man is a sort of warfare, and
a long one, and full of divers chances. And it behooveth a man to play a
soldier’s part, and do all at the nod of his commander; yea, and if it
be possible, to divine what he intendeth. For that commander is not such
a one as this, neither in power nor in exaltation of character. You are
set in a great office, and in no mean place, but are a Senator forever.
Know you not that such a one can attend but little to his household, but
he must be oftentimes abroad, ruling or being ruled, or fulfilling some
office, or serving in the field, or judging? And will you, then, desire
to be fixed and rooted like a plant in the same place? _For it is
pleasant._ Who denies it? But so is a dainty pleasant, and a fair woman
is pleasant. How otherwise are those wont to speak who make pleasure
their end? See you not what kind of men they are whose words you utter?
They are the words of Epicureans and profligates. And doing the works of
these men, and holding their doctrines, wilt thou speak to us with the
speech of Zeno and Socrates?

9. Will you not fling away from you as far as you can these alien
sentiments wherewith you adorn yourself, which beseem you not at all?
What other desire have such men than to sleep their fill unhindered, and
when they have risen, to yawn for languor, and wash their face, and
write and read whatever pleaseth them; then have some trivial talk, and
be praised by their friends, whatever they say; then go forth to walk
about, and having done this a little, go to the baths; then eat; then
retire to rest—such a rest as is the wont of such men, and why need we
say what, for it is easily guessed? Come, tell me, then, thine own way
of life, such as thou desirest, O thou votary of the truth, and of
Socrates and Diogenes! What wilt thou do in Athens? these very things,
or others? Why, then, dost declare thyself a Stoic? Are not they sorely
punished which falsely pretend to be Roman citizens; and should those go
free who falsely pretend to so great and reverend a calling and name? or
let this indeed be impossible; but this is the law, divine and mighty,
and not to be escaped, that layeth the greatest punishments on the
greatest sinners. For what saith this law? He who pretendeth to things
that are not his own, let him be a cheat and braggart; he that is
disobedient to the divine government, let him be an abject, a slave, let
him grieve and envy and pity[2]—in a word, let him be misfortunate, and
mourn.

10.——“And now will you have me attend upon such a one, and hang about
his doors?”

If Reason demand it, for the sake of country, of kinsmen, of mankind,
wherefore shouldst thou not go? Thou art not ashamed to go to the doors
of a cobbler when thou art in want of shoes, nor to those of a gardener
for lettuces; and why to those of a rich man when thou art in need of
some like thing?

——“Yea, but I have no awe of the cobbler.”

Then have none of the rich.

——“Nor will I flatter the gardener.”

And do not flatter the rich.

——“How, then, shall I gain what I want?”

Did I say to thee, _Go, for the sake of gaining it_; or did I not only
say, _Go, that thou mayest do what it beseems thee to do_.

——“And why, then, should I yet go?”

That thou mayest have gone; that thou mayest have played the part of a
citizen, of a brother, of a friend. And, for the rest, remember that the
shoemaker, the vegetable-seller, to whom thou didst go, hath nothing
great or exalted to give, even though he sell it dear. Thy aim was
lettuces; they are worth an obol, they are not worth a talent. And so it
is here. Is the matter worth going to the rich man’s door for? So be it;
I will go. Is it worth speaking to him about? So be it; I will speak.
But must I also kiss his hand, and fawn upon him with praise? Out upon
it! that is a talent’s worth. It is no profit to me, nor to the State,
nor to my friends, that they should lose a good citizen and friend.

11.——“How, then, shall I become of an affectionate disposition?”

In having a generous and happy one. For Reason doth never decree that a
man must be abject, or lament, or depend on another, or blame God or
man. And thus be thou affectionate, as one who will keep this faith.
But if through this affection, or what happens to be so called by thee,
thou art like to prove a miserable slave, then it shall not profit thee
to be affectionate. And what hinders us to love as though we loved a
mortal, or one who may depart to other lands? Did Socrates not love his
children? Yea, but as a free man; as one who remembered that he must
first love the Gods. And, therefore, he never did transgress anything
that it becomes a good man to observe, neither in his defense, nor in
fixing his punishment, nor beforetime when he was of the Council, nor
when he was serving in the field. But we are well supplied with every
excuse for baseness; some through children, some through mothers, some
through brothers. But it behooveth no man to be unhappy through any
person, but happy through all, and most of all through God, which hath
framed us to that end.

12. And, for the rest, in all things which are delightful to thee, set
before thyself the appearances that oppose them. What harm is it, while
kissing thy child, to whisper, _To-morrow thou shalt die_; and likewise
with thy friend, _To-morrow thou shall depart, either thou or I, and we
shall see each other no more_?

——“But these are words of ill-omen.”

And so are some incantations, but in that they are useful I regard not
this; only let them be of use. But dost thou call anything of ill-omen,
save only that which betokeneth some evil? Cowardice is a word of
ill-omen, and baseness and grief and mourning and shamelessness, these
words are of ill-omen. And not even them must we dread to speak, if so
we may defend ourselves against the things. But wilt thou say that any
word is of ill-omen that betokeneth some natural thing? Say that it is
of ill-omen to speak of the reaping of ears of corn, for it betokeneth
the destruction of the ears—but not of the universe. Say that the
falling of the leaves is of ill-omen, and the dried fig coming in the
place of the green, and raisins in the place of grapes. For all these
things are changes from the former estate to another; no destruction,
but a certain appointed order and disposition. Here is parting for
foreign lands, and a little change. Here is death—a greater change, not
from that which now is to that which is not, but to that which is not
now.




