BOOK I.


CHAPTER I.

1. “Enter by the door” (_cf._ S. John, x. 1). The parallelisms in
thought and expression between Epictetus and the New Testament have
often been noticed, and the reader will discover many others, to which I
have not thought it necessary to draw attention.

2. “Conceit:” οἴησις, _Einbildung_.

3. “To be elated:” ἐπαίρεσθαι. One might translate, “to be puffed up,”
except that that expression is only used in a bad sense, and one may be
“elated” in anything that is truly of the nature of the good. The Stoics
distinguished between χαρά, joy, and ἡδονή, pleasure; not rejecting or
despising the former.


Chapter II.

1. τὰ μέν εἰσιν ἐφ’ ἡμῖν, τὰ δὲ οὐκ ἐφ’ ἡμῖν. A fundamental distinction
in the Epictetean system, which he sometimes expresses by the phrases,
τὰ ἡμέτερα and τὰ τῶν ἄλλων—things that are our own and things that
belong to others; or τὰ ἴδια and τὰ ἀλλότρια—things that are our proper
concern, and things that are alien to us.

2. On the Mons Palatinus in Rome there stood a temple to Fever. Upton
quotes from Gruter, p. xcvii., an interesting inscription to this
divinity: Febri. Divæ. Febri. Sanctæ. Febri. Magnæ. Camilla. Amata. Pro.
Filio. Male. Affecto. P.


Chapter III.

1. There is excellent MS. authority for this reading of the passage,
which, however, is not Schweighäuser’s. The latter reads: “Be content
with them, and pray to the Gods.”

2. “Steward of the winds.” A quotation from Homer, _Od._ x. 21.


Chapter IV.

1. “Through not being dazzled,” etc. Ἂν τὰς ὕλας μὴ θαυμάσῃ.


Chapter VI.

1. Note that in this passage “God” and “the Gods” and “the Divine” are
all synonymous terms.

2. Or “of names.”

3. Some texts add “such as Good or Evil.”


CHAPTER VII.

1. Apparently a proverb, which maybe paralleled in its present
application by Luther’s “Pecca fortiter.”

2. A complex or conjunctive proposition is one which contains several
assertions so united as to form a single statement which will be false
if any one of its parts is false—_e.g._, “Brutus was the lover and
destroyer both of Cæsar and of his country.” The disjunctive is when
alternative propositions are made, as “Pleasure is either good or bad,
or neither good nor bad.”

3. I have followed Lord Shaftesbury’s explanation of this passage, which
the other commentators have given up as corrupt. It seems clear that
whether the passage can stand exactly in the form in which we have it,
or not, Lord Shaftesbury’s rendering represents what Epictetus
originally conveyed.

4. According to the usual reading, a scornful exclamation—“_Thou_
exhort them!” I have followed the reading recommended by Schw. in his
notes, although he does not adopt it in his text.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. The founder of the Cynic school was Antisthenes, who taught in the
gymnasium named the Cynosarges, at Athens; whence the name of his
school. Zeller takes this striking chapter to exhibit Epictetus’s
“philosophisches Ideal,” the Cynic being the “wahrer Philosoph,” or
perfect Stoic. (Phil. d. Gr. iii. S. 752.) This view seems to me no more
true than that the missionary or monk is to be considered the ideal
Christian. Epictetus takes pains to make it clear that the Cynic is a
Stoic with a special and separate vocation, which all Stoics are by no
means called upon to take up. Like Thoreau, that modern Stoic, when he
went to live at Walden, the Cynic tries the extreme of abnegation in
order to demonstrate practically that man has resources within himself
which make him equal to any fate that circumstances can inflict.

2. τριβώνιον, a coarse garment especially affected by the Cynics, as
also by the early Christian ascetics.

3. “Nor pity.” Upton, in a note on _Diss._ i. 18. 3. (Schw.), refers to
various passages in Epictetus where pity and envy are mentioned together
as though they were related emotions, and aptly quotes Virgil (_Georg._
ii. 499):—

  “Aut doluit miserans inopem, aut invidit habenti.”

It will be clear to any careful reader that when Epictetus asserts that
certain emotions or acts are unworthy of a man, he constantly means the
“man” to be understood as his highest spiritual faculty, his deepest
sense of reason, his soul. That we are not to pity or grieve means that
that side of us which is related to the divine and eternal is not to be
affected by emotions produced by calamities in mere outward and material
things. St. Augustine corroborates this view in an interesting passage
bearing on the Stoic doctrine of pity (_De Civ. Dei._ ix. 5; _Schw._ iv.
132):—

“Misericordiam Cicero non dubitavit appellare virtutem, quam Stoicos
inter vitia numerare non pudet, qui tamen, ut docuit liber Epicteti
nobilissimi Stoici ex decretis Zenonis et Chrysippi, qui hujus sectæ
primas partes habuerunt, hujuscemodi passiones in animum Sapientis
admittunt, quem vitiis omnibus liberam esse volunt. Unde fit consequens,
ut hæc ipsa non putent vitia, quando Sapienti sic accidunt, ut contra
virtutem mentis rationemque nihil possunt.”

The particular utterances of Epictetus here alluded to by St. Augustine
must have been contained in some of the lost books of the
_Dissertations_, as nothing like them is to be found explicitly in those
which survive, although the latter afford us abundant means for deducing
the conclusion which St. Augustine confirms.

4. This cake seems to form a ridiculous anti-climax. But it appears to
have been a vexed question in antiquity whether an ascetic philosopher
might indulge in this particular luxury (πλακοῦς). Upton quotes Lucian
and Diogenes Laertius for instances of this question being propounded,
and an affirmative answer given (in one instance by the Cynic,
Diogenes). The youth in the text is being addressed as a novice who must
not use the freedom of an adept.

5. Upton quotes from Cymbeline:—

  “Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
  Art they not, but in Britain? Prythee, think,
  There’s living out of Britain!”

But Epictetus means more than this in his allusion to sun and
stars.—See Preface, xxiv. This passage would lead us to suppose that
Epictetus believed in a personal existence continued for some time after
death. In the end, however, even sun and stars shall vanish.—See ii.
13, 4.

6. Being arrested by Philip’s people, and asked if he were a spy,
Diogenes replied, “Certainly I am, O Philip; a spy of thine ill-counsel
and folly, who for no necessity canst set thy life and kingdom on the
chances of an hour.”

7. According to Upton’s conjecture, these were gladiators famous for
bodily strength; and also, one would suspect, for some remarkable
calamity.

8. This highly crude view of the Trojan war might have been refuted out
of the mouth of Epictetus himself. Evil-doers are not to be allowed
their way because they are unable to hurt our souls, but the hurt may be
in the cowardice or sloth that will not punish them.

9. By wearing his cloak half falling off, in negligent fashion. Nothing
is finer or more characteristic in Epictetus than his angry scorn of the
pseudo-Stoics of his day.

10. ἀνάκρινον τὸ δαιμόνιον. The allusion evidently is to the genius or
divine spirit by which Socrates felt himself guided.

11. Crates was a disciple of Diogenes. His wife was named Hipparchia.
Upton quotes Menander (_apud Diog. L._), “Thou wilt walk about with me
in a cloak as once did his wife with Crates the Cynic.”

12. Danaus, father of the fifty Danaidæ. Æolus is mentioned in _Od._ x.
as having six sons and six daughters.

13. τραπεζῆας πυλαωρούς. _Il._ xxi. 69.

14. That is, he capped the quotation by quoting the following line
(_Il._ ii. 24, 25). Not a very striking intellectual effort; but
Epictetus evidently considered it a meritorious thing to know Homer well
enough to quote him in one’s sleep, and he was right.

15. From a poem of Cleanthes.


