CHAPTER XXV.

AIMS OF NATURE.


1. The will of Nature is to be learned from matters which do not concern
ourselves.[1] Thus, when a boy may break the cup of another man, we are
ready to say, _It is a common chance_. Know, then, that when thine own
is broken, it behooves thee to be as though it were another man’s. And
apply this even to greater things. Has another man’s child died, or his
wife? who is there that will not say, _It is the lot of humanity_. But
when his own may die, then straightway it is, _Alas, wretched that I
am!_ But we should bethink ourselves what we felt on hearing of others
in the same plight.

2. As a mark is not set up to be missed, even so the nature of evil
exists not in the universe.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE MIND’S SECURITY.


If any one should set your body at the mercy of every passer-by, you
would be indignant. When, therefore, you set your own mind at the mercy
of every chance, to be troubled and perturbed when any one may revile
you, have you no shame of this?




CHAPTER XXVII.

THAT A MAN SHOULD BE ONE MAN.


1. In every work you will take in hand mark well what must go before and
what must follow, and so proceed. For else you shall at first set out
eagerly, as not regarding what is to follow; but in the end, if any
difficulties have arisen, you will leave it off with shame.

2. So you wish to conquer in the Olympic games? And I, too, by the Gods;
and a fine thing it would be. But mark the prefaces and the
consequences, and then set to work. You must go under discipline, eat by
rule, abstain from dainties, exercise yourself at the appointed hour, in
heat or cold, whether you will or no, drink nothing cold, nor wine at
will; in a word, you must give yourself over to the trainer as to a
physician. Then in the contest itself there is the digging race,[1] and
you are like enough to dislocate your wrist, or turn your ankle, to
swallow a great deal of dust, to be soundly drubbed, and after all these
things to be defeated.

3. If, having considered these things, you are still in the mind to
enter for the contest, then do so. But without consideration you will
turn from one thing to another like a child, who now plays the wrestler,
now the gladiator, now sounds the trumpet, then declaims like an actor;
and so you, too, will be first an athlete, then a gladiator, then an
orator, then a philosopher, and nothing with your whole soul; but as an
ape you will mimic everything you see, and be charmed with one thing
after another. For you approached nothing with consideration nor
regularity, but rashly, and with a cold desire.

4. And thus some men, having seen a philosopher, and heard discourse
like that of Euphrates[2] (yet who indeed can say that any discourse is
like his?), desire that they also may become philosophers.

5. But, O man! consider first what it is you are about to do, and then
inquire of your own nature whether you can carry it out. Will you be a
pentathlos,[3] or a wrestler? Then, scan your arms and thighs; try your
loins. For different men are made for different ends.

6. Think you, you can be a sage, and continue to eat and drink and be
wrathful and take offense just as you were wont? Nay, but you must watch
and labor, and withdraw yourself from your household, and be despised by
any serving boy, and be ridiculed by your neighbors, and take the lower
place everywhere, in honors, in authority, in courts of justice, in
dealings of every kind.[4]

7. Consider these things—whether you are willing at such a price to
gain peace, freedom, and an untroubled spirit. And if not, then attempt
it not, nor, like a child, play now the philosopher, then the
tax-gatherer, then the orator, then the Procurator of Cæsar. For these
things agree not among themselves; and, good or bad, it behooves you to
be one man. You should be perfecting either your own ruling faculty, or
your outward well-being; spending your art either on the life within or
the life without; that is to say, you must hold your place either among
the sages or the vulgar.


END OF BOOK II.




_BOOK III._




