CHAPTER IV.

THE NATURE OF THE GOOD.


1. The subject for the good and wise man is his own master-faculty, as
the body is for the physician and the trainer, and the soil is the
subject for the husbandman. And the work of the good and wise man is to
use appearances according to Nature. For it is the nature of every soul
to consent to what is good and to reject what is evil, and to hold back
about what is uncertain; and thus to be moved to pursue the good and to
avoid the evil, and neither way towards what is neither good nor evil.
For as it is not lawful for the money-changer or the seller of herbs to
reject Cæsar’s coin, but if one present it, then, whether he will or no,
he must give up what is sold for it, so it is also with the soul. When
the Good appears, straightway the soul is moved towards it, and from the
Evil. And never doth the soul reject any clear appearance of the good,
no more than Cæsar’s coin. On this hangeth every movement both of God
and man.

2. The nature and essence of the Good is in a certain disposition of the
Will; likewise that of the Evil. What, then, are outward things? Matter
for the Will, about which being occupied it shall attain its own good or
evil. How shall it attain the Good? Through not being dazzled with
admiration of what it works on.[1] For our opinions of this, when right,
make the will right, and when wrong make it evil. This law hath God
established, and saith, “If thou wouldst have aught of good, have it
from thyself.”

3. If these things are true (and if we are not fools or hypocrites),
that Good, for man, lies in the Will, and likewise Evil, and all other
things are nothing to us, why are we still troubled? why do we fear? The
things for which we have been zealous are in no other man’s power; and
for the things that are in others’ power we are not concerned. What
difficulty have we now? _But direct me_, sayest thou. And why shall I
direct thee? hath not God directed thee? hath He not given thee that
which is thine own unhindered and unhampered, and hindered and hampered
that which is not thine own? And what direction, what word of command
didst thou receive from Him when thou camest thence? “Hold fast
everything which is thine own—covet not that which is alien to thee.
And faithfulness is thine, and reverence is thine: who, then, can rob
thee of these things? Who can hinder thee to use them, if not thyself?
But thyself can do it, and how? When thou art zealous about things not
thine own, and hast cast away the things that are.” With such counsels
and commands from Zeus, what wilt thou still from me? Am I greater than
he? am I more worthy of thy faith? But if thou hold to these things, of
what others hast thou need? _But perchance these are none of his
commands?_ Then bring forward the natural conceptions, bring the proofs
of the philosophers, bring the things thou hast often heard, bring the
things that thyself hast spoken, bring what thou hast read, bring what
thou hast pondered.




CHAPTER V.

THE PROMISE OF PHILOSOPHY.


1. Of things that exist, some are in our own power, some are not in our
own power. Of things that are in our own power are our opinions,
impulses, pursuits, avoidances, and, in brief, all that is of our own
doing. Of things that are not in our own power are the body,
possessions, reputation, authority, and, in brief, all that is not of
our own doing. And the things that are in our own power are in their
nature free, not liable to hindrance or embarrassment, while the things
that are not in our own power are strengthless, servile, subject, alien.

2. Remember, then, if you hold things by their nature subject to be
free, and things alien to be your proper concern, you will be hampered,
you will lament, you will be troubled, you will blame Gods and men. But
if you hold that only to be your own which is so, and the alien for what
it is, alien, then none shall ever compel you, none shall hinder you,
you will blame no one, accuse no one, you will not do the least thing
unwillingly, none shall harm you, you shall have no foe, for you shall
suffer no injury.

3. Aiming, then, at things so high, remember that it is no moderate
passion wherewith you must attempt them, but some things you must
utterly renounce, and put some, for the present, aside. For if, let us
say, you aim also at this, to rule and to gather riches, then you are
like, through aiming at the chief things also, to miss these lower ends;
and shall most assuredly miss those others, through which alone freedom
and happiness are won. Straightway, then, practice saying to every harsh
appearance—_Thou art an Appearance and not at all the thing thou
appearest to be_. Then examine it, and prove it by the rules you have,
but first and above all by this, whether it concern something that is in
our own power, or something that is not in our own power. And if the
latter, then be the thought at hand: _It is nothing to Me._




CHAPTER VI.

THE WAY OF PHILOSOPHY.


1. A certain Roman having entered with his son and listened to one
lecture, “This,” said Epictetus, “is the manner of teaching;” and he was
silent. But when the other prayed him to continue, he spake as
follows:—

Every art is wearisome, in the learning of it, to the untaught and
unskilled. Yet things that are made by the arts immediately declare
their use, and for what they were made, and in most of them is something
attractive and pleasing. And thus when a shoemaker is learning his trade
it is no pleasure to stand by and observe him, but the shoe is useful,
and moreover not unpleasing to behold. And the learning of a carpenter’s
trade is very grievous to an untaught person who happens to be present,
but the work done declares the need of the art. But far more is this
seen in music, for if you are by where one is learning, it will appear
the most painful of all instructions; but that which is produced by the
musical art is sweet and delightful to hear, even to those who are
untaught in it. And here we conceive the work of one who studies
philosophy to be some such thing, that he must fit his desire to all
events, so that nothing may come to pass against our will, nor may aught
fail to come to pass that we wish for. Whence it results to those who so
order it, that they never fail to obtain what they would, nor to avoid
what they would not, living, as regards themselves, without pain, fear,
or trouble; and as regards their fellows, observing all the relations,
natural and acquired; as son or father, or brother or citizen, or
husband or wife, or neighbor or fellow-traveler, or prince or subject.
Such we conceive to be the work of one who pursues philosophy. And next
we must inquire how this may come about.

2. We see, then, that the carpenter becomes a carpenter by learning
something, and by learning something the pilot becomes a pilot. And here
also is it not on this wise? Is it enough that we merely wish to become
good and wise, or must we not also learn something? We inquire, then,
what we have to learn?

3. The philosophers say that, before all things, it is needful to learn
that God is, and taketh thought for all things; and that nothing can be
hid from Him, neither deeds, nor even thoughts or wishes. Thereafter, of
what nature the Gods are. For whatever they are found to be, he who
would please and serve them must strive, with all his might, to be like
unto them. If the Divine is faithful, so must he be faithful; if free,
so must he be free; if beneficent, so must he be beneficent; if
high-minded, so must he be high-minded; so that thus emulating God, he
shall both do and speak the things that follow therefrom.[1]

4. Whence, then, shall we make a beginning? If you will consider this
with me, I shall say, first, that you must attend to the sense of
words.[2]

——“So I do not now understand them?”

You do not.

——“How, then, do I use them?”

As the unlettered use written words, or as cattle use appearances; for
the use is one thing and understanding another. But if you think you
understand, then take any word you will,[3] and let us try ourselves,
whether we understand it. But it is hateful to be confuted, for a man
now old, and one who, perhaps, hath served his three campaigns! And I
too know this. For you have come to me now as one who lacketh nothing.
And what could you suppose to be lacking to you? Wealth have you, and
children, and it may be a wife, and many servants; Cæsar knows you, you
have won many friends in Rome, you give every man his due, you reward
with good him that doeth good to you, and with evil him that doeth evil.
What is still lacking to you? If, now, I shall show you that you lack
the greatest and most necessary things for happiness, and that to this
day you have cared for everything rather than for what behooved you; and
if I crown all and say that you know not what God is nor what man is,
nor Good nor Evil;—and what I say of other things is perhaps endurable,
but if I say you know not your own self, how can you endure me, and bear
the accusation, and abide here? Never—but straightway you will go away
in anger. And yet what evil have I done you? Unless the mirror doth evil
to the ill-favored man, when it shows him to himself such as he is, and
unless the physician is thought to affront the sick man when he may say
to him: _Man, dost thou think thou ailest nothing? Thou hast a fever:
fast to-day and drink water._ And none saith, _What an affront_. But if
one shall say to a man: _Thy pursuits art inflamed, thine avoidances are
mean, thy purposes are lawless, thy impulses accord not with nature,
thine opinions are vain and lying_—straightway he goeth forth and
saith, _He affronted me_.

5. We follow our business as in a great fair. Cattle and oxen are
brought to be sold; and the greater part of the men come some to buy,
some to sell; and few are they who come for the spectacle of the
fair,—how it comes to pass, and wherefore, and who are they who have
established it, and to what end. And so it is here, too, in this
assembly of life. Some, indeed, like cattle, concern themselves with
nothing but fodder; even such as those that care for possessions and
lands and servants and offices, for these are nothing more than fodder.
But few are they who come to the fair for love of the spectacle, what
the world is and by whom it is governed. By no one? And how is it
possible that a state or a house cannot endure, no not for the shortest
time, without a governor and overseer, but this so great and fair fabric
should be guided thus orderly by chance and accident? There is, then,
one who governs. But what is his nature? and how doth he govern? and we,
that were made by him, what are we, and for what are we? or have we at
least some intercourse and link with him, or have we none? Thus it is
that these few are moved, and thenceforth study this alone, to learn
about the fair, and to depart. What then? they are mocked by the
multitude. And in the fair, too, the observers are mocked by the
traders; and had the cattle any reflection they would mock all those who
cared for anything else than fodder.




