CHAPTER VI.

ON STATECRAFT.


1. Not with the stones of Eubœa and Sparta let the structure of your
city walls be variegated; but let the discipline and teaching that comes
from Greece penetrate with order the minds of citizens and statesmen.
For with the thoughts of men are cities well established, and not with
wood and stone.

2. If thou wouldst have a household well established, then follow the
example of the Spartan Lycurgus. For even as he did not fence the city
with walls, but fortified the inhabitants with virtue, and so preserved
the city free for ever, thus do thou not surround thyself with a great
court and set up lofty towers, but confirm the dwellers in the house
with good-will, and faith, and friendliness, and no harmful thing shall
enter; no, not if the whole army of evil were arrayed against it.

3. Which of us will not admire Lycurgus, the Lacedæmonian? For having
lost an eye at the hands of one of the citizens, and having received the
young man from the people that he should punish him as he would, he
refrained from this; but having taught him and proved him to be a good
man, he brought him into the theater. And when the Lacedæmonians
marveled, _I received this man from you_, he said, _insolent and
violent; I give him back to you mild and civil_.




CHAPTER VII.

ON FRIENDSHIP.


1. Whereinsoever a man is zealous, this, it is fair to suppose, he
loveth. Are men, then, zealous for evil things? Never.[1] Or, perchance,
for things which do not concern them? Nor for them either. It
remaineth, then, that they are zealous about good things only; and that
if they are zealous about them, they also love them. Whosoever, then,
hath understanding of good things, the same would know how to love. But
he who is not able to distinguish good things from evil, and things that
are neither from both, how could this man yet be capable of loving? To
love, then, is a quality of the wise alone.

2. _And how is this_, saith one, _for I am foolish, and none the less do
I love my child_. By the Gods! I wonder, then, how you have begun by
confessing yourself to be foolish. For wherein do you lack? Do you not
use your senses? do you not judge of appearances? do you not bring to
the body the nourishment it needeth, and the covering and habitation?
Wherefore, then, confess yourself to be a fool? Because, forsooth, you
are often perplexed by appearances, and troubled, and you are vanquished
by their plausibility; and you take the same things to be now good, and
now evil, and then indifferent; and, in a word, you grieve and fear and
envy, and are troubled, and changed—for these things you confess
yourself a fool.

3. But do you never change in love? But is it wealth, and pleasure,
and, in short, things, alone that you sometimes take to be good and
sometimes evil? and do you not take the same men to be now good, now
evil? and sometimes you are friendly disposed towards them, and
sometimes hostile? and sometimes you praise them, and sometimes you
blame?

——“Yea, even so I do.”

What then? a man who hath been deceived about another, is he, think you,
his friend?

——“Assuredly not.”

And one who hath taken a friend out of a humor for change, hath he
good-will towards him?

——“Nor he either.”

And he who now reviles another, and afterwards reveres him?

——“Nor he.”

What then? Sawest thou never the whelps of a dog, how they fawn and
sport with each other, that you would say nothing can be more loving?
But to know what friendship is, fling a piece of flesh among them, and
thou shalt learn. And cast between thee and thy child a scrap of land,
and thou shalt learn how the child will quickly wish to bury thee, and
thou wilt pray that he may die. And then thou wilt say, _What a child
have I nourished! this long time he is burying me!_ Throw a handsome
girl between you, and the old man will love her, and the young too;[2]
and if it be glory, or some risk to run, it will be on the same fashion.
You will speak the words of the father of Admetus[3]:—

  “Day gladdens thee; think’st thou it glads not me?
  Thou lovest light; think’st thou I love the dark?”

Think you this man did not love his own child when it was little? nor
was in agony if it had a fever? nor said many a time, _Would that I had
the fever rather than he!_ Then when the trial cometh and is near at
hand, lo, what words they utter! And Eteocles and Polyneices,[4] were
they not children of the same mother and the same father? were they not
brought up together, did they not live together, drink together, sleep
together, and often kiss one another? So that any one who saw them, I
think, would have laughed at the philosophers, for the things they say
perversely about friendship. But when royalty, like a piece of flesh,
hath fallen between them, hear what things they speak:—

  “_Pol._ Where wilt thou stand before the towers?”

   _Et._ Wherefore seekest thou to know?”

   _Pol._ There I too would stand and slay thee.”

   _Et._ Thou hast spoken my desire.”

4. For universally, be not deceived, nothing is so dear to any creature
as its own profit. Whatsoever may seem to hinder this, be it father or
child or friend or lover, this he will hate and abuse and curse. For
Nature hath never so made anything as to love aught but its own profit:
this is father and brother and kin and country and God. When, then, the
Gods appear to hinder us in this, we revile even them, and overthrow
their images and burn their temples; as Alexander, when his friend died,
commanded to burn the temples of Esculapius.

5. Therefore, if a man place in the same thing both profit and holiness,
and the beautiful and fatherland, and parents and friends, all these
things shall be saved; but if he place profit in one thing, and friends
and fatherland and kinsfolk, yea, and righteousness itself some other
where, all these things shall perish, for profit shall outweigh them.
For where the I and the Mine are, thither, of necessity, inclineth every
living thing: if in the flesh, then the supremacy is there; if in the
Will, it is there; if in outward things, it is there. If, then, mine I
is where my Will is, thus only shall I be the friend I should be, or the
son or the father. For my profit then will be to cherish faith and piety
and forbearance and continence and helpfulness; and to guard the bonds
of relation. But if I set Myself in one place and Virtue some
otherwhere, then the word of Epicurus waxeth strong, which declareth
that there is no Virtue, or, at least, that Virtue is but conceit.

6. Through this ignorance did Athenians and Lacedæmonians quarrel with
each other, and Thebans with both of them, and the Great King with
Hellas, and Macedonians with both of them, and even now Romans with
Getæ; and through this yet earlier the wars of Ilion arose. Paris was
the guest of Menelaus; and if any one had seen how friendly-minded
towards each other they were, he would have disbelieved any one who said
they were not friends. But a morsel was flung between them—a fair
woman, and about her there was war. And now when you see friends or
brothers that seem to be of one mind, argue nothing from this concerning
their friendship; nay, not if they swear it, not if they declare that
they cannot be parted from each other. For in the ruling faculty of a
worthless man there is no faith; it is unstable, unaccountable, victim
of one appearance after another. But try them, not, as others do, if
they were born of the same parents and nurtured together, and under the
same tutor; but by this alone, wherein they place their profit, whether
in outward things or in the will. If in outward things, call them no
more friends than faithful or steadfast or bold or free; yea, nor even
men, if you had sense. For that opinion hath nothing of humanity that
makes men bite each other, and revile each other, and haunt the
wildernesses, or the public places, like the mountains,[5] and in the
courts of justice to show forth the character of thieves; nor that which
makes men drunkards and adulterers and corruptors, nor whatever other
ills men work against each other through this one and only opinion, that
They and Theirs lie in matters beyond the Will. But if you hear, in
sooth, that these men hold the Good to be there only where the Will is,
where the right use of appearances is, then be not busy to inquire if
they are father and son, or brothers, or have long time companied with
each other as comrades; but, knowing this one thing alone, argue
confidently that they are friends, even as they are faithful and
upright. For where else is friendship than where faith is, where piety
is, where there is an interchange of virtue, and none of other things
than that?

7. _But such a one hath shown kindness to me so long, and is he not my
friend?_ Slave, whence knowest thou if he did not show thee kindness as
he wipes his shoes or tends his beast? Whence knowest thou if, when thy
use is at an end as a vessel, he will not cast thee away like a broken
plate? _But she is my wife, and we have lived together so long?_ And how
long lived Eriphyle with Amphiaraus, and was the mother, yea, of many
children? But a necklace came between them.[6] But what is a necklace?
It is the opinion men have concerning such things. That was the wild
beast nature, that was the sundering of love, that which would not allow
the woman to be a wife, or the mother a mother. And of you, whosoever
hath longed either to be a friend himself or to win some other for a
friend, let him cut out these opinions, let him hate them and drive them
from his soul.

8. And thus he will not revile himself, nor be at strife with himself,
nor be variable, nor torment himself. And to another, if it be one like
himself, he will be altogether as to himself, but with one unlike he
will be forbearing and gentle and mild, ready to forgive him as an
ignorant man, as one who is astray about the greatest things; but harsh
to no man, being well assured of that dogma of Plato, that no soul is
willingly deprived of the truth.

9. But otherwise you may do all things whatsoever, even as friends are
wont to do, and drink together, and dwell together, and voyage together,
and be born from the same parents, for so are snakes; but friends they
are not, nor are ye, so long as ye hold these accursed doctrines of wild
beasts.




