CHAPTER III.

OF PROVIDENCE.


1. Marvel not if the other animals have all things that are needful for
the body without preparation, not alone food and drink, but sleeping
places also, and they have no need of shoes, nor bedding, nor raiment,
while all these things must needs be added to us. For these creatures
exist not for themselves, but for service; it were not expedient that
they had been made with need of such additions. For, look you, what a
task it were for us to take thought, not for ourselves alone, but also
for the sheep and the asses, how they should be clad, how shod, how they
should eat, how they should drink! But as soldiers are ready for their
commands, shod, and clothed, and accoutred, and it would be a grievous
thing if each captain of a thousand must go round and shoe or clothe
his thousand; so also hath Nature formed the animals that are made for
service, ready equipped, and needing no further care. And thus one
little child with a rod will drive the sheep.

2. But now we, neglecting to be grateful, for that we need not attend to
the animals equally with ourselves, do accuse God for our own lack. And
yet, by Zeus and all the Gods, there is no one thing in the frame of
Nature but would give, at least to a reverent and grateful spirit,
enough for the perceiving of the Providence of God. And to speak of no
great things now, consider this alone, how milk is produced from grass,
and cheese from milk, and wool from skins. Who is he that hath made
these things or planned them? _No one_, sayest thou? O monstrous
impudence and dullness!

3. Well, then, let the large works of Nature pass, and let us look only
at her by-works. Is there aught more useless than the hairs on the chin?
What then? hath she not made such use even of these, that nothing could
be comelier? hath she not by them distinguished male from female? Doth
not the nature of every man cry aloud even at a distance, _I am a man,
thus shalt thou approach me, thus speak to me, look for nothing else;
behold the tokens!_ And again in women, as Nature hath mingled something
of softness in the voice, so she hath taken away the hairs. _Nay_, will
you say? _but every creature should have been left undistinguished, and
each of us should proclaim_, “_I am a man_?” But how beautiful is not
the token, and becoming, and reverend? how much more beautiful than the
cock’s comb? how much more becoming than the lion’s mane? Wherefore it
behooveth us to preserve God’s tokens, nor to fling them away, nor to
confound, as far as in us lies, the things that distinguish the sexes.

4. Are these the only works of Providence in us?—but what may suffice
to rightly praise and tell them? For had we understanding thereof, would
any other thing better beseem us, either in company or alone, than to
hymn the Divine Being, and laud Him and rehearse His gracious deeds?
Should we not, as we dig or plow or eat, sing this hymn to God, _Great
is God, who hath given us such instruments whereby we shall till the
earth; great is God, who hath given us hands, and swallowing, and the
belly; who maketh us to grow without our knowledge, and to breathe while
we sleep_. These things it were fitting that every man should sing, and
to chant the greatest and divinest hymns for this, that He hath given us
the power to observe and consider His works and a Way wherein to
walk.[1] What then? since the most of you have become blind, should
there not be one to fill this place, and in the name of all to sing this
hymn to God? For what else can I do, an old man and lame, than sing
hymns to God? If I were a nightingale I would do after the nature of a
nightingale; if a swan, after that of a swan. But now I am a reasoning
creature, and it behooves me to sing the praise of God: this is my task,
and this I do, nor, as long as it is granted me, will I ever abandon
this post. And you, too, I summon to join me in the same song.




CHAPTER IV.

GOD IN MAN.


1. God is beneficial. But the Good is also beneficial. It is likely,
then, that where the essence of God is, there also should be the essence
of the Good. And what is the essence of God? Flesh? God forbid. A
property in land? God forbid. Fame? God forbid. Mind, Intelligence,
Right Reason? Even so. Here, then, once for all, seek the essence of the
Good. For surely you will in no wise seek it in a plant? _Nay._ Or in
any unreasoning creature? _Nay._ If, then, it is sought in a reasoning
creature, wherefore continue to seek it anywhere else than in the
difference between reasoning and unreasoning creatures?

2. The plants have not so much as the use of appearances, therefore we
speak not of the Good in their regard. The Good, then, needs the power
of using appearances. And this alone? Nay; for if so, say then that Good
and Happiness and Unhappiness are with the lower animals too. But this
you will not say, and you are right; for though they possessed the use
of appearances in the highest degree, yet the observing and considering
of this use they do not possess, and naturally so, for they exist to
serve others, nor have any supreme object in themselves.[1] For the ass
was not made for any supreme object in himself? Nay, but he was made
able to bear, because we had need of a back; and, by Zeus, we had need
moreover that he should walk; wherefore he received also the power to
use appearances, else had he not been able to walk. And thereupon the
matter stopped. For had he also received the observing and considering
of the use of appearances, it is clear that in reason he could no longer
have been subject to us, nor have served those needs of ours, but he had
been our equal and our like.

3. For use is one thing, and observation and study is another. God had
need of the other animals to use appearances, but of us to observe and
study appearances. Wherefore it is enough for them to eat and drink, and
rest and breed, and do whatever else each of them performs, but to us,
to whom the faculty of observing and studying hath also been given,
these things are not enough; but unless we act after a certain manner
and ordinance, and conformably to the nature and constitution of man, we
shall never attain the end of our being. For where the constitution is
different, different there also is the task and the end. When,
therefore, the constitution is one for use alone, then the use, of
whatever kind it be, is enough; but where there is also observing and
studying of the use, then, unless the due employment of this faculty be
added, the end shall never be gained. What then? God hath constituted
every other animal, one to be eaten, another to serve for tilling the
land, another to yield cheese, another to some kindred use; for which
things what need is there of the observing and studying of appearances,
and the ability to make distinctions in them? But man he hath brought in
to be a spectator of God and of His works, and not a spectator alone,
but an interpreter of them. Wherefore it is shameful for a man to begin
and to end where creatures do that are without Reason; but rather should
he begin when they begin, and end where Nature ends in ourselves. But
she ends in contemplation, in observing and studying, in a manner of
life that is in harmony with Nature. See to it, then, that ye die not
without having been spectators of these things.

4. Seek, then, the essence of the Good there, where if it be not, thou
wilt not say that the Good is in any other thing.

5. But what? are not those creatures also works of God? Surely; yet not
supreme objects, yet not parts of the Gods. But thou art a supreme
object, thou art a piece of God, thou hast in thee something that is a
portion of Him. Why, then, art thou ignorant of thy high ancestry? Why
knowest thou not whence thou camest? Wilt thou not remember, in thine
eating, who it is that eats, and whom thou dost nourish? in cohabiting,
who it is that cohabits? in converse, in exercise, in argument, knowest
thou not that thou art nourishing a God, exercising a God? Unhappy man!
thou bearest about with thee a God, and knowest it not! Thinkest thou I
speak of some God of gold and silver, and external to thee? Nay, but in
thyself thou dost bear Him, and seest not that thou defilest Him with
thine impure thoughts and filthy deeds. In the presence even of an image
of God thou hadst not dared to do one of those things which thou dost.
But in the presence of God Himself within thee, who seeth and heareth
all things, thou art not ashamed of the things thou dost both desire and
do, O thou unwitting of thine own nature, and subject to the wrath of
God?

6. Why, then, do we fear in sending forth a young man from the school
into some of the business of life, lest he should do wrong in anything,
and be luxurious or profligate, and lest a wrapping of rags degrade him,
or fine raiment uplift him? Such a one knoweth not his own God, nor with
whom he is setting out. But can we have patience with him, saying,
_Would that I had you with me!_[2] And hast thou not God with thee
there? or having Him, dost thou seek for any other? or will He speak
other things to thee than even these?

7. But wert thou a statue of Pheidias, an Athena or Zeus, then wert
thou mindful both of thyself and of the artist; and if thou hadst any
consciousness, thou wouldst strive to do nothing unworthy of thy maker
nor of thyself, nor ever to appear in any unseemly guise. But now that
Zeus hath made thee, thou carest therefore nothing what kind of creature
thou showest thyself for? And yet, is the one Artist like the other
artist, or the one work like the other work? And what kind of work is
that which hath in itself the faculties that were manifest in the making
of it? Do not artists work in stone or brass or gold or ivory? and the
Athena of Pheidias, when she hath once stretched out her hand and
received upon it the figure of Victory, standeth thus for all time? But
the works of God have motion and breathing, and the use of appearances
and the judgment of them. Wilt thou dishonor such a Maker, whose work
thou art? Nay, for not only did He make thee, but to thee alone did He
trust and commit thyself. Wilt thou not remember this too, or wilt thou
dishonor thy charge? But if God had committed some orphan child to thee,
wouldst thou have neglected it? Now He hath given thee to thyself, and
saith, _I had none more worthy of trust than thee; keep this man such as
he was made by nature—reverent, faithful, high, unterrified, unshaken
of passions, untroubled_. And thou wilt not.

8. But they may say: _Whence doth this fellow bring us that eye of scorn
and solemn looks?_ I have it not yet as I should, For I am yet unbold in
those things which I have learned and assented to; I yet fear my
weakness. But let me be bold in them, and then ye shall see such a look,
such a guise, as behooveth me to wear. Then shall I show you the statue
when it is perfected and polished. What look ye for?—an eye of scorn?
God forbid! For doth the Zeus in Olympia look scornfully?—nay, but his
glance is steadfast, as becometh him who will say,

   “None trusts in vain my irrevocable word.”—_Il._ i. 526.

Such will I show myself to you—faithful, reverent, generous,
untroubled. _Not also, then, deathless, ageless, deceaseless?_ Nay, but
dying as God, sickening as a God. These I have, these I can; but other
things I neither have nor can. I will show you the thews of a
philosopher. And what are these? A pursuit that never fails, an
avoidance that never miscarries, seemly desire, studious resolve,
cautious assent.[3] These shall ye see.




