CHAPTER I.

OBLIGATIONS.


1. Obligations are universally defined by the bonds of relation. Is such
a man your father? Then it is implied that you are to take care of him,
to give place to him in all things, to bear his rebukes, his
chastisement. _But if he be a bad father?_ Were you then related by any
law of Nature to a good father? Nay, but simply to a father. Your
brother does you wrong. Then guard your own place towards him, nor
scrutinize what he is doing, but what you may do to keep your will in
accord with Nature. For none other shall hurt you, if yourself choose it
not, but you shall be hurt then when you conceive yourself to be so.

2. Thus shall you discover your obligations from the offices of a
neighbor, a citizen, a general, if you will accustom yourself to watch
the relationships.




CHAPTER II.

AGAINST EPICURUS.


1. Even Epicurus is conscious that we are by nature social, but having
once placed the Good in the husk,[1] he cannot thereafter speak anything
but what agrees with this; for again he affirms, and rightly affirms,
that nothing is to be admired or received that is separated from the
nature of the Good. How, then, Epicurus, do you suspect that we are
social, if Nature had given us no affection for our offspring?[2]
Wherefore do you counsel the sage against bringing up children? Why do
you fear lest he fall into sorrow by so doing? Doth he fall into sorrow
for the mouse that lives in his house? What careth he if a little mouse
complain to him at home. But he knows well that if a little child be
born, it is no longer in our power not to love it and be anxious for it.

2. Thus, too, he saith that no man of sense will take part in affairs
of the state, for he knows what he who takes part in them must do; but
what should hinder one to take part, if he may behave among men as in a
swarm of flies? But Epicurus, knowing these things, dares to say that we
should not rear up our children. But even a sheep will not desert its
young, nor a wolf; and shall a man? _What! will you have us to be silly
creatures, like the sheep?_ Yet they desert not their young. _Or savage,
like wolves?_ Yet even they desert them not. Come, then, who would obey
you if he saw his little child fall on the ground and cry? For my part,
I suppose that had it been prophesied to your mother and your father
that you would say these things, not even so would they have cast you
out.

3. _But how can it be said of these outward things_[3] _that they are
according to Nature, or contrary to Nature?_ That is to speak as if we
were solitary and disunited from others. For to the foot I shall say it
is according to Nature that it be clean; but if you take it as a foot,
and not as a solitary thing, it shall beseem it to go into the mud, and
to tread on thorns, and perchance to be cut off, for the sake of the
whole; otherwise it is no longer a foot.

4. And some such thing we should suppose about ourselves also. What art
thou? A man. Look at thyself as a solitary creature, and it is according
to Nature to live to old age, to grow rich, to keep good health. But if
thou look at thyself as a man, and as a part of a certain Whole, for the
sake of that Whole it may become thee now to have sickness, now to sail
the seas and run into peril, now to suffer need, and perchance to die
before thy time.

5. Why, then, dost thou bear it hard? Knowest thou not, that as the foot
alone is not a foot, so thou alone art not a man? For what is a man? A
part of a polity, first of that which is made up of Gods and men; then
of that which is said to be next to the other, which is a small copy of
the Universal Polity.

6. _Then must I now be brought to trial, and now must another have a
fever, and another sail the seas, another die, another be sentenced?_
Yea, for with such a body, in the bounds of such a universe, in such a
throng of inhabitants, it cannot be but that different things of this
nature should fall on different persons. This is thy task, then, having
come into the world, to speak what thou shouldst, and to order these
things as it is fitting.

7. Then some one saith, _I charge you with wrong-doing_. Much good may
it do thee! I have done my part—look to it thyself if thou have done
thine, for of this too there is some danger, lest it escape thee.




CHAPTER III.

AGAINST THE EPICUREANS AND ACADEMICS.


1. Beliefs which are sound and manifestly true are of necessity used
even by those who deny them. And perhaps a man might adduce this as the
greatest possible proof of the manifest truth of anything, that those
who deny it are compelled to make use of it. Thus, if a man should deny
that there is anything universally true, it is clear that he is obliged
to affirm the contrary, the negation—that there is nothing universally
true. Slave! not even this—for what is this but to say that if there is
anything universal it is falsehood?

2. Again, if one should come and say, _Know that nothing can be known,
but all things are incapable of proof; or another, Believe me, and it
shall profit thee, that no man ought to believe any man_; or again,
another, _Learn from me, O man, that it is not possible to learn
anything, and I tell thee this, and I will teach thee, if thou
wilt_—now wherein do such men differ from those—whom shall I
say?—those who call themselves Academics? _Assent, O men, that no man
can assent to aught; believe us that no man can believe any one._

3. Thus Epicurus, when he would abolish the natural fellowship of men
with one another, employeth the very thing that is being abolished. For
what saith he? _Be not deceived, O men, nor misguided nor
mistaken—there is no natural fellowship among reasoning beings, believe
me; and those who speak otherwise deceive us with sophisms._ What is
that to thee? let us be deceived! Will it be the worse for thee if all
other men are persuaded that we have a natural fellowship with one
another, and that we should in all ways maintain it? Nay—but much the
better and safer. Man, why dost thou take thought for us, and watch at
night for our sakes? Why dost thou kindle thy lamp and rise early? why
dost thou write so many books, lest any of us should be deceived about
the Gods, in supposing that they cared for men? or lest any one should
take the essence of the Good to be anything else than Pleasure? For if
these things are so, then lie down and sleep, and live the life of a
worm, wherefor thou hast judged thyself fit; eat and drink and cohabit
and ease thyself and snore. What is it to thee how other men think
concerning these matters, whether soundly or unsoundly? What hast thou
to do with us? With sheep hast thou some concern, for that they serve us
when they are shorn, and when they are milked, and at last when they
have their throats cut. Were it not, then, to be desired, if men could
be lulled and charmed to slumber by the Stoics, and give themselves to
thee and the like of thee, to be shorn and milked? These things shouldst
thou say to thy brother Epicureans; but shouldst thou not keep them
hidden from other men, and seek in every way to persuade them above all
things that we are by nature social, and that temperance is good; in
order that everything may be kept for thee? Or should we preserve this
fellowship with some and not with others? With whom, then, should we
preserve it? With those who also preserve it towards us, or with those
who transgress it? And who transgress it more than ye, who set forth
such doctrines?

4. What, then, was it that roused up Epicurus from his sleep, and
compelled him to write the things he wrote? What else than Nature, the
mightiest of all powers in humanity? Nature, that drags the man,
reluctant and groaning, to her will. _For_, saith she, _since it seems
to thee that there is no fellowship among men, write this down, and
deliver it to others, and watch and wake for this, and be thyself by
thine own deed the accuser of thine own opinions_. Shall we, then, say
that Orestes was driven by the Furies and aroused from sleep, and did
not crueller Furies and Avengers rouse this man as he slumbered, and
suffered him not to rest, but compelled him, as madness and wine the
priests of Cybele,[1] to proclaim his own evils? So mighty and
invincible a thing is man’s nature.

5. For how can a vine be affected, and not in the manner of a vine, but
of an olive? Or how, again, can an olive be affected not in the manner
of an olive but of a vine? It is impossible, it cannot be conceived.
Neither, then, is it possible for a man wholly to lose the affections of
humanity, for even eunuchs cannot cut away for themselves the desires
of men. And thus Epicurus has cut away all that belongs to a man as
father of a family, and as citizen, and as friend; but the desires of
humanity he hath not cut away, for he could not; no more than these
pitiful Academics are able to cast away or to blind their own
perceptions, although this is the thing that they have striven with all
their zeal to do.

6. How shameful is this! that a man having received from Nature measures
and canons for the recognition of truth, should study not to add to them
and perfect them where they are wanting, but the very contrary of this;
if there be anything that may lead us to the knowledge of the truth,
they strive to abolish and destroy it.

7. What sayest thou, philosopher? religion and holiness, what dost thou
take them for?[2]

——“If thou wilt, I shall prove that they are good.”

So be it; prove it then, in order that our citizens may be converted and
honor the Divinity, and be no longer neglectful of the greatest things.

——“Now hast thou received the proofs?”

I have, and am thankful therefor.

8.——“Now since thou art exceedingly well pleased with these things,
hear the contrary: There are no Gods, or if there be, they have no care
for men, nor have we any communion with them; and this religion and
holiness, whereof the multitude babble, is the lying of impostors and
sophists, or of legislators, by Zeus! for the frighting and restraining
of evil-doers.”

Well said, philosopher! the citizens shall have much profit of thee!
thou hast already brought back all our youths to the contempt of sacred
things.

——“What now? are these doctrines not pleasing to thee? Learn, then,
that Righteousness is nothing, that Reverence is folly, that a father is
nothing, a son nothing.”

Well said, philosopher! proceed, persuade the young, that we may
multiply the number of those who believe and speak with thee. From these
teachings have grown our well-governed States, from these did Sparta
spring, and these beliefs, by his laws and discipline, did Lycurgus
plant among his people:—That slavery is no more base than honorable,
nor to be free men more honorable than base. Through these opinions died
those who fell at Thermopylæ, and through what others did the Athenians
forsake their city?[8]

9. Then those who speak such things marry, and beget children, and take
part in public affairs, and make themselves priests and augurs—of what?
Of beings that do not exist! and they question the Pythian oracle that
they may learn falsehoods; and they declare the oracles to others. O
monstrous impudence and imposture!




