CHAPTER IV

ON SLAVERY.


1. A certain man having inquired how one may make his meals in a manner
pleasing to the Gods, If he do it uprightly, said Epictetus, and
considerately, and equably, and temperately, and orderly, shall it not
also be thus pleasing to the Gods? But when you ask for hot water, and
the boy does not hear, or, hearing, brings it only luke-warm; or if he
is not even to be found in the house, then is it not pleasing to the
Gods if you refrain from indignation, and do not burst with passion?
_How shall one endure such fellows?_ Wretch, wilt thou not bear with
thine own brother, who is of the progeny of Zeus, like a son sprung of
the same seed as thyself, and of the same heavenly descent, but thou
must straightway make thyself a tyrant, for the place of command in
which thou art set? Wilt thou not remember who thou art, and whom thou
rulest—that they are kinsmen, brethren by nature, the progeny of Zeus?
_But I have bought them, and they have not bought me!_ Seest thou, then,
whither thou art looking—towards the earth, towards the pit of
perdition, towards these miserable laws of dead men? but towards the
laws of the Gods thou dost not look.

2. That which thou wouldst not suffer thyself, seek not to lay upon
others. Thou wouldst not be a slave—look to it that others be not
slaves to thee. For if thou endure to have slaves, it seems that thou
thyself art first of all a slave. For virtue hath no communion with vice
nor freedom with slavery.

3. As one who is in health would not choose to be served by the sick,
nor that those dwelling with him should be sick, so neither would one
that is free bear to be served by slaves, or that those living with him
should be slaves.[1]




CHAPTER V.

TO THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE FREE CITIES, WHO WAS AN EPICUREAN.


1. The Administrator[1] having visited him (and this man was an
Epicurean), It is proper, said Epictetus, that ignorant people like us
should inquire of you that are philosophers (as men who come into a
strange city make inquiry of the citizens and those familiar with the
place) what is the chief thing in the world, to the end that, having
learned it, we may go in search of it, and behold it, as men do with
objects in the cities.

2. Now, that there are three things with which man is concerned—soul,
and body, and the outer world—scarce any one will deny. It remaineth,
then, for men like ye to answer which is the chief of these things? What
shall we declare to men? Is it the flesh? And was it for this that
Maximus sent forth his son, and sailed with him through the tempest as
far as Cassiope,[2] for somewhat that he should feel in the flesh?

3. But the Epicurean denying this, and saying, _God forbid_, Epictetus
said:

Is it not fit, then, that we should be zealous about that, the chief
thing?

——“Of all things most fit.”

What, then, have we greater than the flesh?

——“The soul,” he said.

And the good of the chief thing, is it greater than the good of the
lower thing?

——“The good of the chief thing is greater.”

And the good things of the soul, are they in the power of the Will, or
beyond the Will?

——“They are in the power of the Will.”

The pleasure of the soul, then, is within the power of the Will?

He assented.

And this pleasure itself, whence may it arise? From itself? But this is
inconceivable; for we must suppose some original substance of the Good,
whereof the soul doth make us sensible when we light upon it.

This, too, he admitted.

Wherein, then, are we sensible of this spiritual pleasure? for if it be
in spiritual things, the nature of the Good is discovered. For the Good
cannot be something different from the thing that justly delights us;
nor, if the original thing be not good, can aught be good that proceeds
from it; for, in order that the thing proceeding may be good, the
original thing must be good also. But this ye would never say, if ye had
your wits, for so ye would speak things that agree not with Epicurus and
the rest of your opinions. It remains, then, that we are conscious in
bodily things of this pleasure of the soul, and again, that these are
the original things and the very substance of the Good.[3]

4. Wherefore Maximus did foolishly if he made his voyage for the sake of
anything else than the flesh; that is, than the chief thing. And any man
doth foolishly who restraineth himself from others’ good, if he be a
judge, and able to take them. But, if you please, let us regard this
only, how it may be done secretly and safely, and so that none may know
it. For neither does Epicurus himself declare stealing to be bad, but
only to be caught stealing; and because it is impossible to be certain
of no discovery, therefore he saith, _Ye shall not steal_. But I say
that if we steal with skill and discretion, we shall not be caught. And,
moreover, if we have powerful friends among men and women at Rome, and
the Greeks are feeble, no one will dare to go thither on this score. Why
do you refrain from your own good? This is foolish—this is absurd. But
not even if you tell me you do refrain will I believe you. For, as it is
impossible to assent to anything that appeareth to be a falsehood or to
turn away from what appeareth to be true, even so it is impossible to
withhold oneself from anything that appeareth to be good. But riches are
a good, and, at all events, the most potent means of pleasure.
Wherefore, then, not compass them? And why not corrupt our neighbor’s
wife, if we may do it secretly? and also, if the husband talk nonsense
about it, let us fling him out! If you will be a true and perfect
philosopher, and obedient to your own doctrines, thus must you do; but
if you do not, you differ no whit from us that are called Stoics. For
truly we ourselves say one thing and do another; we speak fair and
honest things, and do vile ones. But the opposite distemper will be
thine—a vile creed and honorable deeds.

5. And you think, God help you! of a city of Epicureans? _I do not
marry. Nor I; for it is not right to marry, nor beget children, nor take
part in public affairs._ What will come to pass then? Whence shall we
have citizens? who shall educate them? who shall be the overseer of
youth?[4] who the director of gymnastics? and how shall the youth be
trained up? as the Lacedæmonians? or as the Athenians? Take me a youth,
and bring him up after these doctrines of thine! Evil are they,
subversive of States, mischievous to households, unbecoming to women.
Abandon them, man! Thou dwellest in a chief city; it is thy part to
rule, to judge righteously, to refrain from other men’s goods; nor must
any woman seem beautiful to thee save thine own wife, nor vessel of gold
or silver. Seek for doctrines in harmony with these words, from which
setting out thou mayest with gladness abandon things so potent to
attract and overcome. But if beside the seduction of these things we
have sought out some philosophy like this that pushes us towards them,
and confirms us in them, what shall come of it?

6. In the graver’s work, which is the chief thing? the silver or the
art? The substance of the hand is flesh, but the main things are the
works of the hand. The obligations, therefore, are also three—those
that concern us, firstly, in that we are; and secondly, as we are; and
thirdly, the main things themselves. And thus in man, too, it is not
meet to value the material, this flesh, but the main things. What are
these? To take part in public affairs, to marry, to beget children, to
fear God, to care for parents, and, in general, to pursue, to avoid, to
desire, to dislike, as each of these things should be done, as Nature
made us to do. And how made she us? To be free, generous, pious. For
what other creature blushes? what other is capable of the sense of
shame?

7. And to these things let Pleasure be subject as a minister, a servant,
that she may summon forth our ardor, and that she also may aid in works
that are according to Nature.[5]

8. ——“But I am a wealthy man, and have no need of aught.”

Why, then, dost thou profess philosophy? Thy vessels of gold and vessels
of silver are enough for thee; what need hast thou of doctrines?

——“But I am also a judge of the Greeks!”

Dost thou know how to judge—who made thee know?

——“Cæsar wrote me a commission.”

Let him write thee a commission to be a judge of music, and what help
will it be to thee? And how didst thou become a judge? by kissing of
what man’s hand? Was it that of Symphorus or Numenius? Before whose
bed-chamber didst thou sleep? To whom didst thou send gifts? Dost thou
not perceive, then, that to be a judge is worth just as much as Numenius
is worth?

——“But I can cast into prison whom I will.”

As if he were a stone.

——“But I can flog any man I will.”

As if he were an ass. This is no government of men. Rule us as reasoning
beings; show us what is for our good, and we shall follow it; show us
what is for our ill, and we shall turn away from it; make us emulators
of thyself, as Socrates made his disciples. He, indeed, was one that
governed men as men, who made them subject unto him in their pursuit and
their avoidance, their desire and dislike. _Do this, do not this, or I
will cast thee into prison._ This is not the rule of reasoning beings.
But, _As Zeus hath ordered, so do thou act; but if thou dost not, thou
shall suffer loss and hurt_. What hurt? _None other than this—not to
have done what it behooved thee to do. Thou shall lose faith, piety,
decency—look for no greater injuries than these._




