BOOK II.


CHAPTER I.

1. According to the view of James Harris, in a long and valuable note
communicated to Upton, the “master-argument” was so called from the
supreme importance of the issues with which it dealt. On these issues
different leaders of the Stoics took different sides, Diodorus holding
both future and past things to be _necessary_, Cleanthes both
_contingent_, and Chrysippus past things to be necessary and future
contingent. Any two of the three propositions mentioned in the text
exclude the third. For modern philosophy the distinction between the
possible and the certain in the phenomenal world has, of course, no real
existence; the possible being simply that of which we do not know
whether it will come to pass or not.

2. Of course Epictetus here speaks ironically; all this is just what it
_is_ the business of a thinker to do.

3. Epictetus, I suppose, means to complain that the current phrases of
philosophy are dealt out in glib answer to great ethical questions, just
as Homer might be quoted for an event in the life of Odysseus, by
persons who in neither case think of gaining that vital conviction which
only the strenuous exercise of one’s own reason can produce. A little
later he represents Hellanicus, the historian, as quoted on the
distinction between good and evil, who never treated that subject. If it
is to be a mere question of _authority_, one _name_ is as good as
another, since none is any use at all.

“Indifferent,” be it observed, is _morally_ indifferent—that which has
in _itself_ no bearing on our moral state. See Chap. II. 2.

4. The followers of Aristotle called themselves Peripatetics.


CHAPTER II.

1. The word in the Greek is περιστάσεις, literally _circumstances_, but
the word is evidently used in a bad sense, as equivalent to afflictions.
Doom is likewise etymologically a neutral word, but one which has
received an evil meaning.

2. Socrates’s faith in his genius or “Dæmon” was well known. In this
passage from his _Apologia_ (which Epictetus gives from a bad text), it
is doubtless the manner only that conveyed the idea of mockery. Neither
Socrates nor any one else ever had better evidence of God’s existence
than His voice in our conscience.


CHAPTER IV.

1. Briefly, the three divisions seem to be Action, Character, and
Judgment. The last is to be approached through training in logic, in the
penetration of fallacies, etc., by which means a man is to arrive at
such an inward and vital conviction of the truth that he can never for a
moment be taken off his guard by the delusion of Appearance.

2. Passions, passionless, τὰ πάθη, ἀπαθής.—See Index of Philosophic
Terms.


CHAPTER V.

1. Euripides.—Musonius Rufus, the teacher of Epictetus, is reported to
have said, “Take the chance of dying nobly when thou canst, lest after a
little death indeed come to thee, but a noble death no more.”

2. This phrase of the “open door” occurs frequently in Epictetus,
usually when, as here, he is telling the average non-philosophic man
that it is unmanly to complain of a life which he can at any time
relinquish. The philosopher has no need of such exhortation, for he does
not complain, and as for death, is content to wait God’s time. But the
Stoics taught that the arrival of this time might be indicated by some
disaster or affliction which rendered a natural and wholesome life
impossible. Self-destruction was in such cases permissible, and is
recorded to have been adopted by several leaders of the Stoics,
generally when old age had begun to render them a burden to their
friends.

3. _Nay, thou shalt exist_, etc.—This is the sense given by Zeller’s
punctuation. Schweighäuser’s text would be rendered, “Thou shalt not
exist, but something else will,” etc. Upton changes the text (on his own
authority) by transposing an οὐκ. “Thou shalt exist, but as something
else, whereof the universe has now no need.”

4. This does not appear to have been the law in Epictetus’s time, for he
himself was educated while a slave. But it was a common provision in
antique states.

5. The ceremony in manumitting a slave.


CHAPTER VI.

1. Chap. VI. i. is a passage from the lost Fifth Book of the
Discourses, preserved for us in a rather obscure Latin translation by
Aulus Gellius. During a storm at sea, a certain Stoic on board was
observed by him to look pale and anxious, though not indeed showing the
signs of panic exhibited by the other passengers. Questioned afterwards
by Gellius on this apparent feebleness in his professed faith, the Stoic
produced the Fifth Book of Epictetus, and read this passage.

2. The third Earl of Shaftesbury, an enthusiastic student of Epictetus,
had this dish of water and ray of light engraved, and placed, with the
inscription, πάντα ὑπόληψις—All is Opinion—as an emblem at the front
of his _Characteristics_. The passage, though interesting, is obscure.
At one time the “appearances,” φαντασίαι, are compared to the ray of
light; at another, the doctrines (literally “arts,” _i. e._, arts of
life taught by philosophy) and virtues. Probably the explanation is to
be found in the view of the Stoics that at birth the human soul is a
_tabula rasa_, or blank sheet; all our knowledge coming from without;
that is, from the “appearances” which surround us. Moral and philosophic
convictions are thus, like all other mental states, the result of
external impressions.


