CHAPTER V. Duty of Principals and Seconds on the Ground.

1. The principals are to be respectful in meeting, and neither by look
or expression irritate each other. They are to be wholly passive, being
entirely under the guidance of their seconds.

2. When once posted, they are not to quit their positions under any
circumstances, without leave or direction of their seconds.

3. When the principals are posted, the second giving the word, must
tell them to stand firm until he repeats the giving of the word, in the
manner it will be given when the parties are at liberty to fire.

4. Each second has a loaded pistol, in order to enforce a fair combat
according to the rules agreed on; and if a principal fires before the
word or time agreed on, he is at liberty to fire at him, and if such
second's principal fall, it is his duty to do so.

5. If after a fire, either party be touched, the duel is to end; and no
second is excusable who permits a wounded friend to fight; and no second
who knows his duty, will permit his friend to fight a man already hit.
I am aware there have been many instances where a contest has continued,
not only after slight, but severe wounds, had been received. In all such
cases, I think the seconds are blamable.

6. If after an exchange of shots, neither party be hit, it is the
duty of the second of the challengee, to approach the second of
the challenger and say: "Our friends have exchanged shots, are you
satisfied, or is there any cause why the contest should be continued?"
If the meeting be of no serious cause of complaint, where the party
complaining had in no way been deeply injured, or grossly insulted, the
second of the party challenging should reply: "The point of honor being
settled, there can, I conceive, be no objection to a reconciliation, and
I propose that our principals meet on middle ground, shake hands, and
be friends." If this be acceded to by the second of the challengee, the
second of the party challenging, says: "We have agreed that the present
duel shall cease, the honor of each of you is preserved, and you will
meet on middle ground, shake hands and be reconciled."

7. If the insult be of a serious character, it will be the duty of
the second of the challenger, to say, in reply to the second of the
challengee: "We have been deeply wronged, and if you are not disposed
to repair the injury, the contest must continue." And if the challengee
offers nothing by way of reparation, the fight continues until one or
the other of the principals is hit.

8. If in cases where the contest is ended by the seconds, as mentioned
in the sixth rule of this chapter, the parties refuse to meet and be
reconciled, it is the duty of the seconds to withdraw from the field,
informing their principals, that the contest must be continued under the
superintendence of other friends. But if one agrees to this arrangement
of the seconds, and the other does not, the second of the disagreeing
principal only withdraws.

9. If either principal on the ground refuses to fight or continue the
fight when required, it is the duty of his second to say to the other
second: "I have come upon the ground with a coward, and do tender you
my apology for an ignorance of his character; you are at liberty to post
him." The second, by such conduct, stands excused to the opposite party.

10. When the duel is ended by a party being hit, it is the duty of the
second to the party so hit, to announce the fact to the second of the
party hitting, who will forthwith tender any assistance he can command
to the disabled principal. If the party challenging, hit the challengee,
it is his duty to say he is satisfied, and will leave the ground. If the
challenger be hit, upon the challengee being informed of it, he should
ask through his second, whether he is at liberty to leave the ground
which should be assented to.




