CHAPTER II.

OF THE HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY OF THE ENGLISH.


Before commenting upon the Government, it is useful to speak of the
geography and history of the English Barbarians.

The Kingdom consists of the following: England with Wales and Scotland,
forming one large island; Ireland, separated by a channel of the seas,
lying West; and several small groups of islets, scattered about the
Coasts. It lies Westerly from the great, main Land of the Barbarians,
from which it is separated by a narrow course of the seas. England and
the Main Land form the region designated Europe. The whole Kingdom
surpasses not in area or population some of our Celestial provinces:
the extent being in the English square miles some 110 thousand [Si-re],
and in people some 32 millions [Ken-ty]. In such narrow limits there
are no rivers--only small streams, which, near the sea, owing to the
flux and reflux of the great waters, become broad and deep.

In our Science and in our Annals the whole region and people are known
as one only--but the different petty tribes are distinguished in our
waters by the forms and colours of the _flags_, shown upon the masts
of the Barbarian vessels. The English are less in people and in lands
than many others; but by their fierceness in war, and the multitude of
their big ships, they esteem themselves to be the most powerful of all.

The first account of them is recorded by one of the Romans, who, in
our dynasty, _Han_, crossed the narrow sea from a Roman province,
and entered into the island. It was then a Wilderness, and among the
forests lived a few savages, clothed in skins. Sometime after, the
Romans conquered the country, and established a Roman province--their
dominion lasting four hundred [qua-cet] years--contemporaneous with our
dynasty, _Hewhan_.

During the dynasties, _Han_ and _Hewhan_, the various tribes
surrounding the Roman provinces, grown more populous and better
acquainted with the Military art, crowded, more and more, upon the
Romans; and, gradually, destroyed their power. They were forced to
leave England.

On their departure, and for several ages after, down to our dynasty,
_Song_, the history of the Country is merely a tale of ceaseless
struggles among the different savage tribes from the Main Land, to
plunder and subdue it. The civilization disappeared. Nearly all signs
of the Roman occupancy became obliterated; and the knowledge of letters
would have been lost, but that the Priests who accompanied some of the
savage chiefs had among them some of the Roman learning. These Priests
and chiefs had adopted the worship of the new Christ-god.

At length, one of these invading tribes having fairly mastered the
country, and established a show of regular authority, the germs of
knowledge began to grow. The victorious tribe had lands also on the
main parts; fierce and warlike, it endeavoured to extend its power;
and repeatedly made assaults upon others of the Barbarians of those
chief parts. In these, the remains of the Roman civilization were
considerable, and the knowledge of letters more common.

The position of the English, and their need of communication, made
vessels indispensable; and they learned to build and to sail many
ships. However, but little progress in civilization was made till
our dynasty, _Ming_; when the Sovereign, then a Woman, called by
the Barbarians, _Queen_, sent the first Embassy to our Central
Kingdom--bearing gifts, and humbly approaching our Illustrious, begging
permission to trade at one of our ports on the sea.

From that time to the present, the annals of these Barbarians are
but little more than records of plundering expeditions into distant
regions; of their fierce slaughters; their cunning or bold stratagems
to extend trade, and establish dominion for the sake of trade and
plunder. To obtain trade, by means fair or foul; to get strongholds
abroad and subjugate others--these have been the great objects of the
rulers and the people.

By their ships, manned with the most ignorant and debased, taught only
in the work of sailing and fighting; stimulated by love of plunder, in
which the meanest have a share; the very name of these Barbarians has
become terrible in all the distant seas.

They first appeared within the waters of our Central Kingdom, in the
dynasty _Tsing_, but did not venture then to assault our unoffending
people; and only, by cunning and with low prostrations and humility,
sought to traffic, in such way as should be acceptable to our
Illustrious. Further time was looked to and greater force before
showing their fierceness!

They have since seized nearly all the maritime parts of the Hindoos,
and, penetrating the country with savage bands, have slaughtered the
inoffensive people, and robbed the treasuries of Princes and the
Temples of immense riches. They have, finally, subjugated the chief
provinces of the Hindoos, and yearly bear away from them the ancient
revenues.

Throwing off disguise, in our celestial seas, these Barbarians at
length discovered their true character. To save our people from the
effects of a dreadful poison, to which the lower orders had become
habituated, our Illustrious prohibited the importation of this thing,
called by the English, Opium (Zle-psi). But these disregarded the just
request; wished to pour upon us enormous amounts for the sake of the
gains which the bad traffic yielded, and which was monopolised by them;
and, when nothing else would serve, assaulted our unoffending people,
fell with fire and sword upon our province of Quang-tun, and, rushing
upon other maritime parts with their great ships, armed with prodigious
cannon, threatened to burn and destroy. In our peaceful Kingdom we
had no need of such things; we had no means to meet these destructive
engines, contrived by _Christ-god_ worshippers; and our Illustrious,
to save further dreadful mischiefs to our unprotected people, granted
trade to these selfish and cruel Barbarians! Yet this benevolence
of our Illustrious only served to encourage additional demands; and
we all remember how, coming with more ships, swifter with _steam_,
and greater guns and men, these impious defiers of the Sovereign and
Heavenly Justice have more recently fallen upon the Northern provinces,
and slaughtered and robbed our people, our palaces, and even the
precincts of our Illustrious himself! Who, awaiting and appealing to
the Sovereign Lord of Heaven, doubts not the due chastisement of crime,
which, in due time, shall heavily fall!

Meantime, in all other parts of the great Outer Seas, these English
visited the coasts with their fire-ships, and compelled the natives to
trade, either by fraud or by open war. In the great Sea towards the
sunset, they, in this way, settled upon many Lands; and, in the course
of some generations, their settlements in those regions, wishing to
trade with others beside the English (which these would not allow)
revolted; drove away the armed bands which were sent to subdue them,
and formed a new power.

In this way, about 100 years ago, the Barbarians, called American
[Mel-i-kan], arose. Their ships are known in our Central Kingdom by
a flag, named "Starry," because of the _Stars_ [Zen-ti] which are
painted upon it. These people are ardent for trade, but not so mad
and reckless; and not aggressive in their intercourse with others.
They are not so domineering and haughty--humbly submitting themselves,
in general, to the Son of Heaven, making tribute, and seeking his
Illustrious protection to their trade and to their ships in our Central
Waters.

During these events, the English Barbarians also sent their poor
people and criminals into the Lands of the far South Seas, to make
new places for their poor to toil in, to get rid of them, and to make
safe, distant places, to keep their criminals in; subduing the tribes
in those parts--thus making more trade. And in this way, and with
their many big ships and cannons, they boast that they will bring the
whole immense world, either to be tributaries, or to be completely
subjective. And they please their devotees, because they say that this
subjugation will "_Convert_" all the Pagans to the worship of the gods
of their Superstition--and this great boon will abundantly compensate
for all the wrongs and atrocities committed! In fact, they impiously
pretend that they are commanded to subjugate the Heathen World, that it
may be saved from the dreadful Hell!

The domestic events have not been important; though the Barbarians
themselves think everything to be important which happens amongst
them. They fancy that "Civilization and Progress" (famous words
with them) depend upon the petty disputes arising--sometimes as to
their Superstition, and sometimes as to some trifling thing in their
Customs. One of the main events, is the story of a son of one of their
Sovereigns, who drove his father out of the Kingdom, and rëestablished
the Government in such manner, that, ever after, when the matter is
referred to, one shall say _Glorious_ [Twang-ba]. As well as I can
understand, the things done were, that whereas, before, the Sovereign
had been allowed to worship the Pope, if he wished (but in secret),
afterwards he should not, but _be_ the English Pope, solely. And,
instead of a native dynasty, a foreign, and very base and stupid one,
hateful to the English, was fastened upon them. These events, an
outside observer sees, were followed by long-continued discontents,
and civil war--wherein innocent persons suffered in their persons and
their property; and very many were exiled, and very many were brutally
massacred and put to death--not because of any other offence than
adhering to the ancient Laws, and to the Sovereign whom this base son
had dethroned! Yet, of this event, when one speaks of it, one shall
say, _Glorious!_!

The form of government has not changed; but the power has, during these
periods, past into the hands of the Aristocracy [Fo-hi]. In the time of
the Queen, who sent the humble petition to our Illustrious, the English
Sovereign was Master--being Pope and Ruler; that is, High Priest and
Sovereign. But the people, increasing and growing richer in ships and
merchandize, began to feel the intermeddling of the Ruler. Previously,
the people had been too poor and too few to be accounted anything; and
grew up into an improved condition without notice. They now disliked to
be taxed, and began a struggle with the Sovereign to limit his power in
this thing--for they said, "If he can take a _penny_ (a small coin),
at his own goodwill and pleasure, he can take all." Now this is an
absurdity--yet, it looked sound; and, at any rate, became the ground
of the fight between the well-to-do people (the Middle-Caste), and the
Ruler. _This_ would make his will absolute; the _other_ would make
its will absolute! The Sovereign who first had this opposition seems
to have been a fool, and the next, a knave--but neither had sufficient
sense to arm soldiers enough to compel obedience, as was done on the
Main Land--consequently, after a good deal of wretched fighting between
the Sovereign helped by nearly all the High-Caste, and the _next_
Caste in the Aristocracy and well-to-do people, these last succeeded,
and put the Sovereign to death. As is always the case, during a civil
war, _fanaticism_ arose. It based itself upon two points--the right
of the people to rule, and the right of the gods of the Superstition,
_without any Pope_, to be worshipped. This was a departure from the
original dispute only in part; because some had vehemently denied the
whole notion of Pope-worshipping; and as the Sovereign was English
Pope, this pretension embittered the strife. Now, the Aristocracy
(High-Caste) upheld the Pope; but the Second-Caste and the people,
opposed; and these, at length, for the time, carried all before them;
destroyed the King, overthrew his worship as Pope; and established the
gods of the Superstition, with such severity of worship (especially as
to the _rites_ and as to the _Seventh-day_), that, _Society_ completely
changed. Even the name of the State was changed! The point, of the
_Rule of the people_, was in this vindicated; for the name of the
State was--_Commonwealth_; and of the Ruler--_Protector_. Now, this so
_radical_ change was not real. It was the expression of that extreme
agony into which Civil War hurries. The strong passions sway--the
strongest rule. And the very able military man who organized the troops
into the ways of an invincible army, though of the Aristocratic,
High-Caste connection, happened to have adopted the most severe notions
of the great Superstition; looked upon Christ-god merely as the _Jah_
of the Jews; wished to make the _Sacred Writings_ the law of the
Land; and to get himself proclaimed to be the _High Priest_ and ruler
of this new Jewish State! This remarkable man, with his invincible
troops, could not absolutely do this--but he did completely overawe
and rule the State, causing himself to be declared _Protector of the
Commonwealth_!

With the death of this strong man, there being no successor to his
ability, repression soon relaxed; the Aristocracy came out of their
seclusion; the gloom of fanatical worship brightened in the natural
love of rational life. _Society_ rebounded from the low depression;
ancient feelings, habits, sports, reasserted themselves. Communities do
not radically change, at once--such a thing to be beneficial, must be
cautious. A tree, though misshapen, may not be plucked up by the roots
violently, and forced into uncongenial soil; to improve its beauty and
use, a different method must be sought: only, if the tree be actually
dying, possibly, a complete and radical change may save it--at any rate
it is the sole chance!

The troops, wholly devoted to their late great General, found no one on
whom they could rely; and another portion of the Army in the far North,
was induced actively to assist the Aristocracy. These, joined by the
middle classes, who had wearied of the too gloomy worship and severe
_rites_, hastened to recall a Son of him whom they had not long before
put to death, and place him upon the _Throne_. They declared him to
be Sovereign-pope: they restored the old form and name of government;
and rescinded nearly everything done by the Commonwealth. In this
_Restoration_ (as the English call it) is another event, considered
by them, of great importance. In this Restoration (a natural effect
of the _fanaticism_ largely charged to the greater ignorance of the
lower castes) the High-Castes again became predominant. They again
took influence and power everywhere, and retained the fruits of the
civil struggle in their hands. _They_ had aided the resistance to the
arbitrary will of the Sovereign; and they now grasped and enjoyed the
power wrested from him. They, alone, could impose taxes. No Sovereign
would again dare to tax the people (that is, the High-Castes) without
their consent. But _they_ would levy and raise taxes when they pleased.
Thus holding the _Purse_ of the State they had become supreme.

On the death of this Restored one (who turned out to be so base that
the common people often deplored the loss of the late great General),
a brother reigned. This man, as I have said (wishing to worship the
Rome-pope) was driven out by his son, forming the epoch, _Glorious_.
The present Queen is of the dynasty then established; and during
this period the absorption of power by the High-Caste has gone on.
Taught by the Slaughter of the late King, his successor feared; and
the new dynasty was compelled by the Aristocracy to submit to those
limitations of power, which effectually placed authority in their
hands. To secure this authority, the Sovereign was not allowed any
money to keep troops; and, if, on any pretence, troops were raised,
they were immediately refused pay, and forced to be disbanded upon the
least suspicion that they would be used to strengthen the Sovereign.
The aristocracy had continued to strip him also of all private revenue;
and had, in fact, reduced him to a dependency upon them for his daily
subsistence [Bran-te].

Thus, the High-Caste, acting by the forms of the _Grand Council_,
seized power.

It is proper to explain the substance and form of this Council.

It is divided into two parts--_Upper House, and Lower House_.

The _Upper_ are the Lords [Cheang] of Lands and Lords of the
Temples--(High-State Sect.)

The _Lower_ are lords, brothers, sons, nephews, relations, and devoted
servants of the Upper; and are far more numerous.

No rule can be made, nor law, without both these bodies consent to it.
This they do by asking each one his opinion, and a majority decides.
Everything of importance must originate in the Lower House, and first
be settled there. Then, the will of the Lower House is communicated to
the Upper House, and it is ordered to ratify it. The members do so, and
the Sovereign (or somebody requested thereto by him) approves (as the
English politely phrase it); and the thing, so approved, is a new Law.
Now, no Sovereign dares not _approve_--it might cost him his head. The
last one, many years ago, who thought he might risk it, soon gave up
the attempt, and died in a madhouse.

It will be seen, that the power in the Lower House will necessarily
fall into the hands of any one who can obtain adherents enough to
his opinions to secure a majority of members. The most ready debater
[Qu-iztsi], the coolest and self-possessed, who has made himself master
of the wishes of the majority; or, who, to these things, or with only a
part of them, has great wealth and influence--one, in fine, who knows
and divines what is wanted, and has the ability to lead;--directs and
orders the measures which are to be adopted. This man, who controls the
Lower House, governs the State. He nominates those who shall assist him
in the government, being the same who aid him in managing the House.
Thus, the Lower House governs by its delegates.

All these men, who are really a COMMITTEE [ty-gi-te] of the House
for the ruling of the Kingdom, act in the name of the Sovereign, and
receive the ancient titles of office from him. The ancient forms are
preserved; and these men, obeying the House, profess to obey the
Sovereign--in fact, the Sovereign is pretended to be the source of
honour and of authority; and the very Laws which have been made against
his wish are declared to be his Laws!

Thus, both the Sovereign and the people are amused. The one, by the
respect shown to him, the emoluments and influence of his high office,
and of his Pope-ship; the others, by some semblance of political
[in-tri-gsi] power. This consists in calling together a few of the
people of second and lower caste, to choose a new member for the Lower
House--but this is quite a comedy, [sham-li] for the most part. It
gives the ignorant Barbarians a notion of self-importance, and tickles
them with the fancy that they really have a part in the government of
the State.

Whilst these changes in the ordering of things at home were in
progress, the usual fierce and bloody expeditions of these Barbarians
had not been suspended.

The Americans had succeeded in establishing their independent power,
but not till they had waged a second war with their late masters,
scarcely less important to them than the first. For the English, still
looking upon them with disdain, insisted upon the right to stop any of
the vessels of the Americans upon the high seas, and to seize and carry
away to their own ships any one whom they pleased. They would do this,
and force the victims of their insolent cruelty to fight for them in
their horrible war-ships.

The American Barbarians resisted this outrage; and, forced to fight a
bloody war, vindicated their just cause; so that never since have the
English, or any other Barbarians, dared to board or outrage the ships
or the sailors [mer-tsi] of the Americans.

This stubborn and brutal barbarity, love of plunder and traffic, have
involved the English during the present dynasty in numberless wars
beyond seas. They have internally avoided great commotion, although
the low castes have occasionally perished in surprising numbers by
famine and disease. In Ireland the depopulation has exceeded anything
recorded. The poor people of the Northern parts also, driven away from
their homes, have nearly disappeared, unless in the armed bands sent
over the sea. With these, the poor and despised Irish are in great
numbers also; and, indeed, the strength and ferocity of the armed
bands depend upon these, the most degraded and lowest caste of the
Barbarians. In this way, the most turbulent and ignorant have been
drawn off, trained to use of arms, and used to spread and maintain
the terror and power of the English. Many of the low-castes have been
shipped away in great ships to distant parts to form new settlements,
and to add to those already begun. By these means, and from the
increase of riches from trade, and from plunder of remote regions
giving employment to the low orders, great disorders have been avoided.
The plunder of the vast treasures of the Princes of the Hindoos, and
the trade which has been forced upon them, and upon others, have
contributed to this end. The result of increased wealth has been,
however, mostly to the gain of the High-Castes; who, holding the Lands,
have found in the enormous increase of value in these an additional
strength. The numbers of the rich have increased; and these always look
to the Castes above, and draw away as far as possible from those below.
The poor remained uneducated, and fell more completely under control.
If one of their order benefited himself, he had no ambition higher
than a desire to stand well with those above him. Thus Wealth, always
joining itself to the Higher Castes, made the power of the Aristocracy
[Fo-hi] quite complete, and the obedience of the common people assured.
Of this High-Caste the Sovereign is merely the ornamental top.

The learning of the Romans made but little advance, until very lately.
The great Schools had some of the High-Caste within their walls; the
mass of the people remained ignorant, fierce, and brutal. The laws
continued to be in a most dreadful state; the prisons, foul dens of
disease, cruelty and crime; the administration of Law, and disposal of
offenders, savage and barbarous in the extreme.

The learning took mostly a fantastic [pa-ntsi] form--pedantic, busied
with the mere shells of words, and names of things. It busied itself
chiefly with the old languages of the Romans and the Greeks. A man who
could repeat aloud from memory the _modes_ of a Greek word was a man of
profound learning. Of our Central Kingdom, of the wisdom and knowledge
of the great East, they knew nothing; but nursed an intolerable
conceit in admiration of the trivialities of their own ignorance,
and by disdaining to understand a civilization of which they knew
nothing--branding it as idolatrous, dark, Pagan!

Still, gradually, intercourse and larger acquaintance with the main
parts, revived the love of Roman art; and the Roman civilization once
more revived. Roman architecture, sculpture, learning, laws appeared.
The style of public buildings, houses of the High-Castes, Bridges,
took on the Roman forms. The _Literati_ became more numerous; and,
with the increasing riches, larger numbers became instructed. A long,
bloody and disastrous War, which ended only a few years ago, moderated
the intolerant selfishness of the Barbarians. It left them so crushed
down under the weight of innumerable taxes, that it began to be seen
that these interminable Wars beyond Seas, were not paid for by the
gains of trade, nor by acquisitions of territory. This moderation was
strengthened by the better and increasing knowledge: and Wars are not,
in general, so eagerly waged.

The oldest child of a Ruler succeeds--male first, and failing him, a
female. The direct descent from the _eldest_ always succeeds, to the
exclusion of the younger.

It is justly claimed that this is an element of stability; though it
contains a foolish omission. For there is no recognized authority which
can set aside an heir in the direct Line for however good cause. Thus
the danger of a violent succession is always imminent--and of this the
English history has many examples. In our Flowery Land, this danger is
averted by the wise customs of the great _Calao_.

In my Report, I have explained at length the rules which govern in
transactions with foreign tribes; and shown the maxims needful for
our Illustrious, in all negotiations and dealings with the Western
Barbarians. As trade (particularly by the English) is the grand object,
I have pointed out how to deal in this matter, in such way as to yield
no more than is convenient, nor sooner than is expedient.

The _Committee_ who govern, preserving ancient forms, administer
through them, in the name of the Sovereign. These forms assume _three
great divisions_, one of them being two-fold: _spiritual_, referring
to the great Superstition; and the other _temporal_; this is quite
nominal, for the "temporalities" always touch matters _spiritual_ in
some way.

The _First_ is the Executive.

The _Second_ is the Parliament.

The _Third_ is the Judicial.

The Executive--that is that which executes--has two parts. Spiritual,
(the ghostly, the unknown,) performing all things concerning the
Sovereign-Pope, the Temples, the worship, the Bonzes. Temporal,
ordering the military forces by land and by sea, seeing that the
laws are obeyed, and ruling the Hindoos and other distant peoples
and settlements. Also arranging all matters with other Christ-god
Barbarians, and with all foreign peoples.

The Law-making, called Parliament, or place of talking [Ba-ble]. This
is the Grand Council already referred to, divided into the Upper and
the Lower House, together really forming one, where all Rules and Laws
are made. Here rests the Supreme Authority; and this body is controlled
by the _Committee_, as before explained.

The Upper House is composed of Lords, who sit there in right of
birth, except the _Spiritual_ Lords, who are the great Bonzes (called
Bishops) of the Superstition. Formerly, this Upper was, next after the
Sovereign, most powerful, and often over-ruled, and even dethroned
him. But the greater intelligence has reduced its influence, and made
innoxious its mischievousness. Even its aristocraticalness could
not blind the Lower House to an _Imbecility_ inherent in its very
constitution. Born Law-makers! The proportion of idiots, worn-out
and selfish _roués_ (we have no similar word), narrow caste-bound
egotists, at last, wearied even its congeners, and they left to the
Lords [Tchou] the ancient Forms, but deprived them of all real power.
This might not have happened, but that from the very nature of things
the number of Peers (as a Lord is called, who has the hereditary
law-making right) who are active and young is inconsiderable; and,
for the most part, these prefer out-door sports, pleasures of wealth
and travel, to sitting among the elders to be _snubbed_ for youthful
inexperience. The result is that all warmth, life, and interest, all
generous disinterestedness, are unknown by these venerable egotists.
They are sufficiently amused with hereditary titles, with the respect
shown to their rank, and with the _playing_ at Law-making. They are
too conceited to see that they are "puppets," and too small to despise
the _honours_ which conceal their insignificance. Are they not exalted
above and separated from the "common-herd"? [kou-tong].

They are completely engrossed with the trivialities of their rank
(High-Caste). They wait upon the Sovereign like menials, tricked
out in furs, feathers, and robes, and jewelled chains, stars and
garters, sparkling in gems, silk hose, and the very shoes resplendent
with precious stones! On great occasions they are allowed (and this
permission must come from the Sovereign) to place upon the head a
golden and jewelled "circlet," named _coronet_. With this head-gear
glittering about their brows, they receive the respectful reverence of
the people, and feel a greater exaltation than the gods. "Ah," as the
Barbarians say, "who would not be a Lord!"

A special Superstition attaches itself to this head-ornament. That worn
by the Ruler is called a _Crown_. When he places it on in public, the
trumpets give a mighty sound, all the people bow in humble homage,
and Nature is supposed to arrest the wheels of her majestic course
to join in the rapturous shouts of delight! The act is rooted in the
Superstition, and one of its most cherished things.

The highest ambition of a subject is to be permitted to take _Rank_
and wear this _bauble_. There is no mean service to the Ruler, no
intrigue, no sacrifice which may not be done or suffered to get this
privilege--the right to shine in this coronet. And such an ambition is
so honourable, that success condones every contemptible thing by which
it is secured. Men are blinded by the glare, and overlook the mean
being below: in his Coronet he is unimpeached and unimpeachable!

Nor is this ambition confined to the Lords temporal; the High-Caste
Bonzes will not be remiss in those _duties_ to the Sovereign and to his
family, in those to "Society" and to the exalted Lords, upon whom they
have to attend on all occasions of baptising and marrying and feasting,
to give the _blessings_ [fihu-lsi] of the gods of the Superstition--in
nothing remiss which shall help them to secure the peculiar _head-gear_
given to those of their order whom the Sovereign raises to the lordly
rank called _Bishops_. It is called a _mitre_. Ages ago, in the obscure
days of the Superstition, poor and miserable, the chief Bonzes were
distinguished by a head-covering like two bits of board, united or
_mitred_ together, typical of the two-fold nature of their office.
Thus arose the Mitre, now a resplendent and costly bauble, more lofty
than the coronets, and showing the superiority of spiritual (priestly)
dignity!

In these coveted distinctions, the Sovereign finds the source of nearly
all the power really enjoyed; and by an artful use and distribution
of coronets and mitres, often covertly manages the machinery of
government to his own wishes. An unscrupulous and able man may make
himself respected! I forgot to say that another jewelled symbol of
priestcraft is bestowed with the mitre, so comical that one might
suspect it originated in the love of coarse humour common to the
Barbarians--but its true origin was in the same early and poor days
of the Superstition, when the highest Bonze was only a "Keeper of the
Sheep;" that is, his duty was to keep the poor devotees together and
save them from the idolatrous _pagans_. The Christ was said to have
called his despised followers "Sheep without a shepherd," and to have
requested the chief of his followers "to feed his sheep." Thus it came
about that these chief men took a staff, crooked at one end (similar to
that used by a veritable shepherd), as typical of their duty.

With the mitre is, therefore, handed a costly _Crosier_--crooked and
crossed staff--to enable the Lord Bishop to _pull in_ the wandering
sheep, or to catch hold of any which may have slipt down into
deep holes, or other rough places! "Fancy a Lord Bishop catching
sheep!"--said a jocose Barbarian to me once.

The crowning of a new Ruler is a grand _ceremony_, in which all the
wearers of the little crowns (_coronets_ and _mitres_) attend; and
no Ruler is a RULER unless he be CROWNED, with all the superstitious
_rites_. To this I may refer elsewhere. At present, I may mention that
the history of all the Barbarians, and notably that of the English, is
a story very often of the wars, assassinations, plots, and cruel deeds
done to seize the _Crown_: for whoever could contrive to clap this
thing upon his head was at once King! In the eyes of the superstitious
invested with a sort of divinity! This feeling is well expressed by
their greatest poet: "What a divinity doth _hedge_ a King!" This is,
doth encompass and protect a King.

When the Law-making Houses meet, the custom is for the Sovereign to
attend in all his State, and _open_ the Houses. That is, to swing
open the grand doors of the Upper House for the Lords, and especially
for the Lower members; who, on this occasion, are admitted to enter
in and listen to the GRACIOUS SPEECH. The rush of the Low-members is
frightful, for the _Doors_ are only opened for a very short time.
The speech itself is nothing--merely some polite phrases as to the
health and happiness of "our beloved _Lords and gentlemen_" (as the
form is), and some Incantation to the gods of the Superstition, "on
the prosperity and successful trade of our subjects." The great Lords
sit like gods, effulgent, exalted; whilst the Low-members crowd like
school-boys, and as rudely as school-boys, below. This is another thing
by which the childish Lords are amused with a notion of power.

The present Sovereign rarely opens the Houses, but delegates some great
Lords to do it for her. And the ceremony is far less. The Crown and the
Crown Jewels are, therefore, so rarely seen, that the divinity of the
Ruler is in danger; for the Superstitious reverence and pope-worship
attaches to the _Crown_. These Crown Baubles are, by the present
Ruler, kept imprisoned and guarded in a huge stone castle, so strong
that no force but of nature can throw it down, and are cautiously shown
to the admiring and dazzled few who are allowed by the guards to see
them, at "a penny a-peep" (as an American Barbarian said in my ear,
on the day of my seeing them). In this he referred to the fee [tin]
which is exacted before admission, and which (I was told) went to the
privy-purse of the Queen to buy pins. The Barbarians boast that these
glittering _gewgaws_ cost more than all the Halls of Learning!

The _Judicial_ is the remaining great division of administration. In
this the Laws are explained and applied. No law is, by this department,
ever made. It has no such function. None the less, it really makes new
laws, and unmakes the Statute Law (that is, the Law enacted by the
great Council of Law-makers) just as it pleases. In fact the chief
business of this department is to _unmake_ the Laws, and the chief
business of the Council is to make _them over_ again. And between
the two, of the making of Law there is no end, nor any possible
understanding. Were not the Barbarian body and mind very tough, they
would infallibly perish beneath the weight of this inscrutable and
ponderous contrivance. No one is benefited by it, but the innumerable
officers who manage it, and the Lawyers, who fatten upon the fees
[tin-tin] which it wrings from all the unfortunates who have to attend
upon it. These Lawyers form a special and very exclusive Caste; often
at dispute among themselves upon points of personal concern, and as
to the emoluments and offices which appertain to the Caste, but
always united (and so-called _Brothers_) as to everything outside,
by which they can more effectually conceal and mystify the nature of
their order, and the more adroitly plunder the uninitiated. This is
the Caste which opposes every inquiry into abuses and every attempt
to reform the administration; which shouts the loudest praises to the
Superstition, puts in force all the terrors of the Caste and of the
Law (as by them expounded) to destroy any one who does not adore the
_glorious_ event, and declare the Constitution and the Laws, the Crown
and the Altar (meaning the Superstition), the most perfect of all
human wisdom--indeed, _Divine_. I have explained the Glorious event.
To the Lawyer-Caste glorious in fees and means of plunder; in abuses
which, had the reforms introduced before that event been perfected,
would have been swept away; reforms which that event postponed, and
the subsequent wars and civil dissensions made not only impossible,
but still more difficult in the future. In another place I propose to
refer to this department--the _Judicial_--when speaking of _the Courts
of_ JUSTICE wherein the Laws are expounded and applied: because, as
in these the daily course of the life of a people may be studied, I
wish to look curiously into them. It will be readily seen, however,
that for a stranger to find, beneath the thick and manifold wrappings
and ponderous obscurities of the Lawyer-Caste, where _Justice lies
smothered_, is no easy task.

The present Ruler is of the so-called _glorious_ dynasty, and is
more wise and virtuous than her ancestors, who were remarkable for
obstinacy, meanness, stupidity, and debauchery. If one had a virtue,
it was so misdirected by narrowness of mind as to be worse than vice.
The best man of them was the most mischievous Sovereign, and the wisest
thing done by any of the dynasty was to keep away from England. When
they did nothing they did well; their activity was disastrous.

The Queen now reigning is esteemed by the Aristocracy because she
leaves them to do as they please, and gratifies them by bestowing
upon them and their devoted supporters _coronets_. She only demands
for herself and her numerous children _ample provisions_; if in these
she be gratified, she cares not to vex herself or her Lords by any
disputes. She is very benevolent, filling the great palaces with _poor
relations_, where they are supported--not by her. On the marriage of
one of her royal children her munificence is unequalled; but she asks
her devoted Lords to tax her subjects to pay for it!

Her allowances are, with wise _policy_, made very ample, that a
_splendid Court_ may be kept up, to give places to the aristocracy,
and to gratify the love of display. In this the Lords are generous; it
costs _them_ nothing, the taxes upon the people cover the expenses.
There are murmurs that the crown is never shown; that Royalty is
hidden from view, and that the reverence of the people wanes; that the
allowances designed and heretofore used to maintain a grand _Court of
respect and honour_ are misdirected, and get into the private pocket of
Royalty for merely personal objects. But he who should dare openly to
say this, unless of a very High Caste, would assuredly have his ears
_cropped_ [ku-tof.]

The reign has not been without bloody wars; one of which was to
uphold a sick _Turk_ (an outside Barbarian, who hates the very name of
_Christians_, and calls them _dogs_), and whom the English Barbarians
themselves despise. Yet, they rushed with great ships and armed bands
to attack another _Christ-god_ tribe, who threatened the sick Turkish
chief; because, as they thought, their trade was best secured by
helping the Turk! This foolish war cost thousands of the lives of the
English sailors and armed bands, but what is far more consequential
to the Barbarians, many millions [li-re] of gold. It ended in nothing
at all; for the great tribe which lost in the war some ships and some
forts, taken by the English, have now rebuilt them more strongly than
before, and again threaten the sick Turk more than ever!

When the American Barbarians had a domestic contention--some of them
wishing to deliver a poor people held in slavery, by a custom in some
of their provinces, from the cruel wrong--the English Barbarians sided
with those who wished to keep the slaves. They did this notwithstanding
that always before they had almost quarrelled with the American tribes
for allowing this very thing! Now, however, because they did not like
to have that people great in ships, and because they thought it would
be safer for them and better for their trade, to have the American
tribes broken to pieces, insidiously aided those who fought to hold the
slaves, in every way they could without open war. But the slave-holding
tribes were overpowered, and the slaves set free. Presently, the
American Barbarians demanded that they should be repaid some of the
_monies_ which this treacherous conduct had cost them--the lives
could not be repaid. The English Barbarians, fearing the American
tribes--very valiant, and having many ships--finally submitted to pay a
heavy penalty for their wrong doing!

Lately, also, the English Barbarians have stood silent and seen another
tribe on the Main Land (which aided them just before in the War for the
Turk, and, in fact, saved them from being shamefully beaten) completely
overthrown and mercilessly sacked by another tribe--when a kindly word
would have saved great suffering. But it does not displease the English
Barbarians to see another tribe weakened--and their trade was not
touched in this war--in fact, perhaps they had more to gain by pleasing
the strong tribe which came out victorious.

The English themselves complain that, lately, they have not
distinguished themselves by their usual _glorious_ expeditions; that
their war-ships and their fierce warriors are getting out of use, and
that the late _Committee_ of Government, made the name of England
inglorious. This feeling at length got possession of the Lower House,
and a new Committee appeared. These say that the attempt to carry on
affairs with other tribes, upon the _moral_ rules of the _Christ-god_
worship, although the tribes are devotees, is absurd. That the late
_Committee_, who had some slight notion of correct moral precepts,
and thought possibly one might venture to trust the Sovereign Lord of
Heaven, were _peace-at-any-price_ men, milksops (a term of reproach
equivalent to milkmaids) [kin-e-suk], and that, in their hands, the
English Lion had been _muzzled_--made an object of contempt! (This
blood-thirsty beast is the admired symbol of English power.)

This new Committee are pledged to seize the very first occasion which
may offer to exhibit the _British_. Lion (as he is styled) with his
muzzle off, his claws sharpened, and his frame well fed and strong. The
taxes are raised and the most exact attention is devoted to all needful
things to perfect this beast to the standard of his ancient might. And
the present Government--_Committee_--watch with keen eyes for that
opportunity, when they shall suddenly let spring this monster! It is
supposed that the angry _growl_ [heuien-ro] will sufficiently alarm;
if not, the terrific roar [Zuung-luu] cannot fail! The only drawback
to this ferocious pastime will be found in those members of the Lower
House, who, themselves bearing a good weight of taxes without the
emoluments of office, may oppose the majority and reduce the arrogancy
of its temper. None the less, in the present brutal conceit of the
Lower House and of the lower orders, a war may at any moment break out,
if for no other purpose than to show other Barbarians that the British
Lion is still a _Lion_ in full vigour! The idea of a dull, toothless,
blind old brute, which even a jackass (as one of the Barbarian fables
has it) may kick with impunity, is too intolerable!

The morality of the present Loyal Court is said to be admirable--when
you can once find the Royal residence. But this is quite a _myth_.
There is, in this reign, no Loyal Court, only a domestic circle--a
Royal Family--not kept up with so much splendour as some of the
_homes_ of the High-Caste. It is said that no suitor of an improper
moral colour may approach any Princess, unless he be a cousin of the
Queen, when the blood sanctifies the taint, and all is clean. If a
real cousin be not of these suitors, one as nearly related among the
poverty-stricken princes of the Barbarians from the Main Land as can
be had, is selected. He must profess to worship the great Superstition
of the English _Sect_, and detest the Roman Pope--at least, in public.
His poverty is no objection--that is more than counterbalanced by the
Illustrious obscurity of his race--that is, some family which ages ago
contrived to live by plunder, and by making itself safe within the
walls of stone castles, among steep rocks and hills. A family whose
descendants feel more pride in these, now, old and ruinous wrecks of
former insolence, than in any other possession--and whose alliance is
acceptable to the English Queen! The poverty of these petty chiefs is,
however, removed; nor do they marry a Princess of the English Queen
unless they be paid for it. It is not the Queen who pays; the occasion
is seized upon to obtain that _provision_ to which I have referred.

And the paltry chief, and his new, royal bride, know poverty no more;
they, and their children, and children's children, are provided for by
the Lower House, who tax the people for this privilege, so much valued
by them!--this privilege of succouring and enriching the worn out,
useless and decaying chiefs of foreign Barbarians, who have any, the
remotest, trace of kinship to the Royal House of England!

The more considerable events, therefore, in the present reign, as
the Barbarians think, have reference to these marriages of Royal
Princesses, births, christenings (baptizings), deaths, and the like
among them. The Low-House readily takes these opportunities to profess
its homage and devotion. The Queen follows the _Sacred Writings_
with great exactness, which commands "take care of those of your
own blood"--indeed, her devotion to this precept is, perhaps, more
noticeable than her devotion in general.

Her Illustrious presence is rarely known among the people. When
she does appear, she is hardly more than respectfully and silently
worshipped. She does not attract the _love_ of the people--though
she is (as a sly Barbarian youth of the Low-Castes once said to me,
sarcastically), very _dear_ [chean]. (A _pun_ [phu-nsi] on the word;
which may mean _beloved_, or _very costly_).

When, as rarely happens, to honour some Show wherein the Royal
_presence_ may bring money to a Charity, the Queen appears, surrounded
by Royal guards, and in State, there is always to be seen a gigantic
servant, dressed in the scarlet of the Royal household, seated
immediately behind the _Sacred Person_, to watch over and rescue
her from any danger. His body and mighty strength are always ready
to be interposed! This favourite servant, it is said, assists her
Illustrious, when, among the hills of the Far North, she visits the
great, high rocks, and climbs the sides of mountains--his strength is
so ready, trusty, and invaluable!

To her, and to her subjects, a great loss was inflicted when Death
destroyed the youthful Consort of the Queen, when she was still young.
He was one of ancient family among the petty Barbarian chiefs to whom
I have referred; was near in blood to the Queen, and by her greatly
beloved, it is said. He was never allowed any power in the State, and
was a subject of the Queen, though her husband. It is whispered that he
did not quietly submit to this condition of things--but it would not be
worth the notice of a wise man to attend to this gossip. I could never
learn that he was of any use; but, none the less, the Barbarians exalt
him very highly, and have built lofty monuments to his honour. I said
use--I forgot--he gave a very numerous brood of princes and princesses
to the English Barbarians. Of these they are very proud--not because
they do, or can ever do, anything useful, but because it adds to the
number of the _High-Castes_, and around them very many poor members of
that caste can cluster, and live upon the cast-off clothes and other
second-hand things of these exalted!

On the whole, we may desire the long continuance of Her Illustrious'
reign. If her will were law, distant plunderings would cease; and
her influence is better than may generally be looked for. She cannot
prevent, but she may moderate those expeditions despatched to subjugate
the _Heathen_, extend trade, and bring under the dominion and worship
of the Christ-god distant tribes. Great guns, fire-arms, gunpowder, and
a poisonous liquor called Rum, would, perhaps, under other sovereigns,
even more frequently be sent to prepare the way for the Prince of Peace
(as the Christ-god is often styled).

Some respect for Justice and some regard to the rights of others have
been shown under the influence of this Illustrious; but, as we have
seen, this, the most honourable distinction of the present reign, is
likely to be obliterated. The old predatory instinct of the English
Barbarians again comes uppermost, and though caution and fear of taxes
may make the Committee of Government tardy and unwilling to attack
(unless some weak tribe, where victory would be sure and _its_ glory
conspicuous), yet, such is the prevailing temper, that _blood-letting_
seems needful to cool those fierce and haughty Barbarians.

A ferocious war may be looked for; nor is it by any means incredible
that the war-ships of these Christ-god worshippers and their murdering
bands should again be directed against our peaceful Central Kingdom!




