CHAPTER XVI


HOMER AND PRIMITIVE POETRY


The poet of primitive society was Homer: and if such was his character,
he could not have enjoyed the profound wisdom, the delicate and lofty
sense of morality, and the supreme knowledge of all the sublimest
arts and sciences which ancient philosophers and writers fancied him
to possess, and the common opinion of literary men and critics still
attributed to him in the seventeenth century.

What an extravagant philosopher Homer would have been, if he had
indeed been a philosopher: how miserably, had he set out to do so,
would he have organised Greek civilisation! His Jupiter indicates
force, brute force, as the standard of the respect due to him; his
Minerva despoils Venus, knocks Mars down with a stone, strikes Diana
and is in turn insulted by Mars; and both Venus and Mars are wounded
by Diomed, a mere mortal. The heroes Achilles and Agamemnon exchange
insults such as would hardly be used by servants in a comedy to-day:
they call each other "dogs" and quarrel in the most uncivil manner for
the possession of Briseis and Chryseis. Ferocious in their customs,
they leave the bodies of their enemies to dogs and crows: intemperate
in their pleasures, they drink to excess. Lofty intelligence, kindness
of heart, balance of mind may be sought in vain in all their actions
and sentiments. The fact is, these heroes show themselves men of the
scantiest understanding, the wildest imagination, the most violent
passions; boorish, barbarous, intractable, fierce, arrogant, defiant
and obstinate in their resolves and at the same time flighty in the
extreme, at the mercy of any new object that presents itself to
their eyes. Here again, the most striking parallel may be found in
the psychology of the peasant, who as may be seen every day embraces
any reasonable motive proposed to him but owing to the weakness of
his intellect soon abandons the idea he has been persuaded to adopt
and slips naturally back to his first intention. In the same way the
Homeric heroes sometimes acquiesce in the first word of opposition
offered to them; sometimes at a sudden mournful recollection they burst
into bitter lamentation in the midst of their anger: or else, if while
in the greatest misery they meet with something pleasant, like Ulysses
at the feast of Alcinous, they lose all memory of their sorrows and
become completely cheerful; or else, when in a calm and peaceful state
of mind, they take offence at a harmless word and flying into a blind
passion threaten the speaker with a cruel death. Even the virtues which
they possess in an eminent degree, their frankness, vigour, magnanimity
and generosity, are tinged with this same character of unreflective
passion.

The hero of heroes, Achilles, who bears on his shoulders the destinies
of Troy, owing to a private wrong he had received from Agamemnon--a
grave wrong, but an insufficient motive for the ruin of his country and
his whole nation--condemned all the Greeks to defeat and destruction
at the hands of Hector; and he only determined to aid them in order
to assuage the personal grief caused by Hector's slaying his friend
Patroclus. If only this extreme aloofness had been due to passion and
jealousy! But though when Agamemnon deprived him of Briseis he made
enough noise to fill heaven and earth and supply the plot of the entire
_Iliad,_ yet he never in the whole course of the poem shows a spark
of real love: just as Menelaus mustered the whole of Greece against
Troy to avenge the rape of Helen but never suffers the least pang of
jealousy against Paris who is enjoying her. So devoid is Achilles of
common humanity, that when Hector wishes to arrange that the victor in
the fight shall bury the vanquished, he forgets that they are equals in
rank and that death levels all, and savagely answers: "When have men
ever made a truce with lions, and when have wolves and lambs had the
same wish?" and he adds, "If I slay thee, I will drag thee bound naked
to my chariot round the walls of Troy three days" (as he actually did
in the sequel) and finally, "I will give thee to my hounds to devour."
And he would have carried out his threat, had not the unhappy father
Priam come to him to ransom the corpse. But even in this deeply-moving
interview, when he has received Priam in his tent after the latter has,
escorted by Mercury, passed alone through the midst of the Greek camp,
when he has welcomed him to his table, at a single involuntary word
that falls from the lips of the unhappy old man as he bewails the loss
of so valiant a son Achilles forgets the sacred law of hospitality;
and, ignoring the full and complete trust which Priam had placed in
him, untouched by the terrible misfortunes of such a king, by the
respect due to a father and the veneration due to so old a man, without
reflecting on the reversal of his fortunes, of all things the most apt
to excite pity, flies into a bestial rage and shouts a threat that he
"will cut off his head"! Death itself does not end his anger at the
loss of Briseis, were it not that the beautiful and unhappy princess
Polyxena, daughter of the once rich and powerful Priam and now a
wretched slave, is sacrificed on his tomb, that the shade glutted with
revenge may drink the last drop of her innocent blood; and in the lower
world, when Ulysses asks him what state he prefers, Achilles answers
that he "would rather be the commonest slave, but alive"! Such is the
hero whom Homer adorns with the permanent epithet of "without reproach"
(ἀμύμων) and celebrates in the hearing of Greece as a pattern of
heroic virtue. Such a hero, whose reasoning powers are concentrated in
his spear-point, can only be classed with those self-satisfied persons
of whom we say nowadays that they are too fine to breathe the common
air.

If Homer's greatest characters are so discordant with our civilised
nature, the similes which he uses are drawn from savage beasts and wild
nature generally. If the life which he represents--a life of children
in its intellectual futility, of women in its imaginative vigour, and
of headstrong youths in the violence of its passion--and the tales
of which the _Odyssey_ is full, tales worthy of an old woman engaged
in amusing children, prevent our attributing any esoteric wisdom to
Homer, the striking success of these wild similes is certainly not
characteristic of a mind tamed and civilised by philosophy of any sort.
Nor could that truculent and savage style in which he describes the
various sanguinary battles, the diverse and extravagantly bloodthirsty
species of butchery which especially go to make the sublimity of the
_Iliad,_ have originated in a mind humanised and softened by philosophy.

But who was Homer? What opinions as to him can we find in ancient
writers, and what facts can we draw from his poems? An unprejudiced
reader of the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_ is at every step aware of and
baffled by extravagant and inconsistent statements. The life portrayed
is inconsistent: it takes us now here, now there, over a long period
of time; on the one hand we find Achilles the hero of force, on the
other Ulysses the hero of wisdom: on the one hand, cruelty, barbarism,
ferocity and brutality, on the other the luxury of Alcinous, the
delights of Calypso, the pleasures of Circe, the songs of the Sirens
and the pastimes of suitors who tempt and even win over the chaste
Penelope. On the one hand we are shown boorish and uncivilised
manners, on the other jewels, magnificent clothing, exquisite foods
and the arts of sculpture in bas-relief and metal-founding; on the one
hand a strictly heroic society, on the other some signs of popular
liberty. This delicate life fits ill with the savage and cruel life
which especially in the _Iliad_ is ascribed to the same heroes at the
same time. To regard them thus as contemporaneous is an impossibility.
From the customs of the Trojan period we have leapt abruptly into
those of the time of Numa, to such an extent that "_ne placidis coeant
inmitia_" we are compelled to suppose that the two poems were the work
of many hands extending over many ages. The geographical allusions are
equally inconsistent. These, no less, bring us into varied and distant
physical surroundings. The scene of the _Iliad_ lies to the east of
Greece, inclining to the northward: that of the _Odyssey_ in the west,
inclining to the southward. The language, again, is inconsistent. The
confusion of dialects persists in spite of the revision of Aristarchus,
and has been explained by the most extraordinary hypotheses, such as
the theory that Homer drew the elements of his vocabulary from all the
various Greek nationalities.

Passing from the poems to the traditions of their author, the lives
of Homer by Herodotus (if Herodotus really wrote it) and Plutarch
are valueless. The most elementary facts about Homer are unknown: it
is precisely concerning the man whom they considered the greatest
luminary of Greece that the ancients leave us most completely in the
dark. We know neither Homer's date nor his birthplace: each one of
the Greek peoples claimed him as their citizen. It is said indeed
that he was poor and blind, but it is just these details which excite
our suspicion, as our laughter is aroused by the argument of Longinus
which makes the _Iliad_ the work of his youth and the _Odyssey_ that
of his old age. It would be indeed remarkable if such knowledge were
current concerning a man in whose case the two trifling details of
time and place were unknown! Above all, criticism must ask how a single
man could ever have composed two poems of such a length at a time when
writing was not in existence: since the three inscriptions of heroic
age, one of Amphitryon, another of Hippocoön and a third of Laomedon
mentioned with an excess of good faith by Vossius are mere forgeries
like those made by the strikers of false coins.

All these considerations led Vico to suspect that Homer himself was not
a real person but one of those poetic characters to whom the ancient
world ascribed long series of actions, works and events. If we try to
conceive the Homeric poems not as the work of an individual but as
two great storehouses of the manners and customs of earliest Greece,
containing the history of its natural law and heroic period; if instead
of a single poet we imagine a whole nation of poets, and instead of a
single act of creation, a national poetry developing in the course of
centuries, everything falls into its place and finds an explanation.
The extravagance of the legends is explained by the fact that the
composition of the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_ falls in the third period of
their existence. In the hands of the theological poets they were true
and severe, by the heroic poets they were altered and corrupted, and
in this corrupt state they were incorporated in the two poems. The
variety of customs is explained if we consider the various periods of
composition, and so also the "young Homer" and "old Homer," which are
symbolic of the earlier and later periods of primitive Greece. The
diversity of sites assigned to his birth and death and the variety
of his dialects are accounted for by the fact that different peoples
produced the lays. Finally, it is explained why every Greek people
claimed him as a citizen, just because these peoples were themselves
Homer; and why he was called blind and a beggar, because such were
as a rule the singers who went about from fair to fair reciting their
tales. Thus in order to be rightly understood Homer must lose himself
in the crowd of Greek peoples and be considered an idea or heroic
character; a type of the Greeks in so far as they narrated tales in
ballad form. Thus facts which had only caused confusion and lacked
plausibility in Homer as then understood became natural and necessary
elements of the Homer now rediscovered. Above all, this latter Homer
deserves the high praise of being the first of all historians of
Greece known to us. In Homer we have a proof of the original identity
of history and poetry, and a confirmation of Strabo's assertion that
before Herodotus, before even Hecataeus of Miletus, the history of the
Greek peoples was written by their poets. In two golden passages of the
_Odyssey_ a man is praised for having told a story well and said to
have "told it as a musician and a singer."

Vico did not undertake a detailed investigation into the way in which
the Homeric poems were elaborated. He seems however to incline towards
two chief poet-authors, one, a native of the east of Greece, towards
the north, for the _Iliad,_ the other for the _Odyssey,_ a native of
the west towards the south: and by the title "Homer" he understands a
composer and compiler of legends. But on the other hand, owing to the
purely ideal meaning which this name has for him, we must not rule out
the interpretation that the two Homers in their turn may be two streams
of poetry and two groups of peoples or of popular singers. The historic
figures whom Vico finds before him are the rhapsodes, men of the people
who wandered independently about the fairs and festivals of the Greek
cities reciting the songs of Homer. From the time of their primitive
composition long ages elapsed before the Pisistratidae had them
divided and arranged into two groups, the _Iliad_ and the _Odyssey,_ a
fact which shows clearly that in their time only a confused mass of
material was to be found, and decreed that they should henceforth be
sung by the rhapsodes at the Panathenaea.

It is however certainly not in the resolution, materially understood,
of the individual Homer into a myth or poetic character that the
importance of Vico's theory lies: and the same is perhaps the case
with its truth. From the inconsistencies observed by him, and not
always accurately observed (which are moreover unimportant, since
the inaccuracies he notes might easily be balanced by the correct
statements he omits), there was no strictly logical passage to the
denial of the existence of an individual Homer, the principal author
of one or both poems. These inconsistencies might serve to demonstrate
that the poet or poets were working upon a rich fund of traditional
material, of origin very various both as to time and place, and not
regularly stratified according to origin, but having its strata
confused and contorted. One or more poets, or even many poets and an
able compiler of their lays, or a society of able compilers: these and
similar hypotheses might equally well have been suggested, as happened
later, and supported, as was later the case, by arguments neither more
nor less cogent, because incapable of documentary proof. But underlying
this resolution of Homer into a poetic character, as it underlay other
resolutions made or attempted by Vico, lay the discovery of the long
and laborious historical genesis through which the matter of these
poems had passed, so that in this sense they might really be called a
product of collaboration on the part of the whole Greek people. The
substitution of a nation of Homers for a single Homer was only another
case of mythology constructed according to the principles discovered
by Vico himself: mythology which must be retranslated into scientific
prose. In the same way Vico's analysis of the customs described in the
Homeric poems may be, and is, not only here and there adulterated with
a few inaccuracies, but is on the whole exaggerated and one-sided.
Still, this analysis taken as a whole was a great advance and opened
new paths to Homeric criticism. How could the stubborn illusion of the
noble Homeric hero, a great lord and a good ruler, a shining example
of all civil, military and domestic virtues, be dispelled except by
setting against it the picture of a boorish Achilles, full of elemental
passions, violent, stubborn, unreasoning, quick to a generous impulse
but no less quick to outbursts of brutal wrath?

Vico's progress in artistic appreciation of the Homeric poetry was
no less marked. The recognition that a sound and rational philosophy
was not to be found in the poet Homer would, in the mouth of any
other critic of the time, have amounted to a slur on the poet: as
expressed by Vico and as the consequence of his new aesthetic ideas it
was a compliment. The errors which intellectualism and neo-classical
criticism discovered in Homer led the critics to repeat freely the
saying of Horace that "good Homer nods at times": whereas Vico on
the contrary exclaims "if he had not nodded so often he would never
have been good!" (_nisi ita saepe dormitasset, nunquam bonus fuisset
Homerus_). Homer was a great poet precisely because he was not a
philosopher. He had a retentive memory, a strong imagination and a
sublime mind; and neither the philosophies nor the arts of poetry
and criticism which came after him could ever produce a poet at all
like him. He was the only poet who could conceive heroic characters:
his comparisons are incomparable, his speeches sublime, expressive
of the individuality of the speaker, and created by the power of a
vivid imagination: his diction is clear and splendid, his language
composed entirely of similes, images and comparisons, and has none of
those ideas of genus and species by which things are intellectually
defined. He is not delicate but grand, for delicacy is a small virtue
and grandeur naturally despises small things: or even, just as a great
and rushing torrent cannot help the turbidness of its water, and must
perforce sweep rocks and trees with it in the violence of its course,
so too in Homer we may find things of no value. But the torrent with
all its impurities sweeps on its way superb and impetuous; and Homer in
spite of and partly because of his ruggedness is for ever the father
and prince of all sublime poets.

This new departure in Homeric criticism brought with it implicitly a
complete revolution in the history of ancient literature. But on this
subject Vico made only a few scattered remarks. He was no specialist:
he did not write from a specialist's point of view, and too often when
documentary evidence and thought were unable to solve a difficulty he
solved it by means of his fancy, a faculty which was however in his
case radiant with gleams of insight. Thus, the cyclic poets were not
so called because of the circle of listeners in the centre of which
they declaimed their poems, like the "Rinaldi" or ballad-singers whom
Vico saw on the quay at Naples, and this circle had no connexion with
the _vilem patulumque orbem_ of Horace: but the observation that they
differed little from these ballad-singers was sound. In the same way,
we need not linger on his guesses at the dates of Homer and Hesiod,
nor need we take literally his division of lyric poetry into three
periods, namely those respectively of religious hymns, funeral chants
for dead heroes and melic lyrics or "musical airs," the last including
Pindar, and admired, flourishing as it did at the epoch of the "pompous
virtue" of Greece, at the Olympic games where these poets sang. But
still Vico has here put his finger on the difference between primitive
and refined or cultured lyric poetry. The origin of tragedy he ascribes
to the dithyramb or dramatic satire, of which no example has come down
to us, and in rural customs compared by him to those which were still
in evidence during his own lifetime in Campania at vintage season; and
he notes the relation between tragedy and the epic. Tragedy had its
rude beginnings at a time when the heroic spirit was already dead:
it perfected itself by becoming subordinate to the Homeric poetry,
deriving its inspiration from Homeric characters and avoiding original
ones. The old comedy was closely related to tragedy. Like the latter
it was derived from a chorus, and it preserved its archaic character
in that it displayed living persons and real actions. The new comedy
on the other hand was marked off by a profound change of spirit. Here
the effects of philosophy were directly felt. Imaginative genera were
superseded by intelligible and rational universals: and Menander and
the other poets of the new comedy, living in the most humane period
of Greek history, took their intelligible genera from human life and
depicted them in their comedies, over which one feels that the breath
of Socratic philosophy has passed. The persons of the new comedy were
cast in a mould, and were not public but private characters: and as
the chorus represents the public and argues about public affairs only,
there is no room for it in the new comedy. About this time began the
practice of inserting idealised heroes of perfect morals into poetry.
Aristotle, remembering the strongly individualised characters of
Homer, still maintained as a principle of poetic composition that
the heroes of tragedy should be neither very good nor very bad, but
rather a mixture of great virtues and great faults. But the poets of
the late period, making use of the idea originated by philosophers,
formed a "heroism of virtue": a heroism which may be called "gallant."
Accordingly they either invented entirely new legends or else used old
legends which had originally presented themselves to the founders of
the nation in an appropriately stern and severe form, but softened them
by adapting them to the softening of manners. Equally gallant is the
"shepherd" of the Greek Bucolic poets, Bion and Moschus, "wasting away
with the most delicate love," He makes the general observation on Greek
and Latin literature, that the boundary between verse and prose was so
strictly guarded on both sides that no ancient writer ever composed
both orations and poems--a rule to which perhaps the only exception
is the wretched verses (_ridenda poemata_) of Cicero: and Vico tried
to explain this fact by the democratic habits which compelled orators
studiously to avoid the cultivation of lofty and fanciful modes of
expression, which would have puzzled the people and hindered their full
and clear comprehension of the point at issue.

Vico does not treat Roman literature so fully as Greek, which provided
him with much more primitive documents. But he detected certain
analogies between the origins of Latin and Greek literature. The first
poets and authors in the Latin language were the Salii, sacred poets;
and this was natural in the beginning of a nation's culture; for in the
primitive religious period the gods are the only object of praise. And
just as the earliest fragments of Latin known to us, the remains of
the hymns of the Salii, give an impression of hexameter verse, so the
same metre is felt in the records of Romans who celebrated triumphs,
such as the _"duello magno dirimendo, regibus subiugandis"_ of Lucius
Aemilius Regillus and the _"fudit fugat prosternit maximas legiones"_
of Acilius Glabrio. The first Roman poets, too, sang true stories: this
was the case with Livius Andronicus and his Romanid containing the
annals of early Rome, and with Naevius, and later Ennius, who described
the Punic wars. Satire also was levelled against real and for the most
part notorious persons. The Romans however differed from the Greeks
in advancing with a more measured step and not making the swift and
abrupt transition from barbarism to effeminacy: so that they entirely
lost the history of their gods (which Varro called the "obscure period"
of Rome) and preserved their heroic history, extending down to the
Publilian and Petelian laws, in common speech only. In its greatest
manifestations the literature of Rome is the work of cultivated poets
like Virgil, whom Vico admires for his profound knowledge of heroic
antiquity, but says of him that so far as poetical power is concerned
he is not to be compared with Homer; a verdict agreeing with that of
Plutarch and Longinus, but in opposition to the view of neo-classical
criticism. Another example of cultivated and reflective poetry is to
be found in Horace, who like Pindar in the pompous period of Greece
composed his odes at the most "ostentatious" epoch of Roman history,
the Augustan age.

The Biblical literature would have given Vico materials of great value
for the study of primitive poetry; and he actually did move a few steps
towards it when he observed that poetry was the primitive language of
all nations "including the Hebrews"; and that Moses made no use of the
esoteric wisdom of the Egyptian priests and wrote his history "in a
style which has much in common with that of Homer and often surpasses
him in sublimity of expression." But Vico drops the subject at once, as
if he instinctively guessed what might come of treating the Pentateuch
as he had done the _Iliad,_ and Moses like Homer. So he prefers to wax
enthusiastic over the phrase in which God describes himself to Moses
_"Ego sum qui sum,"_ to which he ascribes a metaphysical profundity
only attained by the Greeks when Plato conceived God as to_ on,_ and
unknown to the Latins down to the latest period, for the word _ens_ is
not pure Latin but belongs to debased Latin. Or he contents himself
with emphatically pointing out that at a time when Greece was under
the sway of a superstitious and natural law, God gave to his people a
code "so full of weight as regards the dogmas of divinity and so full
of humanity as regards the practice of justice, that not even in the
humanest period of Greek history could a Plato have conceived or an
Aristides executed it"; a code "whose ten chief enactments contain an
eternal and universal justice founded upon the excellent conception
of a purified human nature, and are capable of forming by habituation
a character such as the maxims of the greatest philosophers could
only with great difficulty form by ratiocination; whence Theophrastus
called the Hebrews philosophers by nature." The success that attended
the "will to believe" was all the more striking if as we suspect Vico
had read the abhorred Spinoza's _Tractatus Theologico-politicus,_
where the Hebrew prophets, while their "piety" is recognised, are
said to be entirely devoid of "sublime thoughts." Spinoza maintains
that they only taught "very simple things which any one could easily
discover, and adorned these with a style and supported them by reasons
most calculated to move the mind of the multitude to devotion towards
God"; and that the laws revealed by God to Moses were "nothing but
the laws of the particular government of the Jews": and he sets out
to examine the text of the Bible and the problem of the authenticity
of the Pentateuch and the respective authors of its various books. We
might almost venture to say that it was Spinoza's Biblical criticism
that suggested to Vico his criticism of the composition and spirit of
the Homeric poems; but that the latter, after passing in this way from
sacred to profane history, from Moses to Homer, set his face stubbornly
against the opposite transition from Homer to Moses, from profane
history to sacred.




