III

THE CHRISTIAN HOPE IN TIMES OF WAR

FRANK CHAMBERLIN PORTER


Of Paul's three things that abide, hope is the one of which we are now
most conscious of our need. Never before in our experience has hope
been so much the center of our inner life and the heart of our
religion. Our mood alternates between hope and depression, hope and
fear; and we look to our religion to make hope strong, and turn to our
sacred book to seek secure grounds and satisfying expressions for our
hope. We hope for the winning of the war. We hope for the safety and
the home-coming of those we love. We hope for a new world-order
organized to make war impossible, inspired by a spirit of cooperation
and good will between classes and between nations. We hope as never
before for an assured and abundant life after death. We put these
hopes in some relation to each other, weighing one against another,
subordinating one to another. And when we seek their right
relationship and look for their ultimate grounds, we ask what
Christianity has to say and to do about them. What is Christian in
these hopes that are filling the mind and heart of the world? The
importance of this question is very great. The future of the world
depends on the truth and the strength of the hopes that now inspire
and direct men's purposes and efforts. The future of the Christian
religion turns in no small measure on its ability now to keep the hope
of mankind high and pure, free from self-seeking and from material
interests, and true to the ultimate reality of things, and to give
this hope confidence and prevailing strength.

Christians are not at one over the question what, as Christians, they
have a right to hope for. Most evidently is this the case between us
and our enemy. We differ in things hoped for; and it is perhaps not
too much to say that the truth of our hope and the strength of our
hope constitute and measure our spiritual equipment for the winning of
the war. The Germans are fighting for their hope of national expansion
and domination, for their dream of a new world empire of the chosen
and fit people of God. We cannot question the strength of this hope of
theirs, and its powerful influence toward bringing itself to
realization. We and our Allies are resisting these nationalistic and
arrogant hopes, and are appealing to the contrary hope of an inclusive
human brotherhood, in which good will shall prevail between nations,
and hence right and peace. The hope that is truer, more in accordance
with the nature of things, the nature of man, the will of God, and the
hope that is most deeply felt and most loyally served, with most
conviction and most sacrifice, will prevail in the end. That is the
hope that will come true. Ours is inevitably a religious hope, for it
is universal in range, big as the world, and needs not only every
power of ours but the Power not ourselves to bring it about. It is for
every one who holds it intensely, in a real sense, a hope in God and a
hope for God. But is it certain that it is also a Christian hope, a
hope in Christ and a hope for Christ?

There are, not only between us and our enemy, but among ourselves,
radical differences as to what a Christian should hope for in the
present world crisis. There are those who search the Scriptures for
predictions of the Kaiser and his overthrow, and see in the
anti-Christian philosophy and in the anti-Christian arrogance and
cruelty of his militaristic state, a sign that the end of this evil
world-age is near, and that Christ will come quickly and set up his
reign on earth. And there are those to whom such literalism in the use
of Scripture and such externality in the hope for Christ's coming are
intellectually impossible and untrue, and religiously harmful. To them
the meaning of the Bible is to be found in the tendency and spirit of
its teachings, and their hope is for the presence and rule of the
spirit of Christ and the dominance of his principles in the common
life of humanity. This involves a radical difference in the hope of
Christians for a new world, a new human society, and in the ways in
which this hope will affect their motives and efforts. There are also
deep-going differences in regard to the hope for a life after death.
That many are looking eagerly for material, "scientific" proof through
physical communications from the dead, while many, on the other hand,
are feeling that immortality belongs to the race and not to the
individual, and that the sacrifice of the young and the strong finds
its only and sufficient end and justification in the new humanity they
die to create, indicates that Christ has not yet brought life and
immortality to clear light for humanity. Such differences are not to
be desired. If Christianity is to be the religion of the present eager
and pressing hopes of mankind and give these hopes elevation, truth,
and victorious endurance and enthusiasm, Christians should be clear
and united in the contents and character of their hope.

Among these hopes of mankind there can be no doubt which one has the
first place in the minds of the intellectual leaders and the actual
rulers of the allied nations. Never before has a truly prophetic note
been so clearly sounded by leading men of affairs, and by the press
and the leaders of public opinion, as well as by the poets and
preachers to whom prophecy naturally belongs. From all sides we have
expressions of a hope which four years ago was judged to be the dream
of impractical idealists, the hope for a new order of human life, in
which good will and mutual cooperation shall take the place of
suspicion and competitive struggle. We need not be blind to whatever
motives of self-interest may have entered into the action of this or
that one of our Allies in undertaking the war. The outstanding fact
remains that while the German Government appeals to the self-assertion
of the German State and seeks its aggrandizement through force at the
expense of its neighbors, the allied governments appeal to national
self-sacrifice for the sake of international redemption. It is to this
appeal on behalf of the rights, the freedom, the happiness of mankind,
that our soldiers respond; for humanity, not for national gain, that
our peoples are prepared to give and to suffer. This hope takes
concrete form in the word Democracy, and in the idea of a League or
Federation of free, democratic nations, bound together for the defense
of human rights, for cooperation in all that concerns human welfare
and progress, and the repression of every attack upon the peace of the
world. So viewed the war becomes definitely a war to end war, and as
such it is engaged in and supported by peace-loving peoples, against
the nation that glorifies war and would perpetuate it.

Is this great hope Christian? Is Christianity the religion which a
hope so high and so difficult needs if it is to keep its height amid
the many influences that tend to lower it, and if it is to prove
possible and become actual in spite of powerful forces that work
against it? It is not self-evident that Christianity will prove equal
to this which is clearly the greatest task that the present imposes
upon it. There are many who doubt its adequacy; many who see that it
has brought division and warfare, and think it unfitted to create
unity; many who see that it has withdrawn from the world, and think it
unadapted to provide the moral principles and spiritual energies of
the new social and political world-order. It is for us who believe in
the sufficiency of Christ to prove that he alone provides those
religious and moral principles and forces without which no democracy,
still less any federation of democracies, can stand.

The ideal of human brotherhood which the war has revealed as the
deepest desire and faith of men and has put before us as a goal that
we must now set out to reach is of course old in its beginnings, and
for a generation it has been taking ever stronger hold on the minds of
men. Prophetic utterances of this ideal could be quoted in abundance.
A striking example is a saying of Alexander Dumas in 1893: "I believe
our world is about to begin to realize the words 'Love one another,'
without, however, being concerned whether a man or a God uttered
them.... Mankind, which does nothing moderately, is about to be seized
with a frenzy, a madness, of love." And Tolstoy's comment on this at
the time of the Russian revolution, in 1905: "I believe that this
thought, however strange the expression, 'seized with a frenzy of
love,' may seem, is perfectly true and is felt more or less clearly by
all men of our day. A time must come when love, which forms the
fundamental essence of the soul, will take the place natural to it in
the life of mankind, and will become the chief basis of the relations
between man and man. That time is coming; it is at hand."

The world war seems like a violent contradiction of the truth of such
prophecies. It seems for the time to have made love inadequate as a
summing up of morals and religion. We almost feel that the Sermon on
the Mount must be kept in reserve for other times. The war has made
love itself a hope. We renounce it for a time that we may resist a
power that threatens to destroy it altogether and put selfishness and
cruelty on the throne of the world. But the war has not in fact
disproved the faith that God is love and that love is the supreme law
and power among men. It has made mankind more conscious of its ideal
of community and fellowship, and seems to be carrying us faster toward
the realization of human brotherhood than peace and prosperity were
doing. The greatest and most widely approved sentences of President
Wilson's war papers are those that give expression to "what the
thinking peoples of the world desire, with their longing hope for
justice and for social freedom and opportunity." On the anniversary of
our entering the war, Gilbert Murray declared that England needed our
help in battle, but even more in upholding their true faith.
"Americans instinctively believe ... in freedom, peace, democracy,
arbitration, and international good will.... When the war is over
there will be a world to rebuild, and the only principles on which to
rebuild it are these principles." Germany denies the truth of these
principles, but in doing so it denies human nature and derives from
physical nature a state-ethics of struggle and the survival of the
strong. It denies the prophet of Galilee, and looks for its example to
Rome. Sometimes it has seemed as if the German denial of humanity and
affirmation of material and brute force were in danger of justifying
itself by the only test they admit, that of physical success. Where
can we look for help toward a living faith in liberty and brotherhood
over against the powerful demonstration we are offered of faith in
material force and in the progress of nations through aggression and
tyranny? We must look no doubt first of all to our own souls and
oppose to the faith in physical and animal nature a faith in human
nature and in the truth of its best instincts and ideals; and then to
those who know best and most worthily express the human soul and the
reality of its spiritual possessions. Not from the Bible alone, and
not only from Christ are such reassuring testimonies to be gained; and
we are not renouncing the unique value of the Christian religion when
we find that the faith and hope which it teaches are the faith and the
hope of the universal heart of man.

The poet laureate of England made his special contribution to his
nation's needs in time of war in the anthology, "The Spirit of Man."
"Our country," he says, "is called of God to stand for the truth of
man's hope." "Truly it is the hope of man's great desire, the desire
for brotherhood and universal peace to men of good will, that is at
stake in this struggle." From the miseries and slaughter and hate of
war, "we can turn," he says, "to seek comfort only in the quiet
confidence of our souls; and we look instinctively to the seers and
poets of mankind, whose sayings are the oracles and prophecies of
loveliness and loving kindness." They help us gain the conviction our
time most needs, "that spirituality is the basis and foundation of
human life," that "man is a spiritual being, and the proper work of
his mind is to interpret the world according to his higher nature, and
to conquer the material aspects of the world so as to bring them into
submission to the spirit."

But the Bible also is a witness to just these convictions and contains
prophecies of just such hopes. Bridges includes very few citations
from the Bible, chiefly because it is so well known, but also because
"this familiarity implies deep-rooted associations, which would be
likely to distort the context." Alas, for these associations, for the
interpretations that confuse and the prejudices that blind the readers
of the greatest literature of spirituality and of hope which the world
contains. In spite of this, the Bible will be looked to by multitudes
for guidance and support in those hopes on which the future turns,
while the poet's fine work will be prized by few. It is only too
possible to fail to find in the Bible its testimony to that "hope of
man's great desire of brotherhood and peace" which constitutes the
most living religion of our time; and this failure will mean loss to
the hope itself of its most powerful support, and loss to the
Christian religion of contact and sympathy with the most urgent
spiritual need and aspiration of men today.

The Bible does contain various and contradictory hopes, and can
encourage expectations that are not in accordance with the best
conscience of our age, nor with our knowledge of the way in which
human progress is achieved. But there is nothing more instructive than
the relation of these different hopes to each other as the historian
understands them and there is nothing more worthy and inspiring than
the language in which the most spiritual and the most universal of
these hopes are expressed.

The original hope of the religion of Israel was that involved in the
unique and exclusive relation between the nation Israel and Yahweh,
its God. It was the hope of Israel's prosperity and power through the
certain favor of Yahweh, and his intervening help in times of danger,
most of all his help in the nation's wars. These were "the Wars of
Yahweh." Both the strength and the defect of the Old Testament
religion lie in this fundamental faith, the peculiarity and
exclusiveness of the relation between Israel and its God. It inspired
its early victories and created the kingdom of David. It sustained the
nation amid calamities and enabled it to maintain itself when other
small nations disappeared before the great world empires, and while
these also came and passed. It was a natural and not unreasonable
faith for its time, so long as Yahweh was only Israel's national God,
even though he was believed to be better and stronger than the gods of
other nations and destined to triumph over them; but when Israel's God
was believed to be the one and only God of all the world the doctrine
of Israel as his peculiar people must either lead to false claims and
have bad effects upon temper and conduct, or else be reinterpreted and
radically changed. Nothing can be more instructive as to the nature of
religious hope than to follow out two main lines of development by
which an adjustment was attempted between this primitive nationalism
and the later, larger thought of God and the world.

The great prophets before the exile, Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
and after exile Deutero-Isaiah, were those through whom the faith was
attained that Yahweh is the one and only God; and the modification of
the national exclusiveness of Israel which they made was in the
direction of its complete subordination to ethical and spiritual
ideals. The one God of all was the God of righteousness, and of Israel
only on the condition and for the end of righteousness. But an ethical
in place of a national relation to God meant, if it was carried
through consistently, a universal relation of God to all men as
individuals, instead of a peculiar relation to one favored nation.
Consistency was not reached, yet glimpses, sometimes clear momentary
visions, of this individual, universal, ethical religion are to be
found in the great prophets; and in them the Old Testament religion
reaches its height. It is the prophetic denial of national claims and
hopes, not the older and always prevalent assertion of them, that
constitutes the reality and truth of the Old Testament hope. It is
hope for Yahweh and his righteousness, not for Israel and its glory.
It finds its highest expression in such predictions as Isaiah's
promise of security to the humble and believing; and Jeremiah's
expectation of the time when no special revelation will make known the
will of God to a chosen few, but when everyone will have his own
inward knowledge of God; and Ezekiel's belief that the new inward
nature which every man requires if he is to do that will of God which
he knows, will be achieved not only by his own free moral choice
(18:31), but also by the divine spirit, the transforming presence and
power of God (36:26, 27); and in Deutero-Isaiah's interpretation of
the peculiar relation of Israel to the one God of all the world as
that of Yahweh's Servant, his prophet to all nations, who brings light
to the heathen and deliverance from bondage, and who effects this
ministry even through his own shame and suffering for others' sins.

But there was a second still later way of adjusting the original
nationalism of Israel's faith and hope to monotheism and the
conception of a unity in nature and history; and this proved easier
and more popular than the other. In late prophecy and apocalypse the
hope of Israel's national and worldly prosperity and power takes on an
unearthly character. Instead of righteousness and spirituality as in
the earlier prophets, transcendence and heavenliness interpret or
displace the primitive hope. The heavenly region to which apocalyptic
prophecy transferred Israel's hope was a refinement of the physical,
but it was still essentially physical, a region whose riches could be
as sensibly enjoyed and as selfishly desired as the palace and throne
of an earthly kingdom. The heavenly powers by which this hope was to
be realized were divine, yet they were essentially material forces.
The prophetic hopes at their highest rest on human nature at its
highest, on the conscience and reason of man recognized as the will
and thought of God. But the apocalyptic hope, though it strains
language to magnify the contrast between its two worlds, the earthly
and the heavenly, the present and the future, does not succeed in
making them really different. Supernaturalism always fails to find the
real difference between man and God and so the way in which the
difference is to be overcome. This supernaturalism of the apocalypse
is seen also in the ways in which the hope is revealed. The seer
interprets in literal or artful ways the language of prophetic
scriptures regarded as divine oracles, or he is translated in ecstasy
to heaven and shown the secrets of the upper world and the future. The
coming of this new heavenly world men may pray for, and the time of
its coming they may seek to discover from sacred writings and
traditions and from the signs of the times, but only divine powers can
bring this evil world to an end, and only from heaven where they
already are can descend, in heaven's own time and way, the scenery and
the actors in the last great drama of history. There is in this hope
no strong ethical appeal, no prevailing sense that in the inward
region of the heart and in its instincts and desires and wills, God's
presence is to be found and his work for man experienced. Moreover
this hope for a new heavenly world means no hope for the present
world. It is evil and must grow more evil until God intervenes to
destroy it and brings down from heaven the realm of good. To renounce
the world and withdraw from it is the course of wisdom and holiness.
As a way of adjusting Israel's national hope to monotheism it is not
comparable with the prophetic way of ethics and inwardness. It is
still Israel, or the true Israel, that is to inherit the world to
come; and at its coming the world empire must first of all be
overthrown, for the new kingdom, heavenly and supernatural though it
is, is enough like the kingdom of Greece or of Rome to require its
fall and to take its place. The apocalyptic hope is the end of Old
Testament prophecy, but not its height. It was no doubt in some sense
fitted for its times, hard times, always, when the evils of life
seemed irremediable. It knew the need of divine help, and it
encouraged endurance and fidelity even to death. But it was not
grounded in the nature of men, and it was mistaken in its conception
of the nature of the world. It never quite escapes this inherent
falseness and confusion in its fundamental assumptions.

It cannot be hard to pass judgment on the relative value of these
three main hopes of the Old Testament. The primitive hope for God's
special favor to his own peculiar people who are destined to have
dominion over all others would have seemed, before the war, safely
outgrown by humanity. If the world still needed a demonstration of the
danger and falsity of any nation's belief in its peculiar excellence
and in its exclusive right and destiny to rule, and the intolerable
morals and preposterous religion that finally result from such claims,
the aggressors in the present war have supplied it, and the rest of
the world is united in the resolve that no further demonstration of
this hope be undertaken. The early histories of the Old Testament and
parts of its laws, its psalms and even its prophecies, contain
expressions of just this belief in a peculiar people, for whom God
made the world, and to whom the right belongs, secured by the divine
favor and promise, to rule over all other nations. Some of the
inferences and consequences of this faith that now shock the world,
something of the hatred and the cruelty toward foreign peoples, the
exaltation of vengeance, the arrogance and the inhumanity, find
unreserved expression in this literature. But the meaning of the Old
Testament is to be found in the denial and overcoming of this doctrine
and of its results.

In regard to the two ways in which this denial and correction were
chiefly undertaken, there can be no question where the greater value
and truth are to be found. The prophet's criticism of the national
hope and reinterpretation of it as the hope for righteousness really
struck at the heart of the materialism and selfishness of the
popular national hope, its false pride and its denial of trust and
of good will toward mankind. But the apocalyptic modification of the
older hope, though it fitted it for a wider view of the world and of
history and a deeper experience of the power of evil, did not
correct those moral and spiritual faults which were inherent in the
older hope. There is no generosity, no faith in human nature, no
sense of the present prevailing rule of God and power of good, no
thought of the "secret of inwardness" and "the method of
self-renouncement," in the religion of the apocalypse. The righteous
kernel of Judaism, the holy few who feared the Lord, expected an
invasion of divine forces on their behalf, the destruction of their
oppressors and their own elevation to angel-like natures and
God-like authority and blessedness. It could hardly be expected that
they would exhibit Isaiah's virtue of humility, or Jeremiah's of
inwardness and satisfaction in the communion of the soul with God,
or Deutero-Isaiah's impulse to turn their present lowliness to
greatness by ministry to those who persecuted them and even by death
for others' transgressions. The greatest of the apocalypses are no
doubt the canonical ones, Daniel and Revelation; and they are great
in their confidence in the divine government of the world, and in
its final vindication, and in their assertion of the martyr virtues.
But they do not believe in man, and in God in man, though their
belief in a God above is heroic. They do not hope for the world, or
find God in the world; nor do they feel that they are in any sense
responsible for the evil of the world and for its salvation from
evil. Righteousness and blessedness belong only to heaven, and can
come only from heaven to earth, and only by an act of God which will
bring the present world to a sudden end. The faults of materialism
and of self-interest which belong to the naive nationalism of
Israel's beginnings are still present in the conscious and
sophisticated other-worldliness of the apocalyptic hopes, and reveal
the inner untruth of a supernaturalism which reckons in terms of
place and time, and looks above and ahead instead of about and
within for the Kingdom of God.

The post-canonical apocalypses of Judaism fall within the period
beginning with the attempt of Antiochus IV to make the Jews Greeks,
and the successful resistance of the Maccabees and their establishment
of an independent Jewish kingdom, and ending with the Jewish-Roman
wars, the destruction of Jerusalem and the suppression by Hadrian of
the final Messianic, political uprising under Bar Cochba; that is,
from 108 B. C. to 135 A. D. It is of the highest importance to note
that Christianity took its rise in the midst of this period, and that
the apocalyptic hopes which these events encouraged and which in turn
partly shaped the events, formed the immediate environment and
inheritance of the new religion. The question as to the nature of the
hope of the New Testament becomes therefore largely the question of
the place which Jewish apocalyptical expectations had in the new
religion and in the mind of its founder.

There are three elements in the hope of the New Testament which are
found in the later Jewish apocalypses, but not in the Old Testament:
1. The coming of the Son of Man as judge of men and angels at the last
day, which is always thought to be near at hand. 2. The reign on earth
of Messiah and his saints, the living and the risen dead, for a
certain period, during which they will overcome all the powers of
evil. 3. The immortality of the spirit, the transformation of the
righteous into angelic natures, fitting them to be companions of
heavenly beings in the final consummation. For our understanding of
these hopes and for our decision as to their truth and value it is
necessary to look at them as they arise in Jewish writings and not
only in their appearance in the New Testament.

The Son of Man appears first in Daniel, but there he is not an
individual, but the symbol of a nation, "the people of the saints of
the Most High"; and the vision pictures Israel as coming on a cloud,
not from heaven, but to God, to receive from him authority to rule
over the world. It is first in a part of the Book of Enoch, the
"Parables," chapters 37-71, dating probably from the reign of Herod,
that Daniel's "Son of Man" becomes an individual. It is important to
understand the religion of this writer in order to appreciate the
significance of this heavenly Messiah. His religion consists in faith
in the reality of a spiritual world which is destined to displace the
present world and to be the blessed abode of the righteous. God is
"the Lord of Spirits," and the voice of Isaiah's seraphim becomes,
"Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Spirits: he filleth the earth with
spirits." The sin of the kings and mighty of the earth is that they
deny the Lord of Spirits and the hidden dwelling places of the
righteous. This is a religion of faith in heaven and its God and its
angelic inhabitants, and in the destiny of the righteous soon to share
its beauty and blessedness. Among those whom Enoch sees there, one is
above all significant for man. He has the appearance of a man, with a
face of graciousness and beauty, like an angel's. He is described as
the Son of Man to whom righteousness and wisdom belong. He has existed
from before the creation, and has been revealed to the righteous.
Faith in him and hope for his coming have sustained the righteous in
times of trouble, and by faith in him and in the Lord of Spirits and
the heavenly dwelling places, they "have hated and despised the world
of unrighteousness and have hated all its works and ways." Here is a
religion of pure other-worldliness. The calling of this heavenly Son
of Man is to be the judge of the world at the last day. He will then
"sit on the throne of his glory," will "choose the righteous and holy"
from among the risen dead, will condemn and send away to destruction
the kings and mighty of the earth, who because of their unbelief in
the unseen world have been proud and worldly and unjust. The righteous
will dwell in the new heaven and earth, with the Lord of Spirits over
them and the Son of Man as their companion, having been clothed with
garments of glory and immortal life. The likeness between this
religion and the apocalyptic type of New Testament Christianity is
striking. But it is not Christian because it is without Jesus himself.
This Son of Man has not already come and lived among men. The
righteous have not learned of him that God is in this world as well as
in the other, that he is a God of human beings, even the lowliest, and
of birds and grass, of rain and growth. They have not learned that
good is already stronger than evil; least of all do they know the
greatest thing, that love is supreme, and that not by hating the world
and its ways but by the ministry of love is the new world to be
brought in. The religion of Enoch presents in pure and simple form, in
pre-Christian Judaism, just that religion of dualism and pessimism, of
despair of the present and the renunciation of effort to better the
world, of strained expectation of divine intervention, which
sometimes, and even now in some quarters, claims to be the only true
Christianity. It is, in fact, Christianity with Christ left out.

The second element which the apocalypses add to the hope of the Old
Testament and which the New Testament Apocalypse adopts, is the
conception of a millennial earthly kingdom. This appears in probably
an earlier part of Enoch, chapters 91-104. In a short Apocalypse of
Weeks, after seven weeks of world-history up to the writer's present,
an eighth week is predicted, in which the righteous shall wield the
sword against their oppressors and establish the Messianic kingdom;
then a ninth week in which the preaching of judgment to come will
convert all men to righteousness; finally, a tenth week of final
judgment against all angelic powers of evil, ending with a new heaven
and an eternity of blessedness.

It is not only the fact that here and elsewhere these two hopes are
proved to be Jewish, not Christian, in origin, that influences our
judgment on them when they reappear in the New Testament; it is also
the understanding of them which their Jewish form makes possible. They
are two forms of adjusting the old national and earthly hope of Israel
to a new, more universal and transcendent form of faith and hope. In
the religion of the "Parables" of Enoch the transcendent practically
transforms and displaces the earthly. In the millennial scheme, the
heavenly follows the earthly in time. Resurrection enables some of the
dead to have part in the earthly, while translation into angel-like,
immortal natures fits men for the final heavenly life. The
understanding of the origin and purpose of these hopes makes it
unnatural and irrational to regard them as literal disclosures of the
unseen world and of future events.

The third hope which Judaism added to what its sacred scriptures
contained was the hope for immortality of the spirit. It happens that
this also appears earliest in Judaism in the Book of Enoch (especially
chapters 102-104). Enoch solemnly assures his readers that he has seen
it written in heavenly books that joy and glory are prepared for the
spirits of those who have died in righteousness. This is not a
resurrection of the body to enable one to have a share in the earthly
kingdom, but a transformation which fits men for the realm of spirits.

When we turn in the light of the older hopes to the New Testament and
ask what are the hopes that belong properly to Christianity, and how
are they related to the present hopes of the world, we meet the
problem presented by the importance of properly apocalyptical
expectations in the first Christian community. The case is something
like that which meets us in the Old Testament, and we have here no
less than there to distinguish and to choose. The hope of the early
Christian community was no doubt first of all for the physical coming
of Christ and the establishment of his kingdom; but there developed
also within the New Testament period two movements away from this, one
in an ethical and spiritual direction, and the other toward emphasis
on the individual life after death. The first of these is more
characteristic of the New Testament religion than the other. It is the
tendency of Paul to emphasize the present inward experience of Christ,
and the transforming power of his spirit more than the hope of his
coming, though he receives this from primitive Christianity and does
not doubt its literal and early fulfilment. It is, I believe, beyond
question that Paul's Christian hope is chiefly, as Royce has argued,
the hope for a new humanity created by the spirit of Christ, which is
the spirit of love. This is in a measure already experienced. Christ
dwells in the Christian and makes him a center and source of love. His
spirit breaks down barriers and ends divisions. Unity and peace are
its effects. Through this one, present spirit of Christ each man
becomes a distinct but essential member of the new body; and Paul's
greatest hope is for the completion of this unification of man in
mutual helpfulness and brotherhood. Paul attests also the other
tendency away from the outward future coming of Christ to the hope for
a life with Christ and like Christ's after death. This eternal life
with Christ is also experienced by Paul as in some real sense present.
The indwelling spirit of Christ is already transforming the Christian
into his own immortal nature. In the Johannine writings these two
tendencies of hope away from the apocalyptic toward the spiritual go
still further. The Christ in whom the Christian now abides creates a
distinctive unity among his disciples, a love one to another which the
world has not known; and at the same time the experience of this
present Christ is already the possession of eternal life. According to
this which we might call the prophetic in distinction from the
apocalyptic hope of the New Testament the new world of human unity in
love and cooperation is to be brought about not only by the present
spirit of Christ, but also by the moral choice and endeavor of man. It
is through human love that the divine love works, and the rule of God
is present so far as men overcome evil and create good. And even the
immortal life is not solely a hope in God, but is to be attained by
each soul here and now through its choice of the will of God and in
the degree of its moral oneness with God.

That which most concerns us is no doubt the question which of these
hopes, the eschatological or the ethical and inward, was held and
taught by Christ. My own conviction is that the new and distinct hope,
the spiritual, belongs to him and proceeds from him, and not the
familiar Jewish apocalyptic. Two opinions stand in the way of this
judgment; two opposite types of literalism in Biblical interpretation.
Dogmatic literalism accepts scripture throughout, and refuses to
distinguish between higher and lower, between truth and error, in what
is written. In regard to hope, this view leads to great stress on
prediction and fulfilment. The assumption is that the Biblical
predictions that have not been fulfilled will come to pass in the
future. This is precisely a fundamental assumption of the apocalypse.
It is solely upon this conception of scripture that many devout
Christians rest their expectations of the outward coming of Christ and
his thousand-year reign on earth, just as the same idea of Biblical
predictions leads orthodox Jews to expect that Jerusalem will be the
capital and Israel the ruling nation of the world. This literalism
stands in the way of the world's present acceptance of Christianity as
the religion of its highest hopes.

But there is a like danger in the opposite literalism of the
historian. We have already seen how the history of Jewish hopes makes
the literal acceptance of similar New Testament hopes unnatural if not
impossible. The literalism of the historian is, of course, to us true
and immediately helpful in liberating us from bondage to the letter of
an ancient book. It leaves us free to apply our own reason and
conscience and experience to the interpretation of our own life and
times. It turns us back upon our own souls, upon our faith, our
desire, our will, to unveil and shape the future. But the historian is
in danger of doing less than justice to the ethical and spiritual
contents of the hopes of the Bible because of his very love of truth
and willingness to sacrifice his wishes to it. The unpardonable sin to
him is the modernizing of an ancient writing because of reverence for
it, and the effort to find in it what he likes rather than things
outgrown and unwelcome. This conscientious fear, I cannot but believe,
has resulted in a one-sided interpretation of the New Testament,
especially the teachings of Jesus and of Paul, as essentially
apocalyptic in contents and spirit, and a hesitation to recognize the
essentially inward, rational and ethical quality, the prophetic
character of the New Testament as a whole, and to make due allowance
for the ease and naturalness with which the current apocalyptic ideas
of early Jewish Christians could persist and be applied to Jesus and
attributed to him.

This problem over which New Testament scholars are divided into two
groups or tendencies is of course much too complicated to discuss
here. But it is necessary at least to point out that there is a danger
in the historian's anxiety to be without prejudice, and to view the
past as past. The greatness of great men and great books is to be
found in the eternal meaning, not in the mere form, of what they say.
Historians no less than other men have the right and duty to ask in
what direction an ancient teacher is looking, toward what goal the
movement of his mind is tending, what final effects he produced, what
therefore he would think and say if he lived in our time. We are told
that it is unhistorical to seek in the New Testament for "the modern
liberal Christ"; but it is not unhistorical to look for the human
beneath the Jewish, the eternal and universal within the temporary and
limited. The mind of Christ, his manner and mood, his quality, his
spirit, is not less a historical reality than his literal words. This
is of course true also of Paul, and, in his measure, of every man.

There can be no doubt that like the great prophets before him Jesus
was chiefly a critic and corrector of the hopes of his time. He did
not approve the national hopes that had been kindled by the Maccabean
kingdom and were soon to issue in the suicidal revolt against Rome.
Whether Jesus expected the speedy coming of the Son of Man and the end
of the world, and whether he identified himself with this transcendent
Messiah-Judge, are questions made difficult, not by our wishes, but by
the nature of the evidence. My own inclination is, at this point, to
attribute more to the influence of Jewish expectations on the gospel
traditions than to Jesus' own words. What seems to me certain is that
the bearing of the teaching of Jesus was in the direction of the
spiritual hopes of Paul and John rather than the apocalyptic hopes
which they still held in common with the first disciples.

It is the fundamental principle of the apocalyptic hope that God made
not one world but two (II Esdras 7:50). This world must end and
the other world must come if evil is to end and good prevail. But
Jesus believed that this world is already God's world, and that in it
good is already stronger than evil. The Kingdom of God is indeed still
to come, but it is already within. It is already upon us when by the
spirit of God evil is cast out. It has been said that it was the
Greeks who believed in one world in contrast to the Jews who believed
in two; and that Poseidonius, the Platonic Stoic, an oriental, of the
century before Christ, wrote to make men at home in the universe. But
it is surely not a mistake to say that Jesus felt at home in the world
and meant to make others at home. This is precisely the meaning of the
word Father, of which Paul testifies that Jesus' use was to a Jew new,
and that it meant freedom from mental bondage and fear. Poseidonius
made men feel at home in the universe by denying the existence of
evil, which is of course one way of making one world out of two; Jesus
by affirming the reality of a goodness in God and in man capable of
conquering evil. That God is Father, the Father of all men, even, and
especially, of sinners, is not the basis of an apocalyptic hope. Jesus
did not chiefly foretell the end of the world through the catastrophic
intervention of God or of the Son of Man. He did chiefly teach that
the power not ourselves is fatherly, that it is human, that we can
trust our own souls at their best to teach us the nature of God, that
our highest human values are the ultimate realities of the universe.
Jesus found that the chief fears and hopes of men were concerned with
bodily welfare and possessions and with power over others. Mammon and
dominion were the false gods men worshipped. Wealth and power seem now
the objects of the hope and the religious devotion of the Central
Powers. Jesus declared that it is the heathen who are anxious about
food and raiment. It is the heathen who lord it over their fellow men.
Not so was it to be among his disciples. Since the Father knows our
needs and wills to give good things, since the outer world belongs to
him and since the things of the soul are of the greater value, we men
are free to put first things first, to seek God's Kingdom and
righteousness. And since God's rule consists in love and in doing
good, without reserve or regard for deserts or for returns, the only
real rulership among men also must be the renunciation of rulership
for the sake of ministry. Not to be masters over others, not to be
strong by making others weak, but to serve and to give is the divine
plan, the real nature of things. This is not what the war lords learn
from physical and animal nature as to the way to success and primacy,
but it is true to that human nature to which they do violence. The
Christian hope is therefore not for material possessions nor for
authority and power; it is that spiritual realities shall vindicate
and make effectual their preeminence, and shall master matter and all
outward things for their own ends; and that unselfish love shall
measure greatness among men and shall destroy hatred and fear and
create a human family.

If this, according to Christ, is the Christian hope, then Christianity
is certainly the religion for the present hope of the world. The hope
of a league of free nations, of a federated world in which democracy
is safe, is clearly seen by those who see best what it involves and
what obstacles stand in its way to be first of all the hope for a new
spirit among men, a new inward temper, a new will; it is also seen to
be something universal in its range. Not again one league against
another, but a league that at least aims at being inclusive of
humanity. Spirituality and universality, inwardness and good-will,
belong to the hope that is now inspiring the nations; and these are
just the marks of the religion of Christ; they are what Matthew Arnold
called the method of inwardness and the secret of self-renouncement,
controlled by the mildness and sweet reasonableness of Christ;
reverence for the soul, meaning both the preeminent worth of every
individual and the primacy in each of the things of the soul; and
among these the chief greatness and God-likeness of love. However one
attempts to sum up the religion of Jesus it is sure to mean in the end
the same two things which the world now sees to be its great needs and
the ground and heart of its hope.

It would be tragic indeed if Christianity should lose its supreme
opportunity by failing to lead and inspire this newly emerging and
Christ-like hope of men. It can fail if it confuses itself in the
details of Biblical predictions, if it becomes involved in apocalyptic
fancies. It can fail if in reaction against these and under the
influence of an equally literalistic criticism men turn from the Bible
altogether as a book of the past.

The men of our time are shaping the hope of a united and friendly
human family of free peoples, united not only against war but for all
kinds of mutual help and cooperative progress; and the Bible, the
prophets of the Old Testament, Jesus and Paul in the New, are the
chief creative sources of just such hopes. These hopes must have
religion beneath them if they are to endure and be realized in spite
of their powerful foes, the fears and hatreds which materialism and
selfishness create. And Christianity is the only religion which has
the quality and the right to meet this need.

The Christian hope is also the hope of immortality; and just now the
reality and power of this hope are put to the test. Paul, who knew how
far Judaism had gone toward faith in the eternal life of the spirit,
testifies that it was only as a Christian and because of Christ that
this hope had become to him a certainty, almost a present experience.
The nature of God as Christ knew him, and the nature of man's sonship
to God, carry immortality with them as an inward and immediate
assurance. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Here
again the Christian religion has an opportunity and an obligation in
times of war. Men are seeking assurance of life to come for those who
have given their lives for human right and liberty. It is not to be
desired that this pressing religious need of our day should turn to
physical evidences, to messages from the dead through abnormal
experiences and dubious agencies. The Christian faith in immortality
is to be experienced as faith in the God who loves as a father, and
who gives as love must give his best to his children. If God is love,
then our love does not deceive us. If God is spirit, then our spirits
are from God and will return to him. If the soul, the person, is of
supreme worth and reality, then it will not be involved in the body's
destruction, nor lost as a drop in the ocean or as a breath in the
wind, either in the divine being from whom it came, or in the human
race, "the beloved community," to which its service is given.

It is perhaps in the relation to each other of the hope for a new
human brotherhood and the hope for the life of the soul with God, that
the distinction and preeminence of the religion of Jesus come most
clearly to light. He feels no need of sacrificing one to the other,
but holds his hope for this world and the oneness of men in love side
by side with the hope for the other world. He does call upon
individuals to give their lives in ministry to others, but in the
losing of life he declares that life is gained. Paradoxes express his
faith and insight, and the nature of love in God and in man brings
with it the key to the solution of the paradox.

The Christian hopes for a new human brotherhood on earth and for the
immortality of the individual are involved, and their principles
given, in the simple and profound sayings of Jesus, and no other
testimony as to their nature and certainty can be compared with his.
To no other words is the response of our own spirits so instant and
sure. Blessed are the poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the pure
in heart: theirs is the kingdom of heaven; they shall see God. Love
your enemies, that ye may be sons of your Father. Ye shall be perfect
as your heavenly Father is perfect. Lay not up for yourselves
treasures upon earth. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. Be not anxious
for your life what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink, nor yet for
your body what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than food and the
body than raiment? Behold the birds of the heaven ... Are not ye of
much more value than they? Your Father knoweth that ye have need of
all these things. But seek ye his kingdom and righteousness. Be not
afraid of them that kill the body. The very hairs of your head are all
numbered. Fear not therefore. If ye being evil know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father give good
things to them that ask him. All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, even so do ye also unto them. Not every one that
saith unto me, Lord ... but he that doeth the will of my Father.
Freely ye have received, freely give. It is more blessed to give than
to receive. He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth
his life for my sake shall find it. I thank thee, Father ... that thou
hast hid these things from the wise ... and revealed them unto babes.
Except ye turn and become as little children ye shall in no wise enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Forbid them not ... for to such belongeth
the kingdom of heaven. What shall a man be profited if he shall gain
the whole world and forfeit his life? It is hard for the rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God. Keep yourselves from all covetousness:
for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which
he possesseth. The rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, ... but
whosoever would be great among you shall be your minister; and
whosoever would be first among you shall be your servant. Render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's and unto God the things that are
God's. Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these my
brethren ye did it unto me. Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou
wilt. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Here is the Christian hope; here its grounds and motives; here rather
than in apocalyptic foretellings of the coming of the Son of Man and
the near end of the world. Here is an anthology of testimonies to the
faith which a world at war to end war most needs, that man is a
spiritual being and that his proper work is "to interpret the world
according to his higher nature," and to bring the material aspects of
the world into subjection to the spirit. Other "oracles and prophecies
of loveliness and loving-kindness" in the Bible and in the world's
literature have their abiding worth, but no other of "the seers and
poets of mankind" reach humanity so widely and none so deeply.

Certain marks and tests of the Christian hope come clearly into view
in these characteristic sayings of Jesus. It is a hope not imposed
upon the mind by the outward authority of a book or even of Christ
himself, but one that appeals to conscience. Our spirit answers to it,
and our answer is not only the consent of the mind but the disclosure
of character and the choice of the will. It is a hope for which we
cannot merely wait, for we are ourselves challenged to bring it to
realization. The Christian hope is fundamentally inward, and is always
in part already experienced. Paul and John knew the mind of Christ in
this striking quality of it better than later generations. The spirit
of God is already a love that creates unity and fellowship among men;
and it is already the presence and power of divine and eternal life.
The Christian hope unites the community and the individual, and
contains the clue to the mystery that now obscures our minds. We know
that the ruthless sacrifice of individuals for the abstract idol
called the State is a denial of Christ's reverence for the human
personality. But we know also that the devotion of the soldier's life
to the cause of human liberty and right, to the destruction of the
idol of nationality and the creation of the ideal brotherhood of man,
is in accordance with that giving of life for many which Jesus taught,
and is that loss which is the true finding of life. The Christian hope
is too inward and too secure to depend on outward success. The
doctrine of physical force is judged by physical success, but not the
doctrine of love. Yet though superior to outward fortune, the hope of
Christ is certain of ultimate vindication, because it is hope in God.
It is a hope according to Christ, and for Christ's coming as the
ruling spirit in the life of humanity. But if it is a hope for Christ,
if it is Christ's hope for the coming Kingdom of God, it is a hope for
radical change, and for the sacrifice of our prejudices and customs,
our personal wishes and our material advantage.

The hope for a new world-order which is the most significant spiritual
event of our age, requires religion if it is to maintain itself and
work powerfully for its own realization. For it is the hope for a
purified human nature as well as for a changed human organization.
Christianity is the chief source of this hope, and is summoned to
prove itself equal to the task of keeping the hope high and giving it
inward energy and resource. But it will require boldness of faith and
the spirit of sacrifice, a sense of the excellence and worth of
spiritual things, and willingness to trust our own souls and the souls
of our fellow men, to trust ourselves to the instincts and ways of a
Christ-like love, if the Christian hope is to prove able to create a
new world.




