II

GOD AND HISTORY

DOUGLAS CLYDE MACINTOSH


Most urgent among the religious problems of the day is the question as
to the relation of God to the events of current history. As was to be
expected, many erroneous notions are prevalent concerning divine
providence and the present war. Some of these errors are owing to
intellectual confusion; others, however, impress one as due to an
almost wilful perversion of the impulses of religious faith. In any
case, most conspicuous among the erroneous doctrines of the day with
reference to divine providence is that voiced by the German Emperor,
in speaking of the Teutonic triumph over disorganized Russia. His
words are reported as follows: "The complete victory fills me with
gratitude. It permits us to live again one of those great moments in
which we can reverently admire God's hand in history. What turn events
have taken is by the disposition of God." One could scarcely be blamed
for inferring that the Kaiser imagines, or affects to believe, that
the Almighty has entered into a favored-nation treaty of some sort
with Germany. But even this would seem to fall short of what is
claimed. We quote further from the same theological authority. "The
year 1917 with its great battles has proved," he asserts, with almost
incredible simple-mindedness, "that the German people has in the Lord
of Creation above an unconditional and avowed ally on whom it can
absolutely rely." This curious reversion to religious tribalism in the
case of the German Emperor is not without its parallel in the belief
of his subjects. Assiduously taught, as they have been, that they are
fighting a justified defensive war, and praying, as they have been,
for victory over their enemies, their conviction has come to be,
pretty generally, what a German-American in the early days of the war
expressed in these words, "If Germany doesn't win this war, there is
no God!" Well, in view of what the world knows as to the causation and
the conduct of this war on the part of Germany, the only answer so
preposterous a doctrine deserves is that given by ex-President Taft,
"Germany has mistaken the devil for God!"

But the Germans are not the only ones who are cherishing mistaken
notions as to the providence of God in human affairs. We and our
Allies reject the idea of a national God, and any notion of the "Lord
of Creation" being our "unconditional ally." The morally perfect God
is too just and impartial to have any favorites among the nations,
whether Jewish, or German, or British, or American. Might does not
make right, we know; and no more is might an infallible index to God's
will. God is not necessarily "on the side of the heaviest battalions."
On the contrary, the true God, as the God of righteousness, must be,
we feel sure, on the side of right and justice, whichever side that
may be. Being confident, therefore, of the justice of our cause, we
feel that we have the best of reasons for believing that we are
fighting on the side of God, as well as for the true well-being of
humanity.

So far, good; but many among us proceed to put two and two together
and find that they make five. If we are on the side of human rights
and the will of God, and if God is sufficient for our religious needs,
is it not clear that we may be absolutely certain of winning the war,
whatever temporary reverses may have to be encountered? Moreover,
especially since we have had our days of prayer for victory, are we
not entitled to sing,

  Then conquer we must, for our cause it is just,
  And this be our motto, "In God is our trust"?

Indeed, so satisfied are we with the logic of our position that
multitudes of us would agree with the sentiment expressed by a
British-American in the early days of the war, "If Germany wins this
war, there is no God."

But there are reasons for doubting the correctness of this view. Right
makes God's will, surely enough; but is it certain that the side whose
cause is just will win the war, simply because it is the side of right
and of God? Ultimately, we may be sure, right must prevail, for wrong
is not the sort of thing that can permanently succeed; it contains
within itself the germs of its own ultimate destruction. But nothing
in history can be surer than that this ultimate judgment upon evil
does not necessarily involve the defeat of all unjustified military
undertakings. The side with the greater moral justification has not
always won its battles, nor even its wars. It is not enough to have
justice on our side; we must use our might on the side of right. Right
has to be worked for, and sometimes it has to be fought for. That is
the kind of world that--not unfortunately for our development,
probably--we are living in. And the fighting is no sham battle. Its
issue is not predetermined. It is being decided while the fighting is
going on.

Moreover, with reference to prayer as a military factor, it is only
fair to note that in the present war many sincere and believing
prayers for victory have been offered on both sides. It is not
intended to deny that religion of a certain sort is an important
military factor; sincere and believing prayer for a cause that is
regarded as sacred and just undoubtedly helps morale, both in the army
and throughout the nation. But it is a factor which in this war has
operated on both sides. Man has the capacity for misusing not only
physical, but even spiritual forces. But, on the other hand, when
prayer and religious faith encourage an easy-going attitude, and are
thus made to some extent a substitute for effort, such prayer and
faith cannot but prove a serious military hindrance, no matter how
just the cause may be that they are designed to support. They may even
conceivably make enough of a difference on the wrong side to lead to
the defeat of righteousness.

These notions as to God's providence in war, which we have criticized
as manifestly mistaken and dangerously misleading, are symptomatic of
confused and muddy thinking on the whole subject of the providence of
God in human history. How does God secure his adequate providential
control of the course of history? One theory is that he has secured it
by having absolutely predetermined from the beginning all events of
nature and history, so that all process is the simple unfolding of
what has been eternally decreed. There are the strongest ethical and
religious reasons for refusing to accept this unproved and unprovable
dogma. On the one hand, it would mean that man's consciousness of free
agency and moral responsibility would have to be regarded as quite
illusory, since what has been decided and made inevitable before man's
life began cannot have been originated by man himself. On the other
hand, this predestination doctrine would mean that God should be
regarded as the real and responsible cause of all evil, including what
we call human sin. No such God would be moral enough to be trustworthy
or deserving of human adoration.

Another theory as to how God secures his adequate providential control
of the course of events is that it is by various sorts of arbitrary or
unconditioned interventions in external nature, as well as in human
life, in order to realize the ends he may desire to accomplish from
time to time. It has often been suggested, for instance, that a
miracle of this sort took place at the Marne, preventing the German
entry into Paris. But this theory is open to the objection that it
raises three unanswerable questions. In the first place, how can we be
sure that such interventions have taken place, particularly in the
external world? How do you suppose it will ever be established
sufficiently for confident rational belief, that only by special
miracle were the German armies turned back from Paris in 1914? In the
second place, if such special miraculous interventions do take place
for the sake of preventing evil, why do they not take place oftener,
especially in these times of unprecedented disaster to human life? A
miracle like that of the Marne, such as would have turned the Turks
back from the helpless Armenians, would have been much appreciated.
But, for a third question, if such miracles were to take place as
often as this theory of providence would seem to call for, what would
become of the order of nature, and how could man learn what to expect,
or how to adjust himself to his environment?

As against these theories of absolute predetermination and arbitrary
intervention, we may point out that God secures his adequate
providential control of the course of history in two principal ways,
viz., by _enough_ predetermination of events to give man a
dependable universe to live in and learn from, and by _enough_
intervention to admit of a response to man's need of the religious
experience of salvation, that is, of being inwardly or spiritually
prepared to meet in the right way and with triumphant spirit the very
worst that the future may bring. The predetermined order of the laws
of nature and mind exhibits the _general providence_ of God. By
means of this order, or in the light of consequences, God is teaching
man both science and morality, that is, how to adapt means to the
realization of ends, and what ideals and principles of action must be
employed if the most desirable results are to be obtained. The
"intervention enough" of which we spoke--if indeed it is to be called
intervention--or, in other words, the response of the divine Reality
to the right religious attitude on the part of man, is an exhibition
of the _special providence_ of God. When one has found the right
relation to God and gained access to the divine power for the inner
life, one is virtually prepared for whatever can happen to him. But,
as we have indicated, his preparedness is primarily inner, spiritual.
He is in a position to meet danger with moral courage, to gain the
victory over temptation; to make the most of opportunities for
service; to endure hardship, pain and privation, as a good soldier,
with patience and cheerfulness; to face death--his own or that of
others--and whatever there may be after death, with faith and
equanimity.

There are two possible ways, then, in which God may exercise his
providence in the events of human history. There is his shorter and
preferred method, and his longer and more roundabout method. If the
individuals concerned come into the right relation to God, there is
the best possible guarantee that they will be made ready for all there
may be for them to do and to experience, and thus conditions will be
most favorable for the speedy realization of the will of God. But if
this shorter, preferred method cannot be employed, because men fail to
rise to the occasion as they might if they would rightly relate
themselves to God, the divine providence will still be exercised,
although necessarily in the less desirable, more roundabout way. God
will let man choose the wrong way, through thoughtlessness or
wilfulness, and then let him take the bitter consequences of failure,
that he may finally learn to guard against similar mistakes and faults
in the future.

Let us now return to the more particular question of the relation of
the providence of God to the present war. Before discussing again the
question with which we started, viz., as to the final outcome of the
conflict, we may deal with some other aspects of the problem. In the
light of what has been said of the two possible methods of divine
providence, it may be denied that the war was providentially caused by
God in order to curb other evils, such as softness and idleness, or
the selfish pursuit of wealth and pleasure, or drunkenness and vice,
or thoughtlessness and irreligion. It is true enough that in the face
of war conditions some of these evils have been decreased, and the
martial qualities of self-sacrificing courage and fortitude have been
stimulated. But it is notoriously true that the advent of war
introduces a host of evils, in some cases necessarily, in others
almost as inevitably. Drunkenness tends to increase greatly, unless
stern measures are taken for its repression. Vice, with the resulting
transmissible diseases, ordinarily becomes much more prevalent.
Hatred, cruelty, and even the most fiendish brutality are given ample
opportunity to develop, and in many instances they become relatively
fixed attitudes and attributes of character. So far from the
biologically fittest tending to survive, under modern war conditions
these are the very ones who, for the most part and to the incalculable
detriment of the future of the race, are killed off, even granting
that of those who are "fit" enough to get to the front, the weakest
are those who have the poorest chance of survival. And finally, when
the stress of war conditions becomes acute, innumerable enterprises
for social betterment are constrained to be given up, at least for the
time being. In view, then, of all this, not to dwell upon the
unspeakable suffering, physical and mental, on the part not only of
combatants, but of noncombatants as well, and considering the merely
problematical nature of the good to which the crisis involved in a
state of war may prove a stimulus, it must be regarded as incredible
that a God good enough and wise enough to be worthy of absolute
dependence and worship could have ordered so stupendous a catastrophe
as a possible means of human salvation. Neither is it reasonable to
suppose that God is prolonging the war, in order that some social
evils, such as drunkenness, may be eradicated before victory is
finally secured. This might, perhaps, be the outcome, if the war were
greatly prolonged; but it could not be at all certain beforehand that
any such improvement would be permanent enough to offset the evils
involved in the continuation of the war. We cannot suppose anyone who
was wise enough and good enough to be God would be so far below our
best human standards as to will either the existence or the
continuation of the war as a whole, with all its attendant evils, in
order that final good might abound. Any God who might be thought of as
doing so would be a false God; his condemnation would be just.

Understanding, then, that in so far as human hatred, selfishness and
stupidity have been factors in leading to the war, it has been
originated, not by the will or in the providence of God, but against
his will and providence; understanding also that in so far as it has
been prolonged by human inefficiency or stupidity, or by the
efficiency of evil wills, or of wills in the service of wrong, its
continuation has not been in accordance with but in opposition to his
will and providence, let us turn to the more positive aspect of the
divine providence in connection with the war. It may be said to begin
with, that in so far as going into this war has been correctly judged
by any party to it to be the necessary alternative to national
perfidy, or ignoble servitude, or any other evil greater than those
involved in passing through the ordeal of war, and in so far as the
task has been accepted as a solemn duty and entered upon in brave and
self-sacrificing spirit, the act of going to war is to be regarded as
in accord with the will of God. Indeed, if we may regard the divine
spirit as immanent where we find the divine qualities present in human
life, we may go further and say that such righteous participation in
the war is the work of God within the soul of man, fighting against
the forces of evil. Moreover, in so far as the war is prolonged by the
fortitude of men of good intentions and their fidelity to a just
cause, the war may similarly be said to be prolonged in accord with
the will and even by the work of God in and through the good will and
work of men.

But of providence in relation to the war as a whole, it can only be
said that man's evil choice has compelled God to use the long,
roundabout method. It is the second best method, although the best
possible under the circumstances. The sinful choices of men and
nations were not, of course, divinely predetermined. What has been
divinely predetermined, we may well believe, is the law-abiding order
of nature and of individual and social mind, according to which the
disasters and sufferings incidental to war are the inevitable
consequences of certain forms of individual and corporate wrong doing.
In this roundabout way certain reforms may be providentially forced
upon the nations by the war. The evil consequences of certain former
evils tend to be more acutely felt under the strain and stress of
severe and prolonged warfare. Let us suppose that in order to win the
war we and our Allies may yet find it necessary to take drastic steps
to eradicate drunkenness with its attendant evils, or even to prohibit
the waste of food-stuffs and fuel involved in the manufacture of
alcoholic beverages. This would not mean that the war had been
divinely caused in order to realize this end, but only that it was and
always is the divine will that man should learn the lessons of the law
of consequences, which lessons are in some instances more readily
learned in time of war.

But what God is teaching most directly through the law of consequences
in connection with the war is the necessity of correcting certain
immoral international relations. He is teaching the nations through
bitter experience how imperative are international righteousness and
some practicable and adequately democratic scheme of world-government.

But we must not close our eyes to the possibility that through our
failure to do our part, God may be forced to take the long, sad,
roundabout way of exercising his providence in connection with the
end, as he had to in the beginning of the war. What we must wake up to
is this, that _in spite of the justice of our cause, in spite of its
being the cause of humanity and in essential accord with the will of
God, and in spite of our days of prayer and our optimistic religious
faith_, GERMANY MAY WIN THIS WAR! If our consciousness of
being right and our religious optimism make us so complacent that we
shall fail to exert our utmost strength on behalf of our righteous
cause, they may be the very factors that will turn the tide of war
against us. We have resources enough for the winning of victory. If we
fail it will be a moral failure. If we fail to rise to the moral
demands of this great occasion, God may have to let us fail to win the
war and then learn what we can from the bitter consequences of this
failure. We and future generations may have to learn through tragic
experience how imperative it is that right be not left to enforce
itself, but that we devote our full might to the cause of right, and
that before it is too late.

At the time of writing these words--in the early days of May,
1918--it seems not yet too late, however critical the situation,
for the winning of victory for the cause of liberty and justice.
But the surest way of providing for success would be for all who
recognize the right so to surrender themselves to the will of God
for self-sacrificing service, and so to depend upon the indwelling
power of God for inner preparedness for whatever may have to be
faced and whatever may have to be done, that their whole might may
be made use of in this warfare for the right. Our primary need is
_morale_--morale in the government, morale in the shipyards,
morale in the munitions factories, morale among all our people in
their business and home life, as well as fighting spirit in our
army and navy abroad. Enough religion of the right sort may make
enough difference in morale to make all the difference between
defeat and victory as the outcome of this war. And if in this way
victory for the right should come as a result of religion, it would
be not only a crowning example of the short and preferred method of
divine providence; it would be, literally speaking, victory by the
Grace of God.

In any case, the situation for the Western Allies is such that neither
faith without works nor works without faith can accomplish what waits
to be done. There must be, if we would win, faith and works together.

Before leaving this topic of God and history, a word may be said on
the question of what, on this interpretation of providence, we may
expect to be the final outcome of this war for the future of the race.
Will the result be more harm than good, or more good than harm? It is
very certain that the war will need to be the occasion of an immense
amount of good to balance up to the race the evils that have been
involved in it thus far and that will be involved in its prolongation.
Much possible evil will be avoided if the immoral Prussian
militaristic ideal is finally crushed. Moreover, there will be the
tendency for humanity to learn, at least temporarily and as an
intellectual conviction, the undesirability of war and of the
conditions that make for war. But attention and moral effort will be
necessary to retain this lesson with sufficient impressiveness, and to
put it into effect, and the best power of thought will be needed to
determine just how this putting it into effect may be most fully and
lastingly secured. There seems real danger that the human race on
earth will be permanently poorer and worse off, spiritually and
socially as well as biologically and economically, as a result of this
nearest approach to racial suicide. Undoubtedly it will be so, if the
nations fail to learn and to put into effect the lesson of the
necessity of international righteousness and a just and efficient
system of world-government.

It is perhaps still possible for the race to learn enough from this
period of strife and carnage for the resultant good to out-balance the
total evil. But even then no one would have the right to credit the
war with having been the means of greater good than _could_ have
been accomplished without it. All its moral evil at any rate will be
regrettable forever. And the only possible way of guaranteeing
beforehand greater good than evil as an outcome of the war, even
supposing the side of justice and liberty to be victorious, will be
for individuals and groups so to relate themselves to truth, to right
and to God that flagrantly immoral international relations will become
practically impossible. The only safety of the race lies in an
essentially Christian international morality, and the only adequate
guarantee of this is an essentially Christian personal religion. The
only failure of essential Christianity of which the war may fairly be
regarded as evidence was its failure to be given an adequate trial;
which means, of course, not a failure of Christianity as an ethical or
as a religious system, but a failure of the human will to be
adequately Christian.




