CHAPTER II.

As I before remarked, Mrs. Katy Scudder had invited company to tea.
Strictly speaking, it is necessary to begin with the creation of the
world, in order to give a full account of anything. But, for popular
use, something less may serve one's turn, and therefore I shall let the
past chapter suffice to introduce my story, and shall proceed to arrange
my scenery and act my little play on the supposition you know enough to
understand things and persons.

Being asked to tea in our New England in the year 17-- meant something
very different from the same invitation in our more sophisticated days.
In those times, people held to the singular opinion, that the night was
made to sleep in; they inferred it from a general confidence they had in
the wisdom of Mother Nature, supposing that she did not put out her
lights and draw her bed-curtains and hush all noise in her great
world-house without strongly intending that her children should go to
sleep; and the consequence was, that very soon after sunset the whole
community very generally set their faces bedward, and the toll of the
nine-o'clock evening-bell had an awful solemnity in it, sounding to the
full. Good society in New England in those days very generally took its
breakfast at six, its dinner at twelve, and its tea, at six. "Company
tea," however, among thrifty, industrious folk, was often taken an hour
earlier, because each of the _invitees_ had children to put to bed, or
other domestic cares at home, and, as in those simple times people were
invited because you wanted to see them, a tea-party assembled themselves
at three and held session till sundown, when each matron rolled up her
knitting-work and wended soberly home.

Though Newport, even in those early times, was not without its families
which affected state and splendor, rolled about in carriages with
armorial emblazonments, and had servants in abundance to every turn
within-doors, yet there, as elsewhere in New England, the majority of
the people lived with the wholesome, thrifty simplicity of the olden
time, when labor and intelligence went hand in hand, in perhaps a
greater harmony than the world has ever seen.

Our scene opens in the great old-fashioned kitchen, which, on ordinary
occasions, is the family dining and sitting-room of the Scudder family.
I know fastidious moderns think that the working-room, wherein are
carried on the culinary operations of a large family, must necessarily
be an untidy and comfortless sitting-place; but it is only because they
are ignorant of the marvellous workings which pertain to the organ of
"faculty," on which we have before insisted. The kitchen of a New
England matron was her throne-room, her pride; it was the habit of her
life to produce the greatest possible results there with the slightest
possible discomposure; and what any woman could do, Mrs. Katy Scudder
could do _par excellence_. Everything there seemed to be always done and
never doing. Washing and baking, those formidable disturbers of the
composure of families, were all over with in those two or three
morning-hours when we are composing ourselves for a last nap,--and only
the fluttering of linen over the green yard, on Monday mornings,
proclaimed that the dreaded solemnity of a wash had transpired. A
breakfast arose there as by magic; and in an incredibly short space
after, every knife, fork, spoon, and trencher, clean and shining, was
looking as innocent and unconscious in its place as if it never had been
used and never expected to be.

The floor,--perhaps, Sir, you remember your grandmother's floor, of
snowy boards sanded with whitest sand; you remember the ancient
fireplace stretching quite across one end,--a vast cavern, in each
corner of which a cozy seat might be found, distant enough to enjoy the
crackle of the great jolly wood-fire; across the room ran a dresser, on
which was displayed great store of shining pewter dishes and plates,
which always shone with the same mysterious brightness; and by the side
of the fire, a commodious wooden "settee," or settle, offered repose to
people too little accustomed to luxury to ask for a cushion. Oh, that
kitchen of the olden times, the old, clean, roomy New England
kitchen!--who that has breakfasted, dined, and supped in one has not
cheery visions of its thrift, its warmth, its coolness? The noon-mark on
its floor was a dial that told of some of the happiest days; thereby did
we right up the shortcomings of the solemn old clock that tick-tacked in
the corner, and whose ticks seemed mysterious prophecies of unknown good
yet to arise out of the hours of life. How dreamy the winter twilight
came in there,--as yet the candles were not lighted,--when the crickets
chirped around the dark stone hearth, and shifting tongues of flame
flickered and cast dancing shadows and elfish lights on the walls, while
grandmother nodded over her knitting-work, and puss purred, and old
Rover lay dreamily opening now one eye and then the other on the family
group! With all our ceiled houses, let us not forget our grandmothers'
kitchens!

But we must pull up, however, and back to our subject-matter, which is
in the kitchen of Mrs. Katy Scudder, who has just put into the oven, by
the fireplace, some wondrous tea-rusks, for whose composition she is
renowned. She has examined and pronounced perfect a loaf of cake, which
has been prepared for the occasion, and which, as usual, is done exactly
right. The best room, too, has been opened and aired,--the white
window-curtains saluted with a friendly little shake, as when one says,
"How d'ye do?" to a friend;--for you must know, clean as our kitchen is,
we are genteel, and have something better for company. Our best room in
here has a polished little mahogany tea-table, and six mahogany chairs,
with claw talons grasping balls; the white sanded floor is crinkled in
curious little waves, like those on the sea-beach; and right across the
corner stands the "buffet," as it is called, with its transparent glass
doors, wherein are displayed the solemn appurtenances of company
tea-table. There you may see a set of real China teacups, which George
bought in Canton, and had marked with his and his wife's joint
initials,--a small silver cream-pitcher, which has come down as an
heirloom from unknown generations,--silver spoons and delicate China
cake-plates, which have been all carefully reviewed and wiped on napkins
of Mrs. Scudder's own weaving.

Her cares now over, she stands drying her hands on a roller-towel in the
kitchen, while her only daughter, the gentle Mary, stands in the doorway
with the afternoon sun streaming in spots of flickering golden light on
her smooth pale-brown hair,--a _petite_ figure in a full stuff petticoat
and white short gown, she stands reaching up one hand and cooing to
something among the apple-blossoms,--and now a Java dove comes whirring
down and settles on her finger,--and we, that have seen pictures, think,
as we look on her girlish face, with its lines of statuesque beauty, on
the tremulous, half-infantine expression of her lovely mouth, and the
general air of simplicity and purity, of some old pictures of the
girlhood of the Virgin. But Mrs. Scudder was thinking of no such Popish
matter, I can assure you,--not she! I don't think you could have done
her a greater indignity than to mention her daughter in any such
connection. She had never seen a painting in her life, and therefore was
not to be reminded of them; and furthermore, the dove was evidently, for
some reason, no favorite,--for she said, in a quick, imperative tone,
"Come, come, child! don't fool with that bird,--it's high time we were
dressed and ready,"--and Mary, blushing, as it would seem, even to her
hair, gave a little toss, and sent the bird, like a silver fluttering
cloud, up among the rosy apple-blossoms. And now she and her mother have
gone to their respective little bedrooms for the adjustment of their
toilettes, and while the door is shut and nobody hears us, we shall talk
to you about Mary.

Newport at the present day blooms like a flower-garden with young ladies
of the best _ton_,--lovely girls, hopes of their families, possessed of
amiable tempers and immensely large trunks, and capable of sporting
ninety changes of raiment in thirty days and otherwise rapidly emptying
the purses of distressed fathers, and whom yet travellers and the world
in general look upon as genuine specimens of the kind of girls formed by
American institutions.

We fancy such a one lying in a rustling silk _negligee_, and, amid a
gentle generality of rings, ribbons, puffs, laces, beaux, and
dinner-discussion, reading our humble sketch;--and what favor shall our
poor heroine find in her eyes? For though her mother was a world of
energy and "faculty," in herself considered, and had bestowed on this
one little lone chick all the vigor and all the care and all the
training which would have sufficed for a family of sixteen, there were
no results produced which could be made appreciable in the eyes of such
company. She could not waltz or polk, or speak bad French or sing
Italian songs; but, nevertheless, we must proceed to say what was her
education and what her accomplishments.

Well, then, she could both read and write fluently in the mother-tongue.
She could spin both on the little and the great wheel, and there were
numberless towels, napkins, sheets, and pillow-cases in the household
store that could attest the skill of her pretty fingers. She had worked
several samplers of such rare merit, that they hung framed in different
rooms of the house, exhibiting every variety and style of possible
