CHAPTER III.

A quiet, maiden-like place was Mary's little room. The window looked out
under the overarching boughs of a thick apple-orchard, now all in a
blush with blossoms and pink-tipped buds, and the light came
golden-green, strained through flickering leaves,--and an ever-gentle
rustle and whirr of branches and blossoms, a chitter of birds, and an
indefinite whispering motion, as the long heads of orchard-grass nodded
and bowed to each other under the trees, seemed to give the room the
quiet hush of some little side-chapel in a cathedral, where green and
golden glass softens the sunlight, and only the sigh and rustle of
kneeling worshippers break the stillness of the aisles. It was small
enough for a nun's apartment, and dainty in its neatness as the waxen
cell of a bee. The bed and low window were draped in spotless white,
with fringes of Mary's own knotting. A small table under the
looking-glass bore the library of a well-taught young woman of those
times. "The Spectator," "Paradise Lost," Shakspeare, and "Robinson
Crusoe" stood for the admitted secular literature, and beside them the
Bible and the works then published of Mr. Jonathan Edwards. Laid a
little to one side, as if of doubtful reputation, was the only novel
which the stricter people in those days allowed for the reading of their
daughters: that seven-volumed, trailing, tedious, delightful old bore,
"Sir Charles Grandison,"--a book whose influence in those times was so
universal, that it may be traced in the epistolary style even of the
gravest divines. Our little heroine was mortal, with all her divinity,
and had an imagination which sometimes wandered to the things of earth;
and this glorious hero in lace and embroidery, who blended rank,
gallantry, spirit, knowledge of the world, disinterestedness, constancy,
and piety, sometimes walked before her, while she sat spinning at her
wheel, till she sighed, she hardly knew why, that no such men walked the
earth now. Yet it is to be confessed, this occasional raid of the
romantic into Mary's balanced and well-ordered mind was soon
energetically put to rout, and the book, as we have said, remained on
her table under protest,--protected by being her father's gift to her
mother during their days of courtship. The small looking-glass was
curiously wreathed with corals and foreign shells, so disposed as to
indicate an artistic eye and skilful hand; and some curious Chinese
paintings of birds and flowers gave rather a piquant and foreign air to
the otherwise homely neatness of the apartment.

Here in this little retreat Mary spent those few hours which her
exacting conscience would allow her to spare from her busy-fingered
household-life; here she read and wrote and thought and prayed;--and
here she stands now, arraying herself for the tea company that
afternoon. Dress, which in our day is becoming in some cases the whole
of woman, was in those times a remarkably simple affair. True, every
person of a certain degree of respectability had state and festival
robes; and a certain camphor-wood brass-bound trunk, which was always
kept solemnly locked in Mrs. Katy Scudder's apartment, if it could have
spoken, might have given off quite a catalogue of brocade satin and
laces. The wedding-suit there slumbered in all the unsullied whiteness
of its stiff ground broidered with heavy knots of flowers; and there
were scarfs of wrought India muslin and embroidered crape, each of which
had its history,--for each had been brought into the door with beating
heart on some return voyage of one who, alas, should return no more! The
old trunk stood with its histories, its imprisoned remembrances,--and a
thousand tender thoughts seemed to be shaping out of every rustling fold
of silk and embroidery, on the few yearly occasions when all were
brought out to be aired, their history related, and then solemnly locked
up again. Nevertheless, the possession of these things gave to the women
of an establishment a certain innate dignity, like a good conscience; so
that in that larger portion of existence commonly denominated among them
"every day," they were content with plain stuff and homespun. Mary's
toilette, therefore, was sooner made than those of Newport belles of the
present day; it simply consisted in changing her ordinary "short gown
and petticoat" for another of somewhat nicer materials,--a skirt of
India chintz and a striped jacconet short-gown. Her hair was of the kind
which always lies like satin; but, nevertheless, girls never think their
toilette complete unless the smoothest hair has been shaken down and
rearranged. A few moments, however, served to braid its shining folds
and dispose them in their simple knot on the back of the head; and
having given a final stroke to each side with her little dimpled hands,
she sat down a moment at the window, thoughtfully watching where the
afternoon sun was creeping through the slats of the fence in long lines
of gold among the tall, tremulous orchard-grass, and unconsciously she
began warbling, in a low, gurgling voice, the words of a familiar hymn,
whose grave earnestness accorded well with the general tone of her life
and education:--

    "Life is the time to serve the Lord,
    The time to insure the great reward."

There was a swish and rustle in the orchard-grass, and a tramp of
elastic steps; then the branches were brushed aside, and a young man
suddenly emerged from the trees a little behind Mary. He was apparently
about twenty-five, dressed in the holiday rig of a sailor on shore,
which well set off his fine athletic figure, and accorded with a sort of
easy, dashing, and confident air which sat not unhandsomely on him. For
the rest, a high forehead shaded by rings of the blackest hair, a keen,
dark eye, a firm and determined mouth, gave the impression of one who
had engaged to do battle with life, not only with a will, but with
shrewdness and ability.

He introduced the colloquy by stepping deliberately behind Mary, putting
his arms round her neck, and kissing her.

"Why, James!" said Mary, starting up, and blushing. "Come, now!"

"I have come, haven't I?" said the young man, leaning his elbow on the
window-seat and looking at her with an air of comic determined
frankness, which yet had in it such wholesome honesty that it was
scarcely possible to be angry. "The fact is, Mary," he added, with a
sudden earnest darkening of the face, "I won't stand this nonsense any
longer. Aunt Katy has been holding me at arm's length ever since I got
home; and what have I done? Haven't I been to every prayer-meeting and
lecture and sermon, since I got into port, just as regular as a
psalm-book? and not a bit of a word could I get with you, and no chance
even so much as to give you my arm. Aunt Kate always comes between us
and says, 'Here, Mary, you take my arm.' What does she think I go to
meeting for, and almost break my jaws keeping down the gapes? I never
even go to sleep, and yet I'm treated in this way! It's too bad! What's
the row? What's anybody been saying about me? I always have waited on
you ever since you were that high. Didn't I always draw you to school on
my sled? didn't we always use to do our sums together? didn't I always
wait on you to singing-school? and I've been made free to run in and out
as if I were your brother;--and now she is as glum and stiff, and always
stays in the room every minute of the time that I am there, as if she
was afraid I should be in some mischief. It's too bad!"

"Oh, James, I am sorry that you only go to meeting for the sake of
seeing me; you feel no real interest in religious things; and besides,
mother thinks now I'm grown so old, that----Why, you know things are
different now,--at least, we mustn't, you know, always do as we did when
we were children. But I wish you did feel more interested in good
things."

"I _am_ interested in one or two good things, Mary,--principally in you,
who are the beat I know of. Besides," he said quickly, and scanning her
face attentively to see the effect of his words, "don't you think there
is more merit in my sitting out all these meetings, when they bore me so
confoundedly, than there is in your and Aunt Katy's doing it, who really
seem to find something to like in them? I believe you have a sixth
sense, quite unknown to me; for it's all a maze,--I can't find top, nor
bottom, nor side, nor up, nor down to it,--it's you can and you can't,
you shall and you sha'n't, you will and you won't,"----

"James!"

"You needn't look at me so. I'm not going to say the rest of it. But,
seriously, it's all anywhere and nowhere to me; it don't touch me, it
don't help me, and I think it rather makes me worse; and then they tell
me it's because I'm a natural man, and the natural man understandeth not
the things of the Spirit. Well, I _am_ a natural man,--how's a fellow to
help it?"

"Well, James, why need you talk everywhere as you do? You joke, and
jest, and trifle, till it seems to everybody that you don't believe in
anything. I'm afraid mother thinks you are an infidel, but I _know_ that
can't be; yet we hear of all sorts of things that you say."

"I suppose you mean my telling Deacon Twitchel that I had seen as good
Christians among the Mahometans as any in Newport. _Didn't_ I make him
open his eyes? It's true, too!"

"In every nation, he that feareth God and worketh righteousness is
accepted of Him," said Mary; "and if there are better Christians than us
among the Mahometans, I am sure I'm glad of it. But, after all, the
great question is, 'Are we Christians ourselves?' Oh, James, if you only
were a real, true, noble Christian!"

"Well, Mary, you have got into that harbor, through all the sandbars and
rocks and crooked channels; and now do you think it right to leave a
fellow beating about outside, and not go out to help him in? This way of
drawing up, among you good people, and leaving us sinners to ourselves,
isn't generous. You might care a little for the soul of an old friend,
anyhow!"

"And don't I care, James? How many days and nights have been one prayer
for you! If I could take my hopes of heaven out of my own heart and give
them to you, I would. Dr. H. preached last Sunday on the text, 'I could
wish myself accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen'; and he
went on to show how we must be willing to give up even our own
salvation, if necessary, for the good of others. People said it was hard
doctrine, but I could feel my way through it very well. Yes, I would
give my soul for yours; I wish I could."

There was a solemnity and pathos in Mary's manner which checked the
conversation. James was the more touched because he felt it all so real,
from one whose words were always yea and nay, so true, so inflexibly
simple. Her eyes filled with tears, her face kindled with a sad
earnestness, and James thought, as he looked, of a picture he had once
seen in a European cathedral, where the youthful Mother of Sorrows is
represented,

    "Radiant and grave, as pitying man's decline;
    All youth, but with an aspect beyond time;
    Mournful, but mournful of another's crime;
    She looked as if she sat by Ellen's door,
    And grieved for those who should return no more."

James had thought he loved Mary; he had admired her remarkable beauty,
he had been proud of a certain right in her before that of other young
men, her associates; he had thought of her as the keeper of his home; he
had wished to appropriate her wholly to himself;--but in all this there
had been, after all, only the thought of what she was to be to him; and
this, for this poor measure of what he called love, she was ready to
offer, an infinite sacrifice.

As a subtile flash of lightning will show in a moment a whole landscape,
tower, town, winding stream, and distant sea, so that one subtile ray of
feeling seemed in a moment to reveal to James the whole of his past
life; and it seemed to him so poor, so meagre, so shallow, by the side
of that childlike woman, to whom the noblest of feelings were
unconscious matters of course, that a sort of awe awoke in him; like the
Apostles of old, he "feared as he entered into the cloud"; it seemed as
if the deepest string of some eternal sorrow had vibrated between them.

After a moment's pause, he spoke in a low and altered voice:--

"Mary, I am a sinner. No psalm or sermon ever taught it to me, but I see
it now. Your mother is quite right, Mary; you are too good for me; I am
no mate for you. Oh, what would you think of me, if you knew me wholly?
I have lived a mean, miserable, shallow, unworthy life. You are worthy,
you are a saint, and walk in white! Oh, what upon earth could ever make
you care so much for me?"

"Well, then, James, you will be good? Won't you talk with Dr. H.?"

"Hang Dr. H.!" said James. "Now, Mary, I beg your pardon, but I can't
make head or tail of a word Dr. H. says. I don't get hold of it, or know
what he would be at. You girls and women don't know your power. Why,
Mary, you are a living gospel. You have always had a strange power over
us boys. You never talked religion much, but I have seen high fellows
come away from being with you as still and quite as one feels when one
goes into a church. I can't understand all the hang of predestination,
and moral ability, and natural ability, and God's efficiency, and man's
agency, which Dr. H. is so engaged about; but I can understand _you_,
_you_ can do me good!"

"Oh, James, can I?"

"Mary, I'm going to confess my sins. I saw, that, somehow or other, the
wind was against me in Aunt Katy's quarter, and you know we fellows who
take up the world in both fists don't like to be beat. If there's
opposition, it sets us on. Now I confess I never did care much about
religion, but I thought, without being really a hypocrite, I'd just let
you try to save my soul for the sake of getting you; for there's nothing
surer to hook a woman than trying to save a fellow's soul. It's a
dead-shot, generally, that. Now our ship sails to-night, and I thought
I'd just come across this path in the orchard to speak to you. You know
I used always to bring you peaches and juneatings across this way, and
once I brought you a ribbon."

"Yes, I've got it yet, James."

"Well, now, Mary, all this seems mean to me, mean, to try and trick and
snare you, who are so much too good for me. I felt very proud this
morning that I was to go out first mate this time, and that I should
command a ship next voyage. I meant to have asked you for a promise, but
I don't. Only, Mary, just give me your little Bible, and I'll promise to
read it all through soberly, and see what it all comes to. And pray for
me; and if, while I'm gone, a good man comes who loves you, and is
worthy of you, why, take him, Mary,--that's my advice."

"James, I am not thinking of any such things; I don't ever mean to be
married. And I'm glad you don't ask me for any promise,--because it
would be wrong to give it; mother don't even like me to be much with
you. But I'm sure all I have said to you to-day is right; I shall tell
her exactly all I have said."

"If Aunt Katy knew what things we fellows are pitched into, who take the
world headforemost, she wouldn't be so selfish. Mary, you girls and
women don't know the world you live in; you ought to be pure and good:
you are not as we are. You don't know what men, what women--no, they're
not women!--what creatures, beset us in every foreign port, and
boarding-houses that are gates of hell; and then, if a fellow comes back
from all this and don't walk exactly straight, you just draw up the hems
of your garments and stand close to the wall, for fear he should touch
you when he passes. I don't mean you, Mary, for you are different from
most; but if you would do what you could, you might save us. But it's no
use talking, Mary. Give me the Bible; and please be kind to my
dove,--for I had a hard time getting him across the water, and I don't
want him to die."

If Mary had spoken all that welled up in her little heart at that
moment, she might have said too much; but duty had its habitual seal
upon her lips. She took the little Bible from her table and gave it with
a trembling hand, and James turned to go. In a moment he turned back,
and stood irresolute.

"Mary," he said, "we are cousins; I may never come back; you might kiss
me this once."

The kiss was given and received in silence, and James disappeared among
the thick trees.

"Come, child," said Aunt Katy, looking in, "there is Deacon Twitchel's
chaise in sight,--are you ready?"

"Yes, mother."

[To be continued.]




THE AUTOCRAT GIVES A BREAKFAST TO THE PUBLIC.


Before my friend the Professor takes his place at our old table, where,
Providence permitting, he means to wish you all a happy New Year on or
about the First of January next, I wish you to do me the favor of being
my guests at the table which you see spread before you.

This table is a very long one. Legs in every Atlantic and inland
city,--legs in California and Oregon,--legs on the shores of 'Quoddy and
of Lake Pontchartrain,--legs everywhere, like a millipede or a
banian-tree.

The schoolmistress that was,--and is,--(there are her little scholars at
the side-table.)--shall pour out coffee or tea for you as you like.

Sit down and make yourselves comfortable.--A teaspoon, my dear, for
Minnesota.--Sacramento's cup is out.

Bridget has become a thought, and serves us a great deal faster than the
sticky lightning of the submarine _par vagum_, as the Professor calls
it.--Pepper for Kansas, Bridget.--A sandwich for Cincinnati.--Rolls and
sardines for Washington.--A bit of the Cape Ann turkey for
Boston.--South Carolina prefers dark meat.--Fifty thousand glasses of
_eau sucree_ at once, and the rest simultaneously.--Now give us the nude
mahogany, that we may talk over it.--Bridget becomes as a mighty wind
and peels off the immeasurable table-cloth as a northwester strips off
the leafy damask from the autumn woods.

[At this point of the entertainment the Reporter of the "Oceanic
Miscellany" was introduced, and to his fluent and indefatigable pen we
owe the further account of the proceedings.--_Editors of the "Oceanic
Miscellany."_]

--The liberal and untiring editors of the "Oceanic Miscellany"
commissioned their special reporter to be present at the Great Breakfast
given by the personage known as the Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table,
furnishing him with one of the _caput-mortuum_ tickets usually
distributed on such occasions.

The tables groaned with the delicacies of the season, provided by the
distinguished caterers whose names are familiar in our mouths as
household words. After the usual contest for places,--a proceeding more
honored in the breach than the observance,--the band discoursed sweet
music. The creature comforts were then discussed, consisting of the
various luxuries that flesh is heir to, together with fish and fowl, too
numerous to mention. After the material banquet had cloyed the hungry
edge of appetite, began the feast of reason and the flow of soul. As,
take him for all in all, the bright particular star of the evening was
the distinguished individual who played the part of mine host, we shall
make no apology for confining our report to the


SPEECH OF THE AUTOCRAT.

I think on the whole we have had a good time together, since we became
acquainted. So many pleasant looks and words as have passed between us
must mean something. For one person who speaks well or ill of us we may
safely take it for granted that there are ten or a hundred, or an
indefinite number, who feel in the same way, but are shy of talking.

Now the first effect of being kindly received is unquestionably a
pleasing internal commotion, out of which arises a not less pleasing
secondary sensation, which the unthinking vulgar call conceit, but which
is in reality an increased consciousness of life, and a most important
part of the mechanism by which a man is advertised of his ability to
serve his fellows, and stirred up to use it.

In the present instance, the immediate effects of the warm general
welcome received were the following demonstrations:--

1. The purchase of a glossy bell-crowned hat, which is worn a little
inclined to one side, at the angle of self-reliance,--this being a very
slight dip, as compared to the outrageous slant of country dandies and
the insolent obliquity indulged in by a few unpleasantly conspicuous
city-youth, who prove that "it takes three generations to make a
gentleman."

2. A movement towards the acquisition of a pair of pantaloons with a
stripe running down the leg; also of a slender canary-colored cane, to
be carried as formerly in the time when Mr. Van Buren was
President.--[_A mild veto from the schoolmistress was interposed._]

3. A manifest increase of that _monstraridigitativeness_,--if you will
permit the term,--which is so remarkable in literary men, that, if
public opinion allowed it, some of them would like to wear a smart
uniform, with an author's button, so that they might be known and hailed
everywhere.

4. An undeniable aggravation of the natural tendency to caress and
cosset such products of the writer's literary industry as have met with
special favor. This is shown by a willingness to repeat any given
stanza, a line of which is referred to, and a readiness to listen to
even exaggerated eulogy with a twinkling stillness of feature and
inclination of the titillated ear to the operator, such as the Mexican
Peccary is said to show when its dorsal surface is gently and
continuously irritated with the pointed extremity of a reed or of a
magnolia-branch. What other people think well of, we certainly have a
right to like, ourselves.

All this self-exaltation, which some folks make so much scandal of, is
the most natural thing in the world when one gets an over-dose of fair
words. The more I reflect upon it, the more I am convinced that it is
well for a man to think too highly of himself while he is in the working
state. Sydney Smith could discover no relation between Modesty and
Merit, excepting that they both began with an M. Considered simply as a
machine out of which work is to be got, the wheels of intellect run best
when they are kept well oiled by the public and the publisher.

Therefore, my friends, if any of you have uttered words of kindness, of
flattery, of extreme over-praise, even, let me thank you for it.
Criticism with praise in it is azotized food; it makes muscle; to expect
a man to write without it is like giving nothing but hay to a roadster
and expecting to get ten miles an hour out of him. A young fellow cannot
be asked to go on making love forever, if he does not get a smile now
and then to keep hope alive. The truth is, Bridget would have whisked
off the table-cloth and given notice of quitting, and the whole
establishment would have gone to pieces at the end of No. 1, if you had
not looked so very good-natured about it that it was impossible to give
up such amiable acquaintance.

The above acknowledgments and personal revelations are preliminary to
the following more general statement, which will show how they must be
qualified.

Every man of sense has two ways of looking at himself. The first is an
everyday working view, in which he makes the most of his gifts and
accomplishments. It is the superficial stratum in which praise and blame
find their sphere of action,--the region of comparisons,--the habitat
where envy and jealousy are to be looked for, if they have not been
weeded out and flung into the compost-heap of dead vices, with which, if
we understand moral husbandry, we fertilize our living virtues. It is
quite foolish to abuse this thin upper layer of our mental soil. The
grasses do not strike their roots deep in towards the centre, like the
oaks, but they are the more useful and necessary vegetable of the two.
The cheap, but perpetual activities of life grow out of this upper
stratum of our being. How silly to try to be wiser than Providence!
Don't tell me about the vain illusions of self-love. There is nothing so
real in this world as Illusion. All other things may desert a man, but
this fair angel never leaves him. She holds a star a billion miles over
a baby's head, and laughs to see him clawing and batting himself as he
tries to reach it. She glides before the hoary sinner down the path
which leads to the inexorable gate, jingling the keys of heaven at her
girdle.

Underneath this surface-soil lies another stratum of thought, where the
tap-roots of the larger mental growths penetrate and find their
nourishment. Out of this comes heroism in all its shapes; here the
enterprises that overshadow half the planet, when full grown, lie,
tender, in their cotyledons. Here there is neither praise nor blame,
nothing but a passionless self-estimate, quite as willing to undervalue
as to rate too highly. The less clay and straw the task-master has given
his servant, the smaller the tale of bricks he will be required to
furnish. Many a man not remarkable for conceit has shuddered as some
effort or accident has revealed to him a depth of power of which he
never thought himself the possessor and broken his peace with the fatal
words, "Sleep no more!"

This deeper self-appreciation is a slow and gradual process. At first, a
child thinks he can do everything. I remember when I thought I could
lift a house, if I would only try hard enough. So I began with the hind
wheel of a heavy old family-coach, built like that in which my Lady
Bountiful carried little King Pippin, if you happen to remember the
illustrations of that story. I lifted with all my might, and the planet
pulled down with all its might. The planet beat. After that, my ideas of
the difference between my will and my muscular force were more
accurately defined. Then came the illusion, that I could, of course,
"lick," "serve out," or "polish off," various small boys who had been or
might be obnoxious to me. The event of the different "set-tos" to
which, this hypothesis led not uniformly confirming it, another
limitation of my possibilities was the consequence. In this way I groped
along into a knowledge of my physical relations to the organic and
inorganic universe.

A man must be very stupid indeed, if, by the time he is fully ripened,
he does not know tolerably well what his physical powers are. His
weight, his height, his general development, his constitutional force,
his good or ill looks, he has had time to find out; and he is a fool, if
he does not carry a reasonable consciousness of these conditions with
him always. It is a little harder with the mind; but some qualities are
generally estimated fairly enough by their owners. Thus, a man may be
trusted when he says he has a good or a bad memory. Not so of his
opinion of his own judgment or imagination. It is only by a very slow
process that he finds out how much or how little of those qualities he
possesses. But it is one of the blessed privileges of growing older,
that we come to have a much clearer sense of what we can do and what we
cannot, and settle down to our work quietly, knowing what our tools are
and what we have to do with them.

Therefore, my friends, if I should at any time put on any airs on the
strength of your good-natured treatment, please to remember that these
are only the growth of that thin upper stratum of character I was
telling you of. I conceive that the fact of a man's coming out in a book
or two, even supposing them to have a success such as I should never
think of, is to the sum total of that man's life and character as the
bed of tulips and hyacinths you may see in spring, at the feet of the
"Great Elm," on our Boston Common, is to the solemn old tree itself. The
serene, strong life, reaching deep underground and high overhead, robed
itself in April and disrobed itself in October when the Common was a
cow-pasture, and observes the same seasons now that the old tree is
belted with an iron girdle and finds its feet covered with flowers.
Alas! my friends, the fence and the tulips are painfully suggestive.
Authorship is an iron girdle, and the blossoms of flattery that are
scattered at its feet are useful to it only as their culture keeps the
soil open to the sun and rain. No man can please the reading public ever
so little without being too highly commended for it in the heat of the
moment; and so, if he thinks of starting again for the prize of public
approbation, he finds himself heavily handicapped, and perhaps weighted
down, simply because he has made good running for some former stakes.

I don't like the position of my friend the Professor. I consider him
fully as good a man as myself.--I have, you know, often referred to him
and quoted him, and sometimes got so mixed up with him, that, like the
Schildbuergers at their town-meeting, I was puzzled to disentangle my own
legs from his, when I wanted to stand up by myself, they were got into
such a snarl together.--But I don't like the position of my friend the
Professor.

The first thing, of course, when he opens his mouth, will be to compare
him with his predecessor. Now, if he has the least tact in the world, he
will begin dull, so as to leave a wide margin for improvement. You may
be perfectly certain that he can talk and write just as well as I can;
but you don't think, surely, that he is going to begin where I left off.
Not unless we are to have a wedding in the first number;--and you are
not sure whether or not there is to be any wedding at all while the
Professor holds my seat at the table.

But I will tell you one thing,--if you sit a year or so at a long table,
you will see what life is. Christenings, weddings, funerals,--these are
the three legs it stands on; and you have a chance to see them all in a
twelvemonth, if the table is really a long one. I don't doubt the
Professor will have something to tell besides his opinions and fancies;
and if you like a book of thoughts with occasional incidents, as well as
a book of incidents with occasional thoughts, why, I see no reason why
you should not accept this talk of the Professor's as kindly as if it
had a fancy name and called itself a novel.

Life may be divided into two periods,--the hours of taking food, and the
intervals between them,--or, technically, into the _alimentary_ and the
_non-alimentary_ portions of existence. Now our social being is so
intensified during the first of these periods, that whoso should write
the history of a man's breakfasts or dinners or suppers would give a
perfect picture of his most important social qualities, conditions, and
actions, and might omit the non-alimentary portion of his life
altogether from consideration. Thus I trust that the breakfasts of which
you have had some records have given you a pretty clear idea, not only
of myself, but of those more interesting friends and fellow-boarders of
mine to whom I have introduced you, and with some of whom, in company
with certain new acquaintances, my friend the Professor will keep you in
relation during the following year. So you see that over the new
table-cloth which is going to be spread there may very possibly be a new
drama of life enacted; but all that, if it should be so, is incidental
and by the way;--for what the Professor wishes particularly to do, and
means to do, is to talk about life and men and things and books and
thoughts; but if there should be anything better than talk occurring
before his eyes, either at the small world of the breakfast-table or in
the greater world without, he holds himself at liberty to relate it or
discourse upon it.

I suppose the Professor will receive a good many letters, as I did,
containing suggestions, counsel, and articles in prose and verse for
publication. He desires me to state that he is very happy to hear from
known and unknown friends, provided they will not mistake him for an
editor, and will not be offended if their communications are not made
the subject of individual notice. There may be times when, having
nothing to say, he will be very glad to print somebody's note or copy of
verses; I don't think it very likely; for life, is short, and the world
is brimful, and rammed down hard, with strange things worth seeing and
telling, and Mr. Worcester's great Quarto Dictionary is soon coming out,
crammed with all manner of words to talk with,--so that the Professor
will probably find little room, except for an answer to a question now
and then, or the acknowledgment of some hint he may have thought worth
taking.

       *       *       *       *       *

--The speaker shut himself off like a gas-burner at this point, and the
company soon dispersed. I sauntered down to the landlady's, and obtained
from her the following production from the papers left by the gentleman,
whose pen, ranging from grave to gay, from lively to severe, has held
the mirror up to Nature, and given the form and pressure of his thoughts
and feelings for the benefit of the numerous and constantly-increasing
multitudes of readers of the "Oceanic Miscellany," a journal which has
done and is doing so much for the gratification and improvement of the
masses.


_A Poem from the Autocrat's Lose Papers._

[I find the following note written in pencil on the MSS.--_Reporter Oc.
Misc._]

This is a true story. Avis, Avise, or Avice, (they pronounce it
_Arris_,) is a real breathing person. Her home is not more than an hour
and a half's space from the palaces of the great ladies who might like
to look at her. They may see her and the little black girl she gave
herself to, body and soul, when nobody else could bear the sight of her
infirmity,--leaving home at noon, or even after breakfast, and coming
back in season to undress for the evening's party.


AVIS.

    I may not rightly call thy name,--
      Alas! thy forehead never knew
    The kiss that happier children claim,
      Nor glistened with baptismal dew.

    Daughter of want and wrong and woe,
      I saw thee with thy sister-band,
    Snatched from the whirlpool's narrowing flow
      By Mercy's strong yet trembling hand.

    --"Avis!"--With Saxon eye and cheek,
      At once a woman and a child,
    The saint uncrowned I came to seek
      Drew near to greet us,--spoke and smiled.

    God gave that sweet sad smile she wore
      All wrong to shame, all souls to win,--
    A heavenly sunbeam sent before
      Her footsteps through a world of sin.

    --"And who is Avis?"--Hear the tale
      The calm-voiced matrons gravely tell,--
    The story known through all the vale
      Where Avis and her sisters dwell.

    With the lost children running wild,
      Strayed from the hand of human care,
    They find one little refuse child
      Left helpless in its poisoned lair.

    The primal mark is on her face,--
      The chattel-stamp,--the pariah-stain
    That follows still her hunted race,--
      The curse without the crime of Cain.

    How shall our smooth-turned phrase relate
      The little suffering outcast's ail?
    Not Lazarus at the rich man's gate
      So turned the rose-wreathed revellers pale.

    Ah, veil the living death from sight
      That wounds our beauty-loving eye!
    The children turn in selfish fright,
      The white-lipped nurses hurry by.

    Take her, dread Angel! Break in love
      This bruised reed and make it thine!--
    No voice descended from above,
      But Avis answered, "She is mine."

    The task that dainty menials spurn
      The fair young girl has made her own;
    Her heart shall teach, her hand shall learn
      The toils, the duties yet unknown.

    So Love and Death in lingering strife
      Stand face to face from day to day,
    Still battling for the spoil of Life
      While the slow seasons creep away.

    Love conquers Death; the prize is won;
      See to her joyous bosom pressed
    The dusky daughter of the sun,--
      The bronze against the marble breast!

    Her task is done; no voice divine
      Has crowned her deed with saintly fame;
    No eye can see the aureole shine
      That rings her brow with heavenly flame.

    Yet what has holy page more sweet,
      Or what had woman's love more fair
    When Mary clasped her Saviour's feet
      With flowing eyes and streaming hair?

    Meek child of sorrow, walk unknown.
      The Angel of that earthly throng,
    And let thine image live alone
      To hallow this unstudied song!




LITERARY NOTICES.


_Sir Walter Raleigh and his Time, with other Papers._ By CHARLES
KINGSLEY, Author of "Hypatia," "Two Years Ago," etc. Boston: Ticknor &
Fields. 12mo.

This collection of Mr. Kingsley's miscellaneous writings is marked by
the same qualities of mind and temper which have given celebrity and
influence to his novels. An earnest man, with strong convictions
springing from a fervid philanthropy, fertile in thought, confident in
statement, resolute in spirit, with many valuable ideas and not a few
curious crotchets, and master of a style singularly bold, vivid,
passionate, and fluent, he always stimulates the mind, if he does not
always satisfy it. The defects of his intellect, especially in the
treatment of historical questions, proceed from the warmth of his
temperament. His impulses irritate his reason. Intellectually impatient
with all facts and arguments which obstruct the full sweep of his
theory, he has an offensive habit of escaping from objections he will
not pause to answer, by the calling of names and the introduction of
Providence. He is most petulantly disdainful of others when he has
nothing but paradoxes with which to oppose their truisms. He has a trick
of adopting the manner and expressions of Carlyle, in speaking of
incidents and characters to which they are ludicrously inapplicable, and
becomes flurried and flippant on occasions where Carlyle would put into
the same words his whole scowling and scornful strength. He frequently
mistakes sympathy with suffering for insight into its causes, and an
eloquent statement of what he thinks desirable for an interpretation of
what really is. He has bright glimpses of truth, but they are due rather
to the freedom of his thinking than to its depth; and in the hurry and
impatient pressure of his impulses, he does not discriminate between his
ideas and his whims. He seems to be in a state of insurrection against
the limitations of his creed, his profession, and his own mind, and the
impression conveyed by his best passages is of splendid incompleteness.
It would be ungracious to notice these defects in a writer who possesses
so many excellences, were it not that he forces them upon the attention,
and in their expression is unjust to other thinkers. His intellectual
conceit finds its vent in intellectual sauciness, and is all the worse
from appearing to have its source in conceit of conscience and
benevolence.

In spite of these faults, however, Mr. Kingsley's reputation is not
greater than he deserves. He is one of the most sincere; truthful, and
courageous of writers, has no reserves or concealments, and pours out
his feelings and opinions exactly as they lie in his own heart and
brain. We at least feel assured that he has no imperfections which he
does not express, and that there is no disagreement between the book and
the man. He is commonly on the right side in the social and political
movements of the day, if he does not always give the right reasons for
his position. His love, both of Nature and human nature, is intense and
deep, and this gives a cordiality, freshness, and frankness to his
writings which more than compensate for their defects.

The present volume of his miscellanies contains not only his essays and
reviews, but his four lectures on "Alexandria and her Schools," and his
"Loose Thoughts for Loose Thinkers." Of the essays, those on "North
Devon" and "My Winter Garden" are the best specimens of his descriptive
power, and those on "Raleigh" and "England from Wolsey to Elizabeth," of
his talents and accomplishments as a thinker on historical subjects. The
literary papers on "Tennyson," "Burns," "The Poetry of Sacred and
Literary Art," and "Hours with the Mystics," are full of striking and
suggestive, if somewhat perverse, thought. The volume, as a whole, is
read with mingled feelings of vexation and pleasure; but whether
provoked or delighted, we are always interested both in the author and
his themes.


_A Journey due North: Being Notes of a Residence in Russia._ By GEORGE
AUGUSTUS SALA. Boston: Ticknor & Fields. 16mo.

Although the matter of this brilliant volume is of intrinsic interest,
its charm is due more to the mode of description than even to the things
described. It gives us Russia from a Bohemian point of view. The
characteristics of Mr. Sala are keen observation, vivid description,
lively wit, indomitable assurance, and incapacity of being surprised. To
his resolute belief in himself, in what he sees with his own eyes and
conceives with his own brain, the book owes much of its raciness, its
confident, decisive, "knowing" tone, its independence of the judgments
of others, and its freedom from all the deceptions which proceed from
such emotions as wonder and admiration. The volume is read with a
pleasure similar to that we experience in listening to the animated talk
of an acquaintance fresh from novel scenes of foreign travel, who
reproduces his whole experience in recalling his adventures, and gives
us not merely incidents and pictures, but his own feelings of delight
and self-elation.

The three introductory chapters, describing the journey to St.
Petersburg, are perhaps the most brilliant portions of the book. The
delineations of his fellow-passengers, in the voyage from Stettin to
Cronstadt, especially the portraits of the swearing Captain Smith and
the accomplished Hussian noble, are admirable equally for their humor
and their sagacity. The account of the landing at Cronstadt, the scenes
at the Custom-House, the author's first walk in St. Petersburg, and his
first drive in a droschky, are masterpieces of familiar narration, and
fairly convert the readers of his hook into companions of his journey.
The description of the manners and customs of the Russian people, the
shrewd occasional comments on the policy of the government, and the
thorough analysis of the rascality of the Russian police, are admirable
in substance, if somewhat flippant in expression. In power of holding
the amused attention of the reader, equally by the pertinence of the
matter and the impertinence of the tone, the volume is unexcelled by any
other book on the subject of Russia.


_The New Priest in Conception Bay_. Boston: Phillips, Sampson & Co.
1858. 2 vols. 12mo.

The southeastern portion of the island of Newfoundland, as may be seen
by a glance at the map, may be well described by that expressive epithet
of "nook-shotten," which in Shakspeare is applied to the mother-island
of which it is a dependent. The land is indented by bays and estuaries,
so that it bears the same relation to the water that the parted fingers
of an outstretched hand do to the spaces of air that are between them.
One of these inlets bears the name of Conception Bay; and it is around
the shores of this bay that the scene of this novel is laid. Everything
in it suffers a sea-change; everything is set to the music of the winds
and the waves. We find ourselves among a people with whom the sea is
all, and the land only an appendage to the sea,--a place to dry fish,
and mend nets, and haul up boats, and caulk ships. But though the view
everywhere, morally and physically, is bounded by the sea, and though
one of the finest of the characters is a fisherman, yet the moving
springs of the story are found in elements only accidentally connected
with the sea, and by no means new to novel-writers or playwrights. The
plot of the novel is taken from, or founded upon, the peculiar relations
existing between the Roman Catholic priesthood and the female sex; and,
with only a change in costume and scenery, the events might have taken
place in Maryland, Louisiana, or France.

The novel is one of a peculiar class. To borrow a convenient phraseology
recently introduced into the language, its interest is more subjective
than objective,--or, in other words, is derived more from marked and
careful delineations of individual character than from the march of
events or brilliant procession of incidents. With a single
exception,--the abduction of the fisherman's daughter,--the occurrences
narrated are such as might happen any day in any small community living
near the sea. Novels constructed on this plan are less likely to be
popular than those in which the interest is derived from a
skilfully-contrived plot and a rapid and stirring succession of moving
events. To what extent the work before us may be popular we wilt not
undertake even to guess; for we have had too frequent experience of the
capriciousness of public taste to hazard any prediction as to the
reception a particular book may meet with, especially if it rely
exclusively upon its own merits, and be not helped by the previous
reputation of the writer. But we certainly can and will say that to
readers of a certain cast it will present strong attractions, and that
no candid critic can read it without pronouncing it to be a remarkable
work and the production of an original mind. The author we should judge
to be a man who had lived a good deal in solitude, or at least removed
from his intellectual peers,--who had been through much spiritual
struggle in the course of his life,--who had been more accustomed to
think than to write, at least for the press,--and whose own observation
had revealed to him some of the darker aspects of the Roman Catholic
faith and practice.

There is very little skill in the construction of the plot. Most of the
events stand to each other in the relation of accidental and not of
necessary succession, and might be transposed without doing any harm.
Many pages are written simply as illustrations of character; and a fair
proportion of the novel might be called with strict propriety a series
of sketches connected by a slight thread of narrative. But it would be
unreasonable to deal sharply with an author for this defect; for the
faculty of making a well-constructed story, in which every event shall
come in naturally, and yet each bring us one step nearer to the
journey's end, is now one of the lost arts of earth. But this is not
all. A considerable portion of it must be pronounced decidedly slow. We
use the word not in its slang application, but in the sense in which
Goldsmith used it in the first line of "The Traveller," or rather, as
Johnson told him he used it, when he said to him,--"You do not mean
tardiness of locomotion; you mean that sluggishness of mind which comes
upon a man in solitude." But the slowness of which novel-readers will
complain is not mere commonplace, least of all is it dulness. It is the
leisurely movement of a contemplative mind full of rich thought and
stored with varied learning. Such a writer _could not_ have any sympathy
with the mercurial, vivacious, light-of-foot story-tellers of the French
school. The author of "The New Priest in Conception Bay," we surmise,
has not been in the habit of packing up his thoughts for the market, by
either writing for the press, or conversing with clever and
nimble-witted men and women, and thus does not always distinguish
between cargo and dunnage. The current of the story often flows with a
very languid movement. It happens, rather unluckily, that this is
particularly true of the first seventy pages of the first volume. We
fear that many professional novel-readers may break down in the course
of these pages; and we confess ourselves to have been a little
discouraged. But after the ninth chapter, and the touching account which
Skipper George gives of the death of his boys,--a story which the most
indifferent cannot peruse without emotion,--the reader may be safely
left in the author's hands. They will go on together to the end, after
this, on good terms. And the prospect brightens, and the horses are
whipped up, as we advance. The second volume is much more interesting,
in the common sense of the word,--more stirring, more rapid, more
animated, than the first.

It is but putting our criticism into another form to say that the novel
is too long, and, as a mere story, might with advantage be compressed
into at least two-thirds of its present bulk. There are, especially, two
departments or points to which this remark is applicable. In the first
place, the conversations are too numerous, too protracted, and run too
much into trivialities and details. In the second place, the
descriptions of scenery are too frequently introduced, and pushed to a
wearisome enumeration of particulars and minute delineation of details.
In this peculiarity the author is kept in countenance by most
respectable literary associates. This sort of Pre-Raphaelite style of
scenery-painting in words is a characteristic of most recent American
novel, especially such as are written by women. Every rock, every clump
of trees, every strip of sea-shore, every sloping hillside, sits for its
portrait, and is reproduced with a tender conscientiousness of touch
wholly disproportioned to the importance of the subject. When human
hearts and human passions are animating or darkening the scene, we do
not want to be detained by a botanist's description of plants or a
geologist's sketch of rocks. The broad, free sweeps of Scott's brush in
"The Pirate" are more effective than the delicate needle-point lines of
the writer before us.

We think, too, that too much use is made of those strange and uncouth
dialects which have to be represented to the eye by bad spelling. We
have the familiar Yankee type in Mr. Bangs, and a new form of
phraseology in the speech of the Newfoundland fishermen. A little of
this is well enough, but it should not be pushed to an extreme. The
author's style, in general, is vigorous and expressive; it is the garb
of an original mind, and often takes striking forms; but in grace and
simplicity there is room for improvement, and we doubt not that
improvement will come with practice.

There are many passages which we should like to quote as specimens of
the imaginative power, forcible description, and apt illustration which
are shown in this work. Whether the author has ever written verse or
not, he is a poet in the best sense of that much-abused word. To him
Nature in all its forms is animated; it sympathizes with all his moods,
and takes on the hues of his thought. There are very few of these
paragraphs that are easily separable; they are fixed in the page, and
cannot be understood apart from it. Besides, many of these beauties are
minute,--a gleaming word here and there,--but making the track of the
story glow like the phosphorescent waters of the tropics.

We give a few paragraphs at random:--

     "Does the sea hold the secret?

     "Along the wharves, along the little beaches, around the
     circuit of the little coves, along the smooth or broken face of
     rock, the sea, which cannot rest, is busy. These little waves
     and this long swell, that now are here at work, have been ere
     now at home in the great inland sea of Europe, breathed on by
     soft, warm winds from fruit-groves, vineyards, and wide fields
     of flowers,--have sparkled in the many-colored lights, and felt
     the trivial oars and dallying fingers of the loiterers, on the
     long canals of Venice,--have quenched the ashes of the
     Dutchman's pipe, thrown overboard from his dull, laboring
     _treckschuyt_,--have wrought their patient tasks in the dim
     caverns of the Indian Archipelago,--have yielded to the little
     builders under water means and implements to rear their
     towering altar, dwelling, monument.

     "These little waves have crossed the ocean, tumbling like
     porpoises at play, and, taking on a savage nature in the Great
     Wilderness, have thundered in close ranks and countless numbers
     against man's floating fortress,--have stormed the breach and
     climbed up over the walls in the ship's riven side,--have
     followed, howling and hungry as mad wolves, the crowded
     raft,--have leaped upon it, snatching off, one by one, the
     weary, worn-out men and women,--have taken up and borne aloft,
     as if on hands and shoulders, the one chance human body that is
     brought in to land, and the long spur, from which man's dancing
     cordage wastes by degrees, find yields its place to long, green
     streamers, much like those that clung to this tall, taper tree
     when it stood in the Northern forest.

     "These waves have rolled their breasts about amid the wrecks
     and weeds of the hot stream that comes up many thousands of
     miles out of the Gulf of Mexico, as the great Mississippi goes
     down into it, and by-and-by these waves will move, all numb and
     chilled, among the mighty icebergs and ice-fields that must be
     brought down from the poles."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "She asked, 'Have you given up being a priest, Mr. Urston?'

     "'Yes!' he answered, in a single word, looking before him, as
     it were along his coming life, like a quoit-caster, to see how
     far the uttered word would strike; then, turning to her, and in
     a lower voice, added, 'I've left that, once and forever.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

     "He stood still with his grief; and, as Mr. Wellon pressed his
     honest, hard hand, he lifted to his pastor one of those
     childlike looks that only come out on the face of the true man,
     that has grown, as oaks grow, ring around ring, adding each
     after-age to the childhood that has never been lost, but has
     been kept innermost. This fisherman seemed like one of those
     that plied their trade, and were the Lord's disciples, at the
     Sea of Galilee, eighteen hundred years ago. The very flesh and
     blood inclosing such a nature keep a long youth through life.
     Witness the genius, (who is only the more thorough man,) poet,
     painter, sculptor, finder-out, or whatever; how fresh and fair
     such an one looks out from under his old age! Let him be
     Christian, too, and he shall look as if--shedding this
     outward--the inward being would walk forth a glorified one."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "As he mentioned his fruitless visits, a startling, most
     repulsive leer just showed itself in Ladford's face; but it
     disappeared as suddenly and wholly as a monster that has come
     up, horrid and hideous, to the surface of the sea, and then has
     sunk again, bodily, into the dark deep, and is gone, as if it
     had never come, except for the fear and loathing that it leaves
     behind. This face, after that look, had nothing repulsive in
     it, but was only the more subdued and sad."

The author's mind so teems with images, that he does not always
discriminate between the good and the bad. Occasionally we find some
that are manifestly faulty and overstrained.

     "It is one on which the tenderness of the deep heart of the
     Common Mother breaks itself; over which _the broad, dark,
     silent wings of a dread mystery are stretched_."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "Her voice had in it that tender _touch_ which _lays itself,
     warm and loving_, on the heart."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "And then her voice began _to drop down_, as it were, _from
     step to step_,--and _the steps seemed cold and damp, as it went
     down them lingeringly_:--'or for
     trial,--disappointment,--whatever comes!'--and at the last, _it
     seemed to have gone down into a sepulchral vault_."

We do not admire any one of the above,--least of all the last, in which
the human voice is embodied as a sexton going down the steps of a tomb.
Why, too, as a matter of verbal criticism, should the author use such
words as "tragedist," "exhibitress," and "cheaty?"

In the delineation of character the author shows uncommon power and is
entitled to high praise. His portraits are animated, life-like, and
individual. Father Terence is drawn with a firm and skilful touch. The
task which the author prescribed to himself--to present an ecclesiastic
without learning, without intellectual power, without enthusiasm, and
with the easy habits of a careless and enjoyable temperament, and yet
who should be respectable, and even venerable, by reason of the
soundness of his instincts and his thorough right-heartedness--was not
an easy one; but in the execution he has been entirely successful. We
cannot but surmise that he has met sometime and somewhere a living man
with some of the characteristic traits of Father Terence. Father
Ignatius, the conventional type of the dark, wily, and dangerous
ecclesiastical intriguer, is an easier subject, but not so well done. He
is a little too melodramatic; and we apply with peculiar force to him a
criticism to which all the characters are more or less obnoxious, that
he is too constantly and uniformly manifesting the peculiar traits by
which the author distinguishes him from others. Father Debree and Mrs.
Barre are drawn with powerful and discriminating touch, and we recognize
the skill of the writer in the fact that we had read a considerable
portion of the novel before we had any suspicion of the former relations
between them. We may here say that we think that the women who may read
this work will want to know, a little more fully and distinctly than the
author has seen fit to tell, what were the causes and influences which
led to the severing of those relations. We cannot state our meaning more
clearly, without doing what we think should never be done in the review
of a new novel, and that is, telling the story, and thus removing half
the impulse to read it. Skipper George and his household, and the
smuggler Ladford, are very well drawn,--not distinctly original, and yet
with distinctive individual traits, which sharp observation must, to
some extent, have furnished the author with.

But to our commendation of the characters we must make one exception: we
humbly and respectfully submit that Mr. Bangs is a portentous bore, and
we heartily wish that he had been drowned before he ever set his foot
upon the shores of Newfoundland. It is possible, however, that in this
case we are not impartial judges; for we confess, that, for our own
private reading, we are heartily weary of the Yankee,--we mean as a
literary creation,--of the eternal repetition of the character of which
Sam Slick is the prototype,--which is for the most part a caricature,
and no more to be found upon the solid earth than a griffin or a
centaur. And in our judgment the theological discussions between this
worthy and Father Terence are not in good taste. The author surely would
not have us suppose that the wretched, skimble-skamble stuff which the
latter is made to talk is any fair representative of the arguments by
which the Church of Rome maintains its dogmas and vindicates its claims.
A considerable amount of literary skill and a quick perception of the
ludicrous are shown in the ridiculous aspect which the good Father's
statements and reasonings are made to assume in passing through Mr.
Bangs's mind; but we doubt whether such exhibitions are profitable to
the cause of good religion, and whether the advantage thereby secured to
Protestantism is not purchased at the price of some danger to
Christianity. It is not well to teach men the art of making mysteries
ridiculous.

But we take leave of our author and his book with high respect for his
powers,--we do not know but that we may say his genius,--and with no
small admiration for this particular expression of them. The very
minuteness of our criticism involves a compliment. It has been truly
said, that many men never write a book at all, but that very few write
only one. We think that the author of "The New Priest in Conception Bay"
must and will write more. A mind so fruitful and inventive, a spiritual
nature so high and earnest, and an observation so keen and correct,
cannot fail to accumulate materials for future use. We predict that his
next novel will be better than this,--that it will have all its
substantial and essential merits, and will show more constructive skill
and a more practised hand in literary artisanship. His gold will be more
neatly wrought, and not less pure and abundant.


_Summer Time in the Country._ By Rev. ROBERT ARIS WILLMOTT. London and
New York: George Routledge. Square 12mo. Illustrated.

We first made the acquaintance of this work in a shilling volume, a
"railway-library edition," and were charmed with its genial tone, its
nice appreciation of rural scenery, its agreeable and unpedantic
learning. It is a diary for the summer months, with notes upon the
changing aspects of Nature, reminiscences from the poets, and
appropriate comments. We are glad now to welcome the book in this form,
wherein satin paper, careful typography, delicate engravings, and
handsome binding have been employed to give it an appropriate dress.


_Annual Obituary Notices of Eminent Persons who died in the United
States during the Year 1857._ By NATHAN CROSBY. Boston: Phillips,
Sampson, & Co. 8vo. pp. 430.

The object of this work is best stated in the words of the author, as
being "the result of a long and earnest desire to give a more permanent
and accessible memorial to those who have originated and developed our
institutions,--those whose names should be remembered by the generations
to come, as the statesmen, the soldiers, the men of science and skill,
the sagacious merchants, the eminent clergymen and
philanthropists,--those who have brought our country to the prosperity
and distinction it now enjoys."

Eulogies, funeral sermons, and obituaries soon pass out of remembrance,
and an annual compilation like this cannot fail to be of service. The
work appears to have been done with impartiality and care.


_The Poetical Works of Edgar Allan Poe, with an Original Memoir._
Illustrated by F. R. PICKERSGILL, JOHN TENNIEL, BIRKET FOSTER, FELIX
DARLEY, and others. New York: J. S. Redfield. 8vo. pp. 250.

The poems of Poe have taken their place in literature; it is too late to
attempt anything like a contemporaneous criticism, too early to
anticipate the judgement of posterity. But whatever were the faults of
this gifted and erratic genius, much that he has written has become a
part of the thought and memory of the present generation of readers, and
will doubtless go to our children with equal claims.

In this volume it would seem that the arts connected with book-making
have culminated; paper, typography, drawing, and engraving are all
admirable. There are no fewer than fifty-three wood-engravings, of
various degrees of excellence, but all exquisitely finished. The lovers
of fine editions of poetry will find this a gift-book which the most
fastidious taste will approve. If we could add that this mechanical
excellence was from American hands, it would be much more grateful to
our national pride.


_Black's Atlas of North America._ Boston: Little, Brown, & Co.

Nothing could well be more convenient than this series of twenty maps.
They are carefully executed, of a size not too large for easy handling,
and bound in a thin, light volume. They are preceded by some
introductory statistical matter which is very useful for purposes of
ready reference, and accompanied by an index so arranged that one can
find the name he seeks on any map with great facility. We have seen no
maps of North America which seemed to us, on the whole, at once so cheap
and good.

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the announcements of illustrated works in press, we notice "The
Stratford Gallery, comprising Forty-five Ideal Portraits described by
Mrs. J. W. Palmer. Illustrated with Fine Engravings on Steel, from
Designs by Eminent Hands."

In one vol. 8vo. Antique morocco. New York: D. Appleton & Co.

       *       *       *       *       *

The many admirers of the "AUTOCRAT" will learn with pleasure that a fine
edition of his charming volume is in preparation, with tinted paper,
illustrated by Hoppin, and bound in elegant style. Probably no
holiday-book will be in such demand this season.








