letter in the best marking-stitch. She was skilful in all sewing and
embroidery, in all shaping and cutting, with a quiet and deft handiness
that constantly surprised her energetic mother, who could not conceive
that so much could be done with so little noise. In fact, in all
household lore she was a veritable good fairy; her knowledge seemed
unerring and intuitive; and whether she washed or ironed, or moulded
biscuit or conserved plums, her gentle beauty seemed to turn to poetry
all the prose of life.

There was something in Mary, however, which divided her as by an
appreciable line from ordinary girls of her age. From her father she had
inherited a deep and thoughtful nature, predisposed to moral and
religious exaltation. Had she been born in Italy, under the dissolving
influences of that sunny, dreamy clime, beneath the shadow of
cathedrals, and where pictured saints and angels smiled in clouds of
painting from every arch and altar, she might, like fair St. Catherine
of Siena, have seen beatific visions in the sunset skies, and a silver
dove descending upon her as she prayed; but, unfolding in the clear,
keen, cold New England clime, and nurtured in its abstract and positive
theologies, her religious faculties took other forms. Instead of lying
entranced in mysterious raptures at the foot of altars, she read and
ponder treatises on the Will, and listened in rapt attention while her
spiritual guide, the venerated Dr. H., unfolded to her the theories of
the great Edwards on the nature of true virtue. Womanlike, she felt the
subtile poetry of these sublime abstractions which dealt with such
infinite and unknown quantities,--which spoke of the universe, of its
great Architect, of man, of angels, as matters of intimate and daily
contemplation; and her teacher, a grand-minded and simple-hearted man as
ever lived, was often amazed at the tread with which this fair young
child walked through these high regions of abstract thought,--often
comprehending through an ethereal clearness of nature what he had
laboriously and heavily reasoned out; and sometimes, when she turned her
grave, childlike face upon him with some question or reply, the good man
started as if an angel had looked suddenly out upon him from a cloud.
Unconsciously to himself, he often seemed to follow her, as Dante
followed the flight of Beatrice, through the ascending circles of the
celestial spheres.

When her mother questioned him, anxiously, of her daughter's spiritual
estate, he answered, that she was a child of a strange graciousness of
nature, and of a singular genius; to which Katy responded, with a
woman's pride, that she was all her father over again. It is only now
and then that a matter-of-fact woman is sublimated by a real love; but
if she is, it is affecting to see how impossible it is for death to
quench it; for in the child the mother feels that she has a mysterious
and undying repossession of the father.

But, in truth, Mary was only a recast in feminine form of her father's
nature. The elixir of the spirit that sparkled within, her was of that
quality of which the souls of poets and artists are made; but the keen
New England air crystalizes emotions into ideas, and restricts many a
poetic soul to the necessity of expressing itself only in practical
living.

The rigid theological discipline of New England is fitted to produce
rather strength and purity than enjoyment. It was not fitted to make a
sensitive and thoughtful nature happy, however it might ennoble and
exalt.

The system of Dr. H. was one that could have had its origin in a soul at
once reverential and logical,--a soul, moreover, trained from its
earliest years in the habits of thought engendered by monarchical
institutions. For although he, like other ministers, took an active part
as a patriot in the Revolution, still he was brought up under the shadow
of a throne, and a man cannot ravel out the stitches in which early days
have knit him. His theology was, in fact, the turning to an invisible
Sovereign of that spirit of loyalty and unquestioning subjugation which
is one of the noblest capabilities of our nature. And as a gallant
soldier renounces life and personal aims in the cause of his king and
country, and holds himself ready to be drafted for a forlorn hope, to be
shot down, or help make a bridge of his mangled body, over which the
more fortunate shall pass to victory and glory, so he regarded himself
as devoted to the King Eternal, ready in His hands to be used to
illustrate and build up an Eternal Commonwealth, either by being
sacrificed as a lost spirit or glorified as a redeemed one, ready to
throw not merely his mortal life, but his immortality even, into the
forlorn hope, to bridge with a never-dying soul the chasm over which
white-robed victors should pass to a commonwealth of glory and splendor
whose vastness dwarf the misery of all the lost infinitesimal.

It is not in our line to imply the truth or the falsehood of those
systems of philosophic theology which seem for many years to have been
the principal outlet for the proclivities of the New England mind, but
as psychological developments they have an intense interest. He who does
not see a grand side to these strivings of the soul cannot understand
one of the noblest capabilities of humanity.

No real artist or philosopher ever lived who has not at some hours risen
to the height of utter self-abnegation for the glory of the invisible.
There have been painters who would have been crucified to demonstrate
the action of a muscle,--chemists who would gladly have melted
themselves and all humanity in their crucible, if so a new discovery
might arise out of its fumes. Even persons of mere artistic sensibility
are at times raised by music, painting, or poetry to a momentary trance
of self-oblivion, in which they would offer their whole being before the
shrine of an invisible loveliness. These hard old New England divines
were the poets of metaphysical philosophy, who built systems in an
artistic fervor, and felt self exhale from beneath them as they rose
into the higher regions of thought. But where theorists and philosophers
tread with sublime assurance, woman often follows with bleeding
footsteps;--women are always turning from the abstract to the
individual, and feeling where the philosopher only thinks.

It was easy enough for Mary to believe in _self_-renunciation, for she
was one with a born vocation for martyrdom; and so, when the idea was
put to her of suffering eternal pains for the glory of God and the good
of being in general, she responded to it with a sort of sublime thrill,
such as it is given to some natures to feel in view of uttermost
sacrifice. But when she looked around on the warm, living faces of
friends, acquaintances, and neighbors, viewing them as possible
candidates for dooms so fearfully different, she sometimes felt the
walls of her faith closing round her as an iron shroud,--she wondered
that the sun could shine so brightly, that flowers could flaunt such
dazzling colors, that sweet airs could breathe, and little children
play, and youth love and hope, and a thousand intoxicating influences
combine to cheat the victims from the thought that their next step might
be into an abyss of horrors without end. The blood of youth and hope was
saddened by this great sorrow, which lay ever on her heart,--and her
life, unknown to herself, was a sweet tune in the minor key; it was only
in prayer, or deeds of love and charity, or in rapt contemplation of
that beautiful millennial day which her spiritual guide most delighted
to speak of, that the tone of her feelings ever rose to the height of
joy.

Among Mary's young associates was one who had been as a brother to her
childhood. He was her mother's cousin's son,--and so, by a sort of
family immunity, had always a free access to her mother's house. He took
to the sea, as the most bold and resolute young men will, and brought
home from foreign parts those new modes of speech, those other eyes for
received opinions and established things, which so often shock
established prejudices,--so that he was held as little better than an
infidel and a castaway by the stricter religious circles in his native
place. Mary's mother, now that Mary was grown up to woman's estate,
looked with a severe eye on her cousin. She warned her daughter against
too free an association with him,--and so----We all know what comes to
pass when girls are constantly warned not to think of a man. The most
conscientious and obedient little person in the world, Mary resolved to
be very careful. She never would think of James, except, of course, in
her prayers; but as these were constant, it may easily be seen it was
not easy to forget him.

All that was so often told her of his carelessness, his trifling, his
contempt of orthodox opinions, and his startling and bold expressions,
only wrote his name deeper in her heart,--for was not his soul in peril?
Could she look in his frank, joyous fate and listen to his thoughtless
laugh, and then think that a fall from mast-head, or one night's storm,
might----Ah, with what images her faith filled the blank! Could she
believe all this and forget him?

You see, instead of getting our tea ready, as we promised at the
beginning of this chapter, we have filled it with descriptions and
meditations, and now we foresee that the next chapter will be equally
far from the point. But have patience with us; for we can write only as
we are driven, and never know exactly where we are going to land.


