CHAPTER I

THE ARTISTS' EXHIBITION, AND WHAT CAME OF IT.

There was an exhibition of pictures in an upper room on Washington
Street. The artists had collected their unsold productions, and proposed
to offer them at auction. There were sketches of White Mountain scenery,
views of Nahant and other beaches, woodland prospects, farm-houses with
well-sweeps, reedy marshes and ponds, together with the usual variety of
ideal heads and figures,--a very pretty collection. The artists had gone
forth like bees, and gathered whatever was sweetest in every field
through a wide circuit, and now the lover of the beautiful might have
his choice of the results without the fatigue of travel. Defects enough
there were to critical eyes,--false drawing, cold color, and
unsuccessful distances; still there was much to admire, and the spirit
and intention were interesting, even where the inexperience of the
painter was only too apparent.

A group of visitors entered the room: a lady in the prime of beauty,
richly but modestly dressed, casting quick glances on all sides, yet
with an air of quiet self-possession; a gentleman, her brother
apparently, near forty years of age, dignified and prepossessing; a
second lady, in widow's weeds; and a young gentleman with successful
moustaches, lemon-colored gloves, and one of those bagging coats which
just miss the grace of flowing outline without the compensation of
setting off a good figure. The lady first mentioned seemed born to take
the lead; it was no assumption in her; _incedo regina_ was the
expression of her gracefully poised head and her stately carriage. "A
pretty bit," she said, carelessly pointing with her parasol to a picture
of a rude country bridge and dam.

"Yes," said her elder brother, "spirited and lifelike. Who is the
painter, Marcia?"

The beauty consulted her catalogue.

"Greenleaf, George Greenleaf."

"A new name. Look at that distant spire," he continued, "faintly showing
among the trees in the background. The water is surprisingly true. A
charming picture. I think I'll buy it."

"How quickly you decide," said the lady, with an air of languor. "The
picture is pretty enough, but you haven't seen the rest of the
collection yet. Gamboge paints lovely landscapes, they say. I wouldn't
be enthusiastic about a picture by an artist one doesn't know anything
about."

A gentleman standing behind a screen near by moved away with a changed
expression and a deepening flush. Another person, an artist evidently,
now accosted the party, addressing them as Mr. and Miss Sandford. After
the usual civilities, he called their attention to the picture before
them.

"We were just admiring it," said Mr. Sandford.

"Do you like it, Mr. Easelmann?" asked the lady.

"Yes, exceedingly."

"Ah! the generosity of a brother artist," replied Miss Sandford.

"No; you do the picture injustice,--and me too, for that matter; for,"
he added, with a laugh, "I am not generally supposed to ruin my friends
by indiscriminate flattery. This young painter has wonderfully improved.
He went up into the country last season, found a picturesque little
village, and has made a portfolio of very striking sketches."

Miss Sandford began to appear interested.

"Quite pwomising," said the Adonis in the baggy coat, silent until now.

"Yes, he has blossomed all at once. He talks of going abroad."

"Bettah stay at home," said the young gentleman, languidly. "I've been
thwough all the gallewies. It's always the same stowy,--always the same
old humbugs to be admired,--always a doosid boah."

"One relief you must have had in the galleries," retorted Easelmann;
"your all-round shirt-collar wouldn't choke you quite so much when your
head was cocked back."

Adonis-in-bag adjusted his polished all-rounder with a delicately gloved
finger, and declared that the painter was "a jol-ly fel-low."

The gentleman who had blushed a moment before, when the picture was
criticized, was still within earshot; he now turned an angry glance upon
the last speaker, and was about to cross the room, when Mr. Easelmann
stopped him.

"With your permission, Miss Sandford," said the painter, nodding
meaningly towards the person retreating.

"Certainly," replied the lady.

"Mr. Greenleaf," said Easelmann, "I wish you to know some friends of
mine."

The gentleman so addressed turned and approached the party, and was
presented to "Miss Sandford, Mr. Sandford, Mrs. Sandford, and Mr.
Charles Sandford." Miss Sandford greeted him with her most fascinating
smile; her brother shook his hand warmly; the other lady, a widowed
sister-in-law, silently curtsied; while the younger brother inclined his
head slightly, his collar not allowing any sudden movement. In a moment
more the party were walking about the room, looking at the pictures.

When at length the Sandfords were about to leave the room, the elder
gentleman said to Mr. Greenleaf,--

"We should be happy to see you with our friend, Mr. Easelmann, at our
house. Come without ceremony."

Miss Sandford's eyes also said, "Come!" at least, so Greenleaf thought.

Mr. Charles Sandford, meanwhile, who was cultivating the sublime art of
indifference, the distinguishing feature and the ideal of his tribe,
only tapped his boot with his slender ratan, and then smoothed his silky
moustaches.

Greenleaf briefly expressed his thanks for the invitation, and, when the
family had gone, turned to his friend with an inquiring look.

"Famous, my boy!" said Easelmann. "Sandford knows something about
pictures, though rather stingy in patronage; and he is evidently
impressed. The beauty, Marcia, is not a judge, but she is a valuable
friend,--now that you are recognized. The widow is a most charming
person. Charles, a puppy, as every young man of fashion thinks he must
be for a year or two, but harmless and good-natured. The friendship of
the family will be of service to you."

"But Marcia, as you call her, was depreciating my picture not a minute
before you called me."

"Precisely, my dear fellow; but she didn't know who had painted it, and,
moreover, she hadn't seen you."

Greenleaf blushed again.

"Don't color up that way; save your vermilion for your canvas. You _are_
good-looking; and the beauty desires the homage of every handsome man,
especially if he is likely to be a lion."

"A lion! a painter of landscapes a lion! Besides, I am no gallant. I
never learned the art of carrying a lady's fan."

"I hope not; and for that very reason you are the proper subject for
her. Your simplicity and frankness are all the more charming to a woman
who needs new sensations. Probably she is tired of her _blase_ and wary
admirers just now. She will capture you, and I shall see a new and
obsequious slave."

Greenleaf attempted to speak, but could not get in a word.

"I felicitate you," continued Easelmann. "You will have a valuable
experience, at any rate. To-morrow or next day we will call upon them.
Good morning!"

Greenleaf returned his friend's farewell; then walking to a window, he
took out a miniature. It was the picture of a young and beautiful girl.
The calm eyes looked out upon him trustfully; the smile upon the mouth
had never seemed so lovely. He thought of the proud, dazzling coquette,
and then looked upon the image of the tender, earnest, truthful face
before him. As he looked, he smiled at his friend's prophecy.

"This is my talisman," he said; and he raised the picture to his lips.

       *       *       *       *       *

An evening or two later, as Easelmann was putting his brushes into
water, Greenleaf came into his studio. The cloud-compelling meerschaums
were produced, and they sat in high-backed chairs, watching the thin
wreaths of smoke as they curled upwards to the skylight. The sale of
pictures had taken place, and the prices, though not high enough to make
the fortunes of the artists, were yet reasonably remunerative; the
pictures were esteemed almost as highly, Easelmann thought, as the
decorative sketches in an omnibus.

"And did Sandford buy your picture, Greenleaf?"

"Yes, I believe so. In fact, I saw it in his drawing-room, yesterday."

"Certainly; how could I have forgotten it? I must have been thinking of
the animated picture there. What is paint, when one sees such a glowing,
glancing, fascinating, arch, lovely, tantalizing"--

"Don't! Don't pelt me with your parts of speech!"

"I was trying to select the right adjective."

"Well, you need not shower down a basketful, merely to pick out one."

"But confess, now, you are merely the least captivated?"

"Not the least."

"No little palpitations at the sound of her name? No short breath nor
upturned eyes? No vague longings nor 'billowy unrest'?"

"None."

"You slept well last night?"

"Perfectly."

"No dreams of a sea-green palace, with an Undine in wavy hair, and a big
brother with fan-coral plumes, who afterwards turned into a sea-dog?"

"No,--I cut the late suppers you tempt me with, and preserve my
digestion."

"A great mistake! One good dream in a nightmare will give you more
poetical ideas than you can paint in a month: I mean a reasonable
nightmare, that you can ride,--not one that rides you. The imagination
then seems to scintillate nothing but beautiful images."

"I don't care to become a red-hot iron for the sake of seeing the sparks
I might radiate."

"Prosaic again! Now sin and sorrow have their advantages; the law of
compensation, you see. Poets, according to Shelley, learn in suffering
what they teach in song. And if novelists were always scrupulous, what
do you think they would write? Only milk-and-water proprieties,
tamely-virtuous platitudes. Do you think Dickens never saw a taproom or
a thief's den?--or that Thackeray is unacquainted with the "Cave of
Harmony"? No,--all the piquancy of life comes from the slight _soupcon_
of wickedness wherewithal we season it."

"I like amazingly to have you wander off in this way; you are always
entertaining, whether your ethics are sound or not."

"Don't trouble yourself about ethics. You and I are artists; we want
effects, contrasts; we must have our enthusiasms, our raptures, and our
despair."

"You ride a theory well."

"Now, my dear Greenleaf, listen. Kindly I say it, but you are a trifle
too innocent, too placid,--in short, too youthful. To paint, you must be
intense; to be intense, you must feel; and--you see I come back on the
sweep of the circle--to feel, one must have incentives, objects."

"So, you will roast your own liver to make a _pate_."

"Better so than to have the Promethean vulture peck it out for you."

"Well, if I am as you say, what am I to do? I am docile, to-day."

"Fall in love."

"I have tried the experiment."

"It must have been with some insipid girl, not out of her teens, odorous
of bread and butter, innocent of wiles, and ignorant of her
capabilities and your own."

"Perhaps, but still I have been in love,--and am."

"Bless me! that was a sigh! The sleeping waters then did show a dimple.
Why, man, _you_ talk about love, with that smooth, shepherd's face of
yours, that contented air, that smoothly sonorous voice! Corydon and
Phyllis! You should be like a grand piano after Satter has thundered out
all its chords, tremulous with harmonies verging so near to discord that
pain would be mixed with pleasure in the divinest proportions."

Greenleaf clapped his hands. "Bravo, Easelmann! you have mistaken your
vocation; you should turn musical critic."

"The arts are all akin," he replied, calmly refilling his pipe.

"I think I can put together the various parts of your lecture for you,"
said Greenleaf. "You think I see Nature in her gentler moods, and
reproduce only her placid features. You think I have feeling, though
latent,--undeveloped. My nerves need a banging, just enough not to
wholly unstring them. For that pleasant experience, I am to fall in
love. The woman who has the nature to magnetize, overpower, transport me
is Miss Marcia Sandford. I am, therefore, to make myself as
uncomfortable as possible, in pursuit of a pleasure I know beforehand I
can never obtain. Then, from the rather prosaic level of Scumble, I
shall rise to the grand, gloomy, and melodramatic style of Salvator
Rosa. _Voila tout!_

"An admirable summary. You have listened well. But tell me now,--what do
_you_ think? Or do you wander like a little brook, without any will of
your own, between such banks as Fate may hem you in withal?"

"I will be frank with you. Until last season, I never had a serious,
definite purpose in life. I fell in love then with the most charming of
country-girls."

"I know," interrupted Easelmann, in a denser cloud than usual,--"a
village Lucy,--'a violet 'neath a mossy stone, fair as a star when only
one,'--you know the rest of it. She was fair because there _was_ only
one."

"Silence, Mephistopheles! it is my turn; let me finish my story. I never
told her my love"----

"'But let concealment'"----

"Attend to your pipe; it is going out. I did _look_, however. The
language of the eyes needs no translation. I often walked, sketched,
talked with the girl, and I felt that there was the completest sympathy
between us. I knew her feelings towards me, as well, I am persuaded, as
she knew mine. I gave her no pledge, no keepsake; I only managed, by an
artifice, to get her daguerreotype at a travelling saloon."

Easelmann laughed. "Let me see it, most modest of lovers!"

"You sha'n't. Your evil eye shall not fall upon it After I came to
Boston, I took a room and began working up my sketches"----

"Where I found you brushing away for dear life."

"I meant to earn enough to go abroad, if it were only for one look at
the great pictures of which I have so often dreamed. Then I meant to
come back"----

"To find your Lucy married to a schoolmaster, and with five sickly
children."

"No,--she is but seventeen; she will not marry till I see her."

"I admire your confidence, Greenleaf; it is an amiable weakness."

"After I had been here a month or two, I was filled with an unutterable
sense of uneasiness. Something was wrong, I felt assured. I daily kissed
the sweet lips"----

"Of a twenty-five-cent daguerreotype."

Greenleaf did not notice the interruption. "I thought the eyes looked
troubled; they even seemed to reproach me; yet the soul that beamed in
them was as tender as ever."

"_Diablerie!_ I believe you are a spiritualist."

"At last I could bear it no longer. I shut up my room and took the cars
for Innisfield."

"I remember; that was when you gave out that you had gone to see your
aunt."

"I found Alice seriously ill. I won't detain you further than to say
that I did not leave her until she was completely restored, until my
long cherished feelings had found utterance, and we were bound by ties
that nothing but death will divide."

"Really, you are growing sentimental. The waters verily are moved."

"That is because an angel has troubled them. You will mock, I know; but
it is nevertheless true, as I am told, that, for the week before I left
Boston, she was in a half-delirious state, and constantly called my
name."

"And you heard her and came. Sharp senses, and a good, dutiful boy!"

"My presentiment was strange, wasn't it?"

"Oh, don't try to coax me into believing all that! It's very pretty, and
would make a nice little romance for a magazine; but you and I have
passed the age of measles and chicken-pox. Now, to follow your example,
let me make a summary. You are in love, you say, which, for the sake of
argument, I will grant. You are engaged. But you are ambitious. You want
to go to Italy, and you hope to surpass Claude, as Turner has done--over
the left. Then you will return and marry the constant Alice, and live in
economical splendor, on a capital--let me see--of eighty-seven dollars
and odd cents, being the proceeds of a certain auction-sale. Promising,
isn't it?"

Greenleaf was silent,--his pipe out.

"Don't be gloomy," continued Easelmann, in a more sympathetic tone. "Let
us take a stroll round the Common. I never walk through the Mall at
sunset without getting a new hint of effect."

"I agree to the walk," said Greenleaf.

"Let us take Charbon along with us."

"He doesn't talk."

"That's what I like him for; he thinks the more."

"How is one to know it?"

"Just look at him! talk your best,--parade your poetry, your criticism,
your epigrams, your puns, if you have any, and then look at him! By
Jove! I don't want a better talker. I know it's _in_ him, and I don't
care whether he opens his mouth or not."


