CHAPTER XVI

MOTHER’S THIRD TALK--CHOOSING A CHUM


=Early Adolescence.=--You are now entering upon that period of a girl’s
life known as the adolescence period. You are now passing from girlhood
to womanhood. This period will be about seven to eight years long. The
first four years will be the most important years of your life. This is
true for many reasons. During this period you will be largely a girl and
partly a woman. The mind of the girl that was and the woman that you
will be, will occasionally cause you to have confusing experiences. You
will have many new and strange feelings, emotions, impulses. During
these years you will need the advice of those older than yourself.

=New social desires.=--One of the new experiences you will have, will be
the desire for social privileges. You will want a little girl chum. This
is perfectly natural. God has given you a social nature. You should
cultivate your social gifts. This will enlarge your happiness and
usefulness.

=Why a girl wants a chum.=--The reason small girls desire chums is because
the new sex life stimulates and awakens the social nature. This is a
period in a girl’s life when she is especially interested in things
romantic and sensational. Girls naturally choose their special chums,
and it is so easy for them to engage in conversation that they would not
want their mothers to hear. This sensational friendship might lead to
exaggeration, disobedience, and the secret meetings with other girls or
boys. It is not hard for a mother to see how her daughter might become
thoughtless, rash, indiscreet and be overtaken in some very great wrong.

=A girl needs two chums.=--In this period of life little girls need two
chums, her mother and a girl friend. She will often need her mother’s
advice in the choice of a girl chum.

=Choosing the right chum.=--If you wish to have one or more girl friends,
you should exercise great care in your choice. If you find a girl
inclined to exaggeration, to use by-words, to use improper language
while talking about her boy friends, to desire secret meetings with
boys, however attractive she may be, you should not be chummy with her.
To form intimate friendship with such girls would be a great risk. You
will find it safest always to be chaste, sincere and dignified in
conversation, even with a girl chum. This does not mean that you should
not have innocent fun.

=The wise girl.=--The wise girl will take her mother into her confidence
and ask for advice in the choice of her chum. Mamma will always
appreciate the opportunity to be to you a chum, a friend, a companion
and a mother.




CHAPTER XVII

MOTHER’S FOURTH TALK.--CONFIDENTIAL ADVICE


=Organs of sex can be abused.=--In other talks we learned the names,
position and functions of the different parts of the female form. In
this lesson we will study one of the abuses of the organs, and the
effects. In childhood, youth and middle and old age the organs of sex
may be abused in several ways. If girls knew their delicate nature and
their sacred mission, I am sure they would never abuse these organs. The
more delicate and sacred an organ is, the more serious will be the
penalty following its abuse. The abuse of these most delicate organs of
the body results in poor health, poor development, much suffering, and
should the victims marry, their children would be puny, sickly and
short-lived. The bearing of strong, healthy, beautiful, playful children
is woman’s highest mission. It is for this reason that girls should
understand the nature and functions of these organs and the results of
abusing them.

=The secret sin--how learned.=--The special abuse we shall consider at
this time is one that small girls are liable to learn or to have taught
them by companions or servants. This habit has several names. It is
called the “secret sin,” or “secret vice,” for the reason that every
organ of the body, faculty of the mind and power of the soul is abused
by it; “self-pollution,” because it is filthy; or “masturbation,” which
comes from two words meaning the abuse of the body with the hand. This
abuse consists in rubbing or handling the sexual organs so as to excite
them and bring on a feeling of pleasure. Usually this vice is taught a
girl by some companion. If a girl does not keep these parts clean, they
become irritated and she will be disposed to rub or scratch them. In
this way she would likely awaken a sense of pleasure and finally
discover the vice. It sometimes occurs, not often, that a small ligament
or membrane, called the frenum, is too short or broad, and this causes
irritation and leads a girl to discover the secret vice. If you should
find yourself inclined to rub those parts often, you should mention it
to mamma. A girl may, by pressing this part of her body against some
object, or by sitting with her feet underneath her, with the sole or
heel of a shoe pressing or rubbing against these organs, discover this
vice.

=What you should not do.=--From these illustrations you will learn that
you should never handle or rub these organs except to wash and keep them
clean. When you study these organs with a view to understanding them,
or when you think of their sacred functions, these mental relations to
these organs never do them harm. But when you entertain thoughts about
them that you would not be willing to express to your mother; when you
read an immoral book, look upon an obscene picture or engage in improper
conversation about these organs, then these mental states cause the
blood to rush to these organs and sex consciousness and passion follow.
A girl cannot keep from the secret sin if she permits her mind to engage
in wrong thinking.

=The moral effect of the sin.=--Perhaps the first effect of this sin is to
be seen in the moral nature. The expression in the girl’s face often
indicates that she is conscious of wrong doing. She will likely become
irritable, peevish and disobedient. She will not take the interest in
prayer, the Bible, good books and the church she once did.

=The mental effects.=--The constant excitement of the organs of sex leads
to many forms of nerve trouble. The mind becomes sluggish and stupid.
Memory fails and sometimes the poor victim becomes insane. This habit
leads to a gloomy, despondent, discouraged state of mind. One does not
longer enjoy life. Because of this mental state many commit suicide.

=The physical effects.=--Perhaps the most noticeable effects of this vice
are to be found in the physical system. The eyes become hollow and
lusterless, complexion sallow, cheeks haggard, lips and ears pale,
muscles soft and flabby, the breasts shrink, the bodily form is stooped
and weak. Every time the life-giving blood is caused by this sin to rush
in undue quantities to these organs, it returns to the heart with less
of life and more impurities. Such girls will grow up to be weak, puny
women and will suffer from dyspepsia, consumption and nervous troubles.
If you have learned to misuse these organs, you must determine that you
will never do it again. By keeping the mind pure and never abusing these
organs you will develop a healthy and perfect body, a bright and
cheerful mind, a charming, winning personality, and live to be useful
and happy.

=Two letters from young women.=--From a large number of letters received
from young ladies who have heard the author’s lectures or read his
books, the following letters are added to this chapter. A big-hearted
man in Canada gave 500 copies of Perfect Manhood to that number of young
men. Fortunately, a young woman who was greatly in need of help, read
one of these books. These letters tell the sad story of thousands, whom
the author is anxious to help.

=First Letter.=--


----M--, CANADA.

_Dear Professor:_

     You will doubtless be surprised at receiving a letter from a young
     lady of twenty-seven, on a very delicate subject. Recently, I read
     one of your books, “Perfect Manhood,” presented by a friend to my
     brother. It was a great revelation to me. I wish I could have read
     it when I was twelve. When eleven, I was taught the secret sin by
     older girls. I continued the habit until I read your book. I never
     received one word of instruction about this vice from parents,
     teachers, or physicians. When twenty, I became an invalid. For one
     year I was placed in a hospital and treated by eminent specialists.
     I improved much. When I was twenty-four, my mind failed me and I
     was placed in a private institution. I am now very gloomy,
     despondent and I constantly dread a return of mental trouble.

     I will greatly appreciate the favor if you can give me some
     additional advice and help. Please help me if you can.

Most sincerely,

----



Some four times a year, for three years, I received a letter from her.
For eighteen months her letters indicated a hard-fought battle, small
victories and a strong determination to win out. Each succeeding letter
indicated greater victories. In her last letter she assured me that her
womanhood had been restored and that she was entertaining a marriage
proposition from a worthy and very superior young man.


_Professor T. W. Shannon, City._

     DEAR SIR: I heard your lecture this afternoon and am now going to
     write for help and advice. First, I shall tell you the story.

     Like most children, I began quite early in childhood to ask about
     my origin, and received answers that were falsehoods. I do not
     remember just what I was first told, but the replies given did not
     satisfy my enquiring mind. I eagerly listened to the vulgar stories
     of servants and schoolmates and before I was twelve years old my
     mind was taken up with lascivious thoughts and vulgar expressions.

     Two months before I was thirteen, I was taught how to practice that
     awful habit, the secret sin. I became a slave to it. I could not
     stop. In the spring after I was fourteen I was converted. Again I
     tried, oh so hard, to quit this habit, but I could not. My mind was
     filled with those ugly words and I could not expel them. This sin
     is still troubling me and I can’t get rid of it. Oh, I would give
     anything if I could.

     Now, I am away from home attending college, and I know that my
     parents (especially mamma) are worried. They fear that I, being
     young, and, as they think, ignorant of all these things, may bring
     disgrace to them.

     Last winter a friend gave me a book entitled, “Letters of Love to
     Our Girls,” but mamma and papa hid it. I asked them why they did
     so. I received the answer, “It is a book that no married person
     should read, let alone a young girl.”

     I have a little sister nine years old. For four years she has often
     asked questions about the origin of animals. When a colt is born or
     a calf, or kitten, or pigs, she always asks the same question.
     “Where did Dolly find her colt? Where did Lily find her calf?”
     etc., and they always put her off with some falsehood.

     Please advise me how I may be able to rid myself of this habit.

Yours in earnest,

----



=I gave her the following advice:=


“_Dear Friend:_

     Your letter received. In reply, I am glad you had the courage to
     ask for advice and to state facts so frankly.

     Your trouble began with your false training in childhood. If you
     had been taught the sacredness of the sexual organs and their
     functions, your mind would have been safeguarded against this vice.
     Instead, you received the very opposite information. Half-truths,
     clothed in vulgar language, received from the ignorant and vicious,
     lead naturally to a morbid interest in matters of sex and
     consequently to a habit of lascivious thinking. Impure thinking
     causes the blood to rush to the sexual organs. The inflamed and
     gorged condition, due to this rush of blood to these parts, results
     in frequent experiences of sex consciousness and passion. This
     leads very naturally to the handling of the organs of sex.

     That you may clearly understand the relation of the mind to the
     secret sin, and what you must do if you would break from it, I will
     use the following illustration: Suppose that you have been at hard
     work for five or six hours and have had nothing to eat during the
     time. You now come into the presence of a well-spread table, or a
     basket full of luscious fruit. You must wait ten minutes for others
     to take their places at the table. You become quite conscious of
     hunger; you remember how the kinds of food taste, how you have
     enjoyed them before, and you are eager to begin eating. These
     mental states cause the blood to rush to the salivary glands. They
     are stimulated to unusual activity. Under these conditions the
     saliva flows rapidly. Just at this moment, something unusual
     occurs. The blinding flash of lightning followed quickly by a
     deafening peal of thunder. Looking out you see some limbs falling
     from a nearby tree. You run to the window and for ten minutes your
     attention is wholly called from the thought of food. Now the saliva
     is flowing just fast enough to keep your mouth pleasantly moist.
     Excitement over, you again become interested in the food, hunger
     returns, you begin once more to entertain pleasant thoughts about
     the food, blood rushes to the mouth and the salivary glands are
     stimulated and the saliva is formed many times faster than when
     your mind was wholly engaged in the exciting scene a few minutes
     before.

     When you allow your mind to entertain impure thoughts and words,
     the blood rushes to the genital organs and they become inflamed,
     resulting in passion. Now your victory over this habit will come
     just as fast as you can learn to get control of your mind in these
     matters. This is not done in a day. For five or six years you have
     allowed your mind to entertain wrong thoughts. In this way you have
     brought about a condition in which the slightest suggestions
     relating to sex, any pressure or friction of clothing or irritation
     of parts causes the blood to rush to these organs apparently
     without your willing it. This will gradually cease as you begin to
     get control of your mind.

     There are several things that will help you. When you are tempted
     to entertain impure thoughts or to practice the sin, immediately
     engage your mind in something else. Pray, read the Bible or some
     good book, write a letter to mamma or some friend, perform some
     duty or take a walk, anything that will take your mind from the
     temptation. Refuse to handle these organs except to keep them
     clean. Bathing the parts in cold water tends to allay passion. If
     you have in your possession any suggestive pictures or questionable
     literature, destroy them. Cultivate the habit of looking upon every
     young man as you would upon your brother or father.

     One of the most common effects of this habit is discouragement,
     gloominess, despondency. These mental states must be overcome.
     Constantly a firm “I will break from this habit,” “I will have only
     pure thoughts.” Don’t chide and condemn yourself any more because
     of the errors of the past. God has mercifully and lovingly forgiven
     them and graciously offers to give you strength and grace with
     which to win the battles of the future. Hopefully, cheerfully and
     bravely face the future. You may occasionally meet with defeat. If
     so, try again. No lasting defeat can come to one who keeps on
     trying. Victory will crown the persistent effort.

     We often help ourselves by helping others. You are only one of the
     many girls who have had a similar experience. The battles you are
     fighting in your life will enable you to be a blessing to other
     weak ones.

     If I can be of any help to you in the future, write me. If this
     letter helps you in any small degree to win a victory, pass the
     blessing on to another.

“Very sincerely,
 “T. W. S.”






