CHAPTER XXXVII

PROSTITUTION


We have talked over many of the problems of boys and young men. You are
now sixteen and new problems are constantly coming up in your life for
solution. I would like to speak with you on this occasion about the very
vital problem of illicit intercourse with women. By this expression is
meant all sexual intercourse with women outside of holy wedlock.

=Men are as fallen as women.=--When this sin occurs among single people it
is fornication, when among the married, it is adultery. Whether this
occurs among the single or the married, it is prostitution. In this sin
there is no difference, in character, between the male and the female,
the married and the single prostitute; in either case, the priceless gem
of virtue has been forfeited.

=Men think less of their virtue than women.=--Partly due to a bad heredity
and largely due to a false training and the existence of a double
standard of morals, boys and men are more willing to sacrifice their
virtue than are girls and women. There are a few degenerate girls and
some who have been reared in immoral homes who willingly sacrifice
their virtue. But these represent only a very small part of the girls
who annually fall. Most of those who are known as fallen women were
induced to fall by designing men. Many methods are used to accomplish
the fall of girls. Lady clerks, stenographers and servants in homes and
hotels receive such meager wages that they are often unable to meet
their necessary expenses. Men have taken advantage of their financial
need and by skillful advances, artful entreaties and by offering to
supplement their income for special favors, they succeed in ruining many
girls.

=Few women go wrong from choice.=--Some men use the dance, the theater,
alcoholic drinks, certain stimulating drugs, buggy rides and late hours
at night as means of accomplishing their fiendish purposes. Victory once
won, clandestine relations are continued until the girl finds that she
is to be a mother, or her guilt becoming known, being often forced from
her own home, ostracized by society, shunned by professing Christians,
she now becomes an outcast. Few girls ever go wrong from choice. Great
as her sin is, it is small compared with his. There is not greater sin
and crime than his. Possessed of one spark of manhood, he would marry
the girl; instead, he is more likely to boast of his achievement.

=No less a sin because the fallen woman accepts a “price.”=--Young men
often ask, “What harm can there be in seeking sexual gratification with
a woman who voluntarily gives her consent for a price?” There are many
reasons why this is wrong. The Bible condemns it as a very great sin.
Civil law condemns adultery as a crime. By both civil and divine law it
is considered as great a crime as stealing, murder or drunkenness. If
men controlled their passions, there would be no fallen women. If men
would not visit them, they would reform or become Christians. Thus men
are not only largely responsible for the fall of women, but they are
largely responsible for their remaining fallen.

=Man’s appreciation of pure women destroyed.=--Constant association with
fallen women degrades or destroys a man’s conception and appreciation of
pure womanhood. He may become so degraded as to believe that all women
have their “price.” Such a man could not appreciate a pure sister,
daughter, wife or mother. Such men become sensualists and should they
marry, their excesses would wreck the health and happiness of their
wives, and their children would receive an unfortunate heredity.

=A great physical risk.=--For physical reasons a visit to the fallen women
would be a hazardous risk. These women are nearly always diseased. In
this way young men become diseased and they infect their wives and
transmit serious troubles to their children.

=Self-respect lost.=--From a moral point of view a visit to the strange
woman is wholly inadmissible. You could never wholly recover your
self-respect. A young man has no moral right to demand purity of his
sweetheart at the marriage altar unless he can offer her a pure life.

=Danger of becoming an illegitimate father.=--Finally, through illicit
intercourse a young man is constantly in danger of becoming a father. An
illegitimate father never loves, feeds, clothes, shelters, educates and
trains his own child. Every instinct of nature demands this much of him.
The child is blood of his blood, bone of his bone, life of his life; it
is as truly his child as if it had been conceived in wedlock. Sin that
will so degrade a man as to leave him without sense of honor, justice
and right in his relation to his own child certainly has no equal in the
catalogue of crime.

=The pure man is worthy of a pure wife.=--The young man who keeps himself
as pure as a virgin will be worthy of one of God’s queenly women, he
will be capable of making her a kingly husband, and, conscious of their
dignity, purity and virility, he and his wife will become the happy
parents of a brood of fair girls and lusty boys.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

VENEREAL DISEASES


=The bad cold “fallacy.”=--Most boys and young men are disposed to think
of venereal diseases as a joke. They often compare them with a bad cold.
They are often heard to boast of having had one or more attacks from
which they easily recovered. This is due to the fact that these young
men have no just conception of the grave consequence of these diseases.

=Two principal diseases.=--There are two principal kinds of venereal
disease: gonorrhea, in street vernacular known as clap, and syphilis,
popularly called pox. These diseases are due to specific disease germs
and require a specific treatment. These diseases originate as a result
of illicit intercourse, never originating in the married life where
husband and wife are true to each other. Sometimes a husband or wife may
be infected by accidentally coming in contact with the disease germs by
kissing an infected person, the use of public towels, closets, etc.

=As old as prostitution.=--Venereal diseases are as old as prostitution.
These diseases evidently originated as a result of prostitution.
Venereal diseases are known to have been in existence more than 2000
years B.C. All venereal diseases were thought to be one until 1838.

These diseases may be acquired by the use of a closet, towel or bath tub
previously used by an infected person.

=The immoral woman dangerous.=--All immoral women, whether they live in
public houses or in private homes, are diseased some of the time, and
some of them are diseased all the time. No young man can know, not even
a doctor, when a man may or may not be infected by having sexual
relations with either class of these women.

Facts show that eighty per cent. of the young men of this country become
infected with gonorrhea between the ages of eighteen and thirty. This
would indicate that only a few who visit the immoral woman escape,
because at least ten per cent. of our young men never visit fallen
women. The ten per cent. of our young men is increasing.

=Immediate medical attention.=--Should a young man be so thoughtless and
unfortunate as to visit one of these women and become infected, he
should go at once to a competent physician and follow his advice and
take his treatment. He should not postpone treatment one hour, send off
for some remedy he sees advertised, or go and get some patent remedy to
be obtained at a drug store. Money, time, health and even life itself
are too valuable to be hazarded in this way. If this advice were always
followed the diseases could in many cases be cured in their first stage
and most of the after evil results be prevented.

=Discovery of the disease germs.=--In 1879, Dr. Neisser discovered the
specific germ of gonorrhea, called the Neisser gonococcus. In 1895, two
German doctors discovered the germ of syphilis, spirochetæ pallida.

=Gonorrhea.=--The disease appears from three to five days after exposure,
and is heralded by the swelling of the urethra, and an itching, burning
sensation during urination. These symptoms continue for a week or ten
days when a thick greenish yellow discharge begins. Under careful and
prompt treatment the disease may be permanently cured. Even under prompt
and skillful treatment some cases have a persistent tendency to run into
a chronic condition.

Complicated chronic conditions often occur from poor treatment or
neglect. When the disease reaches a chronic form it is likely to
continue for years. Some of the complications of this disease are:
chronic inflammation of the mucous membrane of the urethra, accompanied
by a constant discharge.

=Stricture.=--A tightening or narrowing of the urethra at some point. This
is called stricture. Urinating becomes difficult and painful. A lengthy
and difficult treatment may be required and sometimes a painful
operation.

=Inflammation of the prostate.=--If the prostate gland becomes the seat of
this disease, it will cause great inconvenience and may result in
painful treatment, surgical operation, loss of health and mental vigor,
with possible loss of the power to become a father.

=If both testes become inflamed=, the victim often becomes sterile. A
dangerous and painful operation is sometimes required. He will never be
what he once was, or might have been.

=Gonorrheal rheumatism.=--If the gonorrheal germs get into the blood and
find their way to the joints of the bones, the result is gonorrheal
rheumatism. This is one of the most painful and difficult diseases to be
cured known to medical science.

=Ophthalmia.=--Should some of this poisonous pus be transferred to his eye
or the eye of another, it would cause gonorrheal ophthalmia, a disease
of the eye that often results in blindness in a few hours or unsightly
sore eyes for life.

=Wife and children the greatest sufferers.=--If the guilty young man were
the only one to suffer, it would not be so serious. His future wife and
children may be the greatest sufferers. It is now known that these
disease germs may remain for years in a young man’s body in an inactive
and weakened state; and that too, after he thinks he is perfectly cured.
In this condition he is likely to infect his wife. These weakened germs
will now take on new life in her body and produce gonorrheal conditions.
She will mistake the disease for leucorrhea and treat herself for a
time. During this loss of time, various complications have developed.
One or more of her sexual organs are now inflamed and ulcerated. One
organ after another may have to be removed by a surgical operation to
save her life. Tumors, nodules, and ulcers must be removed by the knife.
The doctor feels that it is best to leave the husband, as well as the
wife, to believe that the whole trouble is due to the weakness of woman.
Perhaps the wife dies under the knife and leaves a husband and children.
In preaching her funeral, the pastor tries to console the bereaved by
laboring to reconcile Providence and the unfortunate death.

=Blind children.=--If she becomes a mother before these operations are
made, as the child passes from her body it gets some of the gonorrheal
germs in its little eyes and in a few hours or days it is totally blind
from gonorrheal ophthalmia. Or, if the doctor suspects this trouble and
puts a drop or two of a solution of silver nitrate in the eyes of the
new-born baby, no serious trouble may come to the child because of the
father’s sin. An eminent physician in Germany says that there are 30,000
blind people in Germany because of gonorrheal ophthalmia. No statistics
have been kept in this country, but reliable physicians claim that there
must be as many as 15,000. What right has a young man to engage in a sin
that will cause his wife and child a lifetime of suffering?

=Syphilis= is by no means as common as gonorrhea, there being only eight
to eighteen per cent. of the young men who contract this disease as
compared with eighty per cent. who contract the other. The germs that
produce gonorrhea have only to come in contact with the mucous membrane
for infection to follow.

The germs of syphilis have to reach the blood by means of a sore or
small crack in the skin or mucous membrane.

=Three stages of syphilis.=--Syphilis develops by three stages, known as
primary, secondary and tertiary syphilis. If treated promptly and
properly during the first stage, it may be cured without great injury
following, or danger of return. In other stages a much longer treatment
will be required, with many possible complications and dangers. Before
the doctor can check the disease it may attack the bones, muscles,
arteries and the internal organs. This disease causes 90 per cent. of
locomotor ataxia, much of apoplexy, paralysis and sudden deaths long
after the disease is supposed to be cured. It is a prolific cause of
insanity. The descendants of a syphilitic father or mother are often
still-born, die prematurely, or become insane later in life. Syphilis
shortens the lives of its victims one-third.

=An innocent person can be infected.=--By using or handling something used
by a diseased person an innocent person may be infected. A person
infected with one of these diseases is absolutely unclean and dangerous.
There are better reasons for putting such a man in the pesthouse than
one who has smallpox.

=A certificate of good health should be required.=--It will not be long
before a young man will have to present a certificate of freedom from
these diseases, obtained from a reputable physician, before he is
granted a license to be married.

=An example.=--The President of a college Y. M. C. A. recently said to me,
“Five years ago I was in poor health due to a long and excessive
practice of the secret vice. I went to a doctor for advice. He suggested
that I should occasionally visit the prostitute. I made but one visit.
That night I caught syphilis. For five years I have been under the
treatment of doctors. I have been to Hot Springs. Doctors tell me that I
cannot be cured under two more years of this treatment. Even then, the
risk of its return will be so great they say, that I should never think
of marrying.” Then he added, “That is what one visit has cost me. Three
times in these five years I have planned to commit suicide.”

=Another example.=--Only a few days since a young man called at my office
for an interview. His story was, “Three years ago I was induced by other
boys to visit the ‘Red Light’ district of this city. On my second visit
I was infected with gonorrhea. My income was small. The doctor’s fees
were beyond my reach. I tried patent remedies sold in drug stores
guaranteed to cure the worst case in three to five days. Failing to cure
myself in this way I was compelled to go to doctors. At times I seem to
be cured. Then I make another visit and the old trouble comes back on
me. This has been repeated three times in two years. I am now in a worse
shape than I have ever been.” He then asked my advice. I told him to
select the most reliable doctor he could find, and regardless of price
take his treatment until he was pronounced cured. Then twice a year for
several years, to have a State Health Board to make a microscopic
examination. If they find no gonococci for two or three years, he might
consider himself well. But marriage will then be a risky proposition.

These two recent cases are selected from a thousand experiences related
to me in the last five years, many of which were far worse than these.
The reader can judge for himself whether or not these diseases are no
worse than a “bad cold.”




