CHAPTER XLII

PHYSICAL CULTURE

     The cuts illustrating the first eleven exercises with descriptive
     matter, are taken from “Fasting, Hydropathy and Exercise” by
     permission of the authors Bernarr MacFadden and Felix Oswald, A.M.,
     M.D.--_The Author._


=The importance of physical culture.=--This chapter is added for the
reason that perfect health, perfect development, perfect virility,
perfect manhood is not possible without physical culture. Physical
culture includes bathing and exercise. The healthful functioning, of the
entire digestive system, the kidneys, the liver, the lungs, the heart
and the brain, are related, vitally, to physical culture. Likewise the
retention, absorption, distribution and assimilation of the creative
life are also vitally related. Bathing and massaging the body and
physical exercise have a remedial effect upon almost all physical
disorders.

=The functions of the skin.=-Stop the functions of the skin three minutes
and death follows. The skin has two functions, one is to eliminate
poisons from the body and the other is to conserve and regulate the heat
of the body.

=The wild tribes.=--In prehistoric times the people wore little or no
clothing. In some of the coldest countries wild tribes go almost naked.
Under these conditions consumption and many modern diseases are unknown.
Clothing is not needed by these people. The skin is able to conserve
sufficient heat.

=Modern customs.=--The wearing of clothing and the neglect of physical
culture has to a large extent destroyed the natural functions of the
skin. The function of conserving heat is nearly lost by the skin. When
the skin is not kept clean and healthy it loses, to some degree, its
power to eliminate poisons. When this occurs the kidneys are forced to
do overwork. This results in kidney disease.

=Getting back to nature.=--For people to go naked again is out of the
question. Modest, pure-minded, civilized people must wear clothing.
Clothing conceals defects, improves bodily appearance and protects the
body from heat and cold. Getting back to nature simply means that we are
to restore to the skin its natural functions of conserving heat and
eliminating poisons.

=The air bath.=--In athletic exercise the skin is incidentally exposed to
the air and sunshine. This largely accounts for the benefits derived.

On arising each morning fifteen minutes should be devoted to restoring
and maintaining the natural functions of the skin. This is done by
throwing off the clothing in a fairly cool room, exposing the skin to
the air. The skin should be rubbed with the hands or a fairly rough
towel until it is stimulated into warmth. It is well to vary the
rubbing, using the hands part of the time and the towel part of the
time. After the skin has become warm, one can take fifteen minutes of
physical exercise, attend to shaving and other features of his toilet,
remaining, meantime, entirely or partly naked, to a very great
advantage. The open air bath can take place of much of the cold and hot
water bathing. Water baths should be taken twice or three times a week
and those should be followed by ten or fifteen minutes’ rubbing the body
and exercising, in the open air.

=Colds prevented.=--A person who is able to warm himself by friction
during an air bath, in a fairly cool room, renders himself practically
immune to colds. Colds cause catarrh, tonsilitis, bronchitis, pneumonia,
pleurisy. Pneumonia causes consumption. If one can prevent taking cold
he will escape many of the ills of life. In addition to this, when the
skin performs its functions properly and the internal organs are doing
the same, the person is practically immune to acute contagious diseases.

The air bath should be taken in a room that is properly ventilated. If
the friction is performed vigorously, with the mouth closed, this will
enforce deep, nasal breathing. This will prevent catarrh, enlarged
tonsils and adenoids, and, if continued long enough, will cure mild
cases and will assist in the cure of all cases.

=Rules for physical exercise.=--Physical exercise should not be taken for
one hour after a hearty meal. The best time for exercising is
immediately after arising each morning.

If one desires to take a cold or warm bath, he should take the air bath
first. Following the water bath, he should rub his body with his hands
and a Turkish towel until a warm glow is felt all over his body. Then
should follow his physical exercise. The lightest dress compatible with
decency and comfort should be worn during the exercises described in
this chapter. He should not continue any exercise to the point of
excessive fatigue. Breathing pauses will frequently be required at
first, but these intervals will be less frequent as the lungs develop.

=Value of physical exercise.=--The beneficial effects of physical culture
cannot be overestimated. It strengthens and develops the muscles. It
restores the natural functions of the skin. By exercising the muscles of
the external organs of the body, exercise is given to the muscles of the
internal organs. By restoring the natural functions of the skin and
giving normal exercise to the internal organs we correct the functional
disorders of the digestive system, the heart and the lungs, and restore
to them their natural functions.

The good effects will be noticed, in some ways, from the start; in other
ways several months may be required.

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 1.--Reclining on right side and raising left
arm, with dumb-bell in hand and elbow rigid from hips to high over head.
Same exercise with right arm while reclining on left side. Inhale deep
breath as arm goes back.]

=Exercise No. 1.=--Reclining on right side raising left arm, with
dumb-bell in hand and elbow rigid from hips to high over head. Repeat
this some ten or fifteen times. Now turn on the right side and repeat
this exercise with the left hand. Inhale a deep breath each time as the
arm goes back. This exercise helps to expand the chest walls and to
develop certain muscles of the arms and side. It is especially valuable
for one who feels debilitated, and is of value in several phases of
heart disease.

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 2.--Reclining on right side and raising left
leg as high as possible and the same exercise taken with right leg while
reclining on left side.]

=Exercise No. 2.=--Reclining on right side, raising left leg as high as
possible. Repeat this a number of times. Now recline on the left side
and raise the right leg as high as possible. This exercise develops the
muscles of the legs, hips and abdomen. It strengthens the digestive
system and will improve an injured spine.

=Exercise No. 3.=--Recline on back and cross right leg over left as far as
possible, and vice versa. This movement brings into activity some
muscles of the legs often neglected.

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 3.--Reclining on back and crossing right leg
over left, as far as possible, and vice versa.]

=Exercise No. 4.=--Reclining on back, with dumb-bells, or any object
weighing one to two pounds in hands, at sides, raising same with elbows
rigid, and cross arms over chest. This brings into activity several
muscles of the arms, shoulders and walls of the body, stimulating the
action of the lungs. This is especially valuable where one is unable to
leave his bed.

=Exercise No. 5.=--Reclining, bring right leg up, clasp hands over knee
and pull leg up as far as possible and vice versa. This exercise brings
into play a large variety of muscles, especially the muscles of the
abdomen. It is a constipation cure. With a little effort one can
voluntarily exercise the muscles of the

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 4.--Reclining on back, with dumb-bells in
hands at side, raising same with elbows rigid, and crossing arms over
chest.]

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 5.--Reclining, bring right leg up, clasping
hands over knee and pulling leg up as far as possible.]

abdomen in such a way as to cause the intestines to move in a circle,
first to the right, then to the left, finally drawing them up and down.
This combined with the foregoing exercise, if practiced daily, will
relieve and cure many cases of constipation.

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 6.--Reclining and bringing arms from far
back straight upward with elbows rigid, to straight over chest, drawing
deep breath and retaining same during movement.]

=Exercise No. 6.=--Reclining with dumb-bells in hands, bring arms from far
back straight upward with elbows rigid, to straight over chest; draw a
deep breath and retain same during the movement. This is, in part, the
exercise used in reviving half-drowned persons. In addition to the fine
muscular movements, it aids in deep breathing and is a fine lung tonic.

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 7.--Reclining and raising left leg as high
as possible, with knee straight, and repeat same with right leg.]

=Exercise No. 7.=--Reclining on back, raise left leg as high as possible,
with knee straight. Repeat several times: also, repeat this exercise
with right leg. This is a modification of Number 2. A splendid exercise
for the hips and has a wholesome effect upon the spine.

=Exercise No. 8.=--Stand, with hands on hips, sway the body in a circular
manner, to the right, left, backward and forward. It is a splendid
exercise for stimulating the intestines.

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 8.--Standing, hands on hips, circulatory
body exercise, swaying body in circular manner right, left, back and
forward.]

=Exercise No. 9.=--Reclining on back, with both hands, grasp some object
back of head; now, holding the knees rigid, raise both feet to a
vertical position. This exercise is rather severe at first. It should
be repeated several times. It exercises the abdominal and hip muscles.

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 9.--Reclining, hands grasping something back
of head, raising both feet to vertical position.]

=Exercise No. 10.=--Reclining on stomach, raise left leg, with knee
straight, as high as possible; same with right. Repeat these exercises
several times. This exercise is tiring at first. It limbers up the
joints. For a person who has been accustomed to inactivity, as in the
case of bedridden invalids, this is a valuable exercise.

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 10.--Reclining on stomach, raising left leg
with knee straight, as high as possible; same with right.]

=Exercise No. 11.=--Recline on stomach, grasp dumb-bells in both hands,
raise arms from hanging

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 11.--Reclining on stomach, grasping
dumb-bells in hand, raising arms from hanging position to position
illustrated.]

[Illustration: EXERCISE NO. 12.--Reclining arms hanging, raising bells
upward and outward from the body, level with shoulders. Reversing that
motion by bringing bells from position illustrated in No. 11 to position
on level with the shoulders, as illustrated in No. 12.]

position to position illustrated. This exercise will strengthen the
muscles of the neck and shoulders. If one has sustained some injury that
threatens tetanus, or “lock-jaw” complications, the application of this
exercise would often break the spell. “Keep moving your arms, keep
moving your arms,” was Dr. Benjamin Rush’s constant advice to persons
threatened with tetanic complications.

=Exercise No. 12.=--Reclining with arm hanging, raise dumb-bells upward
and outward from the body, level with shoulders. Reverse this motion by
bringing bells, from position illustrated in No. 11, to position on
level with shoulders, as illustrated in this exercise. In value and
results this exercise is very much like No. 11. Consumptive microbes
will have a poor chance to effect a lodging in a body getting the
benefit of these exercises.




SEVENTH DIVISION

HEREDITY, OR VITAL FACTS FOR THE MARRIED AND MARRIAGEABLE




