CHAPTER XXXIII

BEAUTY OF BATHING

(By Annette Kellermann.--By Permission of _Physical Culture_.)

     In presenting to our readers the opinions and advice of Annette
     Kellermann, we publish the words of one who knows whereof she
     speaks. Miss Kellermann is celebrated for the beauty of her face
     and form as she is for her remarkable proficiency as an athlete.
     More than that, she is one who has fought her way from indifferent
     health to strength and beauty of the highest order, and her
     discussion of this subject should prove very readable.--_The
     Editor._


=Architects of beauty.=--Nearly everyone looks upon beauty as an
extraneous “something.” Here is a quality which is in the greatest
measure a physical endowment, yet the average woman casting about for
means of cultivating it never for one moment seeks for its acquirement
through physical means. All sorts of devices and medicines and
complicated and costly methods are believed in and followed, as though
beauty were bestowed in about the same fashion that a poster is slapped
on a billboard. Gazing at the stars, she sees not what lies to her hand.
For beauty, poetical though its conception may be, has its roots in
prosaic ground. The same factors which build up flesh and blood, bones,
muscle and nerves of the body are the architects of beauty. Beauty is of
the body and not apart from it, and its builders are those processes
which maintain bodily health: breathing, eating, drinking, exercise,
bathing and sleep. Its acquisition does not depend on chance, but its
development lies within the control of each one of us.

[Illustration: A complete air bath should be given the body several
times each week, even though early rising is thus made necessary.]

In the following pages I shall try to tell clearly of the simple,
easily-to-be-observed methods that can make each woman as beautiful as
it is possible for her to be. When I think of how these simple, sensible
and effective methods are neglected, through ignorance or
thoughtlessness, and the torturous treatment so many members of my sex
undergo: the face-skinning; the incasing in unbearable rubber
undergarments to reduce flesh and the countless other “treatments” of
which they are willing dupes, I marvel and am almost ashamed of the
amazing credulity shown by my sex.

[Illustration: Frequent and vigorous massage of the face and upper parts
of the body is a great aid to beauty building.]

=Beauty building through the bath.=--I shall discuss “Beauty Building
Through the Bath” because the various forms of baths properly applied
can improve the appearance to a remarkable degree and I shall therefore
write at some length on this particular measure as a means of attaining
or enhancing the physical charms. ’Tis a trite phrase that cleanliness
is the handmaiden of beauty, and the first office of the bath is to
clean. The skin is one of the organs by means of which the body is
relieved of waste. Its depurating action is unremitting and thus there
is constantly exuded on the surface waste matters. Hence, unless
frequently bathed, the skin suffers in appearance, firstly, by reason of
its uncleanliness; secondly, becoming clogged up, the wastes are not
readily eliminated from the blood, which becomes impure. In consequence,
the whole system suffers, the skin taking on a yellowish tinge, and the
complexion becoming dull and sallow and coarsened by enlarged pores.

=Cold and warm baths.=--The warm bath is taken daily by many people, who
believe that only thus can perfect cleanliness be insured. There are
opposing views as to whether the daily bath should be warm or cold; but
one should not be confused by the conflicting opinions, the reason
therefor being that differences between individuals necessitate varying
practices, some being benefited by the cold, some by the daily warm
bath, etc. When the daily bath is a cold one, a hot bath must be taken
twice or thrice weekly to cleanse the body, for cold water has no
cleansing power.

The cold bath is a stimulant or tonic. The effect of the cold bath is to
close the pores of the skin, and the blood is driven into the body. But
on emerging from the bath, a “reaction” sets in: the blood rushing to
the skin in quantities, reddening it and making it glow with warmth. The
body should be quickly and vigorously rubbed dry with a Turkish towel,
as it increases the good effects of the reaction. The cold bath should
be a very brief one, and the warm bath, when taken daily, should not
exceed ten minutes in duration. The latter should be followed by a cold
sponge bath.

If, because one is lacking in vitality or from other causes the reaction
does not follow, the effect of the cold bath is to depress instead of
benefit. The bath should never be taken if one is cold, one should be
thoroughly warm before it, and it is best taken after exercise for this
reason.

=It is easy to inure oneself to the cold bath.=--Begin taking daily baths
at a comfortable temperature, gradually lowering it from week to week,
till you can take it cold or almost as cold as it comes from the faucet.
Or one can accustom one’s self to them by taking a cold sponge bath in
the beginning, standing on a cloth or towel wrung out in hot water, or
by standing in a few inches of hot water, if this is required, to lessen
the shock. But if despite these precautions you do not recuperate
properly from the cold bath, it is not for you, for you are not
benefited by it. Both hot and cold bathing accelerate the circulation,
the first relaxing the tissues, the latter giving them tone and
firmness.

=The friction bath.=--But, perhaps, one of the most valuable of baths for
the skin, one that never fails to improve its texture and color is a
bath that does not require water--the friction bath. It stimulates the
circulation to the skin and thoroughly cleanses it. The friction bath is
self-applied by means of two soft bristled brushes. Beginning at the
forehead, the face and neck are thoroughly brushed, then each arm in
turn (working upward from the hand to the shoulder), then using both
brushes together, the shoulders, chest, sides, abdomen, back and lastly
the legs, brushing from the ankles upward. The treatment is continued
till each part of the skin is in a glow. It will be hard to reach the
back of the body, but do the best you can. When taking the friction bath
for the first time, it will be necessary to avoid vigorous brushing and
not to continue the treatment very long, as in the beginning the skin is
easily irritated, but as the treatment

[Illustration: Friction baths with a flesh brush--not too stiff--will
insure a smooth, satin-like skin with a glow of health.]

is continued from day to day, the skin becomes accustomed to it, and it
may be made as vigorous as desired. The friction bath will put one’s
skin in splendid condition, and it will not be possible for pimples,
blackheads, or other eruptions to develop when the friction bath is a
regular practice. The ordinary Turkish towel may be used for the
friction rub instead of the brushes.

[Illustration: In the absence of flesh-brushes, one may go over the body
with a good, heavy bath towel to stimulate the skin and bring to it the
rich glow of health.]

=The relation of air to beauty.=--So much for baths and bathing. A great
deal more that is both interesting and helpful can be said, but enough
has been told to point out their value. In the order of their
importance will be described other measures which directly develop charm
of face and form.

First of all, as that on which every moment of life is dependent we
ought to consider air and its relation to the appearance. Oxygen has
been called the “sweeper of the living body.” Every two minutes the
blood loaded with wastes is brought to the lungs to be purified. Just
think how important it is that the air be absolutely fresh and pure, and
vitalized by the sunshine. If it has been vitiated from any cause, as by
rebreathing so that it is lacking in oxygen and full of impurities, the
blood, instead of being purified and vivified, is sent back, with but a
part of its waste removed, impaired, and becoming more and more
devitalized and poisoned from the breathing of the impure air. The whole
system suffers from the effects of the bad air.

=Effects of foul air.=--During every moment in which impure air is
breathed, uncleanliness is fostered within the body, and even if disease
in acute or chronic form does not follow, the whole bodily tone is
greatly lowered. Just what opportunity attractiveness has to develop in
such a body is apparent. The eyes are dull, the complexion muddy, and
scarcely in any way does the appearance escape deterioration. Yet it is
so uncommon for the air of our dwelling and working places to be pure,
as to be a treat when it is obtained. It is true that the average girl
or woman cannot control the conditions in her place of work, but she can
in her home, or at any rate in her own room, and sleeping or waking, she
should have her room thoroughly ventilated.

=Air baths.=--Choked in its shroud of clothing, the skin is greatly
hampered in the discharge of its functions. Such a measure as the
friction greatly mitigates this evil influence of clothing as it is worn
nowadays, and keeps the skin in working order and health. Lacking this
special care, it is not putting it too strongly to say that it
suffers--and severely. But what the skin needs is that air and sun have
a free access to it. How pallid and sickly of hue the skins of so many
people are. And how, lacking especial care, can they be otherwise, in
the darkened prison formed by the conventional clothing. Remember that
exudations are constantly taking place from the skin, and that in a
slight degree it breathes through its pores. Exposed to the air, the
emanations from its pores would immediately be dissipated and diffused
on the atmosphere instead of being retained by the clothing to cling
about the body. We are compelled to wear what we can get in the way of
clothing, but it is a simple matter to take a bath in the air and
sunshine, and so for a few minutes daily permit these purifying
influences access to our skins. The girl who goes to business daily is
limited in her opportunities to practice this valuable measure, but she
who stays home can easily arrange daily for a sun and air bath. The
business girl can take an air bath before retiring and in the summer an
air and sun bath on arising in the morning before donning her ordinary
costume. Remove every stitch of clothing so that the air can play freely
over the body. These are only suggestions, for one’s own convenience
must determine when air or sun baths can be indulged in.

=Exercise is the elixir of youth.=--If pure air and sunshine are the
cleansers and the vitalizers of the body, exercise may be said to be the
molder and beautifier of the bodily form. But exercise does more than
make the muscles shapely and develop the body to beautiful proportions,
and give it poise and grace. Exercise is the elixir of youth. It is the
method whereby youthfulness of facial and bodily appearance is
preserved, and which conserves youthful energies. It effectually wards
off the dreaded old age signs. The physiological effects of exercise are
these: circulation and respiration are accelerated, all the bodily
functions are stimulated, and through lungs and skin effete matter
rapidly thrown off, old cells are broken down and replaced by new. The
body feels as old and worn out as the cells of which it is made up.
Regular exercise prevents the accumulation of half-dead cells; it breaks
them down rapidly and eliminates them, so that they be replaced with
fresh vital ones.

As to the sort of exercise, it is desirable and indeed necessary that a
systematic series of movements which sufficiently exercise every part of
the body be practiced daily. This is the only way to insure exercising
regularly, which alone is of benefit, spasmodic exercise sometimes being
valueless.

=Exercise in the open air.=--Exercise quickens the heart-rate, and thus
the blood requires a greatly increased amount of oxygen. One should
therefore never exercise in an unventilated room, and for this reason
exercise in the open air is vastly more beneficial than when taken
indoors. In fact, one should get outdoors often and where circumstances
admit the outdoor life (a phrase on everyone’s tongue these days) should
be lived as much as possible. One should not, of course, fail to adopt a
special system of exercises, for this insures that every muscle will be
regularly used, and it is quite likely that one’s activities, whether
outdoors or indoors will but partly use the muscular system. Of outdoor
exercise, walking is ideal, and can be taken at all seasons. And, of
course, all outdoor games and sports are valuable. Exercise in play is
the thing, for it so completely diverts the mind as well as recreates
the body.

Of all exercises, I personally regard, and authorities support my views,
swimming as first in rank, the peer of them all. Every muscle is
exercised by it, it is taken in the open air, and then there is the
tonic of the water.

=Diet.=--There are other measures of which it is necessary to speak and
they are too important to miss mention. She who seeks to improve her
appearance or preserve it unblemished cannot afford to neglect her
diet--for remember that it is from food that flesh and blood are formed.
In greater or lesser degree, bad food and that improperly eaten can
retard improvement from other measures followed. It is impossible to do
more than briefly pass on this subject in its relation to this
discussion on how beauty can be attained. It is of chief interest to
point out that even where no other factors are at work, disfiguring
eruptions on the face are not infrequently caused by errors in this
respect. To be sure there are no special “beauty diets.” The only thing
that is necessary is to avoid such foods as cause a maximum of work on
the part of the vital organs, and give only a minimum of nutriment in
return. Rich, heavy pastry, pickled foods, white flour products, are all
in the above-mentioned class, while cereals, eggs, milk, cheese, nuts,
fruits and vegetables, rightly prepared, properly masticated, can be
depended upon to make good, rich, red blood, firm flesh and muscle, and
altogether help greatly in enhancing personal charm and appearance.

=Sleep.=--We hear much about “beauty sleep.” Really, all sleep is beauty
sleep. It is then that the exhausted nerves regain tone, and the body
generally undergoes a restorative process. Nothing more surely
undermines beauty than lack of sleep. It leaves its mark behind in dull
eyes and even loss of flesh. But in sleep, too, there is a right and
wrong way. The right way is to sleep in a well-aired bed in a properly
ventilated room. The outdoor sleeping room is the ideal one, but it
cannot always be arranged, so the next best thing is the indoor one with
windows wide open. One should awaken in the morning fresh and bright and
strong. Do not cover yourself heavily, just enough to keep comfortable.
The wrong way is--but why waste time in description. It is everything
the right way is not, and consequently one wakes up tired, heavy and
dull-eyed.

=Hair, face and teeth.=--Aside from the constitutional measures spoken of,
there is a word or two to be said in favor of simple local treatment
that the beauty seeker should resort to daily. I mean the little nightly
attentions to the hair, face and teeth. The hair will be much healthier
and brighter if carefully brushed and aired after the unnatural
confinement of the day. The teeth must be well cleaned, so that there
are no tiny particles of food lodged between them to become decomposed
and endanger the teeth. The simplest of tooth powders is all that is
necessary, but the brushing after each meal, if possible, and especially
the last thing at night, should not be neglected. The use of a pure face
cream to soothe the skin from the day’s irritation and exposure is also
advisable, though I do not approve of using cream instead of water, as
is sometimes advised. Soap and water are the best cleansing agents.

[Illustration: Persistent massage of the scalp and frequent brushing of
the hair are essential to the maintenance of the beauty of woman’s
crowning glory.]




