CHAPTER VI

TRAINING AND GOVERNMENT IN THE HOME


=Home a unit of government.=--As already observed, the home is a
partnership. It is a unit of government. In an ideal unit of home
government, every member is governed by and through an intelligent
understanding of the customs, rules and laws, a conscientious
recognition of what is right and wrong and the golden rule of love. Each
have equal rights. What is wrong for one is equally wrong for each and
all. What is right for one is equally right for each and all. Such a
home is a unit of government where parents and children are organized
under a constitution of intellect, conscience and love; for the purpose
of building character, fitting themselves for larger citizenship in this
life and the life that is to be the sequence to this one.

The home is the biggest institution in the world. Home building is the
noblest and highest vocation in life. Its responsibilities are
stupendous, its possibilities are limitless and its rewards are
infinite. Home builders should be the best qualified and the most
skillful of architects.

=The training of a child.=--Solomon said, “train up a child in the way he
should go and when he is old he will not depart from it.” The thoughts,
actions and habits of childhood have much to do with a child’s future
character and possibilities. When a child’s training is commenced in
early childhood, was it begun soon enough? After a noted surgeon had
examined a patient, turning to a friend he said, “If I could have had
this patient two generations ago, I could have saved his life.” When
Oliver Wendell Holmes was asked when a child’s training should begin, he
replied, “At least one hundred years before he is born.” Sometimes it
happens that good children are made bad and bad children are made worse
by the company they keep before they are born. The little boy was not
far wrong, who, when he found his mother lamenting the choice she had
made of a life companion, said, “Mamma, we made a bad choice when we
chose papa, didn’t we?” Some children have made an equally bad choice of
their mammas and some appear to have made a doubly bad choice of both
parents.

=Each child must be studied.=--A child is not easily understood. No two
children are alike. Each child has a very complex nature. He is the
product of the ages. The complex nature of his parents are blended into
his being, producing a more complex being. He is not a duplicate of
either. He has received from his parents a blending of their natures; in
a limited way, what they inherited from his grandparents and their
grandparents back to Adam. Parents and teachers should try to discover
his latent forces, his slumbering passions, his genius, his inherent
propensities and native goodness. They should wisely use nature’s laws
and God’s gifts, in constraining, controlling and eradicating the
inherited and acquainted tendencies that are pernicious; also in drawing
out, giving direction to and developing the inherited and acquired good
in his life.

=Importance of early training.=--Children in the home are to be trained.
Their prenatal culture, the most important part of a child’s education,
may have been respected or neglected. This cannot be altered now. The
next agency to be utilized in the child’s training is environment. This
can be applied from its birth. The child is more susceptible to external
influences in babyhood than in childhood, in childhood than in youth, in
youth than in maturity. The child becomes more fixed in disposition and
character and more difficult to change as he grows older.

=The training of parents.=--If I were a perfect sage, philosopher or
Christian, or all three combined into a perfect teacher, I would much
prefer the task of training one hundred little children than the task of
training ten parents (including the author) how to train their children.
Most parents need to devote three hours, to a careful analysis and study
of their inherited and acquired weaknesses, to one devoted to a similar
study of a child.

=A study of disposition.=--Such peculiarities of mind and disposition as
cruelty, ambition, firmness, conscientiousness and affection may be so
pronounced in one’s life as to bias his judgment and unfit him for the
training of children. When one of these characteristics is very dominant
in a father or mother, it will most likely appear in an exaggerated form
in one or more of the children. Like excites like, is a law that should
be thoroughly understood by parents. Where firmness is very pronounced
in both parents and child, there will be a constant clash unless one or
both exercise full self-control. Such a child should be controlled
largely by love. A severe or cruel parent will make a coward of a timid
child and a criminal of a self-willed child. The over-conscientious
parent will disgust one child and make a fanatic of another. The
over-affectionate parent will appeal alone to the affections and leave
the will of a child undeveloped. Appealing alone to the ambition of a
very proud, ambitious child is likely to make him conceited and
egotistical. For a parent to quarrel, have a fit of anger or to use
violence is degrading and demonstrates his weakness and incapacity to be
at the head of a family. At the same time, these mental states tend to
awaken similar feelings in the child, which usually result in a clash.
If the child had first displayed anger, this could have been overcome
by self-control, kindness and love on the part of the parent.

=The law of influence.=--If you want to arouse a desirable feeling,
sentiment, emotion or conviction in another, you must be controlled by
that mental and moral state and allow it to emanate from you. If you are
controlled, by an undesirable thought or feeling, others must have
self-control enough to resist your influence, or soon they will be
controlled by a similar mental state. Thus, we see that unless parents
exercise judgment and self-control, they will often use methods that are
unwise and harmful.

=Defects in our homes and schools.=--One of the saddest defects in our
home training and our system of education is, that when a child reaches
maturity in the home or graduates from the high school or college, he
knows more about other things than he does about himself and the
essentials of building a home. How to analyze, study, know and control
one’s self; how to understand, train and govern children would be of far
greater value in the education of young men and women than many
departments of study we now emphasize.

=The function of the home.=--The children are in the home for the primary
purpose of being developed into ideal men and women. To accomplish this
end is the mission of parents. To do this effectively parents must
possess high ideals. These ideals include such training and education as
will lead to a strong and healthy body, a keen and well-trained
intellect, a moral and religious character and an abiding faith in God.

=Physical training.=--The physical, mental and moral natures are
intimately and vitally related. One influences each of the other two.
The physical health and strength of a child hinders or helps the mental
and moral life. The proper time to overcome the weakness of any physical
function, or inherited physical weakness, is in childhood. This is done
by proper dieting, hygienic living, bathing, exercise and sexual
chastity. Improperly prepared and unwholesome food are the chief causes
of death among infants and a leading cause of impaired indigestion in
childhood. The kind of food used, effects the mind and character of the
child. Too much candy, rich pastries and meat are not good for a child,
or grown people either.

=Use of medicine.=--One hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) are spent
annually on patent medicine and fully that much or more on mineral
drugs. We are not animals. We do not know how to live. Few men would be
willing to give a lawyer ten dollars to tell him how to keep out of
trouble, but he will give him all he has to get him out of trouble. Few
would give ten dollars to a doctor for preventive advice, but they will
pay a doctor all they possess, for a cure. Oliver Wendell Holmes had a
custom of saying, “If all the drugs of the world were thrown into the
sea, it would be a blessing to humanity, but a curse to the fish.”
Children should be kept healthy by hygienic living.

=Use of condiments, coffee, tobacco, etc.=--Condiments, tea, coffee and
tobacco are not foods--they stimulate--they do not strengthen; they
create unnatural appetites and inflame the passions. No one would drink
tea or coffee were it not for the tannin and caffeine contained in them.
If these drugs were removed, these drinks would be no more tempting than
a cup of warm water. Most people, who use these drinks would consider it
a sin to go to a drug store, buy some pure tannin or caffeine, dilute it
with water, sweeten it with sugar and drink it.

=The tobacco habit is an enormous evil.=--It creates a demand for
something stronger. It paves the way for the whisky habit. Drunkenness
is largely due to a pathological physical condition. Remove the causes,
coffee, tobacco and sensuality and it will do more to check drunkenness
than all the legislation that can be secured in the next century.

=Mental training.=--The mental training of children is very largely
committed to school and college teachers. Parents should take a very
intense interest in the child’s education. They should study the
talents and discover and strengthen the weaker faculties of the child.
Most children get their minds “stuffed” with unassimilated facts.
Nothing is clear to them. They do not remember what they have learned.
They cannot reason logically. They have had their minds “stuffed.”
Parents as well as teachers, can largely prevent this. From the earliest
mental training of the child, he should be trained to take a personal
interest in knowing things. He should be taught to think. Encourage a
child to ask questions. If he asks questions which he should understand,
have him answer them and give his reasons for the answer. In some cases
ask him questions that will suggest an answer. Getting a child started
right is the more important half of his education. He will look after
the other half.

=Moral training.=--The object of all moral training of a child is
self-government or self-control. Before a child is capable of
self-government, he must be taught to distinguish between right and
wrong. This is largely the work of the intellect. His conscience must be
awakened and quickened. Conscience is a natural instinct through which
God’s spirit and man’s conception, of right and wrong, prompts him to
moral action, and which condemns the action he conceives to be wrong and
approves the action he conceives to be right. The will must be so
trained and developed that a child is able to will to do what he knows
to be right and his conscience approves. He is now a perfectly free
agent, a law to himself. He is governed from within and need not to be
governed from without. This moral training requires years and should
begin in infancy.

=Let the baby alone.=--Good babies are made bad by receiving too much
attention. The baby should not be lifted from the cradle, fondled and
coddled, kissed and talked to, simply because it gurgles or makes an
innocent attempt to be noticed. This is needless attention. At first it
is disagreeable to the child. Later a demand is created and the child is
spoiled. If left alone babies would entertain themselves much of the
time.

When a baby is learning to crawl and walk, observe the “let alone”
policy as much as possible. Keep an eye on the child to see that it does
not get hurt. What you do not want it to have, put out of its reach. It
should be safeguarded from places of danger. If these precautions are
taken, you will be saved the excuse for that endless round of “don’t get
hurt,” “don’t touch that,” “don’t do that,” etc. By these endless
“don’ts” children are taught disobedience. If the child falls, unless it
is hurt, do not run and pick it up. Let it alone, it will get up. In
this way you teach it to be independent and self-reliant. If you run
and pick it up, the child gets the idea that you were to blame. Later,
when it falls, it screams, cries and gets angry. Perhaps you hit the
object and teach the child that the object over which it fell was at
fault. This is deception and has a bad effect.

=Give the child something to do.=--Teach it to dress itself, to take off
and put on its shoes and stockings. It should have a special place to
put these, on retiring. It should have a drawer or a room where it can
put its individual belongings. This teaches the child the idea of
responsibility.

=The first idea of wrongdoing.=--When a child eats some forbidden thing,
or does some forbidden act, from which it suffers, it can be led to see
that it has violated the laws of nature. If possible, alleviate the
pain, but the lesson which nature would teach, through pain, should be
emphasized. The child should see that the pain came as a result of
violating the laws of nature. A little later in life, the child can be
taught that all desires, thoughts, words and acts that are helpful to
self and others are right and those that injure self and others are
wrong. These principles can be applied gradually to the laws of the
home, of society and God.

=Parents should agree.=--There should be a perfect agreement between
parents, with respect to the government in the home. Where parents
disagree, children lose all respect for parental authority. Differences
should be discussed by parents, only when the children are not present.

=Punishment in the home.=--Whipping, slapping and cuffing are relics of
savagery. Whipping should never be resorted to except in extreme cases.
It is not the natural consequence of disobedience. It never appeals to a
child’s sense of justice. Punishment should always be natural and
consistent with justice. Some examples will illustrate these principles,
as follows: A child is called to breakfast--it does not come.
Stubbornness or disobedience is the cause. What should be a natural
punishment? Scolding, slapping, jerking the child up and forcing it to
the table? No--there is no logical connection. The punishment should
consist in the child’s doing without its breakfast. This should be
explained to the child: A boy loses his toy. Should he be pitied and
another bought for him? Certainly not. Should he be whipped? This would
not be natural. He simply goes without his toy until he finds it: A boy
steals some object. Should he be whipped? No. His attention should be
called to the nature of his sin. He should be compelled, if necessary,
to return the stolen object and confess his wrong. The deep sense of
humiliation is the natural punishment. Let him feel the full force of
it: A boy uses tobacco. Should he be whipped? Certainly not, as long as
his teacher, the family doctor, the minister and the father use it. No
child on earth could see any connection between the wrong and the
punishment. What should be done? Nine times out of ten, under present
conditions, the boy will use tobacco, in spite of all that a mother can
do. So long as doctors, teachers, ministers and fathers use tobacco,
legislation against the cigarette will increase our youthful criminals.
If a father has a moral right to use tobacco, so has his boy. If the boy
can be led to see clearly that the use of tobacco is wrong, if his
conscience can be awakened and if his personal will can be brought to
constantly oppose the use of it, then he can be saved. THIS IS THE ONLY
REMEDY.

=Study the offense.=--Find the natural consequence. Become an example of
obedience to every law, for your child. Show the child the results of
wrong living and the benefits of right living. This will usually obviate
all punishment, aside from what nature inflicts.

=Corporal punishment.=--If corporal punishment be unavoidable, it should
not be administered when either parent or child is angry. This would
only increase the cause that made the punishment necessary. In most
cases it would be best to postpone the punishment until the next day.
Only a very rebellious child can be helped by this method.

=Scolding and threatening.=--From a hotel window I heard a mother say to
her twelve-year-old girl, “I will gouge your eyes out.” “I will slap
your head off, you little hussy.” A child treated in this way becomes
willful or spiteful, loses self-respect or respect for the parent.
Scolding and threatening children are sins against their finer natures.

=Three good rules.=--The author’s father would not employ men on his farm
without the understanding that they were not to swear, speak vulgarly
about a woman, or tell a “ghost” or “bugaboo” story in the presence of
his children. A servant, man or woman, about your business or home, can
undo or counteract in a few hours or days, in a single statement or
story, picture or book, act or habit, the life efforts of a noble father
and a pure mother. One of the purest men recently said to me, “When I
was only fifteen years of age I heard a servant utter one sentence that
required a score of years to get its effects eradicated.” Men have told
me of the pernicious effects of servants, dating back to when they were
two and three years old. Frightful stories and startling statements, of
impending dangers, destroy the natural freedom, independence and courage
of many children for life. Once I sat by the side of a nervous mother
holding a nervous four-year-old girl in her lap, as our train sped
forward at the rate of fifty miles an hour, over one of those
magnificent stretches on a western prairie. We had discussed heredity,
child training and other interesting and vital subjects, when she
referred to her nervous little girl and told me how at night she would
notice her little body twitching, jerking, floundering and all at once
she would awake with a scream having dreamed that she was falling from
some dizzy height toward jagged rocks and certain death beneath; or that
some huge angry beast, poised on tiptoes and in the act of pouncing upon
her and tearing her body into shreds--a horrible nightmare. About the
time she had finished describing one of those fearful experiences and
was in the act of asking me for advice, we were passing an object on the
outside that interested the little girl; quickly she turned and began
peering through the window. She was in no danger. Her head was not
projected beyond the window. The nervous mother grabbed the little girl
by the body and cried, “You are falling! You are falling!” My reply to
her request for advice was, “My! if you should handle me that way, I
would have a half dozen nightmares here in open daylight.” I told that
mother that her daughter’s nervousness was due to bad heredity and bad
environment and that she was responsible for both.

=Personal purity.=--As soon as a child begins to enquire about its origin,
it is old enough to be told the truth in the right way. Some children
become interested when they are three and four, all normal children by
the time they are seven. Since the inquiring mind will not rest
satisfied until a plausible answer has been received, and since the
ignorant and vicious youth is ever alert and anxious to give this
information in a pernicious way, it behooves the thoughtful parents to
safeguard their children with the truth told in the right way. No normal
boy should reach the age of eight, or girl the age of ten, before they
have been told the story of life.

Children often discover, or are taught, the secret vice at a very early
age. Sex consciousness and pleasure may be early developed because of
some unnatural conditions of the sex organs. For this reason, parents
should know that these parts are normal in their children. When children
are observed to frequently handle, or scratch these organs, unnatural
conditions should be suspected. The child should not be slapped or
scolded, rather call in the family physician. Trying to keep a child
ignorant concerning this vice is impossible, therefore unwise. There is
not one boy in fifty who does not know of the vice, and understands the
language used to describe it. Trying to keep a child from vicious
companions is good as far as it goes, but the facts are that the child
is most likely to discover the vice himself, while it is hardly possible
to keep a child entirely away from the vicious. The only sane method is
to teach the child the laws of personal purity. If the secret vice is to
be prevented, some children should receive council when they are six,
others at eight, all by the time they are ten or twelve. Children have
inherited lustful tendencies. Their troubles are more largely from
within than from without. Hence the children that have been most
carefully guarded from bad company and kept in ignorance are usually the
ones who are most injured by the secret sin. A single talk to a child is
not sufficient. We frequently instruct and appeal to the child to be
obedient, truthful and honest; in like manner we should at reasonable
periods instruct and encourage him to keep his thoughts and desires
pure.




SECOND DIVISION

HOW TO TEACH SOCIAL PURITY AND SEX TRUTHS TO A CHILD




