CHAPTER XLI

PRACTICAL QUESTIONS ANSWERED


=Are men naturally more passionate than women?=--The accumulated
hereditary effects of the double standard for centuries and his acquired
tendencies have made man more sensual than woman. Reasoning from the
lower animals and from all natural conditions there is no reason why a
woman should be less passionate than man. Centuries of false training in
impure mental revelings, obscene language and vicious habits have had a
growing tendency to establish lust in man. Most of man’s lust is the
child of his own cultivation. If the double standard had never existed
and men and women had been equally moral, men would be no more
passionate than woman and both would be better sexed and far less
sensual.

=What are the causes of acquired sensuality in men?=--The chief cause is
wrong mental relations to matters of sex and reproduction. The following
are contributory causes: The false impressions made by parents on the
child; the half truths clothed in the most obscene language received
from servants and playmates; obscene books, pictures, shows and the
dance. All these lead to sexual excitement through the mind. The use of
tobacco and alcoholic drinks tend to inflame the passions.

=What are the principal causes of sterility in men?=--Some authorities
claim that twenty per cent. of childless homes are due to men having had
certain chronic forms of gonorrhea. Excessive use of tobacco and
alcoholic drinks produces temporary sterility. The secret sin, when
continued for many years, often results in temporary sterility. The
inability to become a father, due to one of the last causes, may be
regained on one or more years of abstinence from the cause. Loss of
reproductive powers due to gonorrhea, in most cases cannot be restored.

Eighty per cent. of sterility among married women is due to gonorrheal
infection. In nearly every case they were infected by their husbands who
thought themselves cured. From these facts we see that men, not women,
are largely responsible for sterile homes.

=Are occasional seminal emissions natural?=--If men inherited normal
sexual conditions and never violated sexual laws, it is reasonable to
suppose that men would be as free from sexual losses as are the males of
lower animals. But this ideal state does not exist with men. Nature has
wisely provided for the escape of all surplus secretions from the
various glands of the sexual system. This occurs without any special
shock to the nervous system and the amount of loss is usually small.
Often what is called an emission is but the loss of fluid from the
seminal vessels and not from the testes. This does not contain true
semen. Practically no harm results from these last discharges.

=When do these emissions begin on a young man?=--This depends upon the
sexual development and the habits of the youth. In some it occurs much
earlier than in others. If a young man has lived a continent life, he
may expect an occasional emission when he is eighteen or twenty. If he
has used narcotics, entertained impure thoughts, or practiced the secret
sin, he may expect them sooner. All young men who practice the secret
vice would have frequent emissions if they were not disposing of their
surplus energy in this way. The young man who thus voluntarily gratifies
his sexual desires is losing more energy than he would be doing if he
were to discontinue the habit.

Among many letters received recently are letters from two young men
living nearly a thousand miles apart. Their cases are very similar. Each
began the secret sin when he was only six or seven years old; both were
taught the vice by companions older than they; neither ever received a
word of warning from a parent or teacher. One got to practicing the vice
as often as seven times a day before he was thirteen. He is now
eighteen and having emissions as often as four times a night. He has
varicocele on both sides. The other one is now twenty-two, has practiced
the secret sin as often as four times a day, and now has varicocele on
the left side. Of course these are extreme cases, but they are more
common than most people think.

=Are there some young men who never have emissions?=--It is no doubt true
that all normal young men who are living pure lives have an occasional
emission. In a few young men it may occur during urination and therefore
be unobserved. A young man who willfully dissipates his energy as fast
as it is formed, by means of masturbation or prostitution, may not have
emissions. But let him stop his bad habits and he will experience them.

=Are seminal emissions injurious?=--Unnatural emissions are injurious; the
natural emissions are not.

=What is the difference between a natural and an unnatural emission?=--The
natural emission is a discharge from the seminal vessels; the unnatural
emission is a discharge from the testes. The natural one contains no
sperm cells; the unnatural one does. The first is wholly involuntary;
the second one is due to sexual excitement caused usually by impure
thinking. If a young man keeps his mind pure and avoids all habits that
excite the sexual organs, practically all the sexual life formed by the
testes will be absorbed. Whenever he maintains a high state of passion
for several minutes, several hundred of the latent sperm cells in the
epididymis will take on active life and be sent over to the ampullæ, and
emissions under this condition would contain many sperm cells. This is
why the unnatural emission is injurious. Owing largely to our artificial
methods of living, when a boy is eighteen, the seminal vessels secrete
more than can be absorbed. The surplus is thrown off from one to four
times a month. This is nature’s plan of relieving the gorged condition.

=How can one prevent too frequent emissions?=--Such dietetic measures as
eating non-stimulating foods, discontinuing the use of tobacco and
alcoholic drinks, and such hygienic measures as emptying the bowels and
bladder just before retiring, sleeping on the side, and preventing
constipation, will aid in the control of emissions. But the most
important measure to be used is that of mental control. The cure in all
cases will be gradual and the time required will depend on the condition
of the victim and his determination to conquer the habit.

=Can seminal weakness or loss of manhood be cured by the use of medicine
of any kind?=--The idea that a young man suffering from this trouble, by
opening his mouth and swallowing pills or drinking medicines, can cure
himself is an absolute false hope. No intelligent, conscientious doctor
will advise the use of drugs for seminal weakness. The only safe, sane
and sound prescription that can be given one in this condition is a
strict continent life, aided by pure thinking, proper diet, and hygiene.

=Would you advise the use of any drug or medicine in case of seminal
weakness?=--Absolutely, No. I have no confidence in medicine for such
cases. In no case place your trouble in the hands of a specialist who
claims to cure seminal weakness. Your home doctor is your best friend
when you need medical advice. No well informed doctor will recommend the
use of drugs in such cases.

=How may manhood be restored?=--One suffering from seminal weakness must
abandon the secret sin, get control of his mind, have only pure
thoughts, exercise the mind along other lines, take plenty of outdoor
exercise and avoid all stimulating foods and drinks, especially
narcotics. If not a Christian, become one at once. A genuine conversion
will be the most helpful means of bringing his mind to a pure state of
thinking. Remember that the creation and distribution of this energy is
largely under the control of the will.

=How long will it take a young man to recover from the effects of
masturbation?=--There are so many things to be considered in each
individual case that this question cannot be answered in other than
general terms. The age when the habit was commenced, the age when the
habit was quit, the frequency and the number of years of indulgence, the
inherited constitution, the extent of lascivious thinking and the use or
non-use of coffee, tea, tobacco and alcoholic drinks, all play a part in
the correct answer to the question. I recall one young man of a frail
constitution and a nervous temperament, who had practiced the vice two
to four times a week for four years. He had nearly all the complications
resulting from a greater excess and a much longer period of indulgence.
He used coffee, tobacco, and had been addicted to much impure thinking.
His will-power was weak. He had a long, hard struggle in breaking the
habit. It required four years for him to recover. Here is a remarkable
example. One of my correspondents, twenty-eight years old, began the
habit at the age of eight and practiced the habit two and three times a
day for twenty years. He had very few of the troubles following the
habit of masturbation. Satisfactory recovery took place in a year’s
time. He had everything to his advantage. He had inherited an ideal
constitution and moral tendencies. He had never used coffee, tea,
tobacco or alcoholic drinks. He had never allowed himself to indulge in
obscene language, to read immoral books, to associate with bad company
or to have improper thought about women. He had cultivated studious and
industrious habits, and tried hard to live a Christian life. These ideal
conditions had largely counteracted the injurious effects of the secret
sin and made recovery possible in the brief period of one year. I regard
this as the most remarkable case that I have ever had under my
advisement.

Where one has practiced the secret sin from four to ten or more years
and had the symptoms of greatly injured or lost manhood, it will require
from one to four years for nature to restore his manly powers. Nature
cannot counteract the loss of vitality and restore years of waste in a
few days or weeks of time. Where one has been a victim of this habit for
years he must be patient with nature. Years of practice have established
a stream of waste from his body. In most cases it will require six
months to one year for nature to check this waste. Until this is done,
the patient cannot hope to be conscious of the delightful thrill of
manhood being restored. Just here, I find many of my correspondents
become discouraged. Failing to realize results in a few weeks, they are
tempted to feel that the advice found in this book will not bring relief
when followed, or that their case is a helpless one. They need to be
patient with nature in her slow but sure method of producing real
results.

=What per cent. of children should be circumcised and when?=--The best
physicians are not agreed on this. Many would say one-fourth to
one-third. It is best to do this when the boy is only a few days or
weeks old.

=Should a young man be circumcised after he is grown?=--If the prepuce
passes back freely and there is no irritation or soreness, I would not
advise circumcision. If there is, I would advise circumcision. In
extreme cases of the secret sin, circumcision would help in breaking off
the habit.

=Is there some method of dilating the prepuce and thus avoiding the
necessity for circumcision?=--Yes. In many cases doctors are able to
break up the adhesions and dilate the prepuce as a substitute for
circumcision.

In this matter most parents neglect their boys. When the prepuce is not
passed back every few days and the secretion removed, an adhesion takes
place between the prepuce and the head of the penis. A large number of
boys labor for years, from the age of six to twelve trying to pass the
prepuce back. They have not the right motive in doing this. It is
impossible for them to handle this organ in this way, several times a
day for months or years, without discovering the secret sin. In this
way they dilate the prepuce and break up the adhesions. It is strange
that this experience among boys has not suggested to parents the
following natural and practical method of solving this problem.

Where the prepuce passes back naturally in babyhood, the mother should
occasionally take a damp cloth and remove the secretion. When the boy is
two years old the mother should have the boy trained to do this every
two or three days.

Where the prepuce is long and the opening small, if the mother, every
time she cares for the little fellow’s body, would endeavor to pull the
prepuce back, by the time the boy is one year old, nine times out of
ten, the problem would be solved. This should be done so gradually and
carefully as not to produce soreness. If this is done before the boy is
three years old sex consciousness and passion need not be awakened. I
would not advise the mother to begin this after the boy is two or three
years old.

=Is there a safe method by which small organs, due to the secret sin, may
be enlarged?=--There are some methods advertised by “quacks” and certain
firms, but most of them are unreliable or injurious. The vacuum method
is perhaps the most satisfactory. This consists of an appliance that
removes the external pressure from the organ and allows the blood to
rush into the capillaries. This practice must be kept up for a
considerable time to be effective. While this is the most natural
method, I would not, in any case, advise the use of it. Any method used
tends to call the attention to the organs and this leads to continual
sexual weakness. A restored virility is of far more importance than the
size of the organ. Because this organ varies in size, many men who have
practiced the secret vice to some extent, fear that this organ has
become in a measure atrophied.

=Would you advise marriage as a remedy for weak manhood?=--No. One would
simply substitute marital excess for excessive self-abuse or
prostitution. If a man has impaired his manhood he should recover his
manhood by conserving sexual life, proper diet and physical exercise for
a few years before he marries.

=What effect will a period of self-abuse have upon one’s
offspring?=--Perfect children are born of parents having a strong
vitality. This vice weakens the vitality. Where a young man has
noticeably injured his nerves, his vitality, his health, he should seek
to regain his manly powers before he thinks of becoming a father.

=Should a young man marry who has for a number of years practiced
masturbation?=--It is always best for a young man who has practiced the
secret vice for five, ten or fifteen years to quit the habit and live a
continent life for one or more years. During this time he becomes normal
in his sexual life and sexual demands. If he has practiced the habit
only in a very limited way, so that he is not suffering from any bad
consequences, postponement of marriage is not necessary.

=What should a young man do when he discovers that he has
varicocele?=--The approach of this disease is first noticed by a dilation
of the cord leading to the epididymis of the left testis. When the veins
become full of impure blood and feel like a handful of tangled
earthworms and the left gland becomes painfully tender and begins to
become much reduced in size, then the individual has a real case of
varicocele. If, when the veins are only moderately large and there is
but little soreness, the causes are abandoned, no serious results may
follow. This disease is caused chiefly by the secret sin and impure
thinking. In some cases it is caused by a bruise or the “falling of the
mumps.” The patient must abandon the cause; if it be the secret sin,
quit it; if impure thinking, quit that; if “spooning” with girls, a most
common cause, be a gentleman and quit it.

Buy two silken suspensories, so they can be kept clean. The suspensory
holds the testes up close to the body and prevents much of the uneasy
dragging feeling. If this advice is followed for several months a
surgical operation need never be necessary. Not one of several hundred
young men who have carefully followed this advice have had to be
operated on. If the patient fails to get relief and cure after several
months of following this advice, he should consult a home physician.

=Does varicocele caused by the “falling of mumps,” lead to sterility?=--It
does not. If neglected, varicocele, however caused, may lead slowly to
sexual weakness and this finally to temporary sterility, or inability to
become a father. Prompt attention should be given to the advice found in
the answer to the previous question.

=When a testicle has become reduced in size can it be restored to normal
size?=--If in the earliest stage of varicocele, before the gland has
become much reduced, the advice found elsewhere in this book is
followed, the gland may become normal in size. When the gland has become
much reduced in size, it will not be possible to restore it fully.

=When a young man has become infected with venereal disease, should he
treat himself with a patent remedy purchased in a drug store or send
away for a remedy?=--A young man’s money, health and life are too
valuable to be jeopardized by resorting to either method. Most of these
drug store remedies advertised in gentlemen’s closets are guaranteed to
produce a cure in one to five days, and, it is further guaranteed, that
the disease will never return. There should be a law prohibiting the
sale of such drugs. They are an encouragement to uninformed men to visit
the prostitute. When the young man finds that the patent remedy has
failed to cure him, he is then perhaps in a chronic state of infection.
Now the best medical talent may fail to produce a permanent cure.

=Should a young man who has had a venereal disease in a chronic form ever
marry?=--Few questions are more important and few more difficult to
answer. The right of being a husband and father may be annulled by
inherited defects or acquired conditions. The wife and child have
incontrovertible rights. The specific disease germs producing gonorrhea
have been found in the genital vessels and ducts ten years after the
victim considered himself cured, and the germs producing syphilis have
been found in a man’s brain twenty-two years after he considered himself
cured. Sixty-five per cent. of married women who are operated on in
their pelvic and abdominal cavities, a very large per cent. of imbecile
children, and eighty per cent. of blind infants are traceable to uncured
infection in their husbands and fathers. Where the diseases have been
properly treated and a cure has been effected in the first stage, no
serious after effects will be experienced. Where the seeming cure has
been effected several months or years after taking the disease, quite a
large per cent. are never free from the effects. If such men marry at
all, marriage should be delayed a few years after they consider
themselves cured. At intervals of once or twice a year they should be
carefully examined by the State Health Board. If no disease germs are
found after two, four or more years, the individual may marry with some
measure of assurance that he will not infect his wife or child. Even
when these necessary precautions have been taken, children to the third
and fourth generations may have to suffer for life for the sins of their
fathers.

=Can gonorrhea and syphilis be permanently cured?=--If gonorrhea is
promptly and properly treated, it can, in many cases, be cured without
danger of return or any serious effects being transmitted to the wife or
child. It is also a fact that in many cases of gonorrhea, even when
properly treated, there is a strong tendency to run into chronic
conditions. When the disease has been neglected or poorly treated, or
when a case by its own persistency runs into a chronic state, many such
cases are never cured so that they may not return in some form.
Weakened germs have been known to remain in a quiescent condition in the
genital ducts for years.

In recent years many prominent physicians have changed their views
regarding venereal diseases, as they are now known to be more insidious
and persistent than was formerly thought. Some physicians claim that
syphilis may sometimes be cured; but many eminent physicians claim that
it is quite probable that when one has once been infected with syphilis
that his body is never entirely free from the disease germs. Some
authorities claim that the syphilitic germ has been found in the brain
twenty years after the disease was contracted. Many leading physicians
now consider gonorrhea worse than syphilis.

=When a man experiences a sexual desire, does that not indicate that the
desire should be satisfied?=--Sexual desire results from the conscious
possession of creative energy. This creative energy can be disposed of
in any one of the following ways: (1) For procreation; (2) Built into
the body and converted into health, strength, labor and length of days;
(3) Built into the brain and converted into mental attainments and
achievements; (4) Built into the feelings, sentiment, emotions, and
converted into sympathy, love and service; (5) It can be selfishly
dissipated and reveal its misuse in a blighted, wasted life. What
disposition shall be made of this creative energy is up to the
individual to decide.

=How can a young man judge of his sweetheart’s virtue?=--In the same way
that a sensible girl would decide upon the virtue of her best gentleman
friend. She would consider his reputation, the company he keeps, his
general demeanor and his facial indications of chastity. A modest
demeanor, absence of familiarity, a pure mind, innocent expressions on
the face, and look in the eye, are the only evidences of a young woman’s
virtue by which a young man can be guided.

=Would it be wise for a young man to test the virtue of his best girl by
using the methods of the seducer?=--How would he feel if he knew that
some young man was practicing the same test on his sister? Not very
comfortable, if he had a spark of manhood about him. There is no excuse
for or justice in such a test. Under the pressure of the seductive
methods used, promise of marriage oft repeated, a pure girl might be
induced to surrender her all to the one she loves and trusts. As a rule,
such a young man would then refuse to marry the girl he has ruined. If
he does marry her, the mistake may mar their future happiness.

=Would it be proper for a young man to ask his sweetheart if she has kept
her virtue?=--Certainly, if he can first assure her that he has kept his
own. If he cannot offer a square deal he should, at least, be willing to
take chances.

=If a young woman is not a virgin should she be expected to confess this
to her lover?=--If it were customary for men to make such confessions,
then it would be fair for a woman to do the same. Since men do not
consider it wise or necessary for them to confess their sins before or
after marriage, they should not expect this of women. If the question of
virtue is raised, let the innocent party introduce it.

=If the arm is not exercised it becomes helpless, withered and weak. If a
young man should remain single for five to ten years and live a
continent life, will not his sexual organs lose their function, wither
and atrophy?=--These questions appear to present a most perfect analogy.
Based on the information the average young man is supposed to have, even
if he be a college or university graduate, not one out of a hundred
could extricate himself from the conclusion, that he must reach, viz.,
continence in the single life leads to a loss of the reproductive powers
and to atrophy of parts. When we consider that this is the argument of
the immoral doctor, the ignorant and the vicious, the classes to whom
young men of the past have been compelled to go for all their sex
information, it is not surprising that almost all young men hold to the
“sex necessity lie.” In the past, ministers, teachers and parents have
not been in possession of facts with which to combat this sexual heresy.

The solution of this problem lies in the fact that the male and female
organs of reproduction have two functions. One is a continuous and
regular function, taking place day and night, asleep and awake. The
other is a periodic and special function. To illustrate: The breasts of
a woman are a part of her reproductive system. A married woman becomes a
mother for the first time at the age of twenty. She nurses her babe at
her breasts. This function is called lactation. But, it would have been
possible for her to become a mother at fifteen and to nurse her child.
Then, there were five years during which she did not perform the
function of lactation, and yet, she did not lose this function. Suppose
she does not become a mother the second time until she is forty. Again
her breasts perform this special function as perfectly as they did the
first time. But, remember, there were nineteen years during which she
did not perform this function, and yet, she did not lose this function.
The other sexual organs of a woman have special and periodic functions,
such as, menstruation and ovulation. The normal performance of these
special functions is determined by their general and continuous
function.

If the female sexual glands, ovaries and breasts, were removed from a
girl in her infancy, she would never develop the indescribable physical,
mental and social charms of ideal womanhood. If these glands were
removed at any other age under forty, she would lose in physical, mental
and moral tone. This illustrates the nature of the general and
continuous function of these organs. This function consists in these
organs generating an internal secretion which, if not interfered with,
will build and maintain a perfect womanhood. This continuous function
gives constant activity to these organs; keeps them healthy and strong
and prevents the loss of their special function, that of motherhood.

Day and night, asleep and awake, the male sexual glands are generating
an internal secretion which, if retained in the body, will build and
maintain perfect manhood. It is this continuous function that gives
constant activity to these organs, keeps them healthy and strong and
prevents the loss of their special function of reproduction.

=What effect upon his sex problems has a young man’s keeping company with
young women?=--We have a social nature. It should be normally developed.
The sex nature and the social nature are vitally related. Improper
social relations lead to sensuality and proper social relations lead to
purity of manhood and womanhood.

If a young man would develop an ideal social nature, he should to a
reasonable extent, associate with modest, discreet and chaste young
women. This is natural and in every way helpful. If a young man who has
sexual weakness, due to youthful indiscretions, purposes reform and
desires to regain his manhood, he will find association with young women
of the above type to be very helpful. The normal young man, as well as
the sexually weak, should studiously avoid association with girls whose
actions, conversation or dress suggests impure thought.

=What is the relation of “spooning” to a young man’s sex problems?=--A
single example of “spooning” will answer this question. January 19,
1912, a college young man, in a personal interview, explained that since
April 14th he had been completely impotent and wanted to know of me, if
there was any hope for him to have his manhood restored. I assured him
that there was. He then asked me what he must do. My reply was, “That
depends upon what you have been doing.” I found that he had been guilty
of the secret vice and prostitution to only a limited degree. Convinced
that these habits would not explain his condition, I said to him, “The
trouble is in your mind. You have in some way aroused and maintained a
high state of sexual excitement for hours at a time and over a period of
months or years. Can you explain?” He confessed that for nearly two
years he had spent two or three hours, two or three times a week, in
company with a girl friend who permitted him to hold her hands, play
with her hair, pat her cheeks and chin, kiss, caress and even fondle her
breasts, but absolutely refused to permit further advances. Then I
explained to him how this intense sexual excitement had brought on
varicocele, loss of sexual power and spermatorrhea.

Spooning is a growing evil. It is more injurious than the secret sin.
Our suggestive post cards, pictures on billboards, novels and serial
stories, and the moving pictures in five and ten cent shows are all
giving young people the idea that spooning is natural and expected as a
part of the entertainment, when a young man calls to see his “best
girl.”

The girl who permits spooning will lose many of her personal physical
charms. The eyes that once sparkled with intelligence and glowed with
luster become lusterless, stupid and sunken; the cheeks once rosy and
plump become pale and poor; the handshake that was once warm and full of
life, is now cold and lifeless. Health is gone. She ends her days in
heart trouble, wrecked nerves or consumption.

=If cohabitation is not a physical and sexual necessity, or conducive to
health, why do married people live longer and have better health than
those who remain single?=--As a rule married people are more temperate in
their sexual lives than are the single. But this does not prove that
sexual gratification is ever conducive to health and long life. All
nature contradicts such a conclusion. The embodiment of life in seed is
a universal sacrifice. Many flowering plants wither, fade and die as
soon as they embody life in their seed. If young fruit trees bear fruit
too early in life, they are stunted in their growth and die prematurely.
There is a suspension of growth in all the vegetable kingdom as soon as
the function of reproduction is completed. Among the lowest forms of
animal life, as soon as the eggs are fertilized, the animal dies. Among
all the higher animals, including man, there is abundant evidence of
some bodily depression and nervous exhaustion after each act of
cohabitation, showing the act to be one of sacrifice. The arrested
growth, susceptibility to disease and premature decay among plants,
trees and animals, when premature or over-production occurs, are
significant illustrations of the baneful effects of youthful dissipation
of the sex principle and of marital excesses.

All nature teaches that the normal expression of sex is the unselfish
act of embodying life in a new being and that means sacrifice. The story
of the cross is typical of all nature. Christ sacrificed his life that
humanity might have redemptive life through a process of spiritual
reproduction, regeneration.

Through centuries of bad heredity, a misunderstanding of the nature and
true function of sex and years of violation of sex laws have combined to
give men an abnormal sex nature. It has remained for the people of this
country to discover and apply the laws of heredity, to learn the true
nature and function of sex and to restore to humanity a normal sex
nature. The results of centuries cannot be corrected in one generation.
Few men will be able to reach the ideal life, but it is the privilege of
every man to struggle toward the ideal.

For young people to regard sexual gratification as the one reason for
marriage is positively degrading and shows that our ideas of marriage
should be corrected. There are many reasons why the married life is the
ideal life. Man is a social being. He needs a companion. He is not
complete in himself. He represents only one-half of a complete being. He
is never quite satisfied until he finds the other half, the complement
of himself. A demand for companionship is found in the very physical,
mental and moral natures of man and woman. Their constant association,
their mutual home interests and sacrifice for their children are very
conducive to health, happiness and a long life.

=What is the philosophy of the relation of sex to a happy courtship and
marriage?=--The sexual life forms the basis of these experiences. Without
the creative principle, these social relations would be impossible. The
love and magnetism that draw the sexes together in courtship and
marriage, that harmonize their differences and blend their personalities
and make the husband and wife one are the expressions of the sexual
life. Young people who get the idea that marriage means unrestricted
sexual privilege, will sooner or later land in the divorce court, or be
compelled to live miserably together. If they live in harmony with the
laws of sex, their honeymoon will be lifelong.

My subject is before you. While we may differ as to some minor
particulars, we are agreed that the violation of the laws of sex is the
most prolific source of wrecked manhood, and that a pure life is the
only possible road to perfect manhood. I have tried to lead you to
loathe and abhor all forms of sexual impurity and to form a purpose as
lasting as life and as strong as death, that you will never again
violate the laws of sexual purity. The attainment and maintenance of
perfect manhood, the recovery of wrecked manhood, the transmission of
potential perfect manhood to your offspring, all absolutely depend upon
your faithfulness to the principles of sexual purity enunciated in this
book. If the truths presented in this book keep one boy out of the pit
of sensuality, or if they lead one poor faltering man to form an undying
purpose to become pure, or if just one man finds help, strength and life
through faith in Christ, the author is repaid a thousand-fold. It is a
higher honor to wear a crown of perfect manhood than to wear the crown
of an angel.




