CHAPTER XXXII

SOME PRACTICAL QUESTIONS ANSWERED


=How young can a girl become a mother?=--It would be possible but not
likely for her to become pregnant soon after her first menstruation. If
the ova should be fertilized at that time she would become a mother. In
most cases the ova would be too weak for impregnation to be perfect.
Should it occur, as it does in some cases, soon after puberty begins, it
is always unfortunate for the girl and her child.

=How old should a woman be before she becomes a mother?=--She is not a
matured woman until the close of her adolescence, which is about the
twentieth year. Marriage means motherhood. Motherhood should not take
place until she is matured or practically so. Marriage before eighteen
should be universally discouraged. Children born of mature parents are
healthier, stronger, and live longer than do the children of immature
parents.

=Is there any way to lessen the inconvenience and pain of menstruation
and child-bearing?=--Women of the savage races, women of the laboring
classes of Europe, and to some extent laboring women of this country,
do not suffer the inconvenience of menstruation and the pain of
child-bearing that most women do. If our girls and women took more
outdoor exercise, if they did not displace their sexual organs by tight
lacing, if they did not abuse these organs in other ways in single and
married life, they would suffer less of penalties peculiar to women.
Habits practiced for generations become fixed characteristics and are
transmitted to children. Hence part of the suffering of present-day
womanhood is due to the errors of the past.

=What causes displacement of the womb?=--By reading Mother’s First Talk
you will be able to fix in your mind the location of the womb and
ovaries. You will find that they are near the center of the abdomen,
just behind the bladder and are supported from above by long, broad and
round ligaments. These ligaments are stretched across the abdominal
cavity and are attached to the abdominal walls. The small end of the
womb rests upon the vagina. This tube being flexible affords but little
support for the womb. If a woman wears a corset, or tight waist band
above her hips, the organs of the abdomen will be pressed downward. This
is the principal cause of the womb’s being forced down into the vagina,
bent upon itself, tipped forward or backward. The displacement of the
womb interferes with the functions of the bladder and rectum.
Leucorrhœa and inflamed conditions of the womb often follow. The
fault is not in God’s arrangement of these organs, but in woman’s
slavish devotion to fashion. Were all girls taught by means of charts
the location of these organs, and their relation to the other organs of
the abdomen, fewer girls would try to be like fashion plates.

=Is there some natural method by which a woman can replace her own womb
and avoid exposure, operation and expense?=--Yes; if the following advice
is followed early enough: Having removed your outer clothing, so as to
give you perfect freedom, assume a position on the bed that will throw
your hips above the rest of the body. This is easily accomplished by
kneeling and then bending forward until the head and shoulders rest upon
a pillow. Now contract the muscles of the abdomen in such a way as to
appear to be trying to draw air into the body through the vagina. In
this way all the abdominal organs are drawn toward the chest. When the
womb falls into place, a gurgling sound will be heard caused by the air
rushing into the vagina and the womb. This is the evidence that the womb
has dropped back into its proper place. Now assume an easy position and
be perfectly quiet for one or two hours. Then arise, dress and go about
your duties. Don’t strain yourself or over-work. Very likely the womb
will continue to drop out of place for several days. Keep up this
method and soon the womb will remain in place.

Very likely you will not succeed in replacing the womb, the first
effort. It may be several days before you succeed.

=What are the causes of ovarian trouble?=--The answer to the last question
applies in this case. Anything that interferes with the menstrual
period, such as taking cold, lascivious thought, secret vices; if
married, sexual excesses. These conditions cause a rush of blood to the
sexual organs, and this keeps them inflamed.

=Should a woman have her womb and ovaries removed because of these
conditions?=--Only in the most extreme cases, and, even then, only upon
the united opinion of several capable and honest physicians. In recent
years operations for these troubles have been too frequent. A woman is
never quite herself after one of these operations. If women were taught
plainly and scientifically how to obey the laws of sex they would in
almost all cases recover without an operation. It is generally estimated
by hospital authorities that from sixty-five to eighty per cent. of
married women who are operated upon in their sexual organs have been
infected by gonorrhœa. In almost every case they were infected by
their husbands who thought they were cured. In the initial stage this
is usually treated by the wife as leucorrhœa; later she is treated by
the doctor, or operated upon and the real cause is kept secret from her.
In most cases an operation might be avoided, by going with her trouble
at once to a doctor.

=How may young women know they are marrying men free from venereal
infection?=--This will not be possible in all cases. A young lady should
not become engaged to a young man until she is acquainted with his
record. She could have her brother or father look up his record. Your
family doctor, or some reliable doctor that knows him, might be
profitably interviewed. When we have laid aside our mock modesty and
foolish prudery and shall come to regard these questions in a practical
way, matured young women will not hesitate to ask the young man for a
statement from a reliable physician, showing that he is free from all
communicable diseases.

=What is the cause of pimples on the face and sometimes on a girl’s back
from twelve to seventeen?=--They are due to the change she is passing
through. By some they have been considered as evidences of the secret
sin, but they are not, at least in many cases. Many girls have these
bumps who are perfectly free from the secret sin. It is true that they
may be caused in some cases by the secret vice.

=What remedy would you suggest for these puberty pimples?=--Tonics,
lotions and cosmetics will do no good. Common-sense remedies may
mitigate this evil. Avoid rich pastries and highly seasoned foods, take
plenty of outdoor exercise, bathe frequently, forget your pimples and be
cheerful and happy. This is the best you can do. Nature in her own good
time will remove the pimples.

=Is there a safe way by which a young woman can develop her
bust?=--Several methods are advertised. Most of them are fakes. The
vacuum method is perhaps the least injurious. If a young woman keeps her
body healthy, does not abuse her organs of sex mentally or mechanically,
her bust should be normal. The greatest injury done by any of these
artificial methods is, they lead a girl to be lascivious in her
thoughts. By studying the lower animals we find that motherhood is
nature’s plan of developing the bust. It is natural for single girls to
have small breasts. There are some exceptions to this rule. It is,
therefore, unwise to try to enlarge them.

=What injuries may follow artificial development of the
breasts?=--Flabbiness, inability to nurse a child, tumors and cancers.

=What effect upon the morals of men has the wearing of low-necked dresses
by girls and married women?=--All normal adolescent youths and adults
possess sexuality. Occasional consciousness of sexual desire is natural.
These experiences simply indicate that we are in possession of creative
energy. If we keep control of our thoughts about the opposite sex, this
energy will be converted into physical strength, mental brilliancy and
soul beauty.

It is through the influence of the sex life upon the social nature that
the opposite sexes are attracted to each other and their association is
made sacred, beautiful, enjoyable and mutually uplifting.

God’s greatest blessings to man may be abused by misuse. This is
preëminently true of our God-given sexual nature. Improper thinking
about the opposite sex leads to special excitement of the sexual organs
and results in conscious sexual desire. In the normal man such thoughts
and wishes are awakened by suggestive and inviting environment. A dress
that only partially conceals the breasts of a woman, that reveals the
delicate curves of hips and limbs, has this influence upon the mind of
the normal man. The normal man usually fights off these temptations.
Sometimes they overcome him.

Few men are normal. Licentiousness is transmissible. Most men have
inherited very strong tendencies toward lust. Most men have received an
unfortunate training from childhood. This has led to mental sex
perversion. Improperly dressed women are a special temptation to these
weak men.

The time has come for a reform in woman’s dress. She should not dress in
a way that makes her a source of temptation to men.

It is natural for a woman to desire the attention, courtesy, gallantry,
respect, reverence and love of men. The normal sex nature in woman will
develop those indefinable feminine physical, mental and moral charms. If
she dresses modestly and becomingly, if she is discreet, versatile and
entertaining, she will have her admirers.

=Is there any relation between the nude in art and immodesty?=--Yes and
no. There are great masterpieces of beautiful figures of men and women,
which stand for some lofty ideal, which represent some phase of ideal
thought in life, some exposition of grace and strength, and, while they
are nude, they are no more immodest than perfect landscapes. There are
other famous nude figures of men and women which appear conscious of
their nudity. Such have a bad influence. There are some ignorant or
evil-minded people who would be injured as much by one of these classes
of art as by the other.

=Are there reliable tests of the virginity of a girl?=--The only test
which a man has a right to make before or after marriage is a modest
demeanor, absence of familiarity, a pure state of mind and an innocent
expression in the face and look of the eye. The physical presence of the
hymen, or a flow of blood at the consummation of marriage, should not be
made the test of a young wife’s virginity. In some cases the hymen is
absent from birth and in others only partially represented. Where girls
may have had leucorrhœa the parts are relaxed and no blood appears.
In stout blonds the presence of blood is the exception and not the rule.

=What is the relation of “spooning” to the sex problems of young
people?=--This is a growing evil. It is the kindergarten to prostitution.
Young people cannot engage in “spooning” and maintain a pure state of
mind. When the mind is engaged in sensual thoughts and wishes the sexual
system is stimulated and inflamed by a rush of blood to those parts and
passion becomes more or less intense. In this state virtue is in great
danger.

=What is the relation of suggestive pictures and books to the problems of
sex in young people?=--The suggestive sentences and pictures on post
cards, bill boards, the novel and serial story all tainted with
immorality; and in the moving pictures found in most five and ten cent
shows, are positively pernicious. They lead young people to believe that
hugging, kissing, lying or sitting on each other’s lap, and all other
forms of “spooning,” are natural, harmless and a necessary part of the
entertainment among young people. The young man who would offer to
present a young woman with a suggestive post card or book is stupidly
ignorant or viciously immoral. If young ladies value their virtue and
have the proper regard for young men, they will not accept such cards
and book, nor allow them in their parlors. All women and girls and all
virtuous men should protest against the production, sale and
distribution of all books, cards, and pictures encouraging “spooning”
and the improper dress of the female as an insult to virtuous girlhood
and womanhood and dangerous to the virtue of boyhood and manhood.




