CHAPTER XLIX

ABNORMAL MATERNAL IMPRESSIONS, OR BIRTHMARKS


=Extent of birthmarks.=--In other chapters I have discussed normal,
prenatal influences. In this chapter, I will discuss abnormal mental
influences of the mother, resulting in what are commonly called
birthmarks. The best statistics available on the subject indicate that
but one child in every 2,000 is marked. Personally, I am inclined to
believe that birthmarks are about twice this frequent. The laity think
that the per cent. is even larger, as each individual has seen or heard
of several cases.

=Only the nervous mothers.=--Perhaps not one mother in twenty could mark
her child. Only those mothers who are very susceptible to unusual mental
impressions mark their children. Nervous, gloomy, despondent, excitable
mothers are liable to do this. Practically nineteen-twentieths of the
mothers need not have a moment’s fear of marking their child. If these
facts are true, then it follows that there are many children who in
their prenatal state possessed a temperament not susceptible to abnormal
maternal impressions. Such a child, in all probability, could not be
marked, even if the mother had passed through mental states favorable to
marking her child.

=The materialist puzzled.=--Birthmarks cannot be explained on a
physiological or materialistic basis. Only as we recognize the supremacy
of the mental nature of man over his body can we understand these
hereditary influences. Almost all Christian doctors and scientists
recognize the fact of birthmarks. Men of these professions, who are
materialistic in their belief, treat the subject of birthmarks as a
relic of superstition. Not being able to explain them, they relegate all
birthmarks to the “unknowables,” calling them freaks or monstrosities.

=A government pet.=--After one of the doctors in a state insane asylum,
appointed to this position by the governor for some political favor he
had done and without any regard to his qualifications, had conducted me
through all the wards, I said, “Doctor, what emphasis do you put upon
heredity in your study and treatment of the inmates of this
institution?” “Very little,” he replied. “Do you believe that mental and
moral states of the mother have any influence over her child before it
is born?” To this question he replied, “I believe nutrition and pelvic
environment are the only prenatal relations between the child and its
mother.” I then asked him to explain some of the following cases of
birthmarks by his theory. He did not believe in birthmarks at all, and
stated that as he did not have the opportunity to investigate the pelvic
conditions of the mothers, he should not be expected to explain the
cases I gave him. I will leave the reader to judge whether that little
political pet could have explained the following cases with his theory.

=Explanation.=--Birthmarks can be explained only by the influences of the
mother’s mental states upon the forming child in her body. No single
mentation could possibly mark her child in a very perceptible way. It is
the constant repetition of the mental image in the mother’s mind that
finally takes expression in the physical form of the child. To
illustrate, the first conscious mentation, after an act of murder, does
not give the criminal the facial expression of a murderer. But after
days of thinking of his crime, even if there were no eye witnesses to
his crime and he were not even suspected of guilt, yet his face
gradually takes on the features of a criminal. He cannot remove that
criminal look with soap and water, or by crying or laughing. That
conscious thought of his crime oft repeated has finally taken expression
in physical form. A genuine conversion to Christ alone can remove the
criminal look. The same is true of all classes of criminals. Harmony of
mental states between husband and wife finally establishes a decided
resemblance.

=Mother and child vitally one.=--The physical organism of man is never
more susceptible to mental impression than during its plastic state
before birth. The mother and her child are in continuous vital
communication with each other. In a very vital sense the mother is the
architect of her child. If the mother keeps herself in a perfectly
normal state, the child will most likely be normal. Any abnormal state
the mother may pass through may have its abnormal influence upon her
child.

=The effect of a constant mental repetition.=--The initial mentation,
whether it be a scare, anger, sympathy, grief, desire or disgust locates
and starts the birthmarks. If this unusual initial mental image were
never repeated, the effect on the child would be hardly perceptible. If
the murderer could prevent the return of the mental picture of his
crime, the criminal look in his face would not become noticeable. It is
the constant repetition of the first mental state that finally takes
permanent form in the child’s body.

=How to prevent marking a child.=--How can susceptible mothers prevent
marking their children? By refusing to repeat the mental image. They
should keep their minds engaged in other matters. Banish the mental
picture every time it occurs in the stream of consciousness. In this way
birthmarks may be largely prevented.

The following cases are only a few that I have studied personally and
know to be true. I have had many friends tell me of cases known to them,
many of which would be very interesting to you, but I refrain from the
use of them in this lecture.

=Frightened by a crawfish.=--Rev. T. of ----, had a right thumb that was
double to the first joint. He told me that his mother, while washing
clothes at a stream, turned over a flat rock and a crawfish caught her
by the thumb with one of its big claws. In her fright she flung the
crawfish out on the bank. I studied another case that was very nearly a
duplicate of this one. These are examples of fright.

=Arkansas mother.=--While I was filling an engagement in the town of ----,
Ark., the pastor’s wife became the mother of a little girl whose fingers
were quite long and the joints of the fingers, hands and arms, stiff.
She was quite nervous and despondent during gestation. She told me that
one day when she was alone at home and especially gloomy and nervous,
she heard some one rap at the door and looking up she saw a man standing
at the door with deformed hands.

=Frightened at a mole.=--I went out eleven miles from G. C., state of ----,
to study a very sad case in the home of a cultured young couple. The
child was two years old. Its hands were turned with the palms backwards
and its arms were not over six inches long. It preferred to crawl rather
than walk. On the floor it handled itself like a mole. The mother told
me that in the early months of gestation she was greatly frightened at a
mole.

=Marked by anger.=--While giving a course of lectures in the city of C.,
Missouri, one day while walking down a street I noticed a four-year-old
white-headed boy with a big patch of jet-black hair on the right side of
his head. The contrast between the black and the white was very
striking. The father told me that he and his wife were undecided what
one of two possible causes was responsible for the birthmark. He said,
“One day, while my wife stood on the back porch, a negro stabbed a man
and when he saw an officer approaching he leaped over our yard fence and
ran across our back yard. Seeing that he was running into the arms of
another officer, he threw down his knife in the deep grass. The next day
he got out on bail and came to our home and asked for permission to look
for his knife. The other possible cause was, my wife and her neighbor
had fallen out. One day this lady called at our home and my wife
considered her an intruder, the old trouble was renewed and my wife
pulled her hair. This lady had very black hair. Now we do not know which
of those occurrences is responsible for the patch of black hair on the
boy.” I replied, “I know with almost absolute certainty.” He asked for
my opinion and reason. My reply was, “Had it been caused by the negro,
the patch of black hair would have been kinky. Nature is always true to
itself. I once knew a case where a mother was frightened by an angry dog
and on her child was a patch of canine hair. The fact that the hair in
the mark on the child is straight black hair shows that it was due to
your wife’s pulling the hair of her neighbor.” This is a case due to
unusual anger.

=Marked by disgust.=--After giving a special lecture to ladies in the city
of T----, Kan., an elderly lady, in company with a friend, sought an
interview with me. She told me the following sad personal experience:
“One summer, husband persuaded me to go with him and the children to our
county fair. Being quite nervous and easily fatigued, I requested that I
be permitted to spend the time in the carriage while he and the children
enjoyed the fair. I had been sitting in the carriage but a short time
when I noticed a crowd gathering around some object of attraction and I
decided to go and see what it was. On a table stood a four-year-old boy
wearing the false head of an old man. There was nothing grotesque or
unnatural about the head. But the contrast produced in me a feeling of
disgust. The thought was suggested to me, some one might be frightened
at that boy and mark her child, but I will not, for I am disgusted. I
wondered that others did not feel disgusted as I did. On returning to
my carriage the feeling of disgust and the mental picture of the child
remained with me. When husband and children came I related to them what
I had seen. For weeks after this event the mental picture of the child
with the head of an old man would appear in the stream of consciousness
accompanied with a feeling of disgust. After two days of parturition, a
seven-month child was removed from my body by an operation. Its head was
abnormally large and had the appearance of an old man.” Here was a case
due to disgust.

=Marked by sympathy.=--Ten days ago I was entertained by a family having a
very nervous temperament. The son-in-law sat in a rocking chair on the
front veranda holding his three-year-old child in his arms. The child
was helpless, emaciated and in breathing made a wheezing noise. This
condition had obtained since her birth. During the period of gestation,
a sickly, poor, wheezing, half-grown hog was kept in the yard and cared
for by the nervous mother of the child. The condition of the hog
constantly enlisted the sympathy of the mother. This was the history of
the case as told me by the child’s father. This birthmark was caused by
unusual sympathy.

=An amusing case.=--In most cases abnormal maternal impressions do not
result in serious injuries to children.

While lecturing at M----, Ky., I was told by a mother how she had marked
one of her children. She had listened, a few days before, to some lady
callers explaining the cause of a woman’s giving birth to twins. These
uninformed women claimed that if a prospective mother should find and
become interested in a number of twin objects in nature, such as eggs
with double yolks, twin apples, peaches, ears of corn, potatoes,
tomatoes, etc., that she would most certainly be the mother of twins. A
few days after this conversation she was gathering cucumbers. The vines
were wet and the ground soaked by frequent showers. For this reason she
was barefooted. She stooped over to remove from between two toes a small
object that had lodged between them. The object proved to be a most
perfect small twin cucumber. The mother recalled the conversation of her
friends, and this experience came up in her mind so often that she would
not have been surprised at twins. The child born later had the most
perfect twin toes.

=A sad case.=--While delivering a lecture on heredity in a leading Western
college my attention was called to a very intelligent face in the
audience. It was a young lady who appeared to have no hands or arms.
Later I observed tiny undeveloped hands largely concealed by very short
sleeves. At the close of the address I asked the president about her. He
informed me that she was unusually bright and that her affliction was
from birth. He arranged for me to have an interview with her. I found
that she had two and three fingers to the hand and that her hands and
arms had not grown since birth. In every other particular she was a most
attractive and perfect figure. Her mother’s explanation was that before
her birth she was one day holding her brother, then a baby, in her lap
while operating the sewing machine. The little fellow put his hand where
the needle was forced through his finger. The mother fainted. The mental
picture in the mother’s mind was that some of the baby’s fingers were
cut off. The mental impression lingered in the mother’s mind. The young
lady’s arms were about six inches long. On one hand there were two
fingers, on the other there were three fingers. Her arms and hands had
not grown any since birth. Otherwise she was normally developed.

=Marked her child twice.=--About the close of a lecture in one of the
Central Western states, a lady asked me to call at the Cash Store,
explaining that she wanted an hour’s interview with me. I found her to
be a lady of extremely susceptible temperament, refined and cultured,
but a bundle of nerves. She was the mother of three little nervous
children. Before calling in her oldest child, which she had marked
twice, she explained her experience. She said, “In our early marriage we
owned a cow that we were very proud of. Husband and I had often wished
that she were dehorned. One morning my husband’s brother secretly
dehorned her. The servant boy finding it out ran to the house and urged
me to go out to the barn and see what had occurred. When I rushed
suddenly upon the scene, I seized the fingers of the right hand with the
left and screamed. There were several large clear blisters on the cow’s
head. When my little girl was born the index finger of the right hand
was off at the second joint, the other three fingers were entirely
absent and several blisters had to be removed by the physician.

“During the second or third month of gestation I was told that one of
the neighbors had given birth to a child with one foot turned entirely
around. My curiosity led me to go over and see the child. When our girl
was born her left foot was turned completely around, the toes pointing
backwards. We have spent sixteen hundred dollars trying to have the foot
turned back. We have succeeded only in a small measure.” Then she said,
“I never heard of birthmarks until after my child was born. If I could
have heard your series of lectures, it would have been worth a fortune
to me. I believe this misfortune could and would have been avoided.”

The reader must not conclude that these pathetic cases are common. They
are not. The cases cited here represent fully one-half of the extreme
cases that I have personally studied during years of travel and
lecturing. They forcefully illustrate the possibilities of maternal
impressions on the forming child.




