CHAPTER XXVI

THE REAL SIGNIFICANCE OF SEX


=Views of the past.=--In the past, sex has been regarded as vitally a part
of our physical organism. We are now learning that sex is vitally and
substantially a part of our psychic nature--physical, mental and moral
life. In the male, this sex life may become chemicalized and find
expression on a purely physical plane, but this is not its true or
highest function. Its highest function in relation to the individual,
male or female, is the creation of new life--physical, mental and moral.
Its highest function in relation to society is that of reproduction.

=The unsexed male horse.=--If the male horse be deprived of certain sexual
glands when he is a year old, at maturity he will not have the sparkling
eye; the high arched muscular neck; the heavy flowing mane and tail; the
deep hip and chest muscles, and the elastic bearing of the stallion.

=The caponized male bird.=--If a male bird be caponized, he will not grow
a large comb, ear-lobes and wattles, long glossy, flowing neck and tail
feathers, or strong sharp spurs on his legs; he will be without
gallantry, courage and energy.

=The eunuch.=--If a boy be made a eunuch, when he is twenty-five he will
have no beard, unless it be a few short scattering hairs; his voice will
be devoid of the deep bass tones of a man; his shoulders will be round
and drooped like a girl’s; he will be without bravery, gallantry,
ambition, energy and will be very limited in mental capacity.

=The unsexed girl.=--If the ovaries and breasts of a small girl should be
removed, when she is twenty she would not have the graceful outlines of
limbs, body, shoulders, neck and face; her skin would not become thin
and fair; her cheeks would not have the ruddy glow; her eyes would not
be bright and expressive; her hair would not be long, heavy and glossy;
her voice would not be rich and tender, sympathetic and musical; she
would not take a keen interest in intellectual, moral and social
questions; she would be a woman devoid of many of the physical, mental
and moral characteristics belonging to attractive, beautiful womanhood.

Without these organs of sex it would not be possible for a girl to
develop into attractive normal womanhood. Should these organs be
removed after she has attained maturity, she and her friends would
notice a gradual loss in her physical, mental and moral tone.

=The two functions of the sexual glands.=--These easily recognized and
well established facts show that these organs perform an involuntary and
continuous function that is vitally related to the attainment and
maintenance of perfect womanhood. We know that whatever interferes with
this function will prevent the attainment and maintenance of these
ideals. What is the nature of this function? The monthly creation of the
ovum and the monthly period do not answer the question, for both
represent a sacrifice. The function of becoming a mother does not
explain it, for the reason that perfect womanhood may be attained and
maintained in the single life. The explanation lies in the fact that the
sexual glands of a woman, breasts and ovaries, each have two
functions--a periodic and special function and a continuous involuntary
function. After the dawning of puberty the ovaries, once every
twenty-eight days, produce an egg or ovum. This is their periodic
function. Should she become a mother and nurse her child, this function
of lactation would be the periodic function of the breasts.

=The continuous function.=--Day and night, asleep and awake, both the
breasts and the ovaries are generating an internal secretion that is
being absorbed and used by every organ of the body, faculty of the mind
and attribute of the moral nature. This continuous function, not only
aids in the attainment and maintenance of perfect womanhood, but enables
her to perform perfectly the periodic functions of motherhood and
lactation.

The generation, absorption, distribution and assimilation of the sex
life in the development and normal functions of womanhood are controlled
by natural laws, but these laws may be aided or interfered with by the
individual. As a result of morbid sex heredity, ignorance of sex laws
and a false education, most people misdirect their sex life. When we
learn to plan intelligently for the creation of children, to respect
their prenatal rights, to give them a warm and loving welcome into our
homes and wisely to instruct them in regard to their sex natures, the
sex life will then be intelligently directed towards the development of
a more perfect manhood and womanhood.

=The relation of the mind to the salivary glands.=--It is quite important
for one to understand the relation of the mind to the functions of the
sexual system. The mind has the power to stimulate many of the glands of
the body to unusual activity. In the presence of delicious fruit, or a
table spread with tempting food, the mind stimulates the salivary glands
to increased activity. The blood flows freely to the glands and they
secrete saliva many times as fast as they would when the mind is engaged
in other things. If, when the saliva is being secreted so rapidly the
mind should be suddenly directed to something else the unusual flow of
saliva would cease.

=The relation of the mind to the organs of generation.=--The mind can
awaken, intensify, and prolong a desire for food. This causes a rush of
blood to the salivary glands, stimulating them to unusual activity in
the secretion of saliva. In the same way the mind can awaken, intensify
and prolong sexual excitement. This causes a rush of blood to the
genital glands and stimulates them to unusual activity. In the male,
this results in the dissipation of the vital energy by voluntary or
involuntary discharges of the vital fluid. In the female, the internal
secretions or vital energy does not become chemicalized as in the male,
but is directed to wrong channels or is dissipated by radiation.

There are some authors who hold that the injuries sustained by the
female, due to impure habits of thinking, the secret sin, or sexual
excesses, are not caused by dissipated sexual life, but are due to the
strain upon the nervous system. We have already observed that the
development of the feminine physical and mental characteristics during
adolescence and the maintenance of womanhood are due to the generation
of an internal secretion of the genital glands. The nerves, as well as
all other organs of the body, faculties of the mind and powers of the
soul, are injured by the dissipation of this energy.

=What produces impure thoughts.=--Whatever leads the mind to entertain
lascivious thoughts about matters of sex will cause an excess of blood
to flow to the genital organs, resulting in sex consciousness and
passion. The reading of novels tainted with immoral suggestions,
admiring obscene pictures, engaging in the public round dance or waltz,
kissing, caressing, teasing, fondling, or what modern society calls
“spooning” if indulged in by the sexes, will produce these results.
Self-pollution, or the secret sin, is more common among the females than
was formerly believed. These indulgences lead to abnormal sexual desire,
weaken the will and make it possible for the girl to surrender the
priceless gem of virtue.

=Effects of impure thinking.=--The dissipation of the sex life in any one
or more of these ways will slowly undermine the physical, mental and
moral health. The victim loses the snap and luster of the eye, the ruddy
glow of health, plumpness of features, and becomes conscious of bodily
lassitude, nervousness, loss of mental and moral tone. Dissipation of
the sex life will explain many a nervous invalid and consumptive
patient. = It is for you to decide.=--The continuous involuntary function
of the creative organs is to generate this creative force, this life
principle. It is for you to decide what use you will make of it. If you
keep your mind pure, eat only wholesome food, take plenty of exercise,
breathe deeply, sleep in properly ventilated rooms, spend much time in
God’s out-of-doors, this creative life will vitalize the blood, give
elasticity and strength to the muscles, and will express itself in
physical health, strength and beauty. By keeping your mind pure,
following the forgotten physical directions, taking plenty of mental
exercise in reading books of high mental and moral tone, hearing good
speakers and indulging in independent thought, this vital principle will
be directed to the brain, where it will be converted into intellectual
brilliancy and mental vigor. If you keep your mind pure and follow the
physical directions given, cultivate an unselfish interest in the
well-being of others, sympathize with the sorrowing, boost the
discouraged, love the unlovely, help to bear the burdens of others,
recognize your need of Christ, surrender your life to Him, this
God-given creative life will be directed to the moral nature. This is
Perfect Womanhood.




