CHAPTER XXII

FATHER’S SECOND TALK--PERFECT BOYS MAKE PERFECT MEN


=Why we are given sexual organs.=--You have learned God’s beautiful and
sacred plan of bringing into this world baby plants, fish, birds,
animals and human beings. You learned from the stories of the plants and
animals that God provided them with organs of sex, for the purpose of
increasing their kind. When little children are born they have organs of
sex. A boy’s sexual organs have several important uses. They are as
important to a boy as his mouth, ears, eyes or heart. They are just as
pure as any other organs of his body. These organs are very sacred. It
is through their proper use that men and women obey God’s command to “be
fruitful and multiply.” Without sexual organs, new plants, animals and
human beings could not come into the world.

=They are not sinful.=--We should never think of these organs as being
sinful. They are not. The true names of these organs are as pure as the
words baby, home, mother, Bible, heaven, angels, God, so far as a word
is concerned. The true names of these organs are found in the
dictionary. Your sister and mother can find these words in the
dictionary and just what they mean. They are placed in the dictionary
because they are clean words and are a part of our language.

=The names of these organs are pure.=--Unfortunately, almost all boys have
received their first information about sex from the vicious. Such
teachers are ignorant for they do not know the true names of these
organs or their true purposes. They are vicious because their teaching
is largely false and they fill the minds of boys with impure thoughts
and ideas. Let twenty boys write down on paper all the names of their
sexual organs that they have ever learned and not less than thirty names
would be found among them. Now go to the dictionary and look for these
names. One out of every five cannot be found, for the reason that it is
not a part of our language. The other words do not, even remotely, refer
in meaning to the sexual organs. This is a sample of the ignorance of
such men and boys who are always ready to tell a boy something that he
is not to tell his parents. Such teaching is a very great evil. It has
poisoned the minds and hearts of thousands of boys and started them on
the road to ruin. It is very important that you fix the thought in your
mind that these organs are as pure as any other organ in the body and
that their names are just as pure as any other word in the language.
There are many reasons why we should not expose these organs or talk
about them, except when it is right or necessary for us to do so. We
should learn all we can about our lungs, hearts, brains and other organs
of the body. When we can see these organs or pictures of them, they help
to make many things plain to us that would be difficult for us to
understand. For this reason we have placed the cut of a boy’s body in
this book, showing the urinary and sexual organs.

=The urinary organs.=--The urinary system consists of the following
organs: Two (1) kidneys, only one can be shown in the cut. The kidneys
are located just above the small of the back and in front of the spinal
column, or backbone. The kidneys take up water, waste matter and
impurities from the blood. In this way the kidneys help to keep the
blood pure. This liquid mixture is called urine. The use of tobacco and
strong drink injures the kidneys, and prevents them from doing all the
work that they need to do in order to keep the blood pure and the body
healthy and strong. As fast as the kidneys form the urine it is carried
by two ducts, called the (2) ureters, one leading from each kidney, and
emptied into the (3) bladder. Here it is stored until we wish to
discharge it from our bodies. The urine is discharged from the body by
a duct that leads through the external sexual organ, and this duct is
called the (4) urethra. This process of discharging the urine is called
urinating. This is a perfectly natural act. There is no more sin in
urinating than in shedding a tear. Because of unfortunate training, many
boys think of this act as sinful. The words and expressions they have
learned for this act have been associated for years with low thoughts.
It is for this reason that you should cease to use those false words and
expressions and learn to say, “I desire to urinate,” or “I have
urinated.”

=The sexual organs.=--Some of the sexual organs are on the outside of the
body and some are on the inside of the body. Those on the outside of the
body are perfectly familiar to all boys. The external organ through
which the (4) urethra passes is called the (5) penis. This organ is not
shown in the cut, its position being shown by the figure (5). At the end
of this organ is a sheath of loose skin, called the prepuce or foreskin.
In some boys the prepuce is quite long and tight. When the boys of the
Jewish race are eight days old they are circumcised. This act consists
in cutting off that portion of the prepuce that extends beyond the head
of the penis. The act is performed with a sharp knife and causes but
little pain. Ninety millions of Mohammedans practice circumcision. This

[Illustration]

should be performed on many boys in this country when they are only a
few days old. There are a number of reasons for this. Underneath the
folds of the prepuce are hundreds of little glands that secrete a
substance that should be removed daily with water, or a wet rag. When
the prepuce will not glide back over the head of the penis, it cannot be
kept clean. In such cases the secretion becomes white and hard and
causes irritation. Boys in this condition will often scratch this organ.
In many cases, these boys do not get along well in school, they are
nervous, have fits and spasms, and this scratching often leads to a bad
habit.

When the prepuce of a boy will not glide back, becomes red, sore and
swollen, he should ask his father to have a doctor treat him. The doctor
will know how to enlarge the opening, break up the adhesion and glide it
back.

Underneath the penis is a sack, called the (6) scrotum, in which are
suspended two glands, called the (7) testicles. The (7) indicates where
these glands would be if placed in the cut. Leading off from the (8)
descending artery are two small arteries, called the (9) spermatic
arteries. They carry pure blood to the testicles. Leading back from the
testicles are two small veins that separate from the spermatic arteries
and are called the (10) spermatic veins.

Connected with each testicle is a duct, called the (11) vas deferens
that passes up through the loins and over the bladder and becomes
enlarged into a small vessel called the (12) ampulla. The ampullae open
into the urethra. Near the ampullae, and behind them, are two larger
vessels, called the (13) seminal vessels. These vessels connect with the
urethra by a small duct, at the point where the ampullae do. Surrounding
the neck of the bladder, the lower portion of the ampullae, the seminal
vessels and the deep urethra is a very important gland, called the (14)
prostate gland. Connected with the urethra and only a short distance
from the prostate, are two small glands, called the (15) Cowper’s
glands. These glands and vessels are all very tender. They are protected
by being placed on the inside of the body. Because of bad habits
connected with the organs on the outside, many men suffer much pain from
diseased conditions of the organs on the inside.

=Puberty.=--When a boy is born, he has all these organs. The testicles and
the glands on the inside are inactive until he reaches the age of
fourteen and a half. Until this time he has been only a boy. At about
this age the glands become active and begin to slowly form from the
blood a fluid called semen. This period in a boy’s life is called
puberty. It is at this time that he starts toward manhood. We shall find
later that he will not be a perfect man until he is twenty-four. During
these ten years he will be changing gradually into a man. There is no
way by which a boy can come suddenly to manhood.

=Some things hasten puberty.=--There are some things that will hasten
puberty. Several thousand miles South, puberty comes on a boy a few
months sooner than it does here. Several thousand miles North, puberty
comes later than here. Thus we see that a warm climate tends to hasten
the arrival of puberty, and a cold climate will tend to retard it. This
is the main reason why puberty, in the colored race, comes a few months
sooner than it does in the white race. For centuries the negro lived in
the hot climates of Africa. In this country he has lived largely in the
South. Vulgar language, impure thoughts and the cigarette habit will
tend to hasten puberty. These bad habits arouse passion and lead to the
formation of semen before the body is prepared to absorb it. This leads
to the habit of wasting this energy from the body. It will be noticed by
you that the cigarette smoking and vulgar boys grow up to have a pale or
a dark complexion and many are stunted and ugly. Using cigarettes before
you are fifteen will do you more harm than to use them after that age.

=The nature and value of the creative life.=--The wisest doctors tell us
that one drop of semen is worth twenty drops of blood; one ounce is
worth twenty ounces of the purest blood. If a discharge of this energy
were taken from the body of a healthy, strong man, twenty-five years
old, and placed in a small glass test-tube and allowed to settle for ten
hours, it would divide itself into two unequal parts. The upper and
smaller portion would be thin, clear and slightly oily. It would look
just like joint water. The lower and larger portion would be thick and
milkish in color, with many little (16) sperm cells. These cells can be
seen only under the microscope. They are in the shape of a tadpole,
except they are longer in proportion. They are very active at first, but
when the fluid becomes chilled they soon die. They are formed from the
blood and contain life.

=The condition of an unwell man.=--If a discharge is removed from a man
that is in poor health, a man who drinks liquor, uses much tobacco, or
wastes this energy from his body, it will be found that the amount, as a
rule, is much smaller, the parts reversed, sperm cells fewer in number,
smaller in size, slower in movements, than in the discharge taken from a
healthy man. This illustration shows how bad habits injure the blood and
rob a man of his energy.

=How sex helps to change a boy into a man.=--We are now able to study how
this new life, this vital force, changes a perfect boy into a perfect
man. We find that this energy is formed from the blood and contains
life. These sperm cells contain physical, mental and soul life. This
will be made plain to you, when you learn, that, when one of these sperm
cells of a father unites with the cell of a mother, under proper
conditions, the result will be a child having physical, mental and soul
life. A boy has physical, mental and soul life when he is born, but he
has not as much as he will have when he is grown. If he grows up to be a
man, he will need more of this energy and life. This is the work of the
sexual glands. They form, by the help of the blood, this energy. This
energy is absorbed by the body and carried by the blood to every part of
his being. It is in this way that this energy helps the body to grow,
and the mind and soul to develop.

=Two full brother colts.=--The use of this fluid can be illustrated in
several ways. If two brother colts grow up side by side, they will look
much alike when grown. If one of them be castrated when young, he will
not develop as well as the other one. The castrated horse is called a
gelding. The other one is called a stallion. The stallion has a high
arched neck, dilated nostrils, sparkling eyes, a heavy thick mane and
tail, broad, deep hip and chest muscles and an elastic bearing. He
commands the attention and admiration of all beholders. A boy can’t
manage him. It takes a strong man to control him. Turn him out in the
field with one hundred geldings and he will rule all of them. The only
difference between these horses was that one had had his testicles
removed and the other had not. The gelding could not form from his
blood any of this valuable energy. This energy was formed by the
stallion and absorbed by his body where it gave him perfect development,
an elastic bearing, fiery eyes, strong muscles and lots of vitality.

=Two full brother chickens.=--Take two full brother chickens, put them in
the same pen, give them the same food and shelter and when they are
grown they will look very much alike. Suppose that when these roosters
were small one of them had been caponized, that is, his glands had been
removed, what would have been the result? The one not caponized would
grow a large red comb, ear lobes and wattles, long glossy neck and tail
feathers and long, strong spurs. In the case of the other bird, his
comb, ear lobes and wattles, neck and tail feathers and legs would
resemble an old hen that had not laid an egg for months. If food is
scarce, the first bird will scratch for worms and catch insects for a
living; the other one will starve. If food is thrown down for the old
hen and her brood of chickens, the first bird will step up and pick up a
bit of the food with his beak, drop it, then step back, point his beak
at the food, glance up at the old hen, look down at the chickens and
cluck to them to come up and eat the food. When they are through, if
some food is left, he will eat it. If not, he goes out and finds him a
meal. The capon will rush up to the food, with one foot crushing the
life out of a chicken and the other crushing the life out of another
chicken; he hurriedly eats the food and does not offer any to the old
hen and her chickens. If an old hawk or owl comes to catch the chickens,
the first bird will fight the enemy until the hen and chickens find
shelter. The capon sneaks under the floor.

The first bird retained his glands, formed that vital energy, absorbed
it back into his body; this made him industrious, gallant and brave. The
capon formed none of this energy, and he could not develop a perfect
body, be industrious, gallant and brave.

=Eunuchs.=--Long years ago, men would select some boys that they wanted to
be slaves and remove their sexual glands when they were quite young.
Such boys were called eunuchs. When they were twenty-five years old they
differed much from other men. They grew only a few scattering short
hairs on their faces; their vocal organs never developed so as to
produce a deep base voice; their shoulders never became broad and
square; being cowardly they were never sent to the battlefield, they did
not care to own property and had no desire for an education. Now,
compare in your mind, the manly man with the eunuch. This energy gives
him his beard, square shoulders, bass voice, brilliant mind, snap and
vim, push and enterprise, bravery and attractive manliness.

=If you would be a perfect man.=--While it is now very rare for a boy to
be made a eunuch, yet it is very common to see young men who are dull
and stupid, lifeless and lazy, stunted and ugly. In most cases this is
due to their having wasted this energy.

From these illustrations we see that the sexual energy strengthens and
develops every organ of the body, faculty of the mind and power of the
soul. If a boy would have a strong, healthy and perfect body, this
energy must be kept in the body and built into the muscles. If he would
have a strong and brilliant mind, this energy must be directed to the
brain. If he would be strong in moral character, he must learn how to
use it in his moral nature. In the chapter on how to live a pure life
this will all be made plain to you.




