CHAPTER LII

VITAL FACTS CONCERNING THE CHANGE OF THE LIFE IN WOMAN AND THE YEARS TO
FOLLOW


=Similarity of changes in the sexes.=--Men and women are complements of
each other. They have two correspondingly important and similar periods
in life. In man, the first is when the genital glands begin to secrete
procreative life. This usually occurs when he is from fourteen to
fifteen. This change indicates that nature has begun her work of
preparing the male genital organs for their primal function--fatherhood.
Nature’s processes work gradually. She is apparently in no hurry. If not
interfered with, she will accomplish a perfect work. Hence we find, that
while nature is preparing the boy for fatherhood, this function is not
possible for three or four years after the change begins; and that the
function performed at this time would mean a defective child. Careful
investigations show that among children whose fathers married at

[Illustration: WELL PRESERVED AND CONTENTED IN OLD AGE]

twenty or younger, eight to ten per cent. more of these children die in
the first year than among children whose fathers married at twenty-four
or later. This would indicate that the sexual life of the male has a
double creative function. The first is to create a father, which
requires eight to ten years. This, however, is only preparatory to the
second, the primal function of fatherhood. The second change in man
occurs when he is from forty-five to fifty-five and the physical
indications are that this period of procreation should close.

In woman, the first important period usually occurs from twelve to
fourteen, when the functions of menstruation and ovulation begin. The
change indicates that nature has begun her work of fitting the female
genital organs for their primal function--motherhood. In woman as in
man, nature takes her own time. As a rule motherhood would not be
possible for a year or two after this change has begun. Even then the
child would reveal defects. Carefully gathered facts show that among
children, whose mothers married at sixteen, four to five per cent. more
die in the first year than among children whose mothers married at or
near twenty. This would indicate that the sexual life of the female has
a double creative function. The first is to create a mother, which
requires a period of six to eight years. This, however, also is only
preparatory to the primal functions of the sexual life--motherhood. The
second change in a woman’s life occurs when she is from forty to
forty-nine and the physical changes which occur bring her procreative
period of life to a close.

=The primal purpose of marriage.=--If boys and girls were properly trained
and safeguarded, if our customs and habits of life were natural instead
of artificial; they would use up their sexual energy in their various
activities. Under such normal conditions the gradually developing
paternal and maternal instincts, which are the products of maturing
sexual life, would be under perfect control and lead them to marry for
the primal purpose of procreating the species and perpetuating the race.
This God-implanted paternal and maternal instinct, in their relation to
the normally developing sexual natures, are so strong that matured young
people are willing to assume every burden connected with maintaining a
home and every sacrifice incident to raising a family of children.

=Maternity not an affliction.=--No normal wife, properly educated, who has
the right view of marriage, looks upon maternity as an affliction. No
woman, capable of normal motherhood should marry, who considers
maternity a great affliction. The woman who is willing to sell the use
of her body to one man in marriage for the consideration of being
married, for food, clothing and shelter, and who deliberately and
willfully avoids maternity, is but little better than the woman who
prostitutes herself to a number of men for a price. The motives that
lead a man and woman to commit prostitution outside of the bonds of
marriage cannot be made sacred and pure by the sanction of law and a
marriage ceremony. When husband and wife are mutually agreed, in this
crime, he is as guilty as she.

=Procreative periods in the sexes.=--The possible procreative period of
man extends from about seventeen to the close of life. His normal
procreative period extends from about twenty-four to the beginning of
his change of life. The possible procreative period of woman extends
from puberty to the close of the change of life. Her normal procreative
period extends from about twenty to the beginning of her change of life.

=Function of menstruation.=--The function of menstruation is to prepare
the womb for the reception of embryonic life. Since the womb during
menstruation is not prepared for the reception of this beginning life,
the wife instinctively repels the sexual approaches of her husband.

=Pregnancy a period of continence.=--When impregnation occurs and the womb
becomes the closed home of embryonic life, sexual desire largely or
entirely ceases in the normal woman. She now enters a nine-month period
of gestation. Again it is natural for her to repel sexual approaches of
her husband. All the pregnant females among the lower animals and savage
man faithfully repel the approach of their mates during gestation. This
law is violated alone by semi-civilized and civilized man. The females
among the lower animals and savage men do not dread maternity and the
males are normal and do not force their demands upon their mates during
gestation.

=Why maternity is regarded as an affliction.=--Among the civilized races,
artificial customs, a false education and a selfish devotion to an
unnatural social system, lead many women to dread maternity and to look
upon this most sacred and glorious function of womanhood as a very great
social affliction.

=Enslaved motherhood the crowning curse of the age.=--The artificial life
of civilization leads men to become sexually abnormal. Law, custom and a
misinterpretation of certain passages of the Bible have given men and
women the erroneous idea that the wife must submit herself to the
husband’s sexual demands, even during pregnancy. Hence the civilized
woman submits to her husband’s demands. Another reason why she does not
repel his approaches is because she feels that the “worst has already
happened.” Enslaved motherhood is the crowning curse of an artificial
civilization. If Bible students had given more sincere thought and time
to the study of the redemptive meaning of, “And knew her not till she
had brought forth her firstborn son; and he (Joseph) called his name
Jesus,” than they have to the doubtful meaning of a passage found in the
writings of Paul, past legislation, education and evangelization would
have accomplished more in the redemption of the race from the slavery
and curse of lust.

=Mysteries made clear.=--When we keep in mind the primal purpose of
marriage, the function of menstruation, the period of normal child
bearing, it will not be difficult for us to understand why there should
come a change in middle-aged woman, when menstruation, ovulation and
child bearing should cease. Understanding that normal passion in woman
is nature’s call for maternity, the reason for her repelling the
approaches of her husband, during the change of life, and why sexual
desire largely ceases with this change, will be clear to us. When the
thoughtful husband, who loves his companion, understands the nature of
this experience in the wife, he will be more considerate, sympathetic
and self-controlled. Continence during this change will not only be a
blessing to his wife, but it will be of physical and mental benefit to
himself.

=The age when the change of life occurs.=--In this country, as a rule, the
change of life occurs from forty to fifty. A few thousand miles south
it occurs sooner. Climatic conditions hasten or retard both puberty and
the change of life. If the age at the dawning of puberty is multiplied
by three, this will give the age when the change of life will usually
begin. There are other causes that may hasten or retard the approach of
this change. Women have been known to reach the age of sixty and one
woman to reach the age of seventy, before the change occurred. On the
other hand there are cases where the change has occurred as early
thirty-five and rare cases as early as twenty-eight and thirty.

=Other names for the change of life.=--This change is sometimes known as
the “menopause,” referring to the cessation of the function of
menstruation. It is also referred to as the “climacteric” period,
meaning that a climax in life has been reached.

=The nature of the change.=--As a result of this change the period of
reproduction ceases. To affect this change ovulation must cease. As
menstruation is normally associated with ovulation, this must cease. The
ovaries become reduced in size, the walls of the womb become thinner and
the whole sexual system is undergoing a change, adapting itself to the
new order of things, which will be a part of her life for years to come.

=The duration of the change of life.=--No general rule can be stated as
to the length of this period. The average time is from two to three
years. Occasionally it covers a period of six or seven and in rare cases
ten or twelve years. In rare cases the period has been known to be only
a few weeks or months in length. In some women the change causes but
little inconvenience.

=Evidences of the change.=--The approach of the change of life may be
heralded by a variety of symptoms, which may in part be present in one
woman and absent in another. The menstrual change manifests itself in a
number of ways. In one woman the flow may cease at the approach of the
menopause, never to return. In other cases the intervals of flow are
irregular. In still others, menstruation may be frequent, almost
continuous, or at times amount to flooding. In some cases the abdomen
swells, a feeling of fullness is experienced and the woman may be
convinced that she is pregnant. Any one or more of the following
symptoms may be experienced: dizziness, trouble with the sight, voice,
heart, lungs, constipation, diarrhea, neuralgia of the joints, limbs and
head. These symptoms can be greatly modified by exercise of the will. A
woman need not be alarmed at any one or more of these symptoms. They are
due to a readjustment of the body to the new conditions that are to
follow. While this is a real crisis in a woman’s life, it does not
follow that there is any serious danger. Yet she should take every
precaution to keep herself in a good condition.

=Some precautions.=--Fifteen or twenty minutes of time should be given, to
light exercise, each day.

There will be a tendency in most cases toward constipation. Drink one or
two glasses of water on rising each morning and drink freely during the
day, make a meal occasionally of fruits. If this does not correct the
trouble, flush the colon with tepid water.

Special attention should be given to the diet. This should be wholesome
and nutritious. She should never over-eat. If inclined to be nervous,
coffee and tea should not be used; if at all, with moderation. Other
stimulating drinks should be avoided.

She should have some light occupation of interest to her. Idleness
during this period may lead to despondency, melancholy, or hysteria. Her
mind should be engaged in something all the time.

We are learning more and more that the body is very much subject to the
mind. A feeling of dejection and despondency and many other ailments
associated with this change can be greatly reduced by a strong will.
This is not saying that all of her discomforts are imaginary. They are
largely real, but they can be greatly reduced by self-control.

=Some physical disorders.=--At the time of the change of life, any one of
a number of physical troubles may arise. In the event of any of these, a
reliable physician should be consulted. Apparent flooding or small
hemorrhages may occur. This usually gives rise to great alarm. Unless
the amount appears excessive, no serious concern need to be felt.

Fibroid tumors of the womb and cancer of the womb or breasts are more
likely to occur at this period of life than any other. These troubles
are largely due to miscarriages, willful abortions, injuries done the
womb at birth or some bruise of the breasts. Where these troubles occur,
a physician should be consulted. They usually yield to proper treatment.

=Changes in the reproductive system.=--About the close of the change of
life in a woman, the ovaries become reduced in size, the walls of the
womb thinner and smaller in size and the vagina undergoes a similar
change. Similar changes occur in the sexual organs of the male.

=Sex problems explained.=--As already observed, sexual desire begins to
abate with the approach of the change of life in both sexes. If this
does not occur, it shows an abnormal sexual condition, or some
aggravating cause in some neighboring organ. Occasionally all desire
ceases in the woman at the beginning of the period. In other cases it
does so gradually for a few years. If the husband has practiced
reasonable self-control, the experience in his case is somewhat
similar. He should have no sexual relations during the change of life in
his wife. If the husband wishes to protect the health of his wife and
himself, prolong their lives, increase their usefulness and happiness he
must bring himself to complete self-control.

=The later half of life.=--When the reproductive system has been
readjusted, by the change of life processes, to the new conditions of
the closing period of this life, if both are considerate of each other’s
comfort and happiness, they soon realize that they have entered into an
existence of a larger manhood and womanhood, with limitless
opportunities of loving each other, of enjoying life, of being useful
and a blessing to the world. The transient pleasures of passion are not
to be compared by them with the abiding delights, pleasures and joys
that flow from intellectual and spiritual natures surrounded by a halo
of glory that indicate a readiness for a golden sunset and a final
transition into another period of existence circumscribed by the
eternities and limited in progress and joy only by the inexhaustible
resources of the Infinite.




